62. Beating and Exiling Dhabee’
===============================

One day a man came to Umar and said to him: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen,
Dhabee’ at-Tameemi met us and he began asking us about the
interpretation of some verses of the Qur'an and he said to me: “O Allah,
enable me to overcome him (Umar)!” One day while Umar was sitting during
a banquet he had made for people, Dabee’ came wearing good cloths and a
turban. He sat eating with people. When he finished eating, he asked
Umar: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, what is the meaning of this saying of Allah
“Weth-thariyat tharwa, wel-hamilat waqra-I swear by the wind that
scatters far and wide, then

(312)

those clouds bearing the load (of minute things in space). Qur'an,
51:1-2” Umar said to him: “Woe unto you! It is you!” Umar got up,
uncovered his arms and began whipping the man until his turban fell
down. He had two plaits of hair. Umar said: “I swear by Him, in Whose
hand Umar’s soul is, that if I have seen you with a shaven head, I would
have beheaded you.” Then he ordered the man to be imprisoned in a house.
Every day he took him out to whip him one hundred whips. When he became
well, Umar took him out to whip him another hundred whips. Then he
carried him on a camel and sent him to Basra and wrote to his official
there Abu Musa ordering him to forbid people from mixing with him. He
ordered Abu Musa to make a speech for people telling them that Dabee’
wanted to obtain knowledge but he went astray. After that Dhabee’ became
mean among people until he died whereas he had been the chief of his
people before.[^1]

**63. Exiling Nasr bin Hajjaj**

Abdullah bin Burayd said: “One night while Umar was patrolling, he
arrived at a house, inside which there was a woman singing for other
women: “Is there a way to get some wine to drink, or to be with Nasr bin
Hajjaj?”

Umar said: “As long as she lives, she will not get that!” In the
morning he sent for Nasr bin Hajjaj.[^2] Umar looked at him and found him
very handsome. He ordered him to collect his hair. He did and when his
forehead appeared he became more handsome. Umar asked him to put on a
turban. He put on a turban and then his plentiful hair appeared from
under the turban and he seemed more handsome. Umar asked him to cut his
hair. He cut his hair and he seemed too handsome. Then Umar said to him:
“O bin Hajjaj, you have charmed the women of Medina. Do not neighbor me
in a town I live in!” Then Umar exiled him to Basra. After spending some
days in Basra, Nasr sent a letter to Umar having some verses of poetry,
in which he had showed his innocence and asked Umar to let him go

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.122.
[^2] He was Nasr bin Hajjaj bin Alabit al-Bahzi as-Salami.

(313)

back to his house. Umar said: “Certainly not, as long as I am the
ruler!” When Umar was killed, Nasr rode his sumpter and joined his
family in Medina.

**64. Exceeding the legal penalty with his son**

Once Umar’s son Abdurrahman, surnamed as Abu Shahma, drank wine in
Egypt when Amr bin al-Aass was the wali there. The wali Amr bin al-Aass
ordered Abu Shahma’s hair to be cut and then he was whipped according to
the legal penalty at the presence of his brother Abdullah bin Umar. When
Umar was informed of that, he wrote to Amr bin al-Aass to send him Abu
Shahma in aba and on a camel without a saddle. He stressed on that and
ordered him with severe words. Amr bin al-Aass sent Abu Shahma in the
condition as Umar had ordered and wrote to Umar that he had punished Abu
Shahma with the legal penalty; cutting his hair and whipping him in the
courtyard and he swore by Allah that it was the place, in which the
legal penalties were executed on the Muslims and (ahlul thimma) the
Christians and the Jews. He sent the book with Abdullah bin Umar (Umar’s
son).

Abdullah bin Umar brought the book and his brother Abdurrahman and came
to his father in Medina while Abdurrahman was putting on an aba and was
unable to walk because he was ill and tired of sitting on the bare back
of the camel all the way from Egypt to Medina. Umar became too severe
with his son. He said to him: “O Abdurrahman, have you done this and
that?” Then he cried: “Bring me the whips!” Abdurrahman bin Ouff
interceded with Umar saying to him: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, he has been
punished with the legal penalty and his brother Abdullah has witnessed
that.” But Umar paid no attention to him rather he rebuked him. Umar
began whipping his son Abdurrahman (Abu Shahma), who was shouting at his
father: “I am ill and you are going to kill me!” Umar did never pity him
and gave a deaf ear to his son’s crying until he finished the number of
the legal whips. After that he imprisoned him and a month later
Abdurrahman died.[^1]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] This was one of the famous events in the history of Umar. It has
been mentioned by the most of the historians. Refer to Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 3 p. 123. Ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in the same volume of
his book that Umar had whipped one of his

(314)

If Amr bin al-Aass was trusted in the affairs of the Muslims (the legal
penalties) and he was reliable near Umar, then he told Umar that he had
punished Abu Shahma at the presence of his brother Abdullah, who was the
most trusted one to his father from among the family of al-Khattab;
hence Umar had no any evidence to punish his son again and if Amr bin
al-Aass was not trustworthy and he was not truthful in his swear, then
how had Umar appointed him as the wali of Egypt to execute the verdicts
and penalties of Allah and how had he entrusted him with the bloods ,
honors and properties of the people?

According to the Shariah a sick person is not to be punished before
recovering health and the punished one (with legal penalty) is not to be
imprisoned especially if he is ill or that imprisonment may harm him but
Umar was fond of preferring his own opinions to the legal verdicts.

**65. Cutting the tree of al-Hudaybiya**

It was the tree, under which the Prophet (s) had been paid homage by
his companions to die for him. It was called the homage of ar-Radhwan.
Among the results of this homage was the great conquest of Mecca. Some
of the Muslims often offered prayers under this tree to get blessing and
to thank Allah for the great victory they got after the homage under
this tree.

When Umar knew that they offered prayers under this tree, he ordered
the tree to be cut. He said: “Since this day if any one returns to offer
prayer near this tree, I will kill him with the sword as an apostate is
killed.”[^1] Glory be to Allah! Praise be to Allah! Allah is great!!! How
wonder! Yesterday the Prophet (s) ordered him to kill Thul Khuwaisira,
the head of the hypocrites, and he refrained from killing him respecting
his prayer and today he draws his sword to kill the believers who offer
prayers under this tree; the tree of ar-Radhwan!!”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

sons for drinking wine until he died. All the historians, who have
talked about Abu Shahma, mentioned this case such as ibn Abdul Birr in
his Istee’ab, ad-Dimyari in Hayat al-Haywan and ibn al-Jawzi in his book
Tareekh Umar, chap.77.

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.59.

(315)

Woe! Who has made the bloods of the faithful prayers so cheap to him?
This was the seed that grew and fruited in Najd (where the Satan would
appear).

How many seeds like this Umar had such as his saying to the Black Rock
(of the Kaaba): “You are just a rock; neither benefit nor harm. Unless I
have seen the Prophet (s) kissing you, I would have never kissed you.”

This word became as a principle due to which many ignorants prohibited
kissing the holy Qur'an and glorifying the shrine of the Prophet (s) and
the other sacred shrines. They lost by doing that many virtues as Allah
has said: “… and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of Allah, it is
better for him with his Lord. Qur'an, 22:30” and “… and whoever respects
the signs of Allah, this surely is (the outcome) of the piety of hearts.
Qur'an, 22:32” and they did not love Allah sincerely as one of the poets
has said:

“It is not the love of the country that has filled my heart,

but it is the love of who has dwelled in the country.” 66. Umm Hani
complains against him to the Prophet(s) At-Tabarani mentioned in
al-Kabeer a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman bin Abu Rafi’ that Umm
Hani bint Abu Talib had said to the Prophet (s): “O messenger of Allah,
Umar bin al-Khattab met me and said to me: “Muhammad will not avail you
of anything.” The Prophet (s) became angry. He made a speech saying to
the people: “Why do some ones pretend that my intercession will not
benefit my family? My intercession will avail Ham and Hakam.”[^1]

The Prophet (s) became angry in another occasion when a son of his aunt
Safiyya died and he consoled her. When she went out, a man[^2] met her
and said to her: “Your kinship with Muhammad will not avail you of
anything.” She began crying until the Prophet (s) heard her voice and
hurried to her. She told him of what happened. He became angry and asked
Bilal to announce the azan. The Prophet (s)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Ham and Hakam were two tribes of Yemen, which had no any kinship
with Quraysh, the Prophet’s tribe.
[^2] He was Umar bin al-Khattab undoubtedly.

(316)

got up to make a speech. He praised Allah and then he said: “Why do
some people pretend that my kinship does not avail (my relatives)? Every
kinship and means will be severed on the Day of Resurrection except my
kinship and means. My kinship is connected in this life and in the
afterlife.”[^1]

**67. The day of consultation (an-Najwa)**

On that day all the people had missed goodness save Imam Ali (s). He
was the winner of that goodness with no partner; neither Abu Bakr nor
Umar nor any of the human beings. Here is the Qur’anic verse of that day
and let you ponder on it and do not be among those whom Allah has meant
when saying: “Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Nay, on the hearts
there are locks. Qur'an, 47:24”

This is the verse: “O you who believe! when you consult the Messenger,
then offer something in charity before your consultation; that is better
for you and purer. Qur'an, 58:12.” No one had ever acted according to
this verse except Imam Ali (s). This has been confirmed by the consensus
of the umma. Az-Zamakhshari in al-Kashshaf, at-Tabari in at-Tafseer
al-Kabeer, ath-Tha’labi in at-Tafseer al-Adheem, ar-Razi in Mafateeh
al-Ghayb and the other interpreters have said that in their books when
interpreting this verse.

Al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak[^2] that Imam Ali (s) had said:
“There is a verse in the Book of Allah that no one has acted according
to before me and no one will act according to after me. It is the verse
of (an-Najwa) consultation. I had a dinar and I sold it for ten dirhams.
Whenever I consulted the Prophet (s) I offered a dirham before my
consultation and then the verse was annulled by this one: “Do you fear
that you will not (be able to) give in charity before your consultation?
So when you do not do it and Allah has turned to you (mercifully), then
keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey Allah and His Messenger;
and Allah is Aware of what you do. Qur'an,

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Thakha’ir al-Uqba by Muhibuddeen at-Tabari.
[^2] Vol.2 p.842.

(317)

58:13”[^1]

This scolding included Umar and the rest of the companions except Imam
Ali (s) because he had never (feared that he would not be able to give
alms in charity) nor had he opposed the order so that he would need to
repent.

Ar-Razi here arose as one who (cannot arise except as one, whom the
Satan has prostrated by (his) touch, does rise). He said: “This verse
distresses the hearts of the poor and makes them sad because they cannot
pay charities, it embarrasses the rich because it imposes on them heavy
duty and it causes the Muslims to criticize each other. Acting according
to this verse causes separation and gloominess and giving up acting
according to it causes cordiality. What causes cordiality is worthier of
being followed than what causes separation and gloominess…” How odd his
raving was! It contradicted the saying of Allah (that is better for you
and purer) and His saying (So when you do not do it and Allah has turned
to you (mercifully), then keep up prayer). Refer to this raving in his
tafseer Mafateeh al-Ghayb, vol.8 p.168.

Would that he had said: “Zakat and hajj distress the hearts of the poor
and bring them sorrow because the poor cannot do them and they (zakat
and hajj) embarrass the rich because they impose on them heavy duty;
therefore carrying them out causes separation and gloominess and giving
up carrying them out causes cordiality and friendliness and whatever
causes cordiality and friendliness is worthier of being followed than
what causes separation and gloominess; therefore according to the
analogy of this (imam) giving up the zakat and the hajj is worthier. In
fact his analogy requires giving up all the religions in order not to
lead to separation and disagreements. We resort to Allah to save us from
the torpor of mind and the raving of tongue. There is no power save in
Allah, the Mighty, the High!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Al-Hakim after mentioning this tradition in his Mustadrak said: “It
is a true tradition according to the conditions of the two sheikhs;
al-Bukhari and Muslim but they have not mentioned it.” The same has been
said by ath-Thahabi after mentioning it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak.

(318)

**68. His indulgence to Mo’awiya**

Umar let Mo’awiya, who had been appointed by Umar as the wali of Sham,
free to the full to do whatever he liked, to behave as his deviate mind
led him, to rule however he wished. He lived at ease indifferent to
anything other than what he chose to himself unlike what Umar had
admired of his emirs. Once Umar saw Mo’awiya in Sham surrounded with
splendor like that of Kasra (the emperor of Persia) and wearing highly
brocaded cloths that the nature of Umar disliked and hated but he did
not say to him then except: “I neither order you nor I forbid you”. He
gave him permission and option to do whatever he liked and so he ravaged
left and right and there was no one daring to stand against his vanity
and corruption. One of the fruits of this seed that Umar had grown in
Mo’awiya was his transgression against Imam Ali (s) in Siffeen and after
that was what he did against Imam Hasan (s) in Sabaat.

Since then the Umayyads had seized the wealth of Allah, enslaved His
people and taken the religion of Allah as a means to achieve their greed
and tendencies. We are Allah’s and to Him we shall return and those who
do wrong will come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!

**69. His illegal order**

He often ordered of some things against the Sharia and then he gave up
after being reminded. First: Muhammad bin Mukhallad al-Attar mentioned
in his Fawa’id:[^1] “Once Umar has ordered a pregnant women to be stoned.
Ma’ath bin Jabal denied that and said to Umar: “If you have an evidence
against her, you have no evidence against the one in her abdomen.” Umar
annulled his judgment and said: “Women have become unable to beget one
like Ma’ath. Were it not for Ma’ath, Umar would perish.” Second:
al-Hakim mentioned in his Mustadrak[^2] that ibn Abbas had said: “Once a
mad pregnant woman was brought to Umar and he

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Al-Isaba by ibn Hajar, biography of Ma’ath bin Jabal.
[^2] Vol.4 p.389.

(319)

decided to stone her. Ali said to him: “Have you not known that
obligations are not imposed on three ones; a mad one until he becomes
sane, a child until he becomes adult and a sleeping one until he
awakes?” Then Umar set the woman free.” This woman was different from
that woman. That one, about whom Ma’ath reminded the caliph, was not mad
and the caliph could stone her but after giving birth to her child and
then the caliph would have to ensure the nursing of the child after
stoning his mother but as for the second woman, Umar could not stone her
at all because she was mad.

The judge of the judges Abdul Jabbar in his book al-Mughni had a long
speech about stoning a pregnant woman and this was a point of argument
between him and Sharif al-Murtadha in his book ash-Shafi. Ibn Abul
Hadeed mentioned the arguments of both of them in Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 3 p.150-152.

Third: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[^1] that Abu Dhabyan
al-Janbi had said: “One day a woman, who had committed adultery, was
brought to Umar, who ordered her to be stoned. Ali took the woman away
from Umar’s men and prevented them from stoning her. They went back to
Umar telling him that Ali bin Abu Talib had prevented them from carrying
out the order of the caliph Umar. Umar said: “He (Ali) did not do that
unless he knew something!” He sent for Ali. Ali came to Umar, who was
somehow angry. He said to Ali: “Why did you prevent these men from
executing my order?” Ali said: “Have you not heard the Prophet (s)
saying: “Three ones are free from being considered as sinful; a sleeping
one until he awakes, a child until he becomes adult and a mad one until
he becomes sane”?” He said: “Yes, I have.” Ali said: “This woman is mad.
The adulterer might have committed the sin with her while she was mad.”
Umar said: “I do not know!” Ali said: “I also do not know!” Umar set the
woman free and he did not stone her.”[^2]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] vol.1 p.154-.
[^2] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.389, Talkees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi. Al-Bukahri has summarized the tradition in his Sahih, vol.4
p.117 saying: “Ali said to Umar: “Have you not known that three ones are
free from being considered as sinful;

(320)

Fourth: Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya fee
as-Siyasa ash-Shar’iyya (the wise ways in legal politics) that once a
woman had been brought to Umar and she confessed that she had committed
adultery. Umar ordered the woman to be stoned. Ali asked him to delay
his order a little that she might have an excuse which might save her
from the punishment. He asked the woman: “What has led you to commit
adultery?” She said: “There was a herdsman with me (in the pasture) who
had water and milk among his camels but I had not. I became thirsty and
I asked him for some water or milk. He refused to give me unless I would
(give him my self). I refused to submit to him for three times but when
I became too thirsty and I thought that I was about to die, I submitted
to him and he gave me some water.” Ali said: “Allah is great! ‘but
whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring nor exceeding the limit,
then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. Qur'an, 16:115’”

Al-Bayhaqi mentioned in his Sunan that Abu Abdurrahman as-Sulami had
said: “Once a woman had become too thirsty. She passed by a shepherd and
asked him for some water but he refused to give her unless she would let
him make love with her. She submitted to him. Umar consult the people
about stoning her. Ali said: “She was obliged to do that and I think
that she is to be set free.” Umar set her free.”[^1]

Fifth: Ibn al-Qayyim said:[^2] “Another woman was brought to Umar and
she confessed and confirmed that she had committed adultery. Ali was
present then. He said: “She talks as if she has not known that it
(adultery) is impermissible.” He did not punish her.” Ibn al-Qayyim
added: “This is accurate insight.”

Sixth: Ahmad Ameen said in his book Fajr al-Islam:[^3] “A case was
offered to Umar that a man had been killed by his father’s wife and her
lover. Umar hesitated to kill two persons for one. Ali said to him:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a mad one until he becomes sane, a child until he becomes adult and a
sleeping one until he awakes.”
[^1] At-Turuq al-Hakamiyya fee as-Siyasa ash-Shar’iyya by ibn al-Qayyim,
p.53.
[^2] Ibid. p.55.
[^3] p.285, quoted from the book A’lam al-Muwaqqi’een.

(321)

“If a group of people participate in a theft, will you cut the hands of
all of them?” Umar said: “Yes, I will.” Ali said: “It is the same here.”
He did as Ali said to him and he wrote to his official: “Kill them both!
If all the people of Sana’a participated in killing him, I would kill
them all.”

Seventh: Ibn Abul Hadeed said: “Once Umar sent for a woman to ask her
about something. She was pregnant and because of fearing him, she
miscarried of her fetus. He asked the great companions to give him a
fatwa about this matter. They said to him: “You are not to be blamed
because you are discipliner.” Ali said to him: “If they wanted to
compliment you, they have cheated you and if this was their opinion
after trying their best, they have mistaken. You have to free a
(believing) slave (as a penance).” Umar and the companions referred to
Ali’s opinion.”[^1]

Eighth: Umar was confused what to do to a man from the first
Muhajireen, who had fought in the battle of Badr. He was Qudama bin
Madh’oon. One day he was brought to Umar after drinking wine. Umar
decided to whip him. He said to Umar: “Why will you whip me? The Book of
Allah is between me and you.” Umar said: “Where is it in the Book of
Allah that I should not whip you?” He said: “Allah says in His Book: “On
those who believe and do good there is no blame for what they eat, when
they are careful (of their duty) and believe and do good deeds, then
they are careful (of their duty) and believe, then they are careful (of
their duty) and do good (to others), and Allah loves those who do good
(to others). Qur'an, 5:93” I am from among (those who believe and do
good). I have attended with the Prophet (s) in Badr, al-Hudaybiya,
al-Khandaq and other events. Umar did not know how to reply. He said to
his companions: “Let any of you reply to him!” Ibn Abbas said: “These
verses have been revealed as an excuse for the deceased Muslims and as a
reminder to the remaining believers because Allah says: “O ye who
believe! Intoxicants and gambling, (dedication of) stones, and
(divination by) arrows, are an abomination of Satan's handwork: eschew
such (abomination), that ye may prosper. Qur'an, 5:90” Then he recited
the other verse among which was “they are careful (of their duty) and

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol.1 p.58.

(322)

believe and do good deeds, then they are careful (of their duty) and
believe, then they are careful (of their duty) and do good.” He added:
“Allah has prohibited drinking wine, then would he, who drank wine after
it has been prohibited, be pious and God-fearing?” Umar said: “You are
right. Then what do you see?” Ali gave a fatwa to whip Qudama eighty
whips. The penalty of a winer has become such since that day.[^1]

Ninth: Ibn al-Qayyim mentioned in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya, p.27
a case of a woman, who had loved a young man from the Ansar but when he
did not respond to her, she played a trick. She took an egg and poured
its albumen on her dress and between her thighs and then she came to
Umar crying. She said to him: “This (young) man has raped me and
disgraced me among my family and this is the sign of what he has
committed with me.” Umar asked some women and they said that there was
some sperm on her cloths and body. Then Umar wanted to punish the young
man, who was crying for help and saying: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, make sure
of the matter! By Allah, I have not committed any sin. I have never
intended to do anything to her. She tried to seduce me to yield to her
but I refused.” Ali was present. Umar asked him: “O Abul Hasan, what do
you think about them?” Ali looked at the woman’s cloth and he asked for
boiling water. He poured the hot water over the dress and the white
became solid. He took it, smelt it and tasted it and he found that it
had the taste of egg. He scolded the woman and she confessed the
truth.

Tenth: Ibn al-Qayyim in his book at-Turuq al-Hakamiyya[^2] mentioned
that two men from Quraysh had paid one hundred dinars to a woman as
deposit and they said to her: “Do not give back the money to any one of
us if the other is not with him.” After a year one of them came and said
to the woman: “My friend died and I want the money.” She refused to give
him the money and said: “You both have said to me not to give the money
to any of you if the other was with him. I will not give it to you.” He
asked her relatives and neighbors to intercede with her until she agreed
to repay him the money. After

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.4 p.376, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by
ath-Thahabi.
[^2] P.30-.

(323)

another year the second man came to her and asked her to give him the
money back. She said to him: “Your friend has come to me and he
pretended that you had died and I gave him the money.” They went to Umar
to judge on their case. Umar wanted to judge against the woman. She
asked him to send them to Ali bin Abu Talib to judge on their case. Umar
sent them to Ali, who perceived that the two men had deceived the woman.
He said to the man: “Have you not asked the woman not to repay the money
to any of you unless the other one would be with him?” The man said:
“Yes, we have.” Then Ali said to him: “Go and bring your friend and then
the woman will give you the money; otherwise you have no right to ask
her for anything.”

Eleventh: Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[^1] a tradition
narrated by ibn Abbas that once Umar had been confused about the doubt
in prayer (being uncertain how many rak’as one has offered). He asked
his servant: “O boy, have you heard from the Prophet (s) or any of his
companions if one became uncertain in his prayer, what he should do?”
After a moment Abdurrahman bin Ouff came and asked Umar: “What is the
matter with you?” Umar said: “I asked this boy if he had heard from the
Prophet (s) or any of his companions if one doubted in his prayer what
he should do.” Abdurrahman said: “I have heard the Prophet (s) saying:
“If one of you becomes uncertain in his prayer…” Refer to this
tradition; it has a fatwa from Abdurrahman which is opposite to what has
been narrated from the Prophet (s) by the Shia.

The cases like these ones were many! They showed that Umar soon
submitted to the truth in such matters since he recognized it and he
submitted to whoever reminded him if he ignored; nevertheless he was too
severe when determining his policies without paying any attention to
anyone. He was too severe to his officials; whether to their bodies or
their properties. He often confiscated some of their monies to the
treasury and he often dealt with them with his stick severely! He might
burn down their houses over them as he had done to his emir of Kufa,
Sa’d bin Abu Waqqass when he ordered to burn down his palace. Once again
he beat Sa’d with his stick when Sa’d competed with people to reach him.
Once again he (Umar) saw some

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] vol.1 p.190.

(324)

people following Ubayy bin Ka’b in the street and then he raised his
stick to hit Ubbay. Ubbay said to him: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, fear
Allah!” Umar said to him: “O ibn Ka’b, what are these crowds behind you?
Have you not known that it is conceit to the followed one and meanness
to the followers?”

The darrah[^1] of Umar was a whip of torment, which the great companions
feared, until it was said that it was more frightening than the sword of
al-Hajjaj.[^2]

He had beaten Umm Farwa bint Abu Quhafa severely with his darrah when
her brother Abu Bakr died and she with other women, at the head of whom
was Aa’isha, began crying for him. He did pay no attention to her
position that she was the aunt of Aa’isha and the sister of Abu Bakr.
Hisham bin al-Waleed pulled her in a mean way to the street. Umar wanted
to frighten the other women, who soon ran away here and there. How
harshly he often behaved to achieve his policy without having any pity
towards anyone and without fearing any end! He had said to Imam Ali (s)
and his companions, who had refused to pay homage to Abu Bakr, when they
were in the house of Fatima (s): “I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul
is, either you come out to pay homage or I shall burn down the house
over you.” The daughter of the Prophet (s) went out crying and shouting.
When she saw what Umar and his men had done to Imam Ali (s) and
az-Zubayr, she said: “How soon you have attacked the family of the
messenger of Allah!”[^3]

And many many of such political situations which were as Imam Ali (s)
had said when talking about entrusting Umar with the caliphate by Abu
Bakr: “…he made it (the caliphate) in a harsh land, which was full of
stumbles and which could not be avoided. A man in it was like a rider of
a reluctant camel, if he tightened its noseband, he would tear its nose
and if he loosened its noseband, it would insert him into difficulties.
People were afflicted with confusion, fickleness and

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Darrah is a dry bunch of dates (after losing its fruits).
[^2] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.60. Al-Hajjaj was a tyrant emir of
the Umayyad state.
[^3] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.134.

(325)

objection…”[^1]

**70. Inventing the Shura**

When Umar was about to die, he invented the Shura to choose the caliph
after him. He appointed a committee of six persons pretending that Ali,
the Prophet’s brother and guardian, was one of them;

Ali, who was the best of the human beings after the Prophet,

who was the very self of the Prophet (s).

Muhammad and Ali were the two eyes of the world;

one was the right and the other was the left.

Muhammad was the city of knowledge and Ali was its gate

and whoever wanted to come to the city,

had to enter it from its gate.

O my Lord! What was the Shura invented for?! Had he (Ali) been compared
with the first one (Abu Bakr) so that he would be compared with these
ones and their likes?! Certainly not! But “…a man (Sa’d) listened to his
rage and the other (Abdurrahman) sided with his kin (Othman) for this
and that.[^2]

This Shura had many bad consequences and evil results that had caused
great harm to Islam. Umar had in this Shura contradictories that he
would have better not done!

When he (Umar) was stabbed[^3] and he became desperate of remaining
alive, he was asked: “Would that you have appointed the caliph after
you!” He said: “If Abu Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph
because he was the trustee of this umma[^4] and if Salim, the

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1.
[^2] Referring to horrible event that Imam Ali (s) disliked to mention
openly.
[^3] On Wednesday, four days before the end of Thul Hijja, 23 A.H. and
he died three days after that and then he was buried on Sunday. [^4] If
Abu Ubayda was the trustee of this umma, then Imam Ali (s) was worthier
of the umma than itself as they had known well. Umar himself had
congratulated him of that on the day of al-Ghadeer.

(326)

mawla of Huthayfa was alive, I would appointed him a caliph because he
was too sincere in his love to Allah.”[^1] His son Abdullah was mentioned
to him but he refused to appoint him as the caliph. The companions went
out and then they came back to him saying: “O Ameerul Mo'mineen, Would
that you have determined a decree!” He said: “I have decided, after my
first saying, to entrust your affair with a man, who is the best among
you to lead you to the truth” meaning Ali (s). They said to him: “What
prevents you from that then?” he said: “I cannot bear it (the caliphate)
alive and a dead.” Then he said: “You are to keep to these ones; Ali,
Othman, Abdurrahman, Sa’d, az-Zubayr and Talha. They should consult to
choose one from among them. If they choose that one as the caliph, then
they have to support and assist him.” Then he sent for those six men and
said to them: “When I die, Suhayb should lead the people in offering the
prayer. You have to deliberate for three days and when the fourth day
comes you must have an emir from among you.”

Then he ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari to select fifty men from the Ansar
with their weapons to supervise these six men until they should choose
one from among them within three days after Umar’s death. He ordered
Suhayb to lead the prayers during that time. He ordered the six men to
be inside a house under the supervision of Abu Talha with his sword and
his armed men. He said to Abu Talha: “When five men agreed on one
opinion and the sixth one objected to them, you should split his head
with your sword and when four of them agreed and two refused, you should
behead them both and if each three of them had an opinion, the caliph
should be from the group of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those
three if they would refuse to submit but if the three days elapsed while
they have not agreed on one yet, you should kill all the six[^2] and let
the matter

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] I do not think that he has forgotten his coming back with the
banner after the coming back of his friend (Abu Bakr) from Khaybar
defeated and sorrowful and I do not think that he has forgotten the good
news of the Prophet (s) to Imam Ali (s), who has obtained the great
victory, nor has he forgotten the saying of the Prophet (s) on that day:
“By Allah, I will give the banner tomorrow to a man, whom Allah will
grant victory. He loves Allah and His messenger and Allah and His
messenger love him.”

[^2] Umar’s slighting the bloods of these men might encourage the
killers of Othman to slight his blood and might encourage the Kharijites
to slight the bloods of Imam Ali (s) and his companions on the days of
al-Jamal, al-Basra, an-Nahrawan and Siffeen

(327)

of the caliphate to the Muslims to elect whoever they liked.” This is
the summary of the covenant of the Shura.[^1] If Umar was unwilling to
undertake the caliphate as he pretended, then why did he insert himself
in what he had fled from and arrange in the worst and most harmful and
dangerous way?! He chose six men out of the whole umma and described
them with what prevented them from being chosen as caliphs that we have
not mentioned here![^2] Then he arranged the matter in a way that it
would lead to choose Othman as the caliph in any way and without a bit
of doubt![^3] Which bearing (that Umar pretended to refrain from) was
more than this?! What was the difference between appointing Othman
openly and limiting the matter in a way that would lead to him alone and
would kill the rejecters?

Would he have appointed Othman or any one else and not put the slave
Suhayb over their heads with Abu Talha and his men with their drawn
swords to kill them (Ali and the others) if they opposed that critical
plan which Umar had planned to them! If he had entrusted the caliphate
to anyone he liked, the umma would not have seen him slight their (these
six men’s) bloods and be

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

when fighting him and killing him later on and encouraged Yazeed to
slight the blood of the master of the martyrs Imam Husayn (s) in Kerbala
for Umar was the example especially for those people with no doubt!

[^1] Umar’s covenant of Shura in this way as we have summarized is
proved by the recurrent traditions that have been mentioned by all the
historians and scholars of Hadith. Refer to al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer,
vol.3, the events of the year 23 of hijra, Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by
by ibn Jareer, the events of 23 A.H., Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.62
and the rest of the books of history.

[^2] To see how Umar has described them, refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol.1 p.72 and you will find wonders!

[^3] Therefore Imam Ali (s) said: “It (the caliphate) gone away from
us.” His uncle al-Abbas said-as in al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer and Tareekh
al-Umam wel Mulook by ibn Jareer: “…how did you know?” Imam Ali (s)
said: “Othman has been compared to me…they are with the majority; if two
men will choose a man and the other two men will choose a man, then they
will be with the group of Abdurrahman and Sa’d will never object to his
uncle Abdurrahman at all and Abdurrahman is the kin of Othman; they will
never disagree at all. Even if the other two are with me, they will not
avail me.”

(328)

indifferent to shedding their bloods[^1] nor would have the umma seen
him despise them by preferring the slave Suhayb to them in offering the
prayer of his (Umar’s) funerals and the five daily prayers. As if he was
not satisfied with despising and disgracing them when he said: “If Abu
Ubayda was alive, I would appoint him a caliph and if Salim was alive, I
would appoint him a caliph” preferring them to these six men, among whom
was the Prophet’s brother, guardian and heir, Aaron of the umma, the
judge, the gate of the house of wisdom, the gate of the city of
knowledge and the one who had had the knowledge of the Book; Imam Ali
(s).

As for Salim, he was neither from Quraysh nor was he an Arab. He was a
foreigner from Istakhr or Karmad. He was a slave owned by Abu Huthayfa
bin Utba’s wife, whose name was Thubayta bint Ya’ar bin Zayd bin Ubayd
bin Zayd al-Ansari al-Ousi.[^2] The umma had agreed unanimously due to
the legal verdicts that imamate would not be permissible for one like
Salim,[^3] then how did Umar say: “If Salim was alive, I would appoint
him a caliph?”[^4]

This Shura had caused competition and sedition between these six men
that led to separation and disagreement among the Muslims for each one
of these six men found himself as well-qualified for the caliphate and
equal to the others whereas before the Shura (of Umar) they did not
think in this way. In fact Abdurrahman was a follower of Othman, Sa’d
was a follower of Abdurrahman and az-Zubayr was one of Imam Ali’s
followers, who had supported him on the day of the Saqeefa. It was him
(az-Zubayr) who had drawn his sword[^5] defending

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] In spite of that Allah has strongly prohibited shedding bloods in
the clear verses of the Qur'an and it has been prohibited by the
prophetic traditions and by the consensus of the umma.

[^2] Al-Istee’ab by ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Salim.

[^3] Many scholars have declared the consensus on this matter such as
an-Nawawi in his book Sharh Sahih Muslim, chap. of Imamate.

[^4] They justified that by saying that Umar had said that as an ijtihad
by him due to his own opinion. Among those who have mentioned this
excuse was ibn Abdul Birr in his book al-Istee’ab. Refer to that to see
that they were indifferent to the legal verdicts and the clear texts of
Allah and His messenger.

[^5] Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari mentioned in his book
Kitab as-Saqeefa a long tradition which also has been mentioned by ibn
Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahjol

(329)

Imam Ali (s) and it was him who was among the few ones who had escorted
Fatima (s) to her tomb and offered the prayer for her where she had been
buried under the darkness of night[^1] according to the will of Fatima
(s) herself and it was him who had said during the reign of Umar: “By
Allah, if Umar dies, I will pay homage to Ali”[^2] but the Shura made him
look forward to the caliphate and so he parted with Ali (s) as the
others did. He went to fight against Imam Ali (s) in the battle of
al-Jamal (the camel). Abdurrahman bin Ouff himself regretted his doing
when he had preferred Othman to himself in the matter of the caliphate
and then he parted with him and tried his best to depose him from the
caliphate but he did not succeed. And people knew well what Talha and
az-Zubayr had done to incite people against Othman and then Aa’isha
joined them assisting Talha and hoping that the caliphate might come
back to Taym.[^3] She often said: “Kill Na’thal (meaning Othman) for he
has disbelieved!”[^4]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Balagha, vol. 2, saying: “Umar with a gang, among whom were Usayd bin
Khudhayr and Salama bin Aslam, went to the house of Fatima (s). Umar
said to them (to Ali and the companions who were with Ali inside the
house): “Come out to pay homage.” They refused to do that and az-Zubayr
came out to them with his sword. Umar said: “Arrest the dog!” Salama bin
Aslam jumped to him (to az-Zubayr) and took the sword from his hand and
threw it against the wall…”

[^1] Imam Ali (s) had lead his few companions in offering the prayer of
funerals for Fatima (s) and Abu Bakr had not been allowed (or even
informed) to offer the prayer for her. Refer to Sahih of al-Bukhari,
vol.2 p.39 and Sahih of Muslim, vol.2 p.72.

[^2] Once Umar said from above the minbar in a long speech he made: “…I
have been informed that someone of you has said: “by Allah, if Umar
dies, I will pay homage to so-and-so.” Let no one be deceived to say
such a thing. By Allah, the homage of Abu Bakr was a slip…but Allah has
saved (the umma) from its evil…” Refer to Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.4
p.119. Al-Qastalani said in his book Irshad as-Sari when explaining this
tradition that az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam often said: “If Umar dies, I will
pay homage to Ali. The homage of Abu Bakr was a slip but it was
accomplished.” This saying reached Umar, who became very angry and then
he made that speech. Such was what all the scholars, who had explained
Sahih of al-Bukhari, mentioned in their books.

[^3] Taym was the tribe of Abu Bakr, the father of Aa’isha.

[^4] All the historians have mentioned that she had incited people
against Othman. One of her coevals blamed her by reciting the following
verses of poetry:

The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is from you, Storm
is from you and rain is from you. (330)

These ones and their followers activated their opposition against
Othman until they encouraged the people of Medina and the other
countries to revolt against him and then to kill him. When Othman was
killed and the people paid homage to Imam Ali (s) to be the caliph,
Talha and az-Zubayr were the first ones who had paid the homage but
their position in the Shura raised their greediness to the caliphate and
made them break their homage to Imam Ali (s) and then to wage a war
against him. They (Talha and az-Zubayr) revolted against Imam Ali (s)
and Aa’sha joined them hoping that Talha might be the caliph. Bloods
were shed in Basra (the battle of al-Jama), Siffeen and an-Nahrawan,
fatal seditions spread here and there and bloody wars were waged; all
those horrible events were the consequences of Umar’s Shura, which made
opponents to Imam Ali (s) competing with him in his right and fighting
him to extort this right from him. Moreover, it was this Shura that had
incited Mo’awiya to stretch his neck towards the caliphate.[^1] Then
Mo’awiya and each one of the men of the Shura became impassable obstacle
in the way of Imam Ali (s), who had intended to show the truth and to
restore what had been corrupted.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You have ordered the emir to be killed, And said to us that he has
disbelieved! Refer to al-Kamil by ibn al-Atheer, vol.3 p.8.

[^1] Abu Othman mentioned in the book of as-Sufyaniyya as I Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 1 p.62 that Ma’mar bin Sulayman at-Tameemi narrated from
his father from Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab that ibn Abbas had said: “I have
heard Umar saying to the men of the Shura: “If you cooperate, support
each other and become loyal to each other, you will eat (obtain) it (the
caliphate), you and your progeny but if you envy each other, disagree
with each other and hate each other, then Mo’awiya bin Abu Sufyan is to
be the caliph over you.” Mo’awiya was the emir of Sham, appointed by
Umar, at that time. It is clear that this word has nominated Mo’awiya
and encouraged him to ask for the caliphate with all his power and as
possible as he could use deceit and trick. When the fate of the
caliphate after Umar became in Othman’s hand, it meant that it would
become in Mo’awiya’s hand after Othman; therefore Umar had arranged the
Shura in a way that it would consequently drive the caliphate to Othman
as we have said. In short, Othman, before facing his fate, he had made
five persons compete with Imam Ali (s) and fight him to extort his legal
right. Othman was not satisfied with this until he incited Mo’awiya to
stretch his neck towards the caliphate as it has been clear to the men
of understaning.

(331)

The Shura of Umar had incited the umm against Othman[^1] and planted
seeds that took roots and grew after the killing of Othman that was an
opportunity seized by the people who had fought Imam Ali (s) in
al-Jamal, Siffeen and an-Nahrawan.

How odd and wonderful the order of Umar was! He ordered the six men,
whom he had nominated for the Shura so that one of them should be
elected as the caliph after him, to be killed if they would not achieve
his order before the end of the third day after his death!!!

Woe! Could we believe that it was permissible for him (Umar) to kill
these six men or any one of them just because of delaying carrying out
his order after the third day of his death?! But indeed he had ordered
to kill them while he was comfortable and tranquil with that. He had
ordered Abu Talha al-Ansari and his men with this order and stressed on
them and on Suhayb to execute it.

The Muslims saw and heard, But none denied or felt pain! This was the
utmost persistence of Umar. He went on his exaggeration to the farthest
point! He knew well the position of these

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] On the day of the Shura, Umar had said to Othman: “As if I see that
Quraysh has entrusted you with this matter (the caliphate) and then you
will make bani Umayya (the Umayyads) and bani Ma’eet over the necks of
people and will preferred them to the others with the wealth and then a
group of the Arabs will come to you to slaughter you in your bed. By
Allah, if they do, you will do, and if you do, they will do.” Then Umar
grasped the forelock of Othman and said: “When that occurs, remember my
saying. It will take place.” Ibn Abul Hadeed said in Sharh Nahjol
Balagha, vol. 1 p.22 after mentioning this tradition: “Our Sheikh Abu
Othman has mentioned this tradition in his book as-Sufyaniyya and it has
been mentioned by others when talking about the insight of Umar.” This
confirms our saying that Umar has intended, out of the caliphate of
Othman, to pave the way for Mo’awiya because he knew that Othman would
be killed and then the way would be opened for Mo’awiya to reach the
caliphate. In fact the very caliphate of Othman would take Mo’awiya to
the throne!

The outset is from you and the vicissitudes of time is from you,
Storm is from you and rain is from you.
You have ordered the emir to be killed,
And said to us that he has disbelieved!

(332)

six men more than any other one of the companions and he witnessed then
that the Prophet (s) died while he had been pleased with them.

Among the six there was one, who was the brother of the Prophet (s) and
who was to the Prophet (s) as Aaron was to Moses but he was not a
prophet. He was the vizier and the guardian of the Prophet (s). He was
the father of the two grandsons of the Prophet (s). He was the hero of
Badr, Uhud and Hunayn and he was the one who had the knowledge of the
Book. Umar had better avoid exposing this great man and the rest of the
six to this danger and to this meanness and disgrace! He could entrust
the matter with no one and he would let the Muslims choose whomsoever
they liked and then he would be truthful in his saying: “I cannot bear
it alive and dead.”

Or he could appoint Othman as the caliph openly as Abu Bakr had
appointed him (Umar) before and so he would be frank in what he had
intended to do with no deceit or trickery for he had arranged the matter
of the Shura in a way that it must lead to the caliphate of Othman
definitely. Umar had not preferred Abdurrahman to the other five ones,
unless he knew that this would affect the matter and he knew that Sa’d
would not object to Abdurrahman at all.

People knew this trick of Umar even if he thought that he had blinded
the matter and said: “I do not bear it alive and dead.”

What did the Muslims think if the Prophet (s) heard Umar ordering Abu
Talha by saying to him: “When five men agreed on one opinion and the
sixth one objected to them, you should split his head with your sword
and when four of them agreed and two refused, you should behead them
both and if each three of them had an opinion, the caliph should be from
the group of Abdurrahman and then you should kill those three if they
would refuse to submit but if the three days elapsed while they have not
agreed on one yet, you should kill all the six”? O Muslims, be liberal
in your opinions and say what you think! We are Allah’s and to Him we
shall return!


