Chapter Three : Othman and His Followers’ Interpretations
=========================================================

(333)

**71. His kindness to his relatives**

Othman was kind to his relatives[^1] (the family of Abul Aass).[^2] He
loved them too much and preferred them to the all of the umma until he
paid attention neither to the blamers nor to the revolters. He violated
many Qur’anic verdicts and many holy texts of the sacred Sunna of the
Prophet (s) and the traditions that had been followed before him in
order to satisfy his relatives.

Ibn Abul Hadeed said:[^3] “The prediction of Umar about Othman turned
out to be true. Othman made the Umayyads tread on the necks of people.
He entrusted them with the emirate of the different countries and gifted
them with the wealth of the Muslims. At his

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Othman had violated the legal texts in many occasions for the sake
of his relatives. We cannot cover them all in this book. They may not be
less than the violations of the two previous caliphs together.

[^2] The Prophet (s) has said: “When the family of al-Aass becomes
thirty men, they will distribute the wealth of the Muslims among
themselves, make people slaves for them and distort the religion of
Allah according to their interests.” It has been mentioned by al-Hakim
in his Mustadrak, vol.4 p.480, from Imam Ali (s), Abu Tharr, and Abu
Sa’eed al-Khidri and mentioned by ath-Thahabi in Talkhees al-Mustadrak.
The prophetic traditions dispraising the family of al-Aass are true and
recurrent. The Prophet (s) has declared the reality of those hypocrite
people and he has cursed them (that he who would perish might perish by
clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear proof). Al-Hakim
mentioned in his Mustadrk many other traditions which sufficed in this
concern. Refer to our book Abu Hurayra, p.118-128.

[^3] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.66.

(334)

days Armenia was conquered. He took all the khums[^1] of its booties and
gifted it to Marwan.”

Ibn Abul Hadeed added: “Once Abdullah bin Khalid bin Usayd asked Othman
for a present. He gave him four hundred thousand dirhams…he permitted
al-Hakam bin Abul Aass to return to Medina after the Prophet (s) had
exiled him from it and Abu Bakr and Umar had refused to let him return.
He gave him one hundred thousand dirhams. The Prophet (s) had given the
Muslims a place of a market in Medina called Nahrooz as charity but
Othman, after being the caliph, gifted it to al-Harith bin al-Hakam,
Marwan’s brother and he gave Fadak to Marwan, which Fatima (s) had asked
for after the death of her father as her inheritance one time and as
donation the other time but she had been deprived of it…he prevented all
the Muslims from grazing their cattle in the pastures around Medina
except the Umayyads…he gave Abdullah bin Abu Sarh all the booties the
Muslims had got when conquering north Africa, from Tripoli to Tangier,

without giving any share to any other Muslim…he gave Abu Sufyan bin
Harb two hundred thousand (dirhams) from the public treasury on the same
day when he gave Marwan bin al-Hakam one hundred thousand (dirhams) from
the treasury when he had married him his daughter Umm Abban. On that day
Zayd bin Arqam, who was the keeper of the treasury, brought the keys of
the treasury and put them before Othman and began crying. Othman said to
him: “Do you cry because I help my relatives?” Zayd said: “No, but I
think that you have taken these monies instead of the monies you had
spent for the sake of Allah at the time of the messenger of Allah. By
Allah, if you give Marwan one hundred dirhams, it will be too much.”
Othman said: “O ibn Arqam, throw the keys! We will find other than
you.”

Ibn Abul Hadeed added: “One day Abu Musa brought him (Othman) great
wealth from Iraq (as land taxes) and he distributed it all among the
Umayyads. He married his daughter Aa’isha to al-Harith bin al-Hakam and
he gave him one hundred thousand dirhams from the treasury after
deposing Zayd bin Arqam from the treasury…besides these things he
committed many other faults that made the Muslims bear grudge against
him…such as exiling Abu Tharr to ar-Rabatha

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Fifth.

(335)

(in the desert), beating Abdullah bin Mass’ood until he broke his ribs,
appointing doorkeepers (to prevent people from coming to him), deviating
from the way of Umar in executing the penalties, judging among people,
punishing the transgressors and in being strict to manage the affairs of
the citizens. And he ended his bad deeds with his book to Mo’awiya
ordering him to kill a group of the Muslims and then many people of
Medina with the people who had come from Egypt revolted against him and
killed him; yet they had to depose him from the caliphate and not to
hasten in killing him…Ameerul Mo'mineen (Imam Ali) was the most innocent
of killing him. He had declared that in many of his speeches. He said:
“By Allah, I have not killed Othman and I have not agreed with the
people on killing him.” He had said the truth. Blessing be upon him…”

In short, all the transgressions of Othman had been narrated by the
narrators and mentioned by the historians and the scholars of Hadith.
Many of the scholars had considered them as true and fixed events. Refer
to the resources to see the clear truth.[^1]

The speech of Imam Ali (s), called ash-Shaqshaqiyya, suffices in
showing the reality of this man he said: “…until the third of people (of
the caliphs-Othman) came (become the caliph) struttingly… and his
relatives came with him gnawing the wealth of Allah as camels gnawing
the grass of spring until his weaving turned over him, his deeds
finished him off, his retinue failed him…”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Among those, who have considered the transgressions of Othman as
true and real with no doubt, was ash-Shahristani in his book al-Milel
wen-Nihal. Othman had committed many other violations such as burning
the copies of the holy Qur'an in order to gather the Muslims on one
reciting of the Qur'an, gifting the warriors from the monies of charity
whereas they were not from among the eight classes that Allah had
limited charity to by saying: (Alms are only for the poor and the needy,
and the officials (appointed) over them, and those whose hearts are made
to incline (to truth) and the (ransoming of) captives and those in debts
and in the way of Allah and the wayfarer) 9/60, beating Ammar bin Yassir
severely, not punishing Ubaydillah bin Umar with the legal penalty when
he had killed al-Hurmuzan, his book to the people of Egypt to kill
Muhammad bin Abu Bakr and a group of the believers with him and many
other transgressions!

(336)

**72. His prayer in travel**

A four rak’as prayer is shortened to two rak’as in travel whether in
the case of fear or safety according to the Sharia. The legality of
“taqseer or qasr”[^1] has been proved by the Qur'an, the Sunna and the
consensus of the umma. Allah has said: “And when you journey in the
earth, there is no blame on you if you shorten the prayer, if you fear
that those who disbelieve will cause you distress. Qur'an, 4:101”

Ya’la bin Umayya narrated that he had asked Umar: “Why do we shorten
prayers though we have felt safe?” Umar said: “I have wondered at what
you have wondered at and once I asked the messenger of Allah about it.
He said: “It is a charity that Allah has endowed you with. Accept His
charity!”[^2]

Ibn Umar said:[^3] “I often accompanied the messenger of Allah (s) in
travel. He did not offer more than two rak’as (in travel) until he left
to the better world. I accompanied Umar (in travel). He did not offer
more than two rak’as until he died. I accompanied Othman. He did not
offer more than two rak’as.”[^4]

Allah has said: “Certainly you have in the Messenger of Allah an
excellent exemplar. Qur'an, 33:21”

Ibn Shayba narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: “The best believers
of my umma are they who witness that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and who when doing good they become
pleased, when doing wrong they ask Allah to forgive them and when
traveling they shorten their prayers.”

Anass bin Malik said: “Once we traveled with the Prophet (s) from
Medina to Mecca. He offered two rak’as two rak’as until we
returned.”[^5]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Shortening prayers during travels.
[^2] Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.258.
[^3] As in Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.295.
[^4] So did Othman during the first six or nine years of his caliphate
but after that he offered full (four rak’as) prayers in travel until he
died. We will mention this soon inshallah.
[^5] Sahihs of al-Bukhari and Muslim.

(337)

Ibn Abbas said: “The Prophet (s) stayed at Mecca for nineteen days
shortening the prayers…”[^1] The Prophet (s) shortened the prayers during
the nineteen days because he had had no intention of residence.

It has been proved that the Prophet (s), when leading the people of
Mecca in offering the prayers after the hijra, had recited tasleem[^2]
after two rak’as in the four rak’as prayers. He had told the people (of
Mecca) before beginning the prayers to complete their four rak’as
prayers apologizing to them that he and his companions were travelers.

Anass said: “Once I offered Dhuhr prayer with the Prophet (s) in Medina
in four rak’as and offered Asr prayer with him in Thil Hulayfa in two
rak’as.[^3]

The Qur’anic verse has confirmed the legality of shortening prayers by
a traveler in the state of fear. The true traditions after that have
confirmed the legality of shortening the prayers by a traveler at all
and on this has been the consensus of the umma with no disagreement
except from Aa’isha and Othman. It has been mentioned that both of them
offered full prayers during travel. This was the first thing that the
people began criticizing Othman for as the historians had recorded it
from among the events of the year twenty-three of hijra.[^4]

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned in their Sahihs a tradition narrated by
Nafi’ that ibn Umar had said: “The messenger of Allah (s) always offered
two rak’as (instead of four) in Mina. So did Abu Bakr after him. Umar
did the same after Abu Bakr. Othman offered two rak’as during the first
period of his caliphate but then he offered four rak’as (in Mina)…”

They (al-Bukhari and Muslim) also mentioned that Abdurrahman bin Yazeed
had said: “Othman bin Affan led us in offering the prayer in Mina and he
offered four rak’as. It was said to Abdullah bin

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.1 p.131.
[^2] Saying “peace, mercy of Allah and blessing be upon you” to finish
prayers.
[^3] Sahih of Muslim, vol.1.
[^4] Al-Kamil by Ibn al-Atheer, vol.3 p.49, Tareekh aof at-tabari, vol.3
p.322.

(338)

Mass’ood about that. He sighed and then said: “I offered two rak’as
with the Prophet (s) in Mina, two rak’as with Abu Bakr and two rak’as
with Umar. I hope that two of these four rak’as will be accepted!”

They mentioned too that Haritha bin Wahab al-Khuza’iy had said: “Once
the Prophet (s) led us in offering the prayer where the people were so
many. His prayer was two rak’as.”[^1]

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih a tradition narrated by az-Zuhri from
Urwa that Aa’isha had said: “First the prayer has been legislated as two
rak’as and then the prayer in travel has been fixed (as two rak’as)
whereas the prayer in residence has become full (four rak’as).” Az-Zuhri
said: “I asked Urwa: “Then why does Aa’isha offer full prayers in
travel?” He said: “She has interpreted (the verdict according to her own
opinion) as Othman has done.”[^2]

Al-Fadhil an-Nawawi said when explaining this tradition of Muslim: “The
ulama disagreed on their (Othman and Aa’isha’s) interpretations; it was
said: Othman was Ameerul Mo'mineen (the commander of the believers) and
Aa’isha was Ummul Mo’mineen (the mother of the believers) so as if they
were always at home (in residence and not in travel). He added: “The
scholars have denied this justification saying that the Prophet (s)
would be worthier of this than Othman and Aa’isha and the same would be
with Abu Bakr and Umar. It was also said that Othman had got married in
Mecca.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad, vol.4 p.94 a tradition
narrated by Abbad bin Abdullah bin az-Zubayr that his father had said:
“Once when Mo’awiya has come (to Mecca) to offer the hajj, we came with
him from Mecca. He led us in offering Dhuhr prayer. He offered two
rak’as. But when Othman came to Mecca as traveler, he offered Dhuhr, Asr
and Isha’ prayer four rak’as and when he came to Mina he also offered
full prayers (in Mina and in Arafat). When Mo’awiya offered Dhuhr prayer
as two rak’as,

Marwan bin al-Hakam and Amr bin Othman said to him: “No one has faulted
your cousin (Othman) with worse than you have done!” He said to them:
“How is that?” They said to him: “Have you not known that he (Othman)
has offered full prayer in his travel? Mo’awiya said: “Has it been other
than what I did? I have offered it (the prayer) with the messenger of
Allah (s), with Abu Bakr and with Umar as qasr (shortened form).” They
said to him: “But your cousin has offered it in full and your doing so
would fault him.” Then Mo’awiya offered Asr prayer four rak’as after he
had offered Dhuhr prayer two rak’as.”

[^2] Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.258.

(339)

The scholars have denied this too saying that the Prophet (s) had
traveled with his wives but he had shortened his prayers. It was also
said that Othman and Aa’isha had done so for the sake of the nomads, who
had been with them, so that they would not think that prayers were two
rak’as whether in residence or in travel. The scholars have refuted this
too by saying that this meaning was existing at the time of the Prophet
(s). In fact the matter of prayer has become more famous at the time of
Othman and Aa’isha than before. It was also said that Othman and Aa’isha
had intended to reside in Mecca after offering the hajj.

This has also been refuted by saying that residing in Mecca for more
than three days was impermissible for the Muhajireen. It was said too
that Othman had had a piece of land in Mina. The scholars have refuted
this by saying that this did not require offering full prayers or
residing. They (Othman and Aa’isha) might think that offering qasr
prayer was permissible and offering full prayer was also permissible and
so they followed one of the two.

In fact, their objection to the legal texts was not limited to this
act, which had not led to profaning sanctities, shedding bloods,
violating honors or extorting properties as their other interpretations.
This was simple in comparison with their other interpretations against
the legal verdicts.


