Chapter Six : the Violations of Mo’awiya
========================================

(377) **88. Joining Ziyad to Abu Sufyan (as a son)**

Ziyad was an illegitimate son of Sumayya, with whom Abu Sufyan
(Mo’awiya’s father) had committed adultery while she was the wife of
Ubayd. When Mo’awiya became the caliph, he announced that Ziyad was the
son of Abu Sufyan according to a witness offered by Abu Maryam, the
vintner and the pimp.[^1] The Prophet (s) had said: “The child is to the
bed and the stone is to the adulteress.”[^2] The Prophet (s) had also
said: “He, who does something contrary to our religion, is apostate.”

It suffices us that Allah has said: “Call them by (the names of) their
fathers: that is more equitable in the sight of Allah. Qur'an, 33:5”
This doing of Mo’awiya was the first doing of the pre-Islamic age that
was applied openly in Islam. All the Muslims denied that but Mo’awiya
did not pay any attention and he became indifferent to them. In fact he
often became angry when Ziyad was not called by the name of Abu Sufyan
until one of his coevals said to him:

“Do you become angry when it is said that your father is chaste while
you become delighted when it is said he is an adulterer?”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Al-Mukhtasar by ibn Shuhna.
[^2] It means that the illegitimate child is to be ascribed to the
husband, on whose bed his wife has committed adultery, while the
adulterous wife must be stoned.

(378)

**89. Entrusting his son Yazeed with the caliphate**

Mo’awiya had entrusted his son Yazeed with the caliphate while he was
yet ignorant young boy drinking wine and playing with dogs and monkeys.
He had not known anything of the religion. Yazeed was too excessive in
corruption and his father Mo’awiya knew that well and he also knew well
the high position of Imam Husayn (s) near Allah and His messenger (s)
and inside the hearts of the believers.

At that time there were still many of the first Muslims of the
Muhajireen and the Ansar, of those who had participated in the battle of
Badr and those who had participated in the homage of ar-Radhwan. Among
them were many reciters of the Qur'an and many jurisprudents who were
aware of the divine verdicts and the affairs of politics, the caliphate
and the rule; nevertheless Mo’awiya did not pay any attention to their
precedence in Islam nor to their great jihad in supporting the religion.
He made his wicked, dissolute and drunkard son as the caliph over those
great companions; Yazeed that sinful and criminal dissolute who
committed, a little time after being the ruler, his horrible crime in
Kerbala against the master of the youths of Paradise, Imam Husayn (s),
his family and his sincere companions…that crime which distressed the
prophets and made the rocks cry. Then Yazeed, according to a covenant
from his father Mo’awiya,[^1] sent the criminal Muslim bin Aqaba to
attack Medina. He committed horrible crimes against the people of Medina
for three days. One thousand virgins from among the daughters of the
Muhajireen and the Ansar were violated.[^2] On that day ten thousand

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Ibn Jareer at-Tabari in his Tareekh, vol.7 p.63, ibn Abd Rabbih in
al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 2 when mentioning the event of al-Harrah. Neither
Yazeed nor his father had paid any attention to the saying of the
Prophet (s) “Whoever frightens Medina Allah will frighten him and the
curse of Allah, the angels and all the people will be on him. Allah will
not forgive him on the Day of Resurrection.” Mentioned by Ahmad bin
Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.4 p.96.

[^2] Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayooti. Ibn at-Taqtaqi said in his book
at-Tareekh al-Fakhri, p.107: “…it has been said that after this event
when a daughter wanted to get married, her father could not guarantee
her virginity and he said that she might be violated during the event of
al-Harrah.” Ash-Shabrawi said in his book al-Ithaf, p.66: “…in this
event about one thousand virgins were violated and about one thousand
women, who had had no husbands, became pregnant.” Ibn Khillikan said in
his

(379)

and seven hundred and eighty men of the Muhajireen, the Ansar, their
offspring and the rest of the Muslims had been killed. No one of the
Muslims of Badr had remained alive after this event.[^1] A great number
of women and children had also been killed. The soldiers pulled the
suckling babies with their legs from their mothers’ laps and threw them
against the walls and made their brains scatter before the eyes of their
mothers.[^2] Then the people of Medina were ordered to pay homage to
Yazeed on condition that they were considered as slaves; whether Yazeed
liked to enslave them or to set them free. The people paid homage under
this condition while their monies were plundered, their bloods were shed
and their women were violated. Then Muslim bin Aqaba sent the heads of
the killed people of Medina to Yazeed. When the heads were thrown before
Yazeed, he became delighted and he recited some verses of poetry.

After that Muslim bin Aqaba went to fight ibn az-Zubayr, who had been
paid homage as the caliph in Mecca. On his way to Mecca, Muslim bin
Aqaba died. Then al-Husayn bin Numayr became the leader of the army by
an order of Yazeed. He moved with his army until he arrived at Mecca. He
ordered his army to set up mangonels towards Mecca. He ordered his men
to throw Mecca with ten thousand stones in one day. The army blockaded
Mecca for four months and kept on fighting every day until the news of
Yazeed’s death came. The mangonels had hit the Kaaba and destroyed it
besides the fire that had been set on it.

The horrible crimes of Yazeed since the beginning of his life until his
death were more than to be included in the books or to be written down
by the pens. They had deformed the face of history and blackened its
pages. His father Mo’awiya always saw the dogs,

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wafiyyatul A’yan when mentioning this event: “Yazeed bin Mo’awiya,
during his rule, has sent an army under the leadership of Muslim bin
Aqaba to Medina. The army has plundered Medina and has driven its people
to al-Harrah where the event has taken place. Many horrible crimes have
been committed by Muslim bin Aqaba and his army…it has been said that
after this event of al-Harrah more than one thousand virgins of Medina
have become pregnant because of libertinism that has spread by the army
of Yazeed.”

[^1] Ibn Qutayba in his book al-Imama wes-Siyasa and other historians.
[^2] Al-Imama wes-Siyasa by ibn Qutayba, p.200.

(380)

monkeys, hawks and tigers of his son Yazeed, noticed his wines and
corruptions, knew his horrible deeds, saw his playfulness with the
beauties, knew his meanness and malice and knew well that he could not
be entrusted with anything at all. After all that how could Mo’awiya
raise Yazeed to the high position of the caliphate of the messenger of
Allah, make him the ruler, the imam of the Muslims and make him control
the necks of the umma?! By doing that Mo’awiya had cheated the umma
whereas the Prophet (s) had said: “If a ruler, who rules some of the
Muslims, cheats them, Allah will throw him into Hell.”[^1] The Prophet
(s) had also said: “Whoever manages some affairs of the Muslims and
appoints someone out of favoritism to rule over them, Allah will curse
him, will not forgive him and will put him into Hell.”[^2] The Prophet
(s) had also said: “If one, whom Allah has entrusted with His people,
does not manage their affairs sincerely, he will never enter into
Paradise.”

**90. His corruption in Yemen**

Once Mo’awiya had sent Bisr bin Arta’a to Yemen in the year forty A.H.
to ravage there. The wali of Yemen at that time was Ubaydollah bin
Abbas, who had been appointed by Imam Ali (s) who was the caliph of the
Muslims then. The people of Yemen were loyal and sincere to Imam Ali
(s). Bisr bin Arta’a subjected the people of Yemen to severe torment. He
killed their men and captured their women by the order of Mo’awiya.

Refer to the books of history that have recorded the events of that
year to see the horrible crimes that have committed by Bisr and his men;
they have killed the old men, slain the sucklings, plundered the monies
and captured the women.

Bisr had captured the women of Hamadan, who were sincere to Ahlul Bayt
(s), and taken them to the market with naked legs. Whoever of them had
had bigger legs (thighs) had been sold with high price. They were the
first Muslim women that had been taken as captives in

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.4 p.155, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.67.
[^2] Musnad of Ahmad, vol.1 p.6.

(381)

Islam.[^1]

I do not know whether these doings were more horrible and painful or
his doing to the two children of Ubaydollah bin Abbas the wali of Yemen
then. Ubaydollah fled from Bisr and entrusted his children to Ubaydollah
bin Abd al-Mudan al-Harithy, who was the grandfather of the children
(their mother’s father). Bisr killed the man among the thousands of the
best Muslims he had killed in that event and killed his son too. He
began looking for the two children until he found them with a man from
(tribe of) Kinana in the desert. When bisr wanted to kill the two
children, the man said to him: “Why do kill them while they are innocent
children? If you have determined to kill them, kill me before them.”
Bisr killed the man and then he slaughtered the two children in front of
their mother. The mother was shocked terribly and she wandered aimlessly
about the desert.[^2]

A woman from Kinana said to Bisr when he slaughtered the children: “O
you man, you have killed the men, then why did you kill these children?
By Allah, no one has ever killed a child in the pre-Islamic age. O you
(Bisr) bin Arta’a, by Allah a rule that is not established except by
killing children and old men and by being merciless and indifferent to
kinship is an evil rule.”[^3] Refer to our book al-Fusool al-Muhimma to
see the other horrible crimes of these criminals.

**92. Killing the virtuous believers**

It was great aggression and injustice that Imam Hasan (s), the master
of Ahlul Bayt (s) at his time and the imam and caliph after his father
Imam Ali (s), had been killed by poison, which Ja’da bint al-Ash’ath had
put in his food. Many true traditions had been narrated from Ahlul Bayt
(s) about this fact and many historians had mentioned it in their books.
Abul Hasan al-Mada’ini said: “Al-Hasan died in forty-nine A.H. when he
was forty-seven years old. He was ill for forty days before his death.
Mo’awiya had asked Ja’da bint al-Ash’ath to insert poison to him.
Mo’awiya said to her: “If you kill him with poison, I will give you one
hundred thousand (dirhams or

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Al-Istee’ab by ibn Abdul Birr, biography of Bisr.
[^2] Tareekh of ibnul Atheer, al-Istee’ab of ibn Abdul Birr.
[^3] Tareekh of ibnul Atheer.

(382)

dinars) and I will marry you to Yazeed.” When al-Hasan (s) died,
Mo’awiya gave her the money but he did not marry her to Yazeed. He said
to her: “I fear that you may do to my son as you have done to the son of
the messenger of Allah.”[^1]

Al-Mada’ini mentioned that al-Husayn bin al-Munthir ar-Raqqashi had
said: “By Allah, Mo’awiya has not given al-Hasan his due of what he has
promised him at all. He killed Hijr and his companions, appointed his
son Yazeed as the caliph and poisoned al-Hasan.”[^2] Abul Faraj
al-Isfahani said in his book Maqatil at-Talibiyeen: “Mo’awiya wanted his
son Yazeed to be paid homage (of the caliphate) and nothing was more
difficult to him than the matter of al-Hasan bin Ali and Sa’d bin Abu
Waqqas. He inserted poison to them and they both died.”

Ibn Abdul Birr mentioned in al-Istee’ab, biography of Imam Hasan (s),
that Qatada and Abu Bakr bin Hafs had said: “Ja’da bint al-Ash’ath has
put poison in the food of al-Hasan bin Ali. Some people have said that
Mo’awiya had asked her to do that.”[^3]

People knew well what horrible crime Mo’awiya had committed in Marj
Athra’ when killing the great companions of the Prophet (s); Hijr bin
Adiy and his companions. He killed them because they refused to curse
Imam Ali (s). They were among (those who remember Allah standing and
sitting and lying on their sides and reflect on the creation of the
heavens and the earth: Our Lord! Thou hast not created this in vain!
Glory be to Thee; save us then from the chastisement of the fire). They
were killed in fifty-one A.H. All the Prophet’s companions and the
companions’ successors denied this crime of Mo’awiya. All the
historians, who have recorded the events of that year, have detailed
this event in their books.

Mo’awiya has also killed Amr bin al-Hamq al-Khuza’iy, who was one of
the great companions of the Prophet (s). His head was the first head
that had been carried in Islam. He had no guilt save his love to Imam
Ali (s), who had loved Allah and His messenger and Allah and

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.4.
[^2] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 4 p.70.
[^3] Ibid. vol.4 p.17.

(383)

His messenger had loved him.

Mo’awiya was not satisfied with killing the great believers until he
killed the closest one to him himself; Abdurrahman bin Khalid bin
al-Waleed, who had fought with him in Siffeen and had allied with him on
the enmity of Imam Ali (s) and after that Mo’awiya had sold him cheaply.
He killed him for fear that people might choose him (as the caliph)
instead of Yazeed. Refer to the biography of Abdurrahman in al-Istee’ab
for details.

**92. His bad deeds and his bad officials**

If we wanted to mention all the verdicts that Mo’awiya had altered, the
legal penalties he had annulled, the ordeals he had caused to people,
the heresies he had invented during his reign and the unjust oppressors
he had participated in his rule like al-Mugheerah bin Shu’ba, Amr bin
al-Aass, Bisr bin Arta’a, Samra ibn Jundub, Marwan, ibn as-Samt, Ziyad,
ibn Marjana, al-Waleed and their likes, who had suppressed the umma and
subjected the people to severe torment by killing their men and
capturing their women, we could not have enough ink and papers to
mention all the terrible crimes that had been committed throughout long
years of suffering. Praise be to Allah, Who has made us aware of the
guidance of Ahlul Bayt (s) and the deviation of their enemies!

**93. His hatred and aggression towards Ali**

Mo’awiya’s hatred and aggression towards Imam Ali (s) are well-known by
all the peoples of the earth with their different religions, languages
and colors. It is like the matter of Adam and the Satan. Here are some
of the many traditions talking about loving and hating Imam Ali (s) in
Islam. Salman al-Farisi said, when it was said to him “How greatly you
love Ali”: “I have heard the messenger of Allah (s) saying: “He, who
loves Ali, loves me and he, who hates Ali, hates me.”[^1]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Al-Hakim mentioned it in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.130 and said that
it was a true tradition according to the conditions of al-Bukhari and
Muslim but they had not mentioned it in their Sahihs. Ath-Thahabi
mentioned it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak and said that it was a true
tradition.

(384)

Ammar bin Yasir said: “I have heard the Prophet (s) saying to Ali: “O
Ali, blessed is he who loves you and believes in you and woe unto him
who hates you and disbelieves in you.”[^1]

Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: “I swear
by Him, in Whose hand my soul is. Whoever hates us, Ahlul Bayt, Allah
will enter him into Hell.”[^2]

Abu Tharr said: “We did not know the hypocrites unless by their
disbelieving in the messenger of Allah, being late in coming to offer
the prayers and by hating Ali bin Abu Talib.”[^3]

Ibn Abbas said: “Once the Prophet (s) looked at Ali and said: “O Ali,
you are a master in this life and a master in the afterlife. Your lover
is my lover and my lover is the lover of Allah. Your enemy is my enemy
and my enemy is the enemy of Allah. Woe unto whoever hates you after
me.”[^4] Amr bin Shas al-Aslami (he was one of the Muslims who had
attended the treaty of al-Hudaybiya) said: “Once I travelled with Ali to
Yemen. He turned away from me in that travel until I felt angry with
him. When I came back, I complained of him in the mosque and the Prophet
(s) knew of that. When the Prophet (s) saw me, he gazed at me sharply.
When I sat down, he said to me: “O Amr, by Allah you have hurt me.” I
said: “I seek the protection of Allah if I hurt you!” He said: “Yes, you
have. He, who hurts Ali, hurts me.”[^5]

Abu Tharr narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: “O Ali, he, who
desists from me, desists from Allah and he, who desists from you,
desists from me.”[^6]

The memorizer bin Abdul Aziz said-as in Imam Ali’s biography in al-

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.135.
[^2] Ibid. vol.3 p.150, Talkhees al-Mustadrak by ath-Thahabi.
[^3] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.
[^4] Al-Hakim mentioned it in his Mustdrak, vol.3 p.128 and said that it
was a true tradition according to the conditions of al-Bukhari and
Muslim. Ath-Thahabi mentioned it in his Talkhees al-Mustadrak and said
that all its narrators were trusted.
[^5] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.122, Talkhees al-Mustadrak of
ath-Thahabi.
[^6] Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol.3 p.124.

(385)

Istee’ab- that the Prophet (s) had said: “He, who loves Ali, loves me.
He, who hates Ali, hates me. He, who hurts Ali, hurts me and whoever
hurts me hurts Allah.”

The Prophet (s) has said: “Why do some people hate Ali? He, who hates
Ali, hates me and he, who desists from Ali, desists from me. Ali is from
me and I am from Ali. He has been created from my clay and I have been
created from the clay of Abraham; offspring one from the other; and
Allah is Hearing, Knowing. O Burayda, have you not known that Ali…and he
is your guardian after me.”

Some of the Prophet’s companions complained against Ali because of his
strictness in the way of Allah. The Prophet (s) said: “What do you want
from Ali? What do you want from Ali? What do you want from Ali? Ali is
from me and I am from him and he is your guardian after me.”

Ibn Abdul Birr mentioned in al-Istee’ab (biography of Imam Ali) that
some of the companions had narrated: “The messenger of Allah said to Ali
(may Allah be pleased with him): “No one loves you unless he is faithful
and no one hates you unless he is hypocrite.” Ali (may Allah be pleased
with him) often said: “By Allah it is the covenant of the (illiterate)
Prophet that no one loves me unless he is faithful and no one hates me
unless he is hypocrite.” Muslim has mentioned this tradition in his
Sahih.

The saying of the Prophet (s) “Whoever I am his guardian, here is Ali
to be his guardian. O Allah, assist whoever assists him and be the enemy
of whoever opposes him” has been recurrently narrated by most of the
Muslims. We refer the researchers to our book Sabeel al-Mo’imoneen in
which we have mentioned the true traditions talking about considering
loving Imam Ali (s) as a main aspect of faith and hating him as a main
aspect of hypocrisy.

**94. Cursing Imam Ali (s) in prayers**

Ahlul Bayt (s) were the choice of Allah whom Allah had ordered the
Muslims to pray for in all their obligatory and supererogatory prayers.
Ahlul Bayt (s) were those people whom Allah had purified from all

(386)

uncleanness as He had revealed in His holy Book and with whom the
Prophet (s) had challenged his enemies after the order of Allah. Allah
had ordered the Muslims to love them and the Prophet (s) had imposed
their guardianship on the Muslims by the order of Allah. They were one
of the two weighty things that no one would deviate if keeping to and no
one would be guided if deviating from.

Mo’awiya cursed Ali, Ameerul Mo'mineen, the master of the guardians,
the brother of the Prophet (s), the sincerest assistant of the Prophet
(s) who had striven to establish the religion, for whom the Prophet (s)
had witnessed that he loved Allah and His messenger and Allah and His
messenger loved him, who had been to the Prophet (s) as Aaron had been
to Moses, who was the vizier of the Prophet (s), the imam of the umma
and the father of the two grandsons of the Prophet (s) al-Hasan (s) and
al-Husayn, the two masters of the youth of Paradise. Mo’awiya not only
cursed Ahlul Bayt (s); Imam Ali, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (peace be upon
them) but he also cursed Abdullah bin Abbas, the scholar of the umma and
the cousin of the Prophet (s).

Mo’awiya cursed them although he knew well that glorifying them was one
of the necessities of Islam. He cursed them although he knew well their
high position near the Prophet (s). They were the family of the Prophet
(s), the disciples of the mission, the ones among whom the angels and
the revelation often descended and they were the source of knowledge and
interpretation.

Mo’awiya was not satisfied with cursing them by himself. He ordered the
people to curse Imam Ali (s), the brother of the Prophet (s), the
husband of Fatima az-Zahra’ (s), the father of the infallible imams and
the master of the umma. He forced the people to do that whether
willingly or unwillingly and he made it as a law that cursing Imam Ali
(s) must be announced openly on the minbars every Friday and every Eid.
The speakers all over the Islamic countries had considered that horrible
heresy as a part of the speeches of Fridays and the two Eids until the
year ninety-nine A.H. when the best one of the Umayyads, Umar bin Abdul
Aziz (may Allah reward him with good) cancelled it. Refer to whatever
you like of the books of history to see

(387)

the truth of what we have said.[^1]

Imam Hasan (s) had agreed with Mo’awiya on some conditions when they
had made the treaty of peace between them. From among the conditions was
that Mo’awiya had not to curse Imam Hasan’s father (Imam Ali) but
Mo’awiya did not respond to this condition whereas he responded to the
others. Then Imam Hasan (s) asked Mo’awiya not to let him hear cursing
his father. Mo’awiya promised him to do that but he did not carry out
his promise.[^2]

Mo’awiya cursed Imam Ali (s) and Imam Hasan (s) from above the minbar
of Kufa. Imam Husayn (s) got up to refute him but Imam Hasan (s) asked
him to sit down and then Imam Hasan (s) himself got up and refuted
Mo’awiya and exposed him before the people. This event has been
mentioned by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani in Maqatil at-Talibiyeen and by
other historians.

Mo’awiya kept on cursing Imam Ali (s) and disavowing him before
everyone and he forced the people to do the same. Once he ordered
al-Ahnaf bin Qayss to do that but he refused[^3] and he tried to incite
Aqeel bin Abu Talib (Imam Ali’s brother) with money to curse Imam Ali
(s) but he also refused to do that.

Aamir bin Sa’d bin Abu Waqqas said: “Once Mo’awiya asked Sa’d bin Abu
Waqqas: “What has prevented you from cursing Abu Turab (Imam Ali)?” Sa’d
said: “Three things the Prophet (s) has said to him (Ali) that have made
me not curse him at all. If I have one of them, it will be more beloved
to me than the treasures of the world. Once the Prophet (s) left him
behind in one of the battles. He asked the Prophet (s): “O messenger of
Allah, why have you left me with the women and children?” The Prophet
(s) said to him: “Are you not satisfied to be to me as Aaron has been to
Moses except that there will be no prophet after me?” Once again I have
heard the Prophet

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Refer to the speech of the interpreters of Nahjol Balagha when
mentioning the saying of Imam Ali (s) “After me a man with a big throat
and a large abdomen will appear to you. He will order you to curse me
and to disavow me…” Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.463 and the
later pages to see the wonders.
[^2] Ibnul Atheer in Al-Kamil, ibn Jareer in Tareekh al-Umam wel-Mulook,
Abul Fida’ and ibn al-Shuhna.
[^3] Mentioned by abul Fida’ when talking about the events of the year
67 A.H.

(388)

(s) saying on the day of (the battle of) Khaybar: “I will give the
banner to a man, who loves Allah and His messenger and Allah and His
messenger love him.” We all looked forward to it but the Prophet (s)
said: “Send for Ali!” Ali came while he was sore-eyed. The Prophet (s)
spit in Ali’s eyes and gave him the banner and Allah granted him with
victory. And when this verse “But whoever disputes with you in this
matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us
call our sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near
people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray
for the curse of Allah on the liars. Qur'an, 3:61” was revealed, the
Prophet (s) said: “O Allah, these are my family.”[^1]

Mo’awiya had killed Hijr bin Adiy and his companions just because they
had refused to curse Imam Ali (s). If they had responded to Mo’awiya in
cursing Imam Ali (s), Mo’awiya would have not killed them. Refer to
al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, vol.16 and the events of the year
fifty-one in Tareekh of ibn Jareer and Tareekh of ibnul Atheer to see
the truth and to know that when Abdurrahman bin Hassaan al-Anzi had
refused to curse Imam Ali (s) in the meeting of Mo’awiya, Mo’awiya sent
him to Ziyad and ordered him to kill Abdurrahman in a way that no one
had ever been killed in Islam before. Ziyad had buried him while he was
alive.

Mo’awiya had still kept on forcing people to curse Imam Ali (s) in
every way. Some people of the Umayyads had said to him: “O Ameerul
Mo'mineen (Mo’awiya), you have achieved your hopes. Would you stop
cursing this man?” He said: “By Allah, I would not until children grow
up and adults become old with it and until no one will mention a virtue
of him.”[^2]

The Prophet (s) has said: “He, who curses Ali, curses me.”[^3] Ahmad bin
Hanbal mentioned in his Musnad[^4] that Abdullah or Ubay bin Abdullah had
said: “Once I came to Umm Salama and she asked me:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sahih of Muslim, al-Khasa’is al-Alawiyya by an-Nassa’iy, Sahih of
at-Tarmithi, al-Jam’ bayn as-Sahihayn, al-Jam’ bayn as-Sihah
as-Sittah.
[^2] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.463.
[^3] Mustadrak of al-Hakim.
[^4] Vol.6 p.323.

(389)

“Is the messenger of Allah cursed among you?” I said: “Allah Forbid!
Glory be to Allah!” she said: “I have heard the messenger of Allah
saying: “He, who curses Ali, (as if he) curses me.”

Ibn Abdul Birr mentioned in al-Istee’ab, biography of Imam Ali (s),
that the Prophet (s) had said: “He, who loves Ali, loves me. He, who
hates Ali, hates me. He, who hurts Ali, hurts me and whoever hurts me
hurts Allah.” The true traditions talking about such matter are
recurrent especially the traditions that have been narrated from Ahlul
Bayt (s).

It is an indisputable fact that cursing a Muslim is a transgression
according to the consensus of the Muslims. Muslim has mentioned in his
Sahih a tradition saying that: “Cursing a Muslim is a transgression and
fighting him is disbelief.”

**95. His fights against Imam Ali (s)**

Mo’awiya marched with the rabbles of Sham to fight Imam Ali (s) after
the Muslims had paid homage to him as the caliph. He lit the fire of his
rage and hatred and set the reigns of his tendencies free whereas Imam
Ali (s) invited him to return to Allah. The virtuous remainder of the
first Muslims of Badr, Uhud, al-Ahzab, ar-Radhwan and a great number of
the good believers were with Imam Ali (s) and all of them invited to the
way of Allah and to obey Ameerul Mo'mineen Ali (s). But there was
deafness into Mo’awiya’s ears that he did not hear their invitation and
he insisted on his oppression. He spared no effort to go on his
deviation until he killed on that day a great number of the Muslims[^1]
that such a number had never been killed in any sedition before whereas
the Prophet (s) had said: “Cursing a Muslim is transgression and
fighting a Muslim is disbelief”[^2] and he also had said: “If someone
wants to separate your unity and scatter your gathering while you have
agreed on one (leader) of you, you are to kill him.”[^3]

Ibn Abdul Birr said in al-Istee’ab, biography of Imam Ali (s): “Some

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Among the killed ones were many of the great companions of the
Prophet (s).
[^2] Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 4 p.147, Sahih of Muslim, vol.1 p.44.
[^3] Sahih of Muslim.

(390)

traditions have been narrated from Ali, ibn Mass’ood and Abu Ayyoob
al-Ansari that Ali has ordered his followers to fight those who had
broken the homage on the day (the battle) of al-Jamal, the oppressors
(Mo’awiya and his followers, the people of Sham) in Siffeen and the
Kharijites in an-Nahrawan. It was also narrated that Ali (s) had said:
“I have found no way save to fight or to disbelieve in what Allah has
revealed.”

It sufficed Imam Ali (s) in his fighting against Mo’awiya that Allah
has said: “And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace
between them; but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other,
fight that which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command.
Qur'an, 49:9” No doubt that Mo’awiya and his followers were oppressive
and they had acted wrongfully. This had been agreed on unanimously by
the umma. The Prophet (s) had warned of that beforehand. Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri said: “We carried the adobes of the mosque one by one but
Ammar carried two by two. The Prophet (s) passed by him, wiped the dust
away from his head and said: “Blessed is Ammar! He will be killed by the
aggressive party. Ammar will invite them to Allah and they will invite
him to Hell.”[^1]

According to this tradition Mo’awiya was among the ones who had been
meant by this Qur’anic verse: “And We made them Imams who call to the
fire, and on the day of resurrection they shall not be assisted. And We
caused a curse to follow them in this world, and on the day of
resurrection they shall be of those made to appear hideous. Qur'an,
28:41-42”

They are clear texts from the holy Book of Allah and the holy Sunna of
the Prophet (s). Let you ponder on them and you are free to decide on
them. The Prophet (s) has said: “Fighting against Ali is as fighting
against me and making peace with him is as making peace with me.” He has
also said on the day when he has covered the five (himself, Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husayn) with his garment: “I am a war against whoever fights
them and peace to whoever makes peace with them and an enemy of whoever
opposes them.” He has also said to Imam Ali (s): “O Allah, assist
whoever assists him, be the enemy of whoever opposes him, support
whoever supports him and disappoint

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol.2 p.93, vol.1 p.61.

(391)

whoever disappoints him” besides many other sayings like this which
have been narrated by all the umma.

**96. Fabricating traditions against Imam Ali**

The Mu’tazilite Sheikh Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi said: “Mo’awiya has forced
some companions and some successors to fabricate bad traditions about
Ali (s) to defame him and to lead people to disavow him. He gave them
bribes for that in order to encourage the others to do the same. They
fabricated what had pleased him. Among the fabricators were Abu Hurayra,
Amr bin al-Aass and al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba and from among the successors
was Urwa bin az-Zubayr. Az-Zuhri said that Urwa bin az-Zubayr had told
him that Aa'isha had said to him: “Once I was with the Prophet (s) when
al-Abbas and Ali came. The Prophet (s) said to me: “O Aa'isha, these two
men will die on other than my religion.”

Abdurrazaq narrated that Ma’mar had said: “Az-Zuhri had two traditions
narrated by Urwa from Aa'isha about Ali (s). One day I asked him about
them. He said to me: “What do you have to do with them (Urwa and
Aa'isha) and their traditions? Allah is more aware of them and of their
traditions. I suspect them when they talk about the Hashemites.” As for
the first tradition, we have mentioned it and as for the other one, Urwa
pretended that Aa'isha had said to him: “Once I was with the Prophet (s)
when al-Abbas and Ali came. The Prophet (s) said: “O Aa'isha, if you
like to see two men of Hell, you can look at these two coming ones.” I
looked and I saw that they were al-Abbas and Ali bin Abu Talib.”

As for Amr bin al-Aass, he said-as mentioned by al-Bukhari and Muslim
in their Sahihs: “I have heard the messenger of Allah saying: “The
(members of the) family of Abu Talib are not my guardians. My guardian
is Allah and the good believers.”

As for Abu Hurayra, he narrated that Ali (s) had engaged the daughter
of Abu Jahl during the life of the messenger of Allah (s) and he made
him angry. The messenger of Allah made a speech on the minbar and said:
“By Allah, the daughter of the guardian of Allah (Fatima, the daughter
of the Prophet) can never gather together with the daughter of the enemy
of Allah, Abu Jahl. Fatima is a piece of

(392)

me. Whatever hurts her hurts me. If Ali wants to marry the daughter of
Abu Jahl, he has to be away from my daughter and then let him do
whatever he likes.” This tradition has also been mentioned in Sahih of
Muslim and Sahih of al-Bukhari narrated by al-Musawwir bin Makhrama
az-Zuhri as mentioned by al-Murtadha in his book Tanzeeh al-Anbiya’
wel-A’immah. He said that it had been narrated by Husayn al-Karabeesi,
who had been known of his deviation from Ahlul Bayt (s) and of his
enmity towards them and so his traditions could not be accepted. Abu
Ja’far added: “Al-A’mash said: “When Abu Hurayra came to Iraq with
Mo’awiya in the year of (Jama’a), he came to the mosque of Kufa. When he
saw that many people had come to receive him, he knelt on his knees and
hit his head with his hand many times and said: “O people of Iraq, you
pretend that I fabricate the sayings of Allah and His apostle to be in
Hell. I swear by Allah that I have heard the Prophet (s) saying: “Every
apostle had a sanctum. My sanctum is Medina. Whoever spoils in Medina,
will be cursed by Allah, the angels and all the people.” I swear by
Allah that Ali has spoiled in it!” When Mo’awiya heard him saying that,
he endorsed him, rewarded him and made him the wali of Medina.”[^1]

Sufyan ath-Thawri narrated from Abdurrahman bin Qassim that Umar bin
Abdul Ghaffar had said: “When Abu Hurayra came to Kufa with Mo’awiya, he
sat at the gate of Kinda in the night and people sat around him. One day
a young man from Kufa-he might be al-Asbagh bin Nabata-came and said to
him: “O Abu Hurayra, I ask you , by Allah, if you have heard the Prophet
(s) saying to Ali bin Abu Talib: “O Allah, support whoever supports him
and be the enemy of whoever opposes him.” Abu Hurayra said: “Yes, I
have.” The young man said: “I swear by Allah that you have supported his
enemies and opposed his assistants.” Then he left.”[^2]

In short, Mo’awiya spared no effort and let no way unless he walked in
to do wrong to Imam Ali (s). “Those who do wrong will come to know by
what a (great) reverse they will be overturned 26:227.”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.358.
[^2] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.360.

(393)

**97. Breaking the promises he had given to Imam Hasan(s)**

Mo’awiya invited Imam Hasan (s) to peace and Imam Hasan (s) responded
to him unwillingly because responding to the peace with Mo’awiya was the
less one of the two evils and the easier of the two expected dangers[^1]
especially after Mo’awiya had accepted the conditions of Imam Hasan (s)
and promised him before Allah that he would keep to them and he
announced that in Iraq and Sham.

Many historians[^2] mentioned that Mo’awiya had sent a blank paper with
his seal on its bottom to Imam Hasan (s) and wrote to him: “Write down
your conditions as you like in this blank paper which I have sealed.”

He sent his letter and the blank paper to Imam Hasan (s) with Abdullah
bin Aamir. Imam Hasan (s) did not want to write down his conditions with
his own handwriting. He dictated them to Abdullah bin Aamir and Abdullah
wrote them down as Imam Hasan had dictated them. Then Mo’awiya wrote all
that with his own handwriting, sealed it with his seal and certified it
with promises and binding oaths. He made the people of Sham witness it
and then he gave it to Abdullah bin Aamir to deliver it to Imam Hasan
(s).[^3]

Mo’awiya enclosed the treaty with his saying “On Mo’awiya bin Abu
Sufyan is the covenant and the oath of Allah and the faithfulness that
Allah has ordered His people to keep to as He has bound Himself with.”

But Mo’awiya was indifferent to the treaty and he did not carry out any
of its conditions. He put the promises and the oaths under his feet. He
cursed Imam Ali (s) and Imam Hasan (s) at the presence of Imam Hasan (s)
and Imam Husayn (s) in the mosque of Kufa which was full of the crowds
of people who had come to celebrate the treaty

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Refer to the introduction of Sulh al-Hasan by Sheikh Radhy aal
Yaseen.
[^2] Like ibn Jareer in Tareekh al-Umam wel-Mulook, vol.6 p.93 and Ibnul
Atheer in his Tareekh, vol.3 p.162.
[^3] Al-Imamah wes-Siyasa by ibn Qutayba, p.200.

(394)

of peace.[^1]

Then his policy kept on gushing out with all what contradicted the holy
Qur'an and the Sunna. He committed every denied thing in Islam. He
killed the virtuous believers, violated the honors, plundered the
wealth, imprisoned the free people, exiled the reformers and appointed
the vicious and evil people as the viziers of his state such as Amr bin
al-Aass, al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba, ibn Sa’eed, Bisr bin Arta’a, Samra bin
Jundub, ibn as-Samt, Marwan bin al-Hakam the deviate and the son of the
deviate, ibn Murjana, al-Waleed bin Aqaba and Ziyad bin Sumayya, whom he
had deprived of his legal father and ascribed him to his adulterer
father Abu Sufyan and made him his brother to impose him on the Shia in
Iraq to subject them to severe torment, to kill their men, capture their
women, scatter them here and there, plunder their monies, burn their
houses and to spare no effort in wronging them to support Mo’awiya in
being loyal to carry out the conditions of his treaty with Imam Hasan
(s)!!!

Mo’awiya had ended his horrible crimes with poisoning Imam Hasan (s) in
order to pave the way for the rule of his drunkard son, who, later on,
committed terrible crimes and brought fearful disasters to Medina, Mecca
and Kerbala in every day of his life, which he had spent in fighting
Allah and His messenger (s).

We resort to Allah and pray Him to make us free from Yazeed and from
the one who has made him control the necks of the Muslims “Certainly you
have made an abominable assertion whereby almost the heavens are torn,
and the earth is split asunder and the mountains fall in ruins. Quran;
19:89-90”

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] Mo’awiya surprised the people with this slighting and indifference
to them, to the religion, to the Prophet (s) and to the Lord of the
worlds but this impudence did not affect the patience and the great
personality of Imam Hasan (s) who ascended the minbar and declared the
truth and its people and exposed the untruth and its people. Refer to
Sulh al-Hasan by Sheikh Radhy aal Yaseen, p.279-282.


