Preface
=======

(91)

In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

Praise be to Allah, Who has distinguished His slave and messenger
Muhammad with the high dignity and high position near Him, has taught
him the knowledge of the first and the last and has given him virtues
that He has never given to any other one in the worlds. (Allah best
knows where He places His mission) so He has ended with Muhammad
prophethood and revelation and has annulled with his Sharia all the
previous sacred Sharias concerning the actions of people.[^1] What has
been permitted by Muhammad (s) is permissible until the Day of
Resurrection and what has been prohibited by him is impermissible until
the Day of Resurrection. All his verdicts are valid until the Day of
Resurrection. This has been agreed upon unanimously by all the Muslims
like their consensus on his prophethood. None of them has ever said a
word opposite to this.

They have known that the Islamic Sharia has encompassed the worldly
life and afterlife with all their systems and laws. It (the Islamic
Sharia) is wise in all its verdicts and just in all its criteria. It is
the wise civilization, which is kind and good to the people of the earth
in everywhere and every age with all their different races, colors and
languages.

The Legislator of Islam (the Aware of the unseen, the Almighty) has not
left any aim unless He has declared its way and showed to the men of
understanding its guide. Far be it from Him to leave His

[^1] Not the basic principles of religion like monotheism, justice,
prophethood, resurrection, paradise, hell, rewarding and punishment.
These principles have been adopted by all the prophets (s) since Adam
(s) until Prophet Muhammad (s)

(92)

people to their own opinions or to let them rove in His religion
vigorously. He has bound them via His messenger (s) with His two “ropes”
and preserved them with His two “weighty things”.[^1] His messenger has
promised them of guidance if they would keep to them “the two weighty
things” and warned them of deviation if they would turn away from them.
He has told them that these two weighty things would never separate nor
would the earth be empty of them until they would come to him at the
pond (in Paradise). Whoever turns his back to them, the Prophet (s) will
turn his back to him.

Their (the Prophet’s progeny’s) example in this umma is like the gate
of Hitta “repentance” of the Israelites and like the Ark of Prophet Noah
(s) for his people. No one, whatever high position he has, is to follow
other than their path: “And whoever acts hostilely to the Messenger
after that guidance has become manifest to him, and follows other than
the way of the believers,

We will turn him to that to which he has (himself) turned and make him
enter hell. Qur'an, 4:115”[^2] No one, when interpreting a Qur'anic verse
or a prophetic tradition, is to deviate from the apparent meaning that
comes to mind except if there is a clear evidence. If there is a clear
evidence, one has to interpret a verse or a tradition according to that
evidence; otherwise he will be deviate and heretic.

This has been agreed upon by all the Muslim nation, the umma of
Muhammad (s) with all its sects. They have followed the apparent
meanings of the Qur'an and the Sunna besides their clear texts
(nusoos).[^3]

They have done like the all peoples of the different languages, who
interpret their wordings with the apparent meanings that come to mind.
They do not interpret them according to their tendencies and

[^1] The “two ropes” or the “two weighty things” refer to the Qur'an and
the Prophet’s progeny.
[^2] Ibn Mardwayh mentioned when interpreting this verse: “…acts
hostilely to the messenger and “guidance” mentioned in the verse concern
Ali (s) and what he faces from people”. Al-Ayyashi in his Tafseer
mentioned the same. The true traditions narrated from Ahlul Bayt (s)
have confirmed that “the way of the believers” is the way of Ahlul Bayt
(s).
[^3] Plural form of “nass”.

(93)

advantages whether personal or general.

Yes! I have found, regretfully, some of the rulers and notables of
those past ages preferring their ijtihad, due to their advantages, to
the apparent meanings of the Qur'an and the Sunna and their clear texts.
They have interpreted those texts according to their tendencies
audaciously and led people to contradict them (the Qur'an and the Sunna)
willingly or unwillingly with all their powers. This cannot be excused
in any case. We are Allah’s and to Him we shall surely return!

Allah has said: “… and whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and
from whatever he forbids you, keep back, and be careful of (your duty
to) Allah; surely Allah is severe in retributing (evil). Qur'an, 59:7”
and: “And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that
they should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Messenger
have decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he
surely strays off a manifest straying.

Qur'an, 33:36” and “But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in
reality) until they make you a judge of that which has become a matter
of disagreement among them, and then do not find any straitness in their
hearts as to what you have decided and submit with entire submission.
Qur'an, 4:65” and “Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger.

The processor of strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of
the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed and faithful in trust. And your
companion is not gone mad. Qur'an, 81:19-22” and “Most surely, it is the
Word brought by an honored Messenger. And it is not the word of a poet;
little is it that you believe. Nor the word of a soothsayer; little is
it that you mind. It is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
Qur'an, 69:40-43” and “Nor does he speak out of desire. It is naught but
revelation that is revealed. The Lord of Mighty Power has taught him.
Qur'an, 53:3-5”

The sayings of the Prophet (s) are like the speech of the Holy Qur'an:
“Falsehood shall not come to it from before it nor from behind it; a
revelation from the Wise, the Praised One. Qur'an, 41:42” One, who
believes in these Qur'anic verses and believes in Muhammad’s
prophethood, must not deviate from his sayings even by a hair’s breadth
or less. Those people have not deviated from the Prophet’s

(94)

sayings but they have become mujtahids interpreting his sayings by
themselves (…while they thought that they were acquiring good by their
works). We are Allah’s and to Him we shall return!

Here are some examples of interpreting the clear texts by those people
according to their own opinions. They have preferred their personal
benefits to those verses and traditions.

This is what I could collect in hastiness and due to my old age and in
spite of the distresses, grudges, seditions and the ordeals of time
surrounding us. And with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to
a right issue; on Him do I rely and to Him do I turn.

Here they are; one hundred examples in seven chapters. Let you listen
to them and then you have the right to give your opinion about them.
Allah is the Guide to the truth and to the right path and to Him is our
return. Allah is Sufficient for us! Most Excellent is He, in Whom we
trust. Most excellent is the Patron and most excellent is the Helper.


