Chapter One : Interpretations of Abu Bakr and His Followers
===========================================================

**1. The day of saqeefa**

When Abu Bakr stretched his hand to be paid homage as the caliph after
the Prophet (s), some people paid him homage willingly and others-later
on-paid homage unwillingly although they knew well that the Prophet (s)
had entrusted his brother and cousin Ali bin Abu Talib (s) with the
caliphate after him. They had seen the Prophet (s) and heard him
mentioning this matter many times since the beginning of his prophethood
until the end of his blessed life.

The Prophet (s) had mentioned this tradition in different ways and all
of them were clear in declaring that Ali (s) would be the caliph after
him. Whoever wants to know more details about this subject, let him
refer to our book “al-Muraja’at”, in which we have mentioned a full
research on these traditions and all what have been said about them by
the two sects; the Shia and the Sunni. We have exchanged deliberations
with the sheikh of Islam and the teacher of the ulama Sheikh Saleem
al-Bishri al-Maliki,

the sheikh of al-Jami’ al-Azhar (al-Azhar University) at that time when
I have been studying there.[^1] He was then the sheikh (dean) of al-Azhar
University. He took much care of me as he always did to his students.
Arguments and written deliberations began between us about the caliphate
after the Prophet (s) and the traditions concerning it. We tried our
best to go deep in research and to be fair to the truth and because of
the good soul of [^1] In the year 1329 A.H. and later after we have
returned from the hawza of holy Najaf.

(96)

Sheikh al-Bishri, the result was the useful book “al-Muraja’at”, in
which guidance shone in its brightest signs. Praise be to Allah for this
success.[^1]

I hope that you scrutinize into the aims and the intents of the
Prophet’s sayings and doings, which are the point of deliberation
between us (the Shia) and the Sunni. Let passion not overcome your minds
like those, who have dealt with the clear texts like their dealing with
general or ambiguous sayings without caring for their (the texts’)
rightness and clearness. Allah says: (Most surely it is the Word of an
honored messenger. The processor of strength, having an honorable place
with the Lord of the Dominion. One (to be) obeyed and faithful in trust.
And your companion is not gone mad) then whereto do you go, O you the
Muslims! (It is naught but revelation that is revealed. The Lord of
Mighty Power has taught him).

I have not seen clear and recurrent traditions more than the traditions
talking about the caliphate but they have been confiscated by the most
of the umma while the wound has not recovered yet and the Prophet (s)
has not been buried yet.

The life of the Prophet (s) after his prophethood was full of
traditions that had talked about the caliphate of Imam Ali (s) clearly
since the (day of the warning)[^2] in Abu Talib’s house and throughout
the days after that until he had lain in the bed of death whereas his
room was crowded with people when he said: “O people, I am about to die
and to be taken hastily. I have informed you. I have left among you the
Book of Allah and my progeny”. Then he raised Ali’s hand and said: “This
is Ali. He is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with him. They will
never separate until they will come to me at the pond (in Paradise)”.
The traditions of thaqalayn (two weighty things) are enough to be the
judge between the two sects; the Shia and the Sunni. “Most surely there
is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or he gives ear with full
intelligence. Qur'an, 50:37” [^1] The deliberations (muraja’at) were one
hundred and twelve ones.

[^2] The Prophet (s) had invited his close relatives to warn them. The
last of his speech to them was that when he held Ali’s hand and said:
“This is my brother, my vizier, my guardian and my caliph among you.
Listen to him and obey him!” Refer to muraja’a no. 20 and the one after
it in the book “al-Muraja’at”.

(97)

They (the companions) had appropriate the matter (the caliphate) to
themselves on the day of Saqeefa[^1] interpreting some prophetic
traditions according to their own opinions without caring for anything
else. They had determined their matter among them without informing
anyone of the Hashemites[^2] nor any of their followers; the Hashemites,
who were the family of the Prophet (s), the place of the divine mission,
the descendance of the angels and the descendance of Gabriel and
revelation. As if they had forgotten that the Hashemites were the
weighty thing the Prophet (s) had left, the equal of the Book of
Allah,[^3] the protection of the umma from separation,[^4] the ship of
rescue for the umma from deviation[^5] and the gate of repentance for the
umma.[^6] As if they had forgotten that the Prophet’s family was to the
umma as the head to the body and as the two eyes to the head.[^7] In fact
they were as they had been meant by the saying of the poet:

[^1] Saqeefa means a shed. They (most of the Prophet’s companions) have
gathered in the shed of Bani Sa’ida on that day to determine that
caliphate after the Prophet (s).

[^2] Hashem was the Prophet’s ancestor.

[^3] With reference to the clear traditions mentioned in the reliable
books of traditions; those traditions that have made the Prophet’s
progeny as the equal of the Qur'an to be the example that must be
followed by the men of understanding. Refer to Muslim’s Sahih (book of
Hadith), at-Tarmithi’s Sahih, an-Nassa’iy’s Sahih, Ahmad’s Musnad,
at-Tabarani in his al-Kabeer, al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, ath-Thahabi’s
Talkhees al-Mustadrak, ibn Abu Shayba’s Sunan, Abu Ya’la’s Sunan, ibn
Sa’d’s Tabaqat and many others. For details refer to muraja’a no.8 in
our book “al-Muraja’at”.

[^4] Referring to the Prophet’s saying: “My family is security for my
umma from being separated. If a tribe of the Arabs objects to them, it
will separate and then become the party of Iblis”. Refer to al-Hakim’s
Mustadrak, vol.3 p.149.

[^5] Referring to the Prophet’s saying: “The example of my progeny among
you is like the Ark of Prophet Noah. Whoever rides on it will be saved
and whoever lags behind it, will drown”. Refer to al-Hakim’s Mustadrak,
vol.3 p.151.

[^6] Referring to the Prophet saying: “The example of my progeny is like
the Ark of Prophet Noah. Whoever rides on it will be saved and whoever
lags behind will drown. The example of my progeny among you is like the
gate of repentance of the Israelites. Whoever enters into it will be
forgiven”. Mentioned by at-Tabarani in his al-Awsat.

[^7] Imam as-Sabban in his book Is’af ar-Raghibeen and Sheikh Yousuf
an-Nabhani in his book ash-Sharaf al-Mu’ayyad and others mentioned that
Abu Tharr had narrated the Prophet’s saying: “Make my family among you
as the head to the body and as the two eyes to the head. The head is not
rightly guided without the eyes”. For details refer to our book
al-Muraja’at, muraja’a no.6 -13.

(98)

The matter is determined when Taym[^1] is absent

And they[^2] are not asked permission when they are present.

Yes! The matter had been determined in the Saqeefa[^3] while the Prophet
(s) was lying between his family and his close companions for three
days. They were around him mourning bitterly and their hearts were about
to be cut into pieces with sorrow that might tear the livers and with
fear that might move the mountains. The world, with all its wideness,
had become too narrow before them.

And those people were away from the ordeal for three days being busy
preparing their determinations to seize his (the Prophet’s) authority
and to plunder his rule. They did not pay any attention to any affair of
him until they had determined their matter without caring for anything
else. As soon as they finished burying him, they surprised his guardians
and lovers with asking them either to pay homage or to be burned with
their houses.[^4]

The poet of the Nile, Hafidh Ibraheem had said in a famous poem:

And a saying to Ali said by Umar, Honored is the listener and great is
the sayer

I burn your house and let you not alive longer in it
If you do not pay homage

[^1] One of the great families of Quraysh.
[^2] The people of Taym.
[^3] Saqeefa means shed.
[^4] They had threatened Imam Ali (s) to be burned unless he would pay
homage. Refer to Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari in his book
as-Saqeefa, p. 130, Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1, p. 134, Ibn Jareer
at-Tabari in his book Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook, ibn Qutayba in his
book al-Imama wes-Siyasa, ibn Abd Rabbih al-Maliki, in al-Iqd al-Fareed,
vol.2, al-Mass’oodi in Murooj ath-Thahab, ibn ash-Shuhna in Rawdhatul
Manadhir, Abul Fida’ in al-Mukhtasar fee Akhbar al-Bashar,
ash-Shahristani in al-Milel wen-Nihal, allama al-Hilli in Nahj as-Sidq
quoted from al-Mahasin wa Anfas al-Jawahir, ibn Khanzabah in al-Ghurar
and Abu Makhnaf in a detailed book talking about the homage of the
Saqeefa. (99)

Even if the daughter of al-Mustafa[^1] is in it.

No one save Abu Hafs[^2] that has said it Before the knight and
protector of Adnan[^3] If it has been supposed that there was no clear
tradition showing that the caliphate was to be for one of the Prophet’s
family and if it has been supposed that no one of them had good
ancestry, rank, morals, knowledge, favors, jihad, faith, sincerity or
excellent virtue but they were just like the rest of the Prophet’s
companions, then was there any legal, rational or traditional excuse
that prevented the companions from putting off their homage until the
funerals of the Prophet (s) would finish??? Even if they would have
ordered the army to control the situation temporarily until the matter
of the caliphate would be settled???

Would it be not better for them to be somehow kind to the Prophet’s
family, who were distressed with the great loss, if they had waited a
little? The Prophet’s family was his deposit and his leftover among the
Muslims. Allah has said: “Certainly a Messenger has come to you from
among yourselves; grievous to him is your falling into distress,
excessively solicitous respecting you; to the believers (he is)
compassionate. Qur'an, 9:128” Had this Prophet, who became so grievous
when his umma fell in distress, who strove for its prosperity and who
was so kind to his people, not had a right on them that his family would
not be constrained or surprised with what it had faced while the wound
was not yet healed and the Prophet (s) was not yet buried?!

It was enough for his progeny, then, to worry, to pillow on insomnia,
to suffer griefs, to chat with the stars, to bear pangs and to struggle
against agonies. Waiting a little would have been worthier to console
the Prophet’s progeny, to regard the Prophet’s dignity, to unite the
umma and would have been nearer to wisdom. But the people had determined
to turn the caliphate away from the Prophet’s family at any cost. They
feared that waiting a little might lead them to other

[^1] One of the Prophet’s surnames.
[^2] It is the surname of Umar bin al-Khattab.
[^3] Adnan is the ancestor of the Hashemites.

(100)

than what they had determined because if Muhammad’s family had attended
the deliberations, their evidences and proofs would prevail; therefore
they had hastened to carry out the homage and seized the opportunity
when the Hashemites were busy with their ordeal and with the ceremonies
of the funeral. What helped those people in achieving their plan was the
astonishment of the Muslims and their fear and confusion besides the
meeting of the most of the Ansar[^1] in the Saqeefa to nominate Sa’d bin
Obada, the chief of al-Khazraj,[^2] for the caliphate but his cousin
Basheer bin Sa’d bin Tha’laba and Osayd bin al-Khudhayr, the chief of
al-Owss,[^3] competed with him for the rule. They envied him and feared
that he might be the caliph.

They agreed among themselves to turn the caliphate away from him with
all means. Owaym bin Sa’ida al-Owssi and Ma’an bin Adiy, who were from
the Ansar, agreed with them on that. These two men had been planned
secretly with Abu Bakr and Umar and their party to act so. They had been
from among the followers of Abu Bakr during the time of the Prophet (s)
besides that they had had grudge against Sa’d bin Obada. Owaym hastened
towards Abu Bakr and Umar inciting them to oppose Sa’d. He hastened with
them, Abu Obayda, Salim the freed slave of Hudhayfa and then followed by
others from their party of the Muhajireen[^4] to the Saqeefa.

The dispute flared up between the Muhajireen and the Ansar. The quarrel
became serious and their shouts loudened until sedition was about to
happen. Abu Bakr made a speech, in which he praised the Ansar and
acknowledged their favors softly and leniently. Then he protested
against them saying that the Muhajireen were the people of the Prophet
(s) and the result of his efforts. He told them that they would be the
viziers if the Muhajireen became the rulers. Then he held Umar and Abu
Obayda’s hands and ordered the attendants to pay homage to one of them.
As soon as he said so, Umar and Basheer hastened to pay homage to Abu
Bakr himself. Then he was paid

[^1] Ansar means helpers: the people of Medina, who had assisted (and
believed in) the Prophet (s) and his companions when had emigrated from
Mecca.
[^2] One of the greatest tribes in Medina.
[^3] The other greatest tribe in Medina.
[^4] Muhajireen means the emigrants: the first Muslims, who had
emigrated from Mecca to Medina.

(101)

homage by Osayd bin al-Khudhayr, Owaym bin Sa’ida, Ma’an bin Adiy, Abu
Obayda bin al-Jarrah, Salim and Khalid bin al-Waleed and then these men
tried their best to force the people to pay homage. The extremist among
them was Umar and then Usayd, Khalid and Qunfith bin Umayr bin Jad’an
at-Tameemi.[^1] As soon as Abu Bakr was paid homage, the group that paid
him homage came escorting him towards the Prophet’s mosque as in a
wedding procession[^2] whereas the Prophet (s) was still lain down among
his pure lovers. Imam Ali (s) then could not but to recite this verse of
one of the poets:

Some people began saying whatever they like

And tyrannized when Zayd was afflicted with calamities[^3]

Imam Ali (s) knew well that people had determined to turn the caliphate
away from him and that if he had asked for his right (the caliphate)
they would have disputed against him and if he had fought them they
would have fought him and that would lead to a sedition in the religion
and would bring dangers over the umma; therefore he chose to retire
preferring the general welfare and preferring the most important thing
to the important thing in order to keep Islam safe from any danger. It
was a covenant from the Prophet (s). Ameerul Mo’mineen[^4] became patient
unwillingly and restrained himself from [^1] These persons were among the
ones, who had broken into the house of Fatima, the Prophet’s daughter
(s), when intending to set fire to it. Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha,
vol. 2 p.19. Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhari narrated, as mentioned in
Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 1 p.130, that: “When Abu Bakr had been paid
homage, Az-Zubayr, al-Miqdad and some other people often visited Ali in
the house of Fatima (s).

Umar went to Fatima and said: “O daughter of the messenger of Allah,
none of the people in the world has ever been more beloved to us than
your father and than you after your father. By Allah, this will not
prevent me, if these people meet here in your house, from ordering to
burn the house over them...”

[^2] Mentioned by az-Zubayr bin Bukar in his book al-Muwaffaqiyyat.
Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.8.
[^3] Mentioned by Abu Bakr Ahmad bin Abdul Aziz al-Jawhary in his book
as-Saqeefa. Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.5.
[^4] “Ameerul Mo’mineen” means the commander of the believers. It is the
title of Imam Ali (s).

(102)

carrying out the covenant.[^1] Yes! He remained at home. He was
discontented with what they had done until they took him out by
force.[^2] He protested against those, who had extorted his right, and
how eloquent his protest was when he said to Abu Bakr:

If you protested against your opponents with kinship, The others were
worthier of the Prophet and closer than you And if you ruled them by the
shura,

[^1] For details refer to our thesis Falsafatul Meethaq wel-Wilaya (The
Philosophy of the Covenant and guardianship) and refer to al-Muraja’at,
muraja’a no.82, 84, and refer to chap.8 in our book al-Fusool
al-Muhimma.

[^2] Abu Bakr al-Jawhari mentioned in his book as-Saqeefa-as in Sharh
Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.19- a tradition narrated by ash-Shi’bi saying:
“Umar and Khalid bin al-Waleed went to Fatima’s house. Umar came into
and Khalid stayed at the door. Umar said to az-Zubayr: “What is this
sword for?” He said: “I have prepared it to pay homage to Ali.” There
were many people in the house. Among them were al-Miqdad and some of the
Hashemites. Umar snatched the sword from az-Zubayr, struck it against a
rock and broke it. They took az-Zubayr out to Khalid and his
companions.

There were many people with Khalid. Abu Bakr had sent them to support
Umar and Khalid. Then Umar said to Ali: “Get up and pay homage!” He
lagged and hesitated. Umar caught his hand and said to him: “Get up!” He
refused. They carried him by force and delivered him to Khalid as they
did with az-Zubayr. Umar and his companions drove Ali and az-Zubayr
violently. People gathered looking at the scene. The streets of Medina
became full of people. When Fatima (s) saw what Umar had done, she cried
and shouted. Many women of the Hashemites and others gathered with her.
She went out of her room and shouted: “O Abu Bakr, how hasty you
attacked the Prophet’s family. By Allah, I will not talk with Umar until
I meet Allah.”

Whoever examines the events of those days will find the clear truth in
Abu Bakr’s saying when he was about to die: “I wished I had not broken
into Fatima’s house even if it would lead to war.” Abu Bakr al-Jawhari
mentioned in his book as-Saqeefa another tradition narrated by Luhay’a
from Abul Aswad: “Umar and his companions broke into the house while
Fatima (s) was crying and adjuring them before Allah. They took Ali and
az-Zubayr out being driven by Umar”. Al-Jawhari mentioned too that:
“Umar came to Fatima’s house with people of Ansar and some men of
Muhajireen and said: “I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, either
you come out to pay homage or I shall burn the house over your heads.”
Az-Zubayr came out drawing his sword but they gathered against him until
his sword fell from his hand. Umar struck the sword against a rock and
it broke and then he took them out of the house drawing them violently
with their collars...” Refer to Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.19.

(103)

How is that while the people of the shura were absent?[^1]

[^1] These two verses are in Nahjol Balagha, the book, in which the
speeches, the letters and the maxims of Imam Ali (s) have been
collected. Abdul Hameed bin Abul Hadeed and Sheikh Muhammad Abda had
commented on these two verses in their books. It would be better to the
researchers to refer to. I have mentioned them in al-Muaraja’at no. 80.
Al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib once had protested against Abu Bakr with
something that as if its meaning had been taken from these two verses.

He said to Abu Bakr through an argument between them: “If you have
pretended that the Prophet (s) is from you, then you have extorted our
right and if you have evidenced with the believers, then we are the
first and the best of the believers so if this matter (the caliphate)
would not be legal to you unless with the agreement of the believers
then it would not be legal while we were unwilling”.

In another argument, as mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.1,
he said to him: “As for your saying “we are the tree of the Prophet” you
are its neighbors and we are its branches This was the meaning of Imam
Ali’s saying “You have argued about the tree but lost the fruit”.
Al-Fadhl bin al-Abbas said, as narrated by az-Zubayr bin Bukar in his
Muwaffaqiyyat and mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.8: “O
people of Quraysh and especially you bani Taym, you have taken the
caliphate by means of the prophethood whereas we are its people rather
than you but if we ask for this matter, which is our right, people will
hate us more than to hate the others because of their envy and grudge
towards us. We have known well that our man (Imam Ali) has a covenant
that must be carried out.”

Otba bin Abu Lahab said, as mentioned in Mukhtasar of Abul Fida’ and in
the last page of vol.2, Sharh Nahjol Balagha:

I have not thought that the matter (caliphate)will be turned away From
Hashem (the Hashemites) and then from Abu Hasan (Ali) Was he not the
first who had offered prayers toward your Qibla And the most aware of
the Qur'an and the Sunna among all people, And the closest one to the
Prophet and to Gabriel When helping him (Gabriel) in washing and
preparing his coffin? He has had nothing to be doubted And none of them
has had a bit of his virtues What made them deny him? Let us know It was
injustice that no else was greater than Az-Zubayr bin Bukar, when
mentioning these verses in his al-Muwaffaqiyyat, said: “…Ali sent for
him (Otba bin Abu Lahab) and ordered him not to say such a thing again
and said to him: “The safety of religion is more important for us than
anything else”. Az-Zubayr also mentioned in al-Muwaffaqiyyat as in Sharh
Nahjol Balagha, vol. 2 p.7 that once Abu Sufyan had passed by Ali’s
house. He stopped before the house and recited:

O bani Hashem, do not let people deem you weak

(104)

Their homage was a slip that Allah had saved the Muslims from its evil
as they had pretended but its cost was on the expense of Ameerul
Mo’mineen when he became patient before harm, silent before injustice
and when he sacrificed his right for the sake of Islam. Allah may reward
him for his favors on Islam and the Muslims with the best of His
reward.

**2. The second situation**

When Abu Bakr was about to die, he entrusted Umar with the caliphate!
How odd! (How wonder! As he has extorted it in his life, he has
entrusted it to another one after his death. How much they have
participated in its two udders!).[^1] How wonder! As if the man has given
the other a piece of his own properties! He has entrusted it to whoever
he wished without fearing any punishment, blaming or criticizing. How
wonder! As if he has forgotten or pretended that he has forgotten the
covenant of the caliphate the Prophet (s) had given to Ali and then
after him to the infallible imams of his progeny, who were one of the
two weighty things that whoever kept to would never deviate and whoever
turned away from their path would never be guided to the path of the
truth. They were equal to the Qur'an. They (the Qur'an and the Prophet’s
progeny) would never separate until they would come to him at the pond
in Paradise. They were like the Ark of Noah (s). Whoever rode on it
would be rescued and whoever lagged behind it would drown. They were
like the gate of repentance.

Especially Taym bin Murra and Adiy
For the matter is just among you and for you
No one deserves it save Abu Hasan Ali
O Abu Hasan, be determined for it
For you are the only well-qualified one for the hoped matter

His speech had no any effect on Imam. Ali said: “The messenger of Allah
has promised me with something and I am still keeping to it”. Abu Sufyan
left Ali and went to al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib in his house. He said
to him: “O Abul Fadhl, you are the well-qualified one for it (the
caliphate) and worthier of the heritage of your nephew (the Prophet).
Give me your hand to pay homage to you!” Al-Abbas laughed and said: “Ali
refuses it and al-Abbas asks for it, how far!!!” Abu Sufyan went out
disappointedly”.

[^1] This is a part of one of Imam Ali’s speeches.

(105)

Whoever entered through it would be forgiven. They were the security
for the people of the earth from being tortured and they were the
security of the umma from separation (in religion). If a tribe opposed
them, its people would disagreed among themselves and become the party
of Iblis…etc. to the rest of the clear traditions that had declared
their right of the caliphate and made that compulsory on the whole
peoples. We have mentioned many of such traditions in our book
al-Muraja’at.[^1]

**3. the third situation**

The battle of Mu’ta: it took place in Jumada al-Oola, the eighth year
of hijra, in which the Prophet (s) had appointed Zayd bin Haritha as the
leader of the army. The Prophet (s) said: “If Zayd is struck, then
Ja’far bin Abu Talib will be the leader and if he is struck then
Abdullah bin Rawaha will be the leader”. This has been said by all the
Sunni whereas the Shia say that the first leader, according to the
Prophet’s tradition, is Ja’far, the second is Zayd and the third is
Abdullah bin Rawaha. Our traditions on this subject are true and
recurrent from the pure infallible imams (s).

Muhammad bin Iss~haq has confirmed this in his Maghazi when mentioning
the poems of Hassaan bin Thabit and Ka’b bin Malik on praising and
elegizing Ja’far when he has been martyred.[^2]

However the order of these three leaders was, the fact was that the
Prophet (s) had appointed Zayd as a leader whether he was the first or
the second one. The army and the rest of the companions had heard the
Prophet (s) appointing Zayd as the leader. After that there was no any
excuse for those who had objected to this order unless it was possible
for non-infallible one to interpret (change), according to his own
opinion, a tradition said by an infallible one!!!

[^1] You find them in muraja’a no.8 p.20 (the third edition) until
muraja’a no.14. The dispute through the muraja’at between me and Sheikh
al-Bishri flared up until he said to me in the last of his letters he
had written about this subject: “You have sublimated and corrected my
thinking in your last letter, from whose contents the lights of your
star shone and the signs of your victory appeared”. I said: “Praise be
to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, for granting success and victory”.

[^2] Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.607-.

(106)

The reason of this battle was that the Prophet (s) had sent his
companion al-Harth bin Umayr to the king of Busra[^1] inviting him to be
a Muslim. When he was on his way, Shurahbeel bin Amr stopped him and
asked him: “Where are you going to?” Al-Harth said: “To Sham”. He said:
“Are you one of Muhammad’s messengers?” Al-Harth said: “Yes, I am.”
Shurahbeel ordered his mates to tie al-Harth and then he killed him. No
one of the Prophet’s messengers had been killed except this one. When
the Prophet (s) had been informed of this, he ordered the army to march
and appointed these three leaders according to the order we have
mentioned before.

The Prophet (s) sent this army and another army under the leadership of
Ussama bin Zayd to conquer Sham. Their hearts were full of the dignity
of Islam and the Muslims and the hearts of the Romans were filled with
fear and regard when they saw the seriousness, steadfastness,
devotedness and competing towards martyrdom among the two armies.

How brave Ja’far bin Abu Talib was with his three thousand soldiers
when they attacked bravely Hercules and his two hundred thousand
soldiers.[^2] Ja’far recited:

How nice Paradise is and its becoming near!

How good it is with its cold drinks

And the Romans are waiting for their near torment

They are unbelievers and strangers for me

I will strike them in the meeting

When the fighting became so violent, Ja’far broke into on his horse. He
slaughtered his horse and attacked the enemy. His hands were cut and
then he was killed. Ja’far was the first one, who had slaughtered his
horse in Islam. More than eighty wounds were found on his body.

It was narrated that the Prophet (s) had said: “Last night (in dream)
Ja’far and some angels passed by me. He had two wings. His [^1] In
Syria.
[^2] One hundred thousand soldiers from the Romans and one hundred
thousand from the Arabs from Najm, Jutham and other tribes as mentioned
by Ibnul Atheer in his al-Kamil and by others.

(107)

primaries were dyed with blood”.[^1] How great the situation of Zayd bin
Haritha was when he broke through the spears of the enemy! May Allah
high his position as he has been honored in this life.

And how great the situation of Abdullah bin Rawaha was when he
encouraged himself to face an army of two hundred thousand soldiers! He
recited:

O my soul, if you are not killed, you will die
This is the death you are in now
Whatever you have wished, you have been given
If you do one of them, you will be guided then
He also recited:

O my soul, I swear that you must submit to death
Willingly or you will be forced to it
As people have got ready to meet the hope
So why you hate Paradise
How long you have been reassured

Then he got off his horse. One of his cousins came to him with a piece
of meat and said: “Support yourself with this for you have got much
tiredness.” He ate a bit and then he heard a clamor coming from a side
of the army. He said to himself: “Do hear this and you are still alive?”
He threw the piece of meat and approached to fight until he was
martyred.

Some Muslims of this army, after founding that the enemy army was about
two hundred thousands, thought to inform the Prophet (s) about that but
Abdullah bin Rawaha encouraged them to keep on by saying: “By Allah, we
do not fight by equipments, powers or numbers. We fight by this
religion, with which Allah has honored us. Go on! It is not but one of
two good things; either victory or martyrdom”. The people said: “By
Allah, he is right”. They went on without feeling weak or submissive. By
Allah, it is the honor that goes high on the wing of the eagle and
competes with the Gemini.

[^1] Al-Kamil by Ibnul Atheer (the battle of Mu’ta) and other books of
Hadith and history. The surname of Ja’far among all the Muslims is “the
two-winged” man.

(108)

Yes! It is the real faith in Allah and His messenger. I wish I were
with them to get the great victory!


