8. the Donation of Fatima
=========================

When Allah the Almighty assisted the Prophet (s) to conquer Khaybar and
cast horror into the hearts of the people of Fadak, they submitted to
the Prophet (s) servilely. They made peace with him by giving him a half
of their land[^1] and the Prophet (s) accepted that from them and so a
half of Fadak became a pure property for him where “whatever Allah
restored to His Messenger from them you did not press forward against it
any horse or a riding camel but Allah

[^1] It is mentioned that they have given the Prophet (s) all of their
land.

(135)

gives authority to His messengers against whom He pleases. Qur'an,
59:6” and upon this all the umma had agreed unanimously with no any
objection by anyone. When Allah revealed “And give to the near of kin
his due,” the Prophet (s) donated Fadak to his daughter Fatima (s). It
was still in her hand[^1] until it had been extorted from her to be added
to the treasury.

This was what Fatima (s) had claimed after the death of the Prophet (s)
and because of this she had been subjected to trial. Al-Fakhr ar-Razi
said: “When the messenger of Allah died, Fatima (s) claimed that the
Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to her. Abu Bakr said to her: “It hurts me
to see you needy and it delights me to see you needless but I do not
know whether your saying is true or not;[^2] therefore I can not judge
for you.” Umm Aymen and another mawla (follower) of the messenger of
Allah[^3] witnessed for Fatima but Abu Bakr wanted a witness, whose
witnessing would be accepted

[^1] The infallible imams and their followers have not had any doubt
that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to Fatima (s) and that it had
been in her hand until it had been extorted from her. Imam Ali (s) said
to his administrative official on Basra, Othman bin Hunayf: “...Yes,
Fadak was in our hands out of all what was under the sky but some people
felt greedy for it and others withheld themselves from it but the best
of judges is Allah...” Refer to Nahjol Balagha. There are many
traditions narrated from the infallible imams talking about the same
matter. The reliable narrators have narrated a tradition from Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri saying: “When Allah has revealed (And give to the near of kin
his due), the messenger of Allah gave Fadak to Fatima.” Refer to
Majma’ul Bayan by at-Tabarsi when interpreting this verse 17:26. You
will find there that it is this tradition that has made al-Ma’moon, the
Abbasid caliph, give Fadak back to the progeny of Fatima.

[^2] By Allah O you Abu Bakr, have you really not known whether Fatima’s
claim was true or not after Umm Aymen (the Prophet’s nursemaid) and Imam
Ali (s) had witnessed it was true? Have you considered them all to be
liars, aggressive or mistaken? Certainly not! But (Nay, but your minds
have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely patience. And
Allah it is Whose help is to be sought in that (predicament) which ye
describe). [^3] The other witness besides Umm Aymen was Ameerul Mo’mineen
Ali bin Abu Talib (s) undoubtedly. As if ar-Razi found the rejection of
Imam Ali’s witness by Abu Bakr abominable so he did not mention the name
of Imam Ali (s) respecting Imam Ali and Abu Bakr together so he said “a
mawla of the messenger of Allah”.

(136)

according to the Sharia”.[^1]

Ibn Hajar al-Haythami in his book as-Sawa’iq said: “Fatima, in her
claim that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to her, did not bring
except Ali and Umm Aymen as witnesses and so the quorum was not
complete…”[^2] The same has been said by Ibn Taymiyya, ibnul Qayyim and
other Sunni ulama concerning this case.

May Allah forgive them and us and may He be pleased with Abu Bakr and
make Fatima, her father, her husband and her son forgive him! Would he
have preferred a suitable decision in order not to put Fatima (s), the
prophet’s trust, who had recently lost her father, in those bad
situations; once because of her inheritance, another time because of her
donation of Fadak, a third time, a fourth time…worries and griefs…would
he have not let her go angry and disappointed and then to die on her
anger and to recommend in her will what she had recommended!

Glory be to Allah! Where was the deliberateness of the caliph (Abu
Bakr)? Where was his patience? Where was his insight about the ends of
the affairs and where was his caring for the benefits of the Muslims?

Would he have avoided the fail of Fatima (s) in her situations as
possible as he could with all wisdom he had! Had he done so, it would
have been much better for him and it would have kept him away from
regretting and being blamed and it would have been better to unite the
umma!

He could have protected the trust of the Prophet (s) and the only
daughter of him, Fatima (s), from being disappointed and then to go back
upset stumbling with her garment. What would he have lost, where he had
occupied the position of her father, if he had given Fadak to Fatima (s)
without a trial? An imam could do that due to his general guardianship
and what the value of Fadak was before the general advantage of the
Muslims and before avoiding evils!

[^1] Tafseer Mafateehul Ghayb by ar-Razi, vol.8 p.125.
[^2] P.21 in his book Shubah ar-Rafidha.

(137)

This is what many earlier and later scholars have wished that Abu Bakr
had done.

Here we quote a word concerning this subject said by Professor Mahmood
Abu Riyya, the Egyptian coeval scholar: “There is a matter that we have
to say a frank word about; it is the situation of Abu Bakr towards
Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her), the daughter of the messenger of
Allah, and what he has done to her concerning the inheritance of her
father. Let us suppose that we submit to the traditions narrated by a
single narrator and submit that they may limit the general verdicts of
the Qur’an and that the Prophet (s) has said: “We, the Prophets, do not
bequeath”; nevertheless Abu Bakr could give Fatima (may Allah be pleased
with her) some of her father’s inheritance and that Fadak might be
considered as a part of that inheritance. This would be his right that
no one could refute because he was the caliph and the caliph could give
whatever he liked to whomever he liked. The caliph himself had donated
some of the Prophet’s inheritance to az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam,[^1] Muhammad
bin Maslama and others.[^2] This very Fadak itself had been donated to
Marwan by the caliph Othman after a short time!”[^3]

Ibn Abul Hadeed mentioned in his book Sharh Nahjol Balagha some speech
of some earlier scholars, who had criticized the two caliphs, Abu Bakr
and Umar, due to their situations toward Fatima az-Zahra’ (s) after her
father’s death: “It would be better for them to be more generous,
besides their faith, than to commit what they had committed toward the
daughter of the messenger of Allah”. Ibn Abul Hadeed commented: “This
speech has no answer!”[^4]

Let us away from generosity and let us discuss the matter of the trial.
The legal evidences were sufficient to make it obligatory to judge for
[^1] He was the caliph’s son-in-law. His wife was Asma’, the daughter of
Abu Bakr.

[^2] Abu Bakr had given his daughter Aa’isha the prophet’s house, in
which she buried him beside the tomb of the Prophet (s) after his death
and in which she buried Umar later on but when Imam Hasan (s), the
Prophet’s beloved grandson, died she refused to let him be buried in his
grandfather’s house and then a sedition was about to happen! Just to
Allah we resort!

[^3] Refer to ar-Risala al-Misriyya magazine, vol.518, 11th year,
p.457.

[^4] vol.4, p.106.

(138)

Fatima (s) in order to get her donation back. These evidences, besides
that they were sufficient, were numerous. This was clear to the fair
people of understanding.

It was enough that the ruler (the caliph), at that time, had already
been certain that the claimer (Fatima), with her holiness, was equal to
the Virgin Mary[^1] or better than her[^2] and that she and Mary, Khadeeja
(the Prophet’s wife) and Asiya (the Pharaoh’s wife) were the best of the
women of Paradise[^3] and that she and these three women were the best of
the women of the worlds[^4] and it was she, to whom the Prophet (s) had
said: “O Fatima, are you not satisfied to be the head lady of the
believing women or the head lady of the women of this umma?”[^5]

[^1] According to the true traditions; ibn Abdul Birr said in his book
al-Istee’ab when mentioning the biography of Fatima (s): “The Prophet
(s) visited Fatima when she was ill and said to her: “O my daughter, how
are you today?” She said: “I feel pain and what hurts me more that I
have nothing to eat.” He said: “O my daughter, are you not satisfied
that you are the head lady of the women of the worlds?” She said: “O
father, what about Mary the daughter of Imran?” He said: “She is the
head lady of the women of her world and you are the head lady of your
world. By Allah, I have married you to a master in this world and in the
afterworld”. Many such traditions have been mentioned by other scholars
and historians.

[^2] The infallible imams and their followers have agreed unanimously
that Fatima (s) is better than the Virgin Mary (s). Many Sunni scholars
have declared that she is better than all the women of the worlds even
the Virgin Mary (s), such as at-Taqiy as-Sabki, al-Hallal as-Sayooti,
al-Badr, az-Zarkashi, at-Taqiy al-Maqreezi, ibn Abu Dawood and
al-Mannawi. Refer to ash-Sharaf al-Mu’ayyad by Allama an-Nabahani, p.59
when talking about the virtues of Fatima (s). The same has been said by
Ahmad Zayni Dahlan, the mufti of the Shafiites when talking about the
marriage of Fatima and Ali in his book as-Seera an-Nabawiyya.

[^3] It has been mentioned by Ahmad bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.1
p.293, by Abu Dawood as in al-Istee’ab, the biography of Khadeeja and by
Qasim bin Muhammad as in al-Istee’ab, the biography of Fatima (s).

[^4] Narrated by Abu Dawood from Anass as mentioned in al-Istee’ab when
talking about Khadeeja’s biography and narrated by Abdul Warith bin
Sufyan as in al-Istee’ab, biographies of Fatima (s) and Khadeeja.

[^5] Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.4 p.64, Muslim’s Sahih, vol.2, the virtues
of Fatima (s), at-Tarmithi’s Sahih, al-Jam’ bayna as-Sahihhayn, al-Jam’
bayna as-Sihah as-Sitta, Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal’s Musnad, vol.6 p.282,
ibn Abdul Birr’s Istee’ab, Muhammad bin Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol.2, vol.8.
Al-Bukhari said in his Sahih, vol.4 the last page of chap. al-Isti’than:
“Musa bin Owana narrated from Firas from Aamir from Masrooq that

(139)

All the Muslims have known well that Allah the Almighty has chosen
Fatima (s) from among the women of the umma, chosen her two sons from
among all the sons and chosen her husband from among the near people to
be the elite with the Prophet (s) on the day of Mubahala (supplication)
where Allah has revealed: “But whoever disputes with you in this matter
after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our
sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near people and
your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the
curse of Allah on the liars. Qur'an, 3:61”

Ar-Razi said in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer when interpreting this
Verse: “The Prophet (s) came out wearing a black garment of wool while
he was embracing al-Husayn and leading al-Hasan with his hand. Fatima
was walking behind him and behind her was Ali. He said to them: “If I
invoke Allah, you say Amen”.

The bishop of Aa’isha (the Prophet’s wife) had said: “We, the wives of
the Prophet, were all with him and none of us left him when Fatima came
walking like the walking of the messenger of Allah (s). When the Prophet
(s) saw her, he said: “O my daughter, welcome!” Then he seated her
beside him. He whispered in her ears and she began crying bitterly and
when he saw her crying, he whispered in her ears again and she smiled.
I, from among the Prophet’s wives, asked her: “The Prophet (s) confided
a secret to you from among all of us but you began crying!” When the
Prophet (s) left, I asked her: “What secret did the Prophet (s) confide
to you?” She said: “I would never disclose the Prophet’s secrets”.

When the Prophet (s) died, I said to her: “I adjure you with my right
on you to tell me what the Prophet (s) has whispered in your ears”. She
said: “Yes, now I shall do. The first time he told me that Gabriel was
used to dictate the (entire) Qur'an to him once a year but that year
Gabriel had dictated the Qur'an to him twice and so he thought that he
would die soon. He said to me: “Fear Allah and be patient.

I have been to you the best of fathers.” So I began crying as you saw.
When he saw me crying, he said to me: “O Fatima, are you not satisfied
to be the head lady of the believing women… or the women of this umma?”
Ibn Hajar in his book al-Issaba and other authors mentioned: “…are you
not satisfied to be the head lady of the women of the worlds?” However
the tradition is true and preferring Fatima (s) to all of the other
women is clear. Ibn Sa’d in his book at-Tabaqat, vol.2 mentioned a
tradition narrated by Umm Salama saying: “When the Prophet (s) was about
to die, I asked Fatima about her crying and smiling on that day. She
said: “He (the Prophet (s)) told me that he would die within a short
time and then he told me that I was the head lady of the women of
Paradise”. It has been mentioned by Abu Ya’la and other scholars of
Hadith.

(140)

Najran[^1] said: “O Christian people, I see faces, which if ask Allah to
remove a mountain, He will remove it for them. Do not defy them;
otherwise you will perish and no Christian will remain on the earth
until the Day of Resurrection”.[^2]

Also the Muslims have agreed unanimously that Fatima (s) was one of
those, about whom Allah has revealed this Verse: “Allah only desires to
keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify
you a (thorough) purifying. Qur'an, 33:33” and she was one of those,
whom Allah has ordered the Muslims to love as a reward for (informing
of) the mission when revealing this Verse: “Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it but love for my near relatives. Qur'an, 42:23” and she was
one of those, whom Allah has imposed upon His people to pray for in
their prayers as He has imposed upon them shahada.

Imam ash-Shafi’iy said, as mentioned in as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa:

“O people of the Prophet’s family,
loving you is an obligation imposed by Allah in His Qur'an.
It suffices you, with your high position,
that whoever dose not pray for you (in his prayer)
his prayer will not be accepted”.
Sheikh ibnul Arabi said, as in as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa:

“I find my allegiance to the progeny of Taha[^3] an obligation
that, in spite of my farness, will make me near to Allah.

The Beneficent has not asked for a reward in return to informing of
guidance
except to love the relatives (of the Prophet (s))”.
Allama an-Nabhani said in his book ash-Sharaf al-Mu’abbad: “O progeny
of Taha, you are a progeny of the best of the Prophets.
Your grandfather is elite and you are elite.

[^1] A place between Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It was a centre for the
Christians before Islam.
[^2] This tradition has been mentioned by the interpreters, the
narrators, the historians and by everyone, who has recorded the events
of the tenth year of hijra, in which this event has taken place.
[^3] Prophet Muhammad (s).

(141)

Allah has purified you from uncleanness, O you Ahlul Bayt, since long
before, so you are the purest. Your grandfather has not asked for
reward, when informing the mission, save loving and kindness to his
relatives”. And also Fatima (s) is the best of the righteous, about whom
Allah has said: (Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture
of which is camphor. A fountain from, which the servants of Allah shall
drink; they make it to flow a (goodly) flowing forth. They fulfill vows
and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading far and wide. And
they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and the
captive. We only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire from you neither
reward nor thanks. Qur'an, 76:5-9”[^1]

In short, Fatima (s) was so holy near Allah, near the Prophet (s) and
near the believers that would impose upon the all to trust in whatever
she said. She would not need a witness to prove what she claimed. Her
tongue was too far above every untruth. She would never say but the
truth. Her very claim showed her definite truthfulness without a bit of
doubt. No one of those, who had known her, would doubt this at all. Abu
Bakr had known her very well and believed in whatever she said but the
fact was as Ali bin al-Fariqi, who was one of the famous scholars of
Baghdad, a teacher in the western school (in Baghdad) and one of the
teachers of ibn Abul Hadeed (the author of Sharh Nahjul Balagha), had
said when being asked by ibn Abul Hadeed if Fatima (s) had been truthful
in her claim about her donation of Fadak: “Yes”. Ibn Abul Hadeed said to
him: “Then why did Abu Bakr not give her Fadak while he knew well she
was truthful?” He smiled and said nice words and then he added:

[^1] The Shia have agreed, following their imams, unanimously that these
Verses have been revealed to concern Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn
because of a charity (food) they have paid to a poor one, an orphan and
a prisoner of war in three successive nights whereas they themselves
have been badly in need of that charity. They have kept on fasting
during those three days without having except some water for they have
been offering a vow. Az-Zamakhshari in his book al-Kashshaf has
mentioned this matter in a tradition narrated from ibn Abbas. It has
been also mentioned by al-Wahidi in his book al-Baseet, Abu Is~haq
ath-Tha’labi in his book at-Tafseer al-Kabeer and by Abul Mu’ayyad
Muwaffaq bin Ahmad in his book al-Fadha’il. Many other scholars and
authors have considered it as a reliable tradition.

(142)

“If he had given her Fadak that day just according to her claim, she
would ask him the next day for the caliphate to be given to her husband
(Imam Ali) and she would move him away from his position and then he
would not find any excuse for that because he would have confirmed that
she had been truthful in all what she had claimed without any need for
witnesses”.

Hence Abu Bakr has allowed himself to deny the witness of Ali bin Abu
Talib (s), when witnessing for Fatima (s) concerning her donation,
whereas the Jews of Khaybar, in spite of their meanness and in spite of
that Imam Ali (s) has destroyed them, have considered him (Ali) too
exalted for committing a false testimony. And so the matters were mixed
together that Abu Bakr considered Fatima (s), in whose possession Fadak
was, as a claimer, who had to have evidences to prove her possession. It
was clear that this matter had been planned under darkness!

If we forgot many things, we would not forget Abu Bakr’s saying to
Fatima (s) “I do not know whether your saying is true or not” whereas
her saying was merely the truth and the clearest evidence, due to which
he had to judge for her as she had claimed.

If we gave up all that and we admitted that Fatima (s) was like any
other good believing woman, who had to prove her claim with a true
evidence, then what about Imam Ali (s), who had witnessed to her? It was
Ali (s), who was the Prophet’s spiritual brother and who was to the
Prophet (s) as was Aaron to Moses. Imam Ali (s) was the lofty witness of
the truth, with whose witnessing the lights of certainty shone. Was
there anything beyond certainty that a judge would seek in his
judgments? Therefore the Prophet (s) had considered the witness of
Khuzayma bin Thabit as a witness of two truthful persons. By Allah, Imam
Ali (s) was worthier of such a witness than Khuzayma and the others and
he was worthier of every virtue than the rest of the Muslims.

If we gave up this too and admitted that the testimony of Imam Ali (s)
was like the testimony of one man of the fair Muslims, then was it not
possible for Abu Bakr to ask Fatima (s) to swear to be as the second
witness? If she swore, he would accept her claim and if she did not, he
would reject her claim. But he did not do that! He

(143)

rejected the claim disregarding the testimony of Imam Ali (s) and Umm
Aymen.[^1]

Imam Ali (s) was the equivalent of the Qur'an. He was with the Qur'an
and the Qur'an was with him. They would not separate.[^2] In the Verse of
Mubahala he was considered as the very self of the Prophet (s). But
alas! In spite of all that, his testimony in this trial was considered
as null! What a misfortune in Islam we have received that we cannot but
say: we are Allah’s and to Him we shall return!

**9. Hurting Fatima (s)**

Rejecting Fatima’s claim about her inheritance was against the clear
traditions rather than its reasons and environments.[^3]

Among those traditions is the one that has been mentioned by ibn Abu
Aasim (as in al-Issaba-Fatima’s biography). He mentioned that the
Prophet (s) had said to his daughter Fatima (s): “Allah becomes

[^1] Umm Aymen was the woman, who had brought up the Prophet (s) after
the death of his mother. Her name was Baraka bint Tha’laba. The Prophet
(s) said about her: “Umm Aymen is my mother after my (real) mother”. The
Prophet (s), when looking at her, often said: “She is one of my family”.
He said that she would be in Paradise. She had been mentioned in
al-Issaba by ibn Hajar, al-Istee’ab by ibn Abdul Birr and by all the
authors, who had mentioned the biographies of the Prophet’s companions.
They had mentioned her virtues, good faith, reason and loyalty. Her son
Aymen had been martyred during the battle of Khaybar when fighting with
the Prophet (s). She did not worry for that but she became patient
hoping for the divine reward in the Hereafter.

[^2] With reference to the famous tradition of (ath-Thaqalayn-the two
weighty things), which has been mentioned in the books of Hadith (Sihah)
and many other books. The Prophet (s) said: “I have left among you what
if you keep to, you will never go astray at all; the Book of Allah and
my family”. Definitely the head of his family was Imam Ali (s).

[^3] With reference to the Prophet’s saying narrated by Umm Salama that
she said: “I have heard the messenger of Allah saying: Ali is with the
Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They do never separate until they
will come to me at the pond (in Paradise)”. It has been mentioned by
al-Hakim in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.124 and by ath-Thahabi in his
Talkhees. The Prophet (s), during the illness that led to his death,
said while the room was crowded of his companions: “O people, I am about
to die soon and I will inform you of something so that I will be excused
before you. I have left among you the Book of my god, the Almighty, and
my family.” Then he lifted Ali’s hand and said: “This is Ali. He is with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with Ali. They do never separate”. Refer to
as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa, chap.2 p.75.

(144)

angry when you become angry and He becomes pleased when you become
pleased”. It has also been mentioned by at-Tabarani and others as in
ash-Sharaf al-Mu’abbad by an-Nabhani al-Beiruti.

Al-Bukhari and Muslim mentioned-as in al-Issaba and other books when
talking about Fatima’s biography-a tradition that al-Musawwir had said:
“I have heard the messenger of Allah saying from above the minbar:
Fatima is a piece of me. Whatever hurts her hurts me and whatever
distresses her distresses me”. Sheikh Yousuf an-Nabhani mentioned in his
book ash-Sharaf al-Mu’abbad a tradition quoted from al-Bukhari that the
Prophet (s) had said: “Fatima is a piece of me. Whatever makes her angry
makes me angry”. In al-Jami’ul Sagheer it is mentioned that the Prophet
(s) has said: “Fatima is a piece of me. Whatever depresses her depresses
me and whatever pleases her pleases me”.

She has said to Abu Bakr and Umar: “I adjure you by Allah, have you not
heard the messenger of Allah saying: “The contentment of Fatima is my
contentment and her discontentment is my discontentment. Whoever loves
my daughter Fatima loves me, whoever pleases Fatima pleases me and
whoever discontents Fatima discontents me”? They said: “Yes, we have
heard this from the messenger of Allah”.[^1]

He, who ponders on these traditions and who appreciates the Prophet
(s), will find that these traditions refer to the infallibility of
Fatima (s) because they show that depressing her, discontenting her,
pleasing her, displeasing her, her contentment or her anger do not occur
inexcusably. It is as same as depressing, discontenting, pleasing or
displeasing the Prophet (s) himself and this is the essence and reality
of infallibility.

Some Sunni scholars, like Ahmad bin Hanbal, have mentioned a tradition
narrated by Abu Hurayra saying: “Once the Prophet (s) looked at Ali,
al-Hasan, al-Husayn and Fatima and said: I am a war against whoever
fights you and peace to whoever makes peace with

[^1] Al-Imama wes-Siyasa by ibn Qutayba and other books of history.


(145)

you”.[^1]

At-Tarmithi has mentioned a tradition narrated by Zayd bin Arqam-as in
al-Issaba, Fatima’s biography-that once the Prophet (s) mentioned Ali,
Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn and said: “I am a war against whoever
fights them and peace to whoever makes peace with them”.[^2]

Abu Bakr said: “Once I saw the messenger of Allah (s) erecting a
tent.[^3] He was leaning on an Arabic bow while inside the tent there
were Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. The messenger of Allah said:
“O people, I am peace to whoever makes peace with the people in the
tent, a war against whoever fights them and a guardian to whoever
follows them. He, who loves them, is lucky and of a good origin and he,
who hates them, is wretched and of a bad origin”.

Professor Abbas Mahmood al-Aqqad has mentioned this tradition in his
book Abqariyyatu Muhammad under chapt. “The Prophet, the Imam and the
companions”.

Ahmad bin Hanbal mentioned a tradition narrated by Abdurrahman al-Azraq
that Imam Ali (s) had said: “Once the messenger of Allah (s) came to me
while I was sleeping. Al-Hasan or al-Husayn asked for some water (or
some milk). The Prophet (s) went to our ewe, which had no milk. He
milked it and it gave much milk. Then al-Hasan came to the Prophet (s)
but the Prophet (s) put him aside. Fatima said: O messenger of Allah, I
think he is the most beloved one to you. He said: But he (al-Husayn)
asked for some milk before him. Then the Prophet (s) added: I, you,
these two boys and that sleeping one

[^1] Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.2 p.442. It has also been mentioned by al-Hakim
in his Mustadrak and by at-Tabarani in his al-Kabeer.

[^2] It has been mentioned by ibn Habban in his Sahih, al-Hakim in his
Mustadrak, ad-Dhiya’ in his Mukhtarat, at-Tabarani and ibn Shayaba from
Zayd bin Arqam and by Abu Ya’la in as-Sunna and ad-Dhiya’ in
al-Mukhtarat from Sa’d bin Abu Waqqas. Also mentioned by other famous
scholars like allama Alawi in his book al-Qawl al-Fasl, vol.2 p.7.

[^3] This tent might be the garment, with which the Prophet (s) covered
them (Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn) when Allah revealed to him:
(Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying). Refer to chapt.2
in this book for details.

(146)

will be in one place on the Day of Resurrection”.[^1]

Among their (the Prophet’s progeny’s) rights on the umma and especially
the men of authority was that they should not be surprised by extorting
their position in the umma after the Prophet (s) and doing without them
even in consultation besides being so severe to them in the matter of
the caliphate and denying their rights, khums, inheritance and donation
as well as considering them as the rest of the ordinary people while the
wound had not yet recovered and the Prophet (s) had not yet buried!

The seizers of the umma and their assistants at that time had arranged
their affairs in a way that they had not left any chance to any one to
opposite them otherwise that one would separate the umma and so they had
become safe from the opposition of Imam Ali (s) and his followers. For
full details about this matter, please refer to al-Muraja’at.

Among the principles of the rulers at that time was to be strict in
carrying out the verdicts without differentiating between this and that
or between the noble and the low. They controlled the treasury and
enriched it with wealth and monies and they equalized between the
recidivists and the others in the judgments.

What assisted them in carrying out their principles was their
satisfaction and being away from greediness and transient pleasures of
this worldly life besides their asceticism and so they satisfied the
public and therefore they ruled with no troubles. But when the matter
became serious on the trial of Fatima (s), they considered Fatima, the
Prophet’s piece, as any other woman, who was not purified from
fabricating and lying.[^2]

[^1] Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.1 p.101.
[^2] In fact she was not even treated as an ordinary Muslim woman,
because when a Muslim woman, who was not purified from fabrication, had
one witness (a fair Muslim man) on her claim, then it would be enough
for her, instead of the other witness, to be put to oath and her claim
would not be rejected unless she abstained from the oath. As for Fatima
(s), her husband Imam Ali (s) had witnessed for her and so the rulers
had to put her to oath and if she abstained from oath then they would
reject her claim. They did not do that. They just hastened to reject her
claim without asking her for any kind of oath.

(147)

**10. The Prophet (s) orders Abu Bakr and Umar**

The Prophet (s) had ordered Abu Bakr and Umar to kill Thu ath-Thadiyya
but they did not kill him. Thu ath-Thadiyya was al-Khusayra at-Tameemi
Harqoos bin Zuhayr,[^1] who was the head of the apostates. The Prophet
(s) wanted to uproot the ravage and corruption of this apostate man when
he ordered to kill him but the hypocrisy of this man and his false
reverence in his praying deceived Abu Bakr and Umar and so they hated to
kill him and they let him alive.

This has been mentioned by the scholars, the historians and the authors
of the books of Hadith.

Abu Ya’la has said in his Musnad-as mentioned in al-Issaba by ibn
Hajar, Thu ath-Thadiyya’s biography: “At the age of the messenger of
Allah (s) there was a man, whose worship and loyalty we had admired too
much. We mentioned his name to the Prophet (s) but the Prophet (s) did
not know him. We described him to the Prophet (s) and he did not know
him. After a little the man came towards us. We said to the Prophet (s):
“It is him.” The Prophet (s) said: “You have told me about a man, in
whose face there is a scorch of the Satan.

” He came until he stopped before us but he did not greet us. The
Prophet (s) said to him: “I adjure you by Allah, did you say, when you
stopped before the people: there is no one among this people better than
me?” He said: “Yes, I did.” Then he went in to offer prayer. The Prophet
(s) said: “Who kills him?” Abu Bakr said: “I do.” Abu Bakr went to him
and he found him offering prayer. He said: “Glory be to Allah, shall I
kill a praying one whereas the messenger of Allah has prohibited killing
a praying one?” He came In fact she had Fadak in her possession and had
full control over it and so she had not to have evidence to prove her
possession but the opposite side had to have an evidence according to
the saying of the Prophet (s) “Evidence is on him, who claims, and oath
is on him, who denies”. This is one of the clear traditions that they
have opposed depending on their own ijtihad.

[^1] Ibnul Atheer mentioned his biography in his book Usdol Ghaba and
mentioned another tradition narrated by Abu Sa’eed saying: “As the
messenger of Allah was taking an oath one day, al-Khuwaysara at-Tameemi
said: “O messenger of Allah, be just!” The Prophet (s) said: “Woe unto
you! And who is just if I am not?” It was mentioned by Muslim too.

(148)

back. The Prophet (s) said: “What did you do?” Abu Bakr said: “I hated
to kill him while he was praying and you have prohibited killing praying
people.” The Prophet (s) said: “Who kills him?” Umar said: “I do.” He
went to him and found him lying prostrate and his forehead touching the
ground. Umar said to himself: “Abu Bakr is better than me” and he came
back. The Prophet (s) said to him: “What did you do?” He said: “I found
him prostrate before Allah and I disliked killing him.” The Prophet (s)
said: “Who kills him?” Ali said: “I do.” The Prophet (s) said: “Yes, you
do if you find him.” Ali went to him and found that he had gone. The
Prophet (s) said: “If he was killed, then no two men of my umma would
ever disagree.”

Al-Hafidh (memorizer) Muhammad bin Musa ash-Shirazi has mentioned this
tradition in his book, which he had written according to the tafseers
(interpretations) of Ya’qoob bin Sulayman, Yousuf al-Qattan, al-Qassim
bin Salam, Muqatil bin Hiyad, Ali bin Harb, as-Sadiy, Qatada, Waqee’,
ibn Jurayh and others.

Some scholars have mentioned this tradition and considered it as true
like ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalusi in his book al-Iqd al-Fareed. He
mentioned at the end of the tradition that the Prophet (s) had said:
“This is the first horn that appears in my umma. If you kill him, no two
men will disagree after him. The Israelites have separated into
seventy-two groups and this umma will separate into seventy-three
groups, all of which will be in Hell except one group.”

**11. The Prophet (s) orders Abu Bakr and Umar for the second time**

The Prophet (s) ordered Abu Bakr and Umar to kill this apostate for the
second time but they did as they had done in the first time. A friend of
mine, whom I trust in his virtue, piety and knowledge, told me that once
Abu Bakr passed by this apostate (Thu ath-Thadiyya), after he had been
ordered to kill him but he disliked to kill him, and he found him
offering prayer in one of the valleys where no one could see him save
Allah. He admired his devotedness and supplication. He thanked Allah
that he did not kill him. He came to the Prophet (s) interceding for
that man. He mentioned to the Prophet (s) the sincerity and
submissiveness of that man while

(149)

offering his prayer where no one could see him save Allah. The Prophet
(s) did not accept Abu Bakr’s intercession and he ordered him
immediately to kill that apostate man. When Abu Bakr did not kill the
man, the Prophet (s) ordered Umar and then ordered Imam Ali (s) and
stressed on killing him and his companions. This is what I have been
told by the one, whom I know well and know about his deep research and
careful study.[^1] He has confirmed it to me but I forgot to ask him
about the source of the tradition. I began to research by myself until I
found the tradition, and all thanks be to Allah, in Ahmad bin Hannibal’s
Musnad, vol.3 that Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri had said: “Once Abu Bakr came to
the Prophet (s) and said to him: “O messenger of Allah, I passed through
the valley of so and so and I saw a good looking man offering prayer
reverently.” The Prophet (s) said to him: “Go and kill him!” Abu Bakr
went to him and when he saw him in that state, he disliked killing him
and then he came back to the Prophet (s).

Then the Prophet (s) said to Umar: “Go and kill him!” Umar went to him
and he saw him in that state, which Abu Bakr had seen him in. he
disliked to kill him and he returned to the Prophet (s). He said to the
Prophet (s): “O messenger of Allah, I found him offering prayer
reverently and I disliked killing him.” The Prophet (s) said to Ali: “Go
and kill him!” Ali went but he did not find the man. He came back to the
Prophet (s) and said: “O messenger of Allah, I did not find him.” The
Prophet (s) said: “This man and his companions[^2] recite the Qur'an but
the Qur'an does not go past their clavicles. They get out of religion as
an arrow that slips away from a hunted animal. Kill them for they are
the worst of people.”

He, who ponders on these two traditions concerning this apostate man;
the tradition mentioned by Abu Ya’la and narrated by Anass and the
tradition mentioned by Ahmad bin Hanbal and narrated by Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri, will know that the Prophet (s) has ordered to kill this man
two times in different events. The first tradition narrated by Anass
shows that the Prophet (s) has not known this

[^1] He is the pious Sheikh Mirza Husayn an-Noori, the author of
al-Mustadrakat ala al-Wassa’il.

[^2] Later on, during the rule of Imam Ali (s), they seceded from Imam
Ali (s) and were called the Kharijites.


(150)

apostate man before. The Prophet’s companions mentioned and described
the man to the Prophet (s) but he did not know him until he saw him and
knew him because of the scorch in his face and because of his
self-conceit and then the Prophet (s) ordered his companions to kill
him. The prayer of that apostate, which pleased Abu Bakr and Umar on
that day, was in the mosque whereas the second tradition mentioned by
Ahmad and narrated by Abu Sa’eed showed that Abu Bakr had seen this
apostate offering his prayer in one of the valleys and not in the mosque
where Abu Bakr had admired this apostate’s devotion and reverence where
no one saw him save Allah the Almighty. Abu Bakr told the Prophet (s)
about that and the Prophet (s) immediately ordered him to kill that man
without seeing the man. This was because the Prophet (s) had already
ordered before to kill that man so the traditions talked about two
events with a period of time between them. Here the clear orders of the
Prophet (s) were opposed by Abu Bakr and Umar due to their own
ijtihad.


**The Kharijites**

The Kharijites were the Muslims, who apostatized from religion when
they rebelled against Imam Ali (s). They denied the arbitration (between
Imam Ali (s) and Mo’awiya), which they themselves had forced Imam Ali
(s) to accept. They were about eighty thousands or more. Imam Ali (s)
sent for them to remind them of Allah and the hereafter and to show them
their faults and mistakes in what they had thought and kept to “and most
surely the frailest of the houses is the spider's house if they but
knew. Qur'an, 29:41” but they refused to come to him and they asked him
to acknowledge that he had become unbeliever and he had to repent. When
they did not come to him, Imam Ali (s) sent to them Abdullah bin Abbas,
who tried his best to refute their opinions with clear evidences but
they insisted on their deviation as if there was deafness in their ears
and there were veils on their hearts.

They agreed unanimously on considering every Muslim, who did not adopt
their opinions, as unbeliever and that he and his family were to be
killed and his properties were to be appropriated. They rebelled against
the Muslims and they killed whoever passed by them. Among

(151)

those, whom they had killed, was Abdullah bin al-Khabbab bin al-Arth
at-Tameemi. They cut open his wife’s abdomen while she was pregnant.
Their evils spread everywhere. Imam Ali (s) came to them preaching them
and showing them that they had mistaken when they rebelled against him.
He refuted their excuses and warned them that if they insisted on their
deviation, they would be killed and in the hereafter they would be in
Hell.

They insisted on their transgression without intending to repent and
they became like the people of Noah when “they put their fingers in
their ears, cover themselves with their garments, and persist and are
puffed up with pride. Qur'an, 71:7” and then Imam Ali (s) fought them
and killed them.[^1] Only ten of them escaped death and only ten of Imam
Ali’s companions were killed. This was exactly what Imam Ali (s) had
predicted when warning them but they did not desist from doing evil.

Then some deviate people, who believed in the opinions of the
Kharijites concerning the arbitration and rebelling against the walis,
joined the few Kharijites, who had not been killed. When Abdullah bin
az-Zubayr became the wali, some of those people appeared with Nafi’ bin
al-Azraq in Iraq and some appeared with Najda bin Aamir al-Harawri in
Yamama (in the Arabia). Najda went too far in his opinions and he even
exceeded the doctrine of the Kharijites themselves. He considered every
one, who did not join him and his followers to fight the Muslims, as
unbeliever. They annulled the verdict of stoning a married adulterer.
They made it obligatory to cut a thief’s arm from the armpit. They made
it obligatory on a woman to offer prayers during the period of
menstruation and many other heresies that there was no need to mention
here.

Until now there is a remainder of them spread here and there. The
explorer ibn Batota has met some of them in Oman during his travel

[^1] By doing that Imam Ali (s) just followed the orders of the Qur'an
and the Sunna. Allah said: (fight that (group) which acts wrongfully
until it returns to Allah's command) and: (The punishment of those who
wage war against Allah and His messenger and strive to make mischief in
the land is only this, that they should be murdered). As for the orders
of the Sunna, I shall mention them in the main text of the book
inshallah.

(152)

in the eighth century of hijra. He has mentioned them in his book
Rihlat ibn Batota (ibn Batota’s travel)[^1] and said: “They are Ibadhite
in doctrine. They offer Friday prayer in four rak’as and when they
finish it, their imam recites some verses of the Qur'an and then he
praises Abu Bakr and Umar but he does not mention Othman and Ali. If
they want to mention Ali, they nickname him by saying “the man”. They
praise the cursed Abdurrahman bin Muljam (Imam Ali’s killer) and call
him as “the good servant of Allah” in spite of the great sedition he has
caused. Their women commit adultery too much and their men do not deny
that nor have they jealousy. One day I was with their chief Abu Muhammad
bin Nabhan, who was from the tribe of al-Azd.

A young beautiful woman came and said to him: “O Abu Muhammad, the
Satan has played with my mind (her sexual lust was provoked)”. He said
to her: “Go and drive the Satan away from your mind!” She said: “I
cannot do unless you protect me.” He said: “Go and do whatever you
like.” When she left, he said to me: “This one, and whoever does like
her, will be under my protection. She goes to commit adultery and
neither her father nor any of her relatives will be able to show their
jealousy. If they kill her they will be killed in return because she is
under my protection”.

The messenger of Allah (s) has informed of the truth when he has said:
“O Ali, no one hates you but a bastard, a child of menstruation[^2] or a
hypocrite”.

**Killing the Kharijites**

Many traditions have been narrated about killing the Kharijites
especially from the infallible imams (s). Here we mention some of those
traditions, which have been mentioned by the Sunni scholars. The Prophet
(s) said describing the Kharijites: “They recite the Qur'an but it does
not go past their clavicles. They kill the Muslims and set the idolaters
free. They apostate from Islam like an arrow slipping out of a game
animal. If I live until they appear, I shall kill them like the killing
of the people of Aad.”[^3]

[^1] Vol.1 p.172.
[^2] That he has been created out of making love during a period of
menstruation.
[^3] Muslim’s Sahih, vol.1 p.393.

(153)

In another tradition the Prophet (s) said: “If I live until they
appear, I shall kill them.”[^1] In a third tradition the Prophet (s) said
describing them: “They are young and foolish. They repeat the best of
saying. They recite the Qur'an but it does not go past their clavicles.
They apostate from religion like an arrow that slips away from a hunted
animal. If you find them, you are to kill them. Whoever kills them will
be rewarded by Allah on the Day of Resurrection.”[^2] There are many
other traditions like this mentioned in the books of Hadith. These
traditions show that these people are unbeliever for killing them is
like killing the people of Aad and Thamood.

**They are the worst of people**

The tradition narrated from the infallible imams (s) and showing that
the Kharijites are the worst of people are clear and recurrent but here
we mentioned the traditions mentioned by the Sunni scholars. Muslim
mentioned in his Sahih a tradition narrated by Abu Tharr and Rafi’ bin
Umar al-Ghifari that the Prophet (s) had said: “After me there will be
some people of my umma who recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an does not go
past their throats.[^3] They get out of religion as an arrow that slips
away from a hunted animal and then they do not go back to it (religion).
They are the worst of people.”[^4]

Muslim mentioned in his Sahih another tradition narrated by Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri that the Prophet (s) had mentioned some people, who would
appear from among his umma, and said: “…They are the worst of people.
They will be killed by the righteous people.” And then the Prophet (s)
gave an example when saying: “…like a man, who shots his arrow at an
animal and then he looks at the arrowhead

[^1] Muslim’s Sahih, vol.1 p.394.
[^2] Narrated from Imam Ali (s) and mentioned by Muslim in his Sahih,
vol. 1 p.396.
[^3] It means that their hearts do not perceive what they recite and
they do not benefit from it. They do not do but uttering the words of
the Qur'an in their mouths when reciting them. Their hearts are covered
with the stain of the (ill) which they do! Nothing of the light of the
Qur'an gets into their hearts. Neither their reciting the Qur'an nor any
of their doings will be accepted by Allah.
[^4] Vol.1 p.398.

(154)

but he does not see anything and he looks at the bowstring and he does
not see anything.”[^1] Ahmad mentioned in his Musnad a tradition narrated
by Abu Barza in two ways that the Prophet (s) had described the
Kharijites and said: “…They recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an does not go
past their clavicles. They get out of religion as an arrow that slips
away from an animal and they do not go back to religion. They will still
appear until the last of them will be killed with ad-Dajjal (the fraud).
If you meet them, you are to kill them for they are the worst of people
and the worst in nature. They are the worst of people and the worst in
nature. They are the worst of people and the worst in nature.”[^2]

If they were the worst of people and the worst in nature, then the
idolaters and the unbelievers would not be worse than them and this
would be a clear evidence showing their unbelief.


