The Kharijites’ Apostasy
========================

There have been many clear prophetic traditions talking about the
apostasy of the Kharijites. Here are some of them besides the ones we
have mentioned above. Al-Bukhari and Muslim have mentioned in their
Sahihs a tradition narrated by Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri saying: “While we
were with the Prophet (s), who was taking an oath, Thul Khuwaysira, who
was a man from the tribe of Tameem, said: “O messenger of Allah, be
just!” The messenger of Allah said: “Woe unto you! And who is just if I
am not? Surely I shall fail and lose if I do not do right.” Umar said
(to the Prophet (s)): “Would you allow me to kill him?”[^3] The messenger
of Allah (s) said: “Let him alone! He has companions, who exaggerate in
offering prayers and in fasting. They recite the Qur'an but it does not
go past their clavicles. They apostatize from religion as an arrow that
slips away from a game animal…their sign is a black man whose upper arm
is like a woman’s breast or like a dangling piece of flesh…they will
appear at the time of a good group of people.”[^4] Abu Sa’eed said: “I
witness that I have

[^1] vol.1 p.395 and Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.3 p.5.
[^2] Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.4 p.422, 424.
[^3] Would he have killed him when he had been ordered to!
[^4] The group of Imam Ali (s) and his followers.

(155)

heard this tradition from the messenger of Allah and I witness that
Imam Ali (s) has fought them and I was with him. Imam Ali (s) ordered
that man to be brought. When he was brought, I looked at him and I saw
that he was as the Prophet (s) had described him.”[^1]

The prophetic traditions talking about the evil doings and aspects of
the Kharijites are true and recurrent whether have been narrated from
the infallible imams (s) or the Sunni. These traditions were among the
signs of the Prophet (s) and Islam due to the unseen that appeared like
the light of morning to people after the death of the Prophet (s).
People saw clearly the apostasy of that group (the Kharijites) from
religion when they revolted against Imam Ali (s), who was the legal
caliph.[^2] Their rising was when people had separated into two
groups.[^3] They were killed and their killer was the imam of the
truth.[^4]

They, as the Prophet (s) had predicted, killed the faithful people and
let the idolaters free. They became too strict in religion where there
was no necessity for strictness. They recited the Qur'an but it did not
go past their clavicles because their hearts were covered with their
apostasy. Nothing of the light of the Qur'an got into their hearts. They
exaggerated in offering prayer and fasting but they ignored the rights
of Islam by apostatizing and being away from its guidance. Their sign,
as the Prophet (s) had predicted, appeared to the people. It was a black
man whose upper arm was like a woman’s breast or like a dangling piece
of flesh as the Prophet (s) had said. The Prophet (s) had confirmed,
through his sayings about this apostate group, that the umma would
remain prevailing unlike what the fabricators had fabricated. It was the
unseen that Allah had revealed to the Prophet (s).

Allah said: “The Knower of the unseen! So He does not reveal His
secrets to any except to him whom He chooses as a messenger; for surely
He makes a guard to march before

[^1] Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.3 p.56.
[^2] The Prophet (s) had predicted that: “They will revolt against the
best group. (He means Imam Ali (s) and his followers).”
[^3] Their appearance was in Siffeen when the people were in two groups;
one with Imam Ali (s) and the other with Mo’awiya.
[^4] The Prophet (s) said: “They will be killed by the one, who is the
nearest to the truth” or “…the worthiest of the truth” in another
tradition mentioned by Muslim in his Sahih.

(156)

him and after him. Qur'an, 72:26-27”

Let us finish our speech about this apostate group with a tradition
narrated by Jundub[^1] and mentioned by at-Tabarani in his book al-Awsat.
Jundub said: “When the Kharijites parted with Ali, he decided to pursue
them and we joined him. We moved until we reached their camp. There were
noises like those of bees. They were busy reciting the Qur'an and among
them there were notable and respected persons. When I saw them, I
hesitated to fight them. I stepped aside, fixed my spear in the ground,
got down of my horse, put off my burnoose, spread my armor on me, held
the halter of my horse and began praying. I said in my prayer: “O Allah,
if fighting these people is obedience to You, allow me to fight them and
if it is disobedience to You, show me the truth.

” As I was doing so, Ali bin Abu Talib came near to me and said: “O
Jundub, ask Allah to protect you from His wrath!” I beseeched him. He
began praying. Then a man came to him saying: “O Ameerul Mo’mineen, have
you anything to do with the people?” He said: “What is there?” The man
said: “They (the Kharijites) crossed the river and went away.” Ali said:
“They have never crossed the river.” The man said: “Glory be to Allah!”
Another man came and said to him: “They have crossed the river and went
away.

” Ali said: “They have not crossed the river and they will never cross
it. They will be killed before it. It is a promise from Allah and His
messenger.” Then he rode on his horse and said to me: “O Jundub, I will
send to them a man to invite them to the [^1] Jundub bin Zuhayr bin
al-Harith bin Katheer bin Sab’ bin Malik al-Azdi al-Ghamidi was one of
Imam Ali’s close companions. Ibn Hajar has mentioned him in his book
al-Issaba. There was a debate about his companionship with the Prophet
(s) but there was no doubt that he was one of the great successors and
he was one of their heads and ascetics. He fought with Imam Ali (s) in
the battles of al-Jamal, Siffeen and an-Nahrawan.

In the battle of an-Nahrawan he was the leader of the infantrymen. Abu
Durayd mentioned in his book al-Amali a tradition narrated by Abu Ubayda
that Younus had said: “Abdullah bin az-Zubayr had lined us up on the day
(the battle) of al-Jamal. Salih came out to us saying: “O people of
Quraysh, I warn you of two men; Jundub bin Zuhayr and (Malik) al-Ashtar
because you cannot stand against their swords.” This Jundub bin Zuhayr
was not Jundub, who had killed the magician. The one, who had killed the
magician, was Jundub bin Ka’b al-Abdi and he had been killed in the
battle of Siffeen when fighting with Imam Ali (s). This has been
mentioned by az-Zubayr bin Bukar in his book al-Muwaffaqiyyat quoted
from ibnul Kalbi and others.

(157)

Book of their god and the Sunna of their prophet but when he will come
to them, they will shoot at him with arrows. O Jundub, less than ten
persons from us will be killed and less than ten persons from them will
escape death.” Then he said: “Who will take this Qur'an and go to the
people (the Kharijites) to invite them to the Book of Allah and to the
Sunna of His messenger but he will be killed and will go to Paradise?” A
young man from bani[^1] Aamir bin Sa’sa’a responded to him. The young
man, holding the Qur'an, went towards the Kharijites. As soon as he
became near to them, they began shooting at him with arrows. Then Ali
said: “Attack them!” I (Jundub) myself had killed eight persons of them
before I offered Dhuhr[^2] Prayer. Less than ten persons from us were
killed and less than ten from them escaped death as Ali had predicted.
Praise be to Allah.”[^3]

**12. Fighting innocent people**

Abu Bakr ordered to fight the people who had hesitated to pay him the
zakat. They did so because they had doubted whether Abu Bakr was the
legal guardian after the Prophet (s) or not.

Abu Bakr had gathered the companions to consult with them about
fighting those people. Umar and many other Muslims thought that they
were not to fight faithful people, who had believed in Allah and His
messenger, and instead they were to make use of them to fight the
enemy.[^4] Those, who had adopted this opinion, were the most of the
attendants whereas those, who had thought to fight against those people,
were few. The debate about this serious matter might have taken a long
time until Abu Bakr himself interfered supporting the opinion of the few
companions. He insisted on this opinion and this was clear out of his
saying: “By Allah, if they refused to give me even a headband that they
were used to give to the messenger of Allah (s), I would fight them for
that.” This saying did not deter Umar from seeing that such a fight
would expose the Muslims to dangers and

[^1] Bani means “the family of” or “the tribe of”.
[^2] Dhuhr means noon.
[^3] Kanzol Ummal, vol.6 p.71.
[^4] As-Siddeeq by Ahmad Hasanayn Haykal, p.104.

(158)

bad ends. Umar said sharply: “How do you fight these Muslims whereas
the messenger of Allah (s) has said: “I have been ordered (by Allah) to
fight people until they say “There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is
the messenger of Allah”. Whoever says that his life and monies will be
safe except their due. It is Allah, Who will punish people.”

But Abu Bakr did not hesitate to answer Umar by saying: “By Allah, I
will fight whoever separate between offering prayers and paying zakat.
Zakat is the due on properties and he (the Prophet (s)) said: “except
their due”. I say: may Allah forgive Abu Bakr! He brushed aside this
clear tradition and interpreted it as he liked according to his policy
of fighting. No one of the believers, who had been fought and killed on
that day, separated between prayer and zakat but they just hesitated to
submit to Abu Bakr because they doubted (the legality of) his
replacement for the Prophet (s)[^1] and they were excused for that and in
fact they would be rewarded for that.

They had the right not to obey except the orders of Allah and His
messenger or the orders of the one, whose guardianship was determined by
Allah and His messenger (s).

If Abu Bakr perceived those people’s excuse, he would consider it as an
evidence against him but how would those oppressed people be treated
fairly by Abu Bakr on that day!

The Sihah and books of Hadith are full of true traditions that show the
impermissibility of shedding the bloods of those faithful people and
their likes and there is no tradition that annuls this verdict;
nevertheless their bloods were shed by the order of the caliph, who
interpreted the prophetic traditions according to his own tendency.

As for the zakat that Abu Bakr had talked about it was just an
obligation on the Muslims. The guardian, who replaced the Prophet (s),
was to ask the Muslims for the zakat and he was to take it from them. If
they refused to pay it obeyingly, he then had to force them to pay it
unwillingly by using his power but without fighting or

[^1] We shall explain this matter later on inshallah.

(159)

killing them.

Fighting them just to take the zakat from them contradicted the
verdicts that had determined to protect their bloods and monies. Here
are some of these traditions that have been mentioned by Muslim in his
Sahih[^1] under the chapter of “Ali’s virtues”. The messenger of Allah
(s) said to Ali when he gave him the banner on the day (the battle of)
Khaybar: “Move and do not turn.” Imam Ali walked a little and then he
stopped but did not turn. He cried: “O messenger of Allah, what for
shall I fight the people?” The messenger of Allah (s) said: “fight them
until they witness that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. If they do, they will spare their bloods and monies
except for their due and they will be answerable before Allah.”

In al-Bukhari and Muslim’s Sahihs there is a tradition narrated by
Usama bin Zayd saying: “The messenger of Allah (s) sent us (among an
army) to al-Mahraqa. In the morning we reached there. We defeated the
people. I and another man from the Ansar followed after a man from those
people. When we caught him, he said: “There is no god but Allah.” My
companion abstained from killing him but I stabbed him with my spear.
When we came back, the Prophet (s) knew about what we had done. He said
to me: “O Usama, did you kill him after he had said “there is no god but
Allah”?” I said: “He just wanted to save his life.” The Prophet (s) kept
on repeating this question until I wished I had not become a Muslim
before that day.”

He did not wish that unless he thought that all what he had offered of
faith, prayers, zakat, fasting, companionship (with the Prophet (s)),
jihad and other things before that day would not compensate for this sin
and that all his good doings had come to nothing because of this sin.
His saying showed clearly that he feared that Allah would not forgive
him for ever after that sin and so he wished he had not become a Muslim
before that day in order to be included by the Prophet’s saying:
“(Believing in) Islam forgives all the sins committed before.”

It is a sufficient evidence that shows the dignity of the people of

[^1] Vol.2 p.324.

(160)

“there is no god but Allah” and the protection of their bloods.
Al-Bukhari mentioned in his Sahih that a man had said to the Prophet
(s): “O messenger of Allah, fear Allah!” The Prophet (s) said: “Woe unto
you! Am I not the worthiest among all the people of the earth of fearing
Allah?” Khalid (bin al-Waleed) said: “O messenger of Allah, do you allow
me to kill him?” The Prophet (s) said: “No, he may offer prayers.”[^1]

In al-Bukhari and Muslim’s Sahihs there is a tradition narrated by ibn
Umar that the Prophet (s) has said in Mina while he was pointing at the
Kaaba: “Do you know what country is this?” His companions said: “Allah
and His messenger are more aware.” He said: “This is a prohibited
country.” Then he said: “Do you know what day is this?” They said:
“Allah and His messenger are more aware.” He said: “It is a prohibited
day. Do you know what month is this?” They said: “Allah and His
messenger are more aware.” He said: “It is a prohibited month. Allah has
prohibited your bloods, your monies and your honors like the prohibition
of this day in this month in this country.”

The Sihah and books of Hadith are full of such traditions, whose

[^1] This tradition has been mentioned by Ahmad in his Musnad, vol. p.4
and by ibn Hajar al-Asqalani in his book al-Issaba when talking about
Sarhooq the hypocrite that he was brought to be killed. The Prophet (s)
said: “Does he offer prayers?” It was said: “When people see him (it
means when he thinks that people may see him during the time of prayers,
he offers prayers).” The Prophet (s) said: “I have prohibited killing
the prayers (ones who offer prayer).” Ath-Thahabi in his Mizan, when
talking about the biography of Aamir bin Abdullah bin Yasar, mentioned a
tradition narrated by Anass who said: “Once a man was mentioned to the
Prophet (s) and it was said that he had been the head of the hypocrites.
When people mentioned many bad things about him, the Prophet (s) allowed
them to kill him and then he asked: “Does he offer prayers?” The
companions said: “Yes, useless prayers.” The Prophet (s) said: “I have
prohibited killing the prayers.”

Would Khalid bin al-Waleed have regarded the prayer of Malik bin
Nuwayra and refrained from killing him although that Abdullah bin Umar
and Abu Qatada al-Ansari had witnessed that Malik had offered Fajr
(dawn) prayer with them! But Khalid had been charmed by Malik’s
beautiful wife as his coeval the poet Abu Zuhayr as-Sa’di had said in
his poem:

Khalid killed him aggressively just for his wife.
He had tended to her before that.

(161)

contents are clear to the Muslims. According to these traditions
fighting a Muslim just because he has hesitated in paying the zakat to
the imam is prohibited especially if his hesitation is due to his
doubting about the real imam as what has happened among some tribes when
the Prophet (s) has left to the better world. A great Sedition has
happened at that time and its evils spread everywhere. Many Muslims
apostatized. The Muhajireen and the Ansar disagreed about the matter of
the caliphate. Each of them had two opinions and the Ansar might have
three opinions. During this sedition and evils Abu Bakr was paid homage
as the caliph and his homage was as a slip that Allah had protected the
Muslims from its evil as Umar had said! It was naturally at that time
that people might doubt about the legality of such homage and the
unanimous agreement on it while people were in disagreement. In fact the
state at that time was much worse than what had been mentioned. So there
was no blame on those, who had doubted the caliphate of Abu Bakr, when
they did not submitted to him concerning the matter of zakat and other
things until they would become certain that he was the legal caliph
after the Prophet (s).

**13. The day of al-Bitah**

It was the day of al-Bitah or the day of Malik bin Nuwayra and his
people and what they had got from Khalid bin al-Waleed. Khalid was the
absolute leader of the armies at that time so he ordered as he liked and
he judged as he wished. He was satisfied with killing the believers but
he exceeded in mutilation, capturing women and violating what Allah had
prohibited of monies, honors and legal verdicts. He committed sins and
evils that had never happened even in the pre-Islamic times.

**Who was Malik?**

Malik bin Nuwayra bin Hamza bin Shaddad bin Abd bin Tha’laba bin
Yarboo’ at-Tameemi al-Yarboo’iy was the top of honor for bani Tameem and
the peak of glory for bani Yarboo’. He was one of the famous notables
among the Arabs and an example of magnanimity, generosity, courage and
valor in all their meanings. He was like the kings. When he became a
Muslim, all the people of his tribe became

(162) Muslims. The Prophet (s) had entrusted him with the charities of
his people because he had great confidence and trust in him. What was
the guilt of Malik?

Malik’s guilt, according to Abu Bakr’s thought, was his situation
concerning the matter of zakat and other religious obligations. Malik
was looking for his legal duty according what Allah and His messenger
had legislated.

He did not intend, out of his situation, to cause a separation among
the Muslims, to cause a sedition or to cause a fight. He was surprised
by the raid led by Khalid bin al-Waleed at the beginning of Abu Bakr’s
caliphate where disagreement was still burning about the caliphate.
Ahlul Bayt (s) and their followers had their own opinion and Abu Bakr,
Umar, Abu Ubayda, Salim and their followers had their own opinion. The
Ansar, who had protected and supported the Prophet (s), were defeated
especially their chief Sa’d bin Ubada, who had sworn if he had
assistants, he would fight against Abu Bakr and his party but he
withdrew from the political life and he did not participate in those
people’s occasions until he died lonely in Hawran.

Add to that the disasters that were caused (by the ruling party) around
the houses, about which Allah had said: “O you who believe! do not enter
the houses of the Prophet unless permission is given to you. Qur'an,
33:53” and the distresses that were caused to the Prophet’s daughter
Fatima (s) just because she asked for her inheritance, donation and
khums although she faced them with clear evidences, besides many other
matters that the Qur'an had warned of. Hence it was naturally for a man
like Malik, who had a high position among his people, to look for the
one, who would carry out the will of Allah and who would lead the people
to the truth. Malik waited in order to see the true man, who was
qualified to replace the Prophet (s), and then he would pay him the
zakat so that he would achieve his covenant with Allah. The ruling party
had to give him enough time to look for the ambiguous truth at that
confused time. They had not to surprise him with those disasters for he
was not among those, who had denied the zakat, nor was he among those,
who had separated between the prayer and zakat, nor was he among those
who had permitted fighting Abu Bakr or other Muslims.

(163)

This was the truth of the situation of Malik and his companions;
leading to it his advise to his people to keep to Islam and not to stand
against Khalid. He ordered his people to separate in order not to clash
with the army of Khalid and he forbade them from gathering in one place
so that Khalid and his army might think that they were camping to be
ready to fight.[^1]

**Khalid’s advance towards al-Bitah**

When Khalid finished his fights against bani Asad and Ghatafan, he
decided to move towards al-Bitah to meet Malik and his people but Malik
had withdrawn from al-Bitah and had ordered his people to separate here
and there-as we have said before-for he was looking forward to peace in
order to protect Islam at that critical time. When the Ansar knew that
Khalid would go to fight Malik and his people, they refused to go with
him and they said: “This is not the order of the caliph. The caliph has
ordered that when we finish fighting al-Buzakha we are to camp until he
will write to us again.” Khalid said: “The caliph has not entrusted you
with anything. He has ordered me to go on. I am the emir and the orders
come to me.

If no book or order comes to me, I will find any opportunity to seize
and then I will inform the caliph. If we face something that the caliph
has not sent his order about, we will decide the best to do. Malik bin
Nuwayra is in view of us and I will go to face him with my men.”[^2] Then
he went with his men towards al-Bitah but when they arrived [^1] All that
has been mentioned by Professor Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal in his book
as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr, p.144. Professor Mahmood Abbas al-Aqqad in his book
Abqariyat Khalid, p.131 said when talking about Malik’s situation: “It
was not a situation of obstinacy or being ready to fight.” But Professor
al-Aqqad has mistaken when he has interpreted Malik’s verses of poetry
into other than their real meaning.

[^2] As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr by Professor Haykal, p.143 and Abqariyatu Umar
by Professor al-Aqqad, p.267. You see here through this dialogue that
the caliph has not ordered the army to attack Malik but Khalid claimed
that the caliph had entrusted him especially with the order of the
attack and according to this the caliph had used trick to show the
people that he was not responsible for the crimes that had been
committed on the day of al-Bitah but it was Khalid who was responsible
for that and then he would protect Khalid by justifying his doing by
saying that he had interpreted the verdict but he had mistaken. This
event showed that Abu Bakr was too skilful in politics.

(164)

there, they did not find anyone.[^1]

**Killing Malik and his people**

When they did not find any one of Malik’s people in al-Bitah, Khalid
sent his brigades to follow after them. They came back with Malik and
some of his people. They were put in prison and then they were killed in
a bad way which we will detail later on. At-Tabari mentioned a tradition
narrated by Abu Qatada al-Ansari, who was one of the leaders of the
brigades of Khalid’s army. He said: “When we found Malik and his
companions and it was night, they took their weapons and got ready. We
said: “We are Muslims.” They said: “We are Muslims too.” We said: “Then
why have you got your weapons ready?” They said to us: “And why have you
got your weapons ready?” We said: “If you are as you say then put your
weapons down.” Then we offered prayer and they offered prayer.”

But after the prayer they (Khalid’s soldiers) hastened to seize the
weapons of Malik and his companions and then they tied Malik and his
companions and drove them as captives to Khalid. Among them was Malik’s
wife Layla bint al-Minhal Umm Tameem, who was (as Professor Abbas
Mahmood al-Aqqad said in his book Abqariyatu Umar according to the
historians) one of the most beautiful women among the Arabs especially
her eyes and legs. It was said that no one had seen more beautiful than
her eyes and legs.

Therefore Khalid was attracted by her beauty while he was debating with
Malik where she was beside him. Khalid said to Malik: “I will kill you.”
Malik said: “Has your master (Abu Bakr) ordered you of this?” Khalid
said: “By Allah, I will kill you.” Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatada
al-Ansari were present then. They talked with Khalid about this matter
but he rejected their talks. [^1] The historians agreed upon that when
Khalid occupied al-Bitah with his army, he did not find anyone of its
people. That was because Malik had separated his people here and there
and had ordered them not to fight against Khalid and his army. He had
advised his people to keep to Islam and to remain separated until Allah
would regather them. Refer to as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr by Haykal, p.144.

(165)

Then Malik said: “O Khalid, send us to Abu Bakr and he will decide what
to do to us. You have sent to him other than us whose guilt is greater
than ours.” Abdullah bin Umar and Abu Qatada insisted on Khalid to send
Malik and his companions to the caliph but Khalid refused and said: “Let
Allah not forgive me if I do not kill him.” Khalid asked Dhirar bin
al-Azwar al-Asadi to kill Malik. Malik turned towards his wife and said
to Khalid: “It is she who has killed me!” Khalid said: “It is Allah Who
has killed you because you have apostatized from Islam.” Malik said: “I
am still on Islam.” Khalid said to Dhirar: “Kill him!” Dhirar killed
Malik. Khalid arrested Malik’s wife and married her in that very
night.

Khalid ordered his companions to put the captives (Malik’s people) in
prison. It was very cold. In a dark night Khalid’s caller called out:
“Warm your prisoners!” According to the dialect of Kinana this was a
metonymy to mean killing and so all the prisoners were killed.

Khalid had ordered the executioners of his men to kill the prisoners
when they heard this call. This was a trick used by Khalid to show that
he was not responsible for this crime but it was obvious to Abu Qatada
and his likes of the acute people. It was unknown just for the ordinary
people, who had been deceived by the powerful rulers and their
prevailing policies.

This is the truth behind the event that has happened between Khalid and
Malik. Whoever studies carefully what has been mentioned by the
historians about the event of al-Bitah, will find this truth clearly.

Let not the contradicting sayings scattering here and there keep you
away from the truth; those sayings which have been woven by the personal
tendencies and the flattery to the caliph and to the general leader of
his armies in order to justify their mistakes. We studied this event
carefully and we did not find except a clear evidence showing that the
caliph tried to distort the truth due to his loyalty in his love to
Khalid and in defending him. Allah is the witness over the all!

(166)

**The anger of Abu Qatada and Umar**

Professor Haykal says in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr:[^1] “Abu Qatada
al-Ansari became too angry at the crime of Khalid when he killed Malik
and married his wife. Abu Qatada left Khalid and went to Medina deciding
that he would never be under the leadership of Khalid at all. Mutammim
bin Nuwayra, Malik’s brother, went with him. When they arrived at
Medina, Abu Qatada, who was still too angry, went to Abu Bakr and told
him of what Khalid had done to Malik and his wife. He added that he had
sworn by Allah not to be under the leadership of Khalid at all. But Abu
Bakr was too pleased with Khalid and his victories and he became
displeased with Abu Qatada. In fact he denied all what Abu Qatada said
about the sword of Islam (Khalid)!”

Professor Haykal adds: “Do you think that Abu Bakr’s anger frightened
Abu Qatada and made him keep silent? Certainly not! His revolt against
Khalid was too violent; therefore he went to Umar bin al-Khattab and
told him all the story and showed him Khalid as the man, whose
tendencies prevailed over his duties and who ignored the orders of Allah
in order to satisfy himself. Umar confirmed Abu Qatada’s opinion and
participated with him in criticizing Khalid. Umar went to Abu Bakr and
he was too angry at what Khalid had done. He asked Abu Bakr to depose
Khalid. Umar said to Abu Bakr that Khalid’s sword had committed a sin
and the caliph had to punish Khalid. But Abu Bakr would not have
punished any of his officials![^2] Therefore Abu Bakr said when Umar
insisted on him many times to punish Khalid: “O Umar, let him alone. He
interpreted but he mistook. Do not blame him any more!” But Umar was not
satisfied with this answer and he did not refrain from asking to punish
Khalid. When Abu Bakr became unable to bear the insistence of Umar, he
said to him: “O Umar, no! I would not have to sheathe a sword that Allah
has unsheathed against the unbelievers.”

Professor Haykal adds: “But Umar found that Khalid’s doing was

[^1] p.147.
[^2] In doing so Abu Bakr behaved according to his own ijtihad and
ignored the order of Allah when saying: (And We prescribed to them in it
that life is for life…) Qur'an, 5:45.

(167)

abominable and so his conscience was displeased. How, then, would he
keep silent and let Khalid at ease feeling as if he had not committed
any sin or crime? Umar had to repeat his request to Abu Bakr and to
mention to him frankly that the enemy of Allah had killed a Muslim man
transgressively and committed adultery with his wife and it was not fair
at all not to be punished for his crime. Before the fiery anger of Umar,
Abu Bakr could not but to send for Khalid and ask about what he had
done. Khalid came to Medina.

He came into the mosque with his war materiel wearing a garment, whose
iron parts were rusty, and inserting some arrows into his turban. When
Umar saw him coming into the mosque, he hastened to him, pulled the
arrows out of his turban, destroyed them and said to him: “You have
killed a Muslim man and committed adultery with his wife. By Allah, I
will stone you until you die.” Khalid kept silent and did not apologize.
He came to Abu Bakr and told him the story of Malik and his hesitation
(in paying the zakat). Khalid justified his doing with some excuses and
Abu Bakr excused him and forgave him but he blamed him for marrying a
woman, whose husband’s blood had not dried yet. The Arabs hated sleeping
with women during the wars and considered that as disgrace.”

I say: Islam prohibits marrying a woman, whose husband has died, until
she finishes her iddah.[^1] If a man gets married to a woman during her
iddah, she will be prohibited for him forever. If we suppose that Khalid
has considered Malik’s wife as a captive, also getting married to a
captive woman is not permissible except after the legal absolution[^2]
whereas Khalid has killed Malik and married his wife in the same
night.

Professor Haykal adds: “Umar did not change his opinion a bit about
what Khalid had committed. When Abu Bakr died and Umar became the
caliph, the first thing he did was sending a letter to Sham announcing
the death of Abu Bakr and with it there was a book having a decree of
deposing Khalid from the emirate of the army.”

Professor Haykal says: “The historians agreed unanimously that

[^1] Woman’s prescribed waiting period after divorce or death of
husband.
[^2] Legal absolution here means that a woman has to pass at least one
menstruation to be sure that she is not pregnant from the previous
husband.

(168)

Umar had remained on his situation towards Khalid concerning the matter
of killing Malik and marrying his wife and this situation had had its
effect on the caliph when he had deposed Khalid.”

How wonder it is!

How wonder and odd it was that during the reign of Abu Bakr all those
bloods, honors and properties were wasted in vain! Allah’s sacred rites
were violated and His penalties were annulled. Khalid was not deposed in
spite of all what he had committed! He kept on his extravagancy until
the caliph died but when Umar became the caliph, he deposed him
immediately.

Abu Bakr’s opinion about the criminals on the day of al-Bitah was the
first of the opinions that contradicted the Qur'an and the Sunna. He
preferred benefit to obeying Allah.

**Showing the opinion**

Professor Haykal says in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr when talking
about Abu Bakr’s opinion and excuse: “Abu Bakr thought that the
situation was more dangerous than to regard such things.[^1] Was there
any importance of killing a man or a group of men due to a mistake in
interpretation or even without a mistake where dangers surrounded all
the state and the revolts had broken out throughout the Arab
countries?[^2] [^1] This is an exaggeration. Yes, the situation was too
dangerous but this did not lead to ignore what was possible for the sake
of what was not possible. The possible thing, which was the least thing
that must be done, at that time was to depose Khalid from his position
and to appoint a qualified one like Umar, Abu Ubayda, Ma’ath bin Jabal,
Sa’d or any other one and to put off the trial of Khalid until the
circumstances would become suitable and then to be punished according to
the legal verdicts.

[^2] This is an exaggeration too. His saying “due to a mistake in
interpretation or even without a mistake” is just a fabrication. Malik’s
faith in Islam was doubted neither by Khalid nor by Abu Bakr and
marrying Malik’s wife while she was under her iddah deserved stoning
according to the consensus of the Muslims. This was what Umar wanted to
do if he could. His saying “was there any importance of killing a man or
a group of men” shows indifference to killing whereas Allah says:
(whoever slays a soul, unless it be for manslaughter or for mischief in
the land, it is as though he slew all men) and (And whoever kills a
believer intentionally, his punishment is hell; he shall abide in it)
and (And they who do not call upon another god with

(169)

This leader, who was accused of being mistaken,[^1] was one of the
greatest powers, with which disasters and dangers were repelled.[^2] What
was the problem in marrying a woman unlike the traditions of the Arabs
if it was done by a conqueror, who had conquered countries and
consequently had captive women who would be his possession?”[^3]
Professor Haykal adds: “If we apply the Sharia, then we have not to
criticize the great personalities like Khalid[^4] especially if that will
harm the state and expose it to dangers.[^5]

The Muslims were in need to the sword of Khalid. They were in need to
Khalid on the day when Abu Bakr sent for him and scolded him Allah and
do not slay the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in the
requirements of justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he who
does this shall find a requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled
to him on the day of resurrection, and he shall abide therein in
abasement).

[^1] Khalid was really a killer and an adulterer. He intended to do
prohibited things and he did not miss them. In fact he got them
intendedly even after being forbidden by the caliph.
[^2] He could be replaced by any other qualified man as we have
mentioned above.
[^3] I do not think that Professor Haykal has believed in this saying
and the sayings before and after it nor has Abu Bakr! I do not think
that Professor Haykal is indifferent to the honors when saying: “What
was the problem in marrying a woman unlike the traditions of the Arabs
if it was done by a conqueror…” and I do not think that he allows every
conqueror to do what Khalid has done! This may be allowed to a Muslim
conqueror, who conquers a country of Muslims, who do not believe in
Allah, and most surely that Malik and his people were among the
believers “who keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and of the hereafter
they are sure”.

[^4] Uttering such a word by one like Professor Haykal is something odd
and astonishing. As long as you live, you see many wonders! How wonder!
Professor Haykal says that the legal verdicts do not allow criticizing
great persons like Khalid whereas Allah has created the Paradise to
every one, who obeys Him even if he is a black Abyssinian, and has
created the Hell to every one, who disobeys Him even if he is a Qurayshi
master. There is no flattery between Allah and any of His creatures;
people are equal before Him. A noble man is low until the others’ right
is taken from him and he is punished and a low man is honorable until
his right is restored to him.

[^5] If carrying out the legal penalties causes dangers, then the
penalties should be put off until the dangers disappear. But the caliph
(Abu Bakr) did not put off executing the penalties nor did he wait for
the dangers to disappear. Rather he forgave all those sins and crimes
and became pleased to the full with those criminals.

(170)

more than their need to him before. Musaylama the Liar with forty
thousand men revolted in Yamama near al-Bitah and their revolt was the
worst against Islam and the Muslims.[^1] Was it possible to let the
Muslim armies be defeated by Musaylama and the religion of Allah be
struck with many dangers just for the murder of Malik bin Nuwayra or for
the sake of beautiful Layla who had captivated Khalid?[^2] Khalid was the
sign of Allah and his sword was the sword of Allah. It was the policy of
Abu Bakr when he sent for Khalid to be satisfied with scolding[^3] him
and to order him at the same time to move with his army towards
al-Yamama to meet Musaylama and his men.

When Abu Bakr ordered Khalid at that time to go to fight Musaylama, he
might want to show the people of Medina, especially those who had
adopted Umar’s opinion, that Khalid was the qualified man who would
defeat the difficulties and that he (Abu Bakr) had thrown him into a
hell which would swallow him and that would be the punishment for what
he had committed with Layla and her husband Malik[^4] or victory would
purify him and then he would come back to the Muslims as triumphant and
so he would calm their fears and then his doing committed in al-Bitah
would be unmentionable thing beside his victory.

[^1] This meaning has been repeated by Professor Haykal and here we say
again that Khalid could be replaced with another leader and even if
there was no one like Khalid, the orders of Allah could never be
annulled for any reason. Executing the penalties could be put off but it
could never be annulled at all. Abu Bakr behaved as if there were no
crimes and no criminals!

[^2] Yes, Khalid had to be deposed and to be killed immediately
according to the verdict of Allah. A killer must be killed and an
adulterer, who has a wife, must be stoned. If there is danger in
executing the penalties, they will be put off until the danger
disappears. The penalties can never be annulled for ever. All the
Muslims have agreed on this matter unanimously.

[^3] But Allah would not be satisfied with that! The legal verdicts that
have determined to kill the killer and to stone the adulterer are clear
but Abu Bakr interpreted them as he liked and he preferred his own
opinion to those divine verdicts.

[^4] Let us ponder on what Professor Haykal says as he quotes Abu Bakr’s
thoughts. Do you think that Abu Bakr and Haykal have ignored that an
adulterer, who has a wife, must be punished by the Muslim ruler? Have
they ignored that the punishment must be stoning especially and not to
throw the adulterer into the hell of Yamama or other hells?

(171)

Yamama has tested and purified Khalid[^1] even no long after that he
married a young girl as he had done with Layla while the Muslims’ bloods
were not dried yet nor were the bloods of Musaylama’s followers. Abu
Bakr scolded him for this doing more than he had scolded him for his
doing with Layla before.[^2]”[^3]

Professor Haykal has showed clearly that Abu Bakr had preferred the
benefits to the acting according to the verdicts of Allah and His
messenger. Such was the opinion of many of the virtuous scholars of
al-Azhar University about Abu Bakr. They themselves told me of that when
I had met them in al-Azhar University in 1392 A.H. and later.

But Umar, even he himself had gone too far in interpreting the divine
verdicts according to his own opinion, did not agree with Abu Bakr when
he had forgiven Khalid. Professor Haykal declares Umar’s opinion in
details when saying: “Umar was the exact example of Justice. He thought
that Khalid had killed a man transgressively and committed adultery with
his wife before she had finished her iddah and so Khalid could never
remain as the leader of the army lest he would commit another sin like
that and then he would defame the Muslims and dishonor their position
among the Arabs. Khalid could never be left without punishment for what
he had committed with Layla.

If it was as Abu Bakr said that Khalid interpreted the verdict but he
mistook in his interpretation when he killed Malik, which Umar did not
accept at all, then Khalid would be punished for the sin he had
committed with Layla. Even if Khalid was the sword of Allah and he was
the victorious leader, this would not be an excuse to protect him from
being punished or to justify his crimes. If it was so, then Khalid and
every one like Khalid would be free to commit any crime and sin as they
liked without being punished and this would be the worst example of the
Muslims who had to submit to the Book of

[^1] What purifies the sinners is returning to Allah by repenting and
doing good deeds sincerely for the sake of Allah only. Allah says: (Save
him who shall repent and believe and do right).

[^2] This young girl might have had a husband and Khalid committed
adultery with her as he had done with Layla; therefore Abu Bakr scolded
him for that more than he had scolded him after his sin with Malik’s
wife. If it had been not so, Abu Bakr would have not scolded him
severely or in fact he would have not scolded him at all.

[^3] As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr, p.152.

(172)

Allah absolutely. Therefore Umar insisted on Abu Bakr to punish Khalid
until Abu Bakr sent for Khalid and scolded him.” This is the very speech
of Professor Haykal about Umar’s opinion and evidence about the matter
of Khalid quoted from his book As-Siddeeq Abu Bakr, p.151.


**Some fairness**

Professor al-Aqqad, after mentioning the contradicted sayings about the
murder of Malik to defend Khalid, says: “Out of all these sayings we
have to consider the true and indisputable one among them. It was not
clear or decisive that Malik bin Nuwayra had to be killed.[^1] Malik was
worthier to be sent to the caliph than the chiefs of Fazara tribe and
others, whom Khalid had sent to Abu Bakr to judge how to deal with,
after the battle of al-Buzakha. Khalid got married to Malik’s wife and
took her with him to Yamama after meeting the caliph.[^2]

After these facts, the truth imposed on us to say that the event of
al-Bitah was a page in Khalid’s history. It would be better for him if
this page would have been omitted and not mentioned with any of the [^1]
In fact it was the impermissibility of killing Malik that was clear and
decisive. This murder was one of the great sins that must lead the
murderer to the legal punishment because Malik was a sincere Muslim with
no doubt at all. This was a clear fact to every one who had known the
truth of the event of al-Bitah and had known the secret behind the
violent revolt of Umar, Abu Qatada and all the people of Medina against
Khalid.

The last thing that Malik had said was “I am on Islam”. Abu Bakr and
Umar confessed that Malik was a Muslim when he died. Umar said to Abu
Bakr: “Khalid has committed adultery and you have to stone him.” Abu
Bakr said: “I will not stone him. He interpreted (the verdict) but he
mistook.” Umar said: “He has killed a Muslim and you have to kill him.”
Abu Bakr did not say to Umar that Khalid had killed an apostate but he
said: “I will not kill him. He interpreted (the verdict) but he
mistook.” This was a confession by Abu Bakr that Malik had been a
Muslim; therefore Abu Bakr had paid the diyah (blood-money) to Malik’s
family from the public treasury of the Muslims and he had considered the
captives of Malik’s family as free people and so he had set them free
besides that he had not accepted from Khalid his capturing them.

[^2] Suppose that when Khalid committed adultery with Malik’s wife, he
was mistaken in his interpretation, then what was the excuse of Abu Bakr
when he kept Khalid as the leader of his armies especially after meeting
him and scolding him and what was the excuse of Abu Bakr when he kept
Khalid in his position after taking Malik’s wife with him to Yamama
committing adultery with her while he had a wife?

(173)

justifications at all.”[^1]

**Conclusion**

We end our speech about this subject with reference to those who have
written about Malik concerning his position among the Arabs and among
the Muslims and concerning the calamity that has afflicted Malik and his
people on the day of al-Bitah. Here are some of the books that have
detailed the matter of Malik; Tareekh al-Umam wel Mulook by Muhammad bin
Jareer at-Tabari, Jamharat an-Nasab by ibnul Kalbi, al-Kamil by ibnul
Atheer, Kitab ar-Riddah wel Futooh by Sayf bin Umar, al-Muwaffaqiyyat by
az-Zubayr bin Bakar, al-Aghani by Abu Faraj al-Isfahani, ad-Dala’il by
Thabit bin Qassim, Nuzhat al-Manadhir by ibn Shuhna, al-Mukhtasar by
Abul Fida’, Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed and other books of
history and biographies.

The judge ibn Khillikan said in his book Wafiyyatul A’yan when
mentioning the biography of Wuthayma bin Musa bin al-Furat al-Washsha’
al-Farisi: “Malik bin Nuwayra was a noble man who accompanied the kings.
Malik was mentioned in the proverbs; it was said: “No pasture like
sa’dan,[^2] no water like (that of) Sada’[^3] and no youth like Malik.” He
was a knight, a poet and an obeyed notable man among his people. He was
somehow proud. He had a great group of companions. He was called
al-Jafool.[^4] He came to the Prophet (s) among the Arabs who had come to
declare their faith in Islam. He became a Muslim and the Prophet (s)
entrusted him with the zakat of his tribe…his situation with Khalid bin
al-Waleed on the day of al-Bitah had been detailed. There had been a
long argument between them. Khalid said to Malik: “I am going to kill
you.” Malik said: “Has your friend (Abu Bakr) ordered you to do that?”
Khalid said: “By Allah, I will kill you.” Abdullah bin Umar and Abu
Qatada were present then. They mediated to solve the problem but
Khalid

[^1] Abqariyyatu Khalid, p.134.
[^2] A kind of herbage.
[^3] A famous spring whose water was very pure and palatable.
[^4] Al-Jafool: the one who is always ready to help and aid the others;
whenever he hears a call for help he hastens towards the caller.

(174)

paid no attention to their speech. Malik said to Khalid: “Send us to
Abu Bakr and he will decide what to do with us for you have sent other
than us whose guilt was greater than ours.” Khalid said: “Let Allah not
forgive me if I do not kill you.” He asked Dhirar bin al-Azwar to behead
Malik. Malik turned to his wife Umm Tameem and then said to Khaild: “It
is she who has killed me!” Malik’s wife was very beautiful. Khalid said
to Malik: “Allah has killed you because you have apostatized from
Islam.” Malik said: “I am still on Islam.” Khalid said to Dhirar:
“Behead him!” He cut his head and made it as an andiron under a pot.”
Ibnul Kalbi said in his book Jamharat an-Nasab: “Malik was killed on the
day of al-Bitah and Khalid captured his (Malik’s) wife and married her.
About this matter the poet Abu Zuhayr as-Sa’di had composed a poem.”

After that ibn Khillikan mentioned Umar’s revolt against Khalid and his
saying to Abu Bakr: “Khalid has committed adultery and you have to stone
him.” Abu Bakr said: “I do not stone him. He interpreted (the verdict)
but he mistook.” Umar said: “He has killed a Muslim man and you have to
kill him for that killed one.” Abu Bakr said: “I do not kill him for
that one because he interpreted but he mistook.” Umar said: “Then depose
him!” Abu Bakr said: “I will not sheathe a sword that Allah has
unsheathed against them.” Ibn Khillikan mentioned more details about the
matter. He said that Mutammim bin Nuwayra, Malik’s brother, stood beside
Abu Bakr leaning on his bow and began reciting his poem:

“The best one you have killed O you son of al-Azwar,
When the wind wept behind the houses.
Have you invited him by Allah and then you betrayed him?
If he has invited you with a pact,
He will never betray you.”
He made a sign to Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr said: “by Allah, I have neither
invited him nor have I betrayed him.”
Then Mutammim bin Nywayra recited the rest of his poem. He wept and
collapsed from his bow to the ground.
Ibn Khillikan talked too much about Malik’s qualities such as his
courage, generosity, zeal and high position among his people.

(175)

Among the historians, who had talked about Malik in their books, was
Abul Fadhl Ahmad bin Ali famous as ibn Hajar al-Asqalani. He said in the
first part of his book al-Isaba fee Tamyeez as-Sahaba[^1]: “His name was
Malik bin Nuwayra bin Hamza bin Shaddad bin Abd Tha’laba bin Yarboo’
at-Tameemi al-Yarboo’iy. He was surnamed as al-Jafool. Al-Marzabani said
that Malik was a noble poet, a great knight and one of the honored
notables among his people in the pre-Islamic period. He was a companion
of the kings. The Prophet (s) had entrusted him with the zakat of his
people. When the Prophet (s) died, he stopped taking the zakat[^2] and he
spread (the zakat that had been already in his hand) among his
people.[^3] He recited:

“I said: Take back your monies.
I am not afraid nor expecting what tomorrow will bring.[^4]
If a right one will undertake the religion,
We will obey[^5] and say: the religion is that of Muhammad.”
[^1] At-Tabari mentioned Malik in his Mu’jam and said: “He is Malik bin
Hamza at-Tameemi. The Prophet (s) has entrusted him with the zakat of
Bani Yarboo’ after he and his brother Mutammim had become Muslims…”

[^2] He stopped taking the zakat from his people after the Prophet (s)
had went to the better world because he wanted to be certain that the
one, who would be the caliph after the Prophet (s), would be the right
one and then he would carry out his duty concerning the zakat. You will
find that clearly in his poetry which we have mentioned herein with our
comment.

[^3] He spread the zakat among the poor and needy people of his tribe
because he had taken it from them as he had the guardianship over the
zakat from the Prophet (s) when he was alive and so he thought that he
had had the right to dispose of it according to its legal ways. Malik
was known for his pity towards the orphans, the widows and the poor as
it had been showed through the poem of his coeval poet as-Sa’di when
saying: Who will be for the orphans and the widows after him? And who
will be for the poor and needy people?

[^4] He meant by this verse that he had not committed any wrong or a sin
(when he took the zakat or when he spread it again) that he might fear
on the Day of Resurrection.

[^5] This verse has been mentioned with the phrase “we will obey” by
al-Asqalani in his book al-Isaba, by ibn Sa’d and by Alamul Huda
ash-Shareef ar-Radhiy in his book “ash-Shafi’iy” who had mentioned other
verses when saying: “When Malik knew that the Prophet (s) had died, he
stopped taking zakat from his people and he said to them: “Wait until a
guardian will undertake the rule after the Prophet (s) and then we will
see what to do.” He indicated that in his poetry when saying:

“Some men said: Malik has done right today. Some men said: Malik has
not done right.

(176)

Malik and his companions were killed. He was mutilated. His wife was
raped. The verdicts of Allah were annulled. His sanctity was violated.
The cause behind all that was that they (Abu Bakr, Khalid and their
likes) had interpreted the divine verdicts according to their own
opinion and they had mistaken. We are Allah’s and to Him we shall
return!

**14. Preventing from writing down the prophetic traditions**

Al-Hakim mentioned in his Tareekh a tradition narrated by Abu Bakr that
the Prophet (s) had said: “He, who has written down knowledge or a
tradition from me, will be granted with (divine) reward as long as that
knowledge or tradition will remain.”[^1] In spite of that no I said: let
me alone. I have not done wrong.

I said: Take back your monies.
I am not afraid nor expecting what tomorrow will bring.
Here are the monies. They are yours.
I will defend you what you fear with my soul,
And I will achieve the truth as I say.
If a right one will undertake the religion,
We will obey[^5] and say: the religion is that of Muhammad.”
But Professor Haykal in his book as-Siddeeq Abu Bakr and Professor
al-Aqqad in his book Abqariyat Kkalid have mentioned the verse with the
phrase “we will refrain (or stop)”. I think that they have quoted the
verse from someone of the historians who has taken sides against Malik
to defend Khalid or Abu Bakr. Anyhow there is nothing in the verse
showing apostasy or something like that.

[^1] The prophetic traditions that the umma has narrated from Abu Bakr
are one hundred and forty-two which have been mentioned in a special
chapter by as-Sayooti in his book Tareekh al-Khulafa’. This tradition is
the eighty-ninth one among them. The narrators have confirmed its
content by the traditions they have narrated from Imam Ali (s), Abdullah
bin Umar, Abdullah bin Mas’ood, Abu Sa’eed al-Khidri, Abud Darda’, Anass
bin Malik, Ma’ath bin Jabal and Abu Hurayra that the Prophet (s) had
said: “Whoever has kept forty traditions for my umma, Allah will
resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection among the jurisprudents and
ulama.” In another tradition “…Allah will resurrect him as a
jurisprudent and as an aalim.” In the tradition narrated by Abud Darda’
it has been mentioned as “…I will be his witness and his intercessor.”
In the tradition of ibn Mas’ood “…he will enter into Paradise from any

(177)

tradition had been written down during the reign of Abu Bakr and Umar.
Abu Bakr, during his rule, had decided to write down the prophetic
traditions. He had written down five hundred traditions but he had
become upset. He could not sleep and he tossed about in his bed all that
night. Aa’isha, his daughter, said: “I was uncomfortable because he was
upset. In the morning he said to me: “O my daughter, bring me the
traditions that are with you.” I brought them to him and he burnt
them…”[^1]

Az-Zuhri mentioned from Urwa that once Umar bin al-Khattab wanted to
write down the prophetic traditions. He consulted with the Prophet’s
companions about the subject and they counseled him to write them down.
He went asking Allah to inspire him with the best decision. He kept on
that for a month and then he said: “I wanted to write down the prophetic
traditions but I remembered some peoples before you who had written some
books and then they kept to their books and ignored the Book of Allah.
By Allah, I will not corrupt the Book of Allah with anything at
all.”[^2]

Abu wahab said: “I have heard Malik (bin Anass) saying that Umar wanted
to write down the prophetic traditions or he had already written them
down but then he (Umar) said: “There is no book with the Book of
Allah.”[^3]

Yahya bin Ju’da said: “Once Umar wanted to write down the Sunna but
then he changed his mind and decided not to write it down. He sent a
decree to the countries saying: “Whoever has written down gate he
likes.” In the tradition of ibn Umar “…he will be considered as one of
the ulama and he will be resurrected with the martyrs.” They might have
confirmed this tradition by the tradition in which the Prophet (s) had
said: “Let the present of you inform the absent…may Allah have mercy on
one who has heard my saying and he perceived it and spread it as he has
heard it.”

[^1] Mentioned by Imadudeen bin Katheer in Musnad as-Siddeeq from
al-Hakim bin Abu Abdullah an-Naysaboori and mentioned by Abu Umayya
al-Ahwas bin al-Mufadhdhal al-Ghilabi. It has been mentioned in Kanzol
Ummal, vol.5 p.237.

[^2] Kanzol Ummal, vol.5 p.239, al-Mukhtasar by ibn Abdul Birr, p.33, it
also has been mentioned by ibn Sa’d from az-Zuhri as in Kanzol Ummal,
vol.5 p.239.

[^3] Kanzol Ummal, vol.5 p.239, al-Mukhtasar by Ibn Abdul Birr, p.32.

(178)

some of the Sunna, has to delete it.”[^1] Al-Qassim bin Muhammad bin Abu
Bakr said: “The (writing down of) traditions have been increased during
the reign of Umar so he asked the people to bring him those (written)
traditions. When the people brought him the traditions, he ordered to
burn them.”[^2]

Ibn Umar said: “Once Umar wanted to write down the traditions. He
prayed Allah for a month to inspire him with the best choice. Then he
said: “I remembered that there were peoples before you who had written
some books and they kept to those books and ignored the book of
Allah.”[^3] During the rule of Umar one of his companions came and said
to him: “O Ameerul Mo’mineen, when we have conquered the different
countries, we have got some books of the Persian sciences and other
wonderful subjects.” Umar began striking those books with his stick
until they were torn. Then he recited: (We narrate to you the best of
narratives, by Our revealing to you this Qur'an) and then he said to the
man: “Woe unto you! Are these stories better than the Book of
Allah?”[^4]

The news showing that Umar had prevented people from writing and
collecting the prophetic traditions and everything of the Sunna were
certain and recurrent. He might have prevented them from narrating any
prophetic tradition at all and he might have detained the great

[^1] Al-Mukhtasar by ibn Abdul Birr, narrated by Ibn Khaythama as in
Kanzol Ummal, vol. 5 p.239.
[^2] Ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol. 5 p.140.
[^3] As-Salafi in his book at-Tuyooriyyat and as-Sayooti in his Tareekh
al-Khulafa’.
[^4] This tradition has been mentioned in the books of Hadith. Ibn Abul
Hadeed has mentioned in Sharh Nahjol Balagha, vol. 3 p.122. The caliph
Umar had to check those books to see which of them was useful and which
was not and then he would tear useless ones. This was the right of the
umma and the right of the books themselves. Islam does never permit to
tear the useful books such as those of medicine, mathematics, geology
and history of the previous and ancient nations. Imam Ali (s) has said:
“Knowledge is the long-sought aim of the believers. Try to gain
knowledge even from the polytheists.” He also has said: “Wisdom is the
long-sought goal of the believers. They are to look for it even it is in
the policemen’s hands.” These two traditions of Imam Ali (s) have been
mentioned by ibn Abdul Birr in al-Mukhtasar, p.51

(179)

figures in Medina so that they would not spread the traditions in the
other countries.[^1] No doubt that many corruptions had happened because
of the decisions of the two caliphs (when preventing from writing down
the Sunna) and those corruptions could not be avoided. Would have the
two caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, tried with Imam Ali (s) and Ahlul Bayt
(s) to collect the Prophet’s traditions and Sunna and to write them down
in a special book that the later Muslims and their successors of every
generation in this umma would inherit! The holy Qur'an has analogous and
ambiguous meanings. The Sunna explains the analogous and ambiguous
meanings of the Qur'an and it details many of its special verdicts. It
makes the scholars perceive the essence of the Qur'an and so it saves
many verdicts of the Qur'an from being lost.

It would have been better for the two caliphs if they had written down
the Sunna because in doing that they would have saved the umma and the
Sunna from the fabricators who had fabricated many lies against the
Prophet (s). If the Sunna had been written down at that time in a book,
which the umma would have sanctified, fabricators and liars would
refrain from distorting or inserting any lie in the Sunna. And since the
Sunna had not been collected in a special book, so the fabricators, who
fabricated lies against the Prophet (s), were too active and politics
played a great rule in distorting the Sunna especially during the reign
of Mu’awiya and his oppressive party until imposture spread everywhere
and vanities and trifles sold well.

The two caliphs and their followers could have saved the umma from the
evil of those people if they had written down the Sunna. In fact they
had known the great use of that and they had known that it was very
necessary but their greed and tendencies, which they had prepared and
got ready to achieve, did not meet with many of those

[^1] Abdurrahman bin Ouff said: “By Allah, Umar, before he died, he had
sent for the Prophet’s companions who were in the different countries.
He sent for Abdullah bin Huthayfa, Abud Darda’, Abu Tharr and Uqba bin
Aamir and said to them: “What are these traditions of the Prophet (s)
that you have spread throughout the countries?” They said: “Do you
prevent us from doing that?” He said: “No! You stay here! You will never
be away from me as long as I am alive.” Refer to Kanzol Ummal, vol.5
p.239.

(180)

clear prophetic traditions.

As for the Prophet (s), he had entrusted the Book, the Sunna and the
heritage of the prophets with his guardian Ali bin Abu Talib (s) and
hence he had recorded them in a clear book which falsehood should not
come to from before nor from behind. He asked Imam Ali (s) to entrust
the infallible imams after him with this trust. Hence this trust, the
Qur'an, the Sunna and the prophet’s heritage, would be guarded by the
infallible imams (s) one after the other until they would come to the
Prophet (s) at the pond (in Paradise) on the Day of Resurrection.

The Prophet (s) has said: “Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is
with Ali. They will not separate until they will come to me at the
pond.”[^1] A task Some polytheists had come to the Prophet (s) for some
task and he had referred to his two companions (Abu Bakr and Umar) in
order to reject the polytheists’ task but they (Abu Bakr and Umar)
behaved as intercessors for the polytheists.

The story was when some polytheists came to the Prophet (s) saying: “O
Muhammad, we are your neighbors and allies. Some of our slaves have
resorted to you neither for religion nor for jurisprudence but they have
fled from our farms and properties. Please return them back to us.” The
Prophet (s) did not respond to them lest they would spoil the faith of
those slaves. The Prophet (s) did not want to tell them the truth openly
so he referred to Abu Bakr saying: “O Abu Bakr, what do you say?” and he
hoped that Abu Bakr would reject their request. Abu Bakr said: “O
messenger of Allah, they are right.”

[^1] Al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.3 p.124 and ath-Thahabi’s Talkhees. We
would like to attract the reader’s attention that this sacred
accompaniment between Imam Ali (s) and the Qur'an has been continuous
every moment until they will come to the Prophet (s) at the pond in
Paradise without a moment of separation between them at all. Imam Ali
(s) has died hundreds of years before coming with the Qur'an to the pond
in Paradise so how would the inseparability between him and the Qur'an
be valid? (Most surely, it is the Word brought by an honored Messenger.
And it is not the word of a poet; little is it that you believe. Nor the
word of a soothsayer; little is it that you mind. It is a revelation
from the Lord of the worlds). Qur'an, 69:40-43.

(181)

The Prophet (s) blushed because Abu Bakr’s answer was not as Allah and
His messenger wanted. Then the Prophet (s) asked Umar hoping that he
would be frank with them: “O Umar, what do you say?” Umar said: “O
messenger of Allah, they are right. They are your neighbors and allies.”
The Prophet (s) blushed again…” this tradition has been mentioned by
Ahmad bin Hanbal in his Musnad, vol.1 p.155 (traditions concerning Imam
Ali) and by an-Nassa’iy in al-Khasa’is al-Alawiya, p.11. Here is the
tradition as it has been mentioned by an-Nassa’iy: “…then the messenger
of Allah (s) said: “O people of Quraysh, I swear by Allah that He will
empower over you a man from you, whose heart Allah has tested with
faith. He will strike you to keep to the religion.” Abu Bakr said: “O
messenger of Allah, is it me?” The Prophet (s) said: “It is the one who
is mending the shoes.” The Prophet (s) had given his shoes to Ali in
order to mend them.”


