What does Jahiliyah mean?
=========================

1. Islam calls the pagan life of Arabs \`*Jahiliyah*' (ignorance). This
label specifically identified the lifestyle to be found in the land of
the Arabs before the Islamic Mission began. It included the beliefs and
customs of the pagan Arabs who lived in a most decadent and perverse
manner.

This stage in history was full of chaos and corruption, and witnessed a
decline in the sociology and ideology of the age. This was because the
signs of truth had disappeared in that dark historical stage.

The aspects of deviation from truth and justice had become embodied in
the society, much in the same manner as the perverse practices of Sodom
and Gommorah in the time of Prophet Lot, so that evil was acknowledged
as good and good was acknowledged as evil.

2. Islam calls this lifestyle of the Arabs desert dwellers,
\`*Jahiliyah*', to identify the ideological and social nature of that
age and to compare it to general \`*jahiliyah*' of nations and peoples
that have arisen during man's evolution. Therefore, where we have
written \`*jahiliyah*' with a capital “J” we mean specifically the Age
of Ignorance of the Arabs in the pre-Islamic age, and when it is
specified with a “j” it refers to global ignorance at any stage in man's
evolution where ignorance has buried truth, as is found in our social
and ideological values today.

3. Islam calls that miserable historical period of Arab lifestyle
\`*Jahiliyah*' because it is a word which represents ignorant beliefs,
practices, rules, laws, customs, values and behavior of a perverse
society.

4. Islam does not call the Arabs, \`*Jahiliyah*', before the emergence
of its blessed mission because of academic ignorance, nor does it call
them ignorant \`*jahilin*' because of illiteracy nor for backwardness in
the areas of sciences, so we understand that \`*Jahiliyah*' had a
specific and special meaning.

5. Islam called the Arabs of that age \`*jahiliyah*' because even in the
presence of academic and artistic knowledge, the social manner and
behavior of the people and its acceptable lifestyle were such that the
word, *\`Jahiliyah'*, is suitable for them. The Holy Qur'an has told us
about other nations with capabilities in science, engineering, and
skills. Still, it regarded them as \`*jahiliyah*' (ignorant).

6. The Qur'an describes nature as equal among nations of *\`jahiliyah'*.
In the Qur'anic viewpoint, all of these nations were ignorant. We are
able to understand this equality clearly through the comparison which
the Qur'an has made between the backward state of Arabs and the
developed state of nations before them.

7. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“Have they not then journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of
those before them? They were more (in numbers) than these and greater in
strength and in fortifications in the land, but what they earned did not
avail them.Then when their messengers came to them with clear arguments,
they exulted in what they had with them of knowledge, and there beset
them that which they used to mock”.*** Holy Quran (40:82-83)

***“Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of
those before them? They were stronger than these in prowess, and dug up
the earth, and built on it in greater abundance than these have built on
it, and there came to them their messengers with clear arguments; so it
was not beseeming for Allah that He should deal with them unjustly, but
they dealt unjustly with their own souls.*** ***Then evil was the end of
those who did evil, because they rejected the communications of Allah
and used to mock them”***. Holy Quran (30:9-10)

***“And how many of the generations have We destroyed before them who
were better in respect of goods and outward appearance! Say:*** ***(O
Our Apostle Muhammad)*** ***As for him who remains in error, the
Beneficent Allah will surely prolong his length of days, until they see
what they were threatened with, either the punishment or the hour; then
they shall know who is in more evil plight and weaker in forces”.***Holy
Qur'an (19:74-75)

In this manner, the Qur'an has revealed the depth and content of those
nations to stress that scientific development of man and his civil
advancement are not able to save him from the claws of deviation and
take him out of the fangs of ignorance as long as he embellishes
ignorant faith and embodies the same abnormal ignorant behavior of the
general society.

Although these ignorant deviated nations are scattered throughout
history and are different in scientific and civil levels, they share
common factors. One mental state combines them together and unifies
their deviated course. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“And those who have no knowledge say: Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us? Even thus said those before them, the like of what
they say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed We have made the
communications clear for a people who are sure”.*** Holy Qur'an (2:118)

This similarity among the hearts of the deviated nations and peoples and
the unity of the mental trend, which the Qur'an has revealed, is the
common line which identifies all aspects of the pre-Islamic period of
ignorance and is the center from which all activities of the ignorant
man begins.

This similarity is the factor forming the identity and personality of
this pre-Islamic nation. Also this description may be applied to all
stages of human history whose generations have evolved into a devious
and deviated system and refused to follow the straight path of truth and
peace-the straight path of Allah, the law of the Lord, and the message
of salvation.

When we examine Islamic texts and phrases about identifying and
describing the life of (pre-Islamic period) ignorance, we are able to
understand the meaning of the idiom *\`Jahiliyah'* and the reason why
the Qur'an has used it. Also we are able to understand why the same
idiom has been applied to other nations throughout history.

We are able to understand this terminology and labelling once we learn
of the ignorance in the history of past nations and its connected parts,
when we follow the unity of the line and trends which associated
*\`Jahiliyah'* through its effects and remains, and when we study the
description of the Qur'an about the most important aspects of
\`*Jahiliyah*’, its ways of thinking, and its psychological and
behavioral trends.

When we reach this awareness, we find that *\`jahiliyah'* means error,
going astray, deviation from Allah's straight path, and negligence in
His worship. That is because *\`jahiliyah'*, in the Qur'anic viewpoint,
means a religion and lifestyle that follows a line contrary to the line
of Islam in nature and aim.

It follows the line of deviation from the path of true religion and
Allah's \`*shari'ah*' (law) which guides man.

*\`Jahiliyah'* (ignorance) is a way of life. It has its own faith, way
of thinking, and lifestyle including social manners, worship, values and
concepts, viewpoint towards life, method to create civilization, and a
direction for human activities in areas such as culture, art,
literature, politics, economy, power, law and order, etc.

8. In order to unveil the ugly face of *\`jahiliyah'* and discover the
thread that entwines current ignorant international thoughts, it is
better to return to the Holy Qur'an which describes *\`Jahiliyah'*, and
its people, and the dimensions of their lifestyle and the features of
their civilization and social system.

Also it denotes their general framework and the basic rules of their
formation. The Qur'an says:

***“And none but the guilty led us astray;”*** Holy Qur'an (26:99)

***“And indeed they have led astray many, and do not increase the unjust
in aught but error.”***  
 Holy Qur'an (71:24)

*** “But if they do not answer you, then know that they only follow
their low desires; and who is more erring than he who follows his low
desires without any guidance from Allah? Surely Allah does not guide the
unjust people”.*** Holy Qur'an (28:50)

***“But they rejected him, so We delivered him and those with him in the
ark...”*** Holy Qur'an (10:73)

*** “Then did We raise up after him messengers to their people, so they
came to them with clear arguments, but they would not believe in what
they had rejected before; thus it is that We set seals upon the hearts
of those who exceed the limits”.*** Holy Qur'an (10:74)

***“Then did We send up after them Musa and Haroun to Firon and his
chiefs with Our signs, but they showed pride and they were a guilty
people”.*** Holy Qur'an (10:75)

***“But none believed in Musa except the offspring of his people, on
account of the fear of Firon and their chiefs, lest he should persecute
them; and most surely Firon was lofty in the land; and most surely he
was of the extravagant”.*** Holy Qur'an (10:83)

***“They said: O Hud! you have not brought to us any clear argument and
we are not going to desert our gods for your word, and we are not
believers in you:”.*** Holy Qur'an (11:53)

***“Say: O people! if you are in doubt as to my religion, then (know
that) I do not serve those whom you serve besides Allah but I do serve
Allah…”.*** Holy Qur'an (10:104)

*** “And when he turn,s back, he runs along in the land that he may
cause mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does
not love mischief-making”.*** Holy Qur'an (2:205)

***“The life of this world is made to seem fair to those who disbelieve,
and they mock those who believe…”*** Holy Qur'an (2:212)

*** “And they shall say: O our Lord! Surely we obeyed our leaders and
our great men, so they led us astray from the path”.*** Holy Qur'an
(33:67)

9. If we want more clarity about this collapsed civil situation, let's
consider carefully the sermons of Imam Ali (a.s) from Nahjul- Balagha,
in which he explains the formation of *\`Jahiliyah'* and analyses the
form of its life and faith as follows: “*Allah sent Muhammad (saw.) as a
warner (against vice) for all the worlds and a trustee of His
revelation, while you people of Arabia were following the worst religion
and you resided among rough stones and venomous serpents. You drank
dirty water and ate filthy food. You shed blood of each other and cared
not for relationship. Idols are fixed among you and sins are clinging to
you.”*

Then, he (a.s) speaks about the situations and conditions that preceded
the Holy Prophetic mission as follows: *“At that time people had fallen
into vices whereby the rope of religion had been broken, the pillars of
belief had been shaken, principles had been sacrileged, the system had
become topsy turvy, openings were narrow, passages were dark, guidance
was unknown and darkness prevailed.*

*Allah, The Most Beneficent, was being disobeyed. Satan was given
support and belief had been forsaken. As a result, the pillars of
religion fell down, its traces could not be discerned, its passages had
been destroyed and its streets had fallen into decay.*

*People obeyed Satan and tread his paths. They sought water from his
watering places. Through them Satan's emblems were flying and his
standard was raised in vices which trampled the people under their
hoofs, and treaded upon them with their feet.*

*The vices stood on their toes (in full stature) and the people immersed
in them were astrayed, perplexed, ignorant and seduced as though in a
good house with bad neighbors. Instead of sleep they had wakefulness and
for antimony they had tears in the eyes. They were in a land where the
learned were bridled (mouths forced shut) while the ignorant were
honored.”*

In another place, he (a.s) says:

*“Allah sent the Prophet at a time when the people were going astray in
perplexity and were moving here and there in mischief. Desires had
deflected them and self-conceit had swerved them. Extreme ignorance had
made them foolish. They were confounded by the unsteadiness of matters
and the evils of ignorance. Then the Prophet (saw) did his best in
giving them sincere advice, himself trotting on the right path and
called (them) towards wisdom and good counsel.”*

*“I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger whom He
deputized when the people were collecting in the abyss and moving in
bewilderment. The reins of destruction were dragging them and the locks
of malice lay fixed on their hearts.”*

In another place of his sermons and sayings, we read another analysis of
the nature of the ignorant man and his moral and psychological
character. Imam Ali (a.s) sheds bright light on the nature of this man
in each period and stage and makes these sick symptoms as distinguishing
qualities for the ignorant man and society.

Imam Ali (a.s) speaks about evil, deviation and the call of Satan. He
(a.s) denotes that the followers of this call are ignorant:

*“And the followers of fanaticism, the brothers of fanaticism and the
horsemen of haughtiness and ignorance proved him (Prophet Muhammad,
(saw) to be true.”*

In another speech concerning *\`Jahiliyah'*, we read another analysis of
this restless social situation and discover another dimension in its
structure. He (a.s) says:

*“The conditions were full of distress. The hands were scattered. The
majority was divided. They were in great anguish and under layers of
ignorance. They buried their daughters alive, worshipped idols,
disregarded kinship and practiced robbery.”*

Imam Ali (a.s) is not satisfied with speaking about *\`Jahiliyah'*,
analyzing its structure, and discovering the meanings of civilization
and life therein. Rather, he warns people against the bad background of
those ignorant thoughts. He says:

*“Do not be like those rude people of \`Jahiliyah' who did not exert
themselves in religion nor use their intellects in the matter of Allah.
They are like the breaking of eggs in the nest of a dangerous bird,
because their breaking looks bad but keeping them intact would mean
production of dangerous young ones.”*

Through contemplating deeply on these Islamic analyses and texts-the
verses and sermons-and analyzing their ideas, one will know the features
of \`*Jahiliyah*' society, recognize the clearest characteristics of the
life in it, and know the most common elements among the various
*\`jahiliyah'* nations.

These texts altogether denote that the society of \`*jahiliyah'* is
deviated from what is right; it does not follow the teachings of
religion, nor it seeks light from its system, nor it conforms to the
principles of its law.

Besides, they (the texts and verses) focus on the aspects and the common
features among the international beliefs in the attitude towards the
Divine Messages, in behavior, and the psychological situation of these
ignorant beliefs.

These ignorant beliefs refuse and doubt the messages of Prophets, and
insist on disbelief, going astray, and following low desires.

The definite result of this rejection is that the refusing person has
followed a material, animalistic direction. Thus, lust overcomes him;
pleasures lead him, because he has broken off his relation with Allah.
So he has inclined to the earth, deified the volatile world of lust, and
worshipped the turns of the self.

It is natural that this material and ignorant life is full of
corruption, crimes, and vanity.

We have read that the Qur'an describes these ignorant thoughts and noted
their diseases and corrupt aspects. The Qur'an has shown the most
prominent, sick aspects of those ignorant thoughts as: oppression,
crime, haughtiness, extravagance, arrogance, deviation, doubt,
corruption and destruction on earth, blood shedding, sneering at truth,
blindly following the leaders of deviation and corruption, and following
lusts and low desires.

After this Qur'anic discussion, we have read that Imam Ali (a.s) has
analyzed the most prominent aspects of \`*Jahiliyah*' life. He (a.s) has
stressed those aspects which the Qur'an has stressed such as: decline,
degradation, behavioral and ideological fall.

He (a.s) refers to blood shedding, disbelieving in Allah, refusing the
messages of the Prophets, ignorance in religion, shaky pillars of
religion, going astray, bewilderment, haughtiness, spite, fanaticism,
victory of lust and low desires, and so on.

With this Islamic analysis which we have read in the Qur'anic texts and
Imam Ali's sermons, we are able to know that the pre-Islamic society is
the one which refuses to believe in Allah and deviates in its behavior
and life system from Allah's right path, irrespective of being an
ignorant society like the Bedouins and pastorals or being a society
which lives in the age of the atom, computer, space travel, etc.

\`*Jahiliyah*' is a civil situation having behavioral, psychological,
and physical elements. It has no relation to the degree of science and
knowledge existing in the society. It is just as Imam Ali (a.s) says:

*“The worst religion; and the worst house.”*

Whenever this mark of evil and corruption, is found in faith, the social
system and the method of life, then we are able to call the person who
lives in its shade as ignorant \`*jahil*', and we are able to describe
the human life following it as \`*jahiliyah*'.

For this reason, the Holy Qur'an calls the deviated person, \`*dhal*'
(one who has gone astray), and those who deviate \`*dhaloon*'. \`*Dhal*'
is the person who does not know the way and blunders far away from the
truth and guidance whether in his thinking and faith or in his worship,
life system, and way of his dealings.

Describing the ignorant life and society, Imam Ali (a.s) has often used
the word \`hayara' (bewildered) in his sermons. That is because
bewilderment, worry, estrangement, uneasiness, etc., are the most
prominent morbid symptoms from which the ignorant person suffers. All
these diseases hit him because he is deviated from Allah's path and His
law.

Thus estrangement, bewilderment, going astray, and uneasiness are the
distinguishing and essential marks of the ignorant society which is full
of vanity, oppression, corruption, and low desires.

Islam has shown that the ignorant person is deviated, lost, bewildered
and restless, for such a person suffers from mental disorders. This
condition has an influence on all aspects of his life.

So, man finds himself standing before two ways in every period or age.
These two ways are: 1) The way of guidance and belief; and, 2) The way
of ignorance and misguidance.

The Qur'an highlights this in the following verse:

*** “Is it then the judgment of (the times of) ignorance that they
desire? And who is better than Allah to judge for a people who are
sure?”*** Holy Qur'an (5:50)

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s) has stated:

*“Judgment is two kinds: the judgment of Allah, the Great and Almighty,
and the judgment of the people of ignorance \`Jahiliyah'. So, whoever
misses Allah's judgment, surely will judge according to the judgment of
\`Jahiliyah'.”* To give man a clear idea of the aims and purposes which
Islam strives to achieve, the Qur'an tells him about these aims and
purposes:

***“And thus did We reveal to you an inspired book by Our command. You
did not know what the Book was, nor (what) the faith (was), but We made
it a light, guiding thereby whom We please of Our servants;”***Holy
Qur'an (42:52)

***“-- and We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly
everything, and a guidance and mercy and good news for those who
submit.”*** Holy Qur'an (16:89)

The Qur'an also describes the faithful believers, those who follow the
way of faith and know the right path. It has shown that they are guided
aright and live in safety, security, and peace:

***“Those who believe and mix not up their faith with iniquity -those
are they for whom is security and they are (the ones) guided aright.”***
Holy Qur'an (6:83)

That is because they have believed in Allah and the light that has come
from Him. They have followed the way of righteousness and have not mixed
their belief with oppression nor deviated from Allah's path and His
*\`shari'ah'*. Rather they have conformed to Allah's laws, commands and
teachings. Therefore, they are rightly guided, safe, and happy here and
in the Hereafter.

Unlike the true believers, those who have led themselves towards error,
deviation and misguidance and turned away from Allah's remembrance have
turned their lives into an inferno and a torment. The Qur'an describes
their life and end as follows:

***“And whoever turns away from My reminder, his shall be a straitened
life, and We will*** ***raise him on the day of resurrection, blind. He
shall say: My Lord! why hast Thou raised me blind and I was a seeing one
indeed?. He will say: Even so, Our communications came to you but you
neglected them; even thus shall you be forsaken this day***”. Holy
Qur'an (20:124-126)

Because of their turning away from Allah's remembrance, refusing and
disobeying the true will, they have gone astray. They have blundered in
the darkness of ignorance and deviation. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“…and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, he surely strays off
a manifest straying”.*** Holy Qur'an (33:36)

***“Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his god,
and Allah has made him err having knowledge and has set a seal upon his
ear and his heart and put a covering upon his eye. Who can then guide
him after Allah? Will you not then be mindful?”*** Holy Qur'an (45:23)

So, this is the reality of *\`jahiliyah'*, i.e., deviation from the
religion of Allah, refusing His message, disobeying His Apostles,
adoring lusts and temptations, and obeying the tyrants and the
aggressors. Finally, if we study similar ideas of ignorant life, we will
reach the following conclusions:

*\`Jahiliyah'* (Global ignorance) was a social disease. It was a
psychological state afflicting individuals, peoples, and nations in each
period and generation. The aspects of this ignorant life are quite
similar regardless of time and place. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their
disease…”*** Holy Qur'an (2:10)

*** “And those who have no knowledge say: Why does not Allah speak to us
or a sign come to us? Even thus said those before them, the like of what
they say; their hearts are all alike. Indeed we have made the
communications clear for a people who are sure”.*** Holy Qur'an (2:118)

The evidence to this similarity is the long history of mankind, the
succession of nations and offspring’s, the appearance of the symptoms of
the ignorant life in many generations and nations in each period of
history, and the deviation from the right path and the call to guidance
and the Prophets.

On the pages of history and life's stage, we see standing examples
belonging to the past and present life of mankind-we see atheism,
oppression, tyranny, terrorism, blood shedding, loss of truth,
persecution of the oppressed, exploiting the poor and widespread vices.

These are the reflections of the ignorant current on the life of
mankind. This current represents deviation from the truth, justice,
belief.

Consequently, bewilderment, going astray, and deviation from the
straight path are the most important marks of *\`Jahiliyah*' from which
man suffered too much crises and endured their pains.


