Islam and Jahiliyah
===================

Accordingly, *\`jahiliyah'* is a concept and a civilization. Besides, it
is a mark with which we can differentiate the enemies of Islam through
their different philosophical, mental ideologies and their various
schools and social systems in each period and generation in history.

Whoever does not follow Islam, nor believes in it, nor conveys its
message and the system of its life and call is ignorant and misguided
even if he becomes changeable, pretends, practices hypocrisy, and uses
misleading slogans.

The civil and historical fact is a clear evidence of the existence of
two opposite blocs throughout history and presentation of human life-
its past, its present and its future. These are: the bloc of faith and
monotheism and the bloc of deviation, misguidance and global ignorance
*\`jahiliyah'*.

Prophet Muhammad (saw) was truthful when he said:

*“Verily, there are two ways-the good way, and the evil way.”*

When we consider carefully the life of Allah's Messenger (saw), and his
holy struggle \`jihad', we understand that he used this slogan against
the *\`jahiliyah'* (ignorance) of his time. He also wanted this slogan
to be the slogan of the whole humanity after him just as it was the
slogan of the Prophets and the Apostles before him.

The Prophet (saw) conformed to this slogan truthfully both on the
theoretical and practical levels. Concerning the theoretical level, he
presented to mankind the most wonderful and greatest message and
ideology.

He also presented the best law and the most accurate, miraculous Divine
system. This system is distinguished by justice, mercy, and equality. It
responds to instinctive law and sound mental logic which aims to free
mankind, destroy all ignorant slogans, and demolishes their concepts,
faiths, fables, and customs. Furthermore, this system aims to uproot all
these bad backgrounds to create a social and ideological change.

On the practical level, Allah's Messenger (saw) firmly began to demolish
the foundations of the ignorant society in order to establish the
foundations of the happy Islamic society.

He wanted Islam to prevail in that society and to make one unified
Muslim nation, free from the ignorant marks in thinking, faith, law,
morals, worship, and general human dealings.

The Holy Qur'an has continued to take care of this Prophetic
construction and to support it with awareness and spiritual lawful
maintenance to stress the importance of this Islamic line and protect
its originality and purity from the ignorant ideas which may come into
the pure Islamic life.

So, Allah has addressed His great Prophet by telling him about those
devious persons who try to demolish this marvelous Islamic construction
and distort its originality and purity: Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has
been revealed to you*** ***and what was revealed before you? They desire
to summon one another to the judgment of the Shaitan, though they were
commanded to deny him…”.***Holy Qur'an (4:60)

Allah revealed the address and the warning to his great Prophet to fix
the originality of the Islamic life and concentrate its independence. In
the meantime, Allah focused on carrying out a mental, lawful, practical
unity to show the Muslims that the system of their life, the system of
their judgment, and the way of their worship are clear in their
religion.

So, they must not resort to the tyrants to make them laws, regulations,
and beliefs. That is because the tyrants deviate and mislead the Muslims
from their faith and the way of their thinking.

The Holy Qur'an went on stressing to the Prophet (saw) to make him
practice the process of application, construction, and social reform
based on Islamic foundations. It showed him how to complete and perfect
this construction.

So, it addressed him condemning the deviation of some people and their
cleaving to the ideas of \`*jahiliyah*' and its judgment and laws.

Thus, the main aim is to denote clearly the features of the two ways-
the way of \`*jahiliyah*' (global ignorance) and the way of Islam-and
also to make the Muslim know that human history, everywhere and every
time, follows two lines opposite to each other in aims and motives.
Besides, human conflict goes around two axes opposite in their trends
and different in their contents and purposes.

These two axes are Islam and \`*jahiliyah*'. Furthermore, a Muslim
should know that all different titles and slogans such as schools of
thought, calls to act, philosophies and theories, which appeared
throughout the history of mankind, including contemporary ones or those
that may appear in the future are none other than *\`jahiliyah'*.

All these are only various sides and recurring forms of the conflict
which go on between *\`jahiliyah'* (global ignorance) and belief
represented by Islam, the religion of all Prophets and mankind.

For this reason, the religious Muslim person should know the nature of
the conflict between \`*jahiliyah*' and Islam, and not be cheated when
the names and titles are changed, for they are different forms for one
ignorant fact.

Also he must regard the dissidents of Islam as ignorant persons
repeating the \`*jahiliyah*' (ignorance) of the ancient nations and
peoples in new created titles and forms.


