Essential Centers
=================

If we carefully study the patterns of \`*jahiliyah*' life throughout
history, we find that *\`jahiliyah'* society has many morbid symptoms
and phenomena, from which the lights of belief, religion and guidance
have been extinguished.

Also we discover the main centers on which human and social construction
of the ignorant societies stand. These basic centers can be summed up as
follows:

1. Ideological Deviation
------------------------

The history of civilizations and their ideology, throughout the stages
of the \`*jahiliyah*' life, tell us that there is an ideological
abnormality and deviation from the faith of monotheism.

This problem is regarded as the basic center and general rule for all
ignorant beliefs beginning from the ancient nations, mentioned by the
Holy Qur'an and ending with the ignorance of Arabs, Greeks, and
including our modern, material civilization.

Therefore, man, in these ignorant societies, is abnormal and deviated in
his thinking, understanding, and even in his explanation of existence
and life. This ignorant man always thinks about material things, while
he refuses moral and spiritual values. That is because ignorant thinking
concerning the universe and life is simple and primitive.

This kind of thinking has made ignorant societies unable to recognize
the existence of Allah and believe in His Apostles. Also this material
thinking has made them unable to believe in One Allah, having perfect
attributes and being far above the qualities of the created world.

Therefore, these ignorant societies turn to inactivity, refusing belief
in the Creator, and believing in primitive images as idols to be
worshipped instead of Allah. These images take on the cloak of godhood
in these societies, and all morals are based upon satisfying the
requirements of these images.

2. Emotional and Psychological Deviation
----------------------------------------

Throughout its different periods, \`*jahiliyah*' (global ignorance)
stood on devious emotional and psychological principles. That is because
the pure innate and sound psychological trends do not accept abnormality
and deviation. Rather they accept the idea of righteousness and
behavioral balance, and they help belief to flourish.

However, an ill and complicated personality always inclines towards
straying from the line of psychological righteousness and balance which
belief follows. So, the corrupt personality, which suffers from
schizophrenia and weak will, or the personality which suffers from
self-conceit, spite, haughtiness, selfishness, and sexual perversion
always follows the ignorant system to express its ill complexes and
psychological deviation. The Holy Qur'an often speaks about this ill
personality.

It analyses its construction and depicts its inner content to make man
aware and to teach social understanding which, in turn, make him avoid
falling into this deep abyss. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their disease
and they shall have a painful chastisement because they lied”. ***Holy
Qur'an (2:10)

***“And they denied them unjustly and proudly while their soul had been
convinced of them; consider, then how was the end of the
mischief-makers”.*** Holy Qur'an (27:14)

Through its diagnosis and analysis, the Qur'an points to the place of
the illness and the starting point of the deviation bringing about a
\`*jahiliyah*' in various stages of man's evolution. It is emotional
deviation and psychological disease from which the \`*jahili*'
(ignorant) person suffers.

He turns away from truth and guidance because of the influence of this
disease. Although the truth is clear, the ignorant person refuses it and
tries to get rid of the rules of psychological righteousness and
rational beliefs and behavior.

Imam Ali (a.s) deeply analyses and describes this ill, ignorant, immoral
and psychological situation by saying: *“Desires had deflected them and
self-conceit had swerved them. Extreme ignorance had made them foolish.”
“The sons of vanity, the brothers of fanaticism, and the horsemen of
ignorance proved him to be true.”*

“So, they put out what was hidden in their hearts from the fires of
fanaticism and the spites of ignorance.” Consequently, in every period
and generation, \`*jahiliyah*' (global ignorance) is distinguished by
fanaticism, haughtiness, deviation, and psychological and moral
abnormality.

3. Behavioral Deviation
-----------------------

Among the basic center which contributes in creating and distinguishing
the \`*jahiliyah*' society and individual is the state of behavioral
abnormality and deviation. Deviation from righteousness and absorption
in abnormal practices and habits are the most prominent marks among all
ignorant societies.

In addition, these habits are the most visible social forms which show
deviant, ignorant content. In our time we see marital and child abuse,
child pornography, drug addiction, alcoholism, prostitution,
homosexuality, political oppression and arrogance, and the coveting of
wealth and power as signs of our modern day \`*jahiliyah*'.

The Qur'an speaks about this ignorant deviation by unveiling this common
feature among all ignorant societies. It says:

***:So surely those who are unjust shall have a portion like the portion
of their companions, therefore let them not ask Me to hasten on”.***
Holy Qur'an (51:59)

***“Soon will I (allow to) turn away from my signs those (who) unjustly
are proud in the earth; while (even) if they see all the signs they will
not believe in it; and (even) if they see the right way, they will not
adopt it for a way; and if they see the way of error, they will adopt it
for a way; this is because they belied Our signs and were heedless of
them.”*** Holy Qur'an (6:146)

***“... and hinder (others) from the path of Allah and seek it to be
crooked; these are in error far away (from the right path).”*** Holy
Qur'an (14:3)

*** “So the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off; and all
praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”*** Holy Qur'an (6:45)

In this manner, the devious behavioral society is constructed and is a
distinguishing mark of the ignorant individual throughout different
periods and the succession of his generations until Allah inherits the
earth and what is on it.

In other words, everywhere and every time the ignorant person plays,
corrupts, commits crimes, spreads ruin and destruction, goes deeply into
evil, and scorns all human values and life principles without any
concern or sanction, he is guilty of \`*jahiliyah*'.

This ignorant person reaches this definite, inescapable result because
he feels no sense of responsibility to the Almighty, Just Creator, and
refuses to believe in the reward and punishment due on the Day of
Judgment.

The Results of Ignorant Deviation
---------------------------------

Throughout history, mankind has been the scapegoat and the victim of
ignorant deviation in his life. Mankind is responsible for the sins of
its crimes and the results of its deviation.

The Qur'an refers to this fact and explains the results of such
deviation and ignorant corruption which despoils life and turns it into
an inferno and torture. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“... O mankind! your rebellion is against your own selves***,...”
Holy Qur'an (10:23)

***“Mischief has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what the
hands of people have wrought, that He may make them taste a part of what
they have done, so that they may turn (away from evil).”*** Holy Qur'an
(30:41)

The Qur'an has given this warning and shown the danger of it in order to
urge man to resist *\`jahiliyah'* and face its crimes and deviation so
that each person will be able to play his role and shoulder his
responsibility in resisting *jahiliyah* and defending the will of life
and the welfare of mankind.

Ignorant regimes like communism, capitalism, existentialism, racism,
etc., and their corrupt influences on man are clear evidences of man's
sufferings and misery. A closer look at the past and present history of
\`*jahiliyah*’; will show:

1. The prevalence of materialism, and the absence of rational thought,
which rises above material things and greedy selfishness and
self-interest and balances the moral, material, and spiritual powers of
man, respecting the interests of others, and honoring their rights in
life.

This stonehearted material current has led to the death of moral values
and victory for the opportunist selfish criteria. It has deadened the
conscience of man and made him lazy in his awareness and sensitivity.

2. The appearance of conflict and crimes among men instead of love,
peace, agreement, and cooperation. Chaos and social alienation have
replaced stability, moral discipline, and balanced law. Thus, life
becomes a jungle of conflict and an oasis of blood, hidden behind the
bars of oppression, terrorism, and deviation.

The analysis of Imam Ali (a.s) for this awful phenomenon in the ignorant
life is very accurate when he said: *“And idols were worshipped, kinship
was disregarded, and raids were made.” “In vices which trampled the
people under their hoofs, and trod upon them with their feet, and stood
on their toes.” “You ate filthy food. You shed blood of each other, and
you disregarded your kinship”*

So, this phenomenon of wars, destruction, and bloodshed, is the great
common trait among all ignorant societies of the earth. And it is the
terrible matter from which the angels asked in astonishment:

***“... will You (O Our Lord) appoint therein one who will cause
mischief and shed blood...” Holy Qur'an*** (2:30)

The modern materialistic *\`jahiliyah*' sheds more blood than in the
past. We have the power of mass death and destruction to the point of
“overkill”.

We have learned and used the most diabolic methods of torture, murder,
cannibalism, sexual perversity, violent crimes, and abuse. For this
reason, peace has disappeared from the earth and the beating of peace
and love has stopped in every heart.

3. The collapse of the individual's personality, and the absence of
personal sanction-the death of the human conscience-which the Qur'an
describes through its words:

***“Thenceforth were your hearts hardened as stones or harder
still...”*** Holy Qur'an (2:74)

When the conscience has died, human feeling has also disappeared along
with the feeling of sympathy, justice and responsibility toward the
humanity of others.

Thus, man has withdrawn into the darkness far away from the circle of
light. He has lost the criteria, dispelled the will of good, mixed the
values, and refused guidance and awareness.

These definite results of the *\`jahiliyah'* trends, which man has
reached, are the bitter results caused by deviation and distance from
the straight path of Allah and the call of the Prophets.

They are the results about which the Qur'an speaks and has put man face
to face with them in order that he may know his responsibility and
choose his role in life. The Qur'an describes these results as
oppression, crimes, tyranny, going astray, deviation, cruelty, and
animalistic. It says:

***“…but they behaved haughtily and they were a guilty people.”*** Holy
Qur'an (7:133)

***“... while (even) if they see the right way they will not adopt it
for a way...”*** Holy Qur'an (7:146)

***“... and if they see the way of error, they will take it for a
way***...” Holy Qur'an (7:146)

***“…who went astray before and led many astray and went astray from the
right path”.***Holy Qur'an (5:77)

***“Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought…”*** Holy Qur'an (30:41)

***“…and We did them no injustice, but they were unjust to
themselves”.*** Holy Qur'an (16:118)

When the Qur'an places these facts before man and describes for him such
phenomena, it wants him to rise against his ignorant reality and change
the form of life and civilization so that he will be able to build his
life according to the guidance of belief and his society according to
its rules and message.

This process begins by building his personality and changing his own
psychological content.


