The Nature of Conflict between Jahiliyah and Islam
==================================================

The real meaning of \`*jahiliyah*' is:  
 “Refusing the obedience of Allah and deviation from the system of
religion.”

While Islam means:  
 “The surrendering and obedience to Allah's cosmic order, and conforming
to His system of religion in life.”

We have to know that the conflict between various ignorant ideologies
and Islam-the religion of prophets and mankind-is permanent and
continuous. We have to be aware that they are two opposite facts, and
have been so since the beginning of human history and will continue to
be so until the disappearance of the torch of life from the earth.

This conflict will continue and take various forms and slogans, but it
will last as a conflict between guidance and misguidance, truth and
falsehood, justice and injustice, and between righteousness and
corruption.

This conflict is the conflict of oppositions in the theater of thought
and society. It is the \`jihad' (holy struggle) of goodness against the
call of evil and deviation.

Throughout human history, prophets and the faithful have recorded
wonderful chapters in it. With strength and enthusiasm they faced the
might of tyrants, rulers and the callers to deviation and misguidance
who are the true enemies of all mankind.

These wonderful attitudes of \`jihad' are living phenomena of the law
regarding human conflict and change which is described by the Qur'an as
follows:

***“And were it not for Allah's repelling some men with others, the
earth would certainly be in a state of disorder; but Allah is Gracious
to the creatures.”***Holy Qur'an (2:251)

“... and had repelled not Allah some people by others, verily had been
pulled down the cloisters and the churches and the synagogues, and the
mosques in which Allah's name is much mentioned; and verily Allah will
help him who helps Him (His cause); for verily Allah is All-Strong,
Almighty.” Holy Qur'an (21:40)

This is the law of life, the logic of history, and the law of events and
change. On the basis of these facts, the bloody fights of conflict
happened, and the events of history were written.

So, each party of this conflict has taken its portion and shouldered its
responsibility. In this connection, Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“(All) people are a single nation; so Allah raised prophets as
bearers of good news and as warners, and He revealed with them the Book
with truth, that it might judge between people in that in which they
differed; and none but the very people who were given it differed about
it after clear arguments had come to them, revolting among themselves;
so Allah has guided by His will those who believe to the truth about
which they differed and Allah guides whom He pleases to the right
path.”***Holy Qur'an (2:213)

Whoever follows the Qur'an's descriptions of the nature of conflict and
how it pictures the scenes of rebellion against the prophets, and tells
about the battles which were waged against the prophets and who reads
how Qur'an honors the followers who believed in truth and the message of
Allah, who defended truth in \`jihad' against the callers to
\`*jahiliyah*', oppression and despotism, will be able to identify and
recognize the conflict and that its confrontation and \`jihad', followed
by the believers in Allah's religion and the truth of His prophets is
the only way to pursue the enemy's annihilation.

It is the way which must be followed by the callers to Islam. This
conflict is the continuity of the line of the believing, brave
confrontation against the callers to apostasy and *\`jahiliyah'*.

Whoever chooses the way of prophets and calls to Islam should accept
what the prophets accepted and should endure what they endured.

How wonderful the true words of Allah are! They simplify this plain
truth and explain to us the experience of the conflict and the difficult
test which lies before us:

***“Or do you think that you would enter the garden while yet the state
of those who have passed away before you has not come upon you; distress
and affliction befell them and they were shaken violently, so that the
Messenger and those who believed with him said: When will the help of
Allah come? Now surely the help of Allah is nigh!”*** Holy Qur'an
(2:214)

***“Alif Lam Mim. Do men think that they will be left alone on saying,
We believe, and not be tried? And certainly We tried those before them,
so Allah will certainly know those who are true and He will certainly
know the liars.”*** Holy Qur'an (29:1-3)

Conflict and the Divine trial are necessities in order to discover the
extent of truthfulness and sincerity in the heart of the faithful
believer and his belief in the Divine message in his life.

Furthermore, this conflict is a historical phenomenon which takes place
according to the laws of action and reaction and social change.

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.


