Introduction: Events of Truth are Everlasting
=============================================

The Holy Qur’an illustrates 'the example of truth' in the following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عِنْدَكُمْ يَنفَدُ وَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What is with you vanishes and what is with Allah will endure. (Holy
Qur'an, 16:96)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَأَمَّا مَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ فَيَمْكُثُ فِي الْأَرْضِ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ
يَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…As for the scum, it disappears like froth cast out; and as for that
which benefits mankind, it remains on the earth. This is how Allah sets
forth parables. (13:17)***

Every phenomenon of truth[^1] is everlasting. The verse above likens
clean water with truth and the scum over it with falsehood. Some
phenomena resemble the scum on the water which finally evaporates and
vanishes, while others resemble water which remains on earth and is
beneficial to mankind.

Phenomena of truth resemble springs of pure water that quench every
generation to come. They also benefit those who lived prior to their
existence. Therefore their effect transcends time. Narratives indicate
that the past Prophets of God after having been informed about what will
befall the grandson of the last Prophet of God (S) cursed his
killers[^2].

Hence the matter is beyond the confines of time or place. Such is the
nature of an event of truth.

Those events which have Divine color always remain, but those phenomena
which concern other than Allah never subsist. The Holy Qur’an says in
this connection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا عِنْدَكُمْ يَنفَدُ وَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ بَاقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What is with you vanishes and what is with Allah will
endure...(16:96)***

The Holy Prophet and his infallible progeny, upon whom be peace, were
models of emulation for all times. This is because every act of theirs
was in complete obedience to Almighty Allah and the truth. In the
radiant Ziyara of Jami'a al-Kabira we address them as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْحَقُّ مَعَكُمْ وَ فِيْكُمْ وَ مِنْكُمْ وَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And truth is with you, in you, from you and...**

Therefore every move they made was 'the truth' and everlasting and for
all places and ages to come. The nature of truth is such that it can
never perish. Therefore every move, action, and thought of truth will
never perish.

[^1]: 'haqq' (lit. truth) is known to be so because it 'endures'. The
verb 'haqqa' means 'thabata' (to endure).

[^2]: 'Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 44, pp. 243-244. Readers must
also understand that 'cursing' the killers of the Imam ('a) and his
loyal companions cannot be merely reduced to personal enmity with the
perpetrators of the heinous crime. If one looks at the 'reality of the
matter' he/she would come to realize that the sum total of one's
personality is one's deeds. Small wonder it is that Almighty Allah
describes the son of Nuh as "innahu 'amalun ghayru salihin" (Surely he
is a bad deed, Holy Qur'an, 11:46). Therefore, our curse reflects (1)
our hatred towards the deeds of the perpetrators of evil, and (2) our
stance of being against them - Author


