Reasons Behind Imam al-Husayn’s move to Makka
=============================================

If one were to carefully analyze the reason why the Imam (‘a) left for
Makka, he/she would be able to understand the sanctity of the move.

Following are reflections about the same:

1. The Importance of a Global Platform
--------------------------------------

In one of his historic statements Imam al-Husayn (‘a) clearly says that
the main reason behind his uprising (in whatever stage it may be) is to
seek reform in the Muslim nation. Then he describes the path he would
undertake to meet this aspiration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُرِيْدُ أَنْ آمُرَ بِالْمَعْرُوْفِ وَ أَنْهَى عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘I would like to invite towards good and shun the evil.’**[^1]

In order for him to carry out this reform immediately, the best place to
go to was Makka, where pilgrims from all over the Muslim world would
come to perform 'Umra and Hajj. They would listen to his message, wake
up, and relate the same to their people on their return.

Historical records tell us that while in Makka, Muslims from different
countries would come to Imam al-Husayn ('a) day and night, and listen to
what he had to say.

2. Opposition Against Falsehood
-------------------------------

The flight of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) reveals the Imam's liberated spirit.

He never allowed himself to submit to any government that does not obey
the laws of God. In fact it is a practical manifestation of ‘Islam’
(submission to the will of God). Submitting to every call of disbelief
or polytheism is to alienate from the path of utter submission to
Almighty Allah.

In Imam al-Husayn (‘a)’s not surrendering to falsehood and remaining
very steadfast in his stance, he taught every future human being 'the
lesson of steadfastness' by not submitting to falsehood and oppression.
And this unwavering stance remained until the end of his ephemeral life.

3. Seeking Refuge in Allah
--------------------------

Imam al-Husayn ('a)'s move to Makka also alludes to something highly
important. His flight to the Divine sanctity of safety, perhaps
demonstrated that his only refuge is Allah in whose house there is
always safety:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهِ آيَات بَيِّنَاتٌ مَّقَامُ إِبْرَهِيمَ وَ مَن دَخَلَهُ كانَ
ءَامِناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In it are clear signs and whosoever enters therein is safe (3:97)***

Seeking refuge in the Divine sanctity, however, should transport us to a
loftier meaning: one who really seeks refuge in Allah is safe from all
kinds of polytheism and oppression. It is not necessary for us to limit
our understanding to the physical and tangible import of the verse.

The 'amn' and safety referred to in the verse, however, is a legislative
direction (tashri') which creates responsibilities on the Muslim nation.

In other words, Almighty Allah commands us to observe security in His
house. No one is allowed to shed blood there; no animal is to be
injured, etc. But if some like Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Thaqafi, out of their
disbelief, were to transgress the limits, they can endanger the lives of
the like of the selfishly motivated 'Abdullah bin Zubayr who despite
having sought asylum in the holy precincts of the Ka'ba was killed
therein.

However, 'amn' (safety) can also refer to seeking the shelter of 'one's
spirit' in Almighty Allah. This meaning can also be understood by
looking at some recommended supplications to be recited near the Ka'ba:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنَّكَ قُلْتَ وَ مَنْ دَخَلَهُ كانَ آمِناً فَآمِنِّي مِنْ
عَذَابِ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah, surely You said: “ and whosoever enters therein he/she would
be safe"; therefore, save me from the punishment of Hell Fire."**[^2]

Therefore, one who seeks the protection of his spirit from Almighty
Allah would undoubtedly be safe from every calamity that would ruin his
spiritual life. If his physical life were to be sold for an exalted aim,
he would never lose. Instead he would attain a lofty station and eternal
salvation.

If the leaders who govern Muslim nations of the world today were to
understand and apply this lofty concept they would never assist
terrorist regimes like Israel and the US, whose evil nature is more
apparent than ever today.

Makka is a place where such thoughts must soak our hearts and minds, for
indeed Muslims should undergo a new revolution. Every concerned Muslim
should try to understand and heed to the call of Imam al-Husayn ('a)
which still echoes in the hearts and minds of the truth-seeking human
beings:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقد علمتم أن رسول الله (صلَّى الله عليه و آله) قد قال في حياته من رأى
سلطاناً جائراً مستحلاً لحرم الله ناكثاً لعهد الله مخالفاً لسنة رسول
الله يعمل في عباد الله بالاثم و العدوان ثم لم يغير بقول ولا فعل كان
حقيقاً على الله أن يدخله مدخله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed you know that the Messenger of Allah (S) said during his
lifetime:

"Whoever observes a sovereign legalizing what God has made unlawful,
violating the covenant of God, opposing the Sunnah of the Messenger of
God, and treating the creatures of God sinfully and oppressively, and
does not oppose him with his speech and action, God has a right to bring
him to the same fate as that of the tyrant…"[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألا ترون أن الحق لا يعمل به و أن الباطل لا ينتهى عنه
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Don't you see that what is true and right is not acted upon and what
is false and wrong is not forbidden?..."** [^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هل من ذاب يذب عن حرم رسول الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Is there any protector do defend the sanctuary (haram) of the
Messenger of Allah?**[^5]

[^1]: 'Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 44, p. 328

[^2]: Thiqatu'l Islam al-Kulayna, Al-Kafi, v.4, p. 528

[^3]: 'Allama Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, v. 44, p. 381

[^4]: Ibid, v.75, p. 116

[^5]: Ibid, v.45, p. 45


