An Everlasting Instruction
==========================

In coming to Makka for Hajj we should not think that after performing
the overt rites of Hajj we are absolved from our duties. Hajj is more
than merely an individual worship. It is an act of devotion, whose
multidimensional nature increases the responsibilities of the human
being.

If Muslims were to realize this and practically respond to the problems
that they encounter today, they would surely rule the world and create
an environment that would cater for eternal human felicity.

Hajj is beyond doubt an opportunity which can solve so many problems of
the contemporary Muslims. To be oblivious of this opportunity would
indeed be questionable on the Judgment day.

In the manner that Imam al-Husayn ('a) came to Makka to guide the people
of the world, we too have a similar responsibility, even though it may
be limited. Muslims of the world need to be awakened from their deep
slumber and realize the great danger that they presently confront.

Living in places where there is freedom of worship and safety and being
oblivious of what is happening to other Muslim brethren throughout the
world, expels one from the Muslim nation. The Holy Prophet (S) is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَصْبَحَ لاَ يَهْتَمُّ بِأُمُورِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ فَلَيْسَ
بِمُسْلِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever wakes up in the morning and is indifferent of the affairs of
Muslims is not a Muslim.[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَصْبَحَ لاَ يَهْتَمُّ بِأُمُورِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ فَلَيْسَ منهم و
من سمع رجلا ينادي يا للمسلمين فلم يجبه فليس بمسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever wakes up in the morning and is indifferent of the affairs of
Muslims is not among them, and whosoever hears a man call, 'O Muslims
[come to my rescue!], but does not respond to him is not a Muslim.'[^2]

As Imam al-Husayn ('a) sought refuge in the Haram, we likewise should do
the same. But seeking refuge for us in the beginning would be to cleanse
our tarnished soul with the water of repentance and seeking forgiveness
from God, and resolve not to engage in any sin, so that we can
practically say that we have sought refuge in Allah (swt).

Refuge in our case takes a different form. It depends on our
circumstance.

And in the same way that Imam Husayn ('a) never submitted to the forces
of kufr, we likewise should inculcate this spirit in ourselves and
others, and firmly resolve that till the last moments of our lives we
would totally surrender to Almighty Allah.

The emphasis of bara'a (expression of hatred against the polytheists and
oppressors) which is so explicit in the Qur'an is very essential today
and must never be underestimated. Pathetically, however, it seems that
polytheists still dominate the hearts of so-called Muslim leaders.

The entire Masjid al- Haram should be filled with the cries of protest
of the lovers of God, and overhaul them to resolve to vanquish the
advocates of oppression and falsehood in the manner that Islam dictates.
So long as the concept of severing relationships with the oppressors is
not practically realized, the chaos in the Muslim world will always
increase.

The solution of hampering the forces of kufr from harassing the Muslims
directly or indirectly worldwide is to take major steps like depriving
the oppressor regimes from black gold which is so vital to keep their
technology and perpetual oppression alive. It would literally cripple
them, and it should not be a wonder if Israel [which never was] is
effaced from the map.

If Hajj does not contain the Husayni spirit, but is limited to its
physical and overt acts of devotion, Muslims would never prosper.

The presence of Imam al-Husayn ('a), as has been the case, will always
be felt. But so long as we do not make his foundational move, we would
never prosper. The Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَجِيبُوا لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ إِذَا
دَعَاكمْ لِمَا يُحْيِيكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O believers, respond to Allah and His Apostle, when He calls you to
that which will enliven you. (8:24)***

Isn't it time to respond to Allah (swt)'s call?

Peace be upon you- O utterly obedient servant of Allah, O Doyen of
Martyrs, O Husayn, and on those who sacrificed their lives for your
sake. I humbly pray to Allah to enable us to be with you both in this
world and the Hereafter.

May He unite us with your spirit in this world so that we are blessed
and honored to continue your mission, and may He resurrect us in the
Hereafter in your noble company..

All praises belong to Allah, the Lord of the Universe

[^1]: Thiqatu'l Islam al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, v.2, p. 163

[^2]: Ibid.,, v.2, p. 164


