Foreword
========

In his objective study of the texts, Maurice Bucaille clears away many
preconceived ideas about the Old Testament, the Gospels and the Qur'an.
He tries, in this collection of Writings, to separate what belongs to
Revelation from what is the product of error or human interpretation.
His study sheds new light on the Holy Scriptures.

At the end of a gripping account, he places the Believer before a point
of cardinal importance: the continuity of a Revelation emanating from
the same God, with modes of expression that differ in the course of
time. It leads us to meditate upon those factors which, in our day,
should spiritually unite rather than divide- Jews, Christians and
Muslims.

As a surgeon, Maurice Bucaille has often been in a situation where he
was able to examine not only people's bodies, but their souls. This is
how he was struck by the existence of Muslim piety and by aspects of
Islam which remain unknown to the vast majority of non-Muslims. In his
search for explanations which are otherwise difficult to obtain, he
learnt Arabic and studied the Qur'an. In it, he was surprised to find
statements on natural phenomena whose meaning can only be understood
through modern scientific knowledge.

He then turned to the question of the authenticity of the writings that
constitute the Holy Scriptures of the monotheistic religions. Finally,
in the case of the Bible, he proceeded to a confrontation between these
writings and scientific data.

The results of his research into the Judeo-Christian Revelation and the
Qur'an are set out in this book.


**Introduction**

Each of the three monotheistic religions possess its own collection of
Scriptures. For the faithful-be they Jews, Christians or Muslims-these
documents constitute the foundation of their belief. For them they are
the material transcription of a divine Revelation; directly, as in the
case of Abraham and Moses, who received the commandments from God
Himself, or indirectly, as in the case of Jesus and Muhammad, the first
of whom stated that he was speaking in the name of the Father, and the
second of whom transmitted to men the Revelation imparted to him by
Archangel Gabriel.

If we take into consideration the objective facts of religious history,
we must place the Old Testament, the Gospels and the Qur'an on the same
level as being collections of written Revelation. Although this attitude
is in principle held by Muslims, the faithful in the West under the
predominantly Judeo-Christian influence refuse to ascribe to the Qur'an
the character of a book of Revelation.

Such an attitude may be explained by the position each religious
community adopts towards the other two with regard to the Scriptures.

Judaism has as its holy book the Hebraic Bible. This differs from the
Old Testament of the Christians in that the latter have included several
books which did not exist in Hebrew. In practice, this divergence hardly
makes any difference to the doctrine. Judaism does not however admit any
revelation subsequent to its own.

Christianity has taken the Hebraic Bible for itself and added a few
supplements to it. It has not however accepted all the published
writings destined to make known to men the Mission of Jesus. The Church
has made incisive cuts in the profusion of books relating the life and
teachings of Jesus. It has only preserved a limited number of writings
in the New Testament, the most important of which are the four Canonic
Gospels. Christianity takes no account of any revelation subsequent to
Jesus and his Apostles. It therefore rules out the Qur'an.

The Qur'anic Revelation appeared six centuries after Jesus. It resumes
numerous data found in the Hebraic Bible and the Gospels since it quotes
very frequently from the 'Torah'[^1] and the 'Gospels.' The Qur'an
directs all Muslims to believe in the Scriptures that precede it (sura
4, verse 136).

It stresses the important position occupied in the Revelation by God's
emissaries, such as Noah, Abraham, Moses, the Prophets and Jesus, to
whom they allocate a special position. His birth is described in the
Qur'an, and likewise in the Gospels, as a supernatural event. Mary is
also given a special place, as indicated by the fact that sura 19 bears
her name.

The above facts concerning Islam are not generally known in the West.
This is hardly surprising, when we consider the way so many generations
in the West were instructed in the religious problems facing humanity
and the ignorance in which they were kept about anything related to
Islam. The use of such terms as 'Mohammedan religion' and 'Mohammedans'
has been instrumental-even to the present day-in maintaining the false
notion that beliefs were involved that were spread by the work of man
among which God (in the Christian sense) had no place.

Many cultivated people today are interested in the philosophical,
social and political aspects of Islam, but they do not pause to inquire
about the Islamic Revelation itself, as indeed they should.

In what contempt the Muslims are held by certain Christian circles! I
experienced this when I tried to start an exchange of ideas arising from
a comparative analysis of Biblical and Qur'anic stories on the same
theme. I noted a systematic refusal, even for the purposes of simple
reflection, to take any account of what the Qur'an had to say on the
subject in hand. It is as if a quote from the Qur'an were a reference to
the Devil!

A noticeable change seems however to be under way these days at the
highest levels of the Christian world. The Office for Non-Christian
Affairs at the Vatican has produced a document result. from the Second
Vatican Council under the French title Orientations pour un dialogue
entre Chr√©tiens et Musulmans[^2]

(Orientations for a Dialogue between Christians and Muslims), third
French edition dated 1970, which bears witness to the profound change in
official attitude. Once the document has invited the reader to clear
away the "out-dated image, inherited from the past, or distorted by
prejudice and slander" that Christians have of Islam, the Vatican
document proceeds to "recognize the past injustice towards the Muslims
for which the West, with its Christian education, is to blame".

It also criticizes the misconceptions Christians have been under
concerning Muslim fatalism, Islamic legalism, fanaticism, etc. It
stresses belief in unity of God and reminds us how surprised the
audience was at the Muslim University of Al Azhar, Cairo, when Cardinal
Koenig proclaimed this unity at the Great Mosque during an official
conference in March, 1969. It reminds us also that the Vatican Office in
1967 invited Christians to offer their best wishes to Muslims at the end
of the Fast of Ramadan with "genuine religious worth".

Such preliminary steps towards a closer relationship between the Roman
Catholic Curia and Islam have been followed by various manifestations
and consolidated by encounters between the two. There has been, however,
little publicity accorded to events of such great importance in the
western world, where they took place and where there are ample means of
communication in the form of press, radio and television.

The newspapers gave little coverage to the official visit of Cardinal
Pignedoli, the President of the Vatican Office of Non-Christian Affairs,
on 24th April, 1974, to King Faisal of Saudi Arabia. The French
newspaper Le Monde on 25th April, 1974, dealt with it in a few lines.
What momentous news they contain, however, when we read how the Cardinal
conveyed to the Sovereign a message from Pope Paul VI expressing "the
regards of His Holiness, moved by a profound belief in the unification
of Islamic and Christian worlds in the worship of a single God, to His
Majesty King Faisal as supreme head of the Islamic world".

Six months later, in October 1974, the Pope received the official visit
to the Vatican of the Grand Ulema of Saudi Arabia. It occasioned a
dialogue between Christians and Muslims on the "Cultural Rights of Man
in Islam". The Vatican newspaper, Observatore Romano, on 26th October,
1974, reported this historic event in a front page story that took up
more space than the report on the closing day of the meeting held by the
Synod of Bishops in Rome.

The Grand Ulema of Saudi Arabia were afterwards received by the
Ecumenical Council of Churches of Geneva and by the Lord Bishop of
Strasbourg, His Grace Elchinger. The Bishop invited them to join in
midday prayer before him in his cathedral. The fact that the event Was
reported seems to be more on account of its unusual nature than because
of its considerable religious significance. At all events, among those
whom I questioned about this religious manifestation, there were very
few who replied that they were aware of it.

The open-minded attitude Pope Paul VI has towards Islam will certainly
become a milestone in the relations between the two religions. He
himself Mid that he was "moved by a profound belief in the unification
of the Islamic and Christian worlds in the worship of a single God".
This reminder of the sentiments of the head of the Catholic Church
concerning Muslims is indeed necessary.

Far too many Christians, brought up in a spirit of open hostility, are
against any reflection about Islam on principle. The Vatican document
notes this with regret. It is on account of this that they remain
totally ignorant of what Islam is in reality, and retain notions about
the Islamic Revelation which are entirely mistaken.

Nevertheless, when studying an aspect of the Revelation of a
monotheistic religion, it seems quite in order to compare what the other
two have to say on the same subject. A comprehensive study of a problem
is more interesting than a compartmentalized one. The confrontation
between certain subjects dealt with in the Scriptures and the facts of
20th century science will therefore, in this work, include all three
religions.

In addition it will be useful to realize that the three religions
should form a tighter block by virtue of their closer relationship at a
time when they are all threatened by the onslaught of materialism. The
notion that science and religion are incompatible is as equally
prevalent in countries under the Judeo-Christian influence as in the
world of Islam-especially in scientific circles.

If this question were to be dealt with comprehensively, a series of
lengthy exposes would be necessary. In this work, I intend to tackle
only one aspect of it: the examination of the Scriptures themselves in
the light of modern scientific knowledge.

Before proceeding with our task, we must ask a fundamental question:
How authentic are today's texts? It is a question which entails an
examination of the circumstances surrounding their composition and the
way in which they have come down to us.

In the West the critical study of the Scriptures is something quite
recent. For hundreds of years people were content to accept the
Bible-both Old and New Testaments-as it was. A reading produced nothing
more than remarks vindicating it. It would have been a sin to level the
slightest criticism at it. The clergy were priviledged in that they were
easily able to have a comprehensive knowledge of the Bible, while the
majority of laymen heard only selected readings as part of a sermon or
the liturgy.

Raised to the level of a specialized study, textual criticism has been
valuable in uncovering and disseminating problems which are often very
serious. How disappointing it is therefore to read works of a so-called
critical nature which, when faced with very real problems of
interpretation, merely provide passages of an apologetical nature by
means of which the author contrives to hide his dilemma.

Whoever retains his objective judgment and power of thought at such a
moment will not find the improbabilities and contradictions any the less
persistent. One can only regret an attitude which, in the face of all
logical reason, upholds certain passages in the Biblical Scriptures even
though they are riddled with errors. It can exercise an extremely
damaging influence upon the cultivated mind with regard to belief in
God.

Experience shows however that even if the few are able to distinguish
fallacies of this kind, the vast majority of Christians have never taken
any account of such incompatibilities with their secular knowledge, even
though they are often very elementary.

Islam has something relatively comparable to the Gospels in some of the
Hadiths. These are the collected sayings of Muhammad and stories of his
deeds. The Gospels are nothing other than this for Jesus. Some of the
collections of Hadiths were written decades after the death of Muhammad,
just as the Gospels were written decades after Jesus.

In both cases they bear human witness to events in the past. We shall
see how, contrary to what many people think, the authors of the four
Canonic Gospels were not the witnesses of the events they relate. The
same is true of the Hadiths referred to at the end of this book.

Here the comparison must end because even if the authenticity of
such-and-such a Hadith has been discussed and is still under discussion,
in the early centuries of the Church the problem of the vast number of
Gospels was definitively decided. Only four of them were proclaimed
official, or canonic, in spite of the many points on which they do not
agree, and order was given for the rest to be concealed; hence the term
'Apocrypha'.

Another fundamental difference in the Scriptures of Christianity and
Islam is the fact that Christianity does not have a text which is both
revealed and written down. Islam, however, has the Qur'an which fits
this description.

The Qur'an is the expression of the Revelation made to Muhammad by the
Archangel Gabriel, which was immediately taken down, and was memorized
and recited by the faithful in their prayers, especially during the
month of Ramadan. Muhammad himself arranged it into suras, and these
were collected soon after the death of the Prophet, to form, under the
rule of Caliph Uthman (12 to 24 years after the Prophet's death), the
text we know today.

In contrast to this, the Christian Revelation is based on numerous
indirect human accounts. We do not in fact have an eyewitness account
from the life of Jesus, contrary to what many Christians imagine. The
question of the authenticity of the Christian and Islamic texts has thus
now been formulated.

The confrontation between the texts of the Scriptures and scientific
data has always provided man with food for thought.

It was at first held that corroboration between the scriptures and
science was a necessary element to the authenticity of the sacred text.
Saint Augustine, in letter No. 82, which we shall quote later on,
formally established this principle. As science progressed however it
became clear that there were discrepancies between Biblical Scripture
and science. It was therefore decided that comparison would no longer be
made.

Thus a situation arose which today, we are forced to admit, puts
Biblical exegetes and scientists in opposition to one another. We
cannot, after all, accept a divine Revelation making statements which
are totally inaccurate. There was only one way of logically reconciling
the two; it lay in not considering a passage containing unacceptable
scientific data to be genuine.

This solution was not adopted. Instead, the integrity of the text was
stubbornly maintained and experts were obliged to adopt a position on
the truth of the Biblical Scriptures which, for the scientist, is hardly
tenable.

Like Saint Augustine for the Bible, Islam has always assumed that the
data contained in the Holy Scriptures were in agreement with scientific
fact. A modern examination of the Islamic Revelation has not caused a
change in this position. As we shall see later on, the Qur'an deals with
many subjects of interest to science, far more in fact than the Bible.

There is no comparison between the limited number of Biblical
statements which lead to a confrontation With science, and the profusion
of subjects mentioned in the Qur'an that are of a scientific nature.
None of the latter can be contested from a scientific point of view.
this is the basic fact that emerges from our study. We shall see at the
end of this work that such is not the case for the Hadiths.

These are collections of the Prophet's sayings, set aside from the
Qur'anic Revelation, certain of which are scientifically unacceptable.
The Hadiths in question have been under study in accordance with the
strict principles of the Qur'an which dictate that science and reason
should always be referred to, if necessary to deprive them of any
authenticity.

These reflections on the scientifically acceptable or unacceptable
nature of a certain Scripture need some explanation. It must be stressed
that when scientific data are discussed here, what is meant is data
definitely established.

This consideration rules out any explanatory theories, once useful in
illuminating a phenomenon and easily dispensed with to make way for
further explanations more in keeping with scientific progress. What I
intend to consider here are incontrovertible facts and even if science
can only provide incomplete data, they will nevertheless be sufficiently
well established to be used Without fear of error.

Scientists do not, for example, have even an approximate date for man's
appearance on Earth. They have however discovered remains of human works
which we can situate beyond a shadow of a doubt at before the tenth
millenium B.C. Hence we cannot consider the Biblical reality on this
subject to be compatible with science.

In the Biblical text of Genesis, the dates and genealogies given would
place man's origins (i.e. the creation of Adam) at roughly thirty-seven
centuries B.C. In the future, science may be able to provide us with
data that are more precise than our present calculations, but we may
rest assured that it will never tell us that man first appeared on Earth
6,786 years ago, as does the Hebraic calendar for 1976. The Biblical
data concerning the antiquity of man are therefore inaccurate.

This confrontation with science excludes all religious problems in the
true sense of the word. Science does not, for example, have any
explanation of the process whereby God manifested Himself to Moses. The
same may be said for the mystery surrounding the manner in which Jesus
was born in the absence of a biological father.

The Scriptures moreover give no material explanation of such data. This
present study is concerned With what the Scriptures tell us about
extremely varied natural phenomena, which they surround to a lesser or
greater extent with commentaries and explanations. With this in mind, we
must note the contrast between the rich abundance of information on a
given subject in the Qur'anic Revelation and the modesty of the other
two revelations on the same subject.

It was in a totally objective spirit, and without any preconceived
ideas that I first examined the Qur'anic Revelation. I was looking for
the degree of compatibility between the Qur'anic text and the data of
modern science. I knew from translations that the Qur'an often made
allusion to all sorts of natural phenomena, but I had only a summary
knowledge of it. It was only when I examined the text very closely in
Arabic that I kept a list of them at the end of which I had to
acknowledge the evidence in front of me: the Qur'an did not contain a
single statement that was assailable from a modern scientific point of
view.

I repeated the same test for the Old Testament and the Gospels, always
preserving the same objective outlook. In the former I did not even have
to go beyond the first book, Genesis, to find statements totally out of
keeping With the cast-iron facts of modern science.

On opening the Gospels, one is immediately confronted with a serious
problem. On the first page we find the genealogy of Jesus, but Matthew's
text is in evident contradiction to Luke's on the same question. There
is a further problem in that the latter's data on the antiquity of man
on Earth are incompatible with modern knowledge.

The existence of these contradictions, improbabilities and
incompatibilities does not seem to me to detract from the belief in God.
They involve only man's responsibility. No one can say what the original
texts might have been, or identify imaginative editing, deliberate
manipulations of them by men, or unintentional modification of the
Scriptures. What strikes us today.

when we realize Biblical contradictions and incompatibilities with
well-established scientific data, is how specialists studying the texts
either pretend to be unaware of them, or else draw attention to these
defects then try to camouflage them with dialectic acrobatics. When we
come to the Gospels according to Matthew and John, I shall provide
examples of this brilliant use of apologetical turns of phrase by
eminent experts in exegesis. Often the attempt to camouflage an
improbability or a contradiction, prudishly called a 'difficulty', is
successful.

This explains why so many Christians are unaware of the serious defects
contained in the Old Testament and the Gospels. The reader will find
precise examples of these in the first and second parts of this work.

In the third part, there is the illustration of an unusual application
of science to a holy Scripture, the contribution of modern secular
knowledge to a better understanding of certain verses in the Qur'an
which until now have remained enigmatic, if not incomprehensible. Why
should we be surprised at this when we know that, for Islam, religion
and science have always been considered twin sisters?

From the very beginning, Islam directed people to cultivate science;
the application of this precept brought with it the prodigious strides
in science taken during the great era of Islamic civilization, from
which, before the Renaissance, the West itself benefited. In the
confrontation between the Scriptures and science a high point of
understanding has been reached owing to the light thrown on Qur'anic
passages by modern scientific knowledge.

Previously these passages were obscure owning to the non-availability
of knowledge which could help interpret them.


