The Old Testament
=================

**General Outlines**

**Who is the author of the Old Testament?**

One wonders how many readers of the Old Testament, if asked the above
question, would reply by repeating what they had read in the
introduction to their Bible. They might answer that, even though it was
written by men inspired by the Holy Ghost, the author was God.

Sometimes, the author of the Bible's presentation confines himself to
informing his reader of this succinct observation which puts an end to
all further questions. Sometimes he corrects it by warning him that
details may subsequently have been added to the primitive text by men,
but that nonetheless, the litigious character of a passage does not
alter the general "truth' that proceeds from it.

This "truth' is stressed very heavily. The Church Authorities answer
for it, being the only body, With the assistance of the Holy Ghost, able
to enlighten the faithful on such points. Since the Councils held in the
Fourth century, it was the Church that issued the list of Holy Books,
ratified by the Councils of Florence (1441), Trent (1546), and the First
Vatican Council (1870), to form what today is known as the Canon.

Just recently, after so many encyclicals, the Second Vatican Council
published a text concerning the Revelation which is extremely important.
It took three years (1962- 1966) of strenuous effort to produce. The
vast majority of the Bible's readers who find this highly reassuring
information at the head of a modern edition have been quite satisfied
with the guarantees of authenticity made over past centuries and have
hardly thought it possible to debate them.

When one refers however to works written by clergymen, not meant for
mass publication, one realizes that the question concerning the
authenticity of the books in the Bible is much more complex than one
might suppose a priori. For example, when one consults the modern
publication in separate installments of the Bible in French translated
under the guidance of the Biblical School of Jerusalem[^3], the tone
appears to be very different.

One realizes that the Old Testament, like the New Testament, raises
problems with controversial elements that, for the most part, the
authors of commentaries have not concealed.

We also find highly precise data in more condensed studies of a very
objective nature, such as Professor Edmond Jacob's study. The Old
Testament (L'Ancien Testament)[^4]. This book gives an excellent general
view.

Many people are unaware, and Edmond Jacob points this out, that there
were originally a number of texts and not just one. Around the Third
century B.C., there were at least three forms of the Hebrew text: the
text which was to become the Masoretic text, the text which was used, in
part at least, for the Greek translation, and the Samaritan Pentateuch.
In the First century B.C., there was a tendency towards the
establishment of a single text, but it was not until a century after
Christ that the Biblical text was definitely established.

If we had had the three forms of the text, comparison would have been
possible, and we could have reached an opinion concerning what the
original might have been. Unfortunately, we do not have the slightest
idea. Apart from the Dead Sea Scrolls (Cave of Qumran) dating from a
pre-Christian era near the time of Jesus, a papyrus of the Ten
Commandments of the Second century A.D. presenting variations from the
classical text, and a few fragments from the Fifth century A.D. (Geniza
of Cairo), the oldest Hebrew text of the Bible dates from the Ninth
century A.D.

The Septuagint was probably the first translation in Greek. It dates
from the Third century B.C. and was written by Jews in Alexandria. It
Was on this text that the New Testament was based. It remained
authoritative until the Seventh century A.D. The basic Greek texts in
general use in the Christian world are from the manuscripts catalogued
under the title Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican City and Codex Sinaiticus
at the British Museum, London. They date from the Fourth century A.D.

At the beginning of the Fifth century A.D., Saint Jerome was able to
produce a text in latin using Hebrew documents. It was later to be
called the Vulgate on account of its universal distribution after the
Seventh century A.D.

For the record, we shall mention the Aramaic version and the Syriac
(Peshitta) version, but these are incomplete.

All of these versions have enabled specialists to piece together
so-called 'middle-of -the-road' texts, a sort of compromise between the
different versions. Multi-lingual collections have also been produced
which juxtapose the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Syriac, Aramaic and even
Arabic versions. This is the case of the famous Walton Bible (London,
1667).

For the sake of completeness, let us mention that diverging Biblical
conceptions are responsible for the fact that the various Christian
churches do not all accept exactly the same books and have not until now
had identical ideas on translation into the same language. The
Ecumenical Translation of the Old Testament is a work of unification
written by numerous Catholic and Protestant experts now nearing
completion[^5] and should result in a work of synthesis.

Thus the human element in the Old Testament is seen to be quite
considerable. It is not difficult to understand why from version to
version, and translation to translation, with all the corrections
inevitably resulting, it was possible for the original text to have been
transformed during the course of more than two thousand years.


**ORIGINS OF THE BIBLE**

Before it became a collection of books, it was a folk tradition that
relied entirely upon human memory, originally the only means of passing
on ideas. This tradition was sung.

"At an elementary stage, writes E. Jacob, every people sings; in
Israel, as elsewhere, poetry preceded prose. Israel sang long and well;
led by circumstances of his history to the heights of joy and the depths
of despair, taking part with intense feeling in all that happened to it,
for everything in their eyes had a sense, Israel gave its song a wide
variety of expression". They sang for the most diverse reasons and E.
Jacob mentions a number of them to which we find the accompanying songs
in the Bible:

eating songs, harvest songs, songs connected with work, like the famous
Well Song (Numbers 21, 17), wedding songs, as in the Song of Songs, and
mourning songs. In the Bible there are numerous songs of war and among
these we find the Song of Deborah (Judges 5, 1-32) exalting Israel's
victory desired and led by Yahweh Himself, (Numbers 10, 35); "And
whenever the ark (of alliance) set out, Moses said, 'Arise, oh Yahweh,
and let thy enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee nee before
thee".

There are also the Maxims and Proverbs (Book of Proverbs, Proverbs and
Maxims of the Historic Books), words of blessing and curse, and the laws
decreed to man by the Prophets on reception of their Divine mandate.

E. Jacobs notes that these words were either passed down from family to
family or channelled through the sanctuaries in the form of an account
of the history of God's chosen people. History quickly turned into
fable, as in the Fable of Jotham (Judges 9, 7-21), where "the trees went
forth to anoint a king over them; and they asked in turn the olive tree,
the fig tree, the vine and the bramble", which allows E. Jacob to note
"animated by the need to tell a good story, the narration was not
perturbed by subjects or times whose history was not well known", from
which he concludes:

"It is probable that what the Old Testament narrates about Moses and
the patriarchs only roughly corresponds to the succession of historic
facts. The narrators however, even at the stage of oral transmission,
were able to bring into play such grace and imagination to blend between
them highly varied episodes, that when all is said and done, they were
able to present as a history that was fairly credible to critical
thinkers what happened at the beginning of humanity and the world".

There is good reason to believe that after the Jewish people settled in
Canaan, at the end of the Thirteenth century B.C., writing was used to
preserve and hand down the tradition. There was not however complete
accuracy, even in what to men seems to demand the greatest durability,
i.e. the laws. Among these, the laws which are supposed to have been
written by God's own hand, the Ten Commandments, were transmitted in the
Old Testament in two versions; Exodus (20,1-21) and Deuteronomy (5,
1-30).

They are the same in spirit, but the variations are obvious. There is
also a concern to keep a large written record of contracts, letters,
lists of personalities (Judges, high city officials, genealogical
tables), lists of offerings and plunder. In this way, archives were
created which provided documentation for the later editing of definitive
works resulting in the books we have today. Thus in each book there is a
mixture of different literary genres: it can be left to the specialists
to find the reasons for this odd assortment of documents.

The Old Testament is a disparate whole based upon an initially oral
tradition. It is interesting therefore to compare the process by which
it was constituted with what could happen in another period and another
place at the time when a primitive literature was born.

Let us take, for example, the birth of French literature at the time of
the Frankish Royalty. The same oral tradition presided over the
preservation of important deeds: wars, often in the defense of
Christianity, various sensational events, where heroes distinguished
themselves, that were destined centuries later to inspire court poets,
chroniclers and authors of various 'cycles'.

In this way, from the Eleventh century A.D. onwards, these narrative
poems, in which reality is mixed with legend, were to appear and
constitute the first monument in epic poetry. The most famous of all is
the Song of Roland (La Chanson de Roland) a biographical chant about a
feat of arms in which Roland was the commander of Emperor Charlemagne's
rearguard on its way home from an expedition in Spain. The sacrifice of
Roland is not just an episode invented to meet the needs of the story.
It took place on 15th August, 778. In actual fact it was an attack by
Basques living in the mountains. This literary work is not just legend ;
it has a historical basis, but no historian would take it literally.

This parallel between the birth of the Bible and a secular literature
seems to correspond exactly with reality. It is in no way meant to
relegate the whole Biblical text as we know it today to the store of
mythological collections, as do so many of those who systematically
negate the idea of God. It is perfectly possible to believe in the
reality of the Creation, God's transmission to Moses of the Ten
Commandments, Divine intercession in human affairs, e.g. at the time of
Solomon. This does not stop us, at the same time, from considering that
what has been conveyed to us is the gist of these facts, and that the
detail in the description should be subjected to rigorous criticism, the
reason for this being that the element of human participation in the
transcription of originally oral traditions is so great.


**The Books of the Old Testament**

The Old Testament is a collection of works of greatly differing length
and many different genres. They were written in several languages over a
period of more than nine hundred years, based on oral traditions. Many
of these works were corrected and completed in accordance with events or
special requirements, often at periods that were very distant from one
another.

This copious literature probably flowered at the beginning of the
Israelite Monarchy, around the Eleventh century B.C. It was at this
period that a body of scribes appeared among the members of the royal
household. They were cultivated men whose role was not limited to
writing. The first incomplete writings, mentioned in the preceding
chapter, may date from this period.

There was a special reason for writing these works down; there were a
certain number of songs (mentioned earlier), the prophetic oracles of
Jacob and Moses, the Ten Commandments and, on a more general level, the
legislative texts which established a religious tradition before the
formation of the law. All these texts constitute fragments scattered
here and there throughout the various collections of the Old
Testament.

It was not until a little later, possibly during the Tenth century
B.C., that the so-called 'Yahvist'[^6] text of the Pentateuch was
written. This text was to form the backbone of the first five books
ascribed to Moses. Later, the so-called 'Elohist'[^7] text was to be
added, and also the so-called 'Sacerdotal'[^8] version. The initial
Yahvist text deals with the origins of the world up to the death of
Jacob. This text comes from the southern kingdom, Judah.

At the end of the Ninth century and in the middle of the Eighth century
B.C., the prophetic influence of Elias and Elisha took shape and spread.
We have their books today. This is also the time of the Elohist text of
the Pentateuch which covers a much smaller period than the Yahvist text
because it limits itself to facts relating to Abraham, Jacob and Joseph.
The books of Joshua and Judges date from this time.

The Eighth century B.C. saw the appearance of the writer prophets: Amos
and Hosea in Israel, and Michah in Judah.

In 721 B.C., the fall of Samaria put an end to the Kingdom of Israel.
The Kingdom of Judah took over its religious heritage. The collection of
Proverbs dates from this period, distinguished in particular by the
fusion into a single book of the Yahvist and Elohist texts of the
Pentateuch; in this way the Torah was constituted. Deuteronomy was
written at this time.

In the second half of the Seventh century B.C., the reign of Josiah
coincided with the appearance of the prophet Jeremiah, but his work did
not take definitive shape until a century later.

Before the first deportation to Babylon in 598 B.C., there appeared the
Books of Zephaniah, Nahum and Habakkuk. Ezekiel was already prophesying
during this first deportation. The fall of Jerusalem in 587 B.C. marked
the beginning of the second deportation which lasted until 538 B.C.

The Book of Ezekiel, the last great prophet and the prophet of exile,
was not arranged into its present form until after his death by the
scribes that were to become his spiritual inheritors. These same scribes
were to resume Genesis in a third version, the so-called 'Sacerdotal'
version, for the section going from the Creation to the death of Jacob.
In this way a third text was to be inserted into the central fabric of
the Yahvist and Elohist texts of the Torah. We shall see later on, in
the books written roughly two and four centuries earlier, an aspect of
the intricacies of this third text. It was at this time that the
Lamentations appeared.

On the order of Cyrus, the deportation to Babylon came to an end in 538
B.C. The Jews returned to Palestine and the Temple at Jerusalem was
rebuilt. The prophets' activities began again, resulting in the books of
Haggai, Zechariah, the third book of Isaiah, Malachi, Daniel and Baruch
(the last being in Greek). The period following the deportation is also
the period of the Books of Wisdom: Proverbs was written definitively
around 480 B.C., Job in the middle of the Fifth century B.C.,
Ecclesiastes or Koheleth dates from the Third century B.C., as do the
Song of Songs, Chronicles I & II, Ezra and Nehemiah; Ecclesiasticus or
Sirah appeared in the Second century B.C.; the Book of Wisdom and the
Book of Maccabees I & II were written one century before Christ.

The Books of Ruth, Esther and Jonah are not easily datable. The same is
true for Tobit and Judith. All these dates are given on the
understanding that there may have been subsequent adaptations, since it
was only circa one century before Christ that form was first given to
the writings of the Old Testament. For many this did not become
definitive until one century after Christ.

Thus the Old Testament appears as a literary monument to the Jewish
people, from its origins to the coming of Christianity. The books it
consists of were written, completed and revised between the Tenth and
the First centuries B.C. This is in no way a personal point of view on
the history of its composition. The essential data for this historical
survey were taken from the entry The Bible in the Encyclopedia
Universalis[^9] by J. P. Sandroz, a professor at the Dominican Faculties,
Saulchoir. To understand what the Old Testament represents, it is
important to retain this information, correctly established today by
highly qualified specialists.

A Revelation is mingled in all these writings, but all we possess today
is what men have seen fit to leave us. These men manipulated the texts
to please themselves, according to the circumstances they were in and
the necessities they had to meet.

When these objective data are compared with those found in various
prefaces to Bibles destined today for mass publication, one realizes
that facts are presented in them in quite a different way. Fundamental
facts concerning the writing of the books are passed over in silence,
ambiguities which mislead the reader are maintained, facts are
minimalised to such an extent that a false idea of reality is
conveyed.

A large number of prefaces or introductions to the Bible misrepresent
reality in this way. In the case of books that were adapted several
times (like the Pentateuch), it is said that certain details may have
been added later on. A discussion of an unimportant passage of a book is
introduced, but crucial facts warranting lengthy expositions are passed
over in silence. It is distressing to see such inaccurate information on
the Bible maintained for mass publication.

**THE TORAH OR PENTATEUCH**

Torah is the Semitic name.

The Greek expression, which in English gives us 'Pentateuch',
designates a work in five parts; Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and
Deuteronomy. These were to form the five primary elements of the
collection of thirty-nine volumes that makes up the Old Testament.

This group of texts deals with the origins of the world up to the entry
of the Jewish people into Canaan, the land promised to them after their
exile in Egypt, more precisely until the death of Moses. The narration
of these facts serves however as a general framework for a description
of the provisions made for the religious and social life of the Jewish
people, hence the name Law or Torah.

Judaism and Christianity for many centuries considered that the author
was Moses himself. Perhaps this affirmation was based on the fact that
God said to Moses (Exodus 17, 14): "Write this (the defeat of Amalek) as
a memorial in a book", or again, talking of the Exodus from Egypt,
"Moses wrote down their starting places" (Numbers 33, 2), and finally
"And Moses wrote this law" (Deuteronomy 31, 9). From the First century
B.C. onwards, the theory that Moses wrote the Pentateuch was upheld;
Flavius Josephus and Philo of Alexandria maintain it.

Today, this theory has been completely abandoned; everybody is in
agreement on this point. The New Testament nevertheless ascribes the
authorship to Moses. Paul, in his Letter to the Romans (10, 5) quoting
from Leviticus, affirms that "Moses writes that the man who practices
righteousness which is based on the law . . ." etc. John, in his Gospel
(5,46-47), makes Jesus say the following: "If you believed Moses, you
would believe me, for he wrote of me. But if you do not believe his
writings, how will you believe my words?" We have here an example of
editing, because the Greek word that corresponds to the original
(written in Greek) is episteuete, so that the Evangelist is putting an
affirmation into Jesus's mouth that is totally wrong: the following
demonstrates this.

I am borrowing the elements of this demonstration from Father de Vaux,
Head of the Biblical School of Jerusalem. He prefaced his French
translation of Genesis in 1962 with a General Introduction to the
Pentateuch which contained valuable arguments. These ran contrary to the
affirmations of the Evangelists on the authorship of the work in
question. Father de Vaux reminds us that the "Jewish tradition which was
followed by Christ and his Apostles" was accepted up to the end of the
Middle Ages.

The only person to contest this theory was Abenezra in the Twelfth
century. It was in the Sixteenth century that Calstadt noted that Moses
could not have written the account of his own death in Deuteronomy (34,
5-12). The author then quotes other critics who refuse to ascribe to
Moses a part, at least, of the Pentateuch.

It was above all the work of Richard Simon, father of the Oratory,
Critical History of the Old Testament (Histoire critique du Vieux
Testament) 1678, that underlined the chronological difficulties, the
repetitions, the confusion of the stories and stylistic differences in
the Pentateuch. The book caused a scandal. R. Simon's line of argument
was barely followed in history books at the beginning of the Eighteenth
century. At this time, the references to antiquity very often proceeded
from what "Moses had written".

One can easily imagine how difficult it was to combat a legend
strengthened by Jesus himself who, as we have seen, supported it in the
New Testament. It is to Jean Astruc, Louis XV's doctor, that we owe the
decisive argument.

By publishing, in 1753, his Conjectures on the original writings which
it appears Moses used to compose the Book of Genesis (Conjectures sur
les Mèmoires originaux dont il parait que Moyse s'est servi pour
composer le livre de la Genèse), he placed the accent on the plurality
of sources. He was probably not the first to have noticed it,

but he did however have the courage to make public an observation of
prime importance: two texts, each denoted by the way in which God was
named either Yahweh or Elohim, were present side by side in Genesis. The
latter therefore contained two juxtaposed texts. Eichorn (1780-1783)
made the same discovery for the other four books; then Ilgen (1798)
noticed that one of the texts isolated by Astruc, the one where God is
named Elohim, was itself divided into two. The Pentateuch literally fell
apart.

The Nineteenth century saw an even more minute search into the sources.
In 1854, four sources were recognised. They were called the Yahvist
version, the Elohist version, Deuteronomy, and the Sacerdotal version.
It was even possible to date them:

1) The Yahvist version was placed in the Ninth century B.C. (written in
Judah)

2) The Elohist version was probably a little more recent (written in
Israel)

3) Deuteronomy was from the Eighth century B.C. for some (E. Jacob) ,
and from the time of Josiah for others (Father de Vaux)

4) The Sacerdotal version came from the period of exile or after the
exile: Sixth century B.C.

It can be seen that the arrangement of the text of the Pentateuch spans
at least three centuries.

The problem is, however, even more complex. In 1941, A. Lods singled
out three sources in the Yahvist version, four in the Elohist version,
six in Deuteronomy, nine in the Sacerdotal version, "not including the
additions spread out among eight different authors" writes Father de
Vaux. More recently, it has been thought that "many of the constitutions
or laws contained in the Pentateuch had parallels outside the Bible
going back much further than the dates ascribed to the documents
themselves" and that "many of the stories of the Pentateuch presupposed
a background that was different from-and older than-the one from which
these documents were supposed to have come". This leads on to "an
interest in the formation of traditions". The problem then appears so
complicated that nobody knows where he is anymore.

The multiplicity of sources brings with it numerous disagreements and
repetitions. Father de Vaux gives examples of this overlapping of
traditions in the case of the Flood, the kidnapping of Joseph, his
adventures in Egypt, disagreement of names relating to the same
character, differing descriptions of important events.

Thus the Pentateuch is shown to be formed from various traditions
brought together more or less skillfully by its authors. The latter
sometimes juxtaposed their compilations and sometimes adapted the
stories for the sake of synthesis. They allowed improbabilities and
disagreements to appear in the texts, however, which have led modern man
to the objective study of the sources.

As far as textual criticism is concerned, the Pentateuch provides what
is probably the most obvious example of adaptations made by the hand of
man. These were made at different times in the history of the Jewish
people, taken from oral traditions and texts handed down from preceding
generations. It was begun in the Tenth or Ninth century B.C.

with the Yahvist tradition which took the story from its very
beginnings. The latter sketches Israel's own particular destiny to "fit
it back into God's Grand Design for humanity" (Father de Vaux). It was
concluded in the Sixth century B.C. with the Sacerdotal tradition that
is meticulous in its precise mention of dates and genealogies.[^10]
Father de Vaux writes that "The few stories this tradition has of its
own bear witness to legal preoccupations:

Sabbatical rest at the completion of the Creation, the alliance with
Noah, the alliance with Abraham and the circumcision, the purchase of
the Cave of Makpela that gave the Patriarchs land in Canaan". We must
bear in mind that the Sacerdotal tradition dates from the time of the
deportation to Babylon and the return to Palestine starting in 538 B.C.
There is therefore a mixture of religious and purely political
problems.

For Genesis alone, the division of the Book into three sources has been
firmly established: Father de Vaux in the commentary to his translation
lists for each source the passages in the present text of Genesis that
rely on them. On the evidence of these data it is possible to pinpoint
the contribution made by the various sources to any one of the chapters.
For example, in the case of the Creation, the Flood and the period that
goes from the Flood to Abraham, occupying as it does the first eleven
chapters of Genesis, we can see alternating in the Biblical text a
section of the Yahvist and a section of the Sacerdotal texts.

The Elohist text is not present in the first eleven chapters. The
overlapping of Yahvist and Sacerdotal contributions is here quite clear.
For the Creation and up to Noah (first five chapter's), the arrangement
is simple: a Yahvist passage alternates with a Sacerdotal passage from
beginning to end of the narration. For the Flood and especially chapters
7 and 8 moreover, the cutting of the text according to its source is
narrowed down to very short passages and even to a single sentence. In
the space of little more than a hundred lines of English text, the text
changes seventeen times. It is from this that the improbabilities and
contradictions arise when we read the present-day text. (see Table on
page 15 for schematic distribution of sources)


**THE HISTORICAL BOOKS**

In these books we enter into the history of the Jewish people, from the
time they came to the Promised Land (which is most likely to have been
at the end of the Thirteenth century B.C.) to the deportation to Babylon
in the Sixth century B.C.

Here stress is laid upon what one might call the 'national event' which
is presented as the fulfillment of Divine word. In the narration
however, historical accuracy has rather been brushed aside: a work such
as the Book of Joshua complies first and foremost with theological
intentions. With this in mind, E. Jacob underlines the obvious
contradiction between archaeology and the texts in the case of the
supposed destruction of Jericho and Ay.

The Book of Judges is centered on the defense of the chosen people
against surrounding enemies and on the support given to them by God. The
Book was adapted several times, as Father A. Lefèvre notes with great
objectivity in his Preamble to the Crampon Bible. the various prefaces
in the text and the appendices bear witness to this. The story of Ruth
is attached to the narrations contained in Judges.


**TABLE OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE YAHVIST AND SACERDOTAL TEXTS IN
CHAPTERS 1 TO 11 in GENESIS)**

The first figure indicates the chapter. The second figure in brackets
indicates the number of phrases, sometimes divided into two parts
indicated by the letters a and b. Letters: Y indicates Yahvist text S
indicates Sacerdotal text Example: The first line of the table
indicates: from Chapter 1, phrase 1 to Chapter 2, phrase 4a, the text
published in present day Bibles is the Sacerdotal text.

**What simpler illustration can there be of the way men have
manipulated the Biblical Scriptures?**

The Book of Samuel and the two Books of Kings are above all
biographical collections concerning Samuel, Saul, David, and Solomon.
Their historic worth is the subject of debate. From this point of view
E. Jacob finds numerous errors in it, because there are sometimes two
and even three versions of the same event. The prophets Elias, Elisha
and Isaiah also figure here, mixing elements of history and legend. For
other commentators, such as Father A. Lefèvre, "the historical value of
these books is fundamental."

Chronicles I & II, the Book of Ezra and the Book of Nehemiah have a
single author, called 'the Chronicler', writing in the Fourth century
B.C. He resumes the whole history of the Creation up to this period,
although his genealogical tables only go up to David. In actual fact, he
is using above all the Book of Samuel and the Book of Kings,
"mechanically copying them out without regard to the inconsistencies"
(E. Jacob), but he nevertheless adds precise facts that have been
confirmed by archaeology.

In these works care is taken to adapt history to the needs of theology.
E. Jacob notes that the author "sometimes writes history according to
theology". "To explain the fact that King Manasseh, who was a
sacrilegious persecutor, had a long and prosperous reign, he postulates
a conversion of the King during a stay in Assyria (Chronicles II, 33/11)
although there is no mention of this in any Biblical or non- Biblical
source". The Book of Ezra and the Book of Nehemiah have been severely
criticised because they are full of obscure points, and because the
period they deal with (the Fourth century B.C.) is itself not very well
known, there being few non- Biblical documents from it.

The Books of Tobit, Judith and Esther are classed among the Historical
Books. In them very big liberties are taken with history. proper names
are changed, characters and events are invented, all for the best of
religious reasons. They are in fact stories designed to serve a moral
end, pepll)ered with historical improbabilities and inaccuracies.

The Books of Maccabees are of quite a different order. They provide a
version of events that took place in the Second century B.C. which is as
exact a record of the history of this period as may be found. It is for
this reason that they constitute accounts of great value.

The collection of books under the heading 'historical' is therefore
highly disparate. History is treated in both a scientific and a
whimsical fashion.

**THE PROPHETIC BOOKS**

Under this heading we find the preachings of various prophets who in
the Old Testament have been classed separately from the first great
prophets such as Moses, Samuel, Elias and Elisha, whose teachings are
referred to in other books.

The prophetic books cover the period from the Eighth to the Second
century B.C.

In the Eighth century B.C., there were the books of Amos, Hosea, Isaiah
and Michah. The first of these is famous for his condemnation of social
injustice, the second for his religious corruption which leads him to
bodily suffering (for being forced to marry a sacred harlot of a pagan
cult), like God suffering for the degradation of His people but still
granting them His love. Isaiah is a figure of political history. he is
consulted by kings and dominates events; he is the prophet of
grandeur.

In addition to his personal works, his oracles are published by his
disciples right up until the Third century B.C.: protests against
iniquities, fear of God's judgement, proclamations of liberation at the
time of exile and later on the return of the Jews to Palestine. It is
certain that in the case of the second and third Isaiah, the prophetic
intention is paralleled by political considerations that are as clear as
daylight. The preaching of Michah, a contemporary of Isaiah, follows the
same general ideas.

In the Seventh century B.C., Zephaniah, Jeremiah, Nahum and Habakkuk
distinguished themselves by their preachings. Jeremiah became a martyr.
His oracles were collected by Baruch who is also perhaps the author of
Lamentations.

The period of exile in Babylon at the beginning of the Sixth century
B.C. gave birth to intense prophetic activity. Ezekiel figures
importantly as the consoler of his brothers, inspiring hope among them.
His visions are famous. The Book of Obadiah deals with the misery of a
conquered Jerusalem.

After the exile, which came to an end in 538 B.C., prophetic activity
resumed with Haggai and Zechariah who urged the reconstruction of the
Temple. When it was completed, writings going under the name of Malachi
appeared. They contain various oracles of a spiritual nature.

One wonders why the Book of Jonah is included in the prophetic books
when the Old Testament does not give it any real text to speak of. Jonah
is a story from which one principle fact emerges: the necessary
submission to Divine Will.

Daniel was written in three languages (Hebrew, Aramaic and Greek).
According to Christian commentators, it is a , disconcerting' Apocalypse
from an historical point of view. It is probably a work from the
Maccabaean period, Second century B.C. Its author wished to maintain the
faith of his countrymen, at the time of the 'abomination of desolation',
by convincing them that the moment of deliverance was at hand. (E.
Jacob)

**THE BOOKS OF POETRY AND WISDOM**

These form collections of unquestionable literary unity. Foremost among
them are the Psalms, the greatest monument to Hebrew poetry. A large
number were composed by David and the others by priests and levites.
Their themes are praises, supplications and meditations, and they served
a liturgical function.

The book of Job, the book of wisdom and piety par excellence, probably
dates from 400-500 B.C.

The author of 'Lamentations' on the fall of Jerusalem at the beginning
of the Sixth century B.C. may well be Jeremiah.

We must once again mention the Song of Songs, allegorical chants mostly
about Divine love, the Book of Proverbs, a collection of the words of
Solomon and other wise men of the court, and Ecclesiastes or Koheleth,
where earthly happiness and wisdom are debated.

We have, therefore, a collection of works with highly disparate
contents written over at least seven centuries, using extremely varied
sources before being amalgamated inside a single work.

How was this collection able, over the centuries, to constitute an
inseparable whole and-with a few variations according to
community-become the book containing the Judeo-Christian Revelation?
This book was called in Greek the 'canon' because of the idea of
intangibility it conveys.

The amalgam does not date from the Christian period, but from Judaism
itself, probably with a primary stage in the Seventh century B.C. before
later books were added to those already accepted. It is to be noted
however that the first five books, forming the Torah or Pentateuch, have
always been given pride of place. Once the proclamations of the prophets
(the prediction of a chastisement commensurate with misdemeanour) had
been fulfilled, there was no difficulty in adding their texts to the
books that had already been admitted. The same was true for the
assurances of hope given by these prophets. By the Second century B.C.,
the 'Canon' of the prophets had been formed.

Other books, e.g. Psalms, on account of their liturgical function, were
integrated along with further writings, such as Lamentations, the Book
of Wisdom and the Book of Job.

Christianity, which was initially Judeo-Christianity, has been
carefully studied-as we shall see later on-by modern authors, such as
Cardinal Daniélou. Before it was transformed under Paul's influence,
Christianity accepted the heritage of the Old Testament without
difficulty. The authors of the Gospels adhered very strictly to the
latter, but whereas a 'purge' has been made of the Gospels by ruling out
the 'Apocrypha', the same selection has not been deemed necessary for
the Old Testament. Everything, or nearly everything, has been
accepted.

Who would have dared dispute any aspects of this disparate amalgam
before the end of the Middle Ages-in the West at least? The answer is
nobody, or almost nobody. From the end of the Middle Ages up to the
beginning of modern times, one or two critics began to appear; but, as
we have already seen, the Church Authorities have always succeeded in
having their own way. Nowadays, there is without doubt a genuine body of
textual criticism, but even if ecclesiastic specialists have devoted
many of their efforts to examining a multitude of detailed points, they
have preferred not to go too deeply into what they euphemistically call
difficulties'. They hardly seem disposed to study them in the light of
modern knowledge.

They may well establish parallels with history-principally when history
and Biblical narration appear to be in agreement-but so far they have
not committed themselves to be a frank and thorough comparison with
scientific ideas. They realize that this would lead people to contest
notions about the truth of Judeo-Christian Scriptures, which have so far
remained undisputed.


