The Old Testament and Science Findings
======================================

Few of the subjects dealt within the Old Testament, and likewise the
Gospels, give rise to a confrontation with the data of modern knowledge.
When an incompatibility does occur between the Biblical text and
science, however, it is on extremely important points.

As we have already seen in the preceding chapter, historical errors
were found in the Bible and we have quoted several of these pinpointed
by Jewish and Christian experts in exegesis. The latter have naturally
had a tendency to minimize the importance of such errors. They find it
quite natural for a sacred author to present historical fact in
accordance with theology and to write history to suit certain needs. We
shall see further on, in the case of the Gospel according to Matthew,
the same liberties taken with reality and the same commentaries aimed at
making admissible as reality what is in contradiction to it. A logical
and objective mind cannot be content with this procedure.

From a logical angle, it is possible to single out a large number of
contradictions and improbabilities. The existence of different sources
that might have been used in the writing of a description may be at the
origin of two different presentations of the same fact. This is not all;
different adaptations, later additions to the text itself, like the
commentaries added a posteriori, then included in the text later on when
a new copy was made-these are perfectly recognized by specialists in
textual criticism and very frankly underlined by some of them.

In the case of the Pentateuch alone, for example, Father de Vaux in the
General Introduction preceding his translation of Genesis (pages 13 and
14), has drawn attention to numerous disagreements. We shall not quote
them here since we shall be quoting several of them later on in this
study. The general impression one gains is that one must not follow the
text to the letter.

Here is a very typical example:

In Genesis (6, 3), God decides just before the Flood henceforth to
limit man's lifespan to one hundred and twenty years, "... his days
shall be a hundred and twenty years". Further on however, we note in
Genesis (11, 10-32) that the ten descendants of Noah had lifespans that
range from 148 to 600 years (see table in this chapter showing Noah's
descendants down to Abraham). The contradiction between these two
passages is quite obvious. The explanation is elementary. The first
passage (Genesis 6, 3) is a Yahvist text, probably dating as we have
already seen from the Tenth century B.C. The second passage in Genesis
(11, 10-32) is a much more recent text (Sixth century B.C.) from the
Sacerdotal version. This version is at the origin of these genealogies,
which are as precise in their information on lifespans as they are
improbable when taken en masse.

It is in Genesis that we find the most evident incompatibilities with
modern science. These concern three essential points:

1) the Creation of the world and its stages;
2) the date of the Creation of the world and the date of man's
appearance on earth;
3) the description of the Flood.

**THE CREATION OF THE WORLD**

As Father de Vaux points out, Genesis "starts with two juxtaposed
descriptions of the Creation". When examining them from the point of
view of their compatibility with modern scientific data, we must look at
each one separately.

**First Description of the Creation**

The first description occupies the first chapter and the very first
verses of the second chapter. It is a masterpiece of inaccuracy from a
scientific point of view. It must be examined one paragraph at a time.
The text reproduced here is from the Revised Standard Version of the
Bible.[^11]

**Chapter 1, verses 1 & 2:**

"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The earth was
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and
the Spirit of God was moving over the face of the waters."

It is quite possible to admit that before the Creation of the Earth,
what was to become the Universe as we know it was covered in darkness.
To mention the existence of water at this period is however quite simply
pure imagination. We shall see in the third part of this book how there
is every indication that at the initial stage of the formation of the
universe a gaseous mass existed. It is an error to place water in it.

Verses 3 to 5:

"And God said, 'Let there be light', and there was light. And God saw
that the light was good; and God separated the light from the darkness.
God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there
was evening and there was morning, one day."

The light circulating in the Universe is the result of complex
reactions in the stars. We shall come back to them in the third part of
this work. At this stage in the Creation, however, according to the
Bible, the stars were not yet formed. The "lights' of the firmament are
not mentioned in Genesis until verse 14, when they were created on the
Fourth day, "to separate the day from the night", "to give light upon
earth"; all of which is accurate. It is illogical, however, to mention
the result (light) on the first day, when the cause of this light was
created three days later. The fact that the existence of evening and
morning is placed on the first day is moreover, purely imaginary; the
existence of evening and morning as elements of a single day is only
conceivable after the creation of the earth and its rotation under the
light of its own star, the Sun!

-verses 6 to 8:

"And God said, "Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
and let it separate the waters from the waters.' And God made the
firmament and separated the waters which were under the firmament from
the waters which were above the firmament. And it was so. And God called
the firmament Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a
second day."

The myth of the waters is continued here with their separation into two
layers by a firmament that in the description of the Flood allows the
waters above to pass through and flow onto the earth. This image of the
division of the waters into two masses is scientifically unacceptable.

-verses 9 to 13:

"And God said, "Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together
into one place, and let the dry land appear.' And it was so. God called
the dry land Earth, and the waters that were gathered together he called
Seas. And God saw that it was good. And God said, "Let the earth put
forth vegetation, plants yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit in
which is their seed, each according to its kind upon the earth.' And it
was so. The earth brought forth vegetation, plants yielding seed
according to their own kinds, and trees bearing fruit in which is their
seed, each according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. And
there was evening and there was morning, a third day."

The fact that continents emerged at the period in the earth's history,
when it was still covered with water, is quite acceptable
scientifically. What is totally untenable is that a highly organized
vegetable kingdom with reproduction by seed could have appeared before
the existence of the sun (in Genesis it does not appear until the fourth
day), and likewise the establishment of alternating nights and days.

-verses 14 to 19:

"And God said, 'Let there be lights in the firmaments of the heavens to
separate the day from night; and let them be for signs and for seasons
and for days and years, and let them be lights in the firmament of the
heavens to give light upon the earth.' And it was so. And God made the
two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser
light to rule the night; he made the stars also. And God set them in the
firmament of the heavens to give light upon earth, to rule over. the day
and over the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. And God
saw that it was good. And there was evening and there was morning, a
fourth day."

Here the Biblical author's description is acceptable. The only
criticism one could level at this passage is the position it occupies in
the description as a whole. Earth and Moon emanated, as we know, from
their original star, the Sun. To place the creation of the Sun and Moon
after the creation of the Earth is contrary to the most firmly
established ideas on the formation of the elements of the Solar
System.

-verses 20 to 30:

"And God said, "Let the waters bring forth swarms of living creatures,
and let birds fly above the earth across the firmament of the heavens.'
So God created the great sea monsters and every living creature that
moves, with which the waters swarm, according to their kinds, and every
winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good. And God
blessed them saying, "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the waters in
the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.' And there was evening
and there was morning, a fifth day."

This passage contains assertions which are unacceptable.

According to Genesis, the animal kingdom began with the appearance of
creatures of the sea and winged birds. The Biblical description informs
us that it was not until the next day-as we shall see in the following
verses-that the earth itself was populated by animals.

It is certain that the origins of life came from the sea, but this
question will not be dealt with until the third part of this book. From
the sea, the earth was colonized, as it were, by the animal kingdom. It
is from animals living on the surface of the earth, and in particular
from one species of reptile which lived in the Second era, that it is
thought the birds originated. Numerous biological characteristics common
to both species make this deduction possible. The beasts of the earth
are not however mentioned until the sixth day in Genesis; after the
appearance of the birds. This order of appearance, beasts of the earth
after birds, is not therefore acceptable.

-verses 24 to 31:

"And God said, "Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to
their kinds: cattle and creeping things and beasts of the earth
according to their kinds.' And it was so. And God made the beasts of the
earth according to their kinds and the cattle according to their kinds,
and everything that creeps upon the ground according to its kind. And
God saw that it was good."

"Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and
let them have dominion (sic) over the fish of the sea, and over the
birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth and over
every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth".

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created
him; male and female he created them."

"And God blessed them, and God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the earth and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the
sea and over the birds of the air and over every living thing that moves
upon the earth.' And God said, "Behold, I have given you every plant
yielding seed which is upon the face of the earth, and every tree with
seed in its fruit; you shall have them for food. And to every beast of
the earth, and to every bird of the air, and to everything that creeps
on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every
green plant for food." And it was so. And God saw everything that he had
made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was
morning, a sixth day."

This is the description of the culmination of the Creation. The author
lists all the living creatures not mentioned before and describes the
various kinds of food for man and beast.

As we have seen, the error was to place the appearance of beasts of the
earth after that of the birds. Man's appearance is however correctly
situated after the other species of living things.

The description of the Creation finishes in the first three verses of
Chapter 2:

"Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host (sic)
of them. And on the seventh day God finished his work which he had done,
and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had done. So
God blessed the seventh day and hallowed it, because on it God rested
from all his work which he had done in creation;

These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were
created."

This description of the seventh day calls for some comment.

Firstly the meaning of certain words. The text is taken from the
Revised Standard Version of the Bible mentioned above. The word 'host'
signifies here, in all probability, the multitude of beings created. As
for the expression 'he rested', it is a manner of translating the Hebrew
word 'shabbath', from which the Jewish day for rest is derived, hence
the expression in English 'sabbath'.

It is quite clear that the 'rest' that God is said to have taken after
his six days' work is a legend. There is nevertheless an explanation for
this. We must bear in mind that the description of the creation examined
here is taken from the so-called Sacerdotal version, written by priests
and scribes who were the spiritual successors of Ezekiel, the prophet of
the exile to Babylon writing in the Sixth century B.C.

We have already seen how the priests took the Yahvist and Elohist
versions of Genesis and remodelled them after their own fashion in
accordance with their own preoccupations. Father de Vaux has written
that the 'legalist' character of these writings was very essential. An
outline of this has already been given above.

Whereas the Yahvist text of the Creation, written several centuries
before the Sacerdotal text, makes no mention of God's sabbath, taken
after the fatigue of a week's labor, the authors of the Sacerdotal text
bring it into their description. They divide the latter into separate
days, with the very precise indication of the days of the week. They
build it around the sabbatic day of rest which they have to justify to
the faithful by pointing out that God was the first to respect it.
Subsequent to this practical necessity, the description that follows has
an apparently logical religious order, but in fact scientific data
permit us to qualify the latter as being of a whimsical nature.

The idea that successive phases of the Creation, as seen by the
Sacerdotal authors in their desire to incite people to religious
observation, could have been compressed into the space of one week is
one that cannot be defended from a scientific point of view. Today we
are perfectly aware that the formation of the Universe and the Earth
took place in stages that lasted for very long periods. (In the third
part of the present work, we shall examine this question when we come to
look at the Qur'anic data concerning the Creation).

Even if the description came to a close on the evening of the sixth
day, without mentioning the seventh day, the 'sabbath' when God is said
to have rested, and even if, as in the Qur'anic description, we were
permitted to think that they were in fact undefined periods rather than
actual days, the Sacerdotal description would still not be any more
acceptable. The succession of episodes it contains is an absolute
contradiction with elementary scientific knowledge.

It may be seen therefore that the Sacerdotal description of the
Creation stands out as an imaginative and ingenious fabrication. Its
purpose was quite different from that of making the truth known.

**Second Description**

The second description of the Creation in Genesis follows immediately
upon the first without comment or transitional passage. It does not
provoke the same objections.

We must remember that this description is roughly three centuries older
and is very short. It allows more space to the creation of man and
earthly paradise than to the creation of the Earth and Heavens. It
mentions this very briefly (Chapter 2, 4b-7): "In the day that Yahweh
God made the earth and the heavens, when no plant of the field was yet
in the earth and no herb of the field had yet sprung up-for Yahweh God
had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was no man to till
the ground;

but a flood went up from earth and watered the whole face of the
ground-then Yahweh God formed man of dust from the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being."

This is the Yahvist text that appears in the text of present day
Bibles. The Sacerdotal text was added to it later on, but one may ask if
it was originally so brief. Nobody is in a position to say whether the
Yahvist text has not, in the course of time, been pared down. We do not
know if the few lines we possess represent all that the oldest Biblical
text of the Creation had to say.

The Yahvist description does not mention the actual formation of the
Earth or the Heavens. It makes it clear that when God created man, there
was no vegetation on Earth (it had not yet rained), even though the
waters of the Earth had covered its surface. The sequel to the text
confirms this: God planted a garden at the same time as man was created.
The vegetable kingdom therefore appears on Earth at the same time as
man. This is scientifically inaccurate; man did not appear on Earth
until a long time after vegetation had been growing on it. We do not
know how many hundreds of millions of years separate the two events.

This is the only criticism that one can level at the Yahvist text. The
fact that it does not place the creation of man in time in relation to
the formation of the world and the earth, unlike the Sacerdotal text,
which places them in the same week, frees it from the serious objections
raised against the latter.

**THE DATE OF THE WORLD'S CREATION AND THE DATE OF MAN'S APPEARANCE ON
EARTH.**

The Jewish calendar, which follows the data contained in the Old
Testament, places the dates of the above very precisely. The second half
of the Christian year 1975 corresponds to the beginning of the 5, 736th
year of the creation of the world. The creation of man followed several
days later, so that he has the same numerical age, counted in years, as
in the Jewish calendar.

There is probably a correction to be made on account of the fact that
time was originally calculated in lunar years, while the calendar used
in the West is based on solar years. This correction would have to be
made if one wanted to be absolutely exact, but as it represents only 3%,
it is of very little consequence. To simplify our calculations, it is
easier to disregard it. What matters here is the order of magnitude. It
is therefore of little importance if, over a thousand years, our
calculations are thirty years out. We are nearer the truth in following
this Hebraic estimate of the creation of the world if we say that it
happened roughly thirty-seven centuries before Christ.

What does modern science tell us? It would be difficult to reply to the
question concerning the formation of the Universe. All we can provide
figures for is the era in time when the solar system was formed. It is
possible to arrive at a reasonable approximation of this. The time
between it and the present is estimated at four and a half billion
years. We can therefore measure the margin separating the firmly
established reality we know today and the data taken from the Old
Testament. We shall expand on this in the third part of the present
work. These facts emerge from a close scrutiny of the Biblical text.
Genesis provides very precise information on the time that elapsed
between Adam and Abraham. For the period from the time of Abraham to the
beginnings of Christianity, the information provided is insufficient. It
must be supported by other sources.

**1. From Adam to Abraham**

Genesis provides extremely precise genealogical data in Chapters 4, 5,
11, 21 and 25. They concern all of Abraham's ancestors in direct line
back to Adam. They give the length of time each person lived, the
father's age at the birth of the son and thus make it easily possible to
ascertain the dates of birth and death of each ancestor in relation to
the creation of Adam, as the table indicates.

All the data used in this table come from the Sacerdotal text of
Genesis, the only Biblical text that provides information of this kind.
It may be deduced, according to the Bible, that Abraham was born 1,948
years after Adam.

**ABRAHAM'S GENEALOGY
2. From Abraham to The Beginnings Of Christianity**

The Bible does not provide any numerical information on this period
that might lead to such precise estimates as those found in Genesis on
Abraham's ancestors. We must look to other sources to estimate the time
separating Abraham from Jesus. At present, allowing for a slight margin
of error, the time of Abraham is situated at roughly eighteen centuries
before Jesus. Combined with information in Genesis on the interval
separating Abraham and Adam, this would place Adam at roughly
thirty-eight centuries before Jesus. This estimate is undeniably
wrong:

the origins of this inaccuracy arise from the mistakes in the Bible on
the Adam-Abraham period. The Jewish tradition still founds its calendar
on this. Nowadays, we can challenge the traditional defenders of
Biblical truth with the incompatibility between the whimsical estimates
of Jewish priests living in the Sixth century B.C. and modern data. For
centuries, the events of antiquity relating to Jesus were situated in
time according to information based on these estimates.

Before modern times, editions of the Bible frequently provided the
reader with a preamble explaining the historical sequence of events that
had come to pass between the creation of the world and the time when the
books were edited. The figures vary slightly according to the time. For
example, the Clementine Vulgate, 1621, gave this information, although
it did place Abraham a little earlier and the Creation at roughly the
40th century B.C. Walton's polyglot Bible, produced in the 17th century,
in addition to Biblical texts in several languages, gave the reader
tables similar to the one shown here for Abraham's ancestors.

Almost all the estimates coincide with the figures given here. With the
arrival of modern times, editors were no longer able to maintain such
whimsical chronologies without going against scientific discovery that
placed the Creation at a much earlier date. They were content to abolish
these tables and preambles, but they avoided warning the reader that the
Biblical texts on which these chronologies were based had become
obsolete and could no longer be considered to express the truth. They
preferred to draw a modest veil over them, and invent set-phrases of
cunning dialectics that would make acceptable the text as it had
formerly been, without any subtractions from it.

This is why the genealogies contained in the Sacerdotal text of the
Bible are still honoured, even though in the Twentieth century one
cannot reasonably continue to count time on the basis of such fiction.

Modern scientific data do not allow us to establish the date of man's
appearance on earth beyond a certain limit. We may be certain that man,
with the capacity for action and intelligent thought that distinguishes
him from beings that appear to be anatomically similar to him, existed
on Earth after a certain estimable date. Nobody however can say at what
exact date he appeared. What we can say today is that remains have been
found of a humanity capable of human thought and action whose age may be
calculated in tens of thousands of years.

This approximate dating refers to the prehistoric human species, the
most recently discovered being the Cro-Magnon Man. There have of course
been many other discoveries all over the world of remains that appear to
be human. These relate to less highly evolved species, and their age
could be somewhere in the hundreds of thousands of years. But were they
genuine men?

Whatever the answer may be, scientific data are sufficiently precise
concerning the prehistoric species like the Cro-Magnon Man, to be able
to place them much further back than the epoch in which Genesis places
the first men. There is therefore an obvious incompatibility between
what we can derive from the numerical data in Genesis about the date of
man's appearance on Earth and the firmly established facts of modern
scientific knowledge.

**THE FLOOD**

Chapters 6, 7 and 8 are devoted to the description of the Flood. In
actual fact, there are two descriptions; they have not been placed side
by side, but are distributed all the way through. Passages are
interwoven to give the appearance of a coherent succession of varying
episodes. In these three chapters there are, in reality, blatant
contradictions; here again the explanation lies in the existence of two
quite distinct sources: the Yahvist and Sacerdotal versions.

It has been shown earlier that they formed a disparate amalgam; each
original text has been broken down into paragraphs or phrases, elements
of one source alternating with the other, so that in the course of the
complete description, we go from one to another seventeen times in
roughly one hundred lines of English text.

Taken as a whole, the story goes as follows:

Man's corruption had become widespread, so God decided to annihilate
him along with all the other living creatures. He warned Noah and told
him to construct the Ark into which he was to take his wife, his three
sons and their wives, along with other living creatures. The two sources
differ for the latter. one passage (Sacerdotal) says that Noah was to
take one pair of each species;

then in the passage that follows (Yahvist) it is stated that God
ordered him to take seven males and seven females from each of the
so-called 'pure' animal species, and a single pair from the 'impure'
species. Further on, however, it is stated that Noah actually took one
pair of each animal. Specialists, such as Father de Vaux, state that the
passage in question is from an adaptation of the Yahvist description.

Rainwater is given as the agent of the Flood in one (Yahvist) passage,
but in another (Sacerdotal), the Flood is given a double cause:
rainwater and the waters of the Earth.

The Earth was submerged right up to and above the mountain peaks. All
life perished. After one year, when the waters had receded, Noah emerged
from the Ark that had come to rest on Mount Ararat.

One might add that the Flood lasted differing lengths of time according
to the source used: forty days for the Yahvist version and one hundred
and fifty in the Sacerdotal text.

The Yahvist version does not tell us when the event took place in
Noah's life, but the Sacerdotal text tells us that he was six hundred
years old. The latter also provides information in its genealogies that
situates him in relation to Adam and Abraham. If we calculate according
to the information contained in Genesis, Noah was born 1,056 years after
Adam (see table of Abraham's Genealogy) and the Flood therefore took
place 1,656 years after the creation of Adam. In relation to Abraham,
Genesis places the Flood 292 years before the birth of this Patriarch.

According to Genesis, the Flood affected the whole of the human race
and all living creatures created by God on the face of the Earth were
destroyed. Humanity was then reconstituted by Noah's three sons and
their wives so that when Abraham was born roughly three centuries later,
he found a humanity that Was already re- formed into separate
communities. How could this reconstruction have taken place in such a
short time? This simple observation deprives the narration of all
verisimilitude.

Furthermore, historical data show its incompatibility with modern
knowledge. Abraham is placed in the period 1800-1850 B.C., and if the
Flood took place, as Genesis suggests in its genealogies, roughly three
centuries before Abraham, we would have to place him somewhere in the
Twenty-first to Twenty-second century B.C. Modern historical knowledge
confirms that at this period, civilizations had sprung up in several
parts of the world; for their remains have been left to posterity.

In the case of Egypt for example, the remains correspond to the period
preceding the Middle Kingdom (2,100 B.C.) at roughly the date of the
First Intermediate Period before the Eleventh Dynasty. In Babylonia it
is the Third Dynasty at Ur. We know for certain that there was no break
in these civilizations, so that there could have been no destruction
affecting the whole of humanity, as it appears in the Bible.

We cannot therefore consider that these three Biblical narrations
provide man with an account of facts that correspond to the truth. We
are obliged to admit that, objectively speaking, the texts which have
come down to us do not represent the expression of reality. We may ask
ourselves whether it is possible for God to have revealed anything other
than the truth. It is difficult to entertain the idea that God taught to
man ideas that were not only fictitious, but contradictory.

We naturally arrive therefore at the hypothesis that distortions
occurred that were made by man or that arose from traditions passed down
from one generation to another by word of mouth, or from the texts of
these traditions once they were written down. When one knows that a work
such as Genesis was adapted at least twice over a period of not less
than three centuries, it is hardly surprising to find improbabilities or
descriptions that are incompatible with reality. This is because the
progress made in human knowledge has enabled us to know,

if not everything, enough at least about certain events to be able to
judge the degree of compatibility between our knowledge and the ancient
descriptions of them. There is nothing more logical than to maintain
this interpretation of Biblical errors which only implicates man
himself. It is a great pity that the majority of commentators, both
Jewish and Christian, do not hold with it. The arguments they use
nevertheless deserve careful attention.


