Position of Christian Authors With Regard To Scientific Error in the Biblical Texts
===================================================================================

**A Critical Examination**

One is struck by the diverse nature of Christian commentators'
reactions to the existence of these accumulated errors, improbabilities
and contradictions. Certain commentators acknowledge some of them and do
not hesitate in their work to tackle thorny problems. Others pass
lightly over unacceptable statements and insist on defending the text
word for word. The latter try to convince people by apologetic
declarations, heavily reinforced by arguments which are often
unexpected, in the hope that what is logically unacceptable will be
forgotten.

In the Introduction to his translation of Genesis, Father de Vaux
acknowledges the existence of critical arguments and even expands upon
their cogency. Nevertheless, for him the objective reconstitution of
past events has little interest. As he writes in his notes, the fact
that the Bible resumes "the memory of one or two disastrous floods of
the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates, enlarged by tradition until
they took on the dimensions of a universal cataclysm" is neither here
nor there; "the essential thing is, however, that the sacred author has
infused into this memory eternal teachings on the justice and mercy of
God toward the malice of man and the salvation of the righteous."

In this way justification is found for the transformation of a popular
legend into an event of divine proportions-and it is as such that it is
thought fit to present the legend to men's faith-following the principle
that an author has made use of it to illustrate religious teachings. An
apologetic position of this kind justifies all the liberties taken in
the composition of writings which are supposed to be sacred and to
contain the word of God. If one acknowledges such human interference in
what is divine, all the human manipulations of the Biblical texts will
be accounted for. If there are theological intentions, all manipulations
become legitimate; so that those of the 'Sacerdotal' authors of the
Sixth century are justified, including their legalist preoccupations
that turned into the whimsical descriptions we have already seen.

A large number of Christian commentators have found it more ingenious
to explain errors, improbabilities and contradictions in Biblical
descriptions by using the excuse that the Biblical authors were
expressing ideas in accordance with the social factors of a different
culture or mentality. From this arose the definition of respective
'literary genres' which was introduced into the subtle dialectics of
commentators, so that it accounts for all difficulties.

Any contradictions there are between two texts are then explained by
the difference in the way each author expressed ideas in his own
particular 'literary genre'. This argument is not, of course,
acknowledged by everybody because it lacks gravity. It has not entirely
fallen into disuse today however, and we shall see in the New Testament
its extravagant use as an attempt to explain blatant contradictions in
the Gospels.

Another way of making acceptable what would be rejected by logic when
applied to a litigious text, is to surround the text in question with
apologetical considerations. The reader's attention is distracted from
the crucial problem of the truth of the text itself and deflected
towards other problems.

Cardinal Daniélou's reflections on the Flood follow this mode of
expression. They appear in the review Living God (Dieu Vivant)[^12] under
the title: 'Flood, Baptism, Judgment', (Deluge, Baptème, Jugement')
where he writes "The oldest tradition of the Church has seen in the
theology of the Flood an image of Christ and the Church". It is "an
episode of great significance" . . . "a judgment striking the whole
human race." Having quoted from Origen in his Homilies on Ezekiel, he
talks of '"the shipwreck of the entire universe saved in the Ark",
Cardinal Daniélou dwells upon the value of the number eight "expressing
the number of people that were saved in the Ark (Noah and his wife, his
three sons and their wives)".

He turns to his own use Justin's writings in his Dialogue. "They
represent the symbol of the eighth day when Christ rose from the dead"
and "Noah, the first born of a new creation, is an image of Christ who
was to do in reality what Noah had prefigured." He continues the
comparison between Noah on the one hand, who was saved by the ark made
of wood and the water that made it float ("water of the Flood from which
a new humanity was born"), and on the other, the cross made of wood. He
stresses the value of this symbolism and concludes by underlining the
"spiritual and doctrinal wealth of the sacrament of the Flood" (sic).

There is much that one could say about such apologetical comparisons.
We should always remember that they are commentaries on an event that it
is not possible to defend as reality, either on a universal scale or in
terms of the time in which the Bible places it. With a commentary such
as Cardinal Daniélou's we are back in the Middle Ages, where the text
had to be accepted as it was and any discussion, other than conformist,
was off the point.

It is nevertheless reassuring to find that prior to that age of imposed
obscurantism, highly logical attitudes were adopted. One might mention
those of Saint Augustine which proceed from his thought, that was
singularly advanced for the age he lived in. At the time of the Fathers
of the Church, there must have been problems of textual criticism
because Saint Augustine raises them in his letter No. 82. The most
typical of them is the following passage:

"It is solely to those books of Scripture which are called 'canonic'
that I have learned to grant such attention and respect that I firmly
believe that their authors have made no errors in writing them. When I
encounter in these books a statement which seems to contradict reality,
I am in no doubt that either the text (of my copy) is faulty, or that
the translator has not been faithful to the original, or that my
understanding is deficient."

It was inconceivable to Saint Augustine that a sacred text might
contain an error. Saint Augustine defined very clearly the dogma of
infallibility when, confronted with a passage that seemed to contradict
the truth, he thought of looking for its cause, without excluding the
hypothesis of a human fault. This is the attitude of a believer with a
critical outlook. In Saint Augustine's day, there was no possibility of
a confrontation between the Biblical text and science. An
open-mindedness akin to his would today eliminate a lot of the
difficulties raised by the confrontation of certain Biblical texts with
scientific knowledge.

Present-day specialists, on the contrary, go to great trouble to defend
the Biblical text from any accusation of error. In his introduction to
Genesis, Father de Vaux explains the reasons compelling him to defend
the text at all costs, even if, quite obviously, it is historically or
scientifically unacceptable. He asks us not to view Biblical history
"according to the rules of historical study observed by people today",
as if the existence of several different ways of writing history was
possible. History, when it is told in an inaccurate fashion, (as anyone
will admit), becomes a historical novel.

Here however, it does not have to comply with the standards established
by our conceptions. The Biblical commentator rejects any verification of
Biblical descriptions through geology, paleontology or pre-historical
data. "The Bible is not answerable to any of these disciplines, and were
one to confront it with the data obtained from these sciences, it would
only lead to an unreal opposition or an artificial concordance."[^13] One
might point out that these reflections are made on what, in Genesis, is
in no way in harmony with modern scientific data-in this case the first
eleven chapters.

When however, in the present day, a few descriptions have been
perfectly verified, in this case certain episodes from the time of the
patriarchs, the author does not fail to support the truth of the Bible
with modern knowledge. "The doubt cast upon these descriptions should
yield to the favorable witness that history and eastern archaeology bear
them."[^14] In other words. if science is useful in confirming the
Biblical description, it is invoked, but if it invalidates the latter,
reference to it is not permitted.

To reconcile the irreconcilable, i.e. the theory of the truth of the
Bible with the inaccurate nature of certain facts reported in the
descriptions in the Old Testament, modern theologians have applied their
efforts to a revision of the classical concepts of truth. It lies
outside the scope of this book to give a detailed expose of the subtle
ideas that are developed at length in works dealing with the truth of
the Bible; such as O. Loretz's work (1972) What is the Truth of the
Bible? (Quelle est la Vérité de la Bible?)[^15]. This judgment concerning
science will have to suffice:

The author remarks that the Second Vatican Council "has avoided
providing rules to distinguish between error and truth in the Bible.
Basic considerations show that this is impossible, because the Church
cannot determine the truth or otherwise of scientific methods in such a
way as to decide in principle and on a general level the question of the
truth of the Scriptures".

It is obvious that the Church is not in a position to make a
pronouncement on the value of scientific 'method' as a means of access
to knowledge. The point here is quite different. It is not a question of
theories, but of firmly established facts. In our day and age, it is not
necessary to be highly learned to know that the world was not created
thirty-seven or thirty-eight centuries ago. We know that man did not
appear then and that the Biblical genealogies on which this estimate is
based have been proven wrong beyond any shadow of a doubt. The author
quoted here must be aware of this. His statements on science are only
aimed at side-stepping the issue so that he does not have to deal with
it the way he ought to.

The reminder of all these different attitudes adopted by Christian
authors when confronted with the scientific errors of Biblical texts is
a good illustration of the uneasiness they engender. It recalls the
impossibility of defining a logical position other than by recognizing
their human origins and the impossibility of acknowledging that they
form part of a Revelation.

The uneasiness prevalent in Christian circles concerning the Revelation
became clear at the Second Vatican Council (19621965) where it took no
less than five drafts before there was any agreement on the final text,
after three years of discussions. It was only then that "this painful
situation threatening to engulf the Council" came to an end, to use His
Grace Weber's expression in his introduction to the Conciliar Document
No. 4 on the Revelation[^16].

Two sentences in this document concerning the Old Testament (chap IV,
page 53) describe the imperfections and obsolescence of certain texts in
a way that cannot be contested:

"In view of the human situation prevailing before Christ's foundation
of salvation, the Books of the Old Testament enable everybody to know
who is God and who is man, and also the way in which God, in his justice
and mercy, behaves towards men. These books, even though they contain
material which is imperfect and obsolete, nevertheless bear witness to
truly divine teachings."

There is no better statement than the use of the adjectives 'imperfect'
and 'obsolete' applied to certain texts, to indicate that the latter are
open to criticism and might even be abandoned; the principle is very
clearly acknowledged.

This text forms part of a general declaration which was definitively
ratified by 2,344 votes to 6; nevertheless, one might question this
almost total unanimity. In actual fact, in the commentaries of the
official document signed by His Grace Weber, there is one phrase in
particular which obviously corrects the solemn affirmation of the
council on the obsolescence of certain texts: '"Certain books of the
Jewish Bible have a temporary application and have something imperfect
in them."

'Obsolete', the expression used in the official declaration, is hardly
a synonym for 'temporary application', to use the commentator's phrase.
As for the epithet 'Jewish' which the latter curiously adds, it suggests
that the conciliar text only criticized the version in Hebrew. This is
not at all the case. It is indeed the Christian Old Testament alone
that, at the Council, was the object of a judgment concerning the
imperfection and obsolescence of certain parts.


**Conclusions**

The Biblical Scriptures must be examined without being embellished
artificially with qualities one would like them to have. They must be
seen objectively as they are. This implies not only a knowledge of the
texts, but also of their history. The latter makes it possible to form
an idea of the circumstances which brought about textual adaptations
over the centuries, the slow formation of the collection that we have
today, with its numerous substractions and additions.

The above makes it quite possible to believe that different versions of
the same description can be found in the Old Testament, as well as
contradictions, historical errors, improbabilities and incompatibilities
with firmly established scientific data. They are quite natural in human
works of a very great age. How could one fail to find them in the books
written in the same conditions in which the Biblical text was
composed?

At a time when it was not yet possible to ask scientific questions, and
one could only decide on improbabilities or contradictions, a man of
good sense, such as Saint Augustine, considered that God could not teach
man things that did not correspond to reality. He therefore put forward
the principle that it was not possible for an affirmation contrary to
the truth to be of divine origin, and was prepared to exclude from all
the sacred texts anything that appeared to him to merit exclusion on
these grounds.

Later, at a time when the incompatibility of certain passages of the
Bible with modern knowledge has been realized, the same attitude has not
been followed. This refusal has been so insistent that a whole
literature has sprung up, aimed at justifying the fact that, in the face
of all opposition, texts have been retained in the Bible that have no
reason to be there.

The Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) has greatly reduced this
uncompromising attitude by introducing reservations about the "Books of
the Old Testament" which "contain material that is imperfect and
obsolete". One wonders if this will remain a pious wish or if it will be
followed by a change in attitude towards material which, in the
Twentieth century, is no longer acceptable in the books of the Bible. In
actual fact, save for any human manipulation, the latter were destined
to be the "witness of true teachings coming from God".


