The Gospels : Introduction
==========================

Many readers of the Gospels are embarrassed and even abashed when they
stop to think about the meaning of certain descriptions. The same is
true when they make comparisons between different versions of the same
event found in several Gospels. This observation is made by Father
Roguet in his book Initiation to the Gospels (Initiation à
l'Evangile)[^17].

With the wide experience he has gained in his many years of answering
perturbed readers' letters in a Catholic weekly, he has been able to
assess just how greatly they have been worried by what they have read.
His questioners come from widely varying social and cultural
backgrounds. He notes that their requests for explanations concern texts
that are "considered abstruse, incomprehensible, if not contradictory,
absurd or scandalous'. There can be no doubt that a complete reading of
the Gospels is likely to disturb Christians profoundly.

This observation is very recent: Father Roguet's book was published in
1973. Not so very long ago, the majority of Christians knew only
selected sections of the Gospels that were read during services or
commented upon during sermons. With the exception of the Protestants, it
was not customary for Christians to read the Gospels in their entirety.
Books of religious instruction only contained extracts; the in extenso
text hardly circulated at all. At a Roman Catholic school I had copies
of the works of Virgil and Plato, but I did not have the New Testament.
The Greek text of this would nevertheless have been very instructive: it
was only much later on that I realized why they had not set us
translations of the holy writings of Christianity. The latter could have
led us to ask our teachers questions they would have found it difficult
to answer.

These discoveries, made if one has a critical outlook during a reading
in extens of the Gospels, have led the Church to come to the aid of
readers by helping them overcome their perplexity. "Many Christians need
to learn how to read the Gospels", notes Father Roguet. Whether or not
one agrees with the explanations he gives, it is greatly to the author's
credit that he actually tackles these delicate problems. Unfortunately,
it is not always like this in many writings on the Christian
Revelation.

In editions of the Bible produced for widespread publication,
introductory notes more often than not set out a collection of ideas
that would tend to persuade the reader that the Gospels hardly raise any
problems concerning the personalities of the authors of the various
books, the authenticity of the texts and the truth of the
descriptions.

In spite of the fact that there are so many unknowns concerning authors
of whose identity we are not at all sure, we find a wealth of precise
information in this kind of introductory note. Often they present as a
certainty what is pure hypothesis, or they state that such-and-such an
evangelist was an eye- witness of the events, while specialist works
claim the opposite. The time that elapsed between the end of Jesus'
ministry and the appearance of the texts is drastically reduced.

They would have one believe that these were written by one man taken
from an oral tradition, when in fact specialists have pointed out
adaptations to the texts. Of course, certain difficulties of
interpretation are mentioned here and there, but they ride rough shod
over glaring contradictions that must strike anyone who thinks about
them. In the little glossaries one finds among the appendices
complementing a reassuring preface, one observes how improbabilities,
contradictions or blatant errors have been hidden or stifled under
clever arguments of an apologetic nature. This disturbing state of
affairs shows up the misleading nature of such commentaries.

The ideas to be developed in the coming pages will without doubt leave
any readers still unaware of these problems quite amazed. Before going
into detail however, I will provide an immediate illustration of my
ideas with an example that seems to me quite conclusive.

Neither Matthew nor John speaks of Jesus's Ascension. Luke in his
Gospel places it on the day of the Resurrection and forty days later in
the Acts of the Apostles of which he is said to be the author. Mark
mentions it (without giving a date) in a conclusion considered
unauthentic today. The Ascension therefore has no solid scriptural
basis. Commentators nevertheless approach this important question with
incredible lightness.

A. Tricot, in his Little Dictionary of the New Testament(Petit
Dictionnaire du Nouveau Testament) in the Crampon Bible, (1960
edition)[^18], a work produced for mass publication, does not devote an
entry to the Ascension. The Synopsis of the Four Gospels (Synopse des
Quatre Evangiles) by Fathers Benoît and Boismard, teachers at the
Biblical School of Jerusalem, (1972 edition)[^19], informs us in volume
II, pages 451 and 452, that the contradiction between Luke's Gospel and
the Acts of the Apostles may be explained by a 'literary artifice': this
is, to say the least, difficult to follow ! .

In all probability, Father Roguet in his Initiation to the Gospel,
1973, (pg. 187) has not been convinced by the above argument. The
explanation he gives us is curious, to say the least:

'"Here, as in many similar cases, the problem only appears insuperable
if one takes Biblical statements literally, and forgets their religious
significance. It is not a matter of breaking down the factual reality
into a symbolism which is inconsistent, but rather of looking for the
theological intentions of those revealing these mysteries to us by
providing us with facts we can apprehend with our senses and signs
appropriate to our incarnate spirit."

How is it possible to be satisfied by an exegesis of this kind. Only a
person who accepted everything unconditionally would find such
apologetic set-phrases acceptable.

Another interesting aspect of Father Roguet's commentary is his
admission that there are 'many similar cases'; similar, that is, to the
Ascension in the Gospels. The problem therefore has to be approached as
a whole, objectively and in depth. It would seem reasonable to look for
an explanation by studying the conditions attendant upon the writing of
the Gospels, or the religious atmosphere prevailing at the time.

When adaptations of the original writings taken from oral traditions
are pointed out, and we see the way texts handed down to us have been
corrupted, the presence of obscure, incomprehensible, contradictory,
improbable, and even absurd passages comes as much less of a surprise.
The same may be said of texts which are incompatible with today's proven
reality, thanks to scientific progress. Observations such as these
denote the element of human participation in the writing and
modification of the texts.

Admittedly, in the last few decades, objective research on the
Scriptures has gained attention. In a recent book, Faith in the
Resurrection, Resurrection of Faith[^20] (Foi en la Resurrection,
Resurrection de la foi), Father Kannengiesser, a professor at the
Catholic Institute of Paris, outlines this profound change in the
following terms: "The faithful are hardly aware that a revolution has
taken place in methods of Biblical exegesis since the time of Pious
XII"[^21]. The 'Revolution' that the author mentions is therefore very
recent.

It is beginning to be extended to the teaching of the faithful, in the
case of certain specialists at least, who are animated by this spirit of
revival. "The overthrow of the most assured prospects of the pastoral
tradition," the author writes, "has more or less begun with this
revolution in methods of exegesis."

Father Kannengiesser warns that 'one should not take literally' facts
reported about Jesus by the Gospels, because they are 'writings suited
to an occasion' or 'to combat', whose authors 'are writing down the
traditions of their own community about Jesus'. Concerning the
Resurrection of Jesus, which is the subject of his book, he stresses
that none of the authors of the Gospels can claim to have been an
eye-witness. He intimates that, as far as the rest of Jesus's public
life is concerned, the same must be true because, according to the
Gospels, none of the Apostles-apart from Judas Iscariot-left Jesus from
the moment he first followed Him until His last earthly
manifestations.

We have come a long way from the traditional position, which was once
again solemnly confirmed by the Second Vatican Council only ten years
ago. This once again is resumed by modern works of popularization
destined to be read by the faithful. Little by little the truth is
coming to light however.

It is not easy to grasp, because the weight of such a bitterly defended
tradition is very heavy indeed. To free oneself from it, one has to
strike at the roots of the problem, i.e. examine first the circumstances
that marked the birth of Christianity. Historical Reminder
Judeo-Christian and Saint Paul The majority of Christians believe that
the Gospels were writ ten by direct witnesses of the life of Jesus and
therefore constitute unquestionable evidence concerning the events
high-lighting His life and preachings.

One wonders, in the presence of such guarantees of authenticity, how it
is possible to discuss the teachings derived from them and how one can
cast doubt upon the validity of the Church as an institution applying
the general instructions Jesus Himself gave. Today's popular editions of
the Gospels contain commentaries aimed at propagating these ideas among
the general public.

The value the authors of the Gospels have as eye-witnesses is always
presented to the faithful as axiomatic. In the middle of the Second
century, Saint Justin did, after all, call the Gospels the 'Memoirs of
the Apostles'. There are moreover so many details proclaimed concerning
the authors that it is a wonder that one could ever doubt their
accuracy.

'Matthew was a well-known character 'a customs officer employed at the
tollgate or customs house at Capharnaum'; it is even said that he spoke
Aramaic and Greek. Mark is also easily identifiable as Peter's
colleague; there is no doubt that he too was an eye-witness. Luke is the
'dear physician' of whom Paul talks: information on him is very precise.
John is the Apostle who was always near to Jesus, son of Zebedee,
fisherman on the Sea of Galilee.

Modern studies on the beginnings of Christianity show that this way of
presenting things hardly corresponds to reality. We shall see who the
authors of the Gospels really were. As far as the decades following
Jesus's mission are concerned, it must be understood that events did not
at all happen in the way they have been said to have taken place and
that Peter's arrival in Rome in no way laid the foundations for the
Church. On the contrary, from the time Jesus left earth to the second
half of the Second century, there was a struggle between two factions.
One was what one might call Pauline Christianity and the other
Judeo-Christianity. It was only very slowly that the first supplanted
the second, and Pauline Christianity triumphed over
Judeo-Christianity.

A large number of very recent works are based on contemporary
discoveries about Christianity. Among them we find Cardinal Daniélou's
name. In December 1967 he published an article in the review Studies
(Etudes) entitled. 'A New Representation of the Origins of Christianity:
Judeo-Christianity'. (Une vision nouvelle des origines chrétiennes, le
judéo-christianisme). Here he reviews past works, retraces its history
and enables us to place the appearance of the Gospels in quite a
different context from the one that emerges on reading accounts intended
for mass publication. What follows is a condensed version of the
essential points made in his article, including many quotations from
it.

After Jesus's departure, the "little group of Apostles" formed a
"Jewish sect that remained faithful to the form of worship practised in
the Temple". However, when the observances of converts from paganism
were added to them, a 'special system' was offered to them, as it were:
the Council of Jerusalem in 49 A.D. exempted them from circumcision and
Jewish observances; "many Judeo-Christians rejected this concession".
This group was quite separate from Paul's. What is more, Paul and the
Judeo-Christians were in conflict over the question of pagans who had
turned to Christianity, (the incident of Antioch, 49 A.D.). "For Paul,
the circumcision, Sabbath, and form of worship practised in the Temple
were henceforth old fashioned, even for the Jews. Christianity was to
free itself from its political-cum-religious adherence to Judaism and
open itself to the Gentiles."

For those Judeo-Christians who remained 'loyal Jews,' Paul was a
traitor. Judeo-Christian documents call him an 'enemy', accuse him of
'tactical double-dealing', . . . '"Until 70 A.D., Judeo-Christianity
represents the majority of the Church" and "Paul remains an isolated
case". The head of the community at that time was James, a relation of
Jesus. With him were Peter (at the beginning) and John. "James may be
considered to represent the Judeo-Christian camp, which deliberately
clung to Judaism as opposed to Pauline Christianity." Jesus's family has
a very important place in the Judeo-Christian Church of Jerusalem.
"James's successor was Simeon, son of Cleopas, a cousin of the Lord".

Cardinal Danielou here quotes Judeo-Christian writings which express
the views on Jesus of this community which initially formed around the
apostles: the Gospel of the Hebrews (coming from a Judeo-Christian
community in Egypt), the writings of Clement: Homilies and Recognitions,
'Hypotyposeis', the Second Apocalypse of James, the Gospel of
Thomas.[^22] "It is to the Judeo-Christians that one must ascribe the
oldest writings of Christian literature." Cardinal Daniélou mentions
them in detail.

"It was not just in Jerusalem and Palestine that Judeo-Christianity
predominated during the first hundred years of the Church. The
Judeo-Christian mission seems everywhere to have developed before the
Pauline mission. This is certainly the explanation of the fact that the
letters of Paul allude to a conflict." They were the same adversaries he
was to meet everywhere: in Galatia, Corinth, Colossae, Rome and
Antioch.

The Syro-Palestinian coast from Gaza to Antioch was Judeo-Christian
'"as witnessed by the Acts of the Apostles and Clementine writings". In
Asia Minor, the existence of Judeo-Christians is indicated in Paul's
letters to the Galatians and Colossians. Papias's writings give us
information about Judeo-Christianity in Phrygia. In Greece, Paul's first
letter to the Corinthians mentions Judeo-Christians, especially at
Apollos. According to Clement's letter and the Shepherd of Hermas, Rome
was an 'important centre'. For Suetonius and Tacitus, the Christians
represented a Jewish sect. Cardinal Daniélou thinks that the first
evangelization in Africa was Judeo-Christian. The Gospel of the Hebrews
and the writings of Clement of Alexandria link up with this.

It is essential to know these facts to understand the struggle between
communities that formed the background against which the Gospels were
written. The texts that we have today, after many adaptations from the
sources, began to appear around 70 A.D., the time when the two rival
communities were engaged in a fierce struggle, with the Judeo-Christians
still retaining the upper hand. With the Jewish war and the fall of
Jerusalem in 70 A.D. the situation was to be reversed. This is how
Cardinal Daniélou explains the decline:

"After the Jews had been discredited in the Empire, the Christians
tended to detach themselves from them. The Hellenistic peoples of
Christian persuasion then gained the upper hand. Paul won a posthumous
victory. Christianity separated itself politically and sociologically
from Judaism; it became the third people. All the same, until the Jewish
revolt in 140 A.D., Judeo-Christianity continued to predominate
culturally"

From 70 A.D. to a period sometime before 110 A.D. the Gospels of Mark,
Matthew, Luke and John were produced. They do not constitute the first
written Christian documents: the letters of Paul date from well before
them. According to O. Culmann, Paul probably wrote his letter to the
Thessalonians in 50 A.D. He had probably disappeared several years prior
to the completion of Mark's Gospel.

Paul is the most controversial figure in Christianity. He was
considered to be a traitor to Jesus's thought by the latter's family and
by the apostles who had stayed in Jerusalem in the circle around James.
Paul created Christianity at the expense of those whom Jesus had
gathered around him to spread his teachings. He had not known Jesus
during his lifetime and he proved the legitimacy of his mission by
declaring that Jesus, raised from the dead, had appeared to him on the
road to Damascus.

It is quite reasonable to ask what Christianity might have been without
Paul and one could no doubt construct all sorts of hypotheses on this
subject. As far as the Gospels are concerned however, it is almost
certain that if this atmosphere of struggle between communities had not
existed, we would not have had the writings we possess today. They
appeared at a time of fierce struggle between the two communities. These
'combat writings', as Father Kannengiesser calls them, emerged from the
multitude of writings on Jesus.

These occurred at the time when Paul's style of Christianity won
through definitively, and created its own collection of official texts.
These texts constituted the 'Canon' which condemned and excluded as
unorthodox any other documents that were not suited to the line adopted
by the Church.

The Judeo-Christians have now disappeared as a community with any
influence, but one still hears people talking about them under the
general term of 'Judaïstic'. This is how Cardinal Daniélou describes
their disappearance:

"When they were cut off -from the Great Church, that gradually freed
itself from its Jewish attachments, they petered out very quickly in the
West. In the East however it is possible to find traces of them in the
Third and Fourth Centuries A.D., especially in Palestine, Arabia,
Transjordania, Syria and Mesopotamia. Others joined in the orthodoxy of
the Great Church, at the same time preserving traces of Semitic culture;
some of these still persist in the Churches of Ethiopia and Chaldea".


