The Four Gospels Sources and History
====================================

In the writings that come from the early stages of Christianity, the
Gospels are not mentioned until long after the works of Paul. It was not
until the middle of the Second century A.D., after 140 A.D. to be
precise, that accounts began to appear concerning a collection of
Evangelic writings, In spite of this, "from the beginning of the Second
century A.D.,

many Christian authors clearly intimate that they knew a. great many of
Paul's letters." These observations are set out in the Introduction to
the Ecumenical Translation of the Bible, New Testament (Introduction à
la Traduction oecuménique de la Bible, Nouveau Testament) edited
1972[^23]. They are worth mentioning from the outset, and it is useful to
point out here that the work referred to is the result of a collective
effort which brought together more than one hundred Catholic and
Protestant specialists.

The Gospels, later to become official, i.e. canonic, did not become
known until fairly late, even though they were completed at the
beginning of the Second century A.D. According to the Ecumenical
Translation, stories belonging to them began to be quoted around the
middle of the Second century A.D. Nevertheless, "it is nearly always
difficult to decide whether the quotations come from written texts that
the authors had next to them or if the latter were content to evoke the
memory of fragments of the oral tradition."

"Before 140 A.D." we read in the commentaries this translation of the
Bible contains, "there was, in any case, no account by which one might
have recognised a collection of evangelic writings". This statement is
the opposite of what A. Tricot writes (1960) in the commentary to his
translation of the New Testament: "Very early on, from the beginning of
the Second century A.D., it became a habit to say "Gospel' meaning the
books that Saint Justin around 150 A.D. had also called "The Memoirs of
the Apostles'." Unfortunately, assertions of this kind are sufficiently
common for the public to have ideas on the date of the Gospels which are
mistaken.

The Gospels did not form a complete whole 'very early on'; it did not
happen until more than a century after the end of Jesus's mission. The
Ecumenical Translation of the Bible estimates the date the four Gospels
acquired the status of canonic literature at around 170 A.D.

Justin's statement which calls the authors 'Apostles' is not acceptable
either, as we shall see.

As far as the date the Gospels were written is concerned, A. Tricot
states that Matthew's, Mark's and Luke's Gospels were written before 70
A.D.: but this is not acceptable, except perhaps for Mark. Following
many others, this commentator goes out of his way to present the authors
of the Gospels as the apostles or the companions of Jesus. For this
reason he suggests dates of writing that place them very near to the
time Jesus lived. As for John, whom A.

Tricot has us believe lived until roughly 100 A.D., Christians have
always been used to seeing him depicted as being very near to Jesus on
ceremonial occasions. It is very difficult however to assert that he is
the author of the Gospel that bears his name. For A. Tricot, as for
other commentators, the Apostle John (like Matthew) was the officially
qualified witness of the facts he recounts, although the majority of
critics do not support the hypothesis which says he wrote the fourth
Gospel.

If however the four Gospels in question cannot reasonably be regarded
as the 'Memoirs' of the apostles or companions of Jesus, where do they
come from?

24. Pub. Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, 1967

Culmann, in his book The New Testament (Le Nouveau Testament)[^24], says
of this that the evangelists were only the "spokesmen of the early
Christian community which wrote down the oral tradition. For thirty or
forty years, the Gospel had existed as an almost exclusively oral
tradition: the latter only transmitted sayings and isolated narratives.
The evangelists strung them together, each in his own way according to
his own character and theological preoccupations. They linked up the
narrations and sayings handed down by the prevailing tradition. The
grouping of Jesus's sayings and likewise the sequence of narratives is
made by the use of fairly vague linking phrases such as 'after this',
'when he had' etc. In other words, the 'framework' of the Synoptic
Gospels[^25] is of a purely literary order and is not based on
history."

The same author continues as follows:

"It must be noted that the needs of preaching, worship and teaching,
more than biographical considerations, were what guided the early
community when it wrote down the tradition of the life of Jesus. The
apostles illustrated the truth of the faith they were preaching by
describing the events in the life of Jesus. Their sermons are what
caused the descriptions to be written down. The sayings of Jesus were
transmitted, in particular, in the teaching of the catechism of the
early Church."

This is exactly how the commentators of the Ecumenical Translation of
the Bible (Traduction oecuménique de la Bible) describe the writing of
the Gospels: the formation of an oral tradition influenced by the
preachings of Jesus's disciples and other preachers; the preservation by
preaching of this material, which is in actual fact found in the
Gospels, by preaching, liturgy, and teaching of the faithful;

the slender possibility of a concrete form given by writings to certain
confessions of faith, sayings of Jesus, descriptions of the Passion for
example; the fact that the evangelists resort to various written forms
as well as data contained in the oral tradition.

They resort to these to produce texts which "are suitable for various
circles, which meet the needs of the Church, explain observations on the
Scriptures, correct errors and even, on occasion, answer adversaries'
objections. Thus the evangelists, each according to his own outlook,
have collected and recorded in writing the material given to them by the
oral tradition".

This position has been collectively adopted by more than one hundred
experts in the exegesis of the New Testament, both Catholic and
Protestant. It diverges widely from the line established by the Second
Vatican Council in its dogmatic constitution on the Revelation drawn up
between 1962 and 1965. This conciliar document has already been referred
to once above, when talking of the Old Testament. The Council was able
to declare of the latter that the books which compose it "contain
material which is imperfect and obsolete", but it has not expressed the
same reservations about the Gospels. On the contrary, as we read in the
following.

"Nobody can overlook the fact that, among all the Scriptures, even
those of the New Testament, the Gospels have a well-deserved position of
superiority. This is by virtue of the fact that they represent the most
pre-eminent witness to the life and teachings of the Incarnate Word, Our
Saviour. At all times and in all places the Church has maintained and
still maintains the apostolic origin of the four Gospels. What the
apostles actually preached on Christ's orders, both they and the men in
their following subsequently transmitted, with the divine inspiration of
the Spirit, in writings which are the foundation of the faith, i.e. the
fourfold Gospel according to Matthew, Mark, Luke and John."

"Our Holy Mother, the Church, has firmly maintained and still maintains
with the greatest constancy, that these four Gospels, which it
unhesitatingly confirms are historically authentic, faithfully transmit
what Jesus, Son Of God, actually did and taught during his life among
men for their eternal salvation until the day when He was taken up into
the heavens. . . . The sacred authors therefore composed the four
Gospels in such a way as to always give us true and frank information on
the life of Jesus".

This is an unambiguous affirmation of the fidelity with which the
Gospels transmit the acts and sayings of Jesus.

There is hardly any compatibility between the Council's affirmation and
what the authors quoted above claim. In particular the following:

The Gospels "are not to be taken literally" they are "writings suited
to an occasion" or "combat writings". Their authors "are writing down
the traditions of their own community concerning Jesus". (Father
Kannengiesser).

The Gospels are texts which "are suitable for various circles, meet the
needs of the Church, explain observations on the Scriptures, correct
errors and even, on occasion, answer adversaries' objections. Thus, the
evangelists, each according to his own outlook, have collected and
recorded in writing the material given to them by the oral tradition".
(Ecumenical Translation of the Bible).

It is quite clear that we are here faced with contradictory statements:
the declaration of the Council on the one hand, and more recently
adopted attitudes on the other. According to the declaration of the
Second Vatican Council, a faithful account of the actions and words of
Jesus is to be found in the Gospels; but it is impossible to reconcile
this with the existence in the text of contradictions, improbabilities,
things which are materially impossible or statements which run contrary
to firmly established reality.

If, on the other hand, one chooses to regard the Gospels as expressing
the personal point of view of those who collected the oral traditions
that belonged to various communities, or as writings suited to an
occasion or combat-writings, it does not come as a surprise to find
faults in the Gospels. All these faults are the sign that they were
written by men in circumstances such as these. The writers may have been
quite sincere, even though they relate facts without doubting their
inaccuracy. They provide us with descriptions which contradict other
authors' narrations, or are influenced by reasons of religious rivalry
between communities. They therefore present stories about the life of
Jesus from a completely different angle than their adversaries.

It has already been shown how the historical context is in harmony with
the second approach to the Gospels. The data we have on the texts
themselves definitively confirms it.

**THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MATTHEW**

Matthew's is the first of the four Gospels as they appear in the New
Testament. This position is perfectly justified by the fact that it is a
prolongation, as it were, of the Old Testament. It was written to show
that "Jesus fulfilled the history of Israel", as the commentators of the
Ecumenical Translation of the Bible note and on which we shall be
drawing heavily. To do BO, Matthew constantly refers to quotations from
the Old Testament which show how Jesus acted as if he were the Messiah
the Jews were awaiting.

This Gospel begins with a genealogy of Jesus[^26]. Matthew traces it
back to Abraham via David. We shall presently see the fault in the text
that most commentators silently ignore. Matthew's obvious intention was
nevertheless to indicate the general tenor of his work straight away by
establishing this line of descendants. The author continues the same
line of thought by constantly bringing to the forefront Jesus's attitude
toward Jewish law, the main principles of which (praying, fasting, and
dispensing charity) are summarized here.

Jesus addresses His teachings first and foremost to His own people.
This is how He speaks to the twelve Apostles "go nowhere among the
Gentiles, and enter no town of the Samaritans[^27] but go rather to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel." (Matthew 10, 5-6). "I was sent only
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel". (Matthew 15, 24). At the end
of his Gospel, in second place, Matthew extends the apostolic mission of
Jesus's first disciples to all nations. He makes Jesus give the
following order. "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations"
(Matthew 28, 19), but the primary destination must be the 'house of
Israel'. A.

Tricot says of this Gospel, "Beneath its Greek garb, the flesh and
bones of this book are Jewish, and so is its spirit; it has a Jewish
feel and bears its distinctive signs".

On the basis of these observations alone, the origins of Matthew's
Gospel may be placed in the tradition of a Judeo-Christian community.
According to O. Culmann, this community "was trying to break away from
Judaism while at the same time preserving the continuity of the Old
Testament. The main preoccupations and the general tenor of this Gospel
point towards a strained situation."

There are also political factors to be found in the text. The Roman
occupation of Palestine naturally heightened the desire of this country
to see itself liberated. They prayed for God to intervene in favour of
the people He had chosen among all others, and as their omnipotent
sovereign who could give direct support to the affairs of men, as He had
already done many times in the course of history.

What sort of person was Matthew? Let us say straight away that he is no
longer acknowledged to be one of Jesus's companions. A. Tricot
nevertheless presents him as such in his commentary to the translation
of the New Testament, 1960: "Matthew alias, Levi, was a customs officer
employed at the tollgate or customs house at Capharnaum when Jesus
called him to be one of His disciples." This is the opinion of the
Fathers of the Church, Origen, Jerome and Epiphanes. This opinion is no
longer held today. One point which is uncontested is that the author is
writing "for people who speak Greek, but nevertheless know Jewish
customs and the Aramaic language."

It would seem that for the commentators of the Ecumenical Translation,
the origins of this Gospel are as follows:

"It is normally considered to have been written in Syria, perhaps at
Antioch (. . .), or in Phoenicia, because a great many Jews lived in
these countries.[^28] (. . .) we have indications of a polemic against
the orthodox Judaism of the Synagogue and the Pharasees such as was
manifested at the synagogal assembly at Jamina circa 80 A.D." In such
conditions, there are many authors who date the first of the Gospels at
about 80-90 A.D., perhaps also a little earlier.

it is not possible to be absolutely definite about this . . . since we
do not know the author's exact name, we must be satisfied with a few
outlines traced in the Gospel itself. the author can be recognized by
his profession. He is well-versed in Jewish writings and traditions. He
knows, respects, but vigorously challenges the religious leaders of his
people. He is a past master in the art of teaching and making Jesus
understandable to his listeners. He always insists on the practical
consequences of his teachings. He would fit fairly well the description
of an educated Jew turned Christian; a householder "who brings out of
his treasure what is new and what is old" as Matthew says (13,52). This
is a long way from the civil servant at Capharnaum, whom Mark and Luke
call Levi, and who had become one of the twelve Apostles . . .

Everyone agrees in thinking that Matthew wrote his Gospel using the
same sources as Mark and Luke. His narration is, as we shall see,
different on several essential points. In spite of this, Matthew
borrowed heavily from Mark's Gospel although the latter was not one of
Jesus's disciples (O. Culmann).

Matthew takes very serious liberties with the text. We shall see this
when we discuss the Old Testament in relation to the genealogy of Jesus
which is placed at the beginning of his Gospel.

He inserts into his book descriptions which are quite literally
incredible. This is the adjective used in the work mentioned above by
Father Kannengiesser referring to an episode in the Resurrection. the
episode of the guard. He points out the improbability of the story
referring to military guards at the tomb, "these Gentile soldiers" who
"report, not to their hierarchical superiors, but to the high priests
who pay them to tell lies". He adds however: "One must not laugh at him
because Matthew's intention was extremely serious. In his own way he
incorporates ancient data from the oral tradition into his written work.
The scenario is nevertheless worthy of Jesus Christ Superstar.[^29]"

Let us not forget that this opinion on Matthew comes from an eminent
theologian teaching at the Catholic Institute of Paris (Institut
Catholique de Paris). Matthew relates in his narration the events
accompanying the death of Jesus. They are another example of his
imagination.

"And behold, the curtain of the temple was torn in two, from top to
bottom; and the earth shook, and the rocks were split; the tombs also
were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were
raised, and coming out of tombs after his resurrection they went into
the holy city and appeared to many."

This passage from Matthew (27, 51-53) has no corresponding passage in
the other Gospels. It is difficult to see how the bodies of the saints
in question could have raised from the dead at the time of Jesus's death
(according to the Gospels it was on the eve of the Sabbath) and only
emerge from their tombs after his resurrection (according to the same
sources on the day after the Sabbath).

The most notable improbability is perhaps to be found in Matthew. It is
the most difficult to rationalize of all that the Gospel authors claim
Jesus said. He relates in chapter 12, 38-40 the episode concerning
Jonah's sign: Jesus was among the scribes and pharisees who addressed
him in the following terms:

"Teacher, we wish to see a sign from you. But he answered them, "An
evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign; but no sign shall be
given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah. For as Jonah was three
days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man
be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth."

Jesus therefore proclaims that he will stay in the earth three days and
three nights. So Matthew, along with Luke and Mark, place the death and
burial of Jesus on the eve of the Sabbath. This, of course, makes the
time spent in the earth three days (treis êmeras in the Greek text), but
this period can only include two and not three nights (treis nuktas in
the Greek text[^30]).

Gospel commentators frequently ignore this episode. Father Roguet
nevertheless points out this improbability when he notes that Jesus
"only stayed in the tomb" three days (one of them complete) and two
nights. He adds however that "it is a set expression and really means
three days". It is disturbing to see commentators reduced to using
arguments that do not contain any positive meaning. It would be much
more satisfying intellectually to say that a gross error such as this
was the result of a scribe's mistake!

Apart from these improbabilities, what mostly distinguishes Matthew's
Gospel is that it is the work of a Judeo-Christian community in the
process of breaking away from Judaism while remaining in line with the
Old Testament. From the point of view of Judeo-Christian history it is
very important.

**THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK**

This is the shortest of the four Gospels. It is also the oldest, but in
spite of this it is not a book written by an apostle. At best it was
written by an apostle's disciple.

O. Culmann has written that he does not consider Mark to be a disciple
of Jesus. The author nevertheless points out, to those who have
misgivings about the ascription of this Gospel to the Apostle Mark, that
"Matthew and Luke would not have used this Gospel in the way they did
had they not known that it was indeed based on the teachings of an
apostle". This argument is in no way decisive. O. Culmann backs up the
reservations he expresses by saying that he frequently quotes from the
New Testament the sayings of a certain 'John nicknamed Mark'. These
quotations. do not however mention the name of a Gospel author, and the
text of Mark itself does not name any author.

The paucity of information on this point has led commentators to dwell
on details that seem rather extravagant: using the pretext, for example,
that Mark was the only evangelist to relate in his description of the
Passion the story of the young man who had nothing but a linen cloth
about his body and, when seized, left the linen cloth and ran away
naked. (Mark 14, 51-52), they conclude that the young man must have been
Mark, "the faithful disciple who tried to follow the teacher"
(Ecumenical Translation). Other commentators see in this "personal
memory a sign of authenticity, an anonymous signature", which "proves
that he was an eyewitness" (O. Culmann).

O. Culmann considers that "many turns of phrase corroborate the
hypothesis that the author was of Jewish origin," but the presence of
Latin expressions might suggest that he had written his Gospel in Rome.
"He addresses himself moreover to Christians not living in Palestine and
is careful to explain the Aramic expressions he uses."

Tradition has indeed tended to see Mark as Peter's companion in Rome.
It is founded on the final section of Peter's first letter (always
supposing that he was indeed the author) . Peter wrote in his letter.
"The community which is at Babylon, which is likewise chosen, sends you
greetings; and so does my son Mark." "By Babylon, what is probably meant
is Rome" we read in the commentary to the Ecumenical Translation. From
this, the commentators then imagine themselves authorized to conclude
that Mark, who was supposed to have been with Peter in Rome, was the
Evangelist . . .One wonders whether it was not the same line of
reasoning that led Papias, Bishop of Hierapolis in circa 150 A.D., to
ascribe this Gospel to Mark as 'Peter's interpreter' and the possible
collaborator of Paul.

Seen from this point of view, the composition of Mark's Gospel could be
placed after Peter's death, i.e. at between 65 and 70 A.D. for the
Ecumenical Translation and circa 70 A.D. for O. Culmann.

The text itself unquestionably reveals a major flaw. it is written with
a total disregard to chronology. Mark therefore places, at the beginning
of his narration (1, 16-20), the episode of the four fishermen whom
Jesus leads to follow him by simply saying "I will make you become
fishers of men", though they do not even know Him. The evangelist shows,
among other things, a complete lack of plausibility.

As Father Roguet has said, Mark is 'a clumsy writer', 'the weakest of
all the evangelists'; he hardly knows how to write a narrative. The
commentator reinforces his observation by quoting a passage about how
the twelve Apostles were selected.

Here is the literal translation:

"And he went up into the hills, and called to him those whom he
desired; and they came to him. And he made that the twelve were to be
with him, and to be sent out to preach and have authority to cast out
demons; and he made the twelve and imposed the name Simon on Peter"
(Mark, 3, 13-16). He contradicts Matthew and Luke, as has already been
noted above, with regard to the sign of Jonah. On the subject of signs
given by Jesus to men in the course of His mission Mark (8, 11-13)
describes an episode that is hardly credible:

"The Pharisees came and began to argue with him, seeking from him a
sign from heaven, to test him. And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and
said, 'Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly, I say to you, no
sign shall be given to this generation.' And he left them, and getting
into the boat again he departed to the other side."

There can be no doubt that this is an affirmation coming from Jesus
Himself about his intention not to commit any act which might appear
supernatural. Therefore the commentators of the Ecumenical Translation,
who are surprised that Luke says Jesus will only give one sign (the sign
of Jonah; see Matthew's Gospel) , consider it 'paradoxical' that Mark
should say "no sign shall be given to this generation" seeing, as they
note, the "miracles that Jesus himself gives as a sign" (Luke 7,22 and
11,20).

Mark's Gospel as a whole is officially recognised as being canonic. All
the same, the final section of Mark's Gospel (16,1920) is considered by
modem authors to have been tacked on to the basic work: the Ecumenical
Translation is quite explicit about this.

This final section is not contained in the two oldest complete
manuscripts of the Gospels, the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex Sinaiticus
that date from the Fourth century A.D. O. Culmann notes on this subject
that: "More recent Greek manuscripts and certain versions at this point
added a conclusion on appearances which is not drawn from Mark but from
the other Gospels." In fact, the versions of this added ending are very
numerous. In the texts there are long and short versions (both are
reproduced in the Bible, Revised Standard Version, 1952). Sometimes the
long version has some additional material.

Father Kannengiesser makes the following comments on the ending. "The
last verses must have been surpressed when his work was officially
received (or the popular version of it) in the community that guaranteed
its validity. Neither Matthew, Luke or a fortiori John saw the missing
section. Nevertheless, the gap was unacceptable. A long time afterwards,
when the writings of Matthew, Luke and John, all of them similar, had
been in circulation, a worthy ending to Mark was composed. Its elements
were taken from sources throughout the other Gospels. It would be easy
to recognise the pieces of the puzzle by enumerating Mark (16,9-20). One
would gain a more concrete idea of the free way in which the literary
genre of the evangelic narration was handled until the beginnings of the
Second century A.D."

What a blunt admission is provided for us here, in the thoughts of a
great theologian, that human manipulation exists in the texts of the
Scriptures!

**THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO LUKE**

For O. Culmann, Luke is a 'chronicler', and for Father Kannengiesser he
is a 'true novelist'. In his prologue to Theophilus, Luke warns us that
he, in his turn, following on from others who have written accounts
concerning Jesus, is going to write a narrative of the same facts using
the accounts and information of eyewitnesses- implying that he himself
is not one-including information from the apostles' preachings. It is
therefore to be a methodical piece of work which he introduces in the
following terms:

"Inasmuch as many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the things
which have been accomplished among us, just as they were delivered to us
by those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the
word, it seemed good to me also, having informed myself about all things
from their beginnings, to write an orderly account for you, most
excellent Theophilus, that you may know the truth concerning things of
which you have been informed."

From the very first line one can see all that separates Luke from the
'scribbler' Mark to whose work we have just referred. Luke's Gospel is
incontestably a literary work written in classical Greek free from any
barbarisms.

Luke was a cultivated Gentile convert to Christianity. His attitude
towards the Jews is immediately apparent. As O. Culmann points out, Luke
leaves out Mark's most Judaic verses and highlights the Jews'
incredulity at Jesus's words, throwing into relief his good relations
with the Samaritans, whom the Jews detested. Matthew, on the other hand,
has Jesus ask the apostles to flee from them. This is just one of many
striking examples of the fact that the evangelists make Jesus say
whatever suits their own personal outlook.

They probably do so with sincere conviction. They give us the version
of Jesus's words that is adapted to the point of view of their own
community. How can one deny in the face of such evidence that the
Gospels are 'combat writings' or 'writings suited to an occasion', as
has been mentioned already? The comparison between the general tone of
Luke's Gospel and Matthew's is in this respect a good demonstration.

Who was Luke? An attempt has been made to identify him with the
physician of the same name referred to by Paul in several of his
letters. The Ecumenical Translation notes that "several commentators
have found the medical occupation of the author of this Gospel confirmed
by the precision with which he describes the sick". This assessment is
in fact exaggerated out of all proportion. Luke does not properly
speaking 'describe' things of this kind; "the vocabulary he uses is that
of a cultivated man of his time". There was a Luke who was Paul's
travelling companion, but was he the same person? O. Culmann thinks he
was.

The date of Luke's Gospel can be estimated according to several
factors: Luke used Mark's and Matthew's Gospels. From what we read in
the Ecumenical Translation, it seems that he witnessed the siege and
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus's armies in 70 A.D. The Gospel
probably dates from after this time. Present-day critics situate the
time it was written at .circa 80-90 A.D., but several place it at an
even earlier date.

The various narrations in Luke show important differences when compared
to his predecessors. An outline of this has already been given. The
Ecumenical Translation indicates them on pages 181 et sec. O. Culmann,
in his book, The New Testament (Le Nouveau Testament) page 18, cites
descriptions in Luke's Gospel that are not to be found anywhere else.
And they are not about minor points of detail.

The descriptions of Jesus's childhood are unique to Luke's Gospel.
Matthew describes Jesus's childhood differently from Luke, and Mark does
not mention it at all. Matthew and Luke both provide different
genealogies of Jesus: the contradictions are so large and the
improbabilities so great, from a scientific point of view, that a
special chapter of this book has been devoted to the subject. It is
possible to explain why Matthew, who was addressing himself to Jews,
should begin the genealogy at Abraham, and include David in it, and that
Luke, as a converted Gentile, should want to go back even farther. We
shall see however that the two genealogies contradict each other from
David onwards.

Jesus's mission is described differently on many points by Luke,
Matthew and Mark.

An event of such great importance to Christians as the institution of
the Eucharist gives rise to variations between Luke and the other two
evangelists.[^31] Father Roguet notes in his book Initiation to the
Gospel (Initiation à l'Evangile) page 75, that the words used to
institute the Eucharist are reported by Luke (22,19-24) in a form very
different from the wording in Matthew (26,26-29) and in Mark (14,22-24)
which is almost identical.

"On the contrary" he writes, "the wording transmitted by Luke is very
similar to that evoked by Saint Paul" (First Letter to the Corinthians,
11,23-25) .

As we have seen, in his Gospel, Luke expresses ideas on the subject of
Jesus's Ascension which contradict what he says in the Acts of the
Apostles. He is recognized as their author and they form an integral
part of the New Testament. In his Gospel he situates the Ascension on
Easter Day, and in the Acts forty days later. We already know to what
strange commentaries this contradiction has led Christian experts in
exegesis.

Commentators wishing to be objective, such as those of the Ecumenical
Translation of the Bible, have been obliged to recognise as a general
rule the fact that for Luke "the main preoccupation was not to write
facts corresponding to material accuracy". When Father Kannengiesser
compares the descriptions in the Acts of the Apostles written by Luke
himself with the description of similar facts on Jesus raised from the
dead by Paul, he pronounces the following opinion on Luke: "Luke is the
most sensitive and literary of the four evangelists, he has all the
qualities of a true novelist".

**THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO JOHN**

John's Gospel is radically different from the three others; to such an
extent indeed that Father Roguet in his book Initiation to the Gospel
(Initiation à l'Evangile), having commented on the other three,
immediately evokes a startling image for the fourth. He calls it ,
different world'. It is indeed a unique book; different in the
arrangement and choice of subject, description and speech; different in
its style, geography, chronology; there are even differences in
theological outlook (O. Culmann).

Jesus's words are therefore differently recorded by John from the other
evangelists: Father Roguet notes on this that whereas the synoptics
record Jesus's words in a style that is "striking, much nearer to the
oral style", in John all is meditation; to such an extent indeed that
"one sometimes wonders if Jesus is still speaking or whether His ideas
have not imperceptibly been extended by the Evangelist's own
thoughts".

Who was the author? This is a highly debated question and extremely
varying opinions have been expressed on this subject. A. Tricot and
Father Roguet belong to a camp that does not have the slightest
misgivings: John's Gospel is the work of an eyewitness, its author is
John, son of Zebedee and brother of James. Many details are known about
this apostle and are set out in works for mass publication. Popular
iconography puts him near Jesus, as in the Last Supper prior to the
Passion. Who could imagine that John's Gospel was not the work of John
the Apostle whose figure is so familiar?

The fact that the fourth Gospel was written so late is not a serious
argument against this opinion. The definitive version was probably
written around the end of the First century A.D. To situate the time it
was written at sixty years after Jesus would be in keeping with an
apostle who was very young at the time of Jesus and who lived to be
almost a hundred.

Father Kannengiesser, in his study on the Resurrection, arrives at the
conclusion that none of the New Testament authors, save Paul, can claim
to have been eyewitnesses to Jesus's Resurrection. John nevertheless
related the appearance to a number of the assembled apostles, of which
he was probably a member, in the absence of Thomas (20,19-24), then
eight days later to the full group of apostles (20,25-29).

O. Culmann in his work The New Testament does not subscribe to this
view.

The Ecumenical Translation of the Bible states that the majority of
critics do not accept the hypothesis that the Gospel was written by
John, although this possibility cannot be entirely ruled out. Everything
points however towards the fact that the text we know today had several
authors:

"It is probable that the Gospel as it stands today was put into
circulation by the author's disciples who added chapter 21 and very
likely several annotations (i.e. 4,2 and perhaps 4,1; 4,44; 7,37b; 11,2;
19,35). With regard to the story of the adulterous woman (7,53-8,11),
everyone agrees that it is a fragment of unknown origin inserted later
(but nevertheless belonging to canonic Scripture)". Passage 19,35
appears as a 'signature' of an 'eyewitness' (O. Culmann), the only
explicit signature in the whole of John's Gospel; but commentators
believe that it was probably added later.

O. Culmann thinks that latter additions are obvious in this Gospel;
such as chapter 21 which is probably the work of a "disciple who may
well have made slight alterations to the main body of the Gospel".

It is not necessary to mention all the hypotheses suggested by experts
in exegesis. The remarks recorded here made by the most eminent
Christian writers on the questions of the authorship of the fourth
Gospel are sufficient to show the extent of the confusion reigning on
the subject of its authorship.

The historical value of John's stories has been contested to a great
extent. The discrepancy between them and the other three Gospels is
quite blatant. O. Culman offers an explanation for this; he sees in John
a different theological point of view from the other evangelists. This
aim "directs the choice of stories from the Logia[^32] recorded, as well
as the way in which they are reproduced . . . Thus the author often
prolongs the lines and makes the historical Jesus say what the Holy
Spirit Itself revealed to Him". This, for the exegete in question, is
the reason for the discrepancies.

It is of course quite conceivable that John, who was writing after the
other evangelists, should have chosen certain stories suitable for
illustrating his own theories. One should not be surprised by the fact
that certain descriptions contained in the other Gospels are missing in
John. The Ecumenical Translation picks out a certain number of such
instances (page 282). Certain gaps hardly seem credible however, like
the fact that the Institution of the Eucharist is not described.

It is unthinkable that an episode so basic to Christianity, one indeed
that was to be the mainstay of its liturgy, i.e. the mass, should not be
mentioned by John, the most pre-eminently meditative evangelist. The
fact is, he limits himself, in the narrative of the supper prior to the
Passion, to simply describing the washing of the disciples' feet, the
prediction of Judas's betrayal and Peter's denial.

In contrast to this, there are stories which are unique to John and not
present in the other three. The Ecumenical Translation mentions these
(page 283). Here again, one could infer that the three authors did not
see the importance in these episodes that John saw in them. It is
difficult however not to be taken aback when one finds in John a
description of the appearance of Jesus raised from the dead to his
disciples beside the Sea of Tiberias (John 21,1-14).

The description is nothing less than the reproduction (with numerous
added details) of the miracle catch of fish which Luke (5,1-11) presents
as an episode that occurred during Jesus's life. In his description Luke
alludes to the presence of the Apostle John who, as tradition has it,
was the evangelist, Since this description in John's Gospel forms part
of chapter 21, agreed to be a later addition, one can easily imagine
that the reference to John's name in Luke could have led to its
artificial inclusion in the fourth Gospel. The necessity of transforming
a description from Jesus's life to a posthumous description in no way
prevented the evangelical text from being manipulated.

Another important point on which John's Gospel differs from the other
three is in the duration of Jesus's mission. Mark, Matthew and Luke
place it over a period of one year. John spreads it over two years. O.
Culmann notes this fact. On this subject the Ecumenical Translation
expresses the following .

"The synoptics describe a long period in Galilee followed by a march
that was more or less prolonged towards Judea, and finally a brief stay
in Jerusalem. John, on the other hand, describes frequent journeys from
one area to another and mentions a long stay in Judea, especially in
Jerusalem (1,19-51; 2,13-3,36; 5,1-47; 14,20-31). He mentions several
Passover celebrations (2,13; 5,1; 6,4; 11,55) and thus suggests a
ministry that lasted more than two years".

Which one of them should one believe-Mark, Matthew, Luke or John?

**SOURCES OF THE GOSPELS**

The general outline that has been given here of the Gospels and which
emerges from a critical examination of the texts tends to make one think
of a literature which is "disjointed, with a plan that lacks continuity"
and "seemingly insuperable contradictions". These are the terms used in
the judgement passed on them by the commentators of the Ecumenical
Translation of the Bible. It is important to refer to their authority
because the consequences of an appraisal of this subject are extremely
serious.

It has already been seen how a few notions concerning the religious
history of the time when the Gospels were written helped to explain
certain disconcerting aspects of this literature apparent to the
thoughtful reader. It is necessary to continue, however, and ascertain
what present-day works can tell us about the sources the Evangelists
drew on when writing their texts. It is also interesting to see whether
the history of the texts once they were established can help to explain
certain aspects they present today.

The problem of sources was approached in a very simplistic fashion at
the time of the Fathers of the Church. In the early centuries of
Christianity, the only source available was the Gospel that the complete
manuscripts provided first, i.e. Matthew's Gospel. The problem of
sources only concerned Mark and Luke because John constituted a quite
separate case. Saint Augustine held that Mark, who appears second in the
traditional order of presentation, had been inspired by Matthew and had
summarized his work. He further considered that Luke, who comes third in
the manuscripts, had used data from both; his prologue suggests this,
and has already been discussed.

The experts in exegesis at this period were as able as we are to
estimate the degree of corroboration between the texts and find a large
number of verses common to two or three synoptics. Today, the
commentators of the Ecumenical Translation of the Bible provide the
following figures:

verses common to all three synoptics -------------- 330
verses common to Mark and Matthew ------------ 178
verses common to Mark and Luke ----------------100
verses common to Matthew and Luke ------------ 230

The verses unique to each of the first three Gospels are as follows:
Matthew 330, Mark 53, and Luke 500.

From the Fathers of the Church until the end of the Eighteenth century
A.D., one and a half millenia passed without any new problems being
raised on the sources of the evangelists: people continued to follow
tradition. It was not until modem times that it was realized, on the
basis of these data, how each evangelist had taken material found in the
others and compiled his own specific narration guided by his own
personal views. Great weight was attached to actual collection of
material for the narration. It came from the oral traditions of the
communities from which it originated on the one hand, and from a common
written Aramaic source that has not been rediscovered on the other. This
written source could have formed a compact mass or have been composed of
many fragments of different narrations used by each evangelist to
construct his own original work.

More intensive studies in circa the last hundred years have led to
theories which are more detailed and in time will become even more
complicated. The first of the modem theories is the so-called 'Holtzmann
Two Sources Theory', (1863). O. Culmann and the Ecumenical Translation
explain that, according to this theory, Matthew and Luke may have been
inspired by Mark on the one hand and on the other by a common document
which has since been lost. The first two moreover each had his own
sources. This leads to the following diagram:

Mark Common Document

Culmann criticises the above on the following points: 1. Mark's work,
used by both Luke and Matthew, was probably not the author's Gospel but
an earlier version.

2. The diagram does not lay enough emphasis on the oral tradition. This
appears to be of paramount importance because it alone preserved Jesus's
words and the descriptions of his mission during a period of thirty or
forty years, as each of the Evangelists was only the spokesman for the
Christian community which wrote down the oral tradition.

This is how it is possible to conclude that the Gospels we possess
today are a reflection of what the early Christian communities knew of
Jesus's life and ministry. They also mirror their beliefs and
theological ideas, of which the evangelists were the spokesmen.

The latest studies in textual criticism on the sources of the Gospels
have clearly shown an even more complicated formation process of the
texts. A book by Fathers Benoit and Boismard, both professors at the
Biblical School of Jerusalem (1972-1973), called the Synopsis of the
Four Gospels (Synopse des quatres Evangiles) stresses the evolution of
the text in stages parallel to the evolution of the tradition. This
implies the conquences set out by Father Benoit in his introduction to
Father Boismard's part of the work. He presents them in the following
terms:

"(. . .) the wording and form of description that result from a long
evolution of tradition are not as authentic as in the original. some
readers of this work will perhaps be surprised or embarrassed to learn
that certain of Jesus's sayings, parables, or predictions of His destiny
were not expressed in the way we read them today, but were altered and
adapted by those who transmitted them to us. This may come as a source
of amazement and even scandal to those not used to this kind of
historical investigation."

The alterations and adaptations to the texts made by those transmitting
them to us were done in a way that Father Boismard explains by means of
a highly complex diagram. It is a development of the so-called 'Two
Sources Theory', and is the product of examination and comparison of the
texts which it is not possible to summarize here. Those readers who are
interested in obtaining further details should consult the original work
published by Les Editions du Cerf, Paris.

Four basic documents-A, B, C and Q-represent the original sources of
the Gospels (see general diagram). Page 76.

Document A comes from a Judeo-Christian source. Matthew and Mark were
inspired by it.
Document B is a reinterpretation of document A, for use in
Pagan-cum-Christian churches: all the evangelists were inspired by it
except Matthew.
Document C inspired Mark, Luke and John.
Document Q constitutes the majority of sources common to Matthew and
Luke; it is the , Common Document' in the 'Two Sources' theory referred
to earlier.

None of these basic documents led to the production of the definitive
texts we know today. Between them and the final version lay the
intermediate versions: Intermediate Matthew, Intermediate Mark,
Intermediate Luke and Intermediate John. These four intermediate
documents were to lead to the final versions of the four Gospels, as
well as to inspire the final corresponding versions of other Gospels.
One only has to consult the diagram to see the intricate relationships
the author has revealed.

The results of this scriptural research are of great importance. They
show how the Gospel texts not only have a history (to be discussed
later) but also a 'pre-history', to use Father Boismard's expression.
What is meant is that before the final versions appeared, they underwent
alterations at the Intermediate Document stage. Thus it is possible to
explain, for example, how a well-known story from Jesus's life, such as
the miracle catch of fish, is shown in Luke to be an event that happened
during His life, and in John to be one of His appearances after His
Resurrection.

The conclusion to be drawn from the above is that when we read the
Gospel, we can no longer be at all sure that we are reading Jesus's
word. Father Benoit addresses himself to the readers of the Gospel by
warning them and giving them the following compensation: "If the reader
is obliged in more than one case to give up the notion of hearing
Jesus's voice directly, he still hears the voice of the Church and he
relies upon it as the divinely appointed interpreter of the Master who
long ago spoke to us on earth and who now speaks to us in His glory".

How can one reconcile this formal statement of the inauthenticity of
certain texts with the phrase used in the dogmatic constitution on
Divine Revelation by the Second Vatican Council assuring us to the
contrary, i.e. the faithful transmission of Jesus's words: "These four
Gospels, which it (the Church) unhesitatingly confirms are historically
authentic, faithfully transmit what Jesus, Son of God, actually did and
taught during his life among men for their eternal salvation, until the
day when he was taken up into the heavens"?

It is quite clear that the work of the Biblical School of Jerusalem
flatly contradicts the Council's declaration.


M. E. BOISMARD
SYNOPSIS OF THE FOUR GOSPELS[^1]
GENERAL DIAGRAM
(1) Synopse des quatre Evangiles

**HISTORY OF THE TEXTS**

One would be mistaken in thinking that once the Gospels were written
they constituted the basic Scriptures of the newly born Christianity and
that people referred to them the same way they referred to the Old
Testament. At that time, the foremost authority was the oral tradition
as a vehicle for Jesus's words and the teachings of the apostles. The
first writings to circulate were Paul's letters and they occupied a
prevalent position long before the Gospels. They were, after all,
written several decades earlier.

It has already been shown, that contrary to what certain commentators
are still writing today, before 140 A.D. there was no witness to the
knowledge that a collection of Gospel writings existed. It was not until
circa 170 A.D. that the four Gospels acquired the status of canonic
literature.

In the early days of Christianity, many writings on Jesus were in
circulation. They were not subsequently retained as being worthy of
authenticity and the Church ordered them to be hidden, hence their name
'Apocrypha'. Some of the texts of these works have been well preserved
because they "benefitted from the fact that they were generally valued",
to quote the Ecumenical Translation. The same was true for the Letter of
Barnabas, but unfortunately others were "more brutally thrust aside" and
only fragments of them remain. They were considered to be the messengers
of error and were removed from the sight of the faithful. Works such as
the Gospels of the Nazarenes, the Gospels of the Hebrews and the Gospels
of the Egyptians, known through quotations taken from the Fathers of the
Church, were nevertheless fairly closely related to the canonic Gospels.
The same holds good for Thomas's Gospel and Barnabas's Gospel.

Some of these apocryphal writings contain imaginary details, the
product of popular fantasy. Authors of works on the Apocrypha also quote
with obvious satisfaction passages which are literally ridiculous.
Passages such as these are however to be found in all the Gospels. One
has only to think of the imaginary description of events that Matthew
claims took place at Jesus's death. It is possible to find passages
lacking seriousness in all the early writings of Christianity: One must
be honest enough to admit this.

The abundance of literature concerning Jesus led the Church to make
certain excisions while the latter was in the process of becoming
organized. Perhaps a hundred Gospels were suppressed. Only four were
retained and put on the official list of neo-Testament writings making
up what is called the 'Canon'.

In the middle of the Second century A.D., Marcion of Sinope put heavy
pressure on the ecclesiastic authorities to take a stand on this. He was
an ardent enemy of the Jews and at that time rejected the whole of the
Old Testament and everything in writings produced after Jesus that
seemed to him too close to the Old Testament or to come from the
Judeo-Christian tradition. Marcion only acknowledged the value of Luke's
Gospel because, he believed Luke to be the spokesman of Paul and his
writings.

The Church declared Marcion a heretic and put into its canon all the
Letters of Paul, but included the other Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John. They also added several other works such as the Acts of the
Apostles. The official list nevertheless varies with time during the
first centuries of Christianity. For a while, works that were later
considered not to be valid (i.e. Apocrypha) figured in it, while other
works contained in today's New Testament Canon were excluded from it at
this time. These hesitations lasted until the Councils of Hippo Regius
in 393 and Carthage in 397. The four Gospels always figured in it
however.

One may join Father Boismard in regretting the disappearance of a vast
quantity of literature declared apocryphal by the Church although it was
of historical interest. The above author indeed gives it a place in his
Synopsis of the Four Gospels alongside that of the official Gospels. He
notes that these books still existed in libraries near the end of the
Fourth century A.D.

This was the century that saw things put into serious order. The oldest
manuscripts of the Gospels date from this period. Documents prior to
this, i.e. papyri from the Third century A.D. and one possibly dating
from the Second, only transmit fragments to us. The two oldest parchment
manuscripts are Greek, Fourth century A.D. They are the Codex Vaticanus,
preserved in the Vatican Library and whose place of discovery is
unknown, and the Codex Sinaiticus, which was discovered on Mount Sinai
and is now preserved in the British Museum, London. The second contains
two apocryphal works.

According to the Ecumenical Translation, two hundred and fifty other
known parchments exist throughout the world, the last of these being
from the Eleventh century A.D. "Not all the copies of the New Testament
that have come down to us are identical" however. "On the contrary, it
is possible to distinguish differences of varying degrees of importance
between them, but however important they may be, there is always a large
number of them. Some of these only concern differences of grammatical
detail,

vocabulary or word order. Elsewhere however, differences between
manuscripts can be seen which affect the meaning of whole passages". If
one wishes to see the extent of textual differences, one only has to
glance through the Novum Testamentum Graece.[^33] This work contains a
so-called 'middle-of-the-road' Greek text. It is a text of synthesis
with notes containing all the variations found in the different
versions.

The authenticity of a text, and of even the most venerable manuscript,
is always open to debate. The Codex Vaticanus is a good example of this.
The facsimile reproductions edited by the Vatican City, 1965, contains
an accompanying note from its editors informing us that "several
centuries after it was copied (believed to have been in circa the Tenth
or Eleventh century), a scribe inked over all the letters except those
he thought were a mistake". There are passages in the text where the
original letters in light brown still show through,

contrasting visibly with the rest of the text which is in dark brown.
There is no indication that it was a faithful restoration. The note
states moreover that "the different hands that corrected and annotated
the manuscript over the centuries have not yet been definitively
discerned; a certain number of corrections were undoubtedly made when
the text was inked over." In all the religious manuals the text is
presented as a Fourth century copy. One has to go to sources at the
Vatican to discover that various hands may have altered the text
centuries later.

One might reply that other texts may be used for comparison, but how
does one choose between variations that change the meaning? It is a well
known fact that a very old scribe's correction can lead to the
definitive reproduction of the corrected text. We shall see further on
how a single word in a passage from John concerning the Paraclete
radically alters its meaning and completely changes its sense when
viewed from a theological point of view.

O. Culmann, in his book, The New Testament, writes the following on the
subject of variations:

"Sometimes the latter are the result of inadvertant flaws: the copier
misses a word out, or conversely writes it twice, or a whole section of
a sentence is carelessly omitted because in the manuscript to be copied
it appeared between two identical words. Sometimes it is a matter of
deliberate corrections, either the copier has taken the liberty of
correcting the text according to his own ideas or he has tried to bring
it into line with a parallel text in a more or less skilful attempt to
reduce the number of discrepancies.

As, little by little, the New Testament writings broke away from the
rest of early Christian literature, and came to be regarded as Holy
Scripture, so the copiers became more and more hesitant about taking the
same liberties as their predecessors: they thought they were copying the
authentic text, but in fact wrote down the variations. Finally, a copier
sometimes wrote annotations in the margin to explain an obscure passage.
The following copier, thinking that the sentence he found in the margin
had been left out of the passage by his predecessor, thought it
necessary to include the margin notes in the text. This process often
made the new text even more obscure."

The scribes of some manuscripts sometimes took exceedingly great
liberties with the texts. This is the case of one of the most venerable
manuscripts after the two referred to above, the Sixth century Codex
Bezae Cantabrigiensis. The scribe probably noticed the difference
between Luke's and Matthew's genealogy of Jesus, so he put Matthew's
genealogy into his copy of Luke, but as the second contained fewer names
than the first, he padded it out with extra names (without balancing
them up).

Is it possible to say that the Latin translations, such as Saint
Jerome's Sixth century Vulgate, or older translations (Vetus Itala), or
Syriac and Coptic translations are any more faithful than the basic
Greek manuscripts? They might have been made from manuscripts older than
the ones referred to above and subsequently lost to the present day. We
just do not know.

It has been possible to group the bulk of these versions into families
all bearing a certain number of common traits. According to O. Culmann,
one can define:

--a so-called Syrian text, whose constitution could have led to the
majority of the oldest Greek manuscripts; this text was widely
disseminated throughout Europe from the Sixteenth century A.D. onwards
thanks to printing. the specialists say that it is probably the worst
text. --a so-called Western text, with old Latin versions and the Codex
Bezae Cantabrigiensis which is in both Greek and Latin; according to the
Ecumenical Translation, one of its characteristics is a definite
tendency to provide explanations, paraphrases, inaccurate data and
'harmonizations'. --the so-called Neutral text, containing the Codex
Vaticanus and the Codex Sinaiticus, is said to have a fairly high level
of purity; modern editions of the New Testament readily follow it,
although it too has its flaws (Ecumenical Translation).

All that modern textual criticism can do in this respect is to try and
reconstitute "a text which has the most likelihood of coming near to the
original. In any case, there can be no hope of going back to the
original text itself." (Ecumenical Translation)


