The Gospels and Modern Science the General Genealogies of Jesus
===============================================================

The Gospels contain very few passages which give rise to a
confrontation with modern scientific data.

Firstly however, there are many descriptions referring to miracles
which hardly lend themselves to scientific comment. The miracles concern
people-the healing of the sick (the insane, blind, paralytic ; the
healing of lepers, resurrection of Lazarus) as well as the purely
material phenomena that lie outside the laws of nature (the description
of Jesus walking on water that held him up, the changing of the water
into wine). Sometimes a natural phenomenom is seen from an unusual angle
by virtue of the fact that the time element is very short: the immediate
calming of the storm, the instantaneous withering of the fig tree, the
miracle catch of fish, as if all the fish in the sea had come together
at exactly the place where the nets were cast.

God intervenes in His Omnipotent Power in all these episodes. One need
not be surprised by what He is able to achieve; by human standards it is
stupendous, but for Him it is not. This does not at all mean that a
believer should forget science. A belief in divine miracles and in
science is quite compatible: one is on a divine scale, the other on a
human one.

Personally, I am very willing to believe that Jesus cured a leper, but
I cannot accept the fact that a text is declared authentic and inspired
by God when I read that only twenty generations existed between the
first man and Abraham. Luke says this in his Gospel (3, 23-28). We shall
see in a moment the reasons that show why Luke's text, like the Old
Testament text on the same theme, is quite simply a product of human
imagination.

The Gospels (like the Qur'an) give us the same description of Jesus's
biological origins. The formation of Jesus in the maternal uterus
occurred in circumstances which lay outside the laws of nature common to
all human beings. The ovule produced by the mother's ovary did not need
to join with a spermatozoon, which should have come from his father, to
form the embryo and hence a viable infant. The phenomenon of the birth
of a normal individual without the fertilizing action of the male is
called 'parthenogenesis'.

In the animal kingdom, parthenogenesis can be observed under certain
conditions. This is true for various insects, certain invertebrates and,
very occasionally, a select breed of bird. By way of experiment, it has
been possible, for example, in certain mammals (female rabbits), to
obtain the beginnings of a development of the ovule into an embryo at an
extremely rudimentary stage without any intervention of spermatozoon. It
was not possible to go any further however and an example of complete
parthenogenesis, whether experimental or natural, is unknown. Jesus is
an unique case. Mary was a virgin mother. She preserved her virginity
and did not have any children apart from Jesus. Jesus is a biological
exception.[^34]

**THE GENEALOGIES OF JESUS.**

The two genealogies contained in Matthew's and Luke's Gospels give rise
to problems of verisimilitude, and conformity with scientific data, and
hence authenticity. These problems are a source of great embarrassment
to Christian commentators because the latter refuse to see in them what
is very obviously the product of human imagination. The authors of the
Sacerdotal text of Genesis, Sixth century B.C., had already been
inspired by imagination for their genealogies of the first men. It again
inspired Matthew and Luke for the data they did not take from the Old
Testament.

One must straight away note that the male genealogies have absolutely
no relevance to Jesus. Were one to give a genealogy to Mary's only son,
who was without a biological father, it would have to be the genealogy
of his mother Mary.

Here is the text of the Revised Standard Version of the Bible, 1952:

The genealogy according to Matthew is at the beginning of his Gospel:

So all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations,
and from David to the deportation to Babylon fourteen generations, and
from the deportation to Babylon to the Christ fourteen generations".
(Matthew, I, 1-17)

The genealogy given by Luke (3, 23-38) is different from Matthew. The
text reproduced here is from the Revised Standard Version of the
Bible:

"Jesus, when he began his ministry, was about thirty years of age,
being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli, the son of
Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son
of Joseph, the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the
son of Esli, the son of Naggai, the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias,
the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda, the son of
Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel,
the son of Neri, the sOn of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam,
the son of Elmadam, the son of Er, the son of Joshua, the son of
Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son
of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the
son of Eliakim, the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha,
the son of Nathan, the son of David, the son of Jesse, the son of Obed,
the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon, the son of
Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Ami, the SOD of Hezron, the son
of Perez, the son of Judah, the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son
of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor, the son of Serug, the
son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah, the
son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah,
the son of Lamech, the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of
Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan, the son of Enos, the
son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God."

The genealogies appear more clearly when presented in two tables, one
showing the genealogy before David and the other after him.


GENEALOGY OF JESUS, BEFORE DAVIDAccording to Marrhew VARIATIONS IN THE
MANUSCRIPTS AND IN RELATION TO THE OLD TESTAMENT.

Apart from variations in spelling, the following must be mentioned: a)
Matthew's Gospel The genealogy has disappeared from the Codex Bezae
Cantabrigiensis, a very important Six century manuscript in both Greek
and Latin. It has completely disappeared from the Greek text and also a
large part of the Latin text. It may quite simply be that the first
pages were lost. One must note here the great liberties Matthew has
taken with the Old Testament. He has pared down the genealogies for the
sake of a strange numerical demonstration (which, in the end, he does
not give, as we shall see).

b) Luke's Gospel

1.-Before Abraham: Luke mentions 20 names; the Old Testament only
mentions 19 (see table of Adam's descendants in the Old Testament
section of this work). After Arphaxad (No. 12) , Luke has added a person
called Cainan (No. 13), who is not mentioned in Genesis as the son of
Arphaxad.

2.-From Abraham to David: 14 to 16 names are found according to the
manuscripts.

3.-From David to Jesus.

The most important variation is the Codex Bezae Cantabrigiensis which
attributes to Luke a whimsical genealogy taken from Matthew and to which
the scribe has added five names. Unfortunately, the genealogy of
Matthew's Gospel has disappeared from this manuscript, so that
comparison is no longer possible.

CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE TEXTS.

We are here faced with two different genealogies having one essential
point in common, i.e. they both pass via Abraham and David. To make this
examination easier, we shall separate the whole into three critical
sections:

-From Adam to Abraham.
-From Abraham to David.
-From David to Jesus.

1. The Period from Adam to Abraham

Matthew began his genealogy with Abraham so we are not concerned with
his text here. Luke alone provides information on Abraham's ancestors
going back to Adam: 20 names, 19 of which are to be found in Genesis
(chapters 4, 5 and 11), as has already been stated.

Is it possible to believe that only 19 or 20 generations of human
beings existed before Abraham? The problem has been examined in the
discussion of the Old Testament. If one looks at the table of Adam's
descendants, based on Genesis and giving figures for the time element
contained in the Biblical text, one can see that roughly nineteen
centuries passed between man's appearance on earth and the birth of
Abraham. Today it is estimated that Abraham Was alive in circa 1850 B.C.
and it has been deduced from this that the information provided by the
Old Testament places man's appearance on earth at roughly thirty-eight
centuries B.C. Luke was obviously guided by these data for his Gospel.
He expresses a blatant untruth for having copied them down and we have
already seen the decisive historical arguments leading to this
statement.

The idea that Old Testament data are unacceptable in the present day is
duly admitted; they belong to the 'obsolete' material referred to by the
Second Vatican Council. The fact, however that the Gospels take up the
same scientifically incompatible data is an extremely serious
observation which may be used to oppose those who defend the historical
accuracy of the Gospel texts.

Commentators have quickly sensed this danger. They try to get round the
difficulty by saying that it is not a complete genealogical tree, that
the evangelist has missed names out. They claim that this was done quite
deliberately, and that his sole "intention was to establish the broad
lines or essential elements of a line of descent based on historical
reality."[^35] There is nothing in the texts that permits them to form
this hypothesis. In the text it says quite clearly: A was the father of
B, or B was the son of A. For the part preceding Abraham in particular,
the evangelist draws moreover on the Old Testament where the genealogies
are set out in the following form:

When X had lived n years, he became the father of Y . . . When Y had
lived n years, he became the father of Z. . . .

There is therefore no break.

The part of Jesus's genealogy according to Luke, which precedes
Abraham, is not acceptable in the light of modern knowledge. 2. The
Period from Abraham to David.

Here the two genealogies tally (or almost), excepting one or two names:
the difference may be explained by copiers' errors. Does this mean that
the evangelists are to be considered accurate?

History situates David at circa 1000 B.C. and Abraham at 1800-1860
B.C.: 14 to 16 generations for roughly eight centuries. Can one believe
this? One might say that for this period the Gospel texts are at the
very limit of the admissible.

3. The Post-David Period.

It is a great pity, but unfortunately the texts no longer tally at all
when it comes to establishing Joseph's line from David, and figuratively
speaking, Jesus's, for the Gospel.

Leaving aside the obvious falsification in the Codex Bezae
Cantabrigiensis concerning Luke, let us now compare what the two most
venerable manuscripts have to offer: the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex
Sinaiticus.

In the genealogy according to Luke 42 names are placed after David (No.
35) down to Jesus (No. 77). In the genealogy according to Matthew 27 are
mentioned after David (No. 14) down to Jesus (No. 41). The number of
(fictitious) ancestors given to Jesus after David is therefore different
in the two Gospels. The names themselves are different as well.

This is not all.

Matthew tells us that he discovered how Jesus's genealogy split up
after Abraham into three groups of 14 names; first group from Abraham to
David; second from David to the deportation to Babylon; third from the
deportation to Jesus. His text does indeed contain 14 names in the first
two groups, but in the third-from the deportation to Jesus-there are
only 13 and not 14, as expected; the table shows that Shealthiel is No.
29 and Jesus No. 41. There is no variation of Matthew that gives 14
names for this group.

To enable himself to have 14 names in his second group, Matthew takes
very great liberties with the Old Testament text. The names of the first
six descendants of David (No. 15 to 20) tally with the data in the Old
Testament, but the three descendants of Ioram (No. 20), given in
Chronicles 11 of the Bible as Ahaziah, Joash, and Amaziah, are
suppressed by Matthew. Elsewhere, Jechoniah (No. 28) is for Matthew the
son of Josiah, although Kings II of the Bible tells us that Eliakim
comes between Josiah and Jechoniah.

It may be seen from this that Matthew has altered the genealogical
lines in the Old Testament to present an artificial group of 14 names
between David and the deportation to Babylon. There is also the fact
that one name is missing in Matthew's third group, so that none of the
present-day Gospel texts contains the 42 names mentioned. What is
surprising is not so much the existence of the omission itself
(explained perhaps by a very old scribe's error that was subsequently
perpetuated), but the almost total silence of commentators on this
subject. How can one miss this omission? W. Trilling breaks this pious
conspiracy of silence in his book The Gospel According to Matthew
(L'Evangile selon Matthieu)[^36] by devoting one line to it. It is a fact
which is of considerable importance because the commentators of this
Gospel, including the Ecumenical Translation and Cardinal Daniélou among
others, stress the great symbolical significance of Matthew's 3 x 14.
This significance was so important for the evangelist that he suppressed
Biblical names without hesitation to arrive at his numerical
demonstration.

To make this hold good, commentators will, no doubt, construct some
reassuring statements of an apologetic nature, justifying the fact that
names have been craftily suppressed and carefully avoiding the omission
that undermines the whole point of what the evangelist was trying to
show.

**COMMENTARIES OF MODERN EXPERTS IN EXEGESIS.**

In his book The Gospels of Childhood (1967) Les Evangiles de
l'Enfance)[^37], Cardinal Daniélou invests Matthew's 'numerical
schematisation' with a symbolic value of paramount importance since it
is this that establishes Jesus's ancestry, which is asserted also by
Luke. For him Luke and Matthew are 'historians' who have completed their
'historical investigations', and the 'genealogy' has been 'taken down
from the archives of Jesus family'. It must be added here that the
archives have never been found.[^38] Cardinal Daniélou condemns out of
hand anyone who criticizes his point of view. "It is the Western
mentality, ignorance of Judeo- Christianity and the absence of a Semitic
outlook that have made so many experts in exegesis loose their way when
interpreting the Gospels. They have projected their own categories onto
them: (sic) Platonic, Cartesian, Hegelian and Heideggerian. It is easy
to see why everything is mixed up in their minds." Plato, Descartes,
Hegel and Heidegger obviously have nothing to do with the critical
attitude one may have towards these whimsical genealogies.

In his search for the meaning of Matthew's 3 x 14, the author expands
on strange suppositions. They are worth quoting here: "What may be meant
are the common ten weeks of the Jewish Apocalypse. The first three,
corresponding to the time from Adam to Abraham, would have been
subtracted; seven weeks of years would then remain, the first six would
correspond to the six times seven representing the three groups of
fourteen and leaving the seventh, started by Christ with whom the
seventh age of the world begins." Explanations like this are beyond
comment!

The commentators of the Ecumenical Translation-New Testament-also give
us numerical variations of an apologetic nature which are equally
unexpected: For Matthew's 3 x 14:

a) 14 could be the numerical total of the 3 consonants in the Hebrew
name David (D= 4, V= 6), hence 4+6+4= 14.
b) 3 x 14 = 6 x 7 and "Jesus came at the end of the sixth week of Holy
history beginning with Abraham."

For Luke, this translation gives 77 names from Adam to Jesus, allowing
the number 7 to come up again, this time by dividing 77 by 7 (7x 11=
77). It is quite apparent that for Luke the number of variations where
words are added or subtracted is such that a list of 77 names is
completely artificial. It does however have the advantage of adapting
itself to these numerical games.

The genealogies of Jesus as they appear in the Gospels may perhaps be
the subject that has led Christian commentators to perform their most
characteristic feats of dialectic acrobatics, on par indeed with Luke's
and Matthew's imagination.


