57: To Feign Support To Tyrant Rulers
=====================================

A tradition related through Sunni chain of narrators is recorded in
Biharul Anwar wherein Huzaifah says that he heard the Messenger of Allah
say: Woe upon the tyrant rulers of this nation. How they commit
massacres leaving alone those who are apparently obedient to them. They
terrify all the people, therefore the believers and pious ones meet them
pretending solidarity with them while actually they want to run away
from them.

Thus when the Almighty Allah wants to restore the glory of Islam, He
destroys all types of tyrants and reforms the nation after corruption
and decadence. At that moment His Eminence (aj) said: O Huzaifah, even
if one day remains from the tenure of the earth, the Almighty Allah will
prolong that day till a man from my family rules.

In *Tohaful Uqool*, it is mentioned that Imam Sadiq (as) advised Momin
al- Taq, “O Son of Noman! When you are compelled to spend your life
under a tyrant government, you must behave nicely with those whom you
fear most. Because one who tries to overcome the government has agreed
to get himself killed. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُلْقُوا بِأَيْدِيكُمْ إِلَى التَّهْلُكَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And cast not yourselves to perdition.*** [^1]

In *Ghaibat Nomani* it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators that Amirul Momineen (as) said: “Be like the bees among the
birds. All the birds deem them weak but if they know what blessing there
is inside their (the bees’) interior, they will not do that to them. Mix
with people with your tongues and persons and be far away from them with
your hearts and deeds. I swear by Him, in Whose hand my soul is, you
will not meet what you like until a time comes that you spit at the face
of each other, call each other liars and until none of you remains
except like the kohl in an eye and like the salt in food.

I give you an example. It is like a man having some food (grains). He
sifts and purifies it and then he keeps it in a store for some time.
Then he comes back to find that his food has been worm-eaten. He takes
it out, purifies it and puts it back into the store for some time. After
a time he comes to find that his food has been worm-eaten.

He taken it out, purifies it and puts it back into the store. He does so
again and again until nothing of his food remains except the least,
which will never be harmed by the worms. So are you! You are going to be
clarified until none of you remains save avery few ones, who will never
be affected by seditions.”[^2]

[^1]: Tohaf al-Uqool, Pg. 228

[^2]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 112


