65: Humbling Our Body For Imam (aj)
===================================

The believer is duty-bound to humble himself before Imam (aj) as
mentioned in the tradition recorded by Ali Ibne Tawoos in his book Jamal
al-Usboo. He has narrated it from Imam Sadiq (as) through his chains of
narrators in the supplication of Friday. We have quoted it from the book
Abwaabul Jannat Fee Aadaabul Jumuaat: “O Allah! I come to your door with
a submissive heart and a humble and lowly body towards the guiding
Imams. With a respectful heart, I seek Your nearness.”[^1] The Wali
referred to in this prayer is Imam az-Zaman (aj).

If it is said: It is possible that Wali means Imam in every age and the
perfect believer. I would say: Even though it is a remote possibility we
can say that it could be such if you take into consideration that the
Imam himself is the most perfect believer. And the meaning of physical
humility according to what can be derived from lexicons and traditions
is that one must involve his body in service of the Holy Imam (as) at
the same time acknowledging ones lowliness, as you are well aware of the
greatness of the Imam in comparison to you.

You also must keep in mind your lowliness in relation to the Imam and
how fulfilling his right is obligatory on you; just as is the case of a
slave and his master. Because the slave who understands the meaning of
servitude, knows that he has to involve his body in the service of the
master and along with this he never imagines that he is in any way doing
a favor to his master.

Rather he is aware that if he is in any way shortcoming in his service,
it would be a great and serious defect. If he is arrogant in this regard
he would be considered blameworthy in the view of all sensible people.
Now when such is the case of a slave who has been purchased at the cost
of a few dirhams, what can be said about the one who has God given
Wilayat? The Almighty Allah mentions this in His great Book as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves. (Qur’an, Surah Ahzab 33:6)***

After the Holy Prophet (S), this position is given to the Imam (as).
Anyone who is conversant with the traditions of Aale Muhammad would not
deny any of the points that we have mentioned above. We have refrained
from quoting all such traditions as it would have unduly prolonged the
discussion and we think that this much is enough for the intelligent. A
poet says:

**One who is conversant with the city**  
**Knows where my goods lie.**

[^1]: Jamaal al-Usboo, Pg. 230


