66: Giving Precedence To The Wish Of Imam az-Zaman (aj) To Our Wishes
=====================================================================

It means that when we intend to take a step, we should ponder upon it
whether Imam az-Zaman (aj) shall be pleased with it or not. We should do
it only if it is as per his wishes and not if it is going to earn his
displeasure. In such situations we should overcome our personal desires
and achieve the Imam’s pleasure. You shall become his loved one and
remembered in good words by Imam (aj) and his forefathers.

This is mentioned in the tradition recorded by Fazil Muhaddith Noori
quoting from Amali of Shaykh Tusi that the narrator[^1] asked Imam Sadiq
(as), “Why do we hear so much about Salman the Persian from you?” Imam
(as) said, “Do not call him Salman the Persian, say Salman the
Muhammadan. Do you know why I remember him so much.” “I don’t know,”
said the narrator. “It is due to three things”, said the Imam (as), “He
gave preference to the desire of Amirul Momineen (as) over his personal
wishes. Befriending the poor and preferring them over affluent people
and his attachment to knowledge and scholars. Indeed Salman was a
righteous Muslim and not of the polytheists.”[^2]

I say: Ponder upon these qualities and all the good things that are
related to him and know that the Imam himself has these traits and he
likes these qualities and has praised them. So please put these
traditions into practice and gain the good of the world and the
hereafter. May the Almighty Allah give me and all believers the Taufeeq
to act on these things; He is the proximate One and the One Who answers
the supplications.

[^1]: It is Mansur bin Yunus.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 22, Pg. 227, Tr. no. 33


