71: Falsifying All Those Who Claim Special Deputyship During The Greater Occultation
====================================================================================

It is the unanimous belief of the Shias that the system of special
deputyship came to an end with the passing away of the great Shaykh, Ali
Ibne Muhammad Saymoori (r.a.) He was the last of the four special
deputies of Imam (as) during the lesser occultation (Ghaibat-e-Sughra).
After the passing away of Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori (r.a.) the period
of Greater occultation started and during this period the points of
reference for Shias are the scholars of religion well-versed in
jurisprudence and on the pinnacle of piety.

Thus anyone who claims to be a special deputy of Imam (as) during this
period is a liar and a renegade. Rather, it is indispensable tenet of
Imamiyah faith and none of our scholars have disputed it. This is the
best proof. Moreover, the good prophecy of Imam (as) with regard to the
birth of Shaykh Sadooq also proves this. The book Kamaluddin has a
narration from Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ahmad Mukattib who says that in
the year of Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori’s death he visited Baghdad. He
went to meet Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori a few days before his demise.
Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori showed the people a letter from Imam (as)
(Tawqee).

It was as follows: “In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. O
Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori: May Allah give good rewards to your brethren
concerning you (i.e. on your death), for indeed you shall die after six
days. So prepare your affairs and do not appoint anyone to take your
place after your death. For the second occultation has now occurred and
there can be no appearance until, after a long time, when Allah gives
His permission, hearts become hardened and the world is filled with
injustice.

And someone will come to my partisans (Shia) claiming that he has seen
me, beware of anyone claiming to have seen me before the rise of
al-Sufyani and the outcry from the sky, for he shall be a slanderous
liar. And there is no strength and might except for Allah, the High and
the Mighty.”

Mukattib says that he copied the tawqee and went away from there and
when he returned on the sixth day he found Ali Ibne Muhammad Saymoori in
a dying condition. When he was asked regarding his successor, he said:
“The Almighty Allah shall Himself take the affair to its completion.”
And he passed away after saying this and these were the last words heard
from him.[^1]

I say: Here our discussion will deal with two aspects: One: Chain of
narrators of the tradition and two: Its point of evidence on the point
under discussion.

Issue One: It is that according to terminology this tradition is ‘highly
correct’ because it is narrated from our master by three different
persons. First is the venerable Shaykh Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad
Saymoori, who is in no need of description due to his majestic position
and fame.

Second: Shaykh Sadooq Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Musa Babawayh
Qummi who is also famous for his books and hardly needs explanation.

Third: Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Ahmad Mukattib, as mentioned by Maula
Inayatullah in Majmaur Rijal he is, Abu Muhammad Hasan bin Husain bin
Ibrahim bin Ahmad bin Hisham Mukattib and Sadooq has often narrated from
him, may Allah bless him; and it is a sign of correctness and
reliability as mentioned by Maula Inayatullah in Majmaur Rijal and he
has mentioned many proofs for it that cannot be stated here. Mukattib
means one who teaches writing.

Note: There are two mistakes in two books that have come to my attention
and it is better to clarify them here.

First: In the book of Ghaibah of the venerable Shaykh, Muhammad bin
Hasan Tusi, in the copy I am having, it is mentioned: Narrated to us a
group from Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain bin Babawayh that he
said: Narrated to me Abu Muhammad Ahmad bin Hasan Mukattib that: I was
in Medinatul Islam (Baghdad)…[^2]

In the same way this tradition is mentioned by Ibne Babawayh in
Kamaluddin. But he has narrated from Hasan bin Ahmad.[^3] Apparently
this mistake has occurred from the scribes of Ghaibah Shaykh Tusi. That
which supports that this mistake is from the scribes, is that Haaj Mirza
Husain Noori has mentioned the same tradition in his book, Jannatul Mawa
quoting from Ghaibah Shaykh Tusi from Hasan bin Ahmad Mukattib.[^4] And
Allah knows best.

Second: In the book of Mustadrakul Wasail, written by Mirza Husain
Noori, he quoted a tradition from Shaykh Sadooq but he, despite his
awareness, does not mention his name with respect and just says: Sadooq.
Now we all know that it was only an oversight. There are many examples
of such oversights that the coming scholars must take care to correct.

Thus we must all make efforts in this regard and the Almighty Allah will
not make us lose hope. Perhaps the mistake occurred because they have
narrated from Maula Inayatullah who in turn has taken from Rabius Shia
of Sayyid Ibne Tawoos and he has narrated from Hasan bin Ahmad Mukattib.
Thus we come to know that the narrator from Abul Hasan Saymoori (r.a.)
is same Hasan bin Ahmad through whom Ibne Babawayh has narrated.

Among the proofs of correctness of this tradition and that it is
narrated from the Imam is that Shaykh Tabarsi, author of Ihtijaj, has
mentioned it directly without chain of narrators. While in the beginning
of the book he has stated that whenever he has not mentioned the chain
of narrators it implies that the tradition is well known or tradition
scholars have unanimity on it or unanimity on it by way of logic.[^5]

Thus it becomes clear that the above mentioned tradition is needless of
chain of narrators either because there is unanimity of scholars or its
fame or both. In the same way among the proofs of its correctness is
that all scholars since the time of Shaykh Sadooq till the present age
have accepted it and none have expressed any reservations in it as is
clear to all those who are conversant with their writings. Thus it
became known that the above mentioned tradition is absolute and there is
no doubt in it. It is a tradition regarding which the Imam has said:
Indeed, there is no doubt in that in which there is unanimity.

Issue Two: In the proof of the mentioned tradition on the subject under
discussion, the matter explained is that the saying of Imam (as):
“Indeed, the second Ghaibat has occurred” is the cause for statement,
“Do not appoint anyone as your successor”; thus it proves that Ghaibat
Kubra is one in which there is Wikala and special representation; then
this is emphasized with, “And whoever claims to have met me would come
to my Shias…”

From the first context there is no doubt in the statement that ‘meeting’
here means that special type of meeting that was reserved only for the
four special representatives of Imam (as) during the first occultation
(Ghaibat Sughra) and it became famous through the statement of Imam (as)
that, “One who claims such a thing in Ghaibat Kubra, has lied; and there
is no might and power except by Allah, the High and the Mighty.”

The conclusion is that ‘meeting’ in the above statement is meeting in
sense of ‘Babiyat’ or special representation like that of the four
special representatives during Ghaibat Sughra and it does not mean
direct meeting and it restricts the meaning of ‘meeting’, whether by
common mention or special intention and in this way to use the word in
many of its meanings; like one says: “I bought meat” or “Buy meat”. Here
it denotes special meat of sheep and not absolute meat. In the same way
the context mentioned in the present matter is as the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَىٰ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالْأَسْبَاطِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us, and what
was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and Yaqoob and the tribes.
(Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran 3:84)***

The word of ‘tribes’ (Asbath) is a general term but it denotes something
special, because heavenly scriptures were not revealed on all grandsons
of Yaqoob, it was revealed only on some of them. In the same way, in the
blessed epistle, the meaning of ‘meeting’ is a special type of meeting,
which we shall explain by the help of the Almighty. This shows that
there is no contradiction between this epistle and many sayings of His
Eminence, in Biharul Anwar, Najmus Thaqib and Darus Salaam of Shaykh
Iraqi. As these incidents prove that numerous people met the Holy Imam
(as) during the period of Ghaibat Kubra. May Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime give us all Taufeeq to meet him and also bestow on us his
intercession; Allah is nearest to His servants and one who fulfills the
prayers.

In reconciling these remote justifications there is no need for us to
deviate from them and reject them. What we have explained is like a
brilliant light (Noor) on Mt. Tur, the Taufeeq is from Allah.

That which proves the discontinuation of ‘Babiyat’ and special
representation in Ghaibat Sughra is: No scholar since the time of the
Imams has even indicated in any tradition such a thing. In spite of the
fact that they have gathered and compiled traditions on different
topics. While on the other hand we have numerous incidents that mention
how people met the Holy Imam (as). So much so, that there are not even
weak traditions on the subject of special representation of Imam (as).
Thus we can rest assured that the Imam’s Wikala and special
representation came to an end after Ghaibat Sughra, even though we might
not be having any other reason, this is sufficient.

We can thus conclude that not finding a proof is itself proof of its
non-existence; it is one of the most important rule that scholars of
Usool follow. Also, we see in all the matters related to the world and
the hereafter; earnings and social relations, during all the times,
depend on this rule only, that in whichever subject you have doubts,
when you don’t find any proof against it even though you have searched
it thoroughly, you can assume that it does not exist. In other words it
can be said that no sensible person, after research in something about
which there is no confirmed order, especially after the Imams (as) have
mentioned everything that people will need and established a system of
jurisprudence.

Contemplation on this principle leads us to conclude that it is false
what the Sufis say regarding allegiance to a Gnostic Shaykh and his
obedience as we mentioned previously. In the same way it disproves the
claim of Shaykhiyah sect when they say: “Following a special person is
obligatory at all times and that person is called a pure Shia, and they
think that he is the mirror of the qualities of the Imam, and knowing
him is one of the four pillars of faith.”

It is so because there is no proof in its favor and there are definite
proofs against it as mentioned in its proper place. We beseech the
Almighty to keep us steadfast on true faith and protect us from the
deviations of Satan.

The above points can also be supported by many traditions. For example,
there is a tradition to this effect, narrated by Shaykh Nomani (r.a.) in
the Book of Ghaibat. In which it is narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan
that he said: “I and my father came to Abi Abdullah (as) and he said:
How will you be when you will not be able to see your Imam or know his
location? And none will get salvation from it except those who recite
Dua Ghareeq. My father asked: What shall we do in such circumstances? He
replied: When such a time comes, remain steadfast on religion till the
matter becomes correct for you.”[^6]

Shaykh Sadooq has also recorded this report in Kamaluddin wa Tamamun
Ni’ma, in which it is stated: Till the matter becomes clear on you.[^7]

I say: Ponder on this tradition and rely on the saying of Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) when he spoke of full Ghaibat of Imam (as) and
discontinuation of his special representation in Ghaibat Kubra, telling
them to continue to follow their original faith till the Imam reappears.
The meaning of ‘what you have in your hands’ is following scholars and
tradition experts in principles and practical laws and Sunnah.

Shaykh Nomani (r.a.) has mentioned this only when he says: In the
tradition of Abdullah bin Sinan it was said: “…that you don’t find an
Imam of guidance nor any banner.” This referred to what had really
happened and confirmed the matter of the deputies, who had been between
the Imam and his Shias, but their job stopped after some time.

The deputy between the Imam, during his disappearance, the Shia was like
the banner. When people were afflicted with the ordeal, the banners
disappeared and would not reappear until the expected Imam would
reappear.

Also the confusion that the infallible Imams had told of occurred. The
second disappearance of al- Qaim (aj) also took place. It will be
discussed in the next chapter.” We beseech the Almighty to bestow us
insight and the right path through His mercy and give us Taufeeq to do
what He likes.[^8]

Among the traditions that prove this point is a report quoted in
Kamaluddin from Zurarah through correct chain of narrators in which he
said: Abi Abdullah (as) said: “There will come upon the people a time
when the Imam will disappear from them. It was asked: What should they
do in such circumstances? He replied: They should remain attached to the
faith they were on before, till the matter becomes clear to them.”[^9]

I say: The pronoun in Imam’s statement, “till it becomes clear to them”
is a hidden pronoun which returns to the Imam. That is it is the duty of
people in his Ghaibat that they must stick to their original beliefs and
not to testify for one who claims a special successorship of the Imam
till their Imam reappears.

This shows that the Imam wanted to say that you must not follow anyone
who claims to have a special office of the Hidden Imam (as) till he
reappears with the signs and miracles foretold by his forefathers.

To support this there is a tradition that Shaykh Sadooq (r.a.) has
narrated from Aban bin Taghlib that he said: His Eminence, Abu Abdullah
Imam Sadiq (as) said: A time will come on the people, when Sibtah will
come on the people. Till the narrator said: I asked: What is Sibtah? He
replied: Fatra and Ghaibat. The narrator asked: What should we do at
that time? Imam (as) replied: Remain on your original beliefs till the
Almighty Allah makes your star shine for you.

I say: The shining of the star is an allusion to reappearance of the
Imam. That which proves this is a tradition that Shaykh Nomani through
his own chain of narrators has narrated from Aban bin Taghlib from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: O Aban, a time will come on the
people…till the narrator asked: May I be sacrificed on you, what will we
do and what will happen then? He replied: Keep to what you have kept to
until Allah brings the master (of the matter) for you.[^10]

There is also a tradition from Thiqatul Islam Muhammad bin Yaqoob
Kulaini (r.a.) through a correct chain of narrators from our master,
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said: Indeed, we are like the stars of
the sky, that when one star sets another rises and point at it with your
fingers then the Angel of death comes to take it (him) with him. After
that you remain for a period of time. The progeny of Abdul Muttalib
become the same in this regard and none will be distinguished from the
other, then your star will appear. Praise Allah and accept it.[^11]
Shaykh Nomani has narrated as follows: “The example of my family is like
the stars of the sky. Whenever a star sets another shines until a
certain star shines and you glance at it and point at it with your
fingers then the Angel of death comes to take it (him) with him. After
that you remain a period of time. The progeny of Abdul Muttalib become
the same in this regard and none will be distinguished from the other,
then your star will appear. Praise Allah and accept it.”[^12]

Nomani has also through his own chain of narrators, related from Imam
Sadiq (as) from his forefathers from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he
said: “The example of my family among this Ummah is like the stars of
the sky. Whenever a star sets, another shines until when you stretch
your eyebrows towards (a shining star) and point with your fingers at
it, the Angel of Death comes to take it with him. Then you remain for a
period of time unknowing which one it is and so the progeny of Abdul
Muttalib become the same in this regard. While you are so, Allah will
make your star shine again. Then you are to praise Allah and to accept
your star.”[^13]

With the help of Allah and with the blessings of His Awliya and from
this correct tradition it becomes known that it is not lawful to testify
to the claim of anyone who thinks he has a special office of Imam’s
embassy during the period of Ghaibat Kubra.

Also in support of this is what the venerable Shaykh Kulaini has
mentioned through correct chains of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) that he said: There are two Ghaibats for the Qaim (aj), one is of a
short duration and one is long. In the first Ghaibat no one will know
his location except his special Shias. And in the second Ghaibat, except
for his special friends no one will know where he is.[^14]

After quoting the above tradition, the author of Wafi says: As if the
Imam’s phrase ‘except his special friends’ means the special servants of
His Eminence, because all the Shias do not have access to them. Whereas
in the first Ghaibat, there were special deputies of the Imam who
brought epistles of the Imam to his Shias. The first deputy was Abu Amr
Uthman bin Saeed Amari (r.a.). And when Uthman bin Saeed passed away he
made a bequest in favor of his son, Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Uthman. And
Abu Ja’far made a bequest in favor of Abul Qasim Husain bin Rauh. Abul
Qasim made a bequest in favor of Abul Hasan Ali bin Muhammad Saymoori
(r.a.). When the last moment of Saymoori approached and they wanted him
to make a bequest, he said: The matter belongs to Allah and He will take
it to its end. Thus this is Ghaibat Kubra which occurred after the
passing away of Saymoori.

Also supporting this is a tradition that Shaykh Sadooq has narrated from
Umar bin Abdul Aziz from Abi Abdullah (as) that he said: “When days and
nights pass in such a condition that you are unable to see the Imam whom
you can follow, you must continue to love what you love and continue to
hate what you hate till Allah, the Mighty and Sublime brings him
out.”[^15]

Kulaini (r.a.) in Usool Kafi through the author’s own chain of narrators
has narrated from Mansoor from someone who mentioned him from His
Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that the narrator asked him: What
shall we do when we pass our days without seeing an Imam we can follow?
He replied: Continue to be friendly with those you were before it and
continue to be inimical as before, till the Almighty Allah reveals it
(the Imam).[^16]

Nomani through his own chain of narrators has narrated from Ahmad bin
Mansoor Saiqal from his father, Mansoor that His Eminence, Abi Abdillah
Imam Sadiq (as) said: “If you spend a day and a night without finding an
imam of Muhammad’s progeny, then still love whom you have loved before,
hate whom you have hated before, follow whom you have followed and wait
for the deliverance day and night.”[^17]

I say: These traditions command us not to follow anyone who claims
Imamate, Babiyat or Niyabat Khassa during the period of Ghaibat till the
Almighty Allah makes His awaited Wali reappear. Because the Imam’s
statement, “You must continue to love what you love…” means that we must
ignore those who lay claims to special Imamate or Niyabat Khassa in
Ghaibat. That is if someone is claiming something special to himself we
must not accept his call and must not follow him. This is denial of his
claim as is very much clear.

Among traditions that prove discontinuation of embassy of the Imam, is a
tradition that Nomani has quoted from Mufaddal bin Umar Jofi from Imam
Sadiq (as) that he said: “The man of this matter disappears twice. The
first one lasts long until some people say that he has died, some say
that he has been killed and others say that he has gone. None of his
companions will still believe in him except a very few people. No one
knows his place except the guardian, who manages his affairs.”[^18]

Nomani says: If regarding Ghaibat there had not been any other, it would
have sufficed for consideration.

Beneficial conclusion: You know that, these four mentioned personalities
were special representatives of the Imam in the first Ghaibat and the
Shias referred to them in their matters since their deputyship of the
Imam was proved through the Imam’s Nass in their favor as mentioned with
regard to Uthman bin Saeed[^19] and his son, Muhammad from Imam Hadi and
Imam Askari (as). With regard to Abul Qasim Husain bin Rauh, it was
confirmed by Muhammad bin Uthman through the order of Imam (as). And
Husain bin Rauh declared Imam’s bequest in favor of Abul Hasan Ali bin
Muslim Saymoori. Many miracles were shown by these special deputies as
mentioned in books of Ghaibat.[^20]

Sayyid Ibne Tawoos has narrated incidents about them in his book,
Majmaur Rijal. In Rabius Shia, Sayyid Ibne Tawoos has clarified that
miracles were shown by them. In the same way, Maula Inayatullah has
narrated incidents about them in Majmaur Rijal as have other scholars.
Without any doubt, Wikala and Niyabat Khassa is not proved except
through three methods: Nass of Imam; or Nass of his (Special Deputy)
Naib Khaas or through a miracles at the hands of one who claims to have
this special office. If this were not so, every materialist person will
raise the claim of special deputyship as happened many times when Imam
(as) had to issue epistles in their refutation, cursing them and seeking
immunity from them. The names of Naseeri and Numairi are found in books
of Ghaibat and those who are interested may refer to them.

In the period of Ghaibat Kubra the door of Wikala and special deputyship
is closed; but as per the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Holy Imams (as) it has given general deputyship to the scholars and
jurisprudents, who are experts of religion and well versed in the
traditions of the Holy Imams (as). Thus the general believers are
obliged to refer to them in their religious matters.

There are numerous traditions on this subject like the saying of the
Holy Prophet (S) when he said thrice: O Allah, forgive my caliphs. It
was asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), who are your caliphs? He replied:
Those who will come after me and narrate by traditions and Sunnah.

It is mentioned in the blessed epistle: “…And as for new problems, refer
to those who are narrators of our traditions; they are my proofs on you
and I am the proof of Allah on them.”[^21] And there are many other
traditions mentioned at proper occasions.

Two Points
----------

Here it would be appropriate to mentioned two points:

**First:** It is that some of our scholars are of the view that general
Wilayat is proved for our jurisprudents in the period of Ghaibat. That
is they have all the powers and functions that the Imam has, except
those which are only with regard to the special deputyship. Some
scholars have denied it and said: Their deputyship is only in issues
that are specifically mentioned like issue of verdicts and giving of
decisions when there is dispute among the people. And this is the truth;
and what the former scholars have claimed is based on weak arguments.

**Second:** When a person belonging to our school of thought claims for
himself or anyone else special deputyship of Hazrat Hujjat (aj) during
the period of occultation, knowing that it is a principle of faith to
believe that the system of special deputyship has ended during Ghaibat
Kubra, he has committed heresy and become apostate. Because it denotes
that he has denied the principles of faith and therefore committed
infidelity. In the same way, if he knows through consensus and
traditions and still claims of special deputyship, he is a Kafir. But if
he does not know that it is a principle of faith, and he denied the
special deputyship during Ghaibat Kubra and considered it for himself,
it is sure that such a person is a misguided soul.

But there is no proof for his apostasy and leaving Islam is doubtful.
Because no legal proofs are found for it that he has denied something is
necessary in the view of Muslims that should be reason for his apostasy
and infidelity; what to say of denying the principals of faith! Rather
the denial that makes one an apostate is testimony of the Holy Prophet
(S) with regard to something that he has brought. The same is the case
of Ahle Sunnah who do not believe in that which we consider necessary;
that is the immediate successorship of Amirul Momineen (as). The great
Faqih, Muqaddas Ardebeli is also of the same view and many other
jurisprudents have also accepted it. Some others are of the view that
denying any Islamic creed is absolute cause of infidelity, like denying
one of the two Shahadatain etc. They take support of traditions that
fall short in proving their point, and its details will be given in
proper place. Allah knows best.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 516, Chapter 45, Tr. no. 44

[^2]: Al-Ghaibah, Shaykh Tusi, Pg. 242

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 516

[^4]: Jannatul Maawa, Pg. 18

[^5]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 2, Pg. 297

[^6]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 81

[^7]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 348, Chapter 33, Tr. no. 40

[^8]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 83

[^9]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 350, Chapter 33, Tr. no. 44

[^10]: Ghaibat Nomani, Chapter in praise of the period of occultation

[^11]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 328

[^12]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 79

[^13]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 79

[^14]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 340

[^15]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 348, Chapter 33, Tr. no. 37

[^16]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 342

[^17]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 81

[^18]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 89

[^19]: Al-Ghaibah, Shaykh Tusi, Pg. 242

[^20]: Al-Ghaibah, Shaykh Tusi, Pg. 242

[^21]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 484


