72: To Pray For Seeing The Imam (aj) With Forgiveness And Faith
===============================================================

We must pray to the Almighty that He grant us the distinction of seeing
Imam (aj) with forgiveness and faith. Two points are worth noting in
this regard. One is that having a desire of seeing Imam (aj) is a
mustahab (recommended) act. Secondly, is a prayer for seeing him with
faith and forgiveness. The proof for the first point lies in the
supplications of Ghaibat taught by the Holy Imams (as). For example in
Dua Ahad, quoted from Imam Sadiq (as):

O Allah! Let me see his brilliant countenance and praiseworthy face.[^1]

Similarly in Dua-e-Amri it is mentioned: “O Allah! I beseech You, make
me see Your Wali in the condition when his command is running.” (He is
in power).[^2]

There are other supplications also, but to mention them all will prolong
the discussion. In addition to this, this matter is one of the
necessities of love of faith. Because every friendship creates an
eagerness to see the beloved at all times, or to try all means to
achieve this. Of all the means, is Dua and supplication which is the key
to all goodness and blessing and a means of achieving every important
need.

Also, that which prove our point are all those traditions that command
us to supplicate for hastening of reappearance of the Imam of the Time
(aj). Since it is a Dua that the Almighty Allah keeps us alive till the
time of his reappearance when we see him with the eyes. Thus those
evidences also prove this point. And the second matter is also proved
through what Thiqatul Islam Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini (r.a.) has
mentioned through his own chain of narrators from His Eminence, Abu
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: When one of you wants to see the
Qaim (aj) he should desire to see His Eminence in relief, because the
Almighty Allah sent His Eminence, Muhammad as mercy and the coming of
the Qaim (aj) will be divine chastisement.[^3]

I say: This can be explained as follows: The Almighty Allah did not
order His Prophet to take revenge from the infidels and unjust people,
whereas, they began hostilities. Rather He sent the Holy Prophet (S) as
a mercy for the worlds and addressing him, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَهِّلِ الْكَافِرِينَ أَمْهِلْهُمْ رُوَيْدًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So grant the unbelievers a respite: let them alone for a while.
(Qur’an, Surah Tariq 86:17)***

So that he may allow the revenge to be postponed till the time of the
Qaim (aj) and whenever Jibraeel (as) arrived, he ordered the Prophet to
be kind with the people; but His Eminence, the Qaim (aj) is appointed
for taking revenge, so that he may punish every people for what they
have done. On the basis of this whoever sees him during his time it is
not that his seeing him will be mercy and glad tiding for him. Rather,
for most of the people, it would be revenge and punishment as Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنُذِيقَنَّهُمْ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ الْأَدْنَىٰ دُونَ الْعَذَابِ
الْأَكْبَرِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most certainly We will make them taste of the nearer chastisement
before the greater chastisement [Qiyamat].*** ***(Qur’an, Surah Sajdah
32:21)***

There are numerous verses and traditions on this topic, and since in the
last period of time, and since at that time there would too many
hardships and calamities and many people will deviate, the Imams have
told the Shias to pray to the Almighty Allah for relief. So that they
may meet their Imam in a state of relief and peace and live under the
shade of his blessings and that they may not be included among the
doubters and those who change the religion of Allah, that His Eminence,
the Qaim will have to take revenge from them and put them to the sword;
then their end would be in Hell and what a bad abode it is.

Reminder
--------

It is that meeting the Imam during his reappearance is possible for
those who pray and request for it. It can take place in one of the two
ways: One: That the Almighty Allah brings his reappearance near so that
we can meet him.

Two: It is that the supplicant dies before his reappearance and the
Almighty Allah makes him alive during the time of his reappearance, and
he meets the Imam as a result of his supplication and as a reward of his
hope, as mentioned in Dua Ahad narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as). We
have quoted this Dua in the 34th duty.

Beneficial Conclusion
---------------------

Just as it is recommended to pray for seeing the Imam during his
reappearance, in the same way it is recommended to pray that one sees
him in sleep and wakefulness as proved from the following:

First Aspect: That which proves that it is recommended to supplicate for
every legal thing, like:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you. (Qur’an, Surah
Momin 40:60)***

Also the saying of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَاسْأَلُوا اللَّهَ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And ask Allah of His grace. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:32)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ ۖ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very
near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me. (Qur’an,
Surah Baqarah 2:186)***

There are Mutawatir traditional reports on this matter; for example:

1. It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Dua is a
worship act[^4] regarding which Allah, the Mighty and Sublime said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ
جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell
abased. (Qur’an, Surah Momin 40:60)***

2. It is also narrated from His Eminence (aj) that he said: Dua is the
source of worship, just as the cloud is the source of rain.[^5]

3. It is also narrated from His Eminence (aj) that he said: Call the
Almighty Allah often, as Allah likes the believer who calls Him; and He
has promised the believers that he would accept their prayers. And on
Judgment Day the Almighty Allah will consider it among the deeds of the
believers that He increases their good deeds.

4. In another tradition it is narrated from His Eminence that: So
supplicate more as it is the key to every mercy and success of every
need. And that which is with Allah cannot be achieved except through Dua
and indeed, no door is knocked too much but that it makes the widening
near for the person who is knocking.[^6]

5. It is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said: Every Muslim
who calls the Almighty Allah with a supplication in which there is no
cutting of relations or committing of sins, the Almighty Allah gives him
one of the three: Either He accepts the Dua soon; or He stores it for
the Hereafter or He removes an equivalent evil from his account.[^7]

6. It is narrated from His Eminence that he said: Dua is the kernel of
worship, and no believer calls the Almighty Allah but that He accepts
it. Thus He realizes it in the world very soon or stores it for him in
the Hereafter or forgives an equivalent amount of his sins, except that
he should not supplicate for a sinful act.[^8]

7. It is narrated from His Eminence that he said: The most helpless of
the people is one that is helpless from making supplication and the most
miserly is one who is miserly in saying Salaam.[^9]

8. It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said: The Almighty
Allah does not open the door of Dua and closes the door of acceptance.

9. It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: You must
supplicate; as you will not get anything like it in gaining proximity of
the Almighty Allah.[^10]

10. It is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said: The act most
loved by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime in the earth is Dua, and the best
worship act is chastity.[^11]

11. It is narrated from Fudail bin Uthman that he said: I asked Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as): Teach me something nice. The Imam said: I advise you
piety and fear of God, truthfulness, trustworthiness, good behavior with
your companions, Dua before the rising of the Sun and after it has set,
and a thing that does not stop you from asking your Lord, and you don’t
say: This is something that will not be given to me. And pray that Allah
does what He wants.

There are many traditions that have come in books of our great scholars
and the conclusion is that: Being blessed with the honor of meeting the
Imam is a matter which is possible and legal and for every such act it
is recommended to pray for it. The result is that: It is recommended to
pray for meeting the Imam (aj). The greatness of this incident is proved
from Qur’an and traditions, consensus and reason, and what we have
narrated from Qur’an and traditions are enough. As for consensus, it can
be known to anyone who studies the books of scholars; rather one would
find that Dua is said to be a basic of religion. And reason commands
that it is a good thing for a person to ask his needs from the Lord of
the worlds.

As for the smallest matter, that is possibility of meeting the Awaited
Imam (aj) – legality of asking for it on the people of faith is proved.
And strongest possibility of its occurrence is that it has happened for
many of the scholars and for one whose well being is intended in the
world and the hereafter. And their request has come in some Duas and
Ziarats of the past scholars, just as they mention it in the Dua quoting
from Amari from His Eminence as follows: “And make me of those whose
eyes are lighted by his view.”[^12]

In Dua Ahad we read: “And brighten my eyes with the antimony of seeing
him once.”[^13]

In Dua Nudbah it is mentioned: “And [O Allah,] show the chief of this
small servant of Yours, O One of severe power.” And the supplication
that is mentioned after Salaam on His Eminence, in the Cellar it is
mentioned: “And show his face to me.” Other supplications have been
mentioned in their places. However the fact is that this request is not
only for the period of his reappearance. According to some traditions,
His Eminence comes and goes among the people. They see him but they do
not recognize him. For me and other nice people such opportunities have
appeared.

For example, among traditions that indicate this is a tradition that
Kulaini has mentioned in Usool Kafi through correct chain of narrators
from Sudair Sairafi that he said: “I heard Abu Abdillah, peace be upon
him, say: ‘In the Master of this affair there is a likeness to Yusuf,
peace be upon him.’ “He said: “I said to him: ‘You must be referring to
[al-Mahdi], but to his life or his occultation?’ “He said: “Then he said
to me: ‘Which does this swine-like group deny? The brothers of Yusuf,
peace be upon him, were descendants of prophets; they made a business of
Yusuf, then they traded with him and spoke with him, and they were his
brothers and he was their brother; but they did not know who he was
until he said: “I am Yusuf and this is my brother.” So why does this
cursed group deny that Allah, to whom belong Might and Majesty, can do
with His Divine Proof at some time or other what he did with Yusuf?
Yusuf, peace be upon him, held sovereignty over Egypt and between him
and his father there was an eighteen day journey; if he had wanted to
let [his father] know he would have done so. But Yaqoob, peace be upon
him, and his sons, on [hearing] the good news, traveled the distance
from their desert to Egypt in nine days. So how can this group deny that
Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, can do with his Divine Proof
what he did with Yusuf? He will [come and] go in their markets and step
on their rugs [i.e., enter their homes] until Allah to whom belong Might
and Majesty, gives him leave in this matter; just as He gave Yusuf leave
and they said: “Why, are you indeed Yusuf?” “I am Yusuf,” he said.[^14]

Nomani through his own chain of narrators has quoted from Sudair that he
said: I heard Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as) say: “The Qaim is also having a
similarity to Prophet Yusuf (as).” The narrator says: I said: Perhaps
you want to tell us about him or his occultation. He told me: “In this
Ummah, the opponents who resemble swine, oppose (regarding the
occultation of the Qaim). And Yusuf’s brothers were among the children
of prophets but they sold away Yusuf while all of them were his brothers
and he was also a brother to them, yet when they met they could not
recognize him till Yusuf introduced himself and said: “I am Yusuf and
this is my brother.” Thus how can this Ummah deny if the Almighty Allah
wants to keep His Proof concealed from them in a period of time? And one
day Yusuf became the king of this same Egypt and the distance between
him and his father was only of 18 days’ travel. When Allah, the Blessed
and the High wanted that his status and value be recognized, by Allah,
the people of his house covered this distance in nine days after getting
the glad news. Thus how can this Ummah deny that Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime can do with His Proof what He had done with Yusuf?”[^15]

I say: O believer having certainty, think upon this tradition and see
how the Imam denies and refutes those who think that the Imam of the Age
(aj) does not visit the people and they don’t see him. And the fact that
Imam (as) has compared him to Prophet Yusuf (as). This tradition and the
one mentioned before it suffices for the people of faith and certainty.
In traditions I have not come across anything that contradicts all that
we have mentioned and two traditions explain that they have no
contradiction with what we have mentioned.

Firstly: The statement of His Eminence, in his epistle that we quoted
previously it is mentioned: “One who claims to have seen me before
Sufyani and call from the heavens is a liar…” As we mentioned previously
this tradition has no contradiction with the subject under discussion.

Secondly, supporting this point is the tradition of Ahmad bin Ibrahim
quoted in the Bab-ul-Mazar of Biharul Anwar: The narrator says that he
told Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibne Uthman regarding his desire to see Imam
(as). “He asked me if I was seriously desirous of it and I replied in
the affirmative. He said, “May Allah reward you for your desire. May He
easily show you the blessed face of Hazrat (as) while you are eligible
for salvation. O Abu Abdillah. Do not insist on seeing him because this
is a period of occultation. Do not persist for seeking his company
because it a very serious divine affair and in such circumstances it is
better to submit to Allah’s will. But you must address him by reciting
his Ziarats.”[^16]

I say: There is no contradiction in this tradition with the topic of our
discussion.

First: It is that since His Eminence, Muhammad bin Uthman prayed for him
saying: “So that He may show you the face of His Eminence with ease and
relief.” If this had been impossible, or the request had been illegal,
he would not have prayed thus.

Second: It is that since this question and answer took place during the
first Ghaibat (Sughra) and in that time, many faithful people had the
honor of meeting the Imam from the deputies of His Eminence, and others,
as is clear from traditions and we have not seen anything in traditional
reports that contradicts this.

Third: There is a possibility that at that time, especially, it meant
meeting the Imam was a dangerous thing. Its similarity is found in
Imam’s restraining the Wukala from mentioning him; thus in Usool Kafi it
is narrated from Husain bin Hasan Alawi that he said: Once a friend of
Roz Hasani told him: He [the Imam of the Age] (aj) takes money from the
people and he has agents everywhere for this purpose. And he named the
Wukala of His Eminence in various areas – this information reached
Abdullah bin Sulaiman, the vizier of the ruler; he decided to apprehend
the Wukala and the king said: You must search where this man [His
Eminence (aj)] is, as it is very important. Abdullah bin Sulaiman said:
I will apprehend all the agents.

The ruler said: No, rather you must find unknown people to spy on them
and send them money, whosoever of them accepts the money must be
arrested. The narrator says: [Thus] a letter came [from the Imam] that
commanded all the agents not to take anything from anyone and express
ignorance about the matter of the Imam of the Time (aj). Thus an unknown
person came to Muhammad bin Ahmad in private and said: I have an amount
of money that I want to send [to the Imam]. Muhammad said: You have made
a mistake, I know nothing about it. Although the man tried his best to
coax him into it, he continued to feign ignorance. Spies spread in all
areas but the agents refrained from accepting anything from them due to
the instructions they had received from the Holy Imam (as).[^17]

Fourth: It is not possible for anyone to meet the Imam except by his
permission. And perhaps Abu Ja’far’s refusal from the aspect that Imam
(as) did not accord permission to him was a matter of honor for him or
it is possible that he could not bear the secret and was not capable to
keep confidentiality and he would have publicized the report or for some
other reason.

Supporting this point is that which is mentioned in Usool Kafi from Ali
bin Muhammad from Abu Abdullah Salihi that he said: “[Some of] our
co-sectarians asked me after the passing away of Abu Muhammad, peace be
upon him, to ask about the [twelfth Imam’s] name and whereabouts. The
answer came: ‘If I indicate the name, they will divulge it; and if they
know the place, they will guide [enemies] to it.’”[^18]

Fifth: Perhaps that person wanted to meet the Imam personally and to
become his servant in the way of companions of other Imams (as) and this
was prohibited in both the Ghaibats and Shaykh Abu Ja’far understood it
in this way. Therefore he said: Don’t ask to be in his company.

Supporting this point is that which Kulaini (r.a.) has mentioned in a
correct report from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: “The Qaim,
peace be upon him, will go into two occultations: one of them will be
short, and the other will be long. In the first occultation only the
elite (khassah) of the Shia will known where he is, but in the other,
only those servants especially close to him (khassah mawalih) will know
where he is.”[^19]

The previous point is also supported by this.

Second Aspect: It is that to look at the luminous face of the Holy Imam
(as) is an act of worship. And to pray for Taufeeq to pray is also
worship. On the basis of this to pray for Taufeeq to see Imam’s face is
also worship and each of the two prefaces to this matter is clear that
does not need proof and evidence. Rather, proving the first preface is a
tradition that is mentioned in Majalis of Shaykh Sadooq from our master
Imam Ali Reza (as) that he said: “To glance at the Prophet’s progeny is
an act of worship, whether it be an Imam or otherwise.”[^20] And that
which proves the second preface is a supplication that has come from the
Imams (as) in which they have emphasized seeking Taufeeq for worship
from the Almighty Allah.

Third Aspect: It is the statement of Imam (as) in Dua Ahad etc. that: “O
Allah! Show me the rightly guided face of (Imam a.s.), the praiseworthy
moon and enlighten my vision by looking at him.” It is a general
statement, for the period of Ghaibat as well as his presence as will be
clear to one whose heart is gleaming with his Noor.

Fourth Aspect: It consists of the excellence of reciting Surah Bani
Israel on Friday eves as mentioned in Tafseer Burhan and Ayyashi and
Sadooq has narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: One who
recites Surah Bani Israel every Friday eve will not die till he reaches
the Qaim (aj) and becomes his companion.[^21]

It also consists of the excellence of reciting Dua Ahad that is
mentioned in Biharul Anwar quoting from Ikhtiyar of Sayyid Ibne Baqi
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: One who recites this Dua after
every obligatory will see MHMD in wakefulness or in sleep…[^22]

We have mentioned this Dua at the beginning of Part Six. Also in support
of this is that which is mentioned in Makarimul Akhlaq in praise of
reciting the Dua: Allahumma inna rasoolakas saadiq…after every
obligatory prayer and by doing this continuously he would be blessed
with seeing the Imam.[^23]

We have mentioned this Dua also in Part Six. The point of evidence in it
is that these traditions show that asking the Almighty Allah to allow us
to see the Imam of the Time (aj) is a meritorious deed and Imams (as);
so much so that seeing the Imam was the reward of worship of some of
them.

Fifth Aspect: That which Allamah Tabatabai Sayyid Mahdi Najafi, well
known as Bahrul Uloom has said regarding matters in which it is
recommended to perform Ghusl bath:

To see Imam (as) in dream for something you want to ask.

If request to see the Imam had not been recommended, performing Ghusl
for it would not have been recommended as it is well known that
recommendation of Ghusl is to attract the people to it.

Sixth Aspect: It is that praying to see the Imam is an expression of
eagerness for him and a means of earning his goodwill. Without any
doubt, expression of friendship is one of the best and important acts of
worship because it is a sign of Wilayat. Thus as deep and perfect is
ones love as eager will the person be to meet him. It is from this
aspect that we have presented matter to prove this point.

Seventh Aspect: It is that which is mentioned in Jannatul Mawa of
Muhaddith Noori (r.a.) quoting from Ikhtisaas of Shaykh Mufeed from Abu
Mughra from His Eminence, Abul Hasan Musa bin Ja’far (as) that he said:
One who has a request from the Almighty Allah and wants to see us and
know his abode in the hereafter, he should perform Ghusl for three
nights at the same time praying to see us; he would indeed see us and
will be forgiven and his abode will not remain concealed from him.[^24]

After the mention of this, Muhaddith Noori says: Note the Imam’s words
‘call to Allah regarding us’. That is call Him through our Waseela to
allow you to see us and that you know your position with regard to us.
And the words: ‘and prepare to see us’ means that we should always think
and be eager to see them. Or it could be that we ask them for it.

I say: There is a strong possibility that the Imam’s words ‘call to
Allah regarding us’ mean that a person may speak of his secrets to the
Imam of his time, remind him of his condition and tell him about his
problems again and again. And present to him, his needs and aspirations
and request His Eminence to accept his supplications, like he beseeches
the Almighty Allah. Because his Imam hears his talks and sees him also.
Since an Imam is one whom the Almighty Allah has made as the refuge of
those whose seek it and a helper of those who seek his help. Thus ‘call
to Allah regarding us’ is in the meaning of ‘call us’ and there is a
tradition which be presented in future in which ‘Call with them the
creator’ is meant to be ‘Call them’.

In the supplication for Ashura Day we read: And may Allah include us
among the revenge seekers of Imam Husain (as).[^25] There are many
examples of this as is clear to those who are conversant with
traditions. Supporting this is what Sayyid Ibne Tawoos has mentioned in
Kashful Muhajja quoting from Rasail of Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini
(r.a.) whose name he mentioned that he said: I wrote to Abul Hasan (as):
There is a person who would like to mention his special request and
secrets to his Imam and in the same way he would like to repeat them to
his Lord. His Eminence (aj) replied: If you have a need, move your lips
and you will be answered.[^26]

What we mentioned in relation to Imam’s words ‘call to Allah regarding
us’ is to additionally emphasize this point.

Eighth Aspect: Although anyone from believers can pray to see and meet
the Imam, it is the pious scholars who precede all in this matter. Some
of them spent forty Friday nights in Kufa Masjid and some forty
Wednesday nights in Masjid Sahla. They spent their time in worship and
supplications till they were blessed by what they had aspired. And many
people had the honor of seeing the Imam and their incidents are quoted
in books like Biharul Anwar,[^27] Najmus Thaqib and Darus Salaam etc. In
addition to this I personally know some reliable persons who were
blessed with this honor.

The conclusion is that it is possible to see the Imam during Ghaibat and
many people have had this honor. This can be told to anyone who is in
doubt or if he belongs to Sunni sect, who ask: What is the use of an
Imam who is unseen? They can also be told: Benefits of the Imam are not
restricted to the time of his reappearance. There are many benefits from
him even when he is unseen. There are traditions that speak of the sun
behind cloud. An author has versified this:

He is the standard of guidance through the spread of his effulgence.

Even though unseen by our eyes, he is able to guide as if he is present.

Have you not seen that the Sun spreads its rays everywhere

Even though it may be behind the clouds?

At the end of the book we shall present many justifications why the Imam
in Ghaibat is compared to the sun behind clouds since the Almighty Allah
has blessed me with these matters through the Barakah of His Awliya.
Many of our scholars have clarified in their books that it is not
impossible to see the Imam during Ghaibat and also many believers have
got this honor.

Sayyid Murtuza says in Ghaibah: If it is asked what is the difference
between the fact that [the Imam (as)] exists, but he remains in
occultation; and no one can meet him and no person gets any benefit from
him and on the other hand he does not at all exist and according to
terminology he is non-existent. And whether it is not allowable that he
should remain in non-existence till the time Providence knows that it is
the time for his coming into existence? Because just as you consider it
lawful for him to be kept hidden till He knows the obedience and
submission of the people for him and at that time He brings him out?

In reply it would be said: Firstly: We do not consider it lawful and
possible as many of his devotees, followers and those who believe in his
Imamate have had the honor of meeting him and they have benefited from
him and those also who were not from his Shias and friends when they
also visited him they also derived the same benefits. Because from the
aspect that they had belief in the existence of His Eminence and they
considered his obedience incumbent and necessary upon themselves
therefore they compulsorily feared committing sins and those acts
disliked by him, and they are fearful that he would punish and chastise
them and make them pay for all such things and therefore they committed
the least sins.

Sayyid Raziuddin Ali bin Tawoos (q.s.) says to his son in the book,
Kashful Muhajja: “…the path to your Imam (as) is open for anyone whom
Allah the Almighty considers deserving of the grace of His Eminence and
for whomsoever Allah completes the favor upon him.”[^28]

Among the scholars who have clarified this meaning is Allamah Majlisi,
Bahrul Uloom, Muhaqqiq Kazmi, Shaykh Tusi and other prominent scholars.
Thus what we mentioned through the Barakah of the Imams (as) it is known
that seeing the Imam (as) in wakefulness and sleep during the period of
Ghaibat is possible and it is recommended to pray to the Almighty Allah
for this as He is the One Who gives Taufeeq.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 111

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 90

[^3]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 333, Tr. No. 306

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 467

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 471

[^6]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 470

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 93, Pg. 294, Tr. no. 23

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 93, Pg. 302, Tr. no. 39

[^9]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 93, Pg. 302

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 93, Pg. 302

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 93, Pg. 295

[^12]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 513

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 111

[^14]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 336

[^15]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 84

[^16]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 97, Chapter 7

[^17]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 525, Tr. no. 30

[^18]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 333

[^19]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 340

[^20]: Amali, Pg. 176

[^21]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 2, Pg. 389

[^22]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 86, Pg. 61

[^23]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Tabarsi, Pg. 284, Beirut

[^24]: Jannatul Maawa, Benefit Two; Biharul Anwar, Vol. 53, Pg. 328

[^25]: Misbah, Shaykh Kafami, Pg. 482

[^26]: Kashful Muhajja, Pg. 154

[^27]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 1

[^28]: Kashful Muhajja, Pg. 154


