73: Following Imam (aj) In Moral Behavior And Deeds
===================================================

It is our duty to follow Imam (a j) in good deeds and moral behavior. We
must consider Imam (aj) as our ideal in this regard, because that is the
actual meaning of partisanship and following. The perfection of faith
lies in performing the deeds as he does, being with him in Qiyamat and
residing near him in the Paradise. Hazrat Ali’s (as) letter to Uthman
bin Hunaif the Governor of Basra mentions: “Remember that every follower
has a leader whom he follows and from the effulgence of whose knowledge
he takes light.”[^1]

In Raudatul Kafi, Imam Zainul Abideen (as) is reported to have said,
“There is no superiority for Qurayshite or an Arab regarding his descent
except his humility. There is no virtue, except for his piety there is
no good deed other than intention and no worship act is possible without
considering it correct. Beware! One to whom Allah is most angry is one
who is an Imamite by faith and who does not follow (his Imam) in
deeds.”[^2]

Explanation: It is mentioned in traditions that it is possible Allah may
befriend a slave but He does not like his deeds and it is also possible
that He does not like a slave but likes his actions. This is also
accepted by reason because in the view of Allah love and hate depends on
the legality or the illegality of that action according to Divine law.
If the person has faith according to it, since he is a believer but he
fails to act upon it, Allah will be angry with regard to his actions.

After this introduction it becomes evident that the aim of Imam’s (as)
statement that the most hated person from the aspect of his deeds is one
who accepts the way and religion of Imam (as) from the aspect of belief
only. That is he believes in his Imamat and Wilayat but opposes him by
his actions and behavior. The consequence of this is that when a momin
opposes his Imam by his deeds and behavior the opponents get an
opportunity to ridicule, and this is a greater sin.

When the believer treads in the footsteps of Imams (as) it is as if the
honor of the Waliullah (Imam) has increased and people are more
attracted towards him. In this way the aim of the institution of Imamat
is achieved. As mentioned by Imam Sadiq (as), “Become an ornament for
us, do not be a disgrace for us.”[^3] And his statement that: “Call the
people [to your religion] without using your tongue.”[^4]

In Usool Kafi through correct chains of narrators it is narrated from
His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: I don’t
consider anyone as a believer unless he follows us in all matters, pay
attention that indeed, among our demands are piety and abstemiousness;
so decorate yourself with it so that the Almighty Allah send mercy to
you and through the abstemiousness you put your enemies in sorrow and
grief so that the Almighty Allah gives you honor and keep you alive.[^5]

In Rauda Kafi, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:
I and Abu Ja’far [Imam Baqir (as)] passed a group of Shias who were
sitting between the Prophet’s grave and his pulpit. I said to His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far: They are your Shias and devotees, may I be
sacrificed on you. He replied: Where are they? I said: I saw them
between the grave and the pulpit. He said: Take me to them. So we went
to them and saluted them. Then the Imam said: By Allah, I love your
fragrance and your souls, help us with abstemiousness and struggle as
whatever is with the Almighty Allah is not achieved except through
abstemiousness and struggle. And since He makes the servant know his
Imam he follows him. Indeed, by Allah, you all are on my religion, and
the religion of my forefathers Ibrahim and Ismail, and since they were
on this religion, so you help this religion through abstemiousness and
struggle.[^6]

Allamah Majlisi, in the explanation of this tradition says: The Imam has
mentioned the names of Ibrahim and Ismail to show that all prophets are
following him in religion. Or it could also be the fact that they were
progenitors of the Holy Prophet (S) and his family which goes on to show
that the Prophet and his family follow the right faith and the prophets
follow them. Thus ‘they’ indicate Ibrahim and Ismail and the other past
prophets (as). And these include his forefathers from the Prophet (S)
and the Holy Imams (as).

I say: It is possible that the special mention of the names of Ibrahim
and Ismail was from the aspect of the saying of the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ أَنِ اتَّبِعْ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then We revealed to you: Follow the faith of Ibrahim, the upright
one. (Qur’an, Surah Nahl 16:123)***

And the saying of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ ۚ هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The faith of your father Ibrahim; He named you Muslims before.
(Qur’an, Surah Hajj 22:78)***

Also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّنِي هَدَانِي رَبِّي إِلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ دِينًا
قِيَمًا مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا ۚ وَمَا كَانَ مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Surely, (as for) me, my Lord has guided me to the right path;
(to) a most right religion, the faith of Ibrahim the upright one, and he
was not of the polytheists. (Qur’an, Surah Anaam 6:161)***

And to show that the way that the Almighty Allah showed to them was the
same way of the Shias even though their numbers be less and they may be
less important in the view of people. This is the Shariat of Ibrahim and
true monotheism.

That which proves this point is a traditional report that Thiqatul Islam
Kulaini (r.a.) has mentioned in Rauda Kafi from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Imam Baqir (as) that he said: No one from this Ummah followed the faith
of Ibrahim (as) except us; no one from this Ummah was guided except
through us and no one from this Ummah was misguided except for us (our
opposition).[^7] This statement of His Eminence is an assurance to Shias
and it is punctuated with oaths and other emphasizing points. For
example he says: “They are following their religion.” It denotes the
blind faith of general Muslims and ‘they’ means their leaders of
misguidance, may Allah curse them all, because it was a time of Taqayyah
and occasion of Taqayyah. The Imam want to say in this tradition that
the Shias are not such that they would vie their opponents for wealth
and pelf and that the most important thing in their life is religion as
mentioned in the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَغُرَّنَّكَ تَقَلُّبُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فِي الْبِلَادِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ ثُمَّ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ ۚ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَٰكِنِ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا رَبَّهُمْ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِنْ
تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا نُزُلًا مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ۗ
وَمَا عِنْدَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ لِلْأَبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Let it not deceive you that those who disbelieve go to and fro in the
cities fearlessly. A brief enjoyment! then their abode is hell, and evil
is the resting-place. But as to those who are careful of (their duty to)
their Lord, they shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow, abiding
in them; an entertainment from their Lord, and that which is with Allah
is best for the righteous. (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran 3:196-198)***

There is a possibility that ‘they’ denotes the polytheists; that even
though the blind hearted general Muslims are such; they are in fact
polytheists because they have made their leaders and false deities as
partners in the truth that was given to them by Allah; just as the
polytheists make them share worship:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ وَلَا تُشْرِكُوا بِهِ شَيْئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And serve Allah and do not associate any thing with Him. (Qur’an,
Surah Nisa 4:36)***

Without any doubt one who considers anyone a partner of the Wali of
Allah, is a polytheist; because he has made him a partner in a divine
affair. The replacement of ‘polytheists’ with ‘opponents’ is to the
extent of Tawatur. In Ziarat Jamia we read: One who fights you is a
polytheist. It is mentioned in Ghadeer sermon: O who associates anyone
in the allegiance of Ali (as) is a polytheist.

In Miratul Anwar quoting from Maaniul Akhbar under a tradition of the
Holy Prophet (S) it is mentioned: O people, one who considers Ali as the
Imam, considers me as the Prophet and one who considers me as the
Prophet considers the Almighty Allah as the Lord.[^8]

There are numerous traditions on this matter. The point of conclusion is
that the view of Imam (as) was to make the believers eager for Islam and
monotheism, that the Almighty Allah has chosen for His servants and He
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الْإِسْلَامُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely the (true) religion with Allah is Islam. (Qur’an, Surah Aale
Imran 3:19)***

And Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
وَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the losers.
(Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran 3:85)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّىٰ بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ يَا بَنِيَّ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ
مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and (so did) Yaqoob. O my
sons! surely Allah has chosen for you (this) faith, therefore die not
unless you are Muslims. (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:132)***

In the same way, Imam (as) has emphasized that the opponents have taken
partners for the Awliya of Allah and it is just as one takes a partner
to Allah.

If the readers pay attention to this and they study the meanings of the
Imam’s words they would realize that what we have stated is right.

The word of ‘and surely’ in the verse: “And surely if he had been such”
is for emphasis, like in the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ كَادُوا لَيَفْتِنُونَكَ عَنِ الَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely they had purposed to turn you away. (Qur’an, Surah Isra
17:73)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ كَادَ لَيُضِلُّنَا عَنْ آلِهَتِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He had well-nigh led us astray from our gods. (Qur’an, Surah Furqan
25:42)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَمَا جَعَلْنَا الْقِبْلَةَ الَّتِي كُنْتَ عَلَيْهَا إِلَّا
لِنَعْلَمَ مَنْ يَتَّبِعُ الرَّسُولَ مِمَّنْ يَنْقَلِبُ عَلَىٰ
عَقِبَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We did not make that which you would have to be the qiblah.
(Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:143)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ وَجَدْنَا أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We found most of them to be certainly transgressors. (Qur’an,
Surah Araaf 7:102)***

Etc. And on the basis of what Allamah Majlisi has mentioned ‘and surely’
is a conjunction and this is also not against what we claim.

After this encouragement Imam (as) orders them to follow their Imam (as)
and then says: “help this through abstemiousness and struggle”. Because
it is Imam’s help from two aspects and their own help from two aspects.
It is help of Allah from the aspect that the Imam is asking the people
to help the religion of Allah. And the promotion of religion is that all
people obey Allah. Thus a man is obedient to the Almighty Allah and at
the same time, is away from His disobedience. The second aspect is that
when a person is religious and pious others are also encouraged for
this. And they know that it would be the truth of their Imam. Because it
proves that the Imam has taught them this.[^9] Thus to obey the Imam
will be construed as disobeying the enemies and opponents and in this
way he would help his Imam and fight the enemies as the Imam has
mentioned in this tradition quoted previously.

Also, the fact that it is help and support of oneself is that struggle
in obedience and piety causes one to remain steadfast on faith, just as
one who is firm on sins is being degraded; Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كَانَ عَاقِبَةَ الَّذِينَ أَسَاءُوا السُّوأَىٰ أَنْ كَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا بِهَا يَسْتَهْزِئُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected
the communications of Allah and used to mock them. (Qur’an, Surah Rum
30:10)***

Another reason is that: Struggle and effort in obedience and piety and
refraining from sins will cause you to earn the Imam’s proximity in
Paradise and thus it is a help of believers to themselves just as the
opponents will be such that they would deprive themselves of this and be
far away from the Imams.

Proving this matter is what Thiqatul Islam Kulaini has mentioned in
Rauda Kafi from Muhammad bin Yahya from Ahmad from Hasan bin Ali from
Hammad Lahham from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that his father told him: My
dear son, indeed if you act in contravention to my behavior, you will
also not be with me in my abode in Qiyamat tomorrow. Then he said:
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime does not grant leadership of people who
act in contravention to his followers, to be with them in Qiyamat; no by
the Lord of the Kaaba.[^10]

It would not be out of place to end our discussion on the narrators of
this tradition and our motive in this should remain concealed that some
prominent scholars have said in Miratul Uqool: This tradition is
unknown. Thus with the help from the Almighty Allah and support of the
Prophet’s progeny I can say: This tradition, in my opinion is from the
correct traditions. And if you like to read the explanation of the
matter and are inclined to reveal its truth you should open up the wing
of training and your heart must be open to accept the truth.

It is that Muhammad bin Yahya Attar is the same Muhammad bin Yahya the
trustworthy one; and I will tell you a complete rule: that whenever
Muhammad bin Yahya comes at the beginning of a chain in Kafi he is that
same trustworthy man. As for Ahmad bin Muhammad who has come in this
tradition he is Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa Ashari, a scholar of
jurisprudence. Hasan bin Ali is, according to my research, Hasan bin Ali
bin Faddal, he was a pious and reliable person, he had many excellences
and his place is at the seventh pillar of Kufa Masjid. Although he spent
a major part of his life as a Fatihya, he later returned to the right
beliefs. As for Hammad Lajjam, he is Hammad bin Waqid Kufi Lajjam, he
was a senior reliable Shia who well versed with the conditions of Imams.
Thus what I have concluded so far is that he was a trustworthy narrator
of traditions. There are some aspects for this:

First: The reliance of Qummi reporters on his traditional reports,
specially Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa – as it is mentioned – in spite of
his majesty and foresight, because Qummis usually keep away from weak
narrators, rather it is said that it is from this aspect that Isa
mentioned above exiled from Qom, Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Khalid Barqi.

Second: It is that Ibne Fuddal in spite of piety and religiosity, has
narrated from him, and narration of traditions is only from reliable
persons.

Third: Statement of the Imam Abu Muhammad Askari (as) in reply to the
question regarding the books of Ibne Fuddal in which he said: “Accept
what they have narrated and leave where they have explained their view.”

Fourth: Traditional report of Ja’far bin Bashir Bajali, the trustworthy
scholar about whom they said: He narrated the traditions faithfully.

Fifth: That which Shaykh Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini (r.a.) has
mentioned in Usool Kafi under the chapter of Taqayyah from Muhammad bin
Yahya Attar from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Isa from Hasan bin Ali bin
Faddal from Hammad bin Waqid Lajjam that he said: I saw Imam Sadiq (as)
on the way and turned my face away from him. Then after some day I
visited him and said: That day I saw you but I turned my face away lest
you had to face some difficulty on account of me. His Eminence said: May
the Almighty Allah bless you; however yesterday a man from so and so
place saw me and said: Peace be on you O Aba Abdillah, and he didn’t do
a nice thing.[^11]

In this tradition there is proof that Hammad is from the Shias Imamiyah
who resorted to Taqayyah to protect the Imam and the Imam prayed for
him. Also, this proves his understanding and intelligence. Thus from
this we can conclude that he was a trustworthy and truthful narrator and
what Allamah Majlisi has said about him that he is unknown, is
incorrect.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Letters

[^2]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 234, Tr. No. 312

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 77, Tr. no. 9

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 78, Tr. no. 13

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 78, Tr. no. 13

[^6]: Raudatul Kafi, Vol. 8, Pg. 240, Tr. No. 328

[^7]: Raudatul Kafi, Pg. 254, Tr. No. 359

[^8]: Miraat al-Anwaar, Pg. 24

[^9]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 636, Tr. no. 5

[^10]: Raudatul Kafi, Pg. 253, Tr. No. 358

[^11]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 218


