74: Restraining Our Tongue Except For Allah’s Remembrance
=========================================================

Although this is a meritorious act in all times, it is specially
emphasized for the period of Ghaibat.

Shaykh Sadooq has narrated though a correct chain of narrators that Abu
Ja’far Baqir (as) said: “A time will come upon the people when their
Imam shall disappear from their view. Blessed be those who remain firm
upon our guardianship during such times. The least divine reward that
shall reach them would be that the Almighty Allah shall call them and
say: O My servants and maidservants, you brought faith in My secret and
believed in My unseen. Then good news to you for My goodness and rewards
as you are truly My servants and maidservants. I shall accept your
deeds, disregard your faults and forgive your sins. And due to you I
shall send rain to My creatures and ward off calamities from them. If
you hadn’t been there I would have sent My chastisement upon them.”
Jabir asked: O son of Allah’s messenger, what is the best thing that a
believer can do at that time? He replied: Guard the tongue and stay at
home.[^1]

Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.) has quoted Imam Sadiq (as) and he narrates through
his purified forefathers from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said, “Those
who recognize Allah and are humble to Him, they restrain their tongues
and avoid unlawful foods, fast in the day and pray the whole night.” The
companions said, “O Messenger of Allah (S), may our parents be
sacrificed on you, who are these Awliya of Allah (Friends of Allah)?” He
(S) replied, “When the Awliya were silent, their silence was meditation.
When they spoke, it was Allah’s remembrance. When they looked, it was a
lesson and when they uttered something it was wisdom. When they walked
it was a bounty. If Allah has not destined death for them their souls
would have still been intact in their bodies for the desire of
performing good deeds in anticipation of heavenly rewards and in the
terror of divine chastisement.”[^2]

Explanation: Mostly, silence in guarding the tongue from speaking in a
situation when a person is susceptible to what he says, and keeping
quiet is general from that. And speaking mostly is used when a person is
addressed and dialogue is the general form of that.

It is mentioned in Al-Kafi that Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says, “Our
partisans are mute.”[^3] And in the same book through a reliable chain
of narrators it is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (as) that a person said
to him: Give me some advice. He replied: Protect your tongue so that you
may become beloved and don’t give other people control over your affairs
as they will degrade them.[^4]

In the same book through correct chain of narrators it is narrated from
Imam Reza (as) that he said: Among the signs of Fiqh are forbearance,
knowledge and silence; indeed it is one of the doors of wisdom; indeed
silence brings love, indeed it guides to all good.[^5]

In a correct report it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:
The Messenger of Allah (S) said to person who was present in his
assembly: Shall I not guide you to that for which the Almighty Allah
will send you to Paradise? He said: Yes, O Messenger of Allah (S). The
Prophet said: Help others with what you have got. The man said: What if
I myself need that which I want to give him? The Prophet said: Then help
the oppressed. He said: What should I do if I am unable to help one I
want to? He replied: Then do something for the needy. He asked: What if
I myself am in need of that? He replied: Keep your tongue silent except
from that which is good; are you not pleased that this one quality can
take you to Paradise?[^6]

In Kafi it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: A man is
always written as a good one as long as he keeps quiet; but the moment
he speaks up, he is written either as a good one or a bad one.[^7]

Shaykh Sadooq has also mentioned a similar tradition in Faqih from
Amirul Momineen (as).[^8] These two traditions and the one we quoted
previously and another which is mentioned in Majalis of Shaykh Sadooq
prove that remaining quiet is a recommended act even though it may not
consist of contemplation and Taqayyah etc. There are some traditions
which prove this and we shall present them in the coming pages, Insha
Allah.

Majlisi (r.a.) has contemplated on the last tradition and said in
explanation of the Imam’s words: “he would be written as a good man…”
that: “Either it is due to his faith or due to his silence, because
remaining quiet is a good deed as mentioned in this report.” Then he
said: “And I say: “The first possibility is more obvious though most
people have not noted it, as the Imam has said: “When he speaks up, he
is either written as a good person or as a bad one.” Because according
to the second possibility, the restriction goes away, as it is possible
that he may speak a about lawful matter, that is neither good nor bad,
but we give the bad one a generality, such that it includes all that is
not good, and this is remote.

If there is doubt that: On the basis of what you choose, objection is
laid against it at the time of stating it, he will get the reward of
faith, thus he is good as well as bad. On the basis of this it is not
correct to waver between good and bad.

In reply we say: It is possible that ‘good’ means one who does not
commit a single bad deed as is apparent, then the competition between
the good and bad will be correct. In addition to this we deny the
continuation of reward in spite of committing the sin, and absence [of
continuation of reward] indicates what the Infallibles (as) have said:
“An adulterer, as long as he is a believer, does not commit adultery.”
And the likes of this as some were mentioned before. This is one of the
points derived from it and one of the points derived from the tradition
that: “The sleep of a scholar is worship.” That is while he sleeps also,
he is in the position of worship, as a result of continuation of the
deed and faith and that he keeps from that which invalidates it.[^9]

This discussion is having a number of aspects:

**First:** What they have considered obvious is not so. That the reward
is not restricted to that which is not the proof of his faith, rather
that which is clear is that which the readers is aware of and traditions
have confessed to have understood from: “On the basis of the second
possibility, the restriction goes away…” is a mistake. Because one who
makes a legal statement has done bad to himself because he has wasted
his capital of time and he has given it up in exchange of nothing. The
time he spent in saying the lawful statements could have been used in
remembering Allah or reciting Dua or reading the Qur’an. And as reward
of those things he could have earned a lot of rewards, and here there is
actually no metaphor. Because it is clear that everyone is either good
or bad to himself. The foremost is one who wants the benefits for
himself and second is one who removes the benefits from himself.

The bad people are of two types: The first are those who pull the
punishment and distress towards themselves. And the second are those who
just give up the benefits and each of them do bad to themselves, because
a person who has wasted his life without earning rewards of the
hereafter has wasted his life. And no one can doubt it.

What we have mentioned is having a generality and restriction to the
saying of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعَصْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***I swear by the time. Most surely man is in loss. Except those who
believe and do good. (Qur’an, Surah Asr 103:1-2)***

Since its apparent meaning is that everyone who spends his life in good
deeds, has wasted his life as he has wasted his time, even though it may
be little by little. So think upon what we have said and Insha Allah you
will gain numerous benefits from it. How nicely the poet has said:

Time came to purchase my life continually. I said I will not sell it for
the world and what is in it. But it began to purchase it little by
little with nothing. May those hands perish that sell at a loss!

**Second:** It is that in reply to the doubt you have you say: “It is
possible that the implication of good…” I don’t find any justification
for this. And the apparent meaning of traditional report is that those
who assume silence or speakers who are either good or bad from the
aspect of their deeds, if they remain silent the same act will be
counted as a good turn to themselves. And if they speak up a good thing,
this act will also be considered a good turn to themselves. And if they
utter a lawful statement they would be doing bad to themselves because
they would be forgoing the reward of silence and if they speak up a
haraam thing they would have done bad to themselves from two aspects:
One for losing the reward of silence and another of becoming eligible
for punishment of saying a haraam thing.

**Third:** It is that his statement: “In addition to this I consider
continuation of reward of faith in spite of committing sins as
prohibited,” is a clear mistake. Because it is not compatible with
divine justice and also due to the proofs mentioned above, faith
consists of belief and its confession and the two are related.

And as for deeds: They have no role in formation of faith although it is
concerned with its perfection. Thus if it is supposed that the believer
dies when he is committing fornication. He will not remain in Hellfire
forever even though due to his deed; he will be punished till he gets
intercession. And in the view of Shia Imamiyah, faith is that which
makes one enter Paradise. And the requirement of this scholar is that
such a person will remain in Hell forever. And I don’t know how this
statement was made by such a scholar! But sometimes even the best people
make mistakes and the sharpest sword does not cut a thing. An Infallible
is one that Allah has protected.

**Fourth:** His statement: “we deny the continuation of reward in spite
of committing the sin, and absence [of continuation of reward] indicates
what the Infallibles (as) have said: “An adulterer, as long as he is a
believer does not commit adultery,” is also improper and it is a claim
without proof. The fact is that faith is having different grades as
mentioned in many of the traditional reports and the perfect believer is
one whose words testify to his deeds. And without any doubt, a sinner,
when he is disobeying Allah, his action is opposed to his faith, and in
this manner a defect enters his faith because the true faith is present
in him. Because faith, as you know, is belief and confession and till
the time that person has belief and confession, his reward of faith is
also proved. What we have mentioned is supported by numerous traditional
reports and many Duas narrated from the Holy Imams (as). For example in
one of his Duas the Imam says: O Allah, if I disobey You in what You
have ordered or what You have prohibited, but the fact is that I have
obeyed you in the thing You like most, and it is faith in You, the faith
with which you favored us and not that we favored You by having faith in
You.

**Fifth:** It is his statement: “And this can be an explanation of this
traditional report and one of the causes that is related: (Sleep of the
scholar is worship)…” is also an interpretation without proof, rather
the first is that the saying of the Infallibles (as) (Sleep of the
scholar is worship) etc can be left at their apparent meaning, and there
is no need to interpret it, because the acquisition of knowledge that
the Almighty Allah has called us to is having much benefit and some of
them are: The Almighty Allah gives his sleep the reward of worship and
the wisdom behind it is that the student puts himself to trouble in
acquisition of the pleasure of the Almighty Allah and he gives up rest
so that the people are guided.

Thus the Almighty Allah rewards him, by making his sleep, which is rest
and comfort for his body, as a worship act in exchange of having
subjected his body to hardships. Thus every new sleep brings a new
reward for the scholar as a recompense of subjecting his body to bear
the hardships and discomfort of acquiring knowledge. It is like that
which is mentioned as reward for visiting the grave of our master, His
Eminence, Abi Abdullah al-Husain (as): The angel prays to Almighty Allah
while the visitor to his grave sleeps and the reward is for him and
after he is dead, he prays and this reward is also for him.

The conclusion of our discussion is: Remaining quiet - except to speak
that which the Almighty Allah is pleased with or to speak that which is
necessary for man to spend his life – is a recommended deed, even though
we may discount that which may happen as a result of it. There are many
traditions in Layali that prove this. For example the Holy Prophet (S)
said to Allah: O my Lord, what is the foremost worship? The Almighty
Allah replied: “Silence and fasting.” In another report it is mentioned:
There are four things that except for a believer no one can obtain them.
Silence, and it is the foremost worship act…and the Almighty Allah said:
O Muhammad, there is no worship act more likeable to Me than silence and
fasting.

And his saying: Among the signs of Fiqh are forbearance, knowledge and
silence; indeed it is one of the doors of wisdom; thus guard your tongue
except from that which is good as it would take you to Paradise. And it
was said to Prophet Isa (as): Tell me of that through which I can go to
Paradise. He replied: Never say anything. And the Holy Prophet (S) said:
Good manners, moderation and silence is one of twenty-six parts of
prophethood. And he said to Abu Zar: Shall I not tell of a deed that is
heavy on the balance on Judgment Day and light on your tongue? He said:
Why not, O Messenger of Allah (S)? The Holy Prophet (S) said: Silence
and good manners; leaving off that which does not concern you. Prophet
Isa (as) said: Worship is having ten parts; nine of which are in silence
and one part is fleeing from the people. The Holy Prophet (S) said: The
Almighty Allah conceals the defects of one who guards his tongue.

It is mentioned in traditional reports: There was a young man from the
companions of the Messenger of Allah (S) who was killed battle of Uhad
and it was found that he had tied up a stone to his stomach due to
extreme hunger. Thus his mother present at his side removed dust from
his face and said: My son, may you enjoy the Paradise. The Holy Prophet
(S) said: How do you know that he has got Paradise; perhaps he had said
something useless? And it is mentioned in Hadith Qudsi that: O son of
Adam, if you have got hardness in the heart, deprivation in sustenance
and sickness in the body, you should know that you have said something
that does not concern you. It is narrated that Khwaja Rabi did not speak
about worldly and useless matters for a period of twenty years, till our
master, His Eminence, Husain bin Ali (as) was martyred; so the
congregation said: Today, he would speak up; when they went to his place
and informed him about the martyrdom of His Eminence, he said: May the
Almighty Allah increase your and my reward on the killing of Husain (as)
and he glanced at the sky, wept and said: O Allah, O creator of the
heavens and earth, knower of the unseen and apparent, You do justice
between Your servants in what they differed. After that he went to his
place of worship, and did not say anything except truth till he passed
away.

In Tohafful Uqool, among the advices of Imam Sadiq (as) to Abdullah bin
Jundab it is mentioned: You must observe silence, whether you are
ignorant or learned, you will be considered dignified; because silence
is an ornament for the learned and a means of concealing the defects of
an ignorant.

I say: How beautifully has a poet said:

**Silence is an ornament and keeping quiet is a source of security. Thus
when you speak up, do not be talkative. Not once have you regretted your
silence. Whereas you have regretted speaking up many a times.**

In Tohafful Uqool it is related from Imam Sadiq (as) that he advised Abu
Ja’far Muhammad bin Noman as follows: “Those who preceded you, used to
keep silence; while you are learning how to speak. If one of them wanted
to dedicate his efforts to worship, he would have to learn keeping
silent ten years before that. If he learnt it adequately, he would go
worshipping. Otherwise, he would say: No, I am not fit enough for
it.”[^10]

There are numerous traditions of the Holy Imams (as) and many wise
sayings on this topic. The most comprehensive of this is the saying that
Kulaini (r.a.) has quoted in Usool Kafi through his own chain of
narrators from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: Luqman said to this son: My
dear son, if you think speech is silver, then silence is golden.[^11]

I say: This tradition proves that keeping quiet to oneself is better
than speaking up to oneself. That is if we look at the nature of silence
from the aspect that applies to it and which is seen and nature of
talking should be ignored from an aspect that applies to it is supposed;
silence is the best, and its aspect is clear to its people, because the
comfort of the body and heart lies in it. And it would be of lifespan
from that which is not concerned with it. It has other benefits also
which are clear for one who thinks upon them and on the basis of this it
is a natural phenomenon and between this meaning and what is proved is
inclination to speaking in special circumstances, and it being
obligatory in other circumstances and there is no problem in it, just as
sometimes silence is obligatory (Wajib) and sometimes it is unlawful
(Haraam) and sometimes it may also be despicable (Makrooh). But to look
at reports that speak of it being recommended does not make it lawful
and contradiction between the order of silence and speaking does not
change nature.

It is surprising of Allamah Majlisi that after quoting that tradition in
Miratul Uqool he says: “It proves that silence is better than speech; it
seems as if it is so in most cases and if not, it is clear that speaking
up is better than remaining quiet in many cases. Rather, it is
obligatory to speak up while expressing the principles and practical
laws of religion, enjoining good and forbidding evil; and silence is
haraam. Also, it is recommended to speak giving advices and exhortations
to believers and to make them inclined to religious knowledge etc. Thus
those traditional reports are having specialization without this context
or related to the circumstances of the people, because most of their
speaking is with to that which is not beneficial to them. Or that those
traditions have been content with lawful matters.”[^12]

I say: After you contemplate on what we have mentioned, you will realize
that there is no need of this clarification. It must have become clear
to you that where his doubts reach, in his statements – may Allah exalt
his status – due to his many preoccupations, he failed to think on this
tradition as he should have done.

Explanation and justification: You know that originally keeping quiet is
better than speaking up. It may be otherwise if there are enough
justifications to the contrary, as must be clear to the scholars. Our
stance can best be understood if you consider the following problem: Is
it obligatory to remain quiet while listening to the Qur’an or not? I
say: This problem has three aspects:

First: During the congregation prayer.

Second: When the congregation leader is reciting the sermon of Friday
Prayer.

Third: Listening to Qur’an at other times.

Issue one: It is said: Those who are praying behind a congregation
leader, who fulfills all conditions, are obliged to keep quiet and it is
obligatory on them to listen to his Qiraat keeping quiet at the same
time. Some consider it to be recommended and what has come in traditions
is prohibition of reciting the Qiraat in that condition. And it is that
to remain silent, so much so that we don’t find proof that it is Wajib
to recite glorifications and remembering Allah also, rather an opposite
is found in traditional reports and the details of this have been fully
researched.

Issue Two: It is said: It is obligatory for those who are present in a
place where Friday Prayer is organized to keep quiet and listen to the
sermon. According to another statement: It is obligatory on worshippers
and accordingly yet another statement: on their sufficient numbers
necessary for making Friday Prayer obligatory. According to another
statement: It is obligatory to keep quiet and listen if one of the
followers is able to hear the sermon. Some have considered it
recommended and are opposed to those who have considered it Wajib. And
some believe: It is Wajib to listen to both the sermons from the
beginning to the end. Some say: As much as possible it is Wajib to
remain silent and listen to the two sermons. And the statement that it
is recommended and to take the path of precaution is clear and right.
And the details of this is beyond the scope of this book.

Issue Three: That is since the matter whether it is obligatory or
recommended to keep quiet when one can hear the Qur’an is something that
our scholars have not solved and that is why we have discussed it here.
Many of the Sunni jurisprudents have categorically said that it is Wajib
to keep quiet and listen to Qur’an. But Imamiyah scholars are more
inclined to deny its obligation and advocate that it is recommended and
some of them have reconciled them and it is the right attitude.

But Allamah Majlisi has opposed this and said in Kitabus Salat of
Biharul Anwar after the mention of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قُرِئَ الْقُرْآنُ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ وَأَنْصِتُوا لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when the Qur’an is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you. (Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:204)***

Generally this verse is thought to prove that it is obligatory to keep
quiet and listen to the Qiraat of Qur’an in all circumstances, whether
it be during prayers or otherwise, whether we consider it absolute or
consider the commands of the Qur’an to be for making it obligatory. That
which is generally accepted by all is that it is Wajib to keep quiet
when the Imam is reciting and the recommendation is for other than it,
along with the fact that the apparent meaning of most reliable
traditions is that it is Wajib except for a report of Zurarah who has
quoted from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said: And when you follow
the Imam in congregation prayer, thus in the first two rakats don’t say
anything and remain quiet to listen to Qiraat. And in the remaining two
rakats you recite the recitations as Allah, the Mighty and Sublime says
to believers: “When Qur’an is being recited” that is in obligatory
prayer behind the Imam of Jamaat so you remain quiet and listen to it,
perhaps mercy may be done on you and the two later rakats are like the
first two rakats.[^13]

This tradition can be applied to the verse that is revealed about it and
it will not be against its apparent import but they have gathered
writings that it is not obligatory to listen to the Imam, except for
Qiraat. And it is possible that it may support that: to listen to every
recitation till one can. And another that: In congregation, regarding
people who cannot follow the Imam, they must recite themselves. As much
as possible one should follow the path of precaution and remain quiet
during Qiraat.[^14]

This the end of discourse of Allamah Majlisi, may the Almighty Allah
increase his ranks in Paradise. And you will know what objections are
applicable to his statements according to our view.

Thus I say: There are many points that show that it is not obligatory.
There are many principles that support this matter. On the other hand we
have the command to listen to Qiraat as much as possible. And this is
also supported by verses of Qur’an. Since this matter was frequently
encountered it was necessary for the scholars to have written about it.
And they have objected to those who speak while Qur’an is being are
recited. In the same way, they deny it to those who commit sinful acts
and if it had been true they would have earned fame and reached the ears
of all in all the lands.

A proof that it is recommended: Many sayings prove that it is
recommended to keep quiet while the Qur’an is being recited, even in
prayers when the Imam is reciting. And this has no contradiction with
what some of our scholars say that it is haraam to recite when the Imam
is reciting in congregation prayer. And that it is lawful or recommended
to recite Tasbih at that time. Thus the objection to the writer of
Tanqih al-Ijma does no go against his claim, because it would be for one
that considers it unlawful. And we don’t find anyone saying that
reciting the Tasbih is unlawful. So think upon it. And this is
sufficient proof that it is recommended. In addition to that, keeping
quiet and lending the ear is paying respect to Qur’an and respect of
Qur’an is in fact respect for the Almighty Allah.

Another proof is a tradition that the great scholar Noori has mentioned
in Mustadrakul Wasail quoting from Al-Alaa of Muhammad bin Muslim from
His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Baqir (as) that he said: Remaining quiet
and listening to [Qiraat of] Qur’an in Prayers etc is recommended.[^15]

In Tafseer Imam Askari (as) it is mentioned in the excellence of Surah
Fatiha that he said: In fact Surah Hamd is greater and heavier than all
things treasured in the stores of the Arsh (divine Throne) and the
Almighty has reserved this grace only for me and not granted it to any
of the earlier messengers, except His Eminence, Sulaiman (as) who was
granted only Bismillaahir Rah’maanir Rah’eem from this Surah. This is
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an in these words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ يَا أَيُّهَا الْمَلَأُ إِنِّي أُلْقِيَ إِلَيَّ كِتَابٌ
كَرِيمٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ مِنْ سُلَيْمَانَ وَإِنَّهُ بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ
الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely an honorable letter has been delivered to me. Surely it is
from Sulaiman, and surely it is in the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. (Qur’an, Surah Naml 27:29-30)***

Thereafter he said: Whoever recites this Surah (Hamd), believes in love
of Muhammad and his progeny and has faith in obeying the apparent and
hidden of them, Almighty Allah will grant, in its recitation, one unit
of heavenly reward (Hasanah) for each and every letter of it and Hasanah
is something better than all the treasures of this world. The hearer of
this Surah will get one third of the said reward. Hence each of you must
wish to obtain more and more good from it, which is just in front of
you. You should consider it as worthy of making the most out of it lest
time may pass away and you have to regret. [^16]

I say: The Imam the words, ‘obtain more and more good from it…’ show
that it is recommended to recite and listen to Surah Hamd; since if it
had been obligatory, we would not have been urged to recite it so much,
since an obligatory thing must be carried out in any case. And there is
no difference between this and other Surahs.

In Kanzul Irfan of Fadil Miqdad after the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قُرِئَ الْقُرْآنُ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ وَأَنْصِتُوا لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when the Qur’an is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you. (Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:204)***

It is said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has said: It denotes that it is
recommended to listen to it in prayer etc.

In Wafi and Burhan it is quoted from Tahdhib of Shaykh Tusi in a correct
tradition from Muawiyah bin Wahab from His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) that he said: I asked His Eminence: There is a person you don’t
like and he is leading a group in prayers which is recited aloud [what
is the duty of the follower]? Imam (as) replied: When you hear him
reciting the Qur’an you must listen to him. I said: That Imam of
congregation considers me a polytheist! Imam said: If he disobeys Allah
you obey Him. I asked again but the Imam did not permit. I said: I will
pray at home and then attend prayer behind him also. Imam (as) said: Do
it if you can. And he said: His Eminence, Ali (as) was leading the
Morning Prayer when Ibne Kawwa, standing behind the Imam in prayers,
recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ
أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ وَلَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those before you:
Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come to
naught and you would certainly be of the losers. (Qur’an, Surah Zumar
39:65)***

So Amirul Momineen (as) in order to accord respect to Qur’an, remained
quiet till Ibne Kawwa finished its recitation. Then His Eminence (aj)
continued. Again Ibne Kawwa repeated the same verse. Again Ali (as)
remained quiet and after that continued his Qiraat in prayer. Once more,
Ibne Kawwa recited the verse and Ali (as) remained quiet. And then he
recited the following verse in reply to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اصْبِرْ إِنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ حَقٌّ ۖ وَلَا يَسْتَخِفَّنَّكَ الَّذِينَ
لَا يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true and let not
those who have no certainty hold you in light estimation. (Qur’an, Surah
Rum 30:60)***

After that he completed the Surah and went into Ruku.[^17]

I say: Five orders can be derived from this correct narration. First:
That it is recommended to remain absolutely quiet when Qur’an is being
recited, even though the listener be in prayer and even though the
reciter may not be the prayer leader.

Second: It is that this much silence does not go against the continuity
that is necessary in prayer.

Third: It is allowed to recite Qur’an while in prayers.

Fourth: It is allowed make other announcements and address others
through Qur’an in prayers.

Fifth: That this much Qiraat does not hamper the Mawalaat of prayer is
reliable. And what we mentioned is that it is recommended to keep quiet
and listen to Qiraat of Qur’an in every circumstance and in every place
whether it be in Friday sermon or congregation prayer or in the sermon
for Eids.

As for what is said in tradition: “I asked again but the Imam did not
permit and he continued to prohibit it,” is regarding Wajib Qiraat in
prayer. And this was done in this manner so that he may feel sad about
it as will be clear to those who are conversant with traditions. In
addition to this the prohibition to speak other things is not applicable
to reciting Tasbih and Zikr because the special does not prove the
common as will be clear to people of insight. And as for traditions that
say that it is Wajib to keep quiet: or that which say that it is
recommended; both the kinds can be reconciled like we reconcile the
traditions that speak of obligatory nature of Friday bath.

And to consider them on the basis of Taqayyah because to remain silent
is from the religion of Sunnis and the right way is other than that. And
as for traditions that we came across includes: That which Allamah
Majlisi has quoted from a manuscript who has in turn quoted from Jamil
from Zurarah that he said: I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq
(as) regarding one who is reciting the Qur’an, that is it obligatory on
one who hears him to remain quiet and listen to him? The Imam replied:
Yes, when the Qur’an is recited before you, it is obligatory on you to
keep quiet and listen to it.[^18]

Allamah Majlisi[^19] has also quoted from Tafseer Ayyashi from Zurarah
that he said: I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) say: To
remain quiet for Qiraat of Qur’an in prayer and otherwise, is
obligatory. So when Qur’an is being recited in your presence it is
obligatory on you to keep quiet and listen to it.[^20] Similar
traditions are found in Wasail and Burhan.

In Majmaul Bayan it is narrated from Abdullah bin Yaqoob from His
Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that the narrator said: I asked
His Eminence (aj): There is a person who is reciting the Qur’an, is it
obligatory one who hears him to remain quiet and listen to it? His
Eminence (aj) said: Yes, whenever Qur’an is being recited in your
presence, it is obligatory on you to keep quiet and listen to it. [^21]

These were the traditions that prove its obligation that were based on
Taqayyah and which stressed recommendation. It has become clear from
what we mentioned that what Allamah Majlisi has mentioned could be
objected to for a number of aspects: Firstly: he says: “The apparent
meaning of most traditional reports prove its obligatory nature.” I say:
Are these traditions so many? Even in Biharul Anwar he has not mentioned
them all except which we have quoted.

Second: These traditions are opposed to what you know and this is the
place to reconcile them as it is much preferable. And we have reconciled
them by saying that traditions which say it is obligatory were based on
Taqayyah. And in addition to that we should give preference to
traditions that speak of its recommended nature.

Third: That the verse we have mentioned, keeping aside the correct
tradition, has also not proved absolute silence during Qiraat, as the
meaning of ‘Insaat’ is not known from this verse.

Nishapuri in his Tafseer has narrated from Wahidi that he said: “Insaat
in the view of Arabs is leaving off loud recitation; that is you can
recite softly so that others don’t hear.” On the basis of this the proof
will become brief, that is it will waver between absolute silence and
reciting softly, and it is not proof that silence should be in this
meaning only, although a word must be considered as per its clear
meaning. Thus we cannot accept the claim that the word of ‘Insaat’
creates haste in the mind. And from here we can say that silence is
prohibited to the follower of congregation prayer even in which the
Qiraat is obligatory. Some traditional reports support that it is not
obligatory.

It is mentioned in correct tradition of Abul Mughra that he said: I was
in the company of His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) when Hafas
Kalbi asked the Imam: When we are following a prayer leader who is
reciting the Qur’an; should we supplicate and seek refuge from Satan?
Imam (as) replied: Yes, supplicate.[^22]

And it is that it is not correct to apply them to cases before the Imam
begins recitation or when the followers cannot hear them, because it
would be against the apparent meaning of this tradition.

For example: There is a correct narration from Zurarah that one of the
two Imams [Imam Baqir or Sadiq] said: When you stand behind a
congregation leader who, you can follow, you must observe Insaat and
recite Tasbih to yourself.[^23] This proves that Insaat in the verse and
correct tradition that Majlisi has quoted, means not reciting anything
aloud. And if not it is not ordered that before itself you recite the
Tasbih, and it is that it can only be applied to Zikr and it is not
applicable to anything else.

For example: There is a tradition of Abu Khadija Saalim bin Mukarram
from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: When you
lead some people in prayers you must recite the Qur’an in the first two
rakats, and those following you must recite: Subhaanallaahi wal
h’amdulillaahi wa laa ilaaha illallaahu allaahu akbar, in a standing
position…[^24]

And traditional reports that prohibit Qiraat behind the congregation
Imam, do not prove that one must be absolutely quiet even from Tasbih
and Zikr. All this goes on to show that silence is not obligatory on
worshippers during the Friday sermon, because the best tradition offered
in its support is that the two sermons will be counted as two rakat
prayers. And when their obligation is not proved in prayer it cannot be
proved in the sermon also and also other objections that all cannot be
discussed here.

Thus what we have concluded is that it is not obligatory to keep quiet
to listen to Qiraat in all circumstances, except when leaving off
silence will be an act of disrespect to Qur’an, and if one happens to do
it such a person will be like an infidel, we seek refuge from Allah. By
this I only mean speaking to oneself. From what we have stated, it
becomes clear that the stance that traditions advocate that it is
obligation, are objectionable. Because Insaat does not imply silence
that is mentioned in the traditional report of Muawiyah bin Wahab that
describes the action of Amirul Momineen (as).

Fourth: It is his statement that it can be allowed in case the
congregation leaves off reciting the Qur’an is false because reciting
the Qur’an is not restricted to prayer and there are many places where a
person can hear Qur’an between the Masjid and other houses. And another
point is that in Shia faith, congregation for daily prayer is
recommended and not obligatory. And it is that Qiraat is allowed softly
in recommended prayer because it is tiresome to recite so much aloud and
no one is convinced of its obligation. Thus what we have stated proves
that it is recommended to be quiet when Qur’an is being recited. So
please think upon this.

Rather it can be said: From this aspect silence is ordered so that one
can hear the recitation. Thus hearing depends on keeping quiet, that is
why we are told to be quiet. From this we can say that: If we suppose
that the Insaat mentioned in the verse implies silence, its order will
also be regarding its recommendation and in the same way is the order to
listen to it as mentioned in the correct report of Zurarah in Man Laa
Yahzarul Faqih and Allamah Majlisi has also quoted in his statements
that His Eminence first prohibited Qiraat in the first two rakats in
congregation and ordered Insaat. And the prohibition of Qiraat in the
later two rakats also can be seen in that verse, and after that the Imam
said that the later two rakats are also like the former.

This shows that the order for the first two and the later two rakats is
same. And as we mentioned, Qiraat is allowed in the later two rakats,
even though reciting Tasbih and Zikr is better. This shows that Qiraat
in the first two rakats also is lawful, because it is stated that the
first two rakats are like the later two rakats, and the prohibition in
the first two rakats is from the aspect of despicability; on the basis
of this, the matter will be compelled to be taken as Insaat for being
recommended. That which supports this is a tradition that we have quoted
from Kanzul Irfan. And from this it can be said: The traditional reports
prohibiting Qiraat of the follower behind the congregation Imam should
be taken as despicability as Muhaqqiq Hilli has accepted it and a group
has agreed with his view. And it is possible that there may be doubt in
this statement that the apparent import of other traditional reports is
that it is unlawful and you cannot give up the apparent of so many
traditions to justify your point. So please think upon it. And this much
explanation is sufficient here.

Another problem: That which is related to the actual aim and the topic
of angels that note down what people say and do. Do they write each word
that we utter, even the lawful words? Or they note only the words who
have some effects. That those that are unlawful, obligatory, despicable
or recommended. And that they don’t write the lawful (Mubah) words as
there is not effect in Shariah for them. It is a controversial topic.
Some have taken the first possibility and some have taken the second.
And each of them have relied on a matter which will be too complex to
explain here. What is reliable in the view of the author is that it is
revealed from the Almighty Allah and the traditions that is mentioned in
Tafseer Burhan quoting from the book of Husain bin Saeed through a
correct chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:
“Every person has two angels who note down what he says or utters.”

After that they take him to the two angels that are above them, thus
they confirm the good and bad deeds and delete the rest.[^25] And so far
I have not found any opposition to this tradition and Allah is the best
guide.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 330

[^2]: Amali, Pg. 330

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 113

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 113

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 113

[^6]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 113

[^7]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 116

[^8]: Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 4, Pg. 394, Tr. no. 5842

[^9]: Miraat al-Uqool, Vol. 8, Pg. 225

[^10]: Tohaf al-Uqool, Pg. 228

[^11]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 114

[^12]: Miraat al-Uqool, Vol. 8, Pg. 214

[^13]: Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 392, Tr. no. 1161

[^14]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 88, Pg. 21

[^15]: Mustadrakul Wasail, Vol. 1, Pg. 295, Chapter 21, Tr. no. 4

[^16]: Tafseer Imam Askari (as), Pg. 9

[^17]: Al-Wafi, Vol. 5, Pg. 1208; Al-Burhan, Vol. 3, Pg. 268; Tahdhibul
Ahkam, Vol. 3, Pg. 35

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 92, Pg. 222, Tr. no. 7 & Vol. 88, Pg. 23

[^19]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 92, Pg. 221, Tr. 5

[^20]: Tafseer Ayyashi, Vol. 2, Pg. 44, Tr. no. 132

[^21]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 4, Pg. 515

[^22]: Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 407, Tr. no. 1209

[^23]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 3, Pg. 377, Tr. no. 3

[^24]: Tahdhib, Vol. 3, Pg. 275, Tr. no. 120

[^25]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 220; Surah Qaf 50:18, Tr. no. 6


