75: Prayer Of Imam az-Zaman (aj)
================================

Numerous authentic books have quoted the correct tradition of Jamal
al-Usboo where Sayyid Ibne Tawoos says: The Prayer for Imam az-Zaman
(aj) consists of two rakats and in each rakat one should recite the
Surah al-Hamd till Iyyaaka Na’budo wa iyyaaka Nastae’en. Then repeat
this sentence a hundred times and then complete the Surah. After al-Hamd
recite Surah Ikhlaas (Qul Huwallaaho Ah’ad). On completing this prayer
we should recite the following Dua:

O Allah! Calamities have become severe and our helplessness is clear and
the curtains on it are raised, and the earth has become narrow inspite
of its vastness (due to discontinuance of the bounties). We have
complaint with the Heavens and You and only on You do we rely; on all
severities and hardships. O Allah! Send blessings on Prophet Muhammad
(S) and his progeny, whose obedience You have made obligatory on us, and
hasten. O Allah the reappearance of the “upright one” (Al Qaim) and
manifest his honor. O Muhammad O Ali, O Ali, O Muhammad answer me both
of you as you both are sufficient for me. O Muhammad, O Ali, O Ali, O
Muhammad help me as both of you one my true helpers. O Muhammad, O Ali,
O Ali, O Muhammad you both protect me as you both are my protectors O my
master, O the owner of the universe, O master of the time I have
complaints, complaints complaints. Help me, Help me, Help me. Give me
salvation, salvation, salvation.

I say: A similar Dua with some different wording is mentioned at the end
of Part Seven narrating from His Eminence as.

For example: In Makarimul Akhlaq written by Hasan bin Fadl Tabarsi it is
quoted from Abu Abdullah Husain bin Muhammad Bazoofari directly for,
Najmus Thaqib which in turn has quoted from Kunooz an-Najah of Fadl bin
Husain Tabarsi – father of the author of Makarimul Akhlaq – from Ahmad
bin Darbi that he said: “It is said from Imam of the Time (aj) that: One
who has a need from the Almighty Allah should rise after midnight of
Friday eve, perform the bath; go to the place of his prayer, and perform
two rakats of prayer. In the first rakat recite Surah Hamd, and when he
reaches ‘Iyyaka Na’budo wa iyyaka Nastae’en’ he should repeat it a
hundred times. On the hundredth time he should complete the Surah Hamd.
Then recite Surah Tauheed once. After that perform Ruku and Sujood and
in each of them recite the zikr seventy times. Perform the second rakat
also in the same manner. Recite the following Dua before the Namaz. And
if you do it, the Almighty Allah will fulfill any of your needs whatever
it may be, except that it be for cutting off relations. The Dua is
follows:

O Allah, if I obey You, You are worth commendation, and if I offend You,
You have proof against me. All ease and relief are from You. Glory be to
He Who possesses the power but forgives. O Allah, even though I have
offended You, but I have obeyed You in the thing You love most which is
believing in You, I have not ascribed an offspring to You and I have not
ascribed a partner to You. You have bestowed on me and I have not
bestowed anything on You. O my God, verily I have offended You but not
as a result of stubbornness, nor to depart from Your service and not
denial of Your Divinity; but I have obeyed my desire and Satan has
deviated me. You possess the proof against me. You will not be
oppressing me if You punish me due to my sin, but if You forgive and
have mercy on me, verily You are the Openhanded and Generous. O the
Generous. O the Generous…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجْهِ الْمُكَابَرَةِ وَلاَ الْخُرُوجِ عَنْ عُبُودِيَّتِكَ وَلاَ
الْجُحُودِ لِرُبُوبِيَّتِكَ وَلَكِنْ اَطَعْتُ هَوَايَ وَاَزَلَّنِي
الشَّيْطَانُ فَلَكَ الْحُجَّةُ عَلَيَّ وَالْبَيَانُ فَإِنْ
تُعَذِّبْنِي فَبِذُنُوبِي غَيْرَ ظَالِمٍ وَإِنْ تَغْفِرْ لِي
وَتَرْحَمْنِي فَإِنَّكَ جَوَادٌ كَرِيمٌ يَا كَرِيمُ يَا كَرِيمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(recite till you are out of breath)

Then say:

O He that is secured from everything. O He from Whom everything is
afraid and cautious of. I request You of Your security from everything
and the fear of everything of You, to send blessings on Muhammad and on
the family of Muhammad, and to grant security for me, my family,
offspring and other privileges You have bestowed on me till I was not
frightened by anyone and will not be cautious of anything forever.
Verily You have the power over everything. Allah is sufficient for us as
an excellent trustee. O He that sufficed Ibrahim against Nimrod. O He
that sufficed Musa against Firon, I request You to bless Muhammad and
the family of Muhammad and to suffice me from the evils of so and so,
son of so and so.

In Makarimul Akhlaq it is said: It is narrated that if every believing
man and woman recites this prayer, and supplicates sincerely with this
supplication, doors of the sky will open in acceptance of it and it will
be accepted immediately [or in the same night]. And it is from the mercy
of the Almighty Allah on us and on the people.[^1]

In Najmus Thaqib a similar tradition is quoted from Kunooz an-Najah.

The weak author, Muhammad Taqi Musawi Isfahani – may Allah forgive him –
says: I had many important tasks that prevented me from this prayer but
later through His blessings and bounties of the Imam of the Time (aj) He
removed all such impediments.

For example: in Najmus Thaqib, this prayer is mentioned as the Prayer of
the Imam of the Time (aj) and he has quoted it from Sayyid Fadlullah
Rawandi. And after conclusion of prayer, one as to recite Salawat on
Muhammad and progeny of Muhammad, a hundred times and then there is a
special supplication for this occasion.

In Jannatul Mawa quoting from Tarikh Qom of Shaykh Fadil Hasan bin
Muhammad Qummi from Monisul Hazeen Fee Marifte Haqq wal Yaqeen of Shaykh
Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Babawahy in the chapter of building of Masjid
Jamakaran, a long tradition has been mentioned and then it is said:
“Imam Mahdi (aj) has commanded this prayer in a special way that is:
Recite two rakats prayer and each rakat recite Surah Fatiha and when you
come ‘Iyyaaka na’budu wa iyyaaka nastae’en’, repeat it a hundred times.
After that recite Surah Hamd till the end. In Ruku and Sujood recite the
Tasbih seven times and when you finish the prayer recite tahleel (Laa
ilaaha illallaahu), tasbih of Lady Fatima Zahra (as). When you finish
that perform a Sajdah and recite a hundred times Salawat on the Holy
Prophet (S). Then he said: (And these are Imam’s words): Faman s’allaha
fa kaannama s’alla fee baitil a’teeq; One who prays these two rakats
prayer is like one who prayed in Holy Kaaba.[1]

The respected Muhaddith Noori has said regarding the Imam’s statement:
‘and when you finish the prayer recite tahleel’ apparently means recite
Laa ilaaha illallaahu wah’dahu wah’dahu.

I say: Precaution in worship and preparation of fulfillment of needs
demands that we reconcile between the mentioned values, that after
midnight of Friday, perform the Ghusl and perform this prayer, and after
the prayer recite the Tahleel that the Messenger of Allah (S) has taught
and said: This is my Dua and the Dua of the prophets is before me and
then recite:

There is no god but Allah, the One with no partner to Him. For Him is
the kingdom and the praise. He enlivens and causes death. He causes
death and He enlivens. And He is the living that never dies. In His
control is all the good. And He is powerful over everything.

Then recite the Dua that the Holy Prophet (S) recited on the day of the
conquest of Mecca:

There is no god but Allah, the One with no partner to him. He fulfilled
the promise and helped His servant and destroyed the confederations
through one. Then for Him is the Kingdom and the praise. He enlivens and
causes death and He is powerful over everything.

Then recite the Tasbih of Fatima Zahra (as) that is recited after every
obligatory prayer. Then recite the special Tasbih of His Eminence as
mentioned after his prayer; it is as follows:

Glory be to the One having power, the lofty being. Glory be to the One
with majesty and greatness. Glory be to the One with the original
kingdom of dignity. Glory be to the One who is dressed in beauty and
elegance. Glory be to the One who wears the dress of Noor and dignity.
Glory be to the One who sees the spoor of ant on the black hard rock.
Glory be to the One Who sees the route taken by birds in the air. Glory
be to the One Who is only thus and except for Him none is like it.

Then recite Salawat a hundred times on the Holy Prophet (S) and his
progeny. Then recite the Dua that is mentioned in Makarimul Akhlaq and
after that recite the supplication narrated by Sayyid Ibne Tawoos; as
when you act upon that which we have mentioned, your needs would be
fulfilled, Insha Allah. And it is recommended to prolong the Qunoot in
that Prayer and recite the words of ‘Faraj’ in it as our master, Amirul
Momineen (as) has advised some righteous person in dream and these are
the words of Dua:

There is no god, except Allah, the Forbearing and the Noble. There is no
god, except Allah, the High and the Great. Glory be to Allah, the Lord
of the seven skies and the seven earths and what is in them and what is
between them and the Lord of the Great Arsh.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ اللَّهُ الْحَلِيمُ الْكَرِيمُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ
اللَّهُ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ رَبِّ السَّمَاوَاتِ
السَّبْعِ وَرَبِّ الاَرَضِينَ السَّبْعِ وَمَا فِيهِنَّ وَمَا
بَيْنَهُنَّ وَرَبِّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Note and Conclusion: Sayyid Ibne Tawoos, has mentioned a similar prayer
in Prayers of fulfillment of needs on Friday eve and he says: Prayers of
fulfillment is two rakats on Friday eves and eves of Eid of Sacrifice.
Recite Surah Fatiha till ‘Iyyaaka na’budu wa iyyaaka nastae’en’, and
repeat this verse a hundred times and then complete the Hamd. Then
recite Surah Qul huwallaahu Ahad a hundred times and in every rakat do
the same. Then recite the Salaam and say seventy times: Laa h’awla wa
laa quwwata illa billaahil a’liyil a’z”eem. And after that go into
Sajdah and recite two hundred times: Yaa rabbi, Yaa rabbi…and ask
whatever you need.

[^1]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Tabarsi, Pg. 339-340


