76: Weeping For Imam Husain (as)
================================

It is an action by which we can fulfill the rights of Imam az-Zaman (aj)
and there is no doubt that fulfillment of the rights of Imam az-Zaman
(aj) is a medium of achieving the nearness of Allah.

Ja’far Ibne Muhammad Ibne Qooloolay (r.a.) narrates from Imam Sadiq (as)
a lengthy tradition on the merits of weeping upon Imam Husain (as): “No
eye or tear is more liked by Allah than the eye that weeps on him (Imam
Husain a.s.). No one weeps for him except that he has recompensed Janabe
Fatima Zahra (s.a.) and helped her in the mourning. He has presented a
gift to the Messenger of Allah (S) and fulfilled my right. Everyone
shall be raised in Qiyamat weeping except those who weep on my oppressed
forefather, Imam Husain (as). Because their eyes will be shining. He
would be given the good news and his joy will be apparent from his
facial expression. All the creatures would be dreading their
consequences except those who had wept on Imam Husain (as). They shall
be in absolute security. All the people will gather on the plains of
Mahshar but these people shall be standing under the shade of the Arsh
(throne) conversing with Imam Husain (as).

They shall not be fearful of the rigorous strictness of the day of
accounting. They would be told to enter Paradise but would not do so.
They would prefer the company of Imam Husain (as) to Paradise. The
Houries of Paradise would be sending messages to them that they are
waiting for these people, however, they would be so enchanted by the
conversation of Imam Husain (as) that would not pay heed to the
Houries.”[^1]

The phrase “fulfilled my right” indicates that weeping for Imam Husain
(as) is an act that fulfills the rights of Imam az-Zaman (aj) and the
other holy Imams (as). The reason for this is participation in their
grief implies the fulfillment of mutual rights of believers. Because
when a believer passes away there are some customs that the Shariah has
ordered to be fulfilled. They are of two types: The first type is that
we fulfill the rights of the dead and that consist of participating in
the funeral, standing by the grave, seeking forgiveness for him, paying
Sadaqah on his behalf, reciting prayers on his behalf, mentioning him
nicely, etc. And the second type are with regard to his survivors, that
is to present condolence to them, praying for them, sharing their grief,
sending food etc. to them, and doing good to them; and without any doubt
the rights of the Imam (as) regarding this are greater than all the
people.

Thus, when the believer mourns for our master, Abi Abdullah (as) the
right of the Imam that remains after His Eminence, he is in fact to some
extent, fulfilling the rights of the Holy Imam (as) and seeking
proximity through it although he can never fulfill the whole of it. This
is mentioned in traditional reports recorded from the Holy Imams (as).
However to fully explain this is beyond the scope of this book. In the
end we will just mention the saying of Imam (as) which clarifies it:
“And he would have fulfilled our right.” Thus it is our duty to think
upon it.

[^1]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 26


