77: Visiting The Tomb Of Imam Husain (as)
=========================================

It is an act of goodwill towards Imam az-Zaman (aj) and other Purified
Imams (as). By performing this we can please the pure heart of Imam
(as). Imam (as) prays for the visitor of Imam Husain (as), day and
night.

Ibne Qooloolay has quoted Imam Sadiq (as) in Kamiluz Ziaraat: “One who
visits the tomb of my (great grand) father (Imam Husain a.s.), has
performed an act of goodwill towards the Messenger of Allah (S) and has
respected our relationship. The back-biting of such a person is haraam
and his flesh is haraam for hell-fire.”[^1]

In the same book, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan that he said: I asked His Eminence, Abu
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as): May I be sacrificed on you, your father said:
One dirham spent in the way of Hajj is counted as a thousand. Then what
will be the value if one undertakes a journey to visit your forefather,
Husain (as)? He replied: O son of Sinan, each dirham will be considered
as a thousand thousand – till ten thousand, and in the same proportion
would his levels be increased and the pleasure of Allah will be better
for him. And the Dua of Muhammad (S) will be there for him and the Dua
of Amirul Momineen (as) and the Holy Imams (as) also.[^2]

In the same book, it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators that Imam Sadiq (as) said: “The deed loved most by Allah is
the visitation (Ziarat) of the tomb of Imam Husain (as). The deed of a
believer loved most by Allah is making the Momineen happy and the
condition loved most by Allah is that a person weeps in
prostration.”[^3]

Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from Muawiyah
bin Wahab that he heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) supplicating the Almighty
Allah and beseeching Him: Send Your mercy for me, my brothers and
visitors of the grave of my forefather, Husain (as). Those who spend
from their funds put their bodies into trouble, for the sake of goodness
to us, and in hope of reward and a good turn for us, and to please Your
Prophet (S), and to follow our command, and making the enemies angry, so
that through this they may obtain Your satisfaction.

So [O Allah], reward them through Your satisfaction on our behalf, and
keep them in Your safety, day and night, reward their families and
children, who stay behind in the best way. And be their supporter, and
keep them safe from the evil of every evildoer and every weak and strong
creature, and the evil of Shaitan of men and jinns, and reward them with
the best for forsaking their native place and make them return safely to
their families, children and relatives. O Allah, indeed, our enemies
flay them for undertaking a journey to visit our graves, but do not make
this fault-finding to forgo turning to us. In such a way that they
should oppose our opponents. Thus, have mercy on faces colored by the
heat of the sun. And have mercy on cheeks that fall on the tomb of His
Eminence, Abi Abdullah al-Husain (as), and have mercy on the eyes that
weep for us, and have mercy on the hearts that are aggrieved for us, and
have mercy on the cry that is raised for us. O Allah, I have entrusted
those bodies and souls to You till You bring them to the side of the
Hauz on the day of the great thirst…[^4]

It is a very lengthy tradition and we have quoted only that which is
needed here. And this proves that it makes all the Imams (as) very
pleased when we perform this action; it is fulfillment of their command,
a good turn to them and a way to show enmity to their enemies.

In the same book, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Muawiyah bin Wahab from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he
said to Muawiyah: O Muawiyah, do not leave the Ziarat of the grave of
Imam Husain (as) due to fear, because if one leaves it for fear, will be
in such regret that he would wish his grave was next to his (Imam
Husain’s) grave. Do you not like that the Almighty Allah sees your
person and shadow between those for whom the Messenger of Allah (S),
Ali, Fatima and Imams (as) pray?[^5]

Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from Halabi
in a lengthy tradition that he said: I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdullah
Imam Sadiq (as): May I be sacrificed on you, what do you say about one
who leaves the Ziarat of Imam Husain (as) when he could do it? He
replied: He has done Aaq (broken off relations) to the Holy Prophet (S)
and us and considered light the command to him in this regard. And the
Almighty Allah will fulfill the needs of one who goes for this Ziarat,
and the Almighty Allah makes him sufficient in all the worldly affairs
that are important to him, He widens his sustenance, what he spends is
returned to him, fifty years’ sins are forgiven, when he returns, no sin
will remain in his account but that it would be washed off, when he
passes away, the angels descend and give him bath and open a door to
Paradise. When he is raised in Qiyamat, he will be told: For every
dirham you spent, there are a thousand for you, and the Almighty Allah
has stored it for you.[^6]

In the tradition of Abdullah bin Hammad Basri it is narrated from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) in which the Imam has mentioned the excellence of the
visitor to the grave of Imam Husain (as) till he said: “And as for that
which will be with for him is that we shall be blessing him day and
night…”

In the tradition of Safwan Jammaal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) it is
mentioned: If the visitor of Imam Husain (as) knew what joy he conveys
to the Messenger of Allah (S), to Amirul Momineen (as), to Fatima and
Imams (as), to martyrs of us, Ahle Bayt, and what he gets through their
prayers and how much reward he would get in the world and the hereafter
and what reward is stored with Allah for him, he would wish that he is
not seen at home for the rest of his life…[^7]

[^1]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 127, Chapter 46

[^2]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 128, Chapter 46

[^3]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 146, Chapter 48

[^4]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 116, Chapter 40

[^5]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 126, Chapter 45

[^6]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 128, Chapter 46

[^7]: Kaamiluz Ziaraat, Pg. 297, Tr. no. 15


