12. Friday Eve
==============

Great emphasis and stress has been laid on praying for the last Imam,
al- Hujjat, al-Muntazar (aj), the awaited one, on the following
accounts:

**One**: The significance of Friday for a number of reasons which, we
shall indicate, Inshallah. Thus, it is appropriate that we should pray
for our Imam (as) on its eve.

**Two**: It is the eve of the presentation of deeds, according to the
author of Lataaef al-Maaref.

**Three**: It has come in some of the authentic Shiite books that among
the deeds of the eve of Friday is that you recite a hundred times,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد، وعجل فرجهم، وأهلك عدوهم من الجن والانس من
الأولين والآخرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and hasten their
reappearance. And destroy their enemies, from the Jinns and humans; from
the first and the last.[^1]

The renowned Shaykh Abu Ja’far al-Tusi (a.r.) writes in Mukhtasar al-
Misbaah while describing the rituals for Friday eve, “Send salutations
on the Holy Prophet (S) in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد، وعجل فرجهم، وأهلك عدوهم من الجن والانس من
الأولين والآخرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and hasten their
reappearance. And destroy their enemies, from the Jinns and humans; from
the first and the last.

A hundred times or as many times as possible.

**Four**: The author of Najmus Thaqib has listed the recitation of Dua
Nudbah among the recommended acts of Friday eve, as much as it is
preferred on the day of Friday.

**Five**: Numerous traditions have exhorted invocations for the eve of
Friday, in addition to the fact that it is recommended for a believer to
prefer praying for his master, Imam az-Zaman (aj) over his own self.[^2]

**Six**: It is suggested to pray for all the believers, men and women,
in this night; thus he (aj) of course is more worthy than any other
believer to be prayed for.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 89, Pg. 289

[^2]: An-Najmus Thaqib, Pg. 467


