13. Friday
==========

Generally, it is highly recommended to pray for Imam al-Mahdi (aj)
throughout the day of Friday. Early morning prayers, noon, while going
to the mosque, after Asr prayers, in the Qunoot of Zuhr prayers, in the
Qunoot of Namaz-e-Jumuah, the sermon of Friday Prayer and in the wee
hours of Friday, etc. all have been narrated on the authority of our
infallible, guided Imams (as) as times of invocations for our master
Saahebuz Zamaan (aj).

a) After Morning Prayer
-----------------------

In Biharul Anwar a lengthy supplication is narrated and we have
mentioned it in the book Abwaab al-Jannaat fi Aadaab al-Jumuaat. It is a
noble supplication, which has been ordered to be recited regularly, and
is as follows:

> اللهم وكن لوليك في خلقك وليا وحافظا وقائدا وناصرا حتى تسكنه أرضك طوعا
> وتمتعه منها (7) طويلا وتجعله وذريته فيها الأئمة الوارثين واجمع له شمله
> وأكمل له أمره وأصلح له رعيته وثبت ركنه وافرغ النصر(8) منك عليه حتى
> ينتقم فيشتفي ويشفي حزازات(9) قلوب نغلة وحرارات صدور وغرة وحسرات أنفس
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ترحة، من دماء مسفوكة، وأرحام مقطوعة، وطاعة مجهولة، قد احسنت إليه
البلاء، ووسعت عليه الآلاء، وأتممت عليه النعماء، في حسن الحفظ منك له.
اللهم اكفه هول عدوه وأنسهم ذكره وأرد من أراده، وكد من كاده، وامكر بمن
مكر به، واجعل دائرة السوء عليهم ... اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد وعجل
فرجهم 
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, be for Your Wali among Your creatures, a protector, a guard, a
leader and helper, till he lives in Your earth in peace and enjoys it
for a long time. And appoint him and his progeny the inheritor Imams.
And bring together his dispersed affairs, and perfect his rule, and
bring for him his subjects and make his glory strong, and bless him with
patience and forbearance. Till he takes revenge and give peace to his
heart. And cure the hearts of malice and make the burning hearts cool.

And end the regret of aggrieved souls, from the aspect of blood shed
unlawfully and broken relations, and unknown obedience [ignorance about
compulsory obedience of the rightful Imam] make the hardships good for
him and make our bestowals wide and You complete Your bounties on him
with a good protection to him. O Allah, remove the fear of enemy from
him and erase his memory of enemies; do bad with all those who wish bad
for him and plot against all those who plot against him and reserve evil
for him.

At its end, say a hundred times:[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد وعجل فرجهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and hasten their
reappearance.

I say: We have stated earlier in the light of traditions that his
reappearance is the victory of all the friends of Allah. For, by it the
aims of all of them will be achieved and their goal achieved. It is also
recommended for Friday, (like after the Dawn and Noon prayers everyday),
one should say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد وعجل فرجهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and hasten their
reappearance.

b) During Afternoon
-------------------

Its evidence lies in the invocation mentioned in the chapter of this
book, and it is a noble tradition, comprising of reports that the Holy
Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (as) prayed during the afternoon of
Friday for the early reappearance of our master, Imam az-Zaman (aj).

c) While going to the Masjid
----------------------------

Whatever is recommended to recite while going to the mosque for two Eid
prayers, the same is supposed to be recited while going to the Masjid on
Friday also, and comprises of invocation for Imam az-Zaman (aj).
Inshallah, we shall mention it under the chapter, “Supplications for
special times.”

d) After Asr Prayer
-------------------

In Jamaal al-Usboo it is narrated by Abdullah Ibne Sinan from Imam Sadiq
(as) who said: “On Judgment Day, Allah the Almighty shall raise the
days, and Friday shall be raised as leader of all of them like a bride,
possessing all perfections and beauty, presented to the owner of
religion and wealth. It shall stop at the door of Paradise with other
days behind it, and will intercede for all those who sent more blessings
on Hazrat Muhammad (S) and his holy progeny (as) in it.” Ibne Sinan
says, ‘I said, How much is considered as more in it? And in which times
of Friday is it best to send blessings and salutations?’ Imam (as) said,
‘Hundred times. And the best time is after Asr.’ He asked, ‘And how
should I say it?’ Imam (as) replied, ‘Say a hundred times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم صل على محمد وآل محمد وعجل فرجهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and hasten their
reappearance.

Further evidence for its significance is the saying of the venerable
Sayyid, Ali Ibne Tawoos (r.a.) in Jamaal al-Usboo when he mentions the
supplication from the respectable Shaykh, Uthman Ibne Saeed (a.r.). We
too shall make a mention of it in the coming section, Inshallah.

e) In the Qunoot of Zuhr and Friday Prayer
------------------------------------------

Its importance has been discussed in the chapter of Qunoot.

f) In the Friday sermon
-----------------------

Its emphasis has been underlined in the tradition of Muhammad Ibne
Muslim, from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as), as narrated in *Al-Kafi* and
*Al-Wafi*.[^2] Then refer to it and ponder over it.

g) In the last part of Friday
-----------------------------

Its importance can be gauged from what has been narrated after Dua
Samaat. It is the time when one can expect the invocations to be
accepted. In the book Jamalus Saliheen, the following supplication has
been narrated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم إني أسألك بحرمة هذا الدعاء وبما فات منه من الاسماء وبما يشتمل
عليه من التفسير، والتدبير الذي لا يحيط به إلا أنت، أن تصلي على محمد
وآل محمد، وأن تعجل فرجهم في عافية وتهلك أعداءهم في الدنيا والآخرة، وأن
ترزقنا بهم خير ما نرجو وخير ما لا نرجو وتصرف بهم عنا شر ما نحذر، وشر
ما لا نحذر، إنك على كل شئ قدير، وأنت أكرم الأكرمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, I request from You by the sanctity of this supplication and
Your missing holy names in it and what it encompasses except You, to
send blessings on Muhammad and on the holy family of Muhammad and hasten
their relief in good health and destroy their enemies in this world and
in the world Hereafter. Make provision for us through them to the best
of our aspirations and the best of what we did not aspire, and divert
from us through them the mischief about which we were warned and the
mischief about which we were not warned; verily You possess power over
all things and You are the most noble of the noble ones.

In some other reliable books, another supplication has been mentioned
that has to be recited after Dua-e-Samaat and it is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم بحق هذا الدعاء وبحق هذه الأسماء، التي لا يعلم تفسيرها ولا يعلم
باطنها غيرك، افعل بي ما أنت أهله، ولا تفعل بي ما أنا أهله، وانتقم لي
من ظالمي، وعجل فرج آل محمد وهلاك أعدائهم من الجن والانس، واغفر لي ما
تقدم من ذنبي، وما تأخر ووسع علي من حلال رزقك، واكفني مؤنة انسان سوء،
وشيطان سوء إنك على كل شئ قدير، والحمد لله رب العالمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, for the sake of this supplication and for the sake of all these
names that its deep explanation is not known to anyone save You, send
Your blessings on Muhammad and on the holy family of Muhammad and do for
me what befits You and don’t do with me what I deserve. O Allah, take
revenge for me from my oppressor and hasten the relief of the holy
family of Muhammad and destroy their enemies among the Jinn and humans,
and pardon all my past and future sins, spread for me lawfulness out of
Your provision and suffice me from the problem of the evil men and
wicked neighbor and associates, and wicked devils, surely You possess
power over all things and praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

And that which proves the emphasis for praying in favor of His Eminence
on Fridays, is the mention of Dua Nudbah on this day and also on the two
Eids (Fitr and Qurban), which we shall explain in the next section,
Insha Allah. If anyone researches the books of traditions of the
infallible Imams (as) he will come across other proofs also in addition
to what we have mentioned so far.

Note: Know that Friday enjoys a special particularity and relationship
with our master, Imam az-Zaman (aj) from various aspects. Hence it is
essential that we should make the necessary preparations in it for him
(aj). We have discussed about it in the book Abwaab al-Jannaat Fi Aadaab
al-Jumuaat but we shall hint about these over here as a reminder for
those who are wise.

a) It’s the day of his birth

b) Imamate was transferred to him

c) The day of his reappearance

d) His domination over his enemies

e) It’s the day when he shall take the oath and covenant for himself
from his infallible ancestors (as)

f) Allah the Almighty has particularized him with the title of Al-Qaim
for this day

g) It (Friday) is one of his titles. I have mentioned other factors also
in that book and those who like may refer to it.[^3]

[^1]: Jamal al-Usboo, Pg. 450

[^2]: Kafi, Vol. 3, Pg. 422; Al-Wafi, Vol. 8, Pg. 1149

[^3]: Abwaabul Jannaat Fee Aadaab al-Jumuaat, Pg. 339


