16. Eid-Ul-Fitr
===============

The concerned supplications for this occasion can be seen in the book of
Iqbaalul Aamaal[^1] (of Sayyid Ibne Tawoos), when a person sets out to
perform the prayers of Eid al-Fitr or Eid al-Azhaa. We shall mention it,
Inshallah, in this book later. And also the supplication that is
prescribed for recitation at the time of going out for the Eidul Fitr
Prayer, proves this. Sayyid Ibne Tawoos says: We shall mention a part of
that which is mentioned about supplications to be recited on the way. As
you leave, begin with the following Dua, till the Imam of the
congregations begins the Prayers. And if you are not able to recite all
the Duas, you may recite them after the ritual prayers, by way of Qadha
(fulfillment of lapsed rituals).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم إليك وجهت وجهي وساق الدعاء إلى قوله: اللهم صل على وليك المنتظر
أمرك، المنتظر لفرج أوليائك، اللهم اشعب به الصدع، وارتق به الفتق وأمت
به الجور، واظهر به العدل، وزين بطول بقائه الأرض، وأيده بنصرك وانصره
بالرعب، وقو ناصرهم، واخذل خاذلهم، ودمدم على من نصب لهم، ودمر على من
غشهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, I turn my face to You…O Allah, bless Your Wali, who awaits for
Your order, and awaits for the Faraj of Your Awliya. O Allah, mend the
break through him, and remove the dispersal through him, and finish off
injustice through him, and establish justice through him, and decorate
the earth through his long life and make Your help to follow him, and
help him through awe, and strengthen all those who help him, and degrade
those who wish for his defeat, destroy all those who want to fight him
and eradicate all those who want to deceive him…

It is also recommended to recite Dua Nudbah on both the above instances
and includes the supplications that are to be recited when one intends
to perform Namaz-e-Eid. Imam Sadiq (as) said to Abdullah Ibne Deenar,
“There is no Eid of the Muslims, whether Fitr or Azhaa, but that it
increases the grief of Aal-e-Muhammad (S) because they (Aal-e-Muhammad)
see their right in the hands of others.”[^2]

I say: On the basis of this, it is appropriate that the believer should
fervently pray for the reappearance of the Imam and help his Imams to
remove their distress.

[^1]: Iqbaalul Aamaal, Pg. 283

[^2]: The aim of this is mentioned in Furu Kafi and also in Ilalush
Sharai of Shaykh Sadooq/ 389 narrating from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as).


