18. Dahwul Arz Day - Day Of Earth’s Expansion
=============================================

It is the 25th of Zilqad (when Allah expanded the earth). Praying for
the reappearance of Imam az-Zaman (aj) and asking for his advent has
been tremendously emphasized for this day, as can be seen in Iqbaalul
Aamaal and Zaadul Maad[^1] (of Allamah Majlisi). Some of the points in
this context really make the hearts tremble, and hence, we shall mention
a few of them over here as encouragement:

1. It (25th Zilqad) is like a day when the reappearance of Imam az-Zaman
(aj) has been promised by Allah. When a believer sees that this day of
the year has arrived but his master has not come, he becomes sorrowful
and his grief is aggravated, Thus, his intellect and belief exhort him
to pray even more for the reappearance.

2. On this day, divine mercy is spread and invocations are accepted. So,
the believer for whom his Imam (aj) is dearer than his own self, his
family, his children and his relatives, will pray from the depth of his
heart for the removal of the difficulties of his master (aj).

3. This day is of bounty conferred by Allah on His creation because He
expanded the earth so that he may live in it and reside therein.
Moreover, he can derive pleasures from the various kinds of bounties
that grow from the earth, descend on it and inhabit it. When he realizes
that all these gifts bestowed on him are due to the blessing of his
master (aj), he feels it as his duty to thank him through supplications
in his favor. For sure, he is the medium of these bounties that cannot
be overlooked.

4. Traditions have underlined the significance of being engrossed in the
remembrance of Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, on this day. There is
no doubt that praying for the reappearance of Imam-e-Asr (aj) is the
best form of Allah’s remembrance.

[^1]: Iqbaalul Aamaal, Pg. 312; Zaad al-Maad, Pg. 236


