22. Whole Month Of Ramadan
==========================

This month is the best for praying for the reappearance of Imam az-Zaman
(aj), especially its nights, because it is the month of invocations.
Hence, traditions have ordered for the same and thus, the significance
of reciting Dua Iftetaah have been underlined in the nights of this
month. Do not neglect this supplication for indeed, it is a noble and
comprehensive prayer, encompassing the needs of both this world as well
as the hereafter.

Also supporting this matter is that which the chief of narration
scholars, Shaykh Sadooq has mentioned in his book, Fadail Sharur
Ramadan, through his own chain of narrators from Imam Ali Reza (as) that
he said with regard to the merits of the month of Ramadan: Good deeds
are accepted in the month of Ramadan and the sins are forgiven. One who
recites one verse of the Book of Allah, in the month of Ramadan will get
the reward of reciting a whole Qur’an in other months.

One who makes his believer brother smiles in this month, he would not be
met except with a smile and given the good news of Paradise on Judgment
Day. One who helps his believer brother in this month, will be helped by
the Almighty when passing over the Sirat Bridge, on the day when his
feet would be shaking.

For one who controls his anger on this month, the Almighty Allah will
keep away His anger. If a person helps an oppressed soul, Allah will
help him against one who is inimical to him in this world, and will also
help him at the time of the accounting of deeds.

The month of Ramadan is a month of mercy and blessings. It is month of
forgiveness and return [to the court of Allah]; and one who is not
forgiven in the month of Ramadan, then in which month would he be
forgiven?! Thus, beg the Almighty Allah to accept your fasting and that
He may not make it your last time. And that He should give you the good
sense of obeying Him and protect you from His disobedience, as He is the
best of those who are asked.[^1]  
 I say: In Part Five we had stated that praying for an early
reappearance and success of our master, Hazrat Hujjat (aj) is a kind of
rendering help to him, from the aspect that we are encouraged to help
the believers in this month and without any doubt helping the Imam (as)
is the best form of help. An evidence for this is a special Dua for this
month quoted in Iqbal and Zaadul Maad from the fourth Imam, Imam Zainul
Abideen (as) and his son, Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) which begins as
follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم هذا شهر رمضان، وفيه: أسألك.. ان تنصر وصي محمد، وخليفة محمد،
والقائم بالقسط من أوصياء محمد، صلواتك عليه وعليهم، اعطف عليهم نصرك...
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, this is the month of Ramadan… I ask You to help the vicegerent
of Muhammad and the successor of Muhammad and the one who will establish
justice from the successors of Muhammad. Your blessings be upon him and
them. Bestow Your help to them.

Supporting this point also is the traditional report that Thiqatul
Islam, Muhammad Ibne Yaqoob Kulaini has recorded in the Chapter of
Fasting, in Usool Kafi from Muhammad bin Isa through his own chain of
narrators from the Holy Imam (as) that they said: Recite this Dua on the
eve of 23rd of Ramadan in Sajdah (prostration), in sitting and standing,
and go on repeating it as much as you can. So much so, that you learn it
by heart for your life. Thus after praise and glorification of the
Almighty Allah recite as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم كن لوليك فلان ابن فلان في هذه الساعة، وفي كل ساعة وليا، وحافظا،
وناصرا، ودليلا، وقائدا، وعينا، حتى تسكنه أرضك طوعا، وتمتعه فيها طويلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah You be for so and so, at this hour and at every hour a Guardian,
a protector, a leader, a helper, a guide and a protector, so that he is
at ease and lives on your earth for a long time.[^2]

I say: This tradition proves that praying for the important matter of
hastening the reappearance is emphasized on the 23rd eve of Ramadan of
all the times and occasions just as the month of Ramadan is more
emphasized than other months. It is so because it is the best time for
acceptance of supplications and gaining the best rewards. And also the
angels and Ruhul Qudus come down on this night and the doors of mercy
and success are thrown open and they are not thrown open on other
nights.

Rather it has been clearly mentioned in some traditional reports that
this night is the same night of Qadr (power), which is better than a
thousands months. Thus, Thiqatul Islam, Muhammad Ibne Yaqoob Kulaini has
stated in Usool Kafi, Chapter of Miscellany, Book of the Merits of
Qur’an through his own chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
from the Holy Prophet (S) that he said: The Qur’an was revealed on the
23rd of the month of Ramadan.[^3] This tradition, along with the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We revealed it on the grand night. (Qur’an, Surah Qadr
97:1)***

…proves that the night of power is the same 23rd eve of the month of
Ramadan, as is clear for people with sense.

Muhaqqiq Noori, in his book, Najmus Thaqib, has quoted the above
mentioned Dua in expanded version from Al-Mazmaar of Sayyid Ibne Tawoos
(r.a.). It is as follows:

> اللهم كن لوليك القائم بأمرك الحجة بن الحسن المهدي عليه وعلى آبائه أفضل
> الصلاة والسلام في هذه الساعة وفي كل ساعة وليا، وحافظا، وقائدا وناصرا،
> ودليلا، ومؤيدا (27) حتى تسكنه أرضك طوعا وتمتعه فيها طولا وعرضا وتجعله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وذريته من الأئمة الوارثين، اللهم انصره وانتصر به واجعل النصر منك له،
وعلى يده، واجعل النصر له، والفتح على وجهه، ولا توجه الأمر إلى غيره.
اللهم أظهر به دينك وسنة نبيك (صلى الله عليه وآله) حتى لا يستخفي بشئ من
الحق مخافة أحد من الخلق اللهم إني أرغب إليك في دولة كريمة تعز بها
الإسلام وأهله، وتذل بها النفاق وأهله، وتجعلنا فيها من الدعاة إلى
طاعتك، والقادة إلى سبيلك وآتنا في الدنيا حسنة وفي الآخرة حسنة وقنا
عذاب النار، واجمع لنا خير الدارين، واقض عنا جميع ما تحب فيهما، واجعل
لنا في ذلك الخيرة برحمتك ومنك في عافية آمين رب العالمين، وزدنا من
فضلك، ويدك الملأى فإن كل معط ينقص من ملكه، وعطاؤك يزيد في ملكك. 
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, be for Your Wali, one who will rise up with Your command, the
Hujjat Ibnil Hasan al-Mahdi, upon him and his forefathers, the best of
blessings and salutations on this time and at all times, the guardian,
the protector, the leader and the helper, the proof and supporter till
he lives in Your earth and enjoys its length and breadth. And make him
and his progeny from the inheritor Imams. O Allah, help him and help
through him (Your religion) and make help from You (special) for him and
open upon his face to victory and do not give this (rule) to anyone
else.

O Allah, make Your religion dominant through him and the Sunnah of Your
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. So that they do not conceal
anything from the truth due to the fear of the creatures. O Allah,
indeed, I am inclined to the noble rule, in which Islam and its people
are honored and hypocrisy and its people are debased. And make us the
callers to Your obedience and guides to Your path.

And give us good in the world and good in the hereafter and save us from
the Fire and gather for us all good of both the worlds and repay all our
debts. And make for us good in it by Your mercy and generosity in
prosperity. Amen, Lord of the worlds and increase Your blessings on us
and fill up our needs, for all You give is less than Your kingdom and
Your bestowals increase Your kingdom.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 96, Pg. 341

[^2]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 162

[^3]: Usool Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 2/629


