28. 21st Of The Month Of Ramadan
================================

Particularly after the morning obligatory prayers. That which proved
this is the statement of the venerable Sayyid, Ali Ibne Tawoos in Iqbal,
that he has narrated from Hammad bin Uthman that he said: I went to Abi
Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) on the 21 of Ramadan. His Eminence asked
me: O Hammad, have you performed the ritual bath (ghusl)? I replied:
Yes, may I be sacrificed on you. Then he called for a mat and then said:
Come near me and perform the ritual prayer. And then the began to pray
non-stop and I prayed by his side, till we concluded all the prayers.

After that he began to recite supplications and I kept saying ‘Amen’ at
his Duas till the dawn break. After that His Eminence (aj) recited the
Azaan and Iqamah and called some of his servants and standing in front
led the Morning Prayer and we followed praying behind him. In the first
Rakat he recited the Surah Fatiha and Surah Qadr and in the second Rakat
he recited the Surah Fatiha and Surah Tauheed.

And after we had praised and glorified the Almighty Allah we invoked
blessings on the Messenger of Allah (S) and prayed for all the believer
men and believer women and all the Muslim men and Muslim women from the
first to the last. His Eminence (aj) went into Sajdah and for a long
time we heard nothing but his breathing. Then we heard that he was
reciting as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 لا إله إلا أنت مقلب القلوب والأبصار لا إله إلا أنت خالق الخلق بلا
حاجة فيك إليهم، لا إله إلا أنت مبدئ الخلق لا ينقص من ملكك شئ، لا إله
إلا أنت باعث من في القبور، لا إله إلا أنت مدبر الأمور، لا إله إلا أنت
ديان الدين، وجبار الجبابرة، لا إله إلا أنت مجري الماء في الصخرة الصماء
لا إله إلا أنت مجري الماء في النبات، لا إله إلا أنت مكون طعم الثمار لا
إله إلا أنت محصي عدد القطر وما تحمله السحاب، لا إله إلا أنت محصي عدد
ما تجري به الرياح في الهواء، لا إله إلا أنت محصي ما في البحار من رطب
ويابس، لا إله إلا أنت محصي ما يدب في ظلمات البحار، وفي اطباق الثرى.
أسألك باسمك الذي سميت به نفسك، أو استأثرت به في علم الغيب عندك، وأسألك
بكل اسم سماك به أحد من خلقك، من نبي أو صديق، أو شهيد، أو أحد من
ملائكتك وأسألك باسمك الذي إذا دعيت به اجبت وإذا سئلت به أعطيت وأسألك
بحقك على محمد وآل محمد، وأهل بيته صلواتك عليهم وبركاتك، وبحقهم الذي
أوجبته على نفسك، وأنلتهم به فضلك، أن تصلي على محمد عبدك، ورسولك الداعي
إليك بإذنك، وسراجك الساطع بين عبادك في أرضك وسمائك وجعلته رحمة
للعالمين ونورا استضاء به المؤمنون، فبشرنا بجزيل ثوابك، وأنذرنا الأليم
من عقابك اشهد انه قد جاء بالحق، وصدق المرسلين، واشهد ان الذين كذبوه
ذائقو العذاب الأليم. أسألك يا الله يا الله يا الله، يا رباه يا رباه يا
رباه، يا سيدي يا سيدي يا سيدي، يا مولاي يا مولاي يا مولاي، أسألك في
هذه الغداة أن تصلي على محمد وآل محمد وأن تجعلني من اوفر عبادك وسائليك
نصيبا، وأن تمن علي بفكاك رقبتي من النار يا أرحم الراحمين. وأسألك بجميع
ما سألتك وما لم أسألك، من عظيم جلالك ما لو علمته لسألتك به أن تصلي على
محمد وأهل بيته، وأن تأذن لفرج من بفرجه فرج أوليائك واصفيائك، من خلقك،
وبه تبيد الظالمين وتهلكهم، عجل ذلك يا رب العالمين، وأعطني سؤلي ياذا
الجلال والاكرام. في جميع ما سألتك لعاجل الدنيا وآجل الآخرة، يا من هو
أقرب إلي من حبل الوريد، أقلني عثرتي واقلبني بقضاء حوائجي يا خالقي، ويا
رازقي، ويا باعثي، ويا محيي عظامي وهي رميم، صل على محمد وآل محمد،
واستجب لي دعائي يا أرحم الراحمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no god except You, the changer of the hearts and the eyes.
There is no god, except You, the creator of the creatures without any
need for Him. There is no god, except You. Who initiated the creation
without there developing any deficiency in Your Kingdom. There is no
god, except You, the raiser of those who are in the graves. There is no
god, except You, the destiny maker. There is no god, except You, the
recompenser and the punisher of the oppressors. There is no god, except
You, Who makes the water flow from the hard stone.

There is no god, except You, Who makes the water flow in vegetation.
There is no god, except You, Who conceals taste in fruits. There is no
god, except You, Who knows the count of raindrops and what the clouds
bear. There is no god, except You, Who knows the number of that which
makes the wind breeze flow in the air. There is no god, except You, Who
knows what is in the oceans from wet and dry substances.

There is no god, except You, Who counts the creatures who are in the
darkness of the oceans and in the layers of the earth. I ask You by all
the names You are named with, by Yourself, or which You have restricted
to Yourself in Your concealed knowledge. And I ask You by the names with
which when You are called, You reply, and You give when You are asked.
And I ask you by Your right on Muhammad and his Ahle Bayt, Your peace
and blessings be on them.

And by their right which You have made obligatory on Yourself and made
them repositories of Your blessings, that You bless Muhammad, Your
servant and Your Messenger, the caller to You by Your permission and the
gleaming lamp among your servants in Your earth and Your heavens and
whom You made as the mercy for all the worlds and the illuminated Noor
(light) for the believers. Then give us good news of Your mighty reward
and frighten us with Your painful chastisement.

I testify that he brought truth from truth and testified for Your
messengers. And I testify that those who denied him will taste a painful
punishment. I ask You O Allah, O Allah, O Allah, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord,
O my chief, O my chief, O my chief, O my master, O my master, O my
master. I ask You this morning, that You bless Muhammad and his family.
And make me the fortunate pleader and beseecher. And bless me with the
chance to free my neck from hellfire.

O the most merciful of the merciful ones. And I ask You with all those
who ask You and those who don’t ask You from Your great majesty, which
if I know it, I ask You by it to bless Muhammad and his Ahle Bayt and
that You allow relief with their relief of those who consider them to be
Your beloveds and chosen ones from Your creatures.

And through them destroy the oppressors and eliminate them. Hasten this,
O Lord of the Worlds. And give me what I ask for. O owner of majesty and
greatness. And give me what I ask for in this world and the hereafter. O
one Who is nearer to me than the jugular vein. Cure my deficiencies and
allow me to leave Your court with my wish fulfilled. O my creator, O my
sustainer. O my motivator. O one Who makes the brittle bones alive.
Bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and accept my entreaty. O the
most merciful of the merciful ones.

When he concluded the supplication, he raised his head and I asked: May
I be sacrificed on you, you prayed for the reappearance of one by whose
reappearance the chosen ones of Allah would get ease; are you not him?
He replied: That person is the Qaim of Aale Muhammad (as).

I asked: Are there some signs of his advent? He replied: Yes, solar
eclipse, two third hour after it has risen, lunar eclipse on the 23rd of
the month, a calamity that would strike the people of Egypt, cutting off
of the flow of Nile, remember what you are told, and wait for your
master, day and night, as the Almighty Allah is doing something every
day and one work does not prevent Him from doing another. Allah is the
Lord of the worlds, and it is upon Him to guide his followers and they
are fearful of Him.[^1]

[^1]: Iqbaalul Aamaal, Pg. 200-201


