First Aim: Some Points Discussed
================================

It is important to discuss a few points before we begin the actual
treatise:

**First**: We should know that gaining all the benefits, rewards and
results that we have mentioned in Part Five is subject to the condition
of regularity and excessiveness of praying for an early reappearance of
our Master, because some of the mentioned benefits depend on following
and emulating the Holy Imam (as) as mentioned in his blessed epistle:
“And pray more for an early reappearance…” so refer to it again and
ponder upon it.

**Second**: It is necessary for the supplicant to remove from himself
all the factors that hinder acceptance of supplications. He must purify
his self from undesirable traits and bad behavior, like inclination to
materialism, pride, arrogance, jealousy, backbiting etc. It is so
because supplication is the best form of worship, especially
supplicating for an early reappearance of our Master, Hazrat Hujjat and
his victory.

It therefore requires the supplicant to be free of all selfish motives
and satanic instigations, since sincerity of intention is the most
important matter that a person should abide by. That is why the verses
of Qur’an and traditions of the Messenger of Allah (S) have emphasized
it. May Allah give us and all the believers, the good sense, Insha
Allah.

**Third**: Perfection of rewards and excellence of manners is related to
acquiring of piety from the aspect of the saying of the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللّهُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only accepts from those who guard (against evil).***
***(Qur’an, Surah Maidah 5:27)***

In the same way, piety also has different grades and levels. Acceptance
also has a number of grades. On the basis of this, one who has stronger
piety will have better consequences and special virtues from his
supplications and in the same way all his worship acts – whether
obligatory or recommended – will be subject to the same criteria.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَا نُضِيعُ أَجْرَ مَنْ أَحْسَنَ عَمَلاً..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We do not waste the reward of him who does a good work. (Qur’an,
Surah Kahf 18:30)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُحْسِنِينَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah does not waste the reward of the doers of good (Qur’an,
Surah Taubah 9:120)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِّنكُم..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***That I will not waste the work of a worker among you (Qur’an, Surah
Aale Imran 3:195)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا
وَنَتَجاوَزُ عَن سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أَصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ وَعْدَ
الصِّدْقِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These are they from whom We accept the best of what they have done
and pass over their evil deeds, among the dwellers of the garden; the
promise of truth which they were promised. (Qur’an, Surah Ahqaf
46:16)***

The sum total of the above verses along with the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللّهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

…according to numerous traditional reports shows that the level of
reward depends on the level of piety, and more explanation is not
required here.

**Fourth**: From the above discussion it is known that rewards and
recompenses are outcomes of praying more for the early reappearance of
His Eminence (aj) – whether it be in Persian or Arabic or any other
language – from the aspect of the arguments and traditional reports
mentioned, like the saying of His Eminence (aj): “And pray more for the
reappearance, as in it lies your success” and the saying of Imam Hasan
Askari (as) that: “And give him the good sense of praying for His
Eminence,” and other traditional reports.

**Fifth**: It does not make any difference whether the Dua is in poetry
or prose just as there is no difference whether the supplicant has
composed the text of the Dua himself or someone else has done it, as
mentioned in the above discussion.

**Sixth**: It is allowed for one who is conversant with the language and
who knows the value of Dua to compile it in Arabic language, by the
proof of precedence of the first [that what has not been prohibited
initially, is allowed] and by the argument of generalities and
implications of commands for supplicating, without any restriction of
language.

That which supports this matter is the statement of the Martyr (r.a.) in
the ninth volume of Bihar, in which he relates from Amirul Momineen (as)
that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: Indeed, Dua wards off a
calamity even if its occurrence is inevitable.

Washsha says: I asked Abdullah bin Sinan: Is there a particular Dua for
this? He replied: I asked Imam Sadiq (as) and he said: Yes, there is a
prescribed Dua for the deprived Shias, for every calamity. And as for
those with insight, they have reached [to high ranks] and their prayer
will not remain behind an obstacle.[^1]

What we have stated above is also proved from the authentic tradition
mentioned in Kafi, Tahdhib and Wasail, from Ismail bin Fadl that he
said: I asked His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) regarding
Qunoot and what is mentioned about it. He replied: It is that which the
Almighty Allah makes your tongue utter and in that I don’t know of any
specified thing.[^2] Since there is no difference between Qunoot and
other than it.

Supporting this matter is another traditional report that we have not
quoted for the sake of brevity. If it is said: It is mentioned in Kafi
and Faqih from Abdur Rahim Qaseer that he said: I came to His Eminence,
Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) and asked: May I be sacrificed on you, I
have compiled a Dua. He replied: Leave me from compilation of Dua.
Whenever you face any problem you must take refuge in the Holy Prophet
(S). Then recite two rakats prayers and gift its reward to the Messenger
of Allah (S).[^3] That Imam Sadiq (as) has commanded leaving off
compilation of Duas.

I will say: This matter is not absolutely prohibited according to the
criteria we have mentioned previously. Any Dua is allowed but the best
supplications are those that are prescribed by the Holy Imam (as) as
they are aware of the true station of the Almighty and how He must be
addressed to achieve the best results. They know the method of showing
lowliness before Allah and the way of pleading that is best. So those
supplications will definitely be accepted soonest, since even the angels
are supposed to have learnt the method of divine glorification and
praise from them as mentioned in traditional reports.

**Seventh**: Is it sufficient to think of what one intends to supplicate
without saying it? Apparently it is not sufficient. Because according to
intellectuals and scholars of Arabic, it is against the import of Dua.
If it is said: In *Usool Kafi*, through an authentic chain of narrators
it is narrated from Zurarah that Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said: The
angel does not write but that which may be understood. And Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعاً وَخِيفَةً..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing and in a
voice not loud…*** ***(Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:205)***

Thus no one but Allah knows the great reward of that which one recites
to himself. [^4]On the basis of this just as remembrance in the heart
has rewards; in the same way supplicating in the heart is also a kind of
Zikr (remembrance).

I will say: Dua is the most special Zikr and since Zikr is opposite of
greatness and unawareness, it testifies to the heart of the person,
whereas Dua is opposite of silence, on the basis of this it cannot be
proved except by uttering it by the tongue as we had mentioned at the
beginning of this discussion.

**Eighth**: Shaykh Ja’far Kabir, in his book, Kashful Ghita, says:
Supplicating in the standing position is better than supplicating in the
sitting pose and supplicating in the sitting position is better than
supplicating lying down.

**Ninth**: It was mentioned before that: Duas taught by the Holy Imam
(as) are better and more appropriate to be recited, in light of the
reasoning mentioned in Point No. 6. In addition to that there are
traditions and verses that exhort us to emulate the Imams (as) and learn
from them knowledge and value of obedience and worship. For example the
saying of the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me. (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran
3:31)***

And the statement of the Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْأَلُواْ أَهْلَ الذِّكْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So ask the followers of the Reminder… (Qur’an, Surah Nahl 16:42;
Surah Anbiya 21:7)***

Because Zikr, is the Messenger of Allah (S) himself according to the
statement of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ إِلَيْكُمْ ذِكْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah has indeed revealed to you a reminder. An Apostle who recites
to you the clear communications of Allah. (Qur’an, Surah Talaq 66:11)***

On the basis of this the infallible family of His Eminence are the
people of Zikr, according to the exegesis of numerous verses that are
mentioned at their places. In addition to that we have instructions to
recite the Duas taught by the Holy Imam (as) and the sure rewards
promised for their recitation and the various books on this topic. Also
the fact that the Imams (as) repeated those supplications so that people
may learn them and also recite themselves. There are other testimonies
also that go on to prove that supplications taught by the Holy Imam (as)
are better than supplications compiled by others.

From the above we can also say that the greatness of a saying depends on
the greatness of the sayer and that is why it is said: The sayings of
great people are the greatest of the sayings.

The conclusion is that: There is no doubt that Duas taught by the Holy
Imam (as) have more precedence over the Duas a person has himself
composed in his own way and language. But there are two traditional
reports whose apparent connotation is against this and that is why we
are compelled to clarify regarding them. The two traditional reports are
mentioned by Muhaddith Amili in *Wasailush Shia*.

**First Tradition**: It is narrated from Zurarah that he said: I asked
His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (as): Teach a Dua to me. He said: The best Dua
is that which you say by your tongue.[^5]

**Second Tradition**: It is narrated from the book of Abdullah bin
Hammad Ansari through his own chain of narrators that Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) said to a person who asked him to teach a Dua: The best Dua is that
which you say by your tongue.[^6]

I say: It is possible that in both the cases the narrator is Zurarah
only and the narrator has quoted from him in the second instance also.
But nevertheless both the traditional reports have a number of aspects:

**Aspect One**: It is that the words, ‘that which you say by your
tongue’ imply the excellences of imams, their traditional reports,
dissemination of commands of Shariah by them, having debates with their
enemies, presenting arguments against the opponents, as this matter is
better than Dua, in view of the good effects it has on safeguarding the
religious heritage and elevating the signs of certainty and calling the
people to follow the Holy Prophet (S) as their benefits reach to the
general public.

That which supports this is a traditional report mentioned in Usool
Kafi, through the author’s own chain of narrators from Muawiyah bin
Ammar that he said: I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): There is a man who
narrates your traditions and spreads them among the people gladdening
their hearts, especially those of your Shias. Whereas there is another
person, who is an ardent worshipper but he does not narrate your
traditions, which of them is better? The Imam said: One who is a
narrator of our traditions; as he strengthens the hearts of our Shias,
is better than a thousand ardent worshippers. Now since Zurarah was
always busy in disseminating the teachings of the Holy Imam (as) he was
ordered in this way and he was told that what he was doing was better
than what he was asking (Dua).

The soul of the matter is: ‘Dua’, according to the lexicon, has two
meanings:

1. To call Allah, the Mighty and Sublime to accept a request. And 2. To
call the people to the Almighty Allah. On the basis of this Dua is of
two types. And when the narrator asked for the first type, the Imam (as)
encouraged him to the second type, and told him that the second was
better, as he said: The best Dua is that which you say by your tongue.
It is a subtle aspect which can only be discerned if one is conversant
with the sayings of Imams and one who has the ability to ponder upon
them.

**Aspect Two:** It implies the same meaning as is mentioned by the Imams
(as). Thus the Imam (as) meant to say: What comes to your mind is better
than the taught supplications. So you mention that which comes to your
mind, because this matter takes the condition of the heart and it is
controlled by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime.

**Aspect Three:** It implies supplications that are recited with
sincerity and humility, which is better than those recited without these
factors, even though they may have been taught by the Holy Imam (as). On
the basis of this the aim of Imam’s statement is to highlight the
importance of sincerity and attention to the court of the Almighty.

And the true aim of Dua is this only. And since that which is said by
the tongue is from the source of the heart, the Imam (as) has mentioned
it in that way. The conclusion is that there is a real connection
between Dua and sincere attention whether the Dua is taught by the Holy
Imam (as) or one that is not narrated from them. It does not prove that
this Dua is better than those taught by the Holy Imam (as). Rather it
proves that Dua with sincerity and attention is the best in whatever
words it may be.

**Tenth**: It is obligatory to follow the method of Duas that is taught
by the Holy Imam (as) because just like the other worship acts, it is
conditional [since it is related from the Imams]. On the basis of this
to oppose the method taught by them intentionally is heresy. But
reciting some parts otherwise is not unlawful according to the rule
that, that which is not initially prohibited may be considered lawful.

**Eleventh**: From what is stated above, another point also becomes
clear. It is not allowed to add anything to the Duas taught by the Holy
Imam (as). As for adding something with the aim of divine remembrance
has two aspects:

1. It is allowed, in view of some traditional reports that state that
Zikr of Allah is good in all conditions. That is why it is also allowed
in the ritual prayers. Therefore it should also be allowed in Dua.

2. It is not allowed, in view of the traditional report that is
mentioned in Usool Kafi through correct, rather authentic chain of
narrators, from Alaa bin Kamil that he said: I heard Imam Sadiq (as)
say: the aim of…

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ فِي نَفْسِكَ تَضَرُّعاً وَخِيفَةً وَدُونَ الْجَهْرِ
مِنَ الْقَوْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing and in a
voice not loud… (Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:205)***

…is evening.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ اللَّهُ وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ لَهُ الْمُلْكُ
وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وَيُمِيتُ وَيُحْيِي وَهُوَ حَيٌّ
لاَ يَمُوتُ بِيَدِهِ الْخَيْرُ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَیْ‏ءٍ قَدِیرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**There is no god, except Allah, the One, there is no partner for Him.
For Him is the Kingdom and for Him is the praise. He enlivens and causes
death, He causes death and enlivens. And He is powerful over
everything.**

The narrator says: While repeating the prayer I added the words of “bi
yadihil khair”. The Imam (as) said: It is right, but you recite as I
have told you to. Say ten times: “I seek the refuge of Allah, the
all-hearing and all- knowing” at the time of sunrise and sunset, and he
did not give any more details. In this tradition, the Imam has
especially instructed not to add anything, whether it be with the
intention of Zikr or otherwise since it is necessary to follow the Holy
Imams (as) perfectly. It is so because they are the people of Zikr and
we have been ordered to ask them and do as they say. This point is also
proved from what is mentioned in Kamaluddin quoting from Abdullah bin
Sinan that Imam Sadiq (as) said: “After this, a time will come when you
will not be able to see the Imam of the time. In that period no one will
be saved except the one who recites “Dua-e-Ghareeq”. The narrator
inquired as to what is Dua-e-Ghareeq. Imam (as) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب ثبت قلبي على دينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful! O the One Who transforms the hearts!
Make my heart steadfast upon Your religion!”

The narrator repeated the Dua in this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا الله يا رحمن يا رحيم يا مقلب القلوب والأبصار ثبت قلبي على دينك
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful! O the One Who transforms the hearts
and the sights! Make my heart steadfast upon Your religion!

The narrator added “Moqallebal Quloob. Wal Absaar”. Imam (as) told him,
“Indeed, Allah is the one Who changes the hearts and the visions”, but
you say only “Ya Muqallebal Quloob Sabbit Qalbee Ala Deenek!”[^7]

In *Wasail* it is narrated from Khisal, through the author’s own chain
of narrators from Ismail bin Fadl that he said: I asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ
غُرُوبِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And glorify your Lord by the praising of Him before the rising of the
sun and before its setting. (Qur’an, Surah Taha 20:130)***

He said: It is obligatory on every Muslim to say ten times before
sunrise and ten times after sunset:

***There is no god, except Allah, the One, there is no partner for Him.
For Him is the Kingdom and for Him is the praise. He enlivens and causes
death. In His hands is good. And He is powerful over everything.***

The narrator says: I recited: “He enlivens and causes death, He causes
death and enlivens.”

The Imam said: O so and so, indeed Allah is such that “He enlivens and
causes death, He causes death and enlivens.” But recite as you have been
told to.[^8]

I say: It is possible to reconcile these two aspects as follows: Every
Dua and Zikr has a special effect. Like medicines and pharmaceutical
formulae. But these effects are not derived except through that
particular method and formula. The same is the case of Duas and Zikr,
which do not produce the desired effects except through the methods
taught by the Holy Imams (as).

It was from this aspect that the Imam (as) said: “Indeed, Allah is the
one Who changes the hearts and the visions”, but you say as I have told
you. On the basis of this the command is instructive and it has no
contradiction with proofs for justification of additions in
supplications with the intention of absolute Zikr, (pay attention). Or
that we should adopt the best aspect of Dua - as we have mentioned in
the proofs for recommended acts - and this is in the condition that we
consider the command to be absolute.

**Twelfth**: To make a statement in the middle of a Dua taught by the
Holy Imams (as) is allowed according to the original justification.
Whether this matter contradicts with the desired effect or not?
Apparently if it is within a limit such that it cannot be perceived to
be a contradiction, it is not necessary; otherwise the supplication has
to be started again. Because the instructions that we have received from
the Holy Imams (as) regarding Duas do not lay a condition of silence in
between them.

On the basis of this it should be considered what the general parlance
says, in that same condition, there is no doubt that saying something in
between the Dua is against the decorum of Dua. Thus it is appropriate
that we follow the method accurately. Here it becomes clear that if one
has made a vow that he would not say anything during the Dua, it is
necessary for him to fulfill the vow, as not speaking up during the Dua
hold our attention as is very much obvious.

**Thirteenth**: It is allowed to omit sentences from Duas according to
the original command. But if you think that the saying of the Almighty
Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تُبْطِلُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not make your deeds of no effect. (Qur’an, Surah Muhammad
47:33)***

…proves that nothing must be reduced from a Dua? In reply we shall say:
It is possible that the implication of prohibition of making the deed
invalid is over, and also that a person after completing a deed does
something that makes it invalid, like adopting pride and selfishness, or
to hurt others or resort to polytheism etc., that make the deeds invalid
in light of the following verses of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تُبْطِلُواْ صَدَقَاتِكُم بِالْمَنِّ وَالأذَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do not make your charity worthless by reproach and injury. (Qur’an,
Surah Baqarah 2:264)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ
أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those before you:
Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come to
naught. (Qur’an, Surah Zumar 39:65)***

It is also possible that prohibition to do something novel is invalid in
the instance when it is said: ‘Make the mouth of the well small, that is
make it small from the beginning.’ And ‘we point out to it, that is
consider it unusable’ and ‘I made the house wide; that is I made it on a
broad foundation’ It implies that ‘do not destroy your deeds’. And
apparently, since one of the angles of knowledge would be mentioned, the
possibility also becomes remote. Thus we have to conclude that it is
allowed to shorten the Dua.

**Fourteenth**: It is recommended to recite aloud the supplication for
hastening the reappearance of His Eminence, the seal of the successors,
the Imam of the Time (as). Especially in assemblies that are organized
for this very purpose because it is a kind of according respect to the
signs of Allah and it is these same expressions of religion about whom
it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللَّهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِن تَقْوَى الْقُلُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever respects the signs of Allah, this surely is (the outcome)
of the piety of hearts. (Qur’an, Surah Hajj 22:32)***

Also in view of the Imam’s words in Dua Nudbah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 إلى متى أحأر فيك يا مولاي، وإلى متى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How long am I to bewail for you, O my Master! And how long (Qur’an,
Surah Nahl 16:53)***

and with which…

It is mentioned in Qamoos: Jaa-a-ra on the weight of ma-na-a, Jaaran or
Jauran: Raise up your voice in Dua and call for help with humility.

In *Majmaul Bahrayn* it is said: The saying of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِلَيْهِ تَجْأَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***To Him do you cry for aid.***

It is said: The people cried in a plaintive voice in beseeching Allah.
In the same way is the tradition: “As if I can see Musa (as)
supplicating in a loud voice.” Thus Jaur means to supplicate fervently
in a loud voice.

**Fifteenth**: It is recommended that supplicating sessions should be in
congregation in view of a tradition of Usool Kafi which is mentioned
through his own chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he
said: No group of forty person prays together to Allah for a purpose but
that He does not fulfill their request.[^9] And if forty persons are not
available, four persons must supplicate Allah ten times and their
request will be fulfilled.

And if even four persons are not available, and only one person recites
it forty times, Allah, the High and the Mighty will accept his request.2
And in the same book it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he
said: Whenever my respected father faced a serious problem he used to
gather the women and children and supplicate, while they said:
Amen.[^10]

**Sixteenth**: It is allowed, rather it is recommended to gift the
reward of Dua for His Eminence, to the departed souls in view of the
traditions that generally mention gifting of rewards to the dead. In the
same way it is allowed, rather recommended, to perform these Duas as
their proxy like in the case of other recommended deeds.

In such a way that a believer recites Dua for hastening of reappearance
of the Imam of the Time (as) and pleads to the Almighty on behalf of his
parents or deceased relatives; rather on behalf of all the deceased
believers. There are numerous traditions that generally and particularly
advise such a course of action. For example, in Wasail, it is narrated
from Hammad bin Uthman that he says in his book: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
said: One who performs a deed on behalf of a dead believer is rewarded
twice that by the Almighty Allah and the departed one is also grateful
to him. [^11]

It is narrated from Umar bin Yazid that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
said: Whoever performs a deed on behalf of departed believers is
rewarded twice by Almighty Allah and the departed ones are also grateful
to him. [^12]

It is narrated from Hammad bin Uthman that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) said: Indeed, the Prayer, Fasting, Sadaqah, Hajj, Umrah and every
good deed benefits the departed souls, so much so that sometimes a dead
is squeezed by the grave, and then he is given ease and told: This is
due to the deed performed on your behalf by your so and so son, or your
so and so brother in faith.[^13]

It is mentioned from Hisham bin Saalim that he said: There was a
companion and student of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) and Imam Musa Kazim (as)
who said: I asked the Imam if Dua, Sadaqah, Fasting and similar things
reach the dead? He replied: Yes. I (the narrator) asked: Does he knows
who has sent it to him? He replied: Yes. Then he said: In such a way
that sometimes he is in anger and due to this deed he becomes
satisfied.[^14]

It is narrated from Alaa bin Zarin that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: It
is necessary to do the Qadha of Hajj, Fasting and emancipating of slaves
on behalf of the departed soul.[^15]

It is narrated from Bazanti from Imam Ali Reza (as) that he said: It is
necessary to do the Qadha of Hajj, Fasting, emancipating of slaves and
other good deeds on behalf of the departed soul.[^16]

The author of *Faakhir* has said: Among the matters that all are
unanimous about is that the Holy Imams (as) have stated that Qadha must
be performed of all good deeds on behalf of the dead.

Other traditional reports are also present but we have refrained from
their mention for the sake of brevity. Our contention is also supported
by that which has come in Dua:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم بلغ مولاي صاحب الزمان (عليه السلام) عن جميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات
في مشارق الأرض ومغاربها
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, convey to the master, the Master of the Time, (greetings) from
all the believer men and women in the easts of the earth and its west…

**Seventeenth**: It is allowed, rather it is recommended, that this
valuable deed must also be performed on behalf of the departed souls,
especially ones parents and relatives as proved from various traditions.
Some of which are as follows: In Wasail, it is narrated from Ali bin Abi
Hamza that he said: I asked Imam Musa Kazim (as): Shall I perform Hajj,
Prayer and Sadaqah on behalf of my alive and departed relatives and
friends? He replied: Yes. On his behalf, pay Sadaqah, perform prayer as
he will be rewarded due to it.[^17]

Sayyid bin Tawoos, as is mentioned about him, after quoting this
tradition, says: The above tradition should be applied to instances in
which proxy of the living ones is allowed.

It is narrated from Muhammad bin Marwan that he said: Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) said: What stops a person from among you to perform good deeds on
behalf of your parents, whether dead or alive? Perform the ritual
prayers on their behalf, pay Sadaqah, do the Hajj and keep fasts. What
you do for them will be recompensed to them and you will also get its
equal reward. Thus, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, in view of that good
deed, increases it many times for you.[^18]

The author of Wasail says: Prayer on behalf of the living is restricted
to the Prayer of Tawaf and Ziarat on the basis of proof that will be
presented in due course.[^19]

I say: Apparently, what he implies is based on the traditional report of
Abdullah bin Jundab that he said: I wrote this question to His Eminence,
Abul Hasan (as): There is a person who would like to keep a third of all
his good deeds and prayers for himself and dedicate the rest to his
parents; or can he dedicate all his recommended deeds for them? What is
the command if one of them is alive and the other, dead? Imam (as) wrote
in reply: As for the dead, it is allowed and as for the alive, nothing
is allowed, except good deeds and favor.[^20]

Presently we do not mean to discuss whether there exists or does not
exist justification for performing recommended prayers on behalf of the
living, as this is not the occasion to discuss that in detail. Here we
would only like to state that it is preferable to recite supplication
for an early reappearance of our master, the Master of the Time (as) and
the tradition mentioned above proves this point.

Because Dua for the Imam (as) is without any doubt the best of the good
deeds. And this tradition proves that performing a good deed on behalf
of others is a meritorious act, even on behalf of those who are alive.
In the same way the traditional report of Muhammad bin Marwan proves
that doing good on behalf of the parents, whether dead or alive, is a
good act. And apparently the mention of Prayer, Sadaqah and Hajj is by
way of example. On the basis of this what we have mentioned can also be
supported by the following lines of Dua Ahad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم بلغ مولاي صاحب الزمان (عليه السلام) عن جميع المؤمنين والمؤمنات
في مشارق الأرض ومغاربها، وبرها وبحرها، وسهلها وجبلها حيهم وميتهم، وعن
والدي، وولدي وعني من الصلوات والتحيات
  </p>
</blockquote>

**O Allah, convey to the master, the Master of the Time, from all the
believer men and women in the easts of the earth and its west. In its
lands and its seas, in its plains and its** **mountains, their living
and their dead, and from my parents and my children and from me, from
the blessings and greetings…**

From all that we have discussed so far we can conclude that it is a good
thing to recite supplications for an early reappearance of Imam Mahdi
(aj) and for his victory on behalf of the alive from our people. Rather
it is good to recite all types of supplication on their behalf.
Especially on behalf of those who have a right upon us. And it is also
proved that to perform all good deeds on behalf of the dead is a very
meritorious act. And one who is performing these acts will become
eligible for different kinds of rewards.

If it is said: The tradition of Abdullah bin Jundab does not clearly
mention deeds by proxy, it is possible that it implies gifting the
reward of good deeds, favors and prayer?

I will say: Apparently at the beginning the query is about gifting of
reward and then it is mentioned: “Or that he may only give the
recommended…” This query is regarding proxy as will become clear if you
ponder on it a little.

**Eighteenth**: From what we have mentioned in the two points above it
will be known that supplicating on behalf of the believers for an early
reappearance of our master, the Master of the Time (as) brings rewards
in addition to the benefits that we have mentioned above. They are as
follows:

1. Multiplication of the good deeds and merits, as proved from
traditions quoted in the previous pages.

2. It is a favor on the believers and a way to remove chastisement from
their dead or increase in their rewards, as is very much clear.

3. It is effective in advancing the time of the advent and victory of
His Eminence, because it is of the position that it has been performed
on behalf of all the believers. And from what we have stated in the very
beginning, supplicating in congregation would be really effective in
advancing the advent, Insha Allah.

**Nineteenth**: It is recommended to pray for the friends and companions
of His Eminence (aj) on the basis of general traditions that exhort us
to pray for the believers. It is also supported by what is mentioned in
favor of help and cooperation in piety and good deeds. Thirdly, the
supplications taught by the Holy Imams (as) also contain prayers for the
friends and helpers of the Imam (as). Some of them will be mentioned in
the third point in this same section, Insha Allah.

**Twentieth**: It is recommended to pray for the destruction of his
enemies and the humiliation of their opponents as mentioned in Duas and
traditions. It is also recommended to lay curse on them on the basis of
the rule of seeking immunity from the enemies as also following the
Almighty Allah, the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (as) in light of
what they have mentioned in their sayings.

For example in Bihar, it is narrated from Ali bin Asim Kufi from Imam
Hasan Askari (as) that he said: My father related from his forefathers
from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: One who is (physically)
too weak to help us, Ahle Bayt (as) but in private he recites curse on
our enemies, the Almighty Allah makes his voice reach all the angels
from the earth to the heavens. So when this man curses the enemies these
angels also join him in cursing them. Then he curses the enemies again.

The angels say: O Allah, send blessings on this man, because he is doing
what he is capable of and if he had been capable he would have done more
also. Allah will say: Your request has been accepted and I have sent
blessings on him and made him the greatest of the doers of good.[^21]

[^1]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 94, Pg. 89

[^2]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 3, Pg. 340; Wasailush Shia, Vol. 4, Pg. 908

[^3]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 3, Pg. 476; Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg.
559

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 502

[^5]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 33

[^6]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 33

[^7]: Kamaluddin, Shaykh Sadooq, Vol. 2, Pg. 351

[^8]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 4, Pg. 1236

[^9]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 487

[^10]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 487

[^11]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 369, Tr. No. 24

[^12]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 369, Tr. No. 25

[^13]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 368, Tr. No. 15

[^14]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 366, Tr. No. 7

[^15]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 369, Tr. No. 20

[^16]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 369, Tr. No. 5

[^17]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 368, Tr. No. 9

[^18]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 365

[^19]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 365

[^20]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 368, Tr. No. 16

[^21]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 27, Pg. 223. In another tradition the same
thing is related from Imam Sadiq (as).


