Second Aim: Value Of Praying For The Hastening Of The Reappearance Of The Imam Of The Age (aj) Openly Or Secretly
=================================================================================================================

We should know that these are the highest aims which can be pursued so
that the readers may do their best to put them into practice.

**First**: You must clearly pray to the Almighty, in any language that
He may hasten the advent. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اللهم عجل فرج مولانا صاحب الزمان 
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, hasten the reappearance of our master, the Master of the Time.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عجل الله تعالى فرجه وظهوره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

May Allah, the High, hasten his victory and reappearance.

**Second**: One can beseech the Almighty Allah to advance the success
and ease of Aale Muhammad (as) as the advent of His Eminence is their
victory and ease. This point is mentioned in Duas and traditions.

**Third**: Or that you pray to the Almighty to grant ease and success to
all the believer men and women or invoke Him to grant salvation to the
friends of Allah because the advent of His Eminence (aj) is victory of
the friends of Allah as mentioned in so many traditions.

**Fourth**: It is that you say Amen to one who is supplicating, because
‘Amen’ means ‘accept it’, and it is also a Dua. And since the supplicant
and sayer of Amen, both are participants of Dua as mentioned in
traditional reports.

**Fifth**: That you beseech Allah, the Mighty and Sublime to accept the
supplication of anyone who prays for an early reappearance of our
master. The different between this and the previous point is that the
sayer of Amen does in the presence of the supplicant whereas in the
latter case, the presence is not necessary.

**Sixth**: To pray from the Almighty Allah to make arrangements and
prepare the ground for hastening of the Imam’s advent.

**Seventh**: To request the Almighty to remove the impediments of the
reappearance of His Eminence (aj).

**Eighth**: The supplicants must have their sins forgiven; sins that
delay an early reappearance of His Eminence. Sins that the supplicants
or others from believers have committed.

**Ninth**: They must pray to Allah to keep them away from the above sins
in future.

**Tenth**: They should beseech Allah to destroy the enemies of His
Eminence, as their existence is an obstacle in hastening the relief of
his friends.

**Eleventh**: They should pray to the Almighty Allah to keep the hands
of oppressors away from all the believers as this would be done by the
bounty of the reappearance of the Imam.

**Twelfth**: The supplicant must ask Allah to establish justice and
equity in all the world, because this can be achieved only by the advent
of the Holy Imam (as) as the Almighty Allah and the holy people have
mentioned.

**Thirteenth**: He should supplicate the Almighty Allah to spread peace
and tranquility, with the intention that this would be possible only
when the Imam reappears. Because complete peace cannot come to the
believers without the advent of the Hidden Imam (as) as mentioned in the
traditional report at the end of Part Six.

**Fourteenth**: He should supplicate Allah, the Mighty and Sublime that
the rewards of his worship acts and good deeds should be the hastening
of advent of the Holy Imam (as) according his satisfaction.

**Fifteenth**: That we should all get the Taufeeq to supplicate for the
hastening of the advent of the Holy Imam (as) and for the relief of all
believer men and women, as we mentioned before that unity is very
important for effectiveness in this regard, which is stated in
traditional reports. On the basis of this whenever a believer prays for
the preliminaries of a matter he makes efforts to achieve it.

**Sixteenth**: He must pray to Allah, the Mighty and Sublime that He
gives dominance to Islam and Muslim over all the religions and people.
And this would only happen during the reappearance of the Imam of the
Time (as) as mentioned in Burhan and other books.[^1]

**Seventeenth**: One must plead to the Almighty Allah to take revenge
from the enemies of religion and oppressors of the family of the chief
of the Messengers (S) from the view that according to traditional
reports this will be possible by the advent of the Imam of the Time
(as).

**Eighteenth**: It is that may the Almighty Allah bless His Eminence,
and it implies request for mercy from the Almighty Allah which would
hasten his reappearance. It is also mentioned in a tradition of Kamiluz
Ziaraat etc. In the Ziarat of Imam Ali Reza (as) it is mentioned after
invoking blessings on each of the Imams (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم صل على حجتك ووليك القائم في خلقك صلاة تامة نامية باقية تعجل بها
فرجه وتنصره بها
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, bless Your Proof and Your Wali, the Qaim on Your creatures a
complete perfect and permanent blessing and by it hasten his advent and
render him help…

**Nineteenth**: He (the supplicant) should pray that the Imam’s problems
and hardships may be removed at the earliest because this is connected
to the Imam’s victory and destruction of his enemies.

**Twentieth**: The supplicant has to petition the Almighty Allah to take
as early as possible the revenge for the martyrdom of our master, the
Chief of the Martyrs, Imam Husain (as) because this in their words
implies that He should hasten the advent of Hazrat Hujjat who is in fact
the one who will take revenge from the enemies of His Eminence.

[^1]: Tafseer Al-Burhan; Sayyid Hashim Bahrani; Vol. 2, Pg. 121


