1: To Obtain Knowledge About The Special Characteristics Of Imam (aj) And To Have Information About The ‘Certain’ Signs Of His Reappearance
===========================================================================================================================================

This is obligatory according to texts (Qur’an and Hadith), and reason.

**Rational Proof:** The Imam of the Time (aj) is a guide and a leader
whose obedience is compulsory and it is necessary to recognize correctly
one whose obedience is compulsory. So that if someone lays a false claim
to be that leader, he can be exposed at once and we shall not be
misguided by his false propaganda. Thus the recognition (Marefat) of the
Imam of the Time (aj) is obligatory and it is also obligatory to learn
about his special characteristics so that if a false claimant of
Mahdaviyat appears we can, at once, realize his falsehood. Further
details will come in the coming pages, Insha Allah.

**Textual Proof:** Shaykh Sadooq (r.a.) has recorded a tradition of Imam
Musa Kazim (as) that he said, “One who doubts about four things has
denied everything revealed by Allah. One of these being the Marefat of
the Imam of age.”

Also that which supports the above point is that which is mentioned in
Kamaluddin, quoting from Imam Sadiq (as), who has narrated from his
forefathers that Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said from the pulpit of Kufa
Masjid: “O Allah, it is necessary that Your earth does not remain devoid
of Your Proof on Your creatures, who may guide the people to Your
religion and who teaches Your religion, so that Your argument is not
rendered invalid and those who follow Your saints may not be misguided
after having received guidance, whether this Proof be seen and not be
obeyed or be hidden and the enemies are lying in ambush for him and
himself he is hidden from the view of the people while his knowledge
will not be hidden from the people and his laws are firm in the hearts
of the believers and they act upon them.”[^1]

I say: According the Arabic dictionary Qamoos, the Arabic word ‘aadaab’
for manners is the plural of ‘daab’ which means manner or characteristic
etc. Here it implies the special characteristic of the Imam of the Time
(aj) that make an impression on the hearts of the people, especially his
followers.

It is narrated in traditions that during the time of the advent of the
Imam of the Time (aj) people will adopt virtuous qualities in order to
emulate the Holy Imam (as). Another point derived from this is that the
effectiveness of the Imam’s morals and manners on the hearts of the
believers is a sign of faith. Another thing that proves the importance
of this is the emphasis with which the Holy Prophet (S) has all times
shown in informing the people about the special qualities of His
Eminence. So much so that he is even having precedence over the other
Imams (as) in this regard.

However this is only for the fact that it is necessary for all the
people to have cognition of the special characteristics of Imam Mahdi
(aj). On the basis of this it is obligatory on all believers to know the
Imam of the Time (aj) with his distinguishing features so that they may
not be deceived by the false claimants of this holy office.

In this book we have brought together all that is mentioned on this
topic. Readers are requested to consider each of the subtopics and the
Almighty Allah will indeed guide them to the right path.

**Note**: At the beginning of the book, we had a section regarding the
obligation of recognition of the Holy Imam (as) and there it implied
knowing him, along with his name and genealogy and we have explained
therein that ones deeds are not accepted if not accompanied with
recognition of His Eminence. Whereas here the topic of our discussion is
proving the obligatory nature of recognizing the manners and morals of
the Holy Imam (as) collectively, so do not forget this subtle point.

From both the views, it is obligatory to recognize our master (as) and
this is amply proved through traditional reports that we have quoted so
far. In addition the following reports also prove the same:

1. In Usool Kafi, through correct chains of narrators, it is narrated
from Zurarah from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Know your Imam as
it would cause you no harm whether the matter is advanced or
postponed.[^2]

2. In the same book, through his own chain of narrators the author has
narrated from Fudail bin Yasar that he said: I asked Imam Ja’far Sadiq
(as) regarding the following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Remember) the day when We will call every people with their Imam.
(Qur’an, Surah Isra 17:71)***

He said: O Fudail, know your Imam, for if you recognize your Imam
properly, the advancement or postponing of this matter will cause you no
harm. Because one who recognizes his Imam but he dies before the advent
is having the same position as one who sat in the Imam tent; rather it
is like one who sat under his banner. The narrator says: Some companions
of the Imam said: The Imam said: It is like one who achieved martyrdom
in the company of the Messenger of Allah (S).[^3]

3. Also in the same book, through a correct chain of narrators, it is
narrated from Fudail bin Yasar that he said: I heard Imam Muhammad Baqir
(as) say: One who dies without having an Imam, dies the death of a
pagan, and one who dies with the Imam’s recognition, it will cause no
harm to him whether this matter (reappearance) is advanced or delayed.
And one who dies having the recognition of his Imam, is like one who has
stayed in the tent of the Qaim (aj) with him.[^4]

4. In the same book, in a correct report it is narrated from Umar bin
Aban that he said: I heard Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) say: Recognize the
sign; for if you know the signs, it will not cause any harm to you
whether this matter is advanced or postponed. Indeed Allah, the Mighty
and Sublime has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Remember) the day when We will call every people with their Imam.
(Qur’an, Surah Isra 17:71)***

Thus one who recognizes his Imam is like one who has been present in the
camp of the Awaited Imam.[^5]

I say: The phrase “know the signs” with regard to the recognition of the
Imam is a comprehensive statement; and the sayings of great
personalities are great sayings. It can be further explained by saying
that one who is having some special signs is differentiated through
those signs. Thus one who knows these signs will not fall into doubt.
And the signs of the Imam are either related to his genealogy or to his
personality, or his manners and morals, his knowledge etc during the
time of his reappearance. And they are related to the inevitable signs
that the Holy Imams (as) have informed about.

The signs of the Imam are the miracles that would take place through
him. Thus one who is aware of the signs will not fall into doubt even
though the false claimants of this position may put forward their
claims. And it is from this view that the Imam said: Our matter is as
clear as the shining sun and “like a clear day”. Thus by the grace of
Almighty it becomes clear that it is obligatory to recognize the
qualities, signs, manners and proofs of His Eminence since the
recognition of the Imam will be achieved through this.

Now that you have understood this point, I say: Without any doubt, the
recognition that the Holy Imams (as) have commanded is in fact aimed to
protect us from the doubts created by the false claimants of this divine
office and the apostates. It accords us security from the deviation of
the misleading ones. And this recognition cannot be achieved except
through the following two steps:

Firstly: Recognition of the Imam through his name and genealogy.

Secondly: Recognition of his special and distinguishing features.

To have these two recognitions is the most important thing. It is clear
that the first recognition is obligatory, in addition to what we have
mentioned in the section one of this book, it is also proved by the
tradition quoted by Muhammad bin Ibrahim Nomani through his own chain of
narrators from Imam Sadiq (as) that he asked him: “Someone believes in
your guardianship, exempts himself from your enemy, permits what you
have permitted, refrains from what you have prohibited and thinks that
the Imamate is still among you and will never go to other than you, but
he says: They (the infallible Imams) have disagreed among themselves
while they are the leading Imams. If they agree upon a man and say that
it is he (the Imam), we will say that it is he.” Imam Sadiq (as) said:
“If this person dies with this belief, he will die as a
disbeliever.”[^6]

Through another channel from Sama-a bin Mehran[^7] it is related from
Imam Sadiq (as) and from Humran bin Ayyin[^8] also from Imam Sadiq (as)
a similar statement is reported. Pay attention to this traditional
report how it is considered obligatory to know the Imam by his name and
genealogy and the least of it is this and this much is sufficient.

As for the recognition of his characteristic, since we have not had the
honor to see him directly, if anyone in this claims to be the Imam of
the Time (aj) we cannot know the facts except through two ways: One that
we witness a miracle at his hand or that we see the signs that the Holy
Imams (as) have mentioned with regard to the Awaited Imam. Thus when the
believer recognizes those signs and becomes aware of the special moral
qualities of His Eminence, he does not heed every call that reaches his
ears and he is able to distinguish the truthful and the liar.

From this same point of view, our master, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) told to
Umar bin Aban, who was a prominent companion of His Eminence: Know the
signs…because if one knows the signs one will not be deviated after
being guided, and one shall not be led astray by those who want to
deceive him. It is amazing that a commentator of Kafi has explained the
above traditional report as follows: The ‘signs’ implies Imams, as they
are the signs through whom are known the conditions of the initial
creation and the resurrection; and the laws of the Shariah.

Alas, if I could only know what has made this writer reach this
conclusion? And he has overlooked the real import of the word. Since the
matter of His Eminence, the Qaim (aj) is the greatest and the most
amazing of all issues, and since the position of His Eminence is the
highest of all, as proved from a large number of traditional reports
that have come in his favor from the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams
(as), and they have said: From among us is the Mahdi of this Ummah. And
they have described his special characteristics and the signs of his
reappearance, in such a way that they be clear to all the men and the
women the urban as well as the rural folks. Also, the signs and
characteristics should be opposed to the ordinary, so that difference
could be discerned between the true and false claims.

All these signs should have come to us through traditional reports of
the Holy Imams (as) as is clear for all those who have sense. That which
supports our contention and that which throws more light on this issue
are traditional reports regarding the signs of reappearance and the
special characteristics of His Eminence, the Qaim (aj), that is the
brilliance of his light in the time of his advent, a clear and general
announcement, a fearful call which would be heard by all, a cloud that
shades His Eminence, and announces: This same Mahdi is the Caliph of
Allah, so follow him; and rising up again of the sun and the moon at the
call of His Eminence; removal of hardships and pains of believers
through his Barakah; presence of the stone and staff of Prophet Musa
(as) with the Holy Imam (as) etc. and many other signs that we have
mentioned in Part Four of this book.

Our scholars, may Allah reward them from our side, have compiled those
traditional reports in their books. Among that which has been mentioned
to us is the traditional report of Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) quoted in
Biharul Anwar from Nomani that the Imam said: Till the heavens and the
earth are at rest, you must also keep quiet – that is do not stage an
uprising against anyone – because your matter is not concealed; you
should know that it would be a sign from Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
and not from the people. Know that it would be more clear than the sun;
it will not remain concealed from any person, good or bad, do you
recognize the morning? Indeed that matter is as clear as the morning,
there would be nothing secretive about it.[^9]

Among the traditional reports quoted from the Holy Imams (as) which
clearly prove the obligatoriness of obtaining these two recognitions is
a report mentioned in Tafseer Burhan from Muawiyah bin Wahab narrating
from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Indeed the best and the most
obligatory duty of man is to recognize God and to confess ones servitude
to Him, and the limit of recognition is that he should recognize that
there is no real deity except Him and there is nothing like Him; and he
should know that God is eternal and ever-living, without absence, He is
described without being compared to anything, there is nothing like Him,
and He is the hearer and the seer.

And after that is the recognition of the messenger of God and to testify
for his prophethood. And the minimum recognition of the messenger is to
believe in his prophethood and that the book he has brought or the
commands and prohibitions that he has prescribed are from Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime. After that is to follow an Imam in every
circumstance after recognizing him by his name and qualities. And the
minimum level of recognition of the Imam is to believe that except for
the rank of prophethood, he is equal in all aspects to the Messenger of
Allah (S); and that the Imam is the successor of the Holy Prophet (S).

Obedience of the Imam is obedience of Allah and the Prophet and
submission of every matter to him and to refer to him in all issues and
to accept his statements are the levels of recognition. And we should
know that the Imam after the Messenger of Allah (S) is Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (as) and after him Hasan, then Husain, then Ali bin Husain, then
Muhammad bin Ali, then Ja’far bin Muhammad, then Musa bin Ja’far, then
Ali bin Musa, then Muhammad bin Ali, then Ali bin Muhammad, then Hasan
bin Ali and then the Hujjat from the son of Hasan (as). Then Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) said: O Muawiyah, I have laid out the basic principle of
faith for you, so should act on it…[^10]

[^1]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Sadooq; Vol. 1, Pg. 302

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 371

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 371

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 371

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 372

[^6]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 65

[^7]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 66

[^8]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 66

[^9]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 52, Pg. 139, Tr. No. 49

[^10]: Tafseer Al-Burhan; Sayyid Hashim Bahrani; Vol. 2, Pg. 34, Tr. No.
3


