5: Awaiting His Reappearance
============================

Our discussion on the duty for awaiting for the reappearance of Imam
az-Zaman (aj) consists of a number of arguments and for each argument
there are numerous supporting traditions. We have divided this topic
into following:

Issue No. 1: Excellence of awaiting and the reward of the awaiter and the awaiting of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imams regarding this:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sufficient as an example is the statement of Imam Sajjad (as) in his
supplication on the day of Arafah, in which he has prayed for those who
await for the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (aj); after which he prayed for
Imam Mahdi (aj) also. In addition to this, there are many traditions
that prove the excellence of Intezar.

1. There is a tradition of Imam Sadiq (as) in Kamaluddin: “One of you
who dies awaiting for Imam Mahdi (aj) dies as if he was with him in his
tent.”

2. It is narrated from Abul Hasan Imam Reza (as) that he said: “How good
is patience and awaiting for the reappearance! Have you not heard Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime say?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْتَقِبُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And watch, surely I too am watching with you. (Qur’an, Surah Hud
11:93)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait. (Qurah Surah
Araaf 7:71)***

Thus you must be patient because there is deliverance after despair and
those before you were more patient than you.”[^1]

3. In Basairud Darajat it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators from His Eminence, Imam Abu Abdullah Sadiq (as) that he said:
Amirul Momineen (as) was traveling to Siffeen, and in order to cross the
river Euphrates he reached a mountain near the Siffeen area when it was
the time for Maghrib prayer. He waited for some moments and then
performed the Wudhu and recited the Azaan.

When he concluded the Azaan the mountain split and a white head and a
face emerged from the mountain and said: Peace be on you, O Amirul
Momineen and the mercy and blessings of the Almighty Allah. Welcome, O
successor of the Holy Prophet (S) and the leader of the bright faced
ones. And the most valuable thing that has reached the people. O one who
has achieved the divine rewards of the Siddiqeen!

O chief of the successors! Amirul Momineen (as) said: Peace be on you
too, O my brother Shamoon, the successor of Isa bin Maryam, the holy
spirit, how are you? He replied: I am fine, may Allah have mercy on you.
I am awaiting for His Eminence, the spirit of Allah who will come down
from the sky, and I don’t know of anyone who has undergone such
hardships in the way of Allah as you have and one who would be eligible
for more divine rewards tomorrow [in Qiyamat] and one having the most
exalted status except you…[^2]

I say: The aspect of presenting this traditional report is that it shows
that His Eminence, Shamoon is awaiting for this reappearance.

And indeed to emulate the holy personalities and to follow them is
something that the Almighty Allah likes very much and in addition to all
that has been recorded about the excellence of Intezar (awaiting).

4. In Kamaluddin, it is narrated from Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) from
his forefathers from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said: “One who awaits
for the reappearance of our Qaim is like one who rolls in his blood in
the path of Allah.”[^3]

5. It is also narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: “Fortunate are
the Shias of our Qaim who during the period of his occultation wait for
his reappearance and who obey him during the period of his reappearance.
They are Awliya of Allah for whom there shall be neither fear nor
grief.”[^4]

6. It is narrated from Imam Sajjad (as) that he said: “Awaiting for the
reappearance is the best worship act.”[^5]

7. It is narrated that Abi Khalid Kabuli said: “I came to my master, Ali
bin Husain Zainul Abideen (as) and said: O son of Allah’s Messenger,
tell me about those personalities whose obedience and love Allah has
made incumbent on His servants and that after the Messenger of Allah (S)
they should follow them. The Imam said: O Kankar, The ones whom Allah
has made as Ulil Amr (vested with authority) are Amirul Momineen Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (as) and after him, Imam Hasan (as), then Imam Husain
(as), sons of Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) till this position came to me.
After that the Imam fell silent.

I said: My chief, it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that the
earth shall never be devoid of Proof of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
upon His creatures. So who is the Imam and Divine Proof after you? He
replied: My son, Muhammad and in Taurat his name is Baqir (splitter) and
he will expound knowledge. He will be the Divine Proof after me. And
after him his son, Ja’far who will be famous among the folks of the
heavens as Sadiq.

I said: My chief, why is he named Sadiq (truthful) while all of you are
truthful? He replied: My father narrated to me from his father that the
Messenger of Allah (S) said: When my great grandson, Ja’far bin Muhammad
bin Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) is born, name him Sadiq.
One of his fifth descendants will be named Ja’far, who will falsely
claim Imamate and attribute falsehood to the Almighty Allah. He would be
Ja’far Kazzab in the view of Allah. He will claim something he is not
worthy of. He will oppose his father and be jealous of his brother.

Taking undue advantage of the occultation of Divine Proof he will try to
expose the secret of Allah. After that Imam Ali Ibne Husain (as) cried
much and then said: “As if I can see Ja’far Kazzab helping the tyrant of
the time to search for the Wali of Allah. He will try to spy on him and
not knowing about the birth of Imam Qaim, he will become the executor of
his father’s estate and will desire that were he to gain upper hand on
the Qaim he will eliminate him; and will be greedy for his inheritance,
till he usurps it wrongfully.” Abu Khalid says: I said: O son of Allah’s
Messenger, is it a prediction? He replied: No, rather by Allah, it is
written in the book in our possession that mentions the calamities that
shall befall us after the Messenger of Allah (S). Abu Khalid says:

I asked: O son of Allah’s Messenger, what will happen after that? He
replied: After that there will be a long occultation of the Wali of
Allah and the twelfth successor of the Messenger of Allah (S). O Abu
Khalid, during this period of occultation, those who believe in his
Imamate and who await for his reappearance, they shall be better than
the people of all times because Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would
bestow them intelligence, understanding and recognition and for them
occultation would be same as presence. Their status shall be like that
of the holy warriors who fought under the command of the Messenger of
Allah (S). It is they who are sincere and our true Shias. They shall
call the people to the religion of Allah openly and secretly.[^6]

8. In the Ghaibah of Shaykh Tusi it is narrated from Ghaibah of Fadl bin
Shazan through the author’s own chain of narrators from Mufaddal bin
Umar that he said: We discussed His Eminence, Qaim (aj) and about one of
our co-religionists who dies awaiting for him. He Abu Abdullah Imam
Sadiq (as) said: When the Qaim arises, they will come to the believer in
the grave and he would be told: Indeed, your master has reappeared, so
if you want you can join him and if you want you can remain in the honor
given to you by Allah.[^7]

9. In *Kamaluddin*, the author has narrated though his own chain of
narrators that: Saqr bin Abi Dulf said: I heard Aba Ja’far Muhammad bin
Ali ar-Reza (as) say: “The Imam after me is my son, Ali. His command is
command of his father and his statement is statement of his father and
his obedience is obedience of his father.

Then the Imam fell silent. Then he said: The Imam after him will be his
son, Hasan. His command is command of his father and his statement is
statement of his father and his obedience is obedience of his father.
After this Imam (as) became silent. The narrator asked: ‘O son of
Allah’s Messenger, who will be the Imam after Hasan?’ Imam (as) started
weeping profusely and said: ‘After him, his son Qaim (aj) will be the
Imam’. He will be in Ghaibat and pious and sincere people will await his
reappearance while those in doubt will deny him and will ridicule his
remembrance (Zikr). Those who will hasten will be destroyed and those
who submit will be successful.”[^8]

10. It is narrated from Ali bin Mahziyar that he said: I wrote to Abil
Hasan of Askar (Imam Hadi a.s.) and asked him about the reappearance. In
reply he wrote: “When your Imam disappears from the land of the
oppressors you must await for the reappearance.”

11. In Usool Kafi it is narrated from Abu Baseer that he said: I asked
His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): May I be sacrificed on you, when
will the reappearance be? He replied: O Abu Baseer, you are also of
those who desire the world. One who knows this matter, for him is Faraj
because of his awaiting.[^9]

I say: Apparently, since ‘Faraj’ means to support the Imam and fight
Jihad alongside him, Imam Sadiq (as) has said that this aim is achieved
for the Shias because they are the awaiters of Faraj and he pointed out
that it is necessary and appropriate that by Faraj he implies this great
matter and not achieving of selfish desires and carnal pleasures – as
most people are having this behavior – and that which supports this
would be mentioned in Issue Four.

12. In Biharul Anwar it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he
said: Await for the reappearance and do not despair of the mercy of
Allah, indeed the deed liked best by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is to
await for the reappearance.[^10]

13. It is also narrated from His Eminence, that he said: One who acts on
our command will tomorrow [in Qiyamat] be with us in Khazeeratul Quds
[loftiest station in Paradise] and one who awaits for our kingdom is
like one who rolls in his blood on the path of Allah.[^11]

14. It is narrated from Faid bin al-Mukhtar from His Eminence, Abi
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: Whoever from among you dies
waiting for reappearance is like one who has been with His Eminence, the
Qaim (aj) in his tent. Then he paused for a moment and then said: Rather
he is like one who fights in the service of His Eminence. Then he said:
By Allah, he is like one who is martyred in the company of the Holy
Prophet (S).[^12]

15. His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) narrates from his
forefathers from Amirul Momineen (as) that he said: The best worship act
for a person is to await for the Faraj (relief) from the Almighty Allah.

16. In Kafi, it is narrated through correct chain of narrators from
Abdullah bin Mughira that he said: Muhammad bin Abdullah asked His
Eminence, Imam Ali Reza (as) and I heard that he said: My father
narrated to me from his family from his forefathers that a man asked an
Imam: There is a place of Rabat in my area which is known as Qazwin and
there is an enemy who calls it Dailam, is Jihad or Rabat obligatory on
us? His Eminence replied: It is obligatory on you to perform the Hajj of
this House (Holy Kaaba). The questioner repeated his question. His
Eminence again said: It is obligatory on you to perform the Hajj of this
House. Is one of you not satisfied that he remains in his house and that
he should spend on his family from his labor wait for our matter?

Thus if he lives till that time he would be like one has participated in
the Battle of Badr alongside the Messenger of Allah (S) and if he dies
awaiting for our kingdom, he would be like one who is present with our
Qaim (aj) in his tent – and he joined his two fingers – and I don’t say
that they are like these two fingers (one of which is bigger than the
other). Abu Hasan Imam Ali Reza (as) said: It is right.[^13]

I say: This traditional report does not contradict those reports which
state that Marabata is recommended even in the period of occultation,
because apparently the questioner was asking about the reward of
Marabata and Jihad, then Imam (as) mentioned Hajj and awaiting, which
implied that the reward of Jihad, Rabat and Hajj, all would be given to
him, while if he performs only Marabata he will not get the reward of
Hajj. That which supports this matter is what the Imam said: It is
obligatory on you to perform the Hajj of this House. And he didn’t say:
Don’t perform Marabata or that it is not allowed, or that it is not
permissible etc. and the Almighty Allah knows best.[^14]

17. In Tafseer Nomani, it is narrated from Amirul Momineen (as) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: O Abul Hasan, it befits the
Almighty to send the deviated people to Paradise, by which he meant:
Those who during the time of mischief stand up in following an Imam
whose location is secret and who is unseen by the people. Thus they
accept his Imamate and remain attached to him and await for his
reappearance. They are so certain that no doubt comes to them. [^15]

They are patient and submissive and they are lost only because they have
not seen their Imam. That which supports this is the saying that the
Almighty Allah hides the eye of the sun, which he has appointed as a
sign of prayer time, from the people. He gives them more time to pray,
till they come to know that the sun has set. In the same way is the
person who is awaiting for the advent of Imam (as), as he has accepted
his Imamate and all the duties are obligatory on him he accepts with all
his penalties. And he does not consider them beyond the scope of duties.
Thus he is patient and the Ghaibat of the Imam will not harm his faith.

18. In Kamaluddin, it is narrated from Muhammad bin Noman that he said:
Abi Abdullah (as) said to me: “The most proximate servants of Allah and
those with whom Allah is pleased are those who when the proof of Allah
disappears from sight and they don’t know about his location, yet they
continue to have faith that the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and
day and night they continue to wait for him. And the wrath of Allah is
on those of His enemies who when the proof of Allah disappears from
sight, they fall into doubts and denial. He (Allah) knew that His
special servants will never fall into doubts and if it were not so He
would not have taken away His Proof from their sight even for a
moment.”[^16]

19. It is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) regarding the following
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الم . ٰلِكَ الْكِتَابُ لَا رَيْبَ ۛ فِيهِ ۛ هُدًى لِلْمُتَّقِينَ .
الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِالْغَيْبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Alif Lam Mim. This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those
who guard (against evil). Those who believe in the unseen. (Qur’an,
Surah Baqarah 2:1-2)***

That he said: ‘Those who guard against evil’ are the Shias of Ali (as)
and ‘unseen’ is the unseen Hujjat and that which proves this is the
statement of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْ إِنَّمَا الْغَيْبُ لِلَّهِ فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ
الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say: Why is not a sign sent to him from his Lord? Say: The
unseen is only for Allah; therefore wait- surely I too, with you am of
those who wait. (Qur’an, Surah Yunus 10:20)***

20. In Usool Kafi, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said: He has
not suffered any loss, one who dies waiting for our kingdom; he does not
die in the tent of His Eminence, Mahdi (aj) with his soldiers.[^17]

21. In the tradition of Ammar Sabati, which we shall mention later,
Insha Allah, it is mentioned that Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) said:
Indeed, by Allah, O Ammar, none of you dies on our Wilayat (waiting for
the reappearance) but that he is rewarded by Allah with reward equal to
many of the martyrs of Badr and Uhad; thus congratulations to you.[^18]

22. In the same book, it is narrated from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir
(as) that he said in a tradition: And know that one who awaits for the
reappearance earns the reward of one who fasts in the days and prays all
nights. Thus one who lives till the time of the advent of our Qaim and
joins his forces, and eliminates his enemies, earns the reward of twenty
martyrs; one who is martyred in the company of our Qaim, earns the
reward of twenty-five martyrs.[^19]

23. In Majmaul Bayan, it is narrated from Harith bin Mughaira that he
said: I was in the company of Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) when
he said: One who recognizes this matter and awaits for it considering it
good, is like one who by Allah, fights Jihad alongside the Qaim of Aale
Muhammad. Then he said: Rather, by Allah, one who fights Jihad in the
service of the Messenger of Allah (S). Then he said the third time: By
Allah, he is like one who is martyred in the tent of the Messenger of
Allah (S).[^20]

24. In Tafseer Burhan, it is narrated from Hasan bin Hamza from his
father Abu Hamza [Thumali] that he said: I asked Abi Abdullah Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as): May I be sacrificed on you, I have reached old age,
my bones have gone weak and my death has come near and I fear that I
would die before the coming of your kingdom. The Imam said: O Abu Hamza,
one who brings faith in us and testifies to our sayings, and sits in
anticipation of our rule, is like one who is killed under the banner of
the Qaim (aj)’ rather by Allah, he is like one who is martyred under the
banner of the Messenger of Allah (S).[^21]

25. In Kamaluddin, it is narrated from, Mufaddal bin Umar that he said:
I heard as-Sadiq Ja’far bin Muhammad say: “One who dies awaiting for the
reappearance is like one who is with the Qaim in his tent, rather he is
like one who fights the holy war under the command of the Messenger of
Allah (S).”[^22]

26. In Tafseer Burhan, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Masad that he said: I was in the company of Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) when a very old man taking the support of a walking stick,
came there, saluted and Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) replied to him. The man
said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, give me your hand so that I may kiss
it. So His Eminence gave his hand and he kissed it, then he began to
weep. His Eminence, Sadiq (as) asked: O elderly man, why do you weep? He
replied: May I be sacrificed on you, O son of Allah’s Messenger, I have
waited a hundred years for the advent of your Qaim, saying it would be
this month, this year even though I have reached old age and my bones
have weakened and my death has come near and I have not yet seen that
which I hope for you. I have seen you all being killed and rendered
homeless while your enemies scaled heights of power, so why should I not
weep?

The eyes of His Eminence, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) filled with tears and
he said: O elderly one, if Allah keeps you alive till you see our Qaim,
you will have a great status and if your death comes, on Judgment Day
you will be raised with important trusts of Muhammad (S) and we are his
important trusts as indeed His Eminence said: I leave behind among you
two weighty things, so remain attached to them and you will never go
astray, they are the book of Allah and my progeny my Ahle Bayt. The
elderly man said: Now that I have heard this report I have got peace of
mind. Then the Imam Sadiq (as) said: O elderly one, know that our Qaim
will be born from the loins of Hasan Askari and Hasan will be born to
Ali and Ali from Muhammad, and Muhammad from Ali and Ali from my son,
Musa and Musa is my son; we are twelve and all of us are pure and
infallible…[^23]

27. In Rauda Kafi, it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators from Ishaq bin Ammar that he said: Narrated to me one of our
associates from Hakam bin Utaibah that he said: When I was in the
company of Imam Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) the house was full of people; at
that time an old man arrived supporting himself with a walking stick and
standing at the door said: Peace be on you, O son of Allah’s Messenger
and the mercy and blessings of Allah. Then he fell silent. He Abu Ja’far
Imam Baqir (as) said: And peace be on you and the mercy and blessings of
Allah. Then the old man faced the audience and said: Peace be on you
all. They all replied to his salutation.

The man turned to Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) and said: O son of Allah’s
Messenger, may I be sacrificed on you, allow me a place near you because
I love you and love those who love you. By Allah, My love for you and
for those who love you is not for material benefits. I am inimical to
your enemies and aloof from them. By Allah, my enmity of them and
aloofness from them is not due to personal hatred between us. By Allah,
I follow your commands and prohibition and anticipate your rule. So tell
me, may I be sacrificed on you, how do you think my end would be?

His Eminence, Imam Baqir (as) said: To me. To me! And he made the old
man sit on his side. Then he said: O elderly one, a man also came to my
father Ali bin Husain (as) and posed a question like you. My father told
him: If you die you will go and meet the Messenger of Allah (S), Ali,
Hasan, Husain and Ali bin Husain and your heart will be cooled and your
eye will be refreshed and you will see salvation with the two scribe
angels before you when the time of your death comes – and he pointed to
his throat – and if you remain alive you will see what will refresh your
eyes and you will be with us in the lofty Paradise. The man asked: How
do you say that, O Abu Ja’far?

His Eminence, Baqir (as) repeated his statement. The old man said: Allah
is the greatest, O Abu Ja’far, if I die I will go and meet the Messenger
of Allah (S), Ali, Hasan, Husain and Ali bin Husain and my heart will be
cooled and my eye will be refreshed and I will see salvation with the
two scribe angels welcoming me when my life comes here – and he pointed
to his throat – and if I remain alive I will see what will refresh my
eyes and I will be with you in the lofty Paradise. Then the old man wept
and wailed much and fell to the ground. Seeing him in this condition,
all the people present there also began to weep.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) wiped off his tears; he raised his head and
said: O son of Allah’s Messenger, give me your hand, may I be sacrificed
on you. The Imam gave his hand. He kissed the Imam’s hand and put it to
his eyes and face; then he moved the cloth from his stomach and chest
and rubbed it there also. Then he arose and said: Peace be on you. Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) looked at him and he departed from there. The Imam
addressed the audience and said: One who likes to look at an inmate of
Paradise should look at this man. Hakam bin Utaibah said: I have not
seen so much weeping and wailing in any gathering as I saw in that
gathering.[^24]

Issue No. 2: Awaiting for the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (aj) is obligatory for all
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A tradition of Al-Kafi narrated from Ismail Jofi is sufficient to prove
this point. Imam (aj) said to a person who came to him with a piece of
paper, “This is letter of a debater who has posed a question to the
correct faith.” The newcomer said, “May Allah have mercy on you, you
guessed correctly.” Imam (aj) said, “Confess to the creed that there is
no deity except Allah, and that Muhammad is His slave and His Messenger.
And testify to the veracity of all that is revealed by Allah. Imbibe the
Wilayat of our household, have enmity towards our enemies, submit to our
command, cultivate piety and humility and await for our Qaim. There is a
great kingdom in our fate. When Allah wills He will establish it.”[^25]

In the same book it is narrated from Abul Jarood that he said: I asked
Abu Ja’far Baqir (as): O son of Allah’s Messenger, do you know my
devotion and love towards yourself? He replied: Yes. I said: I have
asked you about some thing, so please reply to me, because I am blind
and I walk very less and I cannot come to meet you whenever I like. The
Imam said: Repeat your question. I said: Tell me about your faith so
that I may also follow it.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said: Though you have asked in short, the
question is very important. By Allah, I will tell you about the faith of
my forefathers and me; it is: To testify that there is no one worthy of
worship, except the Almighty Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah and to accept all that has come from Allah, and to believe in our
Wilayat and to be aloof from our enemies and to accept our command and
to await for our Qaim and to do what we command and keep away from that
which we prohibit.[^26]

In Ghaibat Nomani it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators from Abu Baseer that he related from Imam Sadiq (as) that he
said: “Shall I not tell you that which Allah does not accept any deed
from the people except with it? The narrator said, “Yes, please do.” He
said: “Witnessing that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah, submitting to the orders of Allah, believing in the
guardianship of the infallible imams, submitting to them especially, and
disavowing their enemies, piety, sincerity of faith and waiting for
al-Qaim (aj).

There will be a state for us, Ahle Bayt. Allah achieves that when He
wills. Whoever likes to be one of al-Qaim’s companions has to wait while
being pious and acting morally. If that one dies before the advent of
al-Qaim (aj), he will be rewarded as if he has accompanied al-Qaim (aj).
Try your best (in being pious) and wait. How lucky you are, O you the
mercified group!”[^27]

I say: It is possible that the words, “to them especially” are the
Imam’s and it is also possible that they are Abu Baseer’s. And since it
implies such a Wilayat that one should consider the Imam as his leader
in all matters and that it is obligatory to follow him in all instances,
His Eminence said: Wilayat is obligatory of one whom Allah has specially
bestowed with Imamate and infallibility and not all who are related to
the Holy Prophet (S). In the same way it is obligatory to be inimical to
the enemies of Imam (as) even though they be from the progeny of the
Messenger of Allah (S) or others.

That which proves that awaiting for the reappearance is an obligatory
duty, is the traditional report that Shaykh Sadooq has mentioned in
Kamaluddin through his own chain of narrators from Abdul Azeem Hasani
that he said: I came to my chief, Muhammad bin Ali bin Musa bin Ja’far
bin Muhammad bin Ali bin Husain Ibne Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) and wanted
to ask him regarding the Qaim, that whether he is the Mahdi or someone
else. The Imam began the conversation and said: “O Abal Qasim, the Qaim
is from us and he is the Mahdi. It is obligatory to wait for him in his
occultation and to obey him in his appearance. He is the third from my
descendants…”[^28]

In the same book, through two chains of narrators, it is narrated from
Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: “The most proximate servants
of Allah and those with whom Allah is pleased are those who when the
proof of Allah disappears from sight and they don’t know about his
location, yet they continue to have faith that the Proof of Allah can
never be invalid and day and night they continue to wait for him. And
the wrath of Allah is on those of His enemies who when the proof of
Allah disappears from sight, they fall into doubts and denial. He
(Allah) knew that His special servants will never fall into doubts and
if it were not so He would not have taken away His Proof from their
sight even for a moment. These doubts will reign supreme over the hearts
of evil ones.”[^29]

Issue 3: The Real Meaning of Intezar
------------------------------------

Awaiting is a psychological condition of the person who is waiting for
someone. The opposite of Intezar is usually expressed as despair etc.
Thus the more hopeful you are for the arrival of a particular person,
the more particular you shall be in making arrangements to receive him.
And as the time of his arrival nears, you become more expectant and
eager for him. So much so, that one ultimately starts spending sleepless
nights. The more a person is attached to the one whom he is expecting,
the more severe and painful his wait shall be. Therefore those who are
waiting for their Imam (as) their waiting is proportionate to their love
for him.

On the basis of this a believer who awaits for the reappearance of our
master, the more difficult is the Intezar, the more he will try to
practice piety and train his self, give up the bad traits so that he may
be rewarded with seeing the Imam of the Time (aj).

Therefore the Holy Imam (as) have emphasized this matter in many
traditions. Rather the traditional report of Abu Baseer says that you
can achieve the status of true Intezar only if you are pious and keep
away from sins. Thus Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: One who wants to be a
companion of the Qaim, should await for him and in the condition of
awaiting, he should be pious and perform righteous deeds; in case he
dies and the Qaim reappears after that, his reward is same as that of
one who lives till the time of His Eminence.

And without any doubt as difficult is the Intezar, as much its
practitioner will be rewarded by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime. May the
Almighty Allah make us sincere awaiters of our master, the leader of the
time (aj).

Issue 4: Is the intention of seeking Allah’s nearness a necessary condition for Intezar?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The reply to this question is based on two prefaces:

**First Preface:** Divine commands are of three types:

**One:** Acts of worship where we know that intention of seeking Allah’s
proximity is necessary, e.g. Prayers.

**Two:** The action which is not a direct act of worship. Like the
cleaning of ones dress from Najasat (impurity). Here our intention is
just to complete a particular job.

**Three:** Some acts about whom it is not known whether they are to be
included in worship acts for Allah. In the first two types the command
is crystal clear and as for the last type, if a person performs that
particular act with the intention of seeking Allah’s nearness he would
be rewarded for it and if he performs it without the said intention he
will not qualify for any rewards.

However, he shall not be liable for any punishment either. And the
difference between these lawful acts, which one can perform with the
intention of Allah, is that here an absolute command is related to it.
Whereas in case of permissible acts there is no absolute command for
them. Since the obligation is that they are lawful, rather, from this
aspect the command with relation to them is clear, that they are with
relation to a obligatory command.

**Second Preface:** To follow any command with the intention of Allah’s
obedience, whatever may be the cause. That is, for the love of Allah,
for thanking Allah, for obtaining His nearness, desire for divine
rewards, fear of divine chastisement. As there are various grades of
this;[^30] each is higher than the other and each has its own method.
And the condition of intention is must for all as mentioned in the
following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاعْبُدِ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصاً لَّهُ الدِّينَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore serve Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience.. (Qur’an,
Surah Zumar 39:2)***

Among the authentic traditions in this regard is one quoted in Usool
Kafi from Imam Zainul Abideen (as) that he said: No deed is correct
without an intention.[^31] And also, in Wasail, through the author’s own
chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (as) from his
forefathers from the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: Indeed, deeds
are related to intentions and each will get according to his intention.
One who participated in a battle for the sake of getting divine rewards
will be rewarded by Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and one how goes for
getting booty will get only that.[^32]

In the same book it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he
said: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime said: I am the best partner. If one
performs a deed taking a partner other than Me, I won’t accept it,
except from one who does it solely for Me.[^33]

Other traditions on the subject have also been collected by the scholars
of traditions – may Allah have mercy on them. Now that you have
understood this, you should also know that, that which is nearest to the
view is that the awaiting that has been ordered in traditional reports
is of three types as follows:

**First:** It is that the awaiter means one who obeys the Almighty Allah
whether his aim is obedience, hope or anticipation of reward that is
promised in traditions or some other motive.

**Second:** That his motive in awaiting is to obey a command so that he
may be rewarded in material way or in the hereafter, however the aim of
reward is secondary and subservient to the aim of obedience. (it means
that the actual aim in Intezar is obedience and following it the aim is
for rewards).

These two types enable one to obtain all rewards that are mentioned in
traditional reports and it is appropriate that a believer should choose
the first type which is the best of all that we have explained.

**Third:** It is that Intezar could imply eligibility for reward and
spiritual or worldly benefits from the aspect that he knows that he
would have the necessities of life, a long life span, a wide sustenance
and many bounties and not have any grief and sorrow in the period of
reappearance of the Imam of the Time (aj) because he only wanted this
and didn’t have obedience of the Almighty Allah in view.

**Fourth:** The converse of type two (that is he only aimed to get the
reward for awaiting and always did not want to obey the command of
Almighty Allah).

The apparent meaning is that he will not get the two types of
eligibility of reward that is promised in these traditions, because
eligibility is the reward of worship and is related to the aim of
obedience as you have seen in the explanation of the traditional report.
And the supposition is that the command should not change with aim of
servitude, thus awaiting for him will not be worship.

And just as he will not become eligible for reward in the same way he
will also not be eligible for punishment, because I don’t know if the
exigency of awaiting is found only in doing it with the intention of
proximity, rather the apparent study of traditional reports shows that
it denotes not being despaired of the Imam’s advent. Therefore Amirul
Momineen (as) in a tradition that we quoted in the first point said: “Be
an awaiter of the Faraj and do not despair of divine mercy…” and the
apparent import of Imam’s statement, “do not despair”, is explanation of
first stage of Intezar.

This is also indicated in the saying of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) to Abu
Baseer that, “O Abu Baseer, are you of those who want the world…and in
this way he has objected to him and meant to ask if he was such that he
wanted worldly benefits from Intezar?

It shows that if one is doing Intezar for gaining only worldly benefits,
it is not deserving of punishment. This matter can also be compared to
many deeds, like visiting a believer, visiting a sick person, attending
a funeral, fulfilling the needs of brother in faith etc. all of them are
such that if a person performs them not with intention of servitude to
the Almighty, he would be deserving of punishment. Thus the eligibility
of all of them is related to the intention of servitude. So think upon
this.

If it is said: It is possible to think that the aim of proximity is
obligatory in Intezar, and its opposite is illegal, as mentioned in a
tradition in Tohaful Uqool, in which Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has said to
Mufaddal bin Umar: People are of three types with regard to us: A group
is having love for us and is awaiting for the reappearance of our Qaim
as long as they enjoy their world and they say it and they learn our
statements by heart and they are deficient in keeping up with our
character; these the ones that the Almighty Allah will gather towards
the Fire…

I will say: This is a quality of the hypocrites to verbally express
loyalty to the family of infallibility and deny it from the heart. That
is the meaning of the Imam’s words: “and they say it” as is clear. On
the basis of this the implication is that: These people are hypocrites
and only verbally express our love so that when the Qaim arises they can
get their worldly benefits although their actions do not match their
words and this proves that they are hypocrites. And their final
destination is Hell. It is the same people who are mentioned in
traditional reports that regarding them His Eminence, the Qaim will
order that they be eliminated while they would be standing on one side,
and Allah knows best.

Issue 5: Intezar is the opposite of despair or hopelessness
-----------------------------------------------------------

### Hopelessness is of two types

**Type One:** To be absolutely hopeless of the reappearance of Hazrat
Qaim (aj) is definitely haraam. The belief in the reappearance of Imam
(as) is a necessity of Shia Imamiya faith. Rather there is a great
possibility that it is a fundamental of Islam because traditional
reports regarding this matter have come down from the Holy Prophet (S)
to the extent of Tawatur, through Shia as well as Sunni channels.

Rather the Sunni scholars are unanimous on this point and they only
differ regarding the fact whether the Mahdi has taken birth already or
he will be born in the future. On the basis of this, complete denial of
the Mahdi will tantamount to denial of the Holy Prophet (S). That which
proves this is the statement of Ibne Abil Hadid that Allamah Majlisi has
quoted in Biharul Anwar that he said: All Muslim denominations agree
that the world and religious laws will not end but after the advent of
Mahdi (aj).[^34]

**Type Two:** Hopelessness from the advent of the Qaim (aj) in the
appointed period due to some notions; like one says: His Eminence, the
Qaim (aj) will not reappear for another 50 years and the requirement of
this notion is not to await for the reappearance for another 50 years,
whereas according to traditions we are supposed to await for the
reappearance, day and night. Thus this type of hopelessness is also
unlawful because apparent command is obligatory and omitting an
obligatory thing is Haraam.

As for traditions that prove this matter, we have mentioned some of them
above and also the traditional report of Hammad bin Uthman in Iqbal,
quoting from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Await for reappearance
of your master, day and night, as the Almighty Allah is doing something
every day and one work does not prevent Him from doing another, as we
mentioned in Part Six.[^35]

Also in Biharul Anwar it is narrated from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: The most proximate servants of Allah and
those with whom Allah is pleased are those who when the proof of Allah
disappears from sight and they don’t know about his location, yet they
continue to have faith that the Proof of Allah can never be invalid and
day and night they continue to wait for him…[^36]

For example: In the same way it is mentioned in Biharul Anwar quoting
from Qummi from his father from Muhammad bin Fudail from his father from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he asked the Imam: May I be sacrificed on
you, thus when would this happen? Imam (as) replied: We have not been
informed about any fixed time for this.

But you should know that when we tell you something and that is
fulfilled, you should say: Allah and His Messenger told the truth. And
if that is not fulfilled, you should still say: Allah and His Messenger
told the truth. In this way you will be rewarded twice. Then he said:
But when hunger and poverty increases and people will deny each other,
at that time you should await for the reappearance day and night. The
narrator asked: What does, “people will deny each other” means? The Imam
said: When a person approaches other the former will not meet him
cheerfully, like he used to do previously and neither would he talk to
him with the same courtesy as he used to do before.[^37]

I say: The implication of ‘waiting for reappearance day and night’ means
that at any possible moment the promised reappearance of the Imam may
happen. Therefore it is necessary to continue to wait as without any
doubt the Imam can appear on any day in any year by the order of the
Almighty Allah, therefore it is obligatory on all to be in anticipation
of the Imam’s reappearance.

For example according to traditional reports it is prohibited to fix a
time for reappearance and we would quote them from this aspect only,
because the demand of negating the reappearance in a particular time
frame of years and months is itself an act of fixing the time. By the
passing of the same time period and it is haraam in view of the sayings
of the Imam. And that which supports this are different types of
traditions related from the Holy Imams (as).

For example: There are traditions that prove that the time of
reappearance of His Eminence (aj) is among the tentative matters, and it
is possible that it may be sooner or later, depending on the exigency of
the Almighty Allah as our master, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) has mentioned
in a tradition to Hammad bin Uthman that we have narrated above and
other traditional reports mentioned above also prove the same.

For example: There are traditions which advise armed readiness and
Marabata all the time since if one follows these instructions he can
never be hopeless of reappearance as mentioned in other traditional
reports.

For example: That which is mentioned through the author’s own chain of
narrators in Usool Kafi, that Yaqteen tells his son, Ali bin Yaqteen:
How is it that, that which was told regarding our kingdom (Bani Abbas)
has been fulfilled, and that which was mentioned about your true kingdom
has not been fulfilled?

Ali said: What had been said to you and what had been said to us were
from the same source but the time of your matter came and it occurred as
it had been said to you whereas the time of our matter did not come yet
so we justified that by hopes and wishes. If it was said to us that this
matter would occur after two hundred or three hundred years, our hearts
would be hard and then most people would apostize but they said to us
that it would be so near in order to attract the hearts of people and to
make them feel that deliverance was about to come.[^38]

In Biharul Anwar quoting from Ghaibat Nomani and Ghaibat Tusi a similar
type of report is mentioned,[^39] and in Ilalush Sharai, through the
author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from Ali bin Yaqteen
that: I asked Imam Musa Kazim (as): How is it that the prophecies
regarding you have not been fulfilled while all the prophecies regarding
your enemies have been fulfilled? He replied: What was prophesied
regarding our enemies was true, thus what was mentioned was fulfilled;
but since you were eager for it, it has been mentioned to you.

Also, in Ghaibat Nomani it is narrated from Abu Marhaf that Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) said: The Mahazeer will be destroyed. I asked: What is
Mahazeer? He replied: Those who make haste will perish and those nearest
to Allah will be saved…[^40]

In the same book it is narrated from Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (as)
that he said: “Those who make haste will perish and ‘those who consider
it near’ will be saved…”[^41] Since apparently ‘those who consider it
near’ means the believers who expect the reappearance to be very soon
and they are always waiting. That which supports this matter is a
statement of Dua Ahad narrated by Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as): “They (the
disbelievers) consider it to be distant while we consider it to be
near…”[^42]

Another reason for keeping the time of reappearance of His Eminence,
confidential is that believers may await for it all the time and every
year as indicated in the traditional report of Ibne Yaqteen.

Moreover, there is a traditional report that says that the reappearance
of His Eminence (aj) is like the ‘hour’ whose timing is known to only
the Almighty Allah as mentioned before.

Also, there are traditional reports that show that the reappearance of
His Eminence (aj) would come all of a sudden, like the statement of His
Eminence in the epistle mentioned in Ihtijaj that he wrote: Indeed, our
reappearance would be sudden, and then repentance of anyone would be of
no use…[^43] and a tradition of the Prophet: Mahdi is from us, the
Almighty Allah will reform his affairs in a single night. Another
tradition from the Holy Prophet (S) says: “he would appear like a
shooting star.” It is also narrated from Imam Reza (as) that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah (S), when is the
Qaim from your progeny going to rise?’ He said, ‘His example is like the
example of the Hour:

None but He shall manifest it at its time. It will be momentous in the
heavens and the earth. It will not come on you but suddenly.[^44]

In Usool Kafi it is narrated from Imam Ali Reza (as) that he said: “When
your knowledge [leader] disappears from amongst you, prepare yourselves
for the release from [your] suffering [appearing] beneath your feet
[i.e., from among yourselves].”[^45]

I say: Apparently the words of His Eminence: ‘beneath your feet’ imply
abruptness, on the basis of this it is obligatory to expect relief at
every possible moment.

If it is said: If this reappearance of His Eminence (aj) is sudden then
does it not contradict traditional reports that abound in stating that
the Imam’s advent will be preceded by many signs, like the coming out of
Sufyani, call from the sky and killing of Nafse Zakiyyah etc?

I will say:

**Firstly**; awaiting, which is necessary for the reappearance is in
fact awaiting for itself, thus when you indeed know that the
reappearance of His Eminence will occur after some signs are seen, it is
nothing but that the awaiter awaits for these signs, because those signs
are signs of the reappearance of His Eminence Qaim (aj).

In short, the awaiting that is emphasized in traditions is awaiting for
the reappearance of our master, even though it is having signs and
portents as is clear for the intelligent persons, and to explain further
we can present an example: If an important personality promises you that
he would visit your house in any day next week, will you not start to
gather means of refreshments and decoration right from the start of the
week?

Will you not await for him and expect him since then? Such that all
those who come to you will be honored, so that you will not counted as a
bad host. While you know that when he really comes there would be signs
and these signs are not separate from himself. So the awaiter is one who
awaits for all the necessary requirements.

**Secondly**; the apparent meaning of numerous traditions that are
narrated from the Holy Imams (as), is that: All those signs will appear
the same year, thus it is obligatory that the believer should be
prepared for the reappearance all the year, as it is possible that the
advent will take place that year, rather the traditional reports imply
that all those happenings will occur very close to each other.

Regarding Sufyani, it is narrated in Biharul Anwar from Imam Zainul
Abideen (as) in the description of signs of reappearance that: Before
his advent, a man will appear whose name is Auf Salmi, in the land of
Jazira, who will stay in Tikrit and will be killed in the Masjid of
Damascus; after that will appear Shuaib bin Salih from Samarqand; at
that time will appear the accursed Sufyani from the valley of Yabis, and
he would be from the progeny of Utba bin Abu Sufyan; and when Sufyani
appears, the Mahdi will go into concealment, after that he will appear
again.[^46]

I say: It can be concluded from this traditional report that the advent
of His Eminence Qaim (aj) is contemporary with the rise of Sufyani or
very close to that and it does not contradict the numerous traditions
that the rule of Sufyani will last for eight months and when it is
mentioned that the Sufyani will appear before the advent of the Qaim, it
implies that advent when the Qaim will appear openly in Kaaba and his
appearance to one and all because traditions state that before this
complete reappearance the Qaim will have a number of advents as
mentioned before also.

With regard to the killing Nafse Zakiyyah it is narrated from Abi
Abdullah as-Sadiq (as) that he said: “There will be only a gap of
fifteen days between the rising of the Qaim of Aale Muhammad and the
killing of the Pure Soul (Nafse Zakiyyah).”[^47]

**Type Three:** Despair of seeing the reappearance in near future; that
is one denies that the reappearance will happen soon, as is the
condition of some people of our times, those who base their beliefs on
probabilities and notions and that which proves such a type of
hopelessness unlawful is same that which prove the second type as haraam
because it is clearly mentioned in traditions that a believer should
expect the advent to occur any time and in any year, even though there
may be other reasons also and only the Almighty Allah is aware of all
facts.

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 645, Chapter 55, Tr. No. 5

[^2]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 280, Tr. No. 16

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 645, Chapter 55, Tr. No. 6

[^4]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 357, Chapter 33, Tr. No. 54

[^5]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 320, Chapter 31, Tr. No. 2

[^6]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 1, Pg. 319

[^7]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 276

[^8]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 378, Chapter 36, Tr. No. 3

[^9]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1 Pg. 371

[^10]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 123, Chapter 22, Tr. No. 7

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 123, Chapter 22, Tr. No. 7

[^12]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 126 Tr. No. 18

[^13]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 5, Pg. 22, Tr. No. 2

[^14]: Perhaps the Imam meant that Jihad is not lawful except with the
Imam’s permission, and this depends on reappearance of the Imam.

[^15]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 339, Chapter 33, Tr. No. 17

[^16]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 340, Chapter 33, Tr. No. 20

[^17]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1 Pg. 372, Tr. No. 6

[^18]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1 Pg. 334, Tr. No. 2

[^19]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2 Pg. 222, Tr. No. 4

[^20]: Majma al-Bayan, Vol. 9, Pg. 238

[^21]: Al-Burhan; Sayyid Hashim Bahrani; Vol. 4, Pg. 293

[^22]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 338, Tr. No. 11

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 36, Pg. 408, Tr. No. 17; Kifayatul Athar, Pg.
35

[^24]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 76, Tr. No. 30

[^25]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 22, Tr. No. 13

[^26]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 21, Tr. No. 10

[^27]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 133

[^28]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 377, Chapter 36, Tr. No. 1

[^29]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 339, Chapter 33, Tr. No. 16

[^30]: Surah Isra 17:2

[^31]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 84, Chapter of Niyyat, Tr. No. 1

[^32]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 34, Tr. No. 10

[^33]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 1, Pg. 44, Chapter 8, Tr. No. 9

[^34]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 51, Pg. 114, Tr. No. 10

[^35]: Iqbal, Pg. 201

[^36]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 145, Tr. No. 67

[^37]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 185, Signs of Reappearance, Tr. No. 9

[^38]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 369, Tr. No. 6

[^39]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 111, Chapter 21, Tr. No. 18

[^40]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 103

[^41]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 104

[^42]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 112

[^43]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Shaykh Tabarsi, Vol. 2, Pg. 324

[^44]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 373

[^45]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 341, Chapter of Ghaibat, Tr. No. 24

[^46]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 52, Pg. 213

[^47]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 649


