6: Expressing An Eagerness To See Him
=====================================

This is one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Imam’s (as)
followers. There is no doubt regarding its praiseworthiness and
preference. Numerous traditions and supplications mention this quality.
How beautifully it is expressed in a couplet:

**The heart burns and tears flow in the eagerness to see you. The desire
to see is burning us and the tears of separation are going to drown
us.**

**Have you ever seen a drowning man in flames?**

That which supports this point is the statement of Amirul Momineen (as)
in which he has expressed his eagerness to see the Imam as mentioned in
a tradition in which he has described His Eminence Mahdi (aj) in the
Chapter of Letter ‘A’in’. In that traditional report Imam Ali (as)
described some of his qualities and ordered his allegiance and
acceptance of his leadership, then he sighed and putting his hand to his
chest expressed his eagerness to see the Imam of the Time (aj).

The complete text of this traditional report has passed in the Chapter
of the Knowledge of His Eminence (first volume of this book). Also in
support of this point is that which is mentioned in Biharul Anwar
quoting from Mazar Kabir through the author’s own chain of narrators
from Ahmad bin Ibrahim that he said: I mentioned to Abu Ja’far Muhammad
bin Uthman my eagerness to see our master and he said: In spite of
eagerness are you really inclined to see him? I said: Yes.

He said: May the Almighty Allah reward you for your eagerness and give
you the honor of seeing him easily, O Abu Abdullah do not pray for
seeing him and being in his company as these are important divine
matters and it is better to accept them. But pay attention to his
Ziarat…[^1]

I say: It is clear that having an eagerness to see the Imam is a good
thing, as it is a part of having love for him, and as implied in the
statement: ‘May the Almighty Allah reward you for your eagerness’. It
also clarifies that there is great reward for this as mentioned in a
tradition of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as).

But as for his saying: ‘O Abu Abdullah do not pray for seeing him’ it is
actually seeing him like the previous Imams, that is one could meet them
whenever one wanted. Although the fact is that request to see the Imam
is not absolutely prohibited, rather it is among the duties of the
religious and many have been known to have got this honor.

That which proves this matter is the sentence: Because during the period
of occultation you be eager for him and do not request that you get to
live with him as it is a divine matter. Because if meeting the Imam and
being in his company had been absolutely prohibited so many people would
not have got that opportunity.

And it is something opposed to what is apparent, because traditions and
incidents with regard to the meeting the Imam are based on reports of
reliable persons. And lastly, it is clear that the sentence: ‘Have
eagerness to see him’ is a positive statement and it shows the virtue of
longing to see the Holy Imam (as). It can also be supported by the
tradition of Biharul Anwar, in which through the author’s own chain of
narrators it is narrated from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said: I was on
way to Medina while I was very sick and in pain.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) was told that Muhammad bin Muslim is very ill
and the Imam sent a servant with medicinal liquid to him. The servant
came to him, handed him the vessel and said: Drink it now. The Imam has
told me to wait and make you drink it in my presence. A fragrance of
musk arose from the vessel and it looked delicious and cool. After I
drank it, the servant said: My master said that after you drink it, you
come to meet him. I was thinking what the Imam will say, and the fact
that previously I didn’t have the strength to get up; but when the drink
entered my insides it seemed as if I had been released from being tied
up. I got up and came to the Imam’s place, and asked for his permission
to enter.

The Imam called out: You have become healthy; come in. I entered crying
and greeted the Holy Imam (as) and kissed his hand and head. His
Eminence (aj) said: O Muhammad, why are you crying? I said: May I be
sacrificed on you, I am crying due to my loneliness, distance from you
and disability to remain with you and see you.

He replied: Rarely does the Almighty Allah put our followers in these
circumstances or through such hardships. And as for what you mentioned
about being away from the native place; you should see how Abi Abdullah
(as) lies so far away from his hometown besides the banks of Furat. And
as for the distance that you mentioned, the believer is in this world is
alone and unidentified. Till he leaves the abode of the world to enter
into divine mercy. And as for what you mentioned about not being able to
meet us and see us; the Almighty Allah knows what is in your heart and
your rewards is with Him only.[^2]

I say: In *Mazaar* this tradition has been narrated from Kamiluz Ziaraat
with some additions that emphasize the excellence of the tomb of Imam
Husain (as).

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 97, Chapter 7

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 101, Pg. 120, Chapter 16, Tr. No. 9


