7: Relating The Praiseworthy Qualities Of Imam (aj)
===================================================

To remember Imam (aj) through the mention of his Fadail (special
qualities). Proof for this is based on the general traditions that
recommend the narration of the Fadail of other Purified Imams (as). For
example it is mentioned in Al-Kafi that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (as) is
reported to have remarked, “It is the duty of a group of heavenly angels
to look at two or three people who are discussing the Fadail of Aale
Muhammad (as). One of the angels says, ‘Look at them! In spite of the
fact that they are so few in number and in spite of having so many
enemies, they are still discussing the Fadail of Aale Muhammad (as).’
The other group of angels says:

*That is Allah’s grace; He grants it to whom He pleases, and Allah is
the Lord of mighty grace.*[^1]

In the same book through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Maseer from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said to me:
Do you have secluded meetings and discuss among yourselves what you
like? I replied: Yes, we indeed talk about the excellences of Aale
Muhammad in private. The Imam said: I would like it very much to be
present in those gatherings. By Allah, I like your fragrance and your
souls. Indeed you are following the religion of the Allah and His
angels, thus you help it through piety and effort.[^2]

In the same book it is narrated from Imam Musa Kazim (as) that he said:
That which is most despicable for Satan and his group is mutual
interaction of the believer for the sake of Allah. He said: When two
believers meet and remember Allah and discuss the excellence of us, Ahle
Bayt (as), Iblees scratches his face badly and then his soul screams due
to the intensity of pain so much that the angels of the sky and the
custodians of Paradise hear it and they curse him and no angel remains
but that he curses him, thus the Satan becomes disgraced and
helpless.[^3]

It can also be supported by traditional report that talk of responding
to a good turn and to speak nicely of one who has done a favor to you.
Like the tradition of Imam Zainul Abideen (as) mentioned in the Treatise
of Rights, which is also quoted in books like Makarimul Ahklaq and
Tohaful Uqool etc. In the said tradition, the Imam explains the rights
of one who has done a favor to us.

He says: As for the right of one who has done a good turn to you it is
that you be thankful to him and that you remember his favor and talk of
him in good terms among the people and pray for him with all sincerity
to the Almighty Allah; thus if you do this you have thanked him openly
and privately and if one day you are capable you recompense his favor by
doing a good turn to him.[^4]

Although we have mentioned in Parts Three and Four, the rights of His
Eminence (aj), at this point it would be advisable to refer to them once
again so that your breast may widen and you may enhance your faith. Also
supporting this matter is the argument that speaks of making the Holy
Imam (as) popular among the people and the excellence of attracting the
people to His Eminence, as will be explained in the coming pages, Insha
Allah.

Another point which supports this matter is that traditions emphasize
that during times of innovation it is obligatory for the scholar to make
his knowledge evident; in the same way is all that is told about
remembrance of the Almighty Allah because remembering the Imam is a part
of remembrance of Allah as mentioned in traditional reports and will be
stated in the Ninth duty.

[^1]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 334, Tr. No. 521

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 187, Tr. No. 5

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 188, Tr. No. 7

[^4]: Makarimul Akhlaq, Tabarsi, Pg. 422, Chapter 12


