8: Grief Of A Believer Due To Imam’s Separation
===============================================

One of the duties of a believer is to be sorrowful in the separation of
Imam (as). It is a sign of ones attachment to Imam (as). In the poetic
collection of Imam (as) the following couplets are mentioned on the
subject of ‘true friendship’:

**One of its signs is that it makes one seem like a sick person due to
the eagerness to meet his beloved.**

**One of its signs is that he is so much attached to his beloved that he
dreads anything that will make him busy (in other things).**

**One of its proof is that he laughs among the people in such a way that
his heart is full of grief like a mother who has lost her grown up
son.**

This is one of the signs of the believers. In fact it is one of the most
praiseworthy quality and numerous ahadith emphasize its significance.

1. A distinguishing quality of a Shia is that he is aggrieved by the
grief of the Imams (as) and there is no doubt that the occultation of
the Imam is greatest cause of sorrow for the Holy Imam (as) as will be
mentioned in the excellence of weeping in separation of the Imam (as).

2. In Kamaluddin, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Imam Reza (as) that he said: “How abundant worthy men of
faith and how abundant sorrowful men of belief will be perplexed and
grievous at the loss of that crystal spring.”[^1]

3. 3. In Kafi it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:
One who sighs in sorrow regarding us and is aggrieved for oppression on
us, this act of his is like glorification of Allah, and to be sad with
regard to us is like worship and maintaining our secrets is like Jihad
in the way of God.[^2] Kulaini says: Muhammad bin Saeed a narrator of
this report says: The Imam said: Write down this tradition in gold, I
have not written anything better than this.

4. Among the traditions mentioned in Part Four was a report of Ibne Abi
Yafur regarding the right of one believer on another. That it is
necessary to feel sorrowful on the grief of a believer. This is
applicable to the Imam of the Time (aj) more because he is more
deserving of it as he has precedence over all in the matter of faith.

5. In the third volume of Biharul Anwar, it is narrated from Masmah
Kurdeen from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Indeed, one whose
heart is pained for us, when he sees us at the time of his death, he
would become very happy in such a way that, that happiness will continue
till he meets us besides the Cistern of Kauthar. Indeed Kauthar will be
pleased on seeing our friend so much that it would make him taste
different types of foods so that he may not like to leave its side.

O Masmah, one who takes a drink from it, will never ever feel thirsty
again and he would never feel sorrowful. The water of Kauthar is laced
with camphor and smells of musk and tastes like Zanjabeel. It is sweeter
than honey and finer than butter and more flowing than tear and more
fragrant than Amber. It has come out from Tasneem (a high spring in
Paradise) and passes on the streams of Paradise. Its bottom is strewn
with gems and rubies. There are goblets on it that number more than the
stars of the heavens.

Its fragrance can be discerned from a distance of more than a thousand
years’ travel. The cups on it are made of gold, silver and different
gems. Its fragrance will glow from those who drink it. Till a person who
has drunk from it will say: Alas, if we could stay only here! I would
not ask for anything else and not move from here.

Indeed You, O Kurdeen, will be of those who will drink from it. And no
eye wept for us but that it was rewarded by seeing the Kauthar and did
not drink from it with our friends. Indeed the fact is that whosoever
will drink from it will get a special taste and joy more than who has
less love for us…[^3]

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 371

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 226, Tr. No. 16

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 8, Pg. 22, Chapter 20, Tr. No. 17


