10: To Organize Gatherings Where The Fadail Of Imam (aj) Shall Be Discussed
===========================================================================

The next important duty is to organize programs where the virtues of
Imam (aj) are narrated. Where people will pray for Imam (aj). Even if
one has to work very hard to organize such gatherings it is highly
recommended, because it is the propagation of the religion of Allah, it
is the promotion of the word of Allah, it is a help in goodness in piety
and it is a help to the signs of Allah and the friends of Allah.

Although all the previously quoted traditions prove this duty yet we
shall quote a hadith of Imam Sadiq (as) from Wasail on this juncture,
“Meet each other because it enlivens your hearts and causes the
remembrance of our affair (Wilayat), and our traditions will promote
love amongst you. That if you take them you are successful and achieve
salvation and if you leave them you shall be misguided and fall into
perdition. Act on these traditions and I guarantee your salvation.”[^1]

These traditions prove that when believers meet each other, it is a
medium of revival of Wilayat and refreshing of the remembrance of the
Holy Imam (aj). On the basis of this, there is no doubt that to organize
gatherings in which the Imam (aj) is remembered; and his excellence and
whatever is related from him is mentioned, such gatherings please the
Imams (as) very much. Also alluding to this is the statement of Amirul
Momineen (as) that: Allah, the High and the Mighty looked at the earth
and chose us; then He chose the Shias for us, so that they may support
us; that they be happy in our happiness and sad in our sorrow and that
they may dedicate their lives and properties in our way. They are from
us and shall return to us…[^2]

A problem of Jurisprudence
--------------------------

Among the articles of Islamic Practical Law is that to spend obligatory
Zakat funds in this matter is generally considered preferable; because
it is one of the ‘ways of Allah’ which the Almighty Allah has mentioned
in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الصَّدَقَاتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Alms are only for the poor and the needy..” (Qur’an, Surah
at-Tawbah, 9: 60)***

Note and Beware
---------------

It can be said that holding such gatherings in some circumstances
becomes obligatory; for example when people are getting deviated and
such programs will save their religion and guide them to the true path;
this is thus a type of Amr bil Maroof and Nahy Anil Munkar and it a way
of defeating the efforts of heretics. And the Almighty Allah is always
the protector of those who are on the right path.

[^1]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 11, Pg. 567, Chapter 23, Tr. No. 3

[^2]: Khisaal, Vol. 2, Pg. 635


