11-12: Composing And Reciting Poems In Imam’s Praise
====================================================

One of the duties of Shias in Ghaibat is to compose poetry or couplets
in praise of Imam (aj) and recite these poems etc. These two activities
are ways to help Imam (aj). A tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) is recorded
in the chapter of Al-Megar in the book Wasailush Shia. Imam Sadiq (as)
says, “Allah makes a house in Paradise for one who composes a couplet
about us.”[^1] It is also narrated from His Eminence (aj) that he said:
None composes a verse about us that Ruhul Qudus helps him.[^2] It is
narrated from Imam Ali Reza (as) that he said: For one who composes in
our favor a verse of poetry, the Almighty Allah builds in Paradise a
palace, seven times the size of this earth, where he will be visited by
every proximate angel and every messenger prophet.[^3]

I say: Perhaps different rewards mentioned in various traditions is due
to the different level of recognition that different poets have for the
Holy Imam (aj) and the level of their faith. It is narrated from Zurarah
that he said: Kumayt bin Zaid came to Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) when I
was also present there. Kumayt recited a panegyric in praise of the Holy
Imam (aj). When he concluded, Imam Baqir (as) said: As long as you go on
composing verse in our honor, you will be continued to be assisted by
Ruhul Qudus.[^4]

In Rauda Kafi through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated
from Kumayt bin Zaid Asadi that he said: I went to His Eminence, Abu
Ja’far Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) and His Eminence said to me: By Allah, O
Kumayt, if I had any money I would have given it to you but I can only
say that which the Messenger of Allah (S) said to Hisaan bin Thabit:
Ruhul Qudus will always be there with you, till the time you continue to
defend us…[^5]

This also proved by traditional reports regarding reciting of verses in
the honor of the Holy Imams (as) in their presence and how they rewarded
the poets with a great deal of wealth. There are many incidents on this
subject that throw a great deal of light on the conditions and manners
of Imam (as) and that which is mentioned is sufficient for believers.

[^1]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 10, Pg. 467, Tr. No. 1

[^2]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 10, Pg. 467, Tr. No. 2

[^3]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 10, Pg. 467, Tr. No. 3

[^4]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 10, Pg. 467, Tr. No. 4

[^5]: Raudatul Kafi; Vol. 8, Pg. 102


