17: To Pray To Allah That He Bestows Us With The Marefat (Recognition) Of Imam (As)
===================================================================================

One of the responsibilities during Ghaibat is that we regularly
supplicate Allah to grant us the correct Marefat of Imam az-Zaman (aj).
This is because gaining knowledge is not restricted to writing and
reading. Ilm (knowledge) is a light and to whomsoever He desires he
inculcates his heart with it. He guides whomsoever he wishes. Only those
guided by Allah are actually guided.

In **Al-Kafi** it is narrated that Abu Baseer says that Imam Sadiq (as)
explained the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يؤت الحكمة فقد أوتي خيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And those who are bestowed wisdom they indeed are bestowed with
exceeding goodness.***

‘(Wisdom) Means the obedience of Allah and (exceeding goodness means)
Marefat of Imam (as)’[^1]

In the same book it is narrated from Abu Baseer that he said: “Abu
Ja’far (as) said to me: ‘Do you know your Imam?’ I said: ‘Yes, by Allah;
before I came out from Kufa.’ He said: ‘Then this is sufficient for
you.”[^2]

In the same source, in a correct report it is mentioned that Abu Ja’far
(as) said: “The apex of the thing, the height of it, the key to it, the
gate to everything and the good pleasure of ar-Rahman, the Blessed, the
Sublime, is obedience to the Imam after knowing him.”[^3]

Abu Ayyub Khalid al-Kabuli said: ‘I asked Abu Ja’far (as) concerning the
words of Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَآمِنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَالنُّورِ الَّذِي أَنْزَلْنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore believe in Allah and His Messenger and in the Light which
we have sent down. (Qur’an, Surah Taghabun 64:8)***

He said: ‘O Abu Khalid! The Light, by Allah, is the Light of the Imams
from the Household of Muhammad (S) till the Day of Resurrection. They,
by Allah, are the Light which Allah has sent down, and they, by Allah,
are the Light of Allah in the heavens and on the earth. By Allah, O Abi
Khalid! The Light of the Imam in the hearts is more brilliant than the
sun shining in the day. They, by Allah, are those who illuminate the
hearts of the believers.

And Allah, to Whom belong Might and Majesty, veils their Light from
whoever He wills; thus their hearts are darkened. By Allah, O Abu
Khalid! No slave loves us and accepts our mastership until Allah
purifies his heart. And Allah does not purify the heart of a slave until
he submits to us, and is at peace with us. And when someone is at peace
with us, Allah protects him from the terrible reckoning, and also makes
him secure from the greater terror of the Day of Resurrection.’”[^4]

**Discussion and Explanation:** Know that the most important obligatory
duty after knowing Allah and the Messenger of Allah (S) is recognition
of the Imam of the Time (aj) because this matter is a pillar of faith
and one who dies without knowing the Imam of his time, dies the death of
paganhood and Marifat of the Imam is the key to all the doors of
goodness, success and divine mercy and the Almighty Allah has commanded
His servants to obtain his recognition and Dua is one of the doors that
the Almighty Allah has ordered us to approach Him. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Call upon Me, I will answer you. (Surah Ghafir 40:60)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْأَلُوا اللَّهَ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And ask Allah of His grace. (Surah Nisa 4:32)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ لَا تَهْدِي مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَنْ
يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He
pleases. (Surah Qasas 28:56)***

In Al-Kafi, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated
from Muhammad bin Hakim that he said: I asked His Eminence, Abi Abdullah
Imam Sadiq (as): Whose creation is Marifat? He replied: It is from the
creations of the Almighty Allah; people have no share in that
creation.[^5]

There are a large number of traditions and reports that illustrate this
matter, so the people are obliged to supplicate the Almighty Allah to
grant them perfect Marifat of the Imam of the Time (aj). Supplications
recorded with regard to this also show that it is important to ask
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime for recognition of the Imam as will be
explained in the coming pages, Insha Allah. This is also not in
contravention of traditions that encourage us to undertake study for
gaining Marifat. It is just like the case of earning livelihood. We have
been told to make efforts and also pray to Allah, because it is He that
gives sustenance. People only have to make efforts and it is on Allah to
bestow the livelihood. Allah, the High and the Mighty says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways. (Surah Ankabut 29:69)***

In the same way as agriculture and irrigation is the duty of men. Since
you will be under his control and discretion. And be safe from troubles.
Till the time you reach your aim and it is upon Allah, as it is beyond
their power but it is their duty to supplicate and request the Almighty
to get the aimed result. In the same way Marifat of the Imam is having
means and causes that the Almighty Allah has created for people and it
is in their capacity.

For example to ponder on the miracles and Akhlaq of His Eminence, and
study of traditional reports of the Holy Imam (as) about the Imam of the
Time (aj), his special qualities, prolongation of his Ghaibat and the
duties of people during his Ghaibat.

Thus we are duty bound to study all these things in order to gain the
recognition of the Imam of the Time (aj) but since Marifat is a creation
of Allah, logic and Islamic texts dictate that we must pray to the
Almighty Allah to bestow us this Marifat. Because if Allah opens a door
of mercy there is no one who can close it and if Allah has closed a door
no one could open it.[^6]

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 185

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 185

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 185

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 194

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 163

[^6]: Surah Fatir 35:2


