18: To Pray For Imam (aj) Regularly
===================================

To pray regularly for the well being of Imam az-Zaman (aj) is an
important duty of the Shia Ithna Asharis. Various traditions have been
recorded emphasizing this duty. The great scholar Shaykh Kulaini in
Al-Kafi,[^1] Nomani in his book Ghaibat[^2] and Shaykh Tusi in Ghaibat
state that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (as) said, “This youth will have Ghaibat
before the advent of Qiyamat.” “Why?” asked the narrator. “For the fear
of his life”, replied the Imam (aj) pointing towards his belly.

Then said, “O Zurarah! He is the awaited one (Muntazar), one whose birth
will be doubted. Some will even say that his father departed from the
world without leaving any heir. Others will say that he was not yet born
when his father expired.

Some will say that he was born two years prior to the martyrdom of his
father. He is that same Awaited one. But the Almighty shall test the
Shias. Immediately after this begins the period of doubts of the
deviated people. O Zurarah! If you are alive in such a time, recite the
following Dua:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O Allah! Grant me
Your recognition, for if I do not recognize You I will not recognize
your Messenger. O Allah grant me the recognition of Your Prophet. For if
I do not recognize Your Messenger, I will not recognize Your Hujjat
(Proof). O Allah! Grant me the recognition of Your Hujjat. For if I
don’t recognize Your Hujjat I will deviate from my religion. O Allah,
bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad.

It is mentioned in Kamaluddin that Zurarah bin Ayyan said: I heard Abi
Abdullah (as) say: “There is an occultation for the Qaim before his
reappearance.” I asked: “Why is it so?” He replied: “He is fearful.” And
he pointed towards his belly, implying that the Qaim fears for his life.
Then he said: “O Zurarah; and he is that awaited one and he is the one
in whose birth they shall doubt.

Thus some will say: His father died heirless and some will say: He was
in the womb of his mother when his father died. Some others will allege
that he was born two years before the passing away of his father. And he
is the Awaited one; but the Almighty Allah likes to test the Shias. It
is the time when people of falsehood will fall in doubts.” Zurarah says:
I asked: “If I am able to live till that period, what action I should
perform?” He replied: “O Zurarah if you live till that time you must
recite the following supplication:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم عرفني نفسك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah! Introduce Yourself to me…[^3]

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 337

[^2]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 86

[^3]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 342


