19: Steadfastness In Praying For Imam (As)
==========================================

We have been commanded to recite this Dua regularly. Shaykh Sadooq
narrates from Abdullah bin Sinan who says that Imam Sadiq (as) said,
“After this a time of such doubt will befall you that you will be
without the visible signs and a guiding Imam. And no one shall be able
to achieve salvation from this except those who recite “Dua-e-Ghareeq.”
(Supplication of the drowning man).

The narrator asked what this Dua was? Imam (as) replied,

“O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful! O the One Who transforms the hearts!
Make my heart steadfast upon your religion!”

The narrator repeated the Dua in this way:

The narrator added "**مُقَلِبَ القُلُوبِ و الأبصار**" Imam (as) told
him, "Indeed, Allah is **مُقَلِبَ القُلُوبِ و الأبصار**", but you say
only "**يا مقلب القلوب ثبِّت قلبي على دينك"**.

O Allah! O Beneficent! O Merciful. O One who changes the hearts (of
people) Give me steadfastness upon Your religion.

After repeating ‘Muqallebal Quloob’ the narrator added the word, ‘Wal
absaar’ (and the vision). When Imam (as) heard this, he said, “Indeed
Allah is the One Who changes the hearts and vision, but you recite the
Dua as I have said.”[^1]

Shaykh Nomani in his book, Ghaibah, has through his own chain of
narrators related from Hammad bin Isa from Abdullah bin Sinan that he
said: My father and I went to Abu Abdillah as-Sadiq (as). He said: “What
will you do if you see a time when you do not find an Imam of guidance
not any banner and then no one will be saved from that confusion except
one, who will recite the supplication of the drowning one (Dua
Ghareeq)?” My father said, “By Allah, this is a great calamity. May I be
sacrificed on you, what shall we do then?” He said, “If that occurs -
and you will not attain it – then keep to that which you have had until
the matter becomes clear.”[^2]

[^1]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 351

[^2]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 81


