21: Knowledge Of The Signs Of Reappearance
==========================================

It is obligatory to learn about the signs of Reappearance that are
taught to us by the Imams (as). Especially the ‘Certain’ signs.

Rational Proof
--------------

We have already proved that Marefat of Imam az-Zaman (aj) is Wajib. And
this Marefat includes knowing correctly the ‘certain’ signs of his
reappearance.

If it is said: It is also possible to recognize His Eminence through
means other than those signs, therefore the means of recognition is not
restricted to this. We will say: In traditions we have been ordered to
join the Imam during the time of his reappearance as mentioned in a
traditional report of Nomani through his own chain of narrators from
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) after the mention of the call and sinking of
Baida land it is said: Then head to him even if you have to crawl on
your hands and feet. By Allah, as I can see him between the Rukn and
Maqam taking pledge of allegiance from the people…[^1]

There is no doubt that going out to join the Imam during his
reappearance from different cities will not be possible except after
being informed that the Imam has reappeared and this will become
apparent through the inevitable signs that are promised. However the
recognition of the Imam through his miracles by the people and others in
his service will take place in the presence of the Imam as is obvious.

Textual Proof
-------------

Imam Sadiq (as) is quoted in the book Al-Kafi that he said, “Recognize
the signs (of reappearance). After knowing them correctly, the hastening
or delay of this affair will not cause you any harm.”[^2]

In addition to this, the Holy Imams (as) have described the signs that
the Almighty Allah has appointed for the reappearance of the Imam of the
Time (aj) so that the liar may be distinguished from the truthful and in
some traditions there is mention of some mischiefs that the villains
will create to mislead the gullible.

But those who are aware of traditions of the Holy Imams (as) and know
that such a thing would happen, they will not be fooled by these antics.
They will be able to distinguish the liars from the truthful as they
have learnt about the signs of reappearance on the basis of traditional
reports. Have you not seen that some people, in our age as well as in
the ages gone by, were misguided and became apostates by similar things
only because they were ignorant of the signs of reappearance and special
characteristics of the Imam?

Therefore they became deviated and misled others also. If they had
acquired knowledge and obtained Marifat and followed what is mentioned
about the signs of reappearance and traits of the Imam of the Time (aj)
they would have gained salvation and they would not have washed their
hands of faith. I beg Allah, the Mighty and Sublime to bestow us
knowledge and protect us from mistakes and deviations, as He is the
hearer of supplications. Further explanation on this matter will be
presented at a later stage, Insha Allah.

Also, supporting this matter is the dictum that it is obligatory on us
to obey the commands of His Eminence (aj) according to the saying of the
Almighty Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in authority from among
you. (Surah Nisa 4:59)***

On the basis of this it is obligatory for the believer to recognize the
signs of the reappearance of His Eminence, so that when he reappears, he
can be obeyed and that falsehood may be separated from truth. Here we
shall present some traditions that Shaykh Nomani has included in
Ghaibat:[^3]

1. Umar Ibne Hanzala reports that Imam Sadiq (as) also said, “There are
five certain signs for Qaim (aj): Sufyani, Yamani, Call from the Sky,
Slaying of Nafs-e-Zakiyyah (The pure soul) and sinking of the ground at
Baida?”

2. In another report from the Imam (as) it is mentioned that he said:
“Before the year of the cry (from the heavens), there will be a sign in
the month of Rajab.” He was asked, “What is it?” He said, “A face and a
protruding hand will appear on the moon.”

3. It is narrated from Abdullah bin Sinan that Imam Sadiq (as) said,
“The cry (from the heavens), the rising of the Sufyani, the rising of
the Yamani, killing of the pure soul and a hand appearing in the sky
will be inevitable. There will be also a fright in Ramadan, which will
awaken the sleeping people, terrify those who are awake and bring the
girls out of their veils.”

4. It is narrated from Bazanti from Imam Reza (as) that he said, “Before
the appearance of al-Qaim, there will be the risings of as-Sufyani, al-
Marwani, al-Yamani, Shuaib bin Salih and the protruding hand; then how
can he (Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Ismail known as Ibne Tabataba) say
this?”

It is reported from Abu Baseer that Imam Sadiq (as) said: “If you see a
great fire burning in the east for three days or seven days, then wait
for the deliverance of Muhammad’s progeny if Allah wills. Allah is
Mighty, Wise!” Then he said, “The cry will not occur except in the month
of Ramadan because Ramadan is the month of Allah and the cry is the cry
of Jibraeel to the people.” Then he added, “A call will come from the
heavens with the name of al-Qaim. It will be heard by everyone in the
east and everyone in the west.

The cry will make every sleeper awake, every stander sit and every
sitter stand because of fright. Allah will have mercy upon whoever
submits to the cry and obeys the caller because the first cry will be
the cry of Jibraeel.” Then he said, “The cry will be in the month of
Ramadan, on a Friday eve, which will be the twenty-third of the month.
Do never doubt that. Listen and obey! At the end of the day there will
be the voice of Iblees, the cursed calling out: So and so (Uthman) is
killed unjustly, just to make people doubt and become confused and then
go to Hell. If you hear the call in Ramadan, do not doubt it. It will be
the voice of Jibraeel.

The evidence is that he will call out the name of al-Qaim and the name
of his father. The call will be heard by everyone until the virgins in
their veils instigate their fathers and brothers to rise (to join
al-Qaim). These two calls must occur before the appearance of al-Qaim.
One will be from the heavens calling out the name of al-Qaim and the
name of his father.

It will be the call of Jibraeel. The other will be from the earth and it
will be the call of Iblees calling out the name of someone claiming that
he has been killed unjustly just to create sedition among the people.
Obey the first call and beware of being deceived by the second one.”

6. From some of our associates it is narrated that they asked Imam Sadiq
(as): “Is the rising of the Sufyani inevitable?” He said, “Yes, it is.
Killing of the pure soul, the sinking of the desert, the appearance of a
hand in the sky, the call that comes from the heavens and the appearance
of al-Qaim are also inevitable.” It was asked from him, “What is the
call?” He said, “A caller calling out the name of al-Qaim and the name
of his father.”

7. It is reported by Ibne Abi Yafur that he said: His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) said, “Keep in mind the perishment of so and so
(he mentioned a name of a man from Abbasids), the rising of as- Sufyani,
killing of the Nafs Zakiyyah, the sinking and the call by which the man
of this matter (al-Qaim) will be known.”

8. Zurarah reports that asked Imam Sadiq (as): Is the call, a fact? He
replied: Yes, by Allah, so much so that every people will hear it in
their own tongues.

9. It is reported from Abdullah bin Sinan that he said: I was in the
company of Abi Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) when a man from Hamadan said to
him: “People criticize us and say that we claim that a caller from the
heavens will call out the name of the man of deliverance.” Abi Abdullah
as-Sadiq (as) became so angry, he changed his sitting position and said:
“Do not narrate this from me but narrate it from my father and you are
not to be blamed for that. I heard my father say: By Allah, it is
mentioned in Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ نَشَأْ نُنَزِّلْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ آيَةً فَظَلَّتْ
أَعْنَاقُهُمْ لَهَا خَاضِعِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If We please, We should send down upon them a sign from the heaven so
that their necks should stoop to it. (Qur’an, Surah Shuara 26:4)***

Everyone on the earth will then submit to that (the call coming from the
heavens) and his neck will stoop when a call is heard from the heavens
announcing: The right is with Ali Ibne Abi Talib and his followers. The
next day Iblees will rise in the space until he disappears from the
people of the earth and calls out: The right is with Uthman bin Affan
and his followers. He has been killed unjustly so you are to avenge his
blood.

Allah will confirm the believers, who believe in the first call and then
those, whose hearts are full of diseases, will doubt and become
confused. By Allah, the disease of the heart is the enmity towards us.
Then they will turn away from us and begin to criticize us. They will
say that the first call is a piece of magic of the people of this house
(Ahlul Bayt).” Then Abi Abdillah as-Sadiq (as) recited this Qur’anic
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ يَرَوْا آيَةً يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if they see a miracle they turn aside and say: Transient magic.
(Surah Qamar 54:2)***

10. It is reported by Muhammad bin Samit that he said: I said to Imam
Sadiq (as): “Will there be certain signs before this matter (the
appearance of al-Qaim)?” he said, “Yes, there will be.” I asked, “What
are they?” He said, “The perishment of the Abbasids, the rising of al-
Sufyani, killing of Nafs Zakiyyah, sinking of the desert and the call
from the heavens.” I said, “May I be sacrificed on you, I am afraid that
these things may take a long time!” He said, “No, they will come like
the beads of a rosary; coming one after that other.”

11. It is narrated by Humran bin Ayyin from Imam Sadiq (as) that: “The
inevitable things that must occur before the appearance of al-Qaim are
the rising of as-Sufyani, the sinking of the desert, killing of Nafs
Zakiyyah and the call from heavens.”

12. It is narrated from Zurarah that he said: I heard His Eminence, Abu
Abdillah as-Sadiq (as) say: “A caller will call out from the heavens
that so and so is the emir and that Ali and his followers are the
triumphant ones.” I said, “Then who will fight al-Mahdi after that?” He
said, “The Satan will call out that so and so and his followers are the
triumphant ones, a man of the Umayyads (Uthman).” I said, “Then who will
know which the truthful is and which the liar is?” He said, “Those, who
used to narrate our traditions, will know that and will know that they
are with the truth.”

13. In another tradition from Zurarah it is mentioned that he said: I
said to His Eminence, Abi Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as): “May Allah make you
succeed! I wonder how people will fight against al-Qaim in spite of all
the miracles they will see; like the sinking of the desert with the army
and the divine call that comes from the heavens!” He said, “The Satan
will not free them until he calls out as he had called out against the
Prophet (S) on the day of al-Aqabah.”

14. It is reported from Hisham bin Saalim that he said: I heard His
Eminence, Abi Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) say: “There will be two cries;
one at the beginning of the night and the other will be at the end of
the second night.” I asked, “How will that be?” He said, “One will come
from the heavens and the other will be from Iblees.” I said, “How one
will be distinguished from the other?” He said, “He, who knows about it
before its occurrence will recognize it.”

15. It is narrated by Abdur Rahman bin Maslama that he said: I said to
Imam Sadiq (as): “Some people blame us and say how the truthful call is
distinguished from the false one when they both occur.” He said, “With
what do you answer them?” I said, “With nothing.” He said, “Say to them:
He, who has believed in them before they occur, will know which of them
is true and which is false. Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَى الْحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ لَا
يَهِدِّي إِلَّا أَنْ يُهْدَىٰ ۖ فَمَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What then is the
matter with you; how do you judge? (Qur’an, Surah Yunus 10:35)***

16. It is reported from Abdullah bin Sinan that he said: I heard His
Eminence, Abi Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: “This matter, which
you stretch your necks to, will not be until a caller from the heavens
calls: So and so is the master of the affair, so what is this fighting
for?”

17. It is narrated by Muhammad bin Muslim that Imam Baqir (as) said:
“The rising of as-Sufyani and the rising of the Qaim will be in the same
year.”

18. It is mentioned by Badr bin Khalil Asadi that he said: I was in the
company of Abu Ja’far Imam Baqir (as) when he said that two signs would
appear before the appearance of al-Qaim that had never appeared since
Allah had sent Adam down to the earth. He said that the sun would be
eclipsed in the middle of Ramadan and the moon would be eclipsed in the
end of Ramadan.” A man said, “O son of Allah’s Messenger, it is the moon
that will be eclipsed in the middle of Ramadan and the sun will be
eclipsed at the end of it.” Abu Ja’far al- Baqir (as) said, “I do know
what I say. They are two signs that have never occurred since Adam (as)
descended to the earth.”

19. It is narrated by Ward, brother of Kumayt, the famous poet from His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) that he said: “Before the appearance
of al-Qaim, the moon will be eclipsed five days before the end of the
month and the sun will be eclipsed in the middle of the month. That will
occur in Ramadan and then the calculations of the astrologers will
fail.”

20. It is reported by Abdul Malik bin Ayyin that he said: I was in the
company of His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Baqir (as) when Qaim (aj) was
mentioned. I said to His Eminence: “I hope this (reappearance) happens
soon and that there is no rise of Sufyani also.” He said: “By Allah, it
is inevitable and is bound to happen in any case.”

21. It is narrated by Humran bin Ayyin that Imam Baqir (as) said
regarding the exegesis of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَضَىٰ أَجَلًا ۖ وَأَجَلٌ مُسَمًّى عِنْدَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then He decreed a term; and there is a term named with Him. (Qur’an,
Surah Anam 6:2)***

They are two fixed terms, one is inevitable and the other conditional.”
Humran asked His Eminence: “What is inevitable?” He replied: “It is
something that has nothing to the contrary.” I asked: “What is
conditional?” He replied: “It is something in which there is hidden
divine wisdom.” Humran said: “I hope the decree of Sufyani is from the
conditional matters.” Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said: “No, by Allah, it
is from the inevitable matters.”

22. Again by Fudail bin Yasar it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu
Ja’far Baqir (as) that he said: “Indeed, there are some inevitable
matters and some conditional. Although Sufyani is an inevitable matter,
it is bound to occur in any case.”

23. It is narrated from Khallad Saigh that His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
Sadiq (as) said: “Sufyani; there is no remedy from it. And he will not
appear except in the month of Rajab.” A person asked: What should we do
when he appears? He said: “When he rises you should remain attached to
us, (Ahle Bayt).”

24. Imam Baqir (as) is quoted by Muhammad bin Muslim to have said:
“As-Sufyani is red, blonde and blue. He has never worshipped Allah at
all. He has seen neither Mecca nor Medina. He says: O my God, I take
revenge even if I go to Hell! O my God, I take revenge even if I go to
Hell!”

25. It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: “When Qaim (aj)
rises up, he will appoint a person in every province of the earth and
tell him: If you ever be in a position when you cannot understand or you
do not know what judgment you should deliver, glance at the palm of your
hand and act upon what is mentioned there.

And he would dispatch an army to Constantinople. When it reaches the
gulf they would write something with their feet and walk on the surface
of the water. The people of Constantinople will say: They are the
companions of one who walks on water, then what would be his own
excellence? At that moment they would open up the gates of the city for
them. They would enter the city and rule over it as long as they
like.”[^4]

I say: The strength of Sufyani’s army that will be swallowed by the
desert between Mecca and Medina, is almost three hundred thousand,
according to the narration of Mufaddal. It is mentioned in a lengthy
report quoted in Anwarun Nomaniya and Biharul Anwar.[^5] In some
versions it is stated that when this army will reach Baida, Jibraeel
will descend and call out: “O Baida, swallow the people.”

We shall rest content with only this much as it should be sufficient for
those who want to benefit from them although Shaykh Sadooq and others
have narrated a large number of sayings in this regard. And Shaykh
Sadooq has narrated from Abdullah bin Ijlan that he said: We were
discussing the advent of the Qaim in the company of Abi Abdullah (as)
when I asked him: “How would we know about this?” He replied: “When you
get up in the morning, a slip of paper will be found below your head
with the following written on it: Obedience with recognition.”[^6]

Testimony of some signs
-----------------------

In the book, Noorul Oyoon, among the signs of reappearance is that:
People in the last period of time will give up wearing the turban and
instead of that wear hats. It is also mentioned in a tradition that
among the signs of reappearance is that: People would be happy not to
have children and one who is childless will express joy and
thankfulness.

I say: These signs have appeared in this year, that is year 1346 Hijri.
I saw some people taking off the turban and donning hats to resemble
non- Muslims. I also saw childless people happy of not having issues due
to the burden of upbringing. I protest to the Almighty Allah regarding
the Ghaibat of His Wali and beseech Him to hasten the advent of His
Eminence, and make us among his companions.

[^1]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 139-140

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 372

[^3]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 133

[^4]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 172

[^5]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 53, Pg. 25

[^6]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 654, Chapter 57, Tr. No. 22


