22: We Must Be Submissive As Well As Impatient
==============================================

This topic can be discussed in two parts:

Section One: Some traditions narrated from the Holy Imams
---------------------------------------------------------

1. Abdul Rahman Ibne Kathir is quoted in Al-Kafi that he was present in
the assembly of Imam Sadiq (as) when Muhzam entered and said, “May our
lives be sacrificed on you! Please tell us when the affair that we await
shall come to pass?” Imam (as) replied, “O Muhzam! Those who fix a time
are liars, those who were impatient were destroyed and those who
resigned themselves to the situation were saved.[^1]

2. It is narrated by Ibrahim bin Muhzam from his father that he said: In
the presence of Imam Abu Abdillah (as) were mentioned rulers of so and
so clan and His Eminence (aj) said: Indeed people will perish as a
result of their haste in this matter, the Almighty Allah does not
advance a matter due to haste of people about it. Indeed, for it is the
last command which will (surely) reach it, thus when it reaches; it will
neither be advanced nor delayed by an hour.[^2]

3. It is narrated from Mansoor that he said: His Eminence, Abu Abdillah
Imam Sadiq (as) said: O Mansoor, this matter of yours (reappearance)
will not occur except after hopelessness. No, by Allah, till you
separate from each other. And no by Allah, till you are tested. And no
by Allah, till one who is to be damned is damned and one who is to
succeed succeeds.[^3]

4. It is narrated from Muhammad bin Mansoor Saiqal from his father that
he said: I, Harith bin Mughaira and a group of our companions were
sitting in the gathering of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) and he was listening
to our discussion. He said: What are you worried of? Never! Never! By
Allah! That which you await (reappearance) will not happen except till
you are sieved. No by Allah, what you are longing for will not come to
pass till you are sifted. No by Allah, that which you are eager for will
not come till good is separated from the evil. No by Allah, that which
you are looking for will not happen except after hopelessness. No by
Allah, that which you are anticipating will not come till one who is to
be damned is damned and one who is to succeed succeeds.[^4]

5. In another tradition it is narrated from Abu Ja’far Imam Baqir (as)
that he said: Indeed, the hearts of the people collapse from these
traditions of yours (belief in the occultation of Imam Qaim (aj), thus
one who accepts them, tell more and leave those who deny them. Indeed,
there will be trials so that all the evil is sieved, such that even
those who split hair (for perfection) would fall off. So much so that
except for us and our Shias none would remain.[^5]

6. In Wafi, it is narrated from Kafi through the author’s own chain of
narrators from Abul Marhaf from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said:
Its dust (mischief and sorrow) will reach all those who instigate it.
The Muhazireen will perish. The narrator asked: May I be sacrificed on
you, who are Muhazireen? He replied: Those who make haste.[^6] And in
Wafi the author says: If the word is pronounced as Muhasireen it will
denote straitening of the breast. If it is pronounced as Muhazireen it
would denote running. And Majlisi says in Biharul Anwar: Muhazireen is
the plural of Mahzeer and it is a fast running horse.

7. Also, in Ghaibat Nomani it is narrated from Abu Marhaf that Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: The Muhazireen will be destroyed. I asked: What
is Muhazeer? He replied: Those who make haste will perish and those
nearest to Allah will be saved. And the fort will remain firm upon its
strong pillars…[^7]

8. Abdul Rahman Ibne Kathir is quoted in Al-Kafi that he was present in
the assembly of Imam Sadiq (as) when Muhzam entered and said, “May our
lives be sacrificed on you! Please tell us when the affair that we await
shall come to pass?” Imam (as) replied, “O Muhzam! Those who fix a time
are liars, the impatient are destroyed, those who resigned to the
situation are saved and you shall come back to us.

9. Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said: The hasteners will peris h and those
nearest to Allah will be saved. After distress there will be a wonderful
deliverance.[^8]

10. Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from
Ibrahim bin Hilal that he said: I asked Abu Hasan Imam Ali Reza (as):
May I be sacrificed on you, my father died while still believing in this
matter (the imamate) and I became so old. Shall I die and you do not
tell me of anything? He replied: O Abu Ishaq, you hasten (to hasten the
will of Allah). I said: Yes, by Allah, I hasten, why do I not hasten
where I became so old as you see? He said: O Abu Ishaq, by Allah, that
does not occur until you are tried and clarified until none of you
remains save the least (then he clenched his hands).[^9]

11. Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from
Abdur Rahman bin Kathir from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said
regarding the saying of the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى أمر الله فلا تستعجلوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…*

It is our matter. The Almighty Allah has ordered not to hasten it until
He assists it with three armies; the angels, the believers and awe. His
(Qaim’s) advent will be like the advent of the Prophet as Allah has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كما أخرجك ربُك من بيتك بالحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Even as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the
truth…*[^10]

In Tafseer Burhan[^11] and Muhajja through the author’s own chain of
narrators a similar type of tradition is narrated from Ghaibat of Shaykh
Mufeed.

12 - In those two books it is also narrated from Musnad Fatima (S), by
Shaykh Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Jurair Tabari through his own of
narrators from Aban from His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى أمر الله فلا تستعجلوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…*

Imam Sadiq (as) said: At that moment His Eminence, Qaim (aj) will appear
and perform two rakats prayer at the Place of Ibrahim (as); then he will
move with his 313 companions who would be surrounding him. Indeed, among
his companions will be those who had rushed from their beds overnight.
Thus they will set out from there. The Qaim will have a stone with him;
when it is cast down, vegetables grow from the ground.

13. In Kamaluddin, The chief of traditionists, Shaykh Sadooq has
narrated through a correct chain of narrators from Imam Sadiq (as) that
he said: “The first to pledge allegiance to Qaim (aj) is Jibraeel who
would come down in the form of a white bird and give him oath of
allegiance. Then keeping one foot on the Holy Kaaba and another on the
Holy Qods issue such a loud call that when the creatures hear it they
would cry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى أمر الله فلا تستعجلوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten
it…*[^12]

I say: These two traditions prove that the implication of ‘Allah’s
commandment’ is reappearance of His Eminence Qaim (aj) and that Jibraeel
will recite that verse on this moment from the aspect of proving this
same matter and censuring of deniers and hasteners, and Allah knows
best.

14. In Tafseer Burhan quoting from Ayyashi from Hisham bin Saalim from
some of our associates from Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he was
asked regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أتى أمر الله فلا تستعجلوه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s commandment has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…*

He said: When the Holy Prophet (S) fixed a time for something, this
statement of the Almighty Allah is for that only: ‘Allah’s commandment
has come, therefore do not desire to hasten it…’ till that time arrives.
His Eminence, Sadiq (as) said: If the Almighty Allah says a thing has to
occur it is as if it has already occurred.[^13]

15. In the book of Husain bin Hamadan through the author’s own chain of
narrators it is narrated from Mufaddal from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that
he said regarding the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يُدْرِيكَ لَعَلَّ السَّاعَةَ قَرِيبٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَعْجِلُ بِهَا الَّذِينَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ بِهَا ۖ وَالَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا مُشْفِقُونَ مِنْهَا وَيَعْلَمُونَ أَنَّهَا الْحَقُّ ۗ أَلَا
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُمَارُونَ فِي السَّاعَةِ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ بَعِيدٍ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And what shall make you know that haply the hour be nigh? Those who
do not believe in it would hasten it on, and those who believe are in
fear from it, and they know that it is the truth. Now most surely those
who dispute obstinately concerning the hour are in a great error.***
***(Qur’an, Surah Shura 42:17-18)***

The ‘hour’ denotes reappearance of His Eminence, Qaim (aj). Mufaddal
said: Master, what is the meaning of ‘who dispute obstinately’? He
replied: They say: When was he born, who has seen him and where he is
and where he will be and when he will reappear? All these statements
imply impatience with the command of the Almighty Allah and doubt in His
predestination. They are those who will suffer loss in the world and the
hereafter and indeed bad is the end of the unbelievers.

16. In Hadith Arba Miya from Amirul Momineen (as) it is mentioned that
he said: It is easier to find the source of mountain but it is difficult
to find a rule which has a stipulated time. Seek help from the Almighty
Allah and observe patience, the earth belongs to Allah, He gives it to
whom He likes and the end is for those who are pious. Do not hasten
regarding a matter before its time, as you will have to regret and do
not consider that period to be long as your hearts will become hard.

17. In Kamaluddin, Ibne Babawayh has through his chain of narrators
quoted from Saqr bin Abi Dulf that he said: I heard Aba Ja’far Muhammad
bin Ali ar-Reza (as) say: “The Imam after me is my son, Ali. His command
is command of his father and his statement is statement of his father
and his obedience is obedience of his father. Then the Imam fell silent.
Then he said: The Imam after him will be his son, Hasan. His command is
command of his father and his statement is statement of his father and
his obedience is obedience of his father. After this Imam (as) became
silent. The narrator asked: ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger, who will be the
Imam after Hasan?’ Imam (as) started weeping profusely and said: ‘After
him, his son Qaim (aj) will be the Imam’. He will be in Ghaibat and
pious and sincere people will await his reappearance while those in
doubt will deny him and will ridicule his remembrance (Zikr). Those who
will hasten will be destroyed and those who submit will be
successful.”[^14]

18. It is narrated from Ali bin Husain bin Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) that
he said: “The verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُولُو الْأَرْحَامِ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلَىٰ بِبَعْضٍ فِي كِتَابِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and the possessors of relationship have the better claim in the
ordinance of Allah… (Qur’an, Surah Anfal 8:75)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَهَا كَلِمَةً بَاقِيَةً فِي عَقِبِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he made it a word to continue in his posterity. (Qur’an, Surah
Zukhruf 43:28)***

were revealed about us. And the Imamate will remain in the progeny of
Husain bin Ali (as) till Judgment Day. There are two occultations for
our Qaim, one of which shall be longer than the other. As for the first
one, it would be for six days, or six months or six years. And as for
the second one it would be so long that most of those who have faith in
this matter will turn back from their belief. Then they would not remain
firm on this matter except those who have very strong faith and correct
recognition, and in their hearts there is no discomfort from our
decisions and those that submit to us, Ahle Bayt (as).”[^15]

19. And from the same chain of narrators he said: Ali bin Husain (as)
said: “The religion of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is not obtained
through defective intellect, invalid opinion and corrupted analogy. It
is achieved through submission. Thus there is security for one who
submitted to us. There is guidance for one who followed us. And one who
resorted to analogy and personal opinion, he is destroyed and one who
felt unconvinced by our statements and decisions, he has denied the one
who revealed the seven oft repeated verses and the great Qur’an.”[^16]

20. In Kifayatul Athar, the venerable Shaykh, Ali bin Muhammad bin Ali
Khazzaz Razi Qummi through his own chain of narrators narrated from our
master, Imam Hasan (as) that he said: One day the Messenger of Allah (S)
delivered a sermon, in which after praise and glorification of Allah he
said: O people, I have been summoned and I will have to harken to it.
Indeed I leave among you two weighty things; the Book of Allah and my
progeny, my Ahle Bayt; till you remain attached to them you will not go
astray.

Thus you learn from them and don’t remind them as they are more learned
than you. The earth will never be devoid of them and if it remains
devoid, it will sink into itself along with its inhabitants. Then the
Holy Prophet (S) said: O Allah, I know that the knowledge will not come
to an end and be lost and indeed You will never keep the earth devoid of
Your proof over Your creatures, whether it be apparent and obeyed or
afraid and hidden, so that the Divine Proof is never validated and your
friends do not go astray after You have guided them, their numbers are
the least of all but their value in the view of Allah is more than all.

When he came down from the pulpit, I asked: O Messenger of Allah (S),
are you not Hujjat on all creatures? He replied: O Hasan, the Almighty
Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَنْتَ مُنْذِرٌ ۖ وَلِكُلِّ قَوْمٍ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every people.
(Qur’an, Surah Raad 13:7)***

Thus I am the one who warns of divine punishment and Ali is the guide. I
asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), you said that the earth will not be
devoid of the Divine Proof?

He said: Yes, he is the Imam and Hujjat after me and you are the Imam
and Hujjat after him and Husain is the Imam and Hujjat after you. And
indeed, Allah the Kind and the Knowing has informed me that a son would
be born to Husain, who would be named Ali after the name of his
grandfather Ali. So when Husain will pass away, his son Ali, will take
over the charge of Imamate and he would be the Hujjat of Allah and the
Imam.

And Allah will create a son from the loins of Ali, who would be named
after me and would resemble me the most. His knowledge will be my
knowledge and his command will be my command. And he will be the Imam
and Hujjat after his father. A son will be born to him, who will be
named Ja’far, the most truthful among the people. And he will be the
Imam and Hujjat after his father.

The Almighty Allah will create a son from the loins of Ja’far who will
be named Musa after the name of Prophet Musa bin Imran. He will be an
ardent worshipper. And he will be the Imam and Hujjat after his father.
The Almighty Allah will create a son from the loins of Musa who will be
named Ali. He will be a mine of divine knowledge and wisdom. And he will
be the Imam and Hujjat after his father.

The Almighty Allah will create a son from his loins named Muhammad. And
he will be the Imam and Hujjat after his father. The Almighty Allah will
create a son from his loins named Ali. And he will be the Imam and
Hujjat after his father. The Almighty Allah will create a son from the
loins of Ali who will be called Hasan. And he will be the Imam and
Hujjat after his father. The Almighty Allah will create a son from his
loins named Muhammad who will be the Hujjat, the Qaim, the Imam of his
time on the people and one who will bring deliverance to his followers.
He will disappear from among the people.

Some will lose faith in him and some will remain steadfast and (the
doubters) will say: When will this promised be fulfilled, if you are
from the truthful ones? Thus even if a single day remains from the
tenure of the world, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will prolong it so
much that our Qaim will reappear and fill up the earth with justice and
equity as it would have been filled with injustice and inequity. Thus
the earth will not be devoid of one of you, the Almighty Allah has given
my knowledge and understanding to you and I pray that the Almighty Allah
appoints knowledge and perception in my progeny and in our progeny.[^17]

Section Two: Types of hastes that are denounced, that lead to corruption, apostasy and infidelity
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Type One:** Any undue impatience in this matter and failure to
maintain patience causes one to be misguided by deviant leaders. These
false claimants take the opportunity to exploit those who are ignorant
of the traditions of Imams (as). By propagating false concepts these
people create doubts regarding the true reappearance and invite people
towards indecencies and deviations.

The same impatient people start following these false claimants, even
though Imams (as) have clearly informed the people of the signs that
would precede the reappearance of Imam Mahdi (aj). They have made a
special mention of the signs that are certain and commanded us to be
steadfast on our beliefs. If we encounter a claimant of being the
special emissary (Naib-e-Khaas) of Imam (as) or one who claims to be
Imam Mahdi (aj); before the occurring of the certain signs, we must not
pay any attention to him. We should beseech Allah to keep us safe from
the deceit of that satan.

**Type Two:** It is possible that those who hasten in this matter may
become despaired that it will not occur; as result of which, this haste
would lead one to deny the numerous sayings of the Prophet and the Holy
Imams (as) in which they have said that the divine government will be
established one day; and they have ordered us to await for this as
mentioned in some traditional report that we have quoted in the foregone
pages.

**Type Three:** Sometimes making haste in this matter will cause one to
deny His Eminence, the Imam of the Time (aj) and this is more severe
haste than the previous one. Because it is possible that a person may be
having faith in the Imamate of the twelfth Imam and that he is alive,
while at the same time he is despaired and hopeless of his advent due to
the prolongation of Ghaibat, he makes haste about it, so that he may die
of it. This is the second type of haste which is source of his death,
and the third type is that he makes haste to the extent of denying His
Eminence as he has the corrupted view that: If he had been there he
would have revealed himself.

**Type Four:** Making haste that puts one in doubt and it is also like
the previous type; it can also cause one to go out of the pale of faith
and enter the league of the companions of Satan. Our Holy Imams (as)
have said in some of the traditions that: He (Allah) knew that His
special servants will never fall into doubts and if it were not so He
would not have taken away His Proof from their sight even for a moment.
This tradition is mentioned in Kamaluddin, Ghaibat Nomani and other
books.[^18]

**Type Five:** That which will cause one to question the will of the
Almighty Allah and lead one to object to the Imam as regards delay in
his reappearance is that one says: Why does he not appear, and
statements like this as one who makes haste in this regard due to
objection against and doubt about the Almighty Allah, is the follower of
Satan, whom when Allah commanded to prostrate before Adam and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَأَسْجُدُ لِمَنْ خَلَقْتَ طِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Shall I make obeisance to him whom You have created of dust? (Qur’an,
Surah Isra 17:61)***

In a Surah the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter. (Qur’an, Surah Ahzab 33:36)***

Shaykh Kulaini through a correct chain of narrators narrated from His
Eminence, Abi Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said: If a people
worships the Almighty Allah without associating anything or anyone with
Him, perform the ritual prayer, pay the Zakat, do the Hajj of the House
of Allah, keep fasts during the month of Ramadan; and then he says about
something that the Almighty Allah or the Holy Prophet (S) has done:
Would it not have been better if he had done the opposite? Or even if
they have such a notion; they would become polytheists due to this. Then
His Eminence (aj) recited the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you
have decided and submit with entire submission. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa
4:65)***

Then Imam Sadiq (as) said: Submission is obligatory for you.[^19]

**Type Six:** Sometimes making haste becomes the cause that the person
denies the wisdom behind Ghaibat and this in fact is denial of divine
justice and relating a despicable act to Him. Whereas the Almighty Allah
is much above it – and we have explained some reasons behind occultation
and its prolongation in Part Four under the chapter of Letter A’in; and
some of its secrets will be revealed after the reappearance of His
Eminence (aj).

**Type Seven:** It is that sometimes making haste and not being
submissive becomes the cause of considering light the traditions of the
Infallible Imams (as) that have commanded us to await for the
reappearance of the Hidden Imam (aj). Thus one who makes haste in it, in
fact does not lend any importance to those traditional reports and
through this is included among the disbelievers because to consider the
sayings of the Holy Imams (as) light is to consider the Imams themselves
unimportant. And to consider the Imams unimportant tantamount to
carelessness about Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and that is in fact,
disbelief. I seek refuge of the Almighty Allah from deviation after
being guided.

In *Tohaful Uqool*, Imam Sadiq (as) has mentioned in the explanation of
faith and infidelity as follows: Apostasy from Islam occurs when one of
five matters, all of which are similar and familiar, occurs. They are
atheism, polytheism, deviation, immorality, and committing a greater
sin. Atheism is every deed by which God is disobeyed due to
renouncement, denial, disparagement, and underestimation, whether that
deed is small or big. The doer of such a deed is an atheist…[^20]

**Type Eight:** It may happen that haste may lead to rejection of
traditional reports with regard to the victory and reappearance of our
master (as). The hasty person, due to the straitness of his heart and
lack of patience, and due to the long period of time, is dominated by
Satan who whispers in his heart: Perhaps these traditional reports have
not come from the Holy Imams (as) and perhaps the followers of this
school or the narrators of these traditions have fabricated them, due to
some exigency or material gain that they might have got from this act.

And this notion takes root in his mind and gains strength till the end
of his matter, due to his rejection of these traditional reports gets
over, he is thrown into the valley of destruction in Hell, and how bad
is the abode of this man! It is so because to reject what the reliable
companions and students of the Holy Imams (as) have narrated from the
Imams, is same as rejection of the Imams themselves and denial of their
rights as stated in the tradition of Umar bin Yazid in Wasail etc. in
which he says: I asked His Eminence, Abu Abdillah Imam Sadiq (as): What
is your view about the one who does not accept your position in
Shab-e-Qadr as you mentioned and he does not reject it also. Imam Sadiq
(as) said: Indeed, if argument is complete on a person with regard to
our knowledge and he is still not satisfied, he is a Kafir.

**Type Nine:** Sometimes haste in some people impels them to interpret
the traditional reports of the Holy Imams (as) according to their
personal whims and desires, and derive meanings that are completely
against their clear or apparent meanings. In this way they fall into
deviation using the sayings of the Holy Imams (as) for this purpose.
They don’t know that most of those who went astray from the people of
the past did so because they devised elaborate interpretations of the
verses of Qur’an, sayings of the Messenger of Allah (S) and his true
successors; and they also misled others through this.

Don’t they know that to interpret a sentence in a way which is opposed
to its apparent meaning and is against the context and to mislead people
through it is a very despicable act in the view of intellectuals? And
the Almighty Allah says regarding the ambiguous verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ زَيْغٌ فَيَتَّبِعُونَ مَا تَشَابَهَ
مِنْهُ ابْتِغَاءَ الْفِتْنَةِ وَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ ۗ وَمَا
يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ ۗ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ
يَقُولُونَ آمَنَّا بِهِ كُلٌّ مِنْ عِنْدِ رَبِّنَا ۗ وَمَا يَذَّكَّرُ
إِلَّا أُولُو الْأَلْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then as for those in whose hearts there is perversity they follow the
part of it which is allegorical, seeking to mislead and seeking to give
it (their own) interpretation, but none knows its interpretation except
Allah, and those who are firmly rooted in knowledge… (Qur’an, Surah Aale
Imran 3:7)***

These foolish ones interpret the apparent of traditional reports and
religious texts according to their personal whims and they apply their
own twisted logic to justify their own views. This is due to their
narrow mindedness and lack of patience in prolongation of Ghaibat and
its severe conditions. O Allah, I seek your refuge from deviation after
having been guided. O Lord, for the sake of your proximate friends, save
us from going astray. Amen, O Lord of the worlds.

**Type Ten:** Sometimes, haste and lack of patience in this matter leads
one to make a resolution that ‘if he does not reappear till such and
such time I will deny him’. Such an attitude places that person in the
rows of the doubters who shall be damned as they have either doubted the
sayings of Holy Imams (as).

Or they have doubted the veracity of the narrators of traditional
reports even though the Holy Imams (as) have ordered us to trust them.
In the blessed epistle of the Holy Imam (as) that has come through Qasim
bin Alaa and quoted in some books like Wasail etc it is mentioned: There
is no excuse for any of followers to doubt in anything that our reliable
ones have narrated from us, while knowing that we entrust our secrets to
them and inform them of confidential matters…and there are numerous
sayings on the same lines.

**Type Eleven:** Sometimes due to the effect of this haste one begins to
doubt or deny other traditional reports of the Imams also. Since
according to his distorted notion the traditional reports regarding
reappearance and relief are doubtful, it is also possible that other
sayings of the Imams and Prophet (S) may be wrong. In this way, such a
man begins to deny even the traditions regarding rewards and punishment,
promise and threat etc [^21]…which finally leads him to become a
disbeliever, may Allah give us refuge.

**Type Twelve:** Perhaps the one who is hasty and impatient, due to lack
of faith or due to his doubting nature and narrow mindedness begins to
ridicule the true believers who patiently await for the reappearance of
our master, which would make him liable to be ridiculed by the Almighty
Allah. And this means that he has become a disbeliever and an opponent
of Allah, the High and the Mighty. Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَسْتَهْزِئُ بِهِمْ وَيَمُدُّهُمْ فِي طُغْيَانِهِمْ
يَعْمَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah shall pay them back their mockery, and He leaves them alone in
their inordinacy, blindly wandering on. (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:15)***

In the same way is one who becomes like the people of the community of
Prophet Nuh (as), regarding whom the Almighty Allah has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَصْنَعُ الْفُلْكَ وَكُلَّمَا مَرَّ عَلَيْهِ مَلَأٌ مِنْ قَوْمِهِ
سَخِرُوا مِنْهُ ۚ قَالَ إِنْ تَسْخَرُوا مِنَّا فَإِنَّا نَسْخَرُ
مِنْكُمْ كَمَا تَسْخَرُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوْفَ تَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ يَأْتِيهِ عَذَابٌ يُخْزِيهِ وَيَحِلُّ
عَلَيْهِ عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he began to make the ark; and whenever the chiefs from among his
people passed by him they laughed at him. He said: If you laugh at us,
surely we too laugh at you as you laugh (at us). So shall you know who
it is on whom will come a chastisement which will disgrace him, and on
whom will lasting chastisement come down. (Qur’an, Surah Hud
11:38-39)***

**Type Thirteen:** Sometimes, haste leads one to become angry at Allah,
the High and the Mighty and makes one dissatisfied with divine will, and
this quality is source of destruction and damnation. It is from this
aspect that it is mentioned in the supplication narrated through Amri
(r.a.) from the Imam of the Time (aj): O Allah, and You are the learned
without being taught, about the time when the circumstances of Your Wali
will be reformed and when he will reappear and the veil of occultation
shall be opened. Then give me patience so that I don’t make haste in
what You have delayed or that I be inclined to the delay of that which
You want to hasten.

And that I do not ask of the exposition of what You have concealed. And
search for that which You have concealed. Or that I should be
dissatisfied with what You have decreed. And I should not say why and
how the hidden Imam is not reappearing while the world is fraught with
injustice and oppression. I have entrusted all my affairs to You.[^22]

**Type Fourteen:** Sometimes haste and impatience in some people impels
them to forsake Dua for an early reappearance of the Imam of the Time
(aj) and as a result of that they are deprived of the effects and
benefits of supplicating for an early reappearance of the Imam of the
Time (aj).

This happens when a person prays to Allah for a period of time and begs
for the advent of the Holy Imam (as), but after sometime due to his
impatience he begins to think that the supplications he is making are of
no use; so he gives up supplicating. Although he is ignorant of the fact
that Duas are only accepted after all conditions are fulfilled and it
satisfies the criteria laid down by the Almighty. It is same as one who
prays the ritual prayer without fulfilling the necessary conditions. For
instead of earning rewards and benefits, such a man will become eligible
for divine punishment. So it is obligatory for the suppliant to follow
the proper decorum in order to attain his aim.

If it is said: It is mentioned in traditions that the Holy Prophet (S)
and the Holy Imams (as) prayed for an early reappearance of the Imam of
the Time (aj) and without any doubt their supplications must have
complied with all requirements and followed the decorum perfectly; in
spite of that the reappearance of the Imam has not occurred yet; does is
not make one doubt in the acceptance of their supplications? I will say:
This question will be replied from two aspects:

**Firstly:** It is mentioned in traditions that the matter of
reappearance is a Badi-ee matter and there is possibility that it can be
advanced or postponed, even though its occurrence is inevitable as
Allah, the High and the Mighty has promised it and He does not go back
on His word. Thus it is possible that as a result of the supplications
of Imams and Prophet (S) the reappearance will indeed occur earlier than
its time, but even that time has not arrived yet. And if they had not
prayed for it, it would have taken place at a much later date.

**Secondly**: It is that traditional reports, in addition to forsaking
Dua, there are obstacles also in an early reappearance of Imam (as).
Thus when believers arrange for Dua, these obstacles are removed and the
time of reappearance is advanced. It is also necessary to find out what
other obstructions are. We have mentioned some of these in the Chapter
of Letter ‘Ghain’ in Part Four of this book. And if Dua is abandoned,
there will be further delay.

From what we have explained above it becomes clear that there is no
contradiction between the command for praying for an early reappearance
and prohibition for making haste and being impatient. The haste that is
censured is of the types we have mentioned. As for praying for an early
reappearance, but at the same time being submissive to divine decree, is
something that the Almighty Allah and the Holy Imams (as) have commanded
and emphasized. On the basis of this the supplicant becomes eligible for
one of the two rewards:

1. Either our master will reappear in his time or by obtaining other
benefits and effects of Dua his age will be prolonged; hence our prayer
will be a kind of Sile Rahm to him. As mentioned in a Dua of Imam Zainul
Abideen (as): “O One Who does not change the mediums of His
wisdom.”[^23]

2. Or he will gain other benefits of Dua and be included among the
supplicants of reappearance and awaiters of it. On the basis of this to
pray for an early reappearance is in any case a praiseworthy deed and it
is in not contradictory to the prohibition of making haste in this
matter.

**Conclusion:** Haste which has been censured is one which is the
opposite of patience and submission, and all the types of hastes that we
have explained lie in this category. Without any doubt supplicating and
begging Allah, the Mighty and Sublime that He may hasten an early
reappearance of the Imam of the Time (aj) is something other than this.
Rather, such a supplication is an expression of certainty and faith that
the reappearance of the Holy Imam (as) is beyond the power of all,
except the Almighty Allah.

It is compliance of His command to supplicate, therefore we beg the
Almighty for this. In other words we say: Haste in a person is an
expression of choice and leaving off submission and asking for something
before its time. And this will cause regret as mentioned in the
statement of Amirul Momineen (as) previously.

However, request for an early reappearance from Allah, the High and the
Mighty is admission of servitude to Him and acceptance of His power,
might and will; it is belief in ones own helplessness and incapacity and
knowing that there is no other option. Thus the reality behind Dua is
that a person should become attentive to the Almighty Allah with all his
being and he must comply with His orders, and confess to ones own
incapacity and helplessness.

Thus it is mentioned in traditions that Dua is the essence of worship.
May the Almighty Allah give us and all the believers Taufeeq that we
arrange for Dua for an early reappearance of the Imam of the Time (aj)
with this same acceptance and submission. Allah is the acceptor of Dua
and is the Most Merciful.

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 368-369

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 368-369

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 370

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 370

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 370

[^6]: Al-Wafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 103; Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 273

[^7]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 103

[^8]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 104

[^9]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 111

[^10]: Al-Ghaibah, Pg. 104

[^11]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 2, Pg. 359, Tr. No. 1

[^12]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 671, Tr. No. 18

[^13]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 2, Pg. 360, Tr. No. 6

[^14]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 360, Tr. No. 3

[^15]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 323, Chapter 31, Tr. No. 8

[^16]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 324, Chapter 31, Tr. No. 9

[^17]: Kifayatul Athar, Pg. 309

[^18]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 102

[^19]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 398

[^20]: Tohaf al-Uqool, Pg. 244

[^21]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 18, Pg. 108, Tr. No. 40

[^22]: Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 512

[^23]: Sahifa Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 13


