23: Giving Sadaqah On Behalf Of Imam (aj)
=========================================

Giving Sadaqah on behalf of Imam (aj) proves ones love and friendship
for him. The correctness of this statement is based on whatever has been
recorded concerning the giving of Sadaqah or praying on behalf of
believers. As Imam (aj) is the Master of the believers, he is the most
deserving. Apart from this, we have many traditions that recommend
performing Hajj, Tawaf, Ziarat etc. on behalf of Imam (aj). Further
research, however, throws up the evidence that if we sift through the
huge collection of hadith we shall find that every kind of worship act
on behalf of Imam (aj) is highly rewarding.

As mentioned by Allamah Ali Ibne Tawoos in his book Kashful Muhajja, in
which he has reminded his son about the acts that we should perform
during the Ghaibat of Imam (as). He finally says, “You must care for his
leadership, loyalty and attachment in a way that Allah, Prophet (S) and
the forefathers of Imam Mahdi (aj) expect from you. You must give
preference of the needs of Imam (as) over your own needs when you are
reciting the Namaz-e-Hajat (Prayer of having your need fulfilled).
Before giving Sadaqah on behalf of your family members, give Sadaqah on
behalf of Imam az-Zaman (aj) and pray for him. In addition to this, give
him preference in every good deed. All these things will invite Imam’s
(as) attention and favors.”[^1]

In addition to this, this deed is a type of kindness to the Holy Imam
(as) and we shall study the merits of kindness towards the Imam (as) in
the coming pages, Insha Allah. That which illustrates that giving
Sadaqah for the Imam is an act of kindness to him, is the traditional
report of Ali bin Abi Hamza that is quoted in Bihar, Wasail and other
books in which he says: I asked Abu Ibrahim [Imam Musa Kazim (as)]:
Shall I perform Hajj, pray and pay Sadaqah on behalf of my dead and
alive relatives and friends? He replied: Yes, on their behalf give
Sadaqah and pray and as a result of your kindness to them and for
joining relationships you will become eligible for other rewards.[^2]

I say: Even though the above tradition mentions only relatives and
friends, the fact is that acts of kindness with regard to all those who
are having some connection with us is a meritorious deed. And in this
instance relatives and friends are mentioned only by way of examples.
The question is about the legality of performing worship acts on behalf
of the dead and alive believers.

Hence the Imam replied with further clarification and said ‘yes’ and
then to stress on its recommended nature said: ‘on their behalf pay
Sadaqah and pray’. At that moment the Imam wanted to encourage further
and said: ‘you will become eligible for other rewards’ and since he
wanted to highlight the eligibility for reward he said, ‘as a result of
your kindness to them and for joining relationships’.

Thus this statement confirms the legality of this action and shows that
it is lawful as well as recommended. Therefore, the respected reader is
requested to think deeply on this point. If kindness of one believer
makes one eligible for divine rewards, what would be the position of one
who gives Sadaqah on behalf of the Imam of the Time (aj)? Yes, he will
be rewarded for that and be counted as the best of the Sadaqah-givers
since he has performed this worship act on behalf of one who is the best
in the whole world.

And without any doubt the more perfect is the connection between him and
the Holy Imam (as), the more will be the reward of giving Sadaqah on his
behalf. We pray to the Almighty Allah to bestow on us and all the
believers love and devotion towards the Holy Imam (as) and opportunity
to serve him; and Allah is the Hearer of Dua. That giving Sadaqah on
behalf of the Imam is better than giving it on behalf of others can be
proved from logic as well as a tradition from Tafseer Imam Hasan Askari
(as) which we shall present ahead, Insha Allah.

Note and Guidance
-----------------

We should know that from the above mentioned traditional report of Abu
Hamza it becomes clear that it is allowed to perform worship acts on
behalf of believers, whether dead or alive, although the tradition has
only spoken of Hajj, Sadaqah and prayer. The narrator only mentioned
these three items as examples. This can be proved by the following:

**Firstly:** It is that when the Imam replied, he only mentioned Sadaqah
and prayer and did not make any mention of Hajj, while on the basis of
other traditional reports, Hajj on behalf of others is allowed and none
of our scholars have doubted this matter. This shows that the Imam
considered the three items as examples only.

**Secondly:** To bring the cause of His Eminence (aj) and think that it
is lawful, rather Mustahab that he says: “And there will be other
rewards for you due to your good turn to him.” It proves that to
represent the believer men and women in ones divine obedience and
worship acts is a good turn and a favor to them, therefore the person
who does this gets other rewards in addition to the rewards of those
worship acts due to the good turn and favor done to them.

As for the obligatory worship acts: It is proved with evidence that a
person must perform these himself and obligatory worship acts are not
allowed by proxy, except for Hajj and that also in a particular case,
which will be explained later.

Also, the above mentioned traditional report even though narrated by Abu
Hamza, is weak because he was a Waqifi1.[^3] However, we have already
explained that weak reports can be accepted in matters of recommended
deeds. Proving this matter are some traditional reports that are quoted
in Kafi,[^4] Wafi and other books, which say: If a person hears a
traditional report about reward of a good deed and performs that act
with intention of gaining that reward, will get the same reward even if
that tradition is not authentic.

Here, two points become clear: First: All worship acts are acts of
goodness Secondly: To perform them by proxy on behalf of the dead and
alive, is a recommended act except in cases which are out of this scope.
And there is no obstruction except the possibility that it is an
innovation but such a thought is rejected, because he does an act in
hope of reward with reference to traditional report mentioned that: “One
who hears about the reward of the deed…”

And joining with this aim to another it can be proved as it is
mentioned: From the above mentioned tradition it is proved that it is
allowed, rather recommended to pray recommended prayers on behalf of the
living, therefore this order is applicable to all kinds of good actions
and worship acts because there does not exist a command contrary to
this, as all those who consider it permissible for prayer, also consider
it permissible for other worship acts. Thus if anyone considers it
lawful only in prayer and denies it in other worship acts; the third
statement appears that Ijma composed of by itself.

Shaykh Ansari has mentioned this reason in one of his writings, but it
is worth attention because the proof of Ijma that is narrated is worth
contemplation as mentioned in its own place. Although, for the purpose
of supporting this point it is appropriate.

And also for proving this point we can reply on this argumentation
because among the best recommended worship acts are prayer, fasting,
Tawaf, Marabata, Ziarat and Qurbani, and it is permissible rather
recommended to perform these on behalf of others as the traditional
reports prove clearly. Further, this rule also applies to other worship
acts.

And in this context also it is possible that a doubt may arise about it,
because this inductive reasoning is conjectural and in this way it is
not a proof for us. But we can join the motives mentioned in traditional
reports about proxy of Hajj and Tawaf etc. as these causes are linked
with one who performs them under proxy, and therefore the reward of the
doer is two-fold. The same is the conclusion for doing recommended acts
by proxy of believers as an absolute act of good turn with relation to
him; and the goodness and value of a good turn to believer is not
concealed from anyone having a perfect understanding.

In the same way, as regards the correctness of proxy in prayer on behalf
of others is proved by the traditional report of Muhammad bin Marwan in
Kafi that he said: His Eminence, Imam Sadiq (as) said: What stops a
person from among you to perform good deeds on behalf of your parents,
whether dead or alive? Perform the ritual prayers on their behalf, pay
Sadaqah, do the Hajj and keep fasts. What you do for them will be
recompensed to them and you will also get its equal reward. Thus Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime, in view of that good deed increases it many
times for you.[^5]

The cause of this reasoning is that the statement of the Imam: ‘Perform
the ritual prayers on their behalf’, apparently shows the importance of
kindness to parents during their lifetime and after their passing away
and this is what our scholars have concluded, may Allah have mercy on
them. This is what they have claimed that this order applies to the
matter in discussion. However Allamah Majlisi, the second, in his book,
Miratul Uqool[^6] has explained it to be kindness to parents after their
passing away (pay attention). And it is possible to prove the point
under discussion with the help of the following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَعَاوَنُوا عَلَى الْبِرِّ وَالتَّقْوَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And help one another in goodness and piety.*** ***(Qur’an, Surah
Maidah 5:2)***

Because helping one other, sometimes takes the shape of two persons
doing something jointly and sometimes one person does it on behalf of
another who gets the benefit. Doing something on behalf of a believer is
of the same type as is clear to those who tread the straight path. The
conclusion derived from this is that it is recommended to perform
recommended worship acts on behalf of dead and alive believer men and
women.

Of those who are inclined to this view is Shaykh Ansari (r.a.) who in
his treatise on Qadha of Mayyit, after quoting the report of Ali bin Abi
Hamza says: Apparently to perform prayer on behalf of another, praying
by proxy and not that one performs the prayer and gifts its reward to
that person.

Thus this report proves that praying by proxy for a living person is
allowed and this also applies to all acts of goodness as the statement
is not talking exclusively about prayer, rather in the case of
obligatory fasts it becomes necessary as result of vow of a living
person and this is mentioned in the report of Abdullah bin Jabla in
Faqih, quoting from Ishaq bin Ammar. Rather, the generality of proxy in
all obligatory acts except on those regarding whom there is consensus
that they are not lawful, can be derived from traditional reports that
talk of legality of repaying the debts of Allah. Then can be derived the
law of legality of proxy in recommended acts because no one can
distinguish between the two whether it be voluntary or proxy. So think
on this point.

Also having the same view is the author of Jawahir who in his book,
Kitabul Wikala in the explanation of lawfulness of proxy in Tawaf Prayer
says: As for instances other than these two recommended deeds and
optional fasts: In the book of Masalik it is considered lawful to do it
by proxy and it is that a group of our scholars have definitely
considered it unlawful to perform worship acts by proxy, which are also
included in it, although some of the instances are restricted.

I [author of Jawahir] say: From religious sources we can derive the
legality of gifting of reward of all recommended deeds to the living and
dead, rather perhaps it can be derived that a recommended act can be
performed in a number of ways in proxy of a person that he should get
the reward for it, as we indicated in most worship acts, although in
acts when we don’t have the proof of legality of proxy its recommended
address is not cancelled from the responsible person, rather the
recommended nature of that act remains for that person, even though from
the aspect of performing it be another person with the intention of
proxy which makes the reward related to him. So think upon this.

This shows the absolute value of legality of proxy in deeds as this is
taken as the base in Masalik. Even though it may be related to special
circumstances, there is doubt in the statement of the author of Masalik,
because in worship acts there is nothing but performing those acts with
the intention of gaining proximity and the legislator has related its
reward to that person. And this does not contradict performing of that
act in proxy.

Thus it is taken as a general rule of proxy, whose requirement is its
legality to consider the act of another as ones own through permission
and proxy of another. And this meaning is applicable to worship etc. so
think on this point as it would be beneficial. And it is the result of
that same origin that we mentioned before. Along with this we should
know that it is allowed when the person is alive and after his death
especially in case of monetary worship acts; so think on this. Allah
knows best.” End of quotation from the book of *Jawahir*.

I say: The main aim of the author is clear from his words: “Originality
of justification of proxy in all acts, except when it is proved that it
is not allowed.” May Allah have mercy on the author. We can refer to it
whenever we have a doubt that a particular act allows proxy or not. But
the evidence of this origin deserves consideration and that which is
well known cannot prove it, and the details of this will be given at an
appropriate place.

Among those who apparently consider proxy lawful in recommended prayers
is Muhaqqiq Hilli in the book of Sharai as the prohibition of proxy of
living persons is only in case of obligatory prayers as he says: “And
proxy is valid in all circumstances when one is under control, that
Allah wants to make that person directly responsible like, Ghusl or
Wudhu with the power even though proxy is allowed in washing parts of
the body in times of need and like the Obligatory Prayer, till one is
alive…”

Sometimes suspicion arises that there is contradiction between the
tradition of Ali bin Abi Hamza and Abdullah bin Jundab. Abdullah bin
Jundab says: I wrote this question to His Eminence, Abul Hasan [Imam
Musa Kazim (as)]: There is a person who would like to keep a third of
all his good deeds and prayers for himself and dedicate the rest to his
parents; or can he dedicate all his recommended deeds for them? What is
the command if one of them is alive and the other, dead? Imam (as) wrote
in reply: As for the dead, it is allowed and as for the alive, nothing
is allowed, except good deeds and favor.[^7]

I say: There is no contradiction between these two traditional reports
because the query in the letter is concerned with dedication of rewards
and not performing the acts by proxy. Thus between this report and
traditional reports that prove the legality of gifting of deeds and
their rewards – that we mentioned in their place – there is
contradiction. And supposing we accept that it implies proxy, it
supports the reconciliation of this report and the one quoted
previously. It is that which Sayyid Ibne Tawoos (r.a.) has mentioned
that Prayer should be considered as obligatory prayer but before that he
says: It does not imply recommended prayer, because apparently it is
considered lawful to pray the recommended prayer of Ziarat and Hajj etc
on behalf of the living.

[^1]: Kashful Muhajja, Pg. 151-152, Part 150

[^2]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 367, Tr. No. 9

[^3]: Waqifi are those who stopped at the Imamate of Imam Musa Kazim
(as).

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 87

[^5]: Usool Kafi; Muhammad bin Yaqoob Kulaini; Vol. 2, Pg. 159, Chapter
of Parents, tr. No. 7

[^6]: Miraat al-Uqool, Vol. 8, Pg. 388

[^7]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 5, Pg. 368, Tr. No. 16


