25-26: Performing Hajj On Behalf Of Imam (aj) Or Sending Someone as a Proxy For Imam (aj)
=========================================================================================

This is customary among the Shias from the past centuries. Many
traditions have clearly stated the recommended nature of these good
deeds. Also the traditions that speak of doing good to a believer, also
apply in such a case and support this custom. Scholars have recorded
numerous traditions that praise the performance of good deeds on behalf
of believers. A couple of such traditions are presented below:

1. Ibne Miskan narrates from Imam Sadiq (as) in the book of Al-Kafi that
he asked Imam (as): How much reward is earned by a person who performs a
Hajj on behalf of someone else? Imam (as) replied, “The reward of ten
Hajjs shall be given to the one who performs it on behalf of someone
else.”[^1]

2. Shaykh Sadooq (a.r.) writes in his book, Man La Yahzarul Faqih that
Imam Sadiq (as) was asked regarding the person who performs Hajj on
behalf of others. Would be earn any rewards? Imam (as) said, “One who
performs Hajj on behalf of someone else gets rewarded for 10 Hajjs.
(Also), the person (who has performed the Hajj on behalf of someone) his
mother, father, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, paternal
uncles and aunts and maternal uncles and aunts, all of them receive
salvation. The Mercy of Allah is spread wide and He is kind.”[^2]

3. In Kafi it is narrated through the author’s own chain of narrators
from Abu Baseer that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: One who performs a
Hajj on behalf of his relatives as a good turn to them, his Hajj will be
perfect, and one on whose behalf he performed the Hajj will get an equal
reward, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime is One Who expands that reward.
[^3]

I say: The above two traditional reports and some other traditions that
we have not quoted for the sake of brevity, prove that it is recommended
to perform Hajj on behalf of other believers whether dead or alive,
especially if they are relatives.

Thus proxy Hajj on behalf of our master (aj) is more meritorious and its
reward is higher, because the status of His Eminence (aj) is much higher
than other believers and his reward is more than all others. Also in
support of this is the tradition that says that kindness to the
relatives of the Holy Prophet (S) is more important than kindness to
anyone else.

For example: There is a tradition that mentions the excellence of taking
other believers as partners in recommended Hajj. That which proves it is
are traditions that talk of doing it absolutely on behalf of all
believers. After that it is derived from traditional reports that doing
Hajj of proxy on behalf of the Imam of the believers is more deserving.

1. There is a traditional report of Muhammad bin Hasan that is mentioned
in Kafi and other books that His Eminence, Imam Musa Kazim (as) said:
Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: If you make a thousand persons as partners
in your Hajj, each will get reward of a complete Hajj without there
being any decrease in your reward.[^4]

2. In the same book, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Muhammad bin Ismail that he said: I asked His Eminence,
Imam Musa Kazim (as): How many persons can I include as partners in my
Hajj? He replied: As many as you like.[^5]

3. It is narrated from Muawiyah bin Ammar that he asked Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as): Can I make my parents partners in my Hajj? He replied: Yes,
indeed Allah, the Mighty and Sublime will make it a Hajj for you and a
Hajj for each of them and as it would be a good turn on your part
towards them, you will also get reward for that. I asked: Can I perform
Tawaf for a man and a woman who reside in Kufa? He replied: Yes, when
you begin the Tawaf, recite as follows: O Allah, accept it from so and
so, as I am doing Tawaf on his/her behalf.[^6]

I say: The last hadith clearly shows that taking a partner in a an act
means to take him or her right from the beginning and does not mean that
after doing the thing for yourself, you make him or her share in the
reward. Pay attention to this point.

For example: There is a tradition which proves sending of proxy for
Imams (as) to Mecca so that he may perform the Hajj on behalf of the
Holy Imam (as) and to compensate that person for this. As it is allowed
for the living Imam it must also be permitted for others as there is
nothing which shows that it can only be for the living Imam.[^7]

In *Wasail*, it is narrated from Tahdhib of Shaykh Tusi through the
author’s own chain of narrators from Muhammad bin Isa Yaqteeni that he
said: Imam Ali Reza (as) sent through Yunus bin Abdur Rahman some
clothes, servants and money to perform Hajj and ordered me to perform
the Hajj on behalf of the His Eminence. Thus a hundred dinars were
divided into three parts between us…

For example: In Kafi it is narrated through the author’s own chain of
narrators from Musa bin Qasim Bajli that he said: I asked Imam Muhammad
Baqir (as): My master, I hope to keep the fasts of Ramadan in Medina. He
replied: Insha Allah, you will get those fasts. I said: And I hope to
set out on the 10th of Shawwal for Hajj and may the Almighty Allah bless
me with Ziarat of the Messenger of Allah (S) and his family and to see
you once more. Sometimes it so happens that I perform Hajj on behalf of
your father, and sometimes on behalf of my father, and sometimes on
behalf of one of my brothers and at times on my own behalf. Thus how
should I perform it? He replied: Perform the Hajj Tamatto. I asked: I am
living in Mecca since the last ten years. He said: Perform the Hajj
Tamatto.[^8]

I say: This tradition can be testified from two aspects:

One: The words of the narrator, that: ‘Sometimes it so happens that I
perform Hajj on behalf of your father’ and Imam’s silent approval to its
shows that there is no difference between Hajj on behalf of the late
Imam and on behalf of the living.

Two: It is that the silent approval of Imam to the following words of
the narrator: ‘and sometimes on behalf of one of my brothers’ shows its
goodness. If Hajj is performed on behalf of the Imam of the Time (as) it
would be more perfect and more preferable.

For example: Qutub Rawandi has mentioned in Al Kharaij wal Jarah: Abu
Muhammad Da-alji who was a good co-religionist of us, was a traditionist
and he had two sons. One was named Abul Hasan and he was a righteous man
who had lawful profession and washed the dead bodies. The other son
indulged in unlawful professions. A sum of money was sent to Abu
Muhammad to perform Hajj on behalf of the Imam of the Time (aj) and this
custom was prevalent among the Shias.

So, Abu Muhammad gave some of this money to his errant son, and then he
went to perform the Hajj. When he returned from there he reported the
following incident: I was standing in Arafat when I saw an elegant young
man of wheaten complexion standing besides me and busy in supplication
and worship.

When people departed from Arafat, he turned to me and said: O Shaykh,
are you not ashamed? I said: My master, for what? He replied: From the
money someone sent to do Hajj on my behalf you gave an amount to a
person who is a transgressor and drinks wine? Very soon you will lose
this eye. And he pointed to one of my eyes. From that day I am living in
dread. Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Muhammad Noman, Shaykh Mufeed also
heard of this. The narrator says: Not even forty days passed after his
return that from the same eye which was pointed to, pus came out and it
became blind.[^9]

I say: It is appropriate to study this tradition from the beginning to
the end as it contains numerous benefits and important matters.

1. His Eminence (aj) informs about a matter of the unseen.

2. To accord importance and respect to funds associated with Imam (as)
and that they must not be given to anyone except the righteous because
in that incident Abu Muhammad gave only a part of that money to his
erring son and not the whole of it as some people think.

3. Swiftness of punishment for a believer who does something that is
inappropriate. And this is a blessing on him from the Almighty Allah.

4. Implied approval of the Imam for Hajj on behalf of himself or paying
someone to do Hajj on the Imam’s behalf as is clear from the above.

Among the matters that more or less show that it is recommended to do
Hajj by proxy of Imam are traditions that emphasize performing Tawaf on
behalf of the Holy Imam (as).

[^1]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 312, Chapter of Hajj by Proxy, Tr. No. 2

[^2]: Man Laa Yahzarul Faqih, Vol. 2, Pg. 222-223, Tr. No. 9

[^3]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 316

[^4]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 317

[^5]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 317

[^6]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 317

[^7]: Wasailush Shia, Vol. 8, Pg. 147, Chapter 34; At-Tahdhib, Vol. 8,
Pg. 40, Chapter 3, Tr. No. 40

[^8]: Furu Kafi, Vol. 4, Pg. 314

[^9]: Al-Kharaij wal Jarah, Qutub Rawandi, Pg. 73


