32: Organizing Help Of Imam az-Zaman (aj)
=========================================

During the period of Ghaibat it is the duty to help Imam az-Zaman (aj).

Because one who has helped Imam (as) has actually helped Allah. As Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ
عَزِيزٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Indeed Allah helps those who help Allah. Certainly Allah is all
powerful, the mighty. (Qur’an, Surah Hajj 22:40)***

Elsewhere, Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تَنْصُرُوا اللَّهَ يَنْصُرْكُمْ وَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If you help Allah, He shall help you and make you firm-footed.***
***(Qur’an, Surah Muhammad 47:7)***

Three points are worth noting here:

**Issue 1:** There is no doubt that Allah is All-Powerful and He does
not have any kind of need because He is the absolute cause and Himself
is Self- sufficient and all the creatures are in need of Him, whereas He
Himself says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْتُمُ الْفُقَرَاءُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ وَاللَّهُ هُوَ الْغَنِيُّ
الْحَمِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You all are poor in relation to Allah while Allah is the self-
sufficient, the praised one. (Qur’an, Surah Fatir 35:15)***

Commentators of Qur’an state that ‘helping Allah’ means helping the Holy
Prophet and the Imams (as).

**Issue 2:** Also, helping them means taking every step that is in
compliance of their commands. Therefore the method of helping them
depends upon the time and place. There is a difference between the help
at the time of reappearance and help during his Ghaibat. If he is
present among us we help him by fighting Jihad in his company and when
he is in Ghaibat we sometimes help him by praying for his reappearance,
sometimes by mention of his excellence and qualities and miracles and
signs; sometimes by helping his friends and devotees, sometimes by
compiling and distributing books. There are many ways of rendering help
as is clear to every enlightened person.

**Issue 3:** In the discussion of the value of helping Allah, it is
mentioned that it is a part of helping the Awliya of Allah, helping His
religion and His prophets on the basis of what traditions have
mentioned.

I say: As evident from traditions it is possible that Allah helps His
creatures in ease and in difficulty, in trials and prosperity by keeping
them safe from those things that distance him from His Mercy. However,
in this life their success over their enemies depends upon the time and
circumstances. Thus sometimes our friends are in power and sometimes
they are overpowered. The phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And makes them firm-footed… (Qur’an, Surah Muhammad 47:7)***

May imply that in the end Allah would make them march on Siraatul
Mustaqeem (the Right Path).

**Note:** It is that in our leader and master His Eminence, the Imam of
the Time (aj) all such virtues and excellences have come together, that
each of them alone would justify our efforts in his help and assistance.
Helping the Imam is helping an oppressed one, helping him is helping a
person in alien land, it is helping a scholar, assisting the near
kindred of the Prophet, support of one for whose sake we have received a
bounty, it is helping one who is medium for blessings to reach us, it is
helping one whom Allah helps, and helping a noble, a munificent one…And
if you think upon it you will be able to derive many more points if you
are devoted to the Imam and are inclined to him.

May the Almighty Allah make us a shield of every type of hardship for
the Holy Imam (as). Reason is the best support of this. If we bring
together all the textual proofs for this we would have to write a
separate book on this. When I (the author) reached this point I decided
to perform an Istikhara to ask the Almighty whether I should present
some traditional report of the Holy Imams (as) to illustrate this point
further, but when I opened the Holy Qur’an the following verse appeared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ۗ وَلَيَنْصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَنْ يَنْصُرُهُ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ
عَزِيزٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِنْ مَكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ ۗ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely Allah will help him who helps His cause; most surely Allah
is Strong, Mighty. Those who, should We establish them in the land, will
keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil;
and Allah’s is the end of affairs. (Qur’an, Surah Hajj 22:40-41)***


