33: Having A Firm Intention Of Helping Imam (aj) In Event Of His Reappearance
=============================================================================

Apart from the fact that this intention is a necessary requirement of
Eimaan (belief) and one of the signs of conviction (Yaqeen), many
traditions have been recorded for intention, reward and performing of
good deeds and the reward of every person depends upon his intention.
This is also proved from the words of the Master of Pious, Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (as), who says: “Halt! Be patient in calamities and difficulties.
Do not move your hands and swords under the madness that you utter. And
for those affairs where Allah has not made hasty you do not act hastily
in them.

One who dies sleeping on his bed with correct understanding of the
rights of Allah, His Messenger (S) and his family, dies a martyr and his
reward is upon Allah. And he has received the reward of that which he
intended to do. This intention of his will be considered as pulling out
the sword. And there is no doubt that there is a fixed time for
everything and a particular period.”[^1]

That which proves this matter is that which Thiqatul Islam Muhammad bin
Yaqoob Kulaini has mentioned in Rauda Kafi through the author’s own
chain of narrators from Abdul Hamid Wasiti that he said: I asked His
Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam Baqir (as): May God bless you, we have stopped
going to the markets in anticipation of the reappearance. The Imam said:
O Abdul Hamid do you think that Allah will not open the way for one who
controls his self for His sake? No, by Allah, Allah will indeed open a
way for him. May Allah have mercy on one who controls his self for our
sake. May Allah have mercy on one who keeps our matter alive.

I said: May God bless you, these Murjiya people say: There is no
deviation in what we believe in. Till the time what you say comes about
and thus we and you will be same. He said: O Abdul Hamid, they have said
the truth. One who repents, the Almighty Allah accepts his repentance.
And one who resorts to hypocrisy, the Almighty Allah humiliates him. And
one who exposes our matter, the Almighty Allah makes his blood go waste,
[and to such men], the Almighty Allah will sacrifice on Islam, just as a
butcher cuts off the neck of the sheep.

The narrator says: I asked: Then we and the people will be same on that
day? He replied: No, you shall be the pillars of earth and its rulers.
And there is nothing else in our religion. I asked: What if I die before
the time of Imam Qaim? He replied: If one of you is of the view that if
he is present in the time of Qaim of Aale Muhammad, he will render help
to him, he is like the one who fights in his company; and martyrdom in
the company of His Eminence is equal to two martyrdoms.

Also supporting this point is that which Sayyid Nimatullah Jazairi has
mentioned in Sharh Sahifa Sajjadiya in a tradition quoting directly from
the Masoom that Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: I don’t consider myself
outside the circle of the martyrs of Kerbala and don’t consider my
reward to be less than theirs, because there is help [of religion and
assistance of my great grandfather Imam Husain (as)] in my intention; if
I had been present on that day; in the same way are our Shias are
martyrs even if they die in their beds.

And His Eminence (aj) has prohibited the Shias from insisting
importunately for the reappearance of the Imam of the Time (aj) and
exposing his conditions and he said: Due to your intention you will get
the reward of one who is martyred in the service of His Eminence, even
though you may die in your bedroom.[^2]

Among the evidences of this point and emphasis upon it, is a tradition
that Thiqatul Islam Kulaini has mentioned in Usool Kafi through a
correct chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:
Indeed, a poor believer says: O my Lord, give me sustenance so that I
may perform such and such charitable acts through it. Thus if Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime finds that he is true in his intention, he writes for
him a reward for performing those deeds, the Almighty Allah is kind and
His mercy is unlimited.[^3]

The author of this book, Muhammad Taqi Musawi Isfahani – may Allah the
mighty, include him among the companions of the Imam of the Time (aj),
says: Without any doubt if a sincere believer requests the Almighty
Allah to advance the reappearance of his master so that he may fight
Jihad with the infidels in the Imam’s company, and he decides to do thus
with a sincere intention, Allah, the High and the Mighty gives him the
reward of fighting Jihad in the company of His Eminence and bestows His
blessings to him.

This is clear to people of perception as proved from the above
tradition. And as for the excellence of Jihad in the company of His
Eminence, in *Usool Kafi* it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far
Imam Baqir (as) that he said: One who lives till the time of our Qaim
and arises along with His Eminence, and kills our enemy, a reward equal
to that of twenty martyrs will be given to him and one who is killed in
the company of our Qaim, a reward equal to that of twenty-five martyrs
will be given to him.[^4]

I say: If the determination and intention of the believer is such, he
will achieve this great reward in the period of the occultation of his
Imam (as) on the basis of traditional reports that we have mentioned
before.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Subhi, Sermon 232, Pg. 282

[^2]: Raudatul Kafi, Pg. 80, Tr. No. 37

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 85

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 222


