34: Renewal Of Oath At The Hands Of Imam (aj) Every Day - Every Friday
======================================================================

One of the duties during Ghaibat is to renew the oath of fealty with
Imam (aj). This can be accomplished after every obligatory prayer, or on
Friday. There are two aspects of this discussion. (1) In the meaning of
Bayyat (oath) (2) The command of Bayat.

Discussion One: Meaning of Bayat
--------------------------------

Bayat means that a person gives oath of fealty to a person in all
sincerity and with loyalty. That is, he shall help with his property and
life one to whom he has given the oath. And in helping him he shall not
be deficient in anything related to this oath.[^1]

It this like the oath mentioned in Dua Ahad. There is special emphasis
to recite it in the morning for forty days regularly. Also, the
Messenger of Allah (S) has commanded his nation to pay allegiance to the
Purified Imams (as). And there is no difference between the presence or
absence (Ghaibat) of Imam (as). This type of allegiance is a necessary
requirement of Eimaan. Rather, you cannot imagine faith without
allegiance. Thus the seller here, is the believer and the purchaser is
the Almighty Allah. As mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اشْتَرَىٰ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ بِأَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden.”*** ***(Qur’an,
Surah Taubah 9:111)***

Allah, the High and the Mighty has encouraged the prophets and
messengers for renewal and emphasis of this Bayyat that one who does
Bayyat to them, it is as if he has given Bayyat to the Almighty Allah.
And one who neglects it, it is as if he has ignored Allah; it is from
this aspect that the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ
اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ
نَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ
فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to
Allah; the hand of Allah*** ***is above their hands. Therefore whoever
breaks (his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and
whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will grant him a
mighty reward. (Qur’an, Surah Fath 48:10)***

This verse also proves that Bayyat and Mubaiya both imply the same ledge
and vow with Allah and His Messenger, and those who fulfill this pledge
are promised a great reward.

This Bayyat can be established in two steps:

Firstly: Making a firm intention to be steadfast in obeying the command
of Imam (as) and helping him; and sacrificing ones life and property for
him as mentioned in the holy verse: “Surely Allah has bought of the
believers their persons and their property for this…” Now it is
obligatory on the seller to hand over without any delay, what he has
sold to the buyer whenever the latter demands it and that which is in
his mind will be revealed.

Secondly: What he has in his mind and that which he has decided should
be at the same time expressed verbally and in this manner the Bayyat
will take place, just as the formula of sale and purchase and other
transactions is not complete except through two steps: One: An intention
and determination to undertake that transaction as per the agreement of
the buyer and seller; and Two: To recite all this verbally; and only
after that is the transaction complete.

Sometimes Bayyat is also performed by putting of ones hand over that of
the other as was customary among the Arabs and this is according to the
saying of the Almighty: One who does Bayyat to you, has in fact done
Bayyat to Allah. Allah’s hand is upon his hand. Moreover, companions of
the Messenger of Allah (S) used to place their hands in the hand to give
Bayyat.

In Ihtijaj it is mentioned in the incident in which our master, Amirul
Momineen (as) was forced to do the Bayyat to the first usurper of
caliphate as follows: Then they pulled the hand of His Eminence [Amirul
Momineen (as)], while he was holding it back, but they pulled by force
and putting it over the hand of Abu Bakr said: Do the Bayyat. Do the
Bayyat. And the call echoed in the Masjid: Abul Hasan has done the
Bayyat, done the Bayyat…

Also in Ihtijaj it is mentioned in the traditional report of our master
His Eminence, Baqir (as) that he said: When Usamah entered Medina and
saw that people had joined on the Bayyat of Abu Bakr, he went to Ali
Ibne Abi Talib (as) and said to His Eminence: What is this? Ali (as)
replied: It is as you see! Usamah asked: Have you done Bayyat to him? He
replied: Yes, O Usamah. Usamah said: Did you do it of your own accord or
you were forced? Imam Ali (as) said: Yes, it was by force…[^2]

Thus from what we have mentioned it becomes clear that allegiance is
effected by putting ones hands in another’s. In the same way is shaking
of the hands as the experts of lexicology are aware. And it is called a
‘good allegiance’ and it is mentioned in tradition that ‘Allah has
blessed the shaking of hands’. And the poet has said:

**Time came to purchase my life continually. I said I will not sell it
for the world and what is in it. But it began to purchase it little by
little with nothing. May those hands perish that sell at a loss.**

In *Kafi*, it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq
(as) that he said: One who separates from the congregation of Muslims
and breaks the allegiance of the Imam will come to Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime on Judgment Day with amputed hand.[^3]

Although it must be clarified that placing of the hand is itself not the
essence of Bayyat, it only a sign that Bayyat is complete and apparently
whereas the main thing is the pledge and vow so that one is really
included among the believers who have purchased Paradise even thought
they might not have placed their hands over the hand of the Messenger of
Allah (S) or the Imam (as), as was the case of most believers who lived
during the time of the Holy Imam (as). We will bring the evidence for
this. The aim of all this was that this is a deviation. I beg to the
Almighty Allah by the Barakah of Ahle Bayt (as) to keep us safe from
deviation.

Discussion Two: Regarding the command of Bayyat
-----------------------------------------------

Here it must be mentioned that: Bayyat in the first sense is obligatory
on all; men and women, slave and freemen, rather Faith is not complete
without it, as the essence of faith is belief by heart and acceptance by
tongue of the obedience of the Prophet and the Holy Imams (as) and to
submit to them and to help them with ones life and property. The
Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves.*** ***(Qur’an, Surah Ahzab*** ***33:6)***

The Almighty Allah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among
them, and then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to what you
have decided and submit with entire submission. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa
4:65)***

As submission to the commands of the Prophet and Imams (as) with that
which is related to ones life, relatives and property, is a sign of
perfection of faith.

Among the proofs of essentiality of Bayyat with all Imams (as) is a
tradition that is mentioned in the Sermon of Ghadeer Day quoted from the
Messenger of Allah (S) in which he (S) commanded the people to give
Bayyat to Amirul Momineen (as), Hasan (as) and Husain (as) and the Imams
from the progeny of Husain (as) and the Prophet reminded them of the
pledge to obey them, even though they were all not contemporary to the
people of that time. It was only done so because it is obligatory to
believe in the heart and make a firm pledge to follow and help them, to
sacrifice ones life and property on their path and to obey their
commands.[^4]

And all that we have mentioned is included in the following verse of
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كَانَ آبَاؤُكُمْ وَأَبْنَاؤُكُمْ وَإِخْوَانُكُمْ
وَأَزْوَاجُكُمْ وَعَشِيرَتُكُمْ وَأَمْوَالٌ اقْتَرَفْتُمُوهَا
وَتِجَارَةٌ تَخْشَوْنَ كَسَادَهَا وَمَسَاكِنُ تَرْضَوْنَهَا أَحَبَّ
إِلَيْكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَجِهَادٍ فِي سَبِيلِهِ
فَتَرَبَّصُوا حَتَّىٰ يَأْتِيَ اللَّهُ بِأَمْرِهِ ۗ وَاللَّهُ لَا
يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Apostle and striving in His way, then
wait till Allah brings about His command: and Allah does not guide the
transgressing people. (Qur’an, Surah Taubah 9:24)***

Since this matter is very much clear there is no need to bring further
evidences to prove it. Supporting this point we also find a tradition
narrated through Sunni channels and recorded in Muslim, Bukhari and
Rabiul Abrar[^5] of Zamakhshari that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
One who dies without having on his neck, allegiance to the Imam of the
Muslims, dies the death of paganhood.

Renewal of Bayyat Everyday
--------------------------

Now that you have understood what we have explained above, we say: It is
recommended that the mentioned Bayyat should be renewed everyday
according to the evidence that Sayyid Ali Ibne Tawoos has mentioned in
Misbahuz Zaer and other scholars have also mentioned in their books that
among the recommended things is to recite the following Dua everyday
after the Morning Prayer:

O Allah, convey to the master, the Master of the Time, from all the
believer men and women in the easts of the earth and its west. In its
lands and its seas, in its plains and its mountains, their living and
their dead, and from my parents and my children and from me, from the
blessings and greetings, which are the weight of Allah’s throne and ink
on his words, and whatever His knowledge enumerates and his book
encompasses.

O Allah renew for him my covenant, pledge and allegiance on my neck on
this day and whatever days (of my life) I live. O Allah, like You
honored me with this honor, and gave me this excellence and bestowed
this bounty to me especially, bless my master and chief, the leader of
the time and make me from his helpers and followers and protectors and
make me of those who seek martyrdom in his presence, with full
eagerness, without any hesitation put me in that row of the army of
those whom You have described in Your Book and said: “in ranks as if
they were a firm and compact wall” on Your obedience and the obedience
of Your Messenger and his progeny, peace be on them. O Allah, indeed,
this allegiance is upon my neck till Judgment Day.[^6]

In Mazar Bihar, the Late Allamah Majlisi, after the mention of this
pledge says: I have seen in some ancient books that after reciting this
Dua one has to place his right hand over his left like it is done in
Bayyat.[^7] And it is also recommended that this pledge should be
renewed after every obligatory prayer according to a tradition that is
quoted from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) in *Biharul Anwar* citing
*Al*-*Ikhtiyar* of Sayyid Ibne Baqi,[^8] which we had mentioned at the
beginning of Part Six.

### Dua Ahad

One of the supplications for renewing the allegiance to Imam az-Zaman
(aj) is Dua Ahad. Regarding this Dua, Imam Sadiq (as) says: One who
recites this Dua for forty days, will be included among the helpers of
Hazrat Qaim (aj). If he dies before reappearance, the Almighty Allah
will make him alive so that he can fight Jihad alongside him (Imam Mahdi
a.f.t.s.). For every word of this Dua a thousand Hasanat (good deeds)
are written in the scroll of his deeds and one thousand sins shall be
erased. The Dua is as follows:

In some traditional reports it is mentioned that after this hit your
hand on your thigh and say thrice:

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. O Allah ! Lord of the
great light, Lord of the elevated throne, Lord of the tumultuous seas
and the revealer of the Taurat, Injil and Zaboor, Lord of the shadows
and the warmths, and the revealer of the Great Qur’an. Lord of the
proximate angels and Prophets and Messengers.

O Allah I beseech thee, for the sake of Your noble visage. And for the
sake of Your enlightening visage, and Your ever existing kingdom. O Ever
living! O Controller! I beseech thee in Your name. Which lits the
heavens and the Earths; and in Your name, by which the ancient and the
latter ones become upright. O Ever living Who was before every living
being. O Ever living Who shall (exist) after every living being. O Ever
living who existed when there was no life. O giver of life to dead. O
one who causes death to the living one.

O Ever living. There is no god except You. O Allah send our master the
leader, the Guide, the guided, the upriser with Your command. Blessings
of Allah be on him and his pure forefathers. From all the believing men
and believing women. In the easts of the earth and its wests, in its
plains and its mountains, its lands and its seas, from me and my
parents. Blessings which are the weight of Allah’s throne and ink on his
words, and whatever His knowledge enumerates and his book encompasses.

O Allah renew for him my covenant, pledge and allegiance on my neck in
the morning of this day of mine and whatever days (of my life) I live. I
shall never turn away from it nor let it ever vanish. O Allah appoint me
among his helpers, aides, and his protectors. Those who hasten to
fulfill his commands and obey his orders. Those who are his supporters
and compete with each other to (fulfill) his intention and seek
martyrdom in his presence.

O Allah! If death occurs between me and him (before the reappearance)
(death which You have made obligatory and decreed for Your servants,
then raise me from my grave, wrapped in my shroud, my sword unsheathed,
my spear bared, answering the call of the caller in cities as well as
deserts.

O Allah! Show me the rightly guided face of (Imam a.s.), the
praiseworthy moon and enlighten my vision by looking at him. Hasten his
reappearance, make his arrival smooth, vasten his path, make me tread on
his way and implement his authority and strengthen his back. O Allah,
inhabit Your cities through him, and give life to your servants due to
him for surely You have said and Your word is truth, “Corruption will
become rampant in land and on sea because of the evil which men’s hand
have earned.”

Then O Allah! Manifest for us Your slave and the son of Your Prophet’s
daughter, whose name is the same as that of Your Messenger. So that
nothing from falsehood is victorious except that he tears them
(falsehood) to pieces, establishes the truth and the truth confirms him.
And O Allah! Appoint him as a refuge for Your oppressed servant and a
helper for the one who does not find any helper for himself except You
and the renewer of all the laws of Your book which have been tempered
with and rebuilder of the signs of Your religion and of Your Prophet
(peace of Allah be on him and his Progeny).

And O Allah! Make him among those whom You have protected from the evils
of the adversaries. O Allah! And provide joy to your Prophet Muhammad
(Peace be on him and his Progeny). By his vision and (the vision of) the
one who follows him on his call. O Allah! Remove this sorrow (of
occultation) from this nation with his presence and hasten for us his
reappearance. They (the disbelievers) consider it to be distant while we
consider it to be near. For the sake of Your mercy, O the most Merciful
of all mercifuls.

…hit your hand on your thigh and say thrice:

Hasten! Hasten! O my Master, O master of the era.

Renewal of oath every Friday
----------------------------

It is Mustahab (recommended) to renew the oath of allegiance with Imam
az-Zaman (aj) every Friday. According to traditions every Friday the
angels gather at Baitul Ma’moor and renew the oath of allegiance to
Imams (as). There is another Dua by Imam Sajjad (as) expressing the same
thoughts.

This Dua is recorded in the book Abwaabul Jannaat Fee Aadaabil Jamaat.
Moreover, Friday is the day when the Almighty Allah has obtained the
oath of allegiance from mankind for the Wilayat of Imams (as). One
should try to perform as many virtuous acts as possible on this day,
because the reward for deeds is double on Fridays and there is no doubt
that this oath of allegiance is an exceedingly important and perfect act
of worship.

Command for Bayyat in the second meaning
----------------------------------------

In the second meaning is the command for Bayyat. That is the command of
putting ones hand into the hand of one whom we pay allegiance. This is
also of two types: (1) In the presence of Imam (as). (2) In the Ghaibat
of Imam (as). In the first case, once Imam issues a command there is
nothing that can make the opposite valid because it is obligatory to
obey the Imam (as). If Imam (as) demands allegiance from us we have to
give him the oath of allegiance or in case he commands we have to give
it to his special representative (Naib-e-Khaas). An example of this type
of allegiance is the allegiance commanded by the Holy Prophet (S) for
Ali (as) at Ghadeer-e-Khum.

However, in the presence of an Infallible Imam if a fallible person
demands allegiance, is it allowed to obey him? The Reply: If that person
is specially appointed by Imam (as) and Imam (as) has commanded us to
give him the oath of allegiance, giving him oath of allegiance is
necessary. Because in these circumstances his Bayyat shall be construed
as the Bayyat of Imam (as) and it is obligatory.

However, if Imam (as) has not appointed him specially and has not issued
any command, it is not permitted to give him oath of allegiance. Whether
that person calls people to himself or claims to be the special
representative of Imam (as), because the actual laws could be
ascertained from the one who frames the laws.

And such a thing was not there at time of the Imams that some other
person may be given Bayyat in lieu of the Imam. Because such a thing
would imply that you give Bayyat to one who has temporal power. And in
that case you would be bound to lay at his disposal your life and
property and everything. Now such a thing has not been allowed for
anyone, except the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (as). Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves.*** ***(Qur’an, Surah Ahzab 33:6)***

And the Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Only Allah is your Guardian and His Apostle and those who believe,
those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow. (Qur’an,
Surah Maidah 5:55)***

***And He also said:***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:59)***

Traditions that support this point are so numerous that cannot even be
counted; and some of them are mentioned in Usool Kafi and Basairud
Darajat. It is also mentioned in the supplication of Imam Zainul Abideen
(as) for Friday and two Eids as follows: “O Lord, verily this position
belongs to Your vicegerents and Your chosen ones and is the place of
Your trusted ones in the exalted rank with which You distinguished them.
People robbed them of it…”[^9]

On the basis of what we have explained, it becomes clear that it is not
allowed to do Bayyat of anyone other than the Prophet and the Imams
(as). Because if one does such Bayyat, it implies that he has considered
them to share in the holy status of the Prophet and the Imams that the
Almighty Allah has given to them and as a result of his opposition to
the chosen ones of Allah, he goes out of the pale of faith. Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter. (Qur’an, Surah Ahzab 33:36)***

Interpreting the words of Almighty that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيْكَ وَإِلَى الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ لَئِنْ
أَشْرَكْتَ لَيَحْبَطَنَّ عَمَلُكَ وَلَتَكُونَنَّ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those before you:
Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come to
naught and you would certainly be of the losers. (Qur’an, Surah Zumar
39:65)***

A traditional report says: If you associate (with Ali’s Wilayat anyone
else) your work would certainly come to naught…This tradition is
mentioned in *Burhan* and other books.[^10]

From what we have discussed it becomes clear that it is not allowed to
do Bayyat for any of the people, whether they be scholars or laymen,
whether it be to them directly or on behalf of the Imam in the period of
occultation of His Eminence. As we mentioned previously it would denote
absolute authority and rulership, because Bayyat to them is Bayyat to
Allah as mentioned in the Ghadeer Sermon. Thus one who does Bayyat to
them, does Bayyat to the Almighty Allah and one who turns away from them
turns away from the Almighty Allah.

That which further proves that Bayyat to anyone other than the Prophet
and Imams (as) is invalid, is a tradition mentioned in Biharul Anwar
quoting from Mufaddal bin Umar from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said:
O Mufaddal, every kind of Bayyat before the reappearance of His Eminence
Qaim (aj) is a Bayyat of infidelity, hypocrisy and deception; the
Almighty Allah has cursed one who gives such Bayyat and one who takes
it…[^11]As you can clearly see, this tradition is emphatic that all
Bayyats are invalid, whether it be to a scholar or to a layman. And also
that Bayyat means absolute submission to the authority, which is not
allowed for anyone except His Eminence. For example:

1. There is no mention of any Bayyat between the companions of any of
the Imams. And neither is there any record of Bayyat between the
believers who were present in their time.

2. There is no traditional report which can show that any of the Imams
allowed any of their companions to take Bayyat on their behalf.

3. There is no mention of Bayyat in sayings and writings and books of
scholars and there is no mention of its manner and decorum etc. Rather
we have no instance from the time of the Holy Imams (as) that Bayyat to
so and so implied Bayyat to the Imam.

4. The Messenger of Allah (S) noticed at time Bayyat was being given to
Amirul Momineen (as) that it was not possible for all of them to place
their hands on his, so he told them to recite the Bayyat only verbally.
He did not tell them to give Bayyat to another righteous companion of
his on behalf of Amirul Momineen (as) while such a thing was possible at
that time. But as we see in Ihtijaj there is no mention of it in that
account.[^12] Those who like may refer to this book.

5. When the Messenger of Allah (S) conquered Mecca and was taking Bayyat
from the people, some ladies also wanted to do Bayyat to him. The Holy
Prophet (S) said: ‘I don’t shake hands with ladies,’ and then he called
for a bowl of water, placed his and in it, then removed his hand and
told the ladies: Now put your hands in this water as this very act is
Bayyat.

This tradition and other traditions on this topic have come in Kafi,
Burhan and other books. A notable point is that the Holy Prophet (S) did
not select one of the ladies to take Bayyat on his behalf.

6. That which is mentioned by Allamah Majlisi in Biharul Anwar after
quoting the Dua or renewal of Bayyat: I have seen in some ancient books
that after reciting this Dua one has to place his right hand over his
left like it is done in Bayyat.[^13] Note it is allowed to place one’s
right hand over one’s left hand but it is not allowed to place it on
anyone else’s hand.

7. In Ihtijaj it is mentioned from our master His Eminence, Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) that after narrating about the event of Ghadeer, the
Prophet’s sermon on that occasion and how Bayyat was given to Amirul
Momineen (as), he said: The giving of Bayyat continued for three days.
Whenever a group of people gave Bayyat the Messenger of Allah (S) used
to remark: Praise be Allah, Who gave excellence to us over all the
worlds. Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says: And the giving of hand in Bayyat
became a Sunnat and a custom, lest someone who does have the right to
this position should misuse it.[^14]

I say: From all that we have mentioned etc. it is certain that the mode
of Bayyat that took shape between the Prophet and his companions, that
is putting one’s hand in that of others, was something that was
restricted to the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imam (as). No one other
than them was permitted to take it in that way except if he had been
appointed as a representative of the Prophet or an Imam. Representation
in this matter is same as representation in other issues.

If it is said: On the basis of the norm that general guardianship is
proved for the jurisprudent it can be said that the jurisprudent is a
representative of Imam (as); thus it is permissible for him to take
Bayyat from the people in the capacity of being the representative of
Imam (as), and it is permissible for the people to give Bayyat to them
and put their hands on his hand.

I will say: **Firstly:** General guardianship (Wilayat) is not proved
for the Faqih (jurisprudent).

**Secondly:** Even if we suppose that general guardianship is proved for
the Faqih, according to traditions it is one of those issues that are
only valid for the Prophet and the Imams (as), like the matter of Jihad,
which is only possible during the time of the Imam and by his
permission; and it is like the Eid Prayer which is Wajib only in the
presence of the Imam and it is not allowed for any representative to
take the place of the Imam.

Its equal is that the manners of Imams (as) in eating, drinking and
dressing, when they are in power will be on the manners of Amirul
Momineen (as) – as mentioned in some traditional reports – to quote whom
here would prolong the discussion - and its equal is lawfulness of
sacrifice while the wife and children are in need and distress etc. and
like eating from the right hand is despicable etc. that the Holy Prophet
(S) and the Imams have mentioned.

**Thirdly:** Supposing that it is not proved that Bayyat is restricted
for the Prophet and Imams, in that case the Faqih can also take the
Bayyat but it cannot be proved that it is allowed for non-infallibles to
take Bayyat on behalf of the infallibles.

If it is said: Its legality can be proved by verses that exhort the
people to follow the Prophet (S). For example the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me. (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran
3:31)***

And the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِمَنْ كَانَ
يَرْجُو اللَّهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly you have in the Apostle of Allah an excellent exemplar for
him who hopes in Allah and the latter day. (Qur’an, Surah Ahzab
33:21)***

The point of evidence is that: Since it is recommended to emulate the
Prophet in every action it is also recommended to take Bayyat like he
did.

I will say: **Firstly:** There is nothing which proves that it is
obligatory or recommended to emulate the Prophet in each and everything
he did. The only thing that is established is that the believers have to
follow all the commands and prohibitions of His Eminence. And if we go
into more details, we would be going beyond the scope of this book.

**Secondly:** Supposing we take the verses to mean that emulating the
Prophet is preferable in all instances; I will say: In that case it will
have to be exactly in the same fashion as was in the time of the Prophet
and the Imams. That is it was conducted under their orders and it was by
putting ones hand in the hand of His Eminence, or as per his instruction
as was the case of Bayyat to Muslim Ibne Aqeel under the express
instructions of Imam Husain (as).

But in this time of ours there is nothing which can prove the legality
of giving Bayyat by placing a hand in another, thus it would be a heresy
and an unlawful act. It will be a source of curse and regret and this is
from the aspect of the statement of our master, Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as)
when he said to Mufaddal: “O Mufaddal, every kind of Bayyat before the
reappearance of His Eminence Qaim (aj) is a Bayyat of infidelity,
hypocrisy and deception…”

What we have mentioned is the corrupted belief of a scholar from Zanjan,
who in his book, Saighul Uqood, has advocated that it is recommended to
give Bayyat to the Faqihs, and he has composed a formula to be recited
for this Bayyat. In the beginning of the discussion the author has
himself admitted that the formula of Bayyat is not found in any of the
books of the ancient or modern scholars.

I say: O intelligent reader, can you imagine that all the scholars from
the time of the Holy Imam (as) to this day have ignored such an
important matter, even though it is also mentioned in the Holy Qur’an,
even though it is something that is supposed to be obligatory or
recommended? And that none of them have ever mentioned it in their
speeches and in any gatherings? Can it be anything other than that it is
not lawful to place ones hand in another’s for Bayyat except in case of
the Holy Imam (as) or his special representative? So much so that they
have not even mentioned it as a possibility as they have done in case of
many other jurisprudential issues. We pray to the Almighty Allah to
protect us from mistakes and deviation in speech and actions.

Since the book written by this person is in Persian we see that he has
tried to prove that Bayyat is recommended in this age through the
following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُبَايِعُونَكَ إِنَّمَا يُبَايِعُونَ اللَّهَ يَدُ
اللَّهِ فَوْقَ أَيْدِيهِمْ ۚ فَمَنْ نَكَثَ فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ
نَفْسِهِ ۖ وَمَنْ أَوْفَىٰ بِمَا عَاهَدَ عَلَيْهُ اللَّهَ
فَسَيُؤْتِيهِ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to
Allah; the hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore whoever breaks
(his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and
whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will grant him a
mighty reward. (Qur’an, Surah Fath 48:10)***

He says: It is known that it is a rewarding act and having the same
position as pledge to Allah, and like placing ones hand in the hand of
Allah, even though it may not be obligatory, it in any case be
recommended emphatically.[^15] Then he says: “The main thing in an act
or avoidance of the Holy Prophet (S) that serves as a preface to his
prophethood is inclination.”[^16] At that point he says: “And since his
inclination is known thus by the proof of originality of sharing it can
also be referred to the Imam (as) and also his deputies.”

This is his conclusion and you know such a statement is not appropriate
to be announced by scholars. Since the holy ayat proves that it is
obligatory to fulfill the vow made to the Holy Prophet (S) and it is
that whoever fulfills it would be given a great reward; and one who
breaks that oath will cause harm to himself. To prove allegiance to
anyone other than the Prophet is more difficult with this verse.

But the root that is mentioned in its first doubt is that: It is an
intellectual matter to be inclined to something that is related to the
Holy Prophet (S). In addition to the fact that it is recommended and
that its reward is in addition to the actual act that the Holy Prophet
(S) has ordered. It is like looking for water for purification [as it is
logical] so, to prove recommendation from the root is something we
cannot accept from minor scholars, what to say of the senior ones?

The second doubt is that: Obedience of the Holy Prophet (S) in message
and commands cannot be applied to giving of Bayyat, it is like other
actions in which it is obligatory to take the decree of the Holy Prophet
(S). Thus when it is proved that a particular act is obligatory or
unlawful, its performance or avoidance is obligatory. And in cases when
the dos and don’ts are not proved to be from His Eminence, like eating,
drinking and other common place actions, if the doer performs them
considering them beyond the ambit of Shariah, it would be lawful for
him, but if he considers them to be prescribed by Shariah it would
amount to heresy and is unlawful. Now in the case of Bayyat we see that
the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (as) have not sanctioned it;
rather they have prohibited it in some traditions; hence such a thing is
heresy and unlawful.

If it is said: It is possible to hope for reward and give allegiance so
that it not be considered unlawful or an innovation.

I will say: Firstly, it is that: after having proved that it is a
specialty of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imam and we explained that
prohibition for it has come from the Imams (as), there is no scope of it
in hope of reward or with possibility of it being likeable. Secondly:
Even if we ignore all these points and suppose that it is not a
specialty of the Holy Prophet (S) and Imams and there is no prohibition
of it.

I say: The topic of traditional report, “One who hears about a reward
for doing a thing and he does to in hope of that reward,” is related to
the excellence of an act or deed regarding which there is tradition of
the Imam and a person performs those acts in that hope and if in fact
the tradition has not come from the Imams and a believer performs them
the Almighty Allah through His grace will give that same reward to him.

Now I will ask that person: Which weak tradition proves allegiance to
anyone other than the Imam (as)? And which scholar has issued Fatwa that
it is recommended or which scholar has said that it can be performed in
hope of getting rewards? While this person himself knows that he has
confessed at the beginning of his statement that no former or latter
scholars have mentioned such a thing. We pray to the Almighty Allah to
keep us safe from this deviation through His mercy and blessings.

As for the matter of originality of sharing the responsibility, we say
with the help of the Almighty Allah: The requirement of proving it,
rather it is a necessity of that the Ummah of Prophet Muhammad (S)
understands that the Shariat and law of His Eminence will endure till
Judgment Day and all the people since the time of the Besat of the Holy
Prophet (S) till Judgment Day are duty bound to follow this Shariat and
act on the commands and prohibitions and it is a requirement of the
finality of prophethood of His Eminence on the basis of some clear
verses of Qur’an. However, there is no doubt that whenever there are
some apparent contradictions in subjects and conditions, the Almighty
Allah has clarified them. We can say that the acts and laws of the Holy
Prophet (S) were of four types:

**First:** Those which were obligatory only for His Eminence like: Witr
Prayer or some special laws of marriage that scholars have mentioned in
their books.

**Second:** Those which are common for the present and the absent; those
who were present during the time of His Eminence and those who came
after him: Like: The obligation of obligatory prayer and the recommended
nature of recommended prayers; and the obligations of Zakat and Hajj
etc. and other obligatory and recommended acts; and the prohibition of
prohibited things and many laws that resemble them.

**Third:** It is restricted to those that were present during the time
of the Infallibles (as) like: Obligatory nature of Jihad, and obligatory
nature of Prayers of Eidul Fitr and Eidul Qurban. Obligatory nature of
Friday Prayer for all the people etc…

**Fourth:** Laws about which it was understood that they were only for
the people of those times since there was nothing to show that they
could be also for those who were not present at that time. For example:
Some laws that were revealed for particular situations and there is no
proof they were also intended for those who are not present at that
time.

In the same way is the matter of allegiance that the Holy Prophet (S)
ordered only those who were present there to take it. If we suppose that
there was no proof of their restriction, or if we ignore the mentioned
proofs, in such matters it would be necessary to refer to the original
command and we cannot assume sharing of the responsibility. Because a
doubtful obligation, logically and lawfully shows its negativity.

On the basis of this “originality of sharing the responsibility” as this
person has mentioned, there is no proof for it as is clear to
intelligent persons. Rather one can say: If we accept sharing of
responsibility in similar circumstances we would not be able to prove
the recommended nature of doing the Bayyat in time of Ghaibat.

Because all that which calls for attention must be such that at the time
of address that person was not present there so that it may prove that
he also shares the responsibility. And this is not possible in our
discussion, since it supposes that allegiance was obligatory on those
who were present with the Holy Prophet (S) and the Imam. And this is not
applicable to those who were not present at that time – like the people
of this period. So they cannot be held responsible for it.

Also, from another aspect it is not proved that the people of this
period should be responsible for that Bayyat, since: The Holy Prophet
(S) ordered the people who were present that they should do Bayyat at
that particular time. So it is not proved for the people who were
present there, even after that time. Then how can we say about those who
were not present only at that time? Since in its place we have proved
that the order should be about a new matter and it is not necessary that
it should be enforced after the expiry of its time, except if there is
another proof for it, and here we have assumed that there is no such
proof.

There is another objection against this person and that is: The
requirement of proof which he himself has brought, if it is over, it is
that of the obligation of allegiance which will be applicable with the
hand on all the people in all times since the Holy Prophet (S) made it
an obligation on those who were present there. Thus requirement of
sharing the responsibility according to his view is a source of
accepting that the obligation is also upon those who were not present
there at the time of His Eminence (S). While it is that this person does
not fit this description as is clear from his statement.

Another aspect of Bayyat
------------------------

From what we have mentioned, it becomes clear that it is not proper to
give allegiance at the hands of the Shaykh as some Sufis believe and
practice. These people think that it is obligatory to give Bayyat to the
Shaykh and that it is a part of faith and that the faith is not complete
without it and they have named it ‘Bayyat-e-Walwiya’ and
‘Bayyat-e-Khaassatul Eimaan’ and they think that it is only for the Sufi
Shaykhs. They says: Giving of Bayyat is not allowed except to those whom
the Shaykh permits.

This matter is a principle of their faith from their four principles.
First we quote one of their scholars in Bayanus Saada regarding this and
then by the help of Allah present a critique: In the exegesis of Surah
Yunus, he says with regard to illegality of doing Bayyat to one the
Shaykh has not permitted: “Just as some of those who pretend to be Sufis
have dared to do without the permission of the infallible Shaykhs”,[^17]
and then he goes on to say: In the same way are the true Sufis, in
commands and prohibitions and in explaining the laws and seeking
forgiveness for the people and taking Bayyat from them are not included
except whom they have permitted and there is an organized system of
Bayyat in their orders.[^18]

In Tafseer of Surah Taubah after the mention of obligation of Bayyat in
all times and necessity of touching the hand of the Shaykh he says: “And
this was a strong Sunnah from the time of Adam till the period of the
Holy Prophet (S), in such a way that the people of religion did not find
anyone worthy of it except the chief of religion or one whom he has
appointed to take the Bayyat. And there were for him conditions and
manners and none except him fulfilled it. And in every religion after
becoming strong and the passing away of its founder have gone into
concealment.[^19] End of quotation.

I say: What he has mentioned is claim without proof and it is proved by
logic and religious texts and if there had been a weak reason behind it
he would bring that also, since he is greedy that the requirement of
Bayyat will show the reply to be proof because his leadership depends on
that - as we have indicated - and in addition to this are following
points of dispute that were mentioned in the discussion about allegiance
to the Infallibles:

**First:** It is that if doing Bayyat by giving of the hand was
obligatory in Islam or faith, it would have been obligatory on the
Prophet, the Imam and their companions, rather on all the believers such
that whoever entered Islam or Shiaism would be ordered to pay the
allegiance. It was necessary for them to order it before commanding
prayer and other obligations and it does not have a fixed time and with
all our efforts we have not found such a thing in traditions, rather it
is clear that this claim is also against that and if not he would have
brought it into discussion as it proves his aim.

**Second:** It is that if we accept such a thing it would take all the
believers since the time of the Imams (as) till our time beyond the pale
of faith because they have never performed such a Bayyat.

**Third:** It is that a number of traditional reports say: Some of the
prominent companions of the Holy Imams (as) presented their faith and
duties for inspection and the Imams certified their faith and supported
their deeds and considered their faith perfect, and in this regard
neither in the statements of the questioners nor in the advices of the
Holy Imams (as) we find any mention of Bayyat and if Bayyat had any
effect in the establishment of faith or its perfection, the Imams would
have mentioned it, as is clear, and some of these traditional reports
are mentioned in *Usool Kafi*.

**Fourth:** It is that we have many traditional reports of the Holy
Imams (as) regarding the qualities, manners and morals of believers and
the discussion of signs of faith and its perfection etc, but in none of
these we find any clarification about Bayyat.

**Fifth:** It is he says: …according to the nobility of this Bayyat…in
critique I will say to him: Which evil is related to that the believers
should discuss among themselves if they have given Bayyat to their
chief? And which mischief is related to that Bayyat? And without any
doubt giving of the hand in the view of people is easier than sacrifice
of wealth?

And we openly see that religious persons have no problem in paying the
Imam’s share to the scholars during the Ghaibat of His Eminence, so who
will they have any objection to giving of hand, if they knew that in the
view of the Shariah it is an obligatory act? It is just like Musafiha
(handshake) that is common among them and the only difference lies in
ones intention and title.

**Sixth:** It is that expression of the caliphate of Amirul Momineen
(as) was much greater and its danger was more, as mentioned in verses,
traditions and history, in spite of that the Messenger of Allah (S)
ordered its expression because it is a part of faith. And if doing
Bayyat to other than His Eminence had also been a part of faith – as
this claimant thinks – the Holy Prophet (S) and his rightful caliph
would have mentioned it.

**Seventh:** How can this great obligatory deed, regarding which they
claim that no one can be a believer without it, has remained concealed
from all believers and common people of this religion, except for the
Sufi sect? It is nothing but a blatant allegation. We ask him: Was it a
deficiency (God forbid) of the Prophet of his Caliphs (as) that they
deprived all the people from the explanation of this order? Or was it a
deficiency of all believers that they concealed the orders of the
Almighty Allah from the unjust? In spite of all the efforts and
propagation of religious law! And by Allah, I ask Your refuge from evils
that deviate and misguide.

**Eighth:** If this matter was obligatory to complete the faith it was
necessary that it should have been mentioned in books of scholars and
should have been a subject of discussion among them. Thus how can such a
thing be claimed while not even one traditional report has mentioned it?
And if this claimant thinks that is mentioned in one of the books, he
should bring it to us.

**Ninth:** According to Sufis’ claim that it is a hidden secret and it
was arranged to keep it concealed. Then how can – with regard to this
view – they act in opposition to it and reveal this matter and announce
it in their books and talks.

If you say: In your own view – you are owners of secrets and secrets are
not concealed from those who are deserving of them. I will say: Was
there no one among the Holy Prophet (S), the Imams (as) and their
companions worthy of this secret that they could have been told? While
the fact is that there were many special people among them such that
each and every Imam had some confidants. Since we know that the Imams
did not mention such a thing, then how have the Sufis got it and how
only they are specialized with it?

**Tenth:** Ignoring all that we have mentioned so far, we say: As you
say that Bayyat is obligatory by putting the hand in the hand of the
Shaykh or one he has appointed as his deputy; what I want to know is
that whether this deputyship is special or common? If you say that it is
special I will say that it is an established fact in Shia Imamiyah that
special deputyship is no more in the period of Major Occultation. In
addition to this – this statement of his, like other statements is
without any evidence. If you say: It is general deputyship, why he has
appointed only a particular person for this? And if the appointment of a
special person was through the appointment and permission of the Shaykh
with regard to him, I will say: We will object to the Shaykh for
firstly: Why has he appointed a Shaykh?

Secondly: Who has given him the authority to appoint a person? Because
any statement other than that of the infallible Imam is not having any
worth in this matter, it does not reach to an Infallible and it would
imply they have given legislating power to another which is not
possible. That is why this permission is not restricted to the
Mujtahids; rather they have to prove that each of their verdicts is
compatible with the sayings of the Holy Imams (as).

Also such permission is quite different from the permission of Sufi
Shaykhs to take Bayyat. In the end his statement that: “In the same way
are the true Sufis, in commands and prohibitions and in explaining the
laws and seeking forgiveness for the people and taking Bayyat from them
are not included except whom they have permitted…” is against Qur’anic
verses and traditions received from the Holy Imams (as), because it is
the duty of all Muslims to enjoin good, forbid evil, and explain
religious laws. And only particular persons are not selected for this.

The same is the case of seeking forgiveness because it is a sort of Dua.
And to encourage and order Dua is upon all believer men and women and to
pray for brothers in faith in their absence is mentioned in traditions.
To seek forgiveness and pray for people of faith is the duty of all
believer men and women and this matter is clear to all that are
conversant with traditional reports and Qur’anic verses; such that if we
mention all of them this book will be unduly prolonged. And as for
taking of Bayyat, it is the specialty of the Holy Prophet (S), the Imams
and whom they have appointed in a special way and it is not allowed for
anyone else. This much would be sufficient for people of sincerity.

[^1]: Majma al-Bahrayn, Vol. 2, Pg. 345

[^2]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 1, Pg. 115

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 405

[^4]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 1, Pg. 74, Tradition of Ghadeer

[^5]: Muslim, Vol. 3, Pg. 1478; Bukhari, Vol. 2, Pg. 13; Rabiul Abraar,
Vol. 4, Pg. 221

[^6]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 102, Pg. 111

[^7]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 102, Pg. 110, Chapter 7

[^8]: Biharul Anwar; Vol. 86, Pg. 61, Chapter 38, Tr. no. 69

[^9]: Sahifa Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 48

[^10]: Tafseer Al-Burhan, Vol. 4, Pg. 83

[^11]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 53, Pg. 8

[^12]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 1, Pg. 66, Tradition of Ghadeer

[^13]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 102, Pg. 111, Chapter 7

[^14]: Al-Ihtijaaj, Vol. 1, Pg. 84, Sermon of Ghadeer

[^15]: Saigal Uqood, Pg. 146

[^16]: Saigal Uqood, Pg. 147

[^17]: Bayanul Saadah Fee Maqaamaatil Ibaadah, Vol. 2, Pg. 292,
University of Tehran, Published 1344

[^18]: Bayanul Saadah Fee Maqaamaatil Ibaadah, Vol. 2, Pg. 292

[^19]: Bayanul Saadah Fee Maqaamaatil Ibaadah, Vol. 2, Pg. 280


