37: Pleasing The Believers
==========================

Pleasing the believers during the time of Ghaibat makes the Imam (aj)
very happy. Pleasing the believers is possible through monetary
assistance and physical help. Sometimes their pleasure is obtained by
solving their problems or recommending their case to some authorities or
even by praying for them. At other times we could make them happy by
giving them respite for the repayment of a debt. Thus while performing
any of the above actions if the intention of the doer is that Imam (as)
will be pleased with it, he will get the reward for it. Rather, there is
more virtue in this than merely pleasing the believers.

A tradition of Imam Sadiq (as) in Al-Kafi says, “Those of you who please
a believer should not think that you have pleased only this believer. By
Allah! He has pleases us! Rather by Allah! He has pleased the Messenger
of Allah (S).”[^1] In the same book through the author’s own chain of
narrators it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: One
who pleases a believer, it is as if he has pleased the Messenger of
Allah (S) and one who pleased the Messenger of Allah (S) has pleased the
Almighty Allah and similar is the case of one who makes a believer
sad.[^2]

In the same book in a correct report, it is narrated from His Eminence
(aj) that he said: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime revealed to Prophet
Dawood (as): Indeed, a servant of Mine performs one good deed and I make
the Paradise lawful for him. Dawood (as) asked: O Lord, what good deed
is that? The Almighty Allah replied: He gives a joy to a believer
servant of Mine, even though it might have been with a single date.
Dawood (as) said: O Lord, it is appropriate that one who recognizes You
should not lose hope from You.[^3] There are numerous traditional
reports to this effect, and what we have mentioned is sufficient to
those with insight.

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 189

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 192

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 189


