38: Being A Well-Wisher Of Imam az-Zaman (aj)
=============================================

It is mentioned in Al-Kafi that Imam Baqir (as) narrates from the
Messenger of Allah (S), that he said, “Allah does not look at any of His
friends who has borne difficulties in doing good for us except that,
that person will be with us in an exalted friendship.”[^1] In another
place in the same book it is narrated that Imam Sadiq (as) said, “The
Messenger of Allah (S) delivered a discourse among the people in
Masjide-e-Khaif and said: O Allah! Please the slave who listens to our
words, gives them place in his heart and conveys them to those who have
not heard them.

He is mostly conversant with Fiqh (jurisprudence) but he is not a Faqih
(Jurisprudent) himself. Many a times a person with knowledge of
jurisprudence passes it to a more intelligent jurisprudent. A Muslim
should not do Khayanat (defalcation) in three things: (1) He should
perform deeds purely for Allah (2) He should be a well-wisher for the
Imam (as) and the religious leaders. (3) He should not distance himself
from their congregation, because their invitation is for all those who
like it. Muslims are brothers to each other and their blood is of equal
value and even the weakest of them strives in the fulfillment of oath
and vow.[^2]

In the same book it is related from a Quraishite man that he said:
Sufyan Thawri said to me, “Take me to Ja’far bin Muhammad (as).” He says
that I went with him to the Imam but when we reached there, he was
mounted on his beast. Sufyan said: “O Aba Abdillah please repeat for us
the sermon that the Messenger of Allah (S) delivered at Masjid Kheef.”
He replied: “Leave it for the time being. I am going out for some work
and I will narrate it after I return, as I am already mounted.”

He said: “I ask you for the sake of your relationship with the Messenger
of Allah, tell us about it.” So His Eminence dismounted and Sufyan said:
“Please call for pen and paper for me so that I may note it down from
you directly.”

So His Eminence called for ink and paper and said: “Write: Bismillaahir
Rah’maanir Rah’eem. Sermon of the Holy Prophet (S) in Masjid Kheef:
Allah likes one who listens to my words and places them in his heart and
conveys them to those who have not heard it. O people it is necessary
for those who are present to convey it to those who are absent. How
often it is that one who reports a point of law while he himself is not
capable to think and reflect on it.

And many a times it is so that he narrates points of knowledge and
jurisprudence to one who is wiser and more intelligent than him. There
are three things in which the heart of a Muslim is not dishonest: 1 –
Sincerity of deeds for Allah. 2 – Well-wishing for Imams and leaders of
the Muslims. 3 – Following their congregation, because their call is
widespread for all those who are in its pursuit. The believers are equal
and their blood is same. They are united against others. The smallest of
them makes effort to fulfill their pledge.” Sufyan wrote down this
tradition and then repeated it to His Eminence.

After that His Eminence, Sadiq (as) mounted and went away. I and Sufyan
also came away. On the way he said to me: “Just wait, let me look at the
tradition again and think upon it.” I said: “By Allah, by quoting this
tradition, Abu Abdillah has made something obligatory on you, from which
you can never be free.” ‘What duty?’ he asked. I said: “As mentioned in
this tradition there are three things in which a Muslim is not
dishonest:

The first is sincerity in deeds for Allah; we have understood it but the
second one about well-wishing for Imams and leaders of the Muslims; who
are these Imams that it is necessary for us to wish well for them? Is it
Muawiyah bin Abi Sufyan, Yazid bin Muawiyah and Marwan bin Hakam?

Those whose testimony is not valid for us and prayer behind whom is not
correct? And the third point: Following their congregation, what
congregation is it? Is it the Murjiah sect who say that even one who
does not pray and fast and does not perform ghusl or one who demolishes
the Kaaba and beds with his mother, he is equal in faith to Jibraeel and
Mikaeel? Or is it the sect of Qadariyya which says that what Allah wants
does not happen and that which Satan wishes happens?

Or is it about the Hururiya sect that abuses Ali Ibne Abi Talib and
calls him a disbeliever? Or the Hellish sect that says faith is only the
recognition of Allah and nothing besides that?” Sufyan said: “What a
strange thing you said. Now tell me what the Shias say?” I said: “They
say that Ali Ibne Abi Talib (as) is an Imam, loving whom sincerely is
obligatory and it is necessary to remain in the congregation of Ahle
Bayt.” Hearing this, he took the paper from me and tore it up and told
me not to inform anyone about it.”[^3]

**Reminder:** Matter on this topic has been mentioned in Part Five,
point numbers 40 and 59, which may be referred to once more.

Explanation and Discussion
--------------------------

It is that when the Holy Prophet (S) said, ‘There are three things in
which the Muslim never doubts: having sincerity in what you do for the
sake of Allah, being united with the nation’s leaders and being
associated with the Muslims’, it is possible that doubt implies betrayal
of trust as the same thing is mentioned in the following verse of
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِنَبِيٍّ أَنْ يَغُلَّ ۚ وَمَنْ يَغْلُلْ يَأْتِ بِمَا
غَلَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And it is not attributable to a prophet that he should act
unfaithfully; and he who acts unfaithfully shall bring that in respect
of which he has acted unfaithfully on the day of resurrection. (Qur’an,
Surah Aale Imran 3:161)***

And it is also possible that it may denote malice and enmity as
mentioned in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَعْنَا مَا فِي صُدُورِهِمْ مِنْ غِلٍّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will remove whatever of ill-feeling is in their breasts.
(Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:43)***

On the basis of this, of these two possibilities, it can be said that
the sentence of the tradition is predicative or it can be initiative.
Further it can be pronounced in a different way to imply that which is
mentioned in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غُلَّتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their hands shall be shackled. (Qur’an, Surah Maidah 5:64)***

It is the opposite of widening of the breast and in consonance of the
following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوْلِهِمْ قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ بَلْ طَبَعَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهَا
بِكُفْرِهِمْ فَلَا يُؤْمِنُونَ إِلَّا قَلِيلً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their saying: Our hearts are covered; nay! Allah set a seal upon them
owing to their unbelief. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:155)***

On the basis of all possibilities: It is possible that the word ‘Alaa’
in ‘Alaihinna’ is metaphorical. And perhaps it is in the meaning of ‘in’
like in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَخَلَ الْمَدِينَةَ عَلَىٰ حِينِ غَفْلَةٍ مِنْ أَهْلِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he went into the city at a time of unvigilance on the part of its
people. (Qur’an, Surah Qasas 28:15)***

And it is possible that it could be in the meaning of ‘with’ like in the
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتَى الْمَالَ عَلَىٰ حُبِّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…and give away wealth out of love for Him. (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah
2:177)***

Or it can be for showing the cause like in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِتُكَبِّرُوا اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ مَا هَدَاكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that you should exalt the greatness of Allah for His having
guided you. (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:185)***

The word of ‘Muslim’ here denotes all Muslims not particularly the
believers or it could also be that it is about the believers. The word
‘Nasiha’ is derived from ‘Nussh’ and it denotes sincerity. Sincerity can
be with regard to aiming for goodness to the one who is advised or it
can be in all words and acts through which he aims for goodness. “He
should not distance himself from their congregation…” is clearly implied
at the congregation of Imams (as); that is a believer is one who
believes in all of them and accepts them all.

Such that if one denies even one of them it is as if he has denied all
of them. “…because their invitation is for all those who like it.”
Apparently first the pronoun ‘their’ refers to the Imams (as) and the
second pronoun of ‘those who’ refers to Muslims and ‘invitation’ is in
the meaning of Dua and it could also mean a call to the people to
understand the proofs of faith and clear signs of religion, that is the
Holy Imams (as) as they are the callers to the Almighty Allah through
their personal excellence and through miracles etc. The conclusion of
this traditional report is having the following aspects:

### First Aspect

It is that these are three things in which the heart of no Muslim should
betray the trust. And this aspect is based on the supposition that the
sentence is creative and the word ‘alaa’ is in the meaning of ‘in’ and
‘advice’ is taken to mean being a well wisher to the advised one.

On the basis of this there are three mental conditions on which the
physical actions of a man are based, and they are the source of his
behavior. The tradition thus lays down the responsibility of a Muslim to
have this attitude to the Almighty Allah and His Awliya, then he must
observe sincerity in his actions with regard to Allah and must be a well
wisher of Awliya of Allah; lastly he should keep with the community.
These two duties are related to the Messenger of Allah (S) and his
rightful successors and this can be obtained only if the believer is
having a good intention to them and dedicate himself to their service.
This duty is obligatory on all, Muslims as well as the non-Muslims.

Also, here all the laws specially related to Muslims are mentioned from
the aspect of exalting them as the address is to them only due to his
attention to the Almighty Allah and in being attached to the standards
of religion and to degrade the infidels as he has deviated from the
truth. The Almighty Allah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَنَسِيَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They have forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them. (Qur’an, Surah
Taubah 9:67)***

And He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُضِلُّ اللَّهُ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah causes the unjust to go astray. (Qur’an, Surah Ibrahim
14:27)***

And also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَعْرِضْ عَنْ مَنْ تَوَلَّىٰ عَنْ ذِكْرِنَا وَلَمْ يُرِدْ إِلَّا
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Therefore turn aside from him who turns his back upon Our reminder
and does not desire anything but this world’s life. (Qur’an, Surah Najm
53:29)***

### Second Aspect

It is that in the points mentioned – sincerity to the Holy Imams (as)
indicates means of protecting the heart from dishonesty. And this aspect
is based on the fact that the predicate of ‘upon’ is in the meaning of
‘with’ or it may for causality. And it is possible that the ‘advice’ is
mental advice and it is related to all things related to him. Or it may
be physical or monetary and it is regarding everything that is good for
the advice.

### Third Aspect

It is that the sentence is informative and the tradition is regarding
the signs of believers. That is a Muslim is really as he should be
according to the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And whoever submits himself wholly to Allah and he is the doer of
good (to others), he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon
which one can lay hold. (Qur’an, Surah Luqman 31:22)***

Because the reality of faith lies in knowing the Almighty Allah and
sincerity to Him in all acts; and then knowing his Awliya Amr (the
Prophet and Imams) and service to them. And it includes wishing their
well being. These are the matters that should be there in the mind of
all Muslims and it is a good reason that ‘yaghillo’ is derived from
‘Ghalaw’ the Arabic word for deceit and also that it is the opposite of
widening and expansion as is clear.

### Fourth Aspect

It is that it could be a positive sentence and if it is read
as‘yughallo’ it would be a common verb and the ‘upon’ denotes ‘with’ as
it is for causality. And Muslim is taken in general sense to mean all
Muslims, believers and non-believers. And ‘Aimmatul muslimeen’ denotes
Amirul Momineen (as) and the Holy Imams (as) from the progeny of His
Eminence.

The conclusion is that every Muslim that has sincerity to the Almighty
Allah and has goodwill to the Imams of the Muslims, he serves their
congregation and he gathers in it, his heart will be opened and
enlightened and he will be safe from sealing of the heart and he would
be from one whose heart the Almighty Allah has opened for faith. He will
receive light from his Lord. And if all these matters don’t gather in
his heart he would be like one mentioned in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَوْلِهِمْ قُلُوبُنَا غُلْفٌ ۚ بَلْ طَبَعَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهَا
بِكُفْرِهِمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And their saying: Our hearts are covered; nay! Allah set a seal upon
them owing to their unbelief. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:155)***

Because punishments have different grades and levels and one of them is
worse than others and each is having a special effect. May Allah save us
from them! In the same way, faith is also having different grades and
levels and some of them are better than others and there are special
effects with regard to each of them. I pray to the Almighty Allah to
give us Taufeeq to complete the levels of faith and that we have
goodwill to our master, the Imam of the Time (aj).

Conclusion and Reminder
-----------------------

It is that one who wills good for the Imam of his time, is, according to
what we have mentioned and explained, is one who protects his own
position and he is disciplined in his deeds. In such a way that his acts
and intentions are all related to the Imam of his time (as) and he is
away from every displeasure and disrespect of the Imam.

In every circumstance he only wishes for the well being of Imam (as). He
is constantly trying to become proximate to his Imam, he adopts the
company of the pious and keeps away from rejected and transgressing
people. And if he does not find anyone with these qualities, so that he
may sit with him, he remains in his house and adopts silence and he
avoids the company of those who are not appropriate. And we shall
present more points in this regard, Insha Allah.

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 404

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 403

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 1, Pg. 403


