41: Reciting Salawat And Salutations Upon Imam (aj)
===================================================

One of the duties during the period of Ghaibat is to recite Salawat and
Salutations upon Imam (aj). Its merit and emphasis is evident from the
following:

1. Salawat is a kind of prayer. Therefore whatever applies to Dua or
praying for Imam (aj) is applicable here as well. The traditions
exhorting us to pray for Imam (aj) also support the importance of this
duty. Actually the aim of reciting Salawat is to pray to Allah to bestow
Mercy upon Imam (aj). And as we all know, all the affairs of the world
and the hereafter are accomplished with the help of Divine Mercy.
Therefore whenever we recite Salawat for Imam (aj) and say, “Allahumma
Salle a’laa Maulana wa Sayyidina Saheb az-zamaan,” etc. (Translation: O
Allah! Bless our Master and our Chief, the Master of the Age.). We mean
to invocate Divine mercy for all the affairs connected with Imam (aj).

Thus in this request to the Almighty Allah we pray that He protect the
Imam and remove every kind of sorrow and grief from him and from the
hearts of his Shias and friends and also hasten his reappearance. From
this we actually intend to please the Imam due to his victory over the
enemies of faith, establishment of justice on the earth, success of his
followers and believers in obtaining Paradise…from the different types
of wide mercy of Allah that He has specialized his Awliya with it and
its count is known by none except Him, and is concealed in this Salawat
of ours. We beseech the Almighty to include us among the companions of
the Imam and his friends in the world and the hereafter who have been
specially chosen for his blessings; and Allah is the acceptor of
supplications.

2. The arguments in favor of reciting the Salawat upon the Messenger of
Allah (S) and his holy progeny (Ahle Bayt [a.s.]) apply here as well.

3. In quite a few supplications of the Purified Imams (as) we find the
mention of Salawat upon Imam az-Zaman (aj).

4. In a supplication narrated through Amari that we have quoted in the
previous section, there is special emphasis on asking the Almighty Allah
to give us Taufeeq to recite Salawat on the Holy Imam (aj).

5. All the traditions generally highlight the importance of reciting
Salawat on the Imam of the Time (aj), especially the traditional report
quoted by Sayyid Ibne Tawoos in Jamalul Usboo narrating from Imam Hasan
Askari (as) in which he has advised reciting Salawat on all Imams, each
with a special Salawat; in that the following special Salawat is
mentioned for the Imam of the Time (aj):

O Allah! Send blessings upon Your Wali and the son of Your Wali. One
whose obedience You made incumbent and rights obligatory. You removed
all impurities from him and purified him a thorough purification. O
Allah! Help him and by it help Your religion and thereby help Your
Awliya (friends) and his friends and by it help his Shias and his
helpers and include us among them.

O Allah! Take them in Your refuge from the mischief of every oppressor
and transgressor, and from mischief of all Your creatures. And protect
him from the front, the back, from right and left and protect him and
grant security to him from every calamity that comes to him from every
direction. And through him protect (the religion of) Your Messenger and
the Progeny of Your Messenger.

And make evident through it justice through his hands and bestow him
with special help. And help those who help him and degrade his
opponents. And through him destroy the oppressor and infidels and
annihilate the disbelievers, the hypocrites and all the apostates
whether they are from the east or the west from the dry land or from the
seas, from the plains or from hilly areas.

And by him fill up the earth with justice and make apparent the religion
of Your Messenger (Peace be upon him and his progeny). O Allah! Include
us among his helpers and assistants and followers and Shias. And make
apparent in my life all that the Aale Muhammad are eager for and fulfill
their hopes as regards their enemies (degrade their enemies). O the
rightful God, the Lord of the worlds! (accept my supplication).[^1]

Reminder
--------

At the end of Part Seven we have presented a Salawat based on a Dua for
His Eminence (aj), quoting from Misbahuz Zaer, which may referred to.

[^1]: Jamaal al-Usboo, Pg. 493


