43: Gift Of A Special Prayer
============================

This can be any special prayer that a momin recites for gifting its
Thawab to Imam az-Zaman (aj) or any other Imam (as). There is no fixed
quantity of this prayer nor is there a prescribed time for it. It
depends upon how much we love Imam (as) and how much we can strive for
him. The proof of this virtuous act is the tradition which states that
even if we recite two rakat prayer everyday, we can gift its Thawab to
one of the Imams. The method of reciting this two rakat prayer is that
we start it with seven or three takbeers (Allaho Akbar), or one takbeer
in every rakat. After ruku and two Sajdahs, we recite the following Dua
three times:

May Allah bless Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad the chaste and the
pure ones. After tashahud and salam, recite the following Dua:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O Allah! You are the
unblemished One Who bestows safety (to us). O the One with majesty and
greatness, bless Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad, the most pure and
clean of the creatures. Exalt them with the most exalted of the
blessings.

O Allah these rakats (units of prayers) are a gift from me to Your slave
and Your Prophet and Your Messenger, Muhammad bin Abdullah, the seal of
the prophets and the chief of the Messengers. O Allah accept them from
me and convey them from me and make them the best of my expectations and
my hope in You and in Your Prophet (S), and the successor of Your
Prophet and Fatima Zahra, the daughter of Your Prophet and Hasan and
Husain the grandsons of Your Prophet and Your Awliya (saints) from the
progeny of Husain (as). O the guardian of the believers, O the guardian
of the believers, O the guardian of the believer.[^1]

Prayer for Hadiya to Amirul Momineen Ali (as)
---------------------------------------------

After reciting two rakat prayer, recite the first Dua of this chapter
till “Afzalul Tahiyat was salaam” and after that recite the following
Dua:

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your servant, Your Wali,
cousin of Your Prophet, his successor, Amirul Momineen Ali Ibne Abi
Talib. O Allah, so please accept them from me and convey them to them
from me and reward me with the best that which I hope from You, Your
Prophet, successor of Your Prophet, Fatima Zahra, daughter of Your
Prophet, Hasan and Husain, grandsons of Your Prophet and His Awliya from
the progeny of Husain; O guardian of the believers, O guardian of the
believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Janabe Fatima Zahra (s.a.)
-----------------------------------------------

After this prayer recite the following Dua:

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to the most purified, and
chaste Fatima, the daughter of Your Prophet. O Allah, so please accept
them from me and convey them to them from me and reward me with the best
that which I hope from You, Your Prophet, successor of Your Prophet,
Fatima Zahra, daughter of Your Prophet, Hasan and Husain, grandsons of
Your Prophet and His Awliya from the progeny of Husain; O guardian of
the believers, O guardian of the believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Hasan (as)
------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali al-Hasan bin Ali. O Allah, so
please accept them from me and convey them to them from me and reward me
with the best that which I hope from You, Your Prophet, Your Wali, son
of Your Wali. O guardian of the believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Husain (as)
-------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, the
chaste, pure and clean and satisfied, al-Husain bin Ali, al-Mujtaba. O
Allah, so please accept them from me and convey them to them from me and
reward me with the best that which I hope from You, Your Prophet, Your
Wali, son of Your Wali. O guardian of the believers, O guardian of the
believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Sajjad (as)
-------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, the
ornament of the worshippers, Ali Ibne Husain. O Allah, so please accept
them from me and convey them to them from me and reward me with the best
that which I hope from You, Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of Your Wali. O
guardian of the believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Baqir (as)
------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, Muhammad
bin Ali al-Baqir. O Allah, so please accept them from me and convey them
to them from me and reward me with the best that which I hope from You,
Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of Your Wali. O guardian of the believers,
O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (as)
----------------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, Ja’far
bin Muhammad as-Sadiq. O Allah, so please accept them from me and convey
them to them from me and reward me with the best that which I hope from
You, Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of Your Wali. O guardian of the
believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Musa Ibne Ja’far (as)
-----------------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, Musa bin
Ja’far the heir of the knowledge of the prophets. O Allah, so please
accept them from me and convey them to them from me and reward me with
the best that which I hope from You, Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of
Your Wali. O guardian of the believers, O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Ali Reza (as)
---------------------------------------

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, Ali Ibne
Musa ar-Reza. O Allah, so please accept them from me and convey them to
them from me and reward me with the best that which I hope from You,
Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of Your Wali. O guardian of the believers,
O guardian of the believers.

Prayer for Hadiya to Imam Muhammad Taqi, Imam Ali Naqi and Imam Hasan Askari (as)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recite the Dua by the method mentioned above and just replace the name
of the particular Imam (as) till you come to Imam Sahebuzzamaan (as).
Then recite the following Dua:

O Allah, these two rakats are gift from me to Your Servant, son of Your
servant, Your Wali, son of Your Wali, grandson of Your Prophet, on Your
earth, and Your Proof on His creatures. O Allah, so please accept them
from me and convey them to them from me and reward me with the best that
which I hope from You, Your Prophet, Your Wali, son of Your Wali. O
guardian of the believers, O guardian of the believers.

The venerable Sayyid Ali Ibne Tawoos says in Jamalul Usboo: Perhaps we
don’t see the joy in replacing these gifts or for saying to ourselves
that the Infallible Imams (as) are needless of these gifts; or perhaps
from the aspect that they seek forgiveness and do it everyday many a
times; that they (as) are needless of your gift; but you are not
needless that you don’t send gifts to them, and that your words reach to
them; just as the Almighty Allah is needless of these things. Thus in
your intention whenever you begin these acts it should be that the
Almighty Allah guides you in success and security:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمُنُّونَ عَلَيْكَ أَنْ أَسْلَمُوا ۖ قُلْ لَا تَمُنُّوا عَلَيَّ
إِسْلَامَكُمْ ۖ بَلِ اللَّهُ يَمُنُّ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ هَدَاكُمْ
لِلْإِيمَانِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They think that they lay you under an obligation by becoming Muslims.
Say: Lay me not under obligation by your Islam: rather Allah lays you
under an obligation by guiding you to the faith. (Qur’an, Surah Hujurat
49:17)***

You are same as a scholar has said:

**I dedicate this to his respectable assembly and there is nothing
except this. I don’t have anything that I can gift to him. Like the sea
on which the clouds rain while the fact is that it is not in any need of
it because what is raining is taken from the sea only.**

It is that you consider prayers as too many or that you are inclined you
have finished them so that you may go out to obtain your success, then
you should know that this is obtained through bestowal of Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime and His great Awliya of Allah and their sincerity in
worship of Allah, the High and the Mighty for you, especially when you
have the belief that if the proofs of Allah had not been there for the
people Allah, the Mighty and Sublime would have neither created the
earth nor the heavens, or any creature in the world, or Hell and Heaven
for the Hereafter.

Neither He would have initiated any bounty nor mercy, thus do you
consider all the acts and deeds to be intended for anything other than
the criterion of acceptance or you expect reward from someone else,
because their sincerity in worship is through the excellence that the
Almighty Allah has given to them for their success.

Thus when your deed measures upto their criterion, you should gift it to
them so that you may obtain their rewards and if the generality of their
bestowals and excellence had not been there you will not obtain it. And
if you really know the right of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and their
rights by the kindness of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime and you know how
many rights of theirs are trespassed day and night, you will know that
it is in need of seeking excuse. And this is what a poet has said:

“Since you have accepted a lowly gift from me, I consider your
acceptance to be on the basis of one of your mercies. And its acceptance
in your view would be more an act of favor and grace, as the heart of
your devotee from being humiliated and disgraced, gets honor. And your
devotee becomes its source of thankfulness due to your prominent
position, and in taking up the rights that I am unable to fulfill.”

A co-religionist said to me: I consider myself and my deeds so small and
lowly that I should gift it to them? I said: Why don’t you consider
yourself lowly in serving Allah, the Mighty and Sublime, that you praise
and thank Him and that you perform all the duties? While the fact is
that He is greater than every great personality? Thus it does not matter
if you consider yourself small with regard to their deputies, especially
that they accept your service to them.[^2]

[^1]: Jamaal al-Usboo, Pg. 15

[^2]: Jamaal al-Usboo, Pg. 20


