45: Reward Of Reciting Qur’an For Imam (aj)
===========================================

Ali Ibne Mughira is quoted in Al-Kafi that he asked Imam Kazim (as), “My
father had asked your respected grandfather regarding the complete
recitation of Qur’an every night and he told him, “Yes it can be
completed every night.” When my father asked about completion of Qur’an
in the month of Ramadan he received the same reply. So he used to finish
reading the complete Qur’an forty times during the holy month of
Ramadan.

After him I continued this practice. On the day of Eid, I complete a
Qur’an for the Holy Prophet (S) and after him for Amirul Momineen (as)
till I reach you. So tell me how is this act of our considered by your
goodself? Imam (as) said, “Your reward is that you shall be in the
company of those exalted personalities.” The narrator said, “Such a high
reward?” Imam (as) said three times, “Yes.”[^1]

I say: The point of evidence in this is that the apparent meaning of the
statements of Imam (as) consists of the reward upon those deeds is from
the aspect that they should be gifted to the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Imam and the proximity is to them and it is not the above mentioned
quality of the Imams. Rather, it is learnt from the statement of the
narrator that when he gifted the reward of reciting one complete Qur’an
to Imam Musa Kazim (as) and when the Imam was alive, therefore he said:
Since that time I am in this condition…and the Imam praised his actions
and certified their correctness.

The conclusion derived from this tradition is that: It is recommended to
gift the reward of reciting the Qur’an to the Holy Prophet (S), Lady
Fatima Zahra (as) and the Holy Imams (as). That which supports this
matter is that the dedication of Prayer to them as was mentioned
previously. There are other proofs also that can be derived by those who
study the traditional reports. I beg to the Almighty Allah for the sake
of Muhammad and his progeny, to give me and all the believers Taufeeq to
perform this meritorious deed.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 98, Chapter 5, Pg. 5


