46: Tawassul And Seeking Intercession Through Imam az-Zaman (aj)
================================================================

The proof for the above acts during the period of Ghaibat is that Imam
az-Zaman (aj) is the ‘Babullah’ the door of Allah, through which people
enter. Imam (as) is the sole channel of achieving Allah’s satisfaction.
He is the one who will intercede for us with Allah. He is that same name
of Allah whose tawassul is ordered for us. As mentioned in the
traditions in the explanation of Qur’anic verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And for Allah are the most beautiful names. So call Him by them.
(Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:180)***

The Imams have said: By Allah, we are those beautiful names about whom
the Almighty Allah has commended the people to call Him [supplicate
Him].[^1] There are many other proofs but this much would be sufficient
for those with insight.

In *Bihar*, it is narrated from our master, Imam Ali Reza (as) that he
said: Whenever you are involved in hardships and calamities you must ask
for the help of Allah, the Mighty and Sublime through us, and that is
the interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And for Allah are the most beautiful names. So call Him by
them.***[^2]

In the same book it is narrated from Qabas al-Misbah in the discussion
of supplications of seeking mediation from the Almighty Allah through
the Holy Imams (as): Seeking mediation of our master:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O Allah! I ask You
by the right of Your Wali and Hujjat the Master of the Age that You make
easy for me all my affairs. And suffice me against all oppressors and
unjust and traitors and remove them away from me. Bestow me with the
companionship of Hazrat as I have reached to the end of my efforts. And
suffice me against all enemies and sorrows and griefs and in the
religion and children and all of my people and my brothers and all the
affairs related to him. Amen O, Lord of the worlds Amen.[^3]

In *Biharul Anwar* it is narrated from *Oddatud Dai* quoting Salman
Farsi that he said: I heard Prophet Muhammad (S) say: Indeed, Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime says: “O My servant! Has it not happened that someone
asks a big thing from you but you are not willing to fulfill it unless
he brings the person most beloved to you to persuade you to fulfill
those desires for the sake of that intercessor?

Let it be known to you that the most honorable and supreme creature with
Me is Muhammad and his brother Ali and the Imams who are the medium of
nearness to Me. Be aware that whoever has a great desire and wishes for
a benefit or removal of a harm, if he calls on Me through Muhammad and
his pure progeny, I will fulfill his desires far better than fulfilling
the desire of one who has taken the most beloved creature of God as an
intercessor.”

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 618

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 94, Pg. 22

[^3]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 94, Pg. 35


