52: To Practice Taqayyah With Mischief-Makers And To Maintain Secrecy From People Of Other Faiths
=================================================================================================

In *Kafi* through an authentic chain of narrators it is narrated from
His Eminence, Abi Abdullah Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said
explaining the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ يُؤْتَوْنَ أَجْرَهُمْ مَرَّتَيْنِ بِمَا صَبَرُوا
وَيَدْرَءُونَ بِالْحَسَنَةِ السَّيِّئَةَ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ
يُنْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***These shall be granted their reward twice, because they are patient
and they repel evil with good and spend out of what We have given them.
(Qur’an, Surah Qasas 28:54)***

Imam Sadiq (as) says, “(They shall be granted their reward) for their
patience in practicing Taqayyah.” Regarding, “and they repel evil with
good”, Imam (as) says that ‘good’ refers to Taqayyah and ‘evil’ refers
to the revealing of confidential matters.[^1] Again in Al-Kafi Imam
Sadiq (as) says, “Taqayyah is the shield of a believer and a protection
for him.

One who does not believe in Taqayyah does not have faith. Indeed our
tradition does not reach a person but that he fulfills religiousness
between himself and his Lord. That thing brings him respect in the world
and light (Noor) in the hereafter. And our tradition reaches another
person and he exposes it (to opponents) and it causes him insult and the
Almighty Allah takes away the Noor from him.”[^2]

It is mentioned in a correct tradition from Hisham Kandi[^3] that he
said: I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) say: It must
not be that you do something that causes us to be censured, because a
father is criticized for the bad character of his son. You should be an
ornament to one in whom you have faith [the rightful Imam] and you
should not be cause of disgrace to him. Perform prayers in their
[Sunnis’] congregation, and visit their sick and participate in the
funeral of their dead and they should not get precedence over you in any
good deed, as you are worthier than them for it.

By Allah, Allah, has not been worshipped by anything which is more liked
by Him than ‘khaba’. The narrator asked: What is ‘Khaba’? Imam (as)
replied: It is Taqayyah.[^4] In the same book in another tradition from
His Eminence (aj) it is mentioned that: One who sighs in sorrow
regarding us and is aggrieved for oppression on us, this act of his is
like glorification of Allah, and to be sad with regard to us is like
worship and maintaining our secrets is like Jihad in the way of God.[^5]

Muhammad bin Saeed – a narrator of this tradition – says: Write down
this tradition in gold, I have not written anything better than this.

In Kamaluddin it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he was
asked what is the best deeds that a believer can perform during the
period of occultation and His Eminence (aj) said: Controlling the tongue
and sitting at home.[^6]

In *Tafseer Nishapuri* it is mentioned that the following verse was
recited before Abdullah bin Masood:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْفُسَكُمْ ۖ لَا
يَضُرُّكُمْ مَنْ ضَلَّ إِذَا اهْتَدَيْتُمْ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! take care of your souls; he who errs cannot hurt
you when you are on the right way. (Qur’an, Surah Maidah 5:105)***

He said: This would happen in the last period of time.

I say: There are numerous traditional reports on this matter but we have
refrained from quoting them here for the sake of brevity. Here it is
necessary to remove the doubt that some people have that there is
contradiction among the traditions narrated from the Holy Imams (as).

This doubt haunts most of those who have not pondered over these
traditional reports carefully and those who from the very beginning
think that these traditional reports are contradictory, since in some of
them it is commanded to publicize the matter and in some, we have been
ordered to conceal the matter and observe Taqayyah. This contradiction
can be explained from what we have learnt from the saying of the Holy
Imams (as) that: People are of three types, either they are scholars and
enlightened with truth or non-scholars; and the second types consist of
eight groups:

**Group One:** Ordinary ignorant people, who if they recognize the
truth, will not refuse to accept it.

**Group Two:** Those who have fallen into confusion as they are in the
middle of inquiry and recognition of truth, but they are in a state of
bewilderment.

**Group Three:** Deviated and misguided souls; who as a result of being
in the company of deviated or sinful people, go astray in acquisition of
knowledge and recognition etc. According to reason and religious texts,
it is obligatory for the learned scholar to guide these three groups,
invite them to guidance. A tradition is narrated from the Holy Prophet
(S) to the effect that: If the Almighty Allah guides a single man
through you, it is better for you than everything in the world.

**Group Four:** Deniers and opponents of truth; who are such that when
truth is mentioned before them, they would ridicule it and make fun of
the Imam (as) and those who call to the truth.

**Group Five:** Such deniers and opponents that if truth is expressed
before them it would cause harm to life, honor or property.

It is necessary to observe Taqayyah from these two groups and according
to the command of reason and religious texts it is obligatory not to
speak to them as would be clear for the intelligent. In Kafi, it is
narrated through a correct chain of narrators from Abdul Alaa that he
said: I heard His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) say:
Undertaking our matter is not only by believing and accepting it.

Undertaking our matter is by preserving and keeping it secret from
those, who are not qualified for it. Deliver my greetings to them (the
Shia) and tell them that I say: May Allah have mercy on one who brings
me and himself people’s love by telling them of what they know and
concealing what they deny. By Allah, he that makes war against us, is
not more harmful to us than one, who accuses us of what we hate.[^7]

In the same book, in another tradition it is narrated from His Eminence
(aj) that he said: One who exposes our matter is like one who has denied
it.[^8] It is also narrated from His Eminence that he said: Indeed,
nine-tenth of the faith lies in observing Taqayyah and one who has no
Taqayyah, has no knowledge…[^9] and there are numerous traditions on
this matter.

**Group Six:** It is of those who have a weak intellect and Marifat
(recognition); believers who are not capable to bear, accept and protect
the secrets. As per the dictates of reason and texts it is necessary to
conceal the secrets from this group also as mentioned in the above
traditions.

In *Kafi*, in a correct tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) it is
mentioned that he said: By Allah, the best of my companions in my view
are those who the most pious, most thoughtful and the most secretive
(from our opponents about our traditions) and the worst of them are
those, who are such that when something is narrated from us and
attributed to us they don’t accept it; and also denies that which he
has; although he doesn’t know that this tradition has come from us and
is attributed to us; and as a result of this denial he goes out of our
Wilayat.[^10]

In *Basairud Darajat*, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) that he said:
Deal with the people according to what they recognize and leave what
they deny; and don’t put yourself and us in difficulty.

Indeed, our matter is difficult and intricate which none can bear except
the proximate angel, or a messenger prophet or a believer whose heart
the Almighty Allah has tested for faith.[^11] It is narrated through the
author’s own chain of narrators from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) from his
father that he said: One day the topic of Taqayyah came to be discussed
in the presence of Imam Ali Ibne Husain (as).

His Eminence (aj) said: By Allah, if Abu Zar knew what was in the heart
of Salman, he would have killed him, although the Messenger of Allah (S)
had established brotherhood between them. Then what can you expect from
other (common) people? Indeed, the knowledge of the scholars (Aale
Muhammad) is difficult, serious, convincing, clear and sharp-witted.
None can bear it except the proximate angels, messenger prophets or the
man whose heart the Almighty Allah has tested for faith. His Eminence
(aj) said: Salman became to be included among the scholars because he is
from us, Ahle Bayt (as), that is why he is related to us.[^12]

Through the author’s own chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam
Muhammad Baqir (as) that he said: Our traditions are difficult, such
that they could not be borne by anyone except the proximate angels,
messenger prophets or the man tested for faith or a city that is having
a strong fort.

Thus when our matter happens and our Mahdi reappears, men from our Shias
would become like brave lions and sharp spears, they would trample our
enemies under their feet and hit them with the claws of their hands. And
it is the time when the blessing of deliverance would be sent by the
Almighty Allah on the people.[^13]

**Group Seven:** It is of those whose ears and hearts have been sealed
by the Almighty Allah because they turned away from truth and chosen
falsehood so that the call to truth may not affect them, and that good
advice may not profit them, although they are such that they cause harm
to everybody; it is best to avoid calling them to truth and the mention
of truth before them should be avoided, because it is of no use; it
being alike to them whether you warn them, or do not warn them, will not
believe.[^14] Therefore it is commanded in traditions that religious
propaganda must not be directed to them, as mentioned in Kafi, through
the author’s own chain of narrators from Thabit Abi Saeed that he said:
His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) said: O Thabit, what have you
got to do with the opponents? Keep away from them.

Don’t invite the people to Imamate as by Allah, if all the folks of the
heavens and the earth try to misguide one whom Allah wants to guide,
they will not be able to do it. You are separate from the people, and
don’t consider the opponents to be your brother, cousin and neighbor.
Indeed, when the Almighty Allah wants good of a person, He purifies his
soul. Thus when he hears something good, he recognizes it and denies
that which is bad. The Almighty Allah puts such a word in his heart that
he understands the matter of Imamate.[^15]

In *Tohaful Uqool*, among the advices of Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) to Momin
Taq the same statement is mentioned.[^16] Also in Kafi, in a correct
report, from Fudail it is mentioned that he said: I asked His Eminence,
Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as): Shall we invite the people to Imamate? He
(Imam) replied: O Fudail, when the Almighty Allah wants the good of a
person, heorders an angel to catch his neck and make him accept this
matter willingly or unwillingly.[^17]

In the same book, in another tradition from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) it is
mentioned that he said: Do not dispute with the people regarding your
religion as it induces many diseases of the heart. The Almighty Allah
told His Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ لَا تَهْدِي مَنْ أَحْبَبْتَ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يَهْدِي مَنْ
يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely you cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He
pleases. (Qur’an, Surah Qasas 28:56)***

And also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَأَنْتَ تُكْرِهُ النَّاسَ حَتَّىٰ يَكُونُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Will you then force men till they become believers?***[^18]

**Group Eight:** Whose position is not clear; that is you don’t know
whether they would accept the call and truth or not. The duty of a
scholar with regard to them is as mentioned in the tradition that the
venerable Shaykh, Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar has narrated through his own
chain of narrators from Asbagh bin Nubatah from Amirul Momineen Ali (as)
that he said: I heard His Eminence (aj) say: Indeed, our traditions are
difficult, crude and harsh. Thus only very few of them are told to the
people. One who understands them, more are given to him and one who
denies them, they are denied to him. None bear them except three groups:
the proximate angels or messenger prophets or a believer whose heart the
Almighty Allah has tested for faith.[^19]

Through the author’s own chain of narrators, it is narrated from Furat
bin Ahmad that he said: Amirul Momineen Ali (as) said: Indeed, our
traditions are such that people accept them with great difficulty; thus
to one who accepts them, tell more and leave those who deny them.[^20]

In a tradition of Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) it is mentioned that he said:
Indeed, the hearts of the people would accept our traditions with much
difficulty. Thus to one who accepts them, tell more and leave those who
deny them. Indeed, there will be trials so that all the evil is sieved,
such that even those who split hair (for perfection) would fall off. So
much so that except for us and our Shias none would remain.[^21]

Nomani has also mentioned this same tradition in his Ghaibat, in which
after the sentence: “Indeed, the hearts of the people would accept our
traditions with much difficulty,” it is mentioned, “Inform them only
about some traditions. Thus to one who accepts them, tell more and leave
those who deny them.”[^22]

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 217

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 221

[^3]: Apparently it is Hisham bin Hakam.

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 219

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 226

[^6]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Sadooq, Vol. 1, Pg. 330

[^7]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 222

[^8]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 224

[^9]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 217

[^10]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 223

[^11]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 26

[^12]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 25

[^13]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 24

[^14]: Surah Baqarah 2:6

[^15]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 213

[^16]: Tohaf al-Uqool, Pg. 229

[^17]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 213, Tr. no. 3

[^18]: Surah Yunus 10:99 and Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 166 & Vol. 2, Pg.
213

[^19]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 21, Chapter 11, Tr. no. 5

[^20]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 23, Chapter 11, Tr. no. 12

[^21]: Basairud Darajaat, Pg. 23, Chapter 11, Tr. no. 14

[^22]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 107


