53: To Bear Hardships, Denials And Other Testing Circumstances For The Sake Of Imam (As)
========================================================================================

There is no doubt that the Almighty Allah subjects us to all kinds of
examinations regarding the Ghaibat of His Wali, in order to distinguish
the righteous ones from the sinful. So that He may reward the righteous
slaves and gather the wrong doers with other evil creatures and dispatch
them to Hell. The Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ اللَّهُ لِيَذَرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَىٰ مَا أَنْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
حَتَّىٰ يَمِيزَ الْخَبِيثَ مِنَ الطَّيِّبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***On no account will Allah leave the believers in the condition which
you are in until He separates the evil from the good. (Qur’an, Surah
Aale Imran 3:179)***

Now this is not something new because before this Allah has taken the
examination of all the previous nations and those who would come in the
future. Allah also says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَسِبَ النَّاسُ أَنْ يُتْرَكُوا أَنْ يَقُولُوا آمَنَّا وَهُمْ لَا
يُفْتَنُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ فَتَنَّا الَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do men think that they will be left alone on saying, We believe, and
not be tried? And*** ***certainly We tried those before them…(Qur’an,
Surah Ankabut 29:2-3)***

Hazrat Ali (as) says, “O Men! The Almighty Allah has kept you away from
oppression but He has not given you exemption from trials because Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِي الْأَنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Most surely there are signs in this, and most surely We are ever
trying (men).***[^1]

I say: One of the greatest examinations for a believer is when he sees
that vicious and evil people are living in style and splendor while the
righteous have to undergo untold difficulties and penury, and no one
pays any attention to them. No one even lends ear to their pleading and
they are oppressed by the tyrants of this world. They are made the butt
of ridicule and people make fun of their belief with regard to Ghaibat
of Imam az-Zaman (aj). This causes a contradiction of reason and desire.
The carnal desires command us to follow falsehood and spend our lives in
enjoyment while reason advises us to be patient in the difficulties and
to bear their falsification.

That it is necessary to follow the truth in order to achieve everlasting
life in the hereafter in addition to the rightful kingdom. Thus the best
people are those who strive for good consequences and remain patient in
calamities. See what Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) says to Humran in a correct
lengthy tradition, in Rauda Kafi, when he asked His Eminence: How will
these (Bani Abbas) people rule? Or when would we rid of them? Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: Don’t you know that everything has a tenure? He
replied: Why not? I said: Does it benefit you to know that when this
matter occurs it will not come even a moment earlier.

Indeed, if you knew their condition in the view of Allah, you will be
more angry with them and if with all the people of the world try to
worsen their condition from sin and crimes – you will not be able to do
so. Thus Shaitan will not deviate and worry you. Because indeed, honor
from the Almighty Allah is for the Messenger of Allah (S), and for the
believers, but the hypocrites don’t know, do you not know that one who
awaits for our kingdom, and is patient on all hardships and troubles,
will be in our group tomorrow [in Qiyamat].[^2]

In *Tohaful Uqool*, it is mentioned among the advices of Imam Ja’far
Sadiq (as) to Momin Taq: O Son of Noman, a servant will not be a
faithful believer before he learns three characteristics; one from God,
one from His Messenger, and one from the Imam. The characteristic he
should learn from God is the concealment of secrets. God the Glorified
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any,
(Qur’an, Surah Jinn 72:26)***

The characteristic he should learn from the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) is that he should treat people courteously. The
characteristic he should learn from the Imam (peace be upon him) is to
be steadfast against situations of misfortune and crises until relief
comes about…[^3]

Also, in Rauda Kafi, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Hasan bin Shazan Wasiti that he said: I wrote a letter to
Abul Hasan Imam Reza (as) in which I complained about the oppressions of
the people of Wast.

Since in that city there were groups of Uthmanis, they used to trouble
me. The Imam replied as follows: Allah, the blessed and the High has
taken a covenant from our followers to observe patience in the rule of
tyrant rulers. So be patient at the command of your Lord and when the
leader of the creatures arises, they shall say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا مَنْ بَعَثَنَا مِنْ مَرْقَدِنَا ۜ ۗ هَٰذَا مَا
وَعَدَ الرَّحْمَٰنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O woe to us! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place? This is
what the Beneficent God promised and the apostles told the truth.***[^4]

I say: ‘Leader of the creatures denotes His Eminence, Qaim (aj) and
their saying: ‘O woe to us! who has raised us up from our
sleeping-place? This is what the Beneficent God promised’ implies that
His Eminence, by the leave of the Almighty Allah, would make them alive
and take revenge from them, as is mentioned in traditional reports.

In *Usool Kafi*, it is narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: A time will come upon the people
when rulership will not be obtained except through killing and
oppression and wealth will not be obtained except through usurpation and
miserliness and love and friendship will not be got except through
throwing out the religion and following selfish desires; thus one who
lives till that time should be patient on poverty even though he may be
able to obtain riches.

And he should be patient on the enmity of the people even though he may
be able to earn love of the people by giving up his religion and
following carnal desires. And he should be patient on humiliation even
though he might be capable of becoming powerful; the Almighty Allah will
give him the reward equal to that of fifty Siddiqs (truthful ones) who
have testified me.[^5]

It is mentioned in Kharaij, that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: After
you will come a people such that one of them alone will earn the reward
of fifty of you. They asked: O Messenger of Allah (S), we accompanied
you in Badr, Uhad and Hunain and the Qur’an descended among us! The
Prophet said: You cannot bear that which would descend on them and you
don’t have as much patience as they have.

I say: This is with reference to the condition of patient believers in
the period of occultation of the Imam of the Age (as) as proved by other
traditional reports.

It is mentioned in Burhan under the interpretation of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اصْبِرُوا وَصَابِرُوا وَرَابِطُوا
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! be patient and co-operate in patience and remain
steadfast. (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran 3:200)***

That Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) said: Be patient on the troubles you have to
face in our path. The narrator asked: What does, ‘co-operate in patience
and remain steadfast,’ mean? The Imam replied: Co-operate with your Wali
regarding your enemies and be steadfast with your Imam.

There are numerous traditional reports regarding this but to quote them
all would prolong the discussion. All these are in addition to other
verses and traditional reports that have come in praise of patience and
command to observe it, because patience on calamities during the period
of occultation of Imam (as) is among the most important and clear
implication of patience as is obvious.

Thiqatul Islam, Kulaini (r.a.) has mentioned a number of correct and
good traditions from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) that he said: Patience is to
faith what the head is to the body, if the head goes, so does the body,
in the same way if patience goes, so does faith.[^6]

In the same book, in another tradition from Hafas bin Ghiyath it is
mentioned that he said: His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) said:

One who observes patience has to be patient for a short while and one
who is impatient, remains impatient for a short while. Then he said: It
is necessary for you to be patient in all your affairs as Allah, the
Mighty and Sublime sent His Eminence, Muhammad (S) and commanded him
patience and forbearance and He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ وَاهْجُرْهُمْ هَجْرًا جَمِيلًا .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَرْنِي وَالْمُكَذِّبِينَ أُولِي النَّعْمَةِ وَمَهِّلْهُمْ قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming
avoidance. And leave Me and the rejecters, the possessors of ease and
plenty. (Qur’an, Surah Muzzammil 73:10-11)***

The Almighty Allah also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَسْتَوِي الْحَسَنَةُ وَلَا السَّيِّئَةُ ۚ ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي
هِيَ أَحْسَنُ فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ
وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَمَا يُلَقَّاهَا إِلَّا
ذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Repel (evil) with what is best, when lo! he between whom and you was
enmity would be as if he were a warm friend. And none are made to
receive it but those who are patient, and none are made to receive it
but those who have a mighty good fortune. (Qur’an, Surah Fussilat
41:34-35)***

Thus the Messenger of Allah (S) maintained patience till he was even
accused of serious things [like sorcery and insanity] and the Almighty
Allah revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَعْلَمُ أَنَّكَ يَضِيقُ صَدْرُكَ بِمَا يَقُولُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَكُنْ مِنَ السَّاجِدِينَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And surely We know that your breast straitens at what they say.
Therefore celebrate the praise of your Lord, and be of those who make
obeisance. (Qur’an, Surah Hijr 15:97-98)***

After that they rejected His Eminence, and made allegations against him;
so he became sad. Therefore the Almighty Allah revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ نَعْلَمُ إِنَّهُ لَيَحْزُنُكَ الَّذِي يَقُولُونَ ۖ فَإِنَّهُمْ
لَا يُكَذِّبُونَكَ وَلَٰكِنَّ الظَّالِمِينَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ
يَجْحَدُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كُذِّبَتْ رُسُلٌ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فَصَبَرُوا عَلَىٰ مَا
كُذِّبُوا وَأُوذُوا حَتَّىٰ أَتَاهُمْ نَصْرُنَا ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We know indeed that what they say certainly grieves you, but surely
they do not call you a liar; but the unjust deny the communications of
Allah. And certainly apostles before you were rejected, but they were
patient on being rejected and persecuted until Our help came to them.
(Qur’an, Surah Anaam 6:33-34)***

At that time His Eminence (S) made his heart firm on patience till those
people crossed all limits of shamelessness and torture and they
mentioned Allah, the High and the Mighty with disrespect and denied Him.
The Holy Prophet (S) said: I remained patient regarding myself, my
family and my honor but I cannot be patient on disrespect to my Lord. So
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime revealed the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ وَمَا مَسَّنَا مِنْ لُغُوبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ عَلَىٰ مَا يَقُولُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We created the heavens and the earth and what is
between them in six periods and there touched Us not any fatigue.
Therefore be patient of what they say. (Qur’an, Surah Qaf 50:38-39)***

His Eminence, (S) remained patient in all circumstances till he was
given glad tidings about the Imams from his progeny and they were
described to be having patience as Allah, the Mighty and Sublime said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا لَمَّا صَبَرُوا ۖ
وَكَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command when they were
patient, and they were certain of Our communications. (Qur’an, Surah
Sajdah 32:24)***

His Eminence, (S) said: Patience is to faith, like the head is to the
body; then the Almighty Allah recompensed him for patience and revealed
the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ الْحُسْنَىٰ عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ بِمَا
صَبَرُوا ۖ وَدَمَّرْنَا مَا كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِرْعَوْنُ وَقَوْمُهُ وَمَا
كَانُوا يَعْرِشُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the good word of your Lord was fulfilled in the children of
Israel because they bore up (sufferings) patiently; and We utterly
destroyed what Firon and his people had wrought and what they built.
(Qur’an, Surah Araaf 7:137)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said: This is a glad tiding and revenge that Allah,
the Mighty and Sublime has allowed war against the polytheists. And the
Almighty Allah revealed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَيْثُ وَجَدْتُمُوهُمْ وَخُذُوهُمْ
وَاحْصُرُوهُمْ وَاقْعُدُوا لَهُمْ كُلَّ مَرْصَدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Then slay the idolaters wherever you find them, and take them
captives and besiege them and lie in wait for them in every ambush.
(Qur’an, Surah Taubah 9:5)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ ثَقِفْتُمُوهُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And kill them wherever you find them. (Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:
191)***

Thus the Almighty Allah destroyed them through the Messenger of Allah
(S) and his followers and made it a reward of their patience in addition
to what is stored for His Eminence in the Hereafter. So one who remains
patient and is forbearing in the path of Allah, he will not leave the
world till the Almighty Allah does not make him happy with regard to
(the fate) of his enemies, in addition to what is stored for him in the
Hereafter.[^7]

In the same book, in a correct traditional report from Abu Sabbah Kinani
it is narrated that he said: I was in the company of His Eminence, Abu
Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) when an old man came to His Eminence and said:
O Aba Abdillah, I have brought a complain to you about my children and
their thanklessness and my brothers and their oppression, when I have
become old. His Eminence, Abu Abdullah Imam Sadiq (as) said: O man,
indeed there is a kingdom for truth and a kingdom for falsehood, and
each is degraded during the rule of other, and the least that can reach
the believer during the rule of falsehood is disobedience of children
and injustice of the brothers.

And there is no believer who gets any comfort or luxury during the rule
of falsehood, except that he has to bear hardships before his death,
either physically or regarding his children or his property so that the
Almighty Allah may purge him from that which he has obtained during the
rule of falsehood and He increase his share in the kingdom of truth. So
remain patient and glad tidings to you.

In the same book, it is narrated from His Eminence, Abu Ja’far Imam
Baqir (as) that he said: When the final moments of my father, Ali bin
Husain (as) approached, he embraced me and said: My son, I advise you
that which my father advised me at the time of his passing away and
mentioned that which his father had advised: My son, be patient on truth
even though it may be bitter.[^8]

In *Kamaluddin*, through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
quoted from Imam Reza (as) that he said: “How good is patience and
awaiting for the reappearance! Have you not heard Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime say?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَارْتَقِبُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ رَقِيبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And watch, surely I too am watching with you. (Qur’an, Surah Hud
11:93)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانْتَظِرُوا إِنِّي مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الْمُنْتَظِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wait then, I too with you will be of those who wait. (Qur’an, Surah
Araaf 7:71)***

Thus you must be patient because there is deliverance after despair and
those before you were more patient than you.”[^9]

In the same book it is narrated from Muhammad bin Muslim that he said: I
heard Abi Abdullah (as) say: “Before the rising of the Qaim, Allah will
appoint signs for the believers. I asked: What are those, may I be
sacrificed on you? He replied: They are mentioned in the saying of
Allah, the Mighty and Sublime:

That is before the advent of the Qaim the believers will be tested
through fear and hunger and loss of property and lives and fruits; and
give good news to the patient.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَنَبْلُوَنَّكُمْ بِشَيْءٍ مِنَ الْخَوْفِ وَالْجُوعِ وَنَقْصٍ مِنَ
الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَنْفُسِ وَالثَّمَرَاتِ ۗ وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We will most certainly try you with somewhat of fear and hunger
and loss of property and lives and fruits; and give good news to the
patient…(Qur’an, Surah Baqarah 2:155)***

He said: “The believers will be tested through the fear of the last
ruler of Bani so-and-so. Hunger through rise in prices. Loss of property
and lives and fruits means loss in business and agriculture. And give
good news to the patient means those who await for the reappearance.”
Then he said: “O Muhammad, this is the interpretation of the saying of
the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ ۗ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي
الْعِلْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…but none knows its interpretation except Allah, and those who are
firmly rooted in knowledge…***[^10]

In *Tafseer Nishapuri*, it is narrated from the Holy Prophet (S) that he
said: Enjoin good to each other and forbid evil; thus when you see a
debased person being obeyed and carnal desires being followed, and
materialism being preferred, and every person liking his own view, it is
necessary for you to leave yourself and public affairs and indeed, after
that there will come a time when patience will be like a burning coal on
your hand; the doers of good in that time will be given a reward equal
to that of fifty persons in other times.

In *Ghaibat Nomani* through the author’s own chain of narrators it is
narrated from Imam Ja’far Sadiq (as) from his father that he said: The
believers are tested and purified by Allah. Allah has not assured the
believers from calamities and distresses of this life but He has assured
them from being wretched in the afterlife.

Then Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said: His Eminence, Husain bin Ali
arranged his martyrs side by side [in Kerbala] and said: Our martyrs are
the martyrs of prophets.[^11] In the same book through the author’s own
chain of narrators it is narrated from Imam Zainul Abideen (as) that he
said: I wish I was permitted to talk to people three times (about three
things) and then Allah might do to me whatever He liked. But it is the
will of Allah that we are to be patient and to wait. Then he recited the
following verse of Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَتَسْمَعُنَّ مِنَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ
وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ أَشْرَكُوا أَذًى كَثِيرًا ۚ وَإِنْ تَصْبِرُوا
وَتَتَّقُوا فَإِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عَزْمِ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And you shall certainly hear from those who have been given the Book
before you and from those who are polytheists, much annoying talk; and
if you are patient and guard (against evil), surely this is one of the
affairs (which should be) determined upon. (Qur’an, Surah Aale Imran
3:186)***

In the same book another tradition is quoted from His Eminence, which we
shall present in the sub-topic of Marabat, Insha Allah, in which he
says: “…the believers will remain steadfast and persevere until Allah
determines and He is the best of judges.”[^12] There are many other
traditional reports also, that have been mentioned at appropriate
places.[^13] The conclusion is best worded in a poetical composition of
Amirul Momineen (as):

**If evil and hardships increase upon him, he increases the level of his
patience. He is like Musk under the tools of pulverizing it, because
fragments of Musk are such that their perfume and fragrance increases
due to the tools if patience is observed.**

**Note:** Our discussion so far shows that patience during the period of
the occultation of the Imam (as) is of few types:

1. Patience of the prolongation of occultation so that impatience in
this regard may not harden ones heart; because impatience with regard to
Imam (as) can lead to doubts as explained in the twenty-second duty.

2. Patience of the believer on difficulties, ridicule and rejection etc
from his opponents.

3. Patience on different calamities and hardships that befall him as
mentioned in the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاصْبِرْ وَمَا صَبْرُكَ إِلَّا بِاللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And be patient and your patience is not but by (the assistance of)
Allah. (Qur’an, Surah Nahl 16:127)***

4. Patience on different calamities and hardships at the hands of the
opponents, that he cannot ward off and defend himself from them; in this
instance his duty is to observe patience and pray. And there are other
types of patiences that a believer has to observe in difficult times.

[^1]: Surah Momin 40; Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 102

[^2]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 37

[^3]: Tohaf al-Uqool, Pg. 230

[^4]: Raudatul Kafi; Pg. 247, Tr. no. 346; Surah Yasin 36:52

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 91

[^6]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 87, Chapter of Patience, Tr. no. 2

[^7]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 447, Tr. no. 12

[^8]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 91, Chapter of Patience, Tr. no. 13

[^9]: Kamaluddin; Shaykh Sadooq; Vol. 2, Pg. 645

[^10]: Surah Aale Imran 3:7 & Kamaluddin, Vol. 2, Pg. 649

[^11]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 112

[^12]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 105

[^13]: Ghaibat Nomani, Pg. 105


