54: Pray To Allah For Patience In Imam’s Separation
===================================================

It is a duty of believers to ask Allah for Taufeeq of being patient in
the Ghaibat of Imam (aj). This is evident from the words of the
supplication of Amri (r.a.) regarding Imam az-Zaman (aj): “Bestow me
patience in this.”

In another instance it is stated that the momin should pray to Allah to
improve his worldly conditions and the hereafter because Allah has the
key to everything. The Messenger of Allah (S) was told, “And be patient
and your patience is not possible except by Allah.” The word ‘by’ in the
above indicates causing or helping. Thus when patience is not possible
without Allah’s help the momin is obliged to beseech Allah to help him
in being patient where patience is suitable. It can also be taken to
mean ‘from’ although the author of Mughni Labeeb has mentioned and it is
not important to deny that which occurs in eloquent statement, in the
same way as some scholars of syntax have denied that it is for
discrimination; even though there are traditional reports from the Holy
Imams (as) regarding this.

The Messenger of Allah (S) said, “Ask Allah for whatever you may need,
even if it be a shoe lace. Because if Allah does not make its
acquisition easy it would never be easy to acquire it.” In another
tradition he (S) says, “Each one of you should pray to Allah for
whatever you may need, even if your shoelace breaks, you ask Allah for
it.” Numerous traditions have been recorded to this effect as also the
verses of the Holy Qur’an. All this proves the efficacy of Dua for
patience wherever it is required. Because there are many instances where
patience is required but man is impatient. While on other occasions it
is not desirable. So the best option is to pray to Allah that He grant
us patience wherever it is appropriate.

For example: Many a times it so happens that one mistakes an occasion to
be that of patience while it is not so; and one is patient when he
should not have been and is not patient when he should have been. He
remains quiet when he should have spoken up and he speaks up when he
should have remained silent. It is a taufeeq from the Almighty Allah
that a person places each thing in its proper place and does everything
at its appropriate time. Thus a believer who wants to tread the path of
guidance, his duty is to beseech the Almighty to give him patience and
make him cognizant of the occasion, whether it demands patience or not.

For example: According to traditional reports Allah, the Mighty and
Sublime has ordered patience as mentioned in Kafi, in tradition of Imam
Ja’far Sadiq (as) in which he says: Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
specialized His messengers with the best of manners, thus check
yourself; if you are having those qualities, thank Allah, and know that
it is your excellence. If you don’t have those qualities, beseech the
Almighty Allah to bestow them to you.

Then His Eminence mentioned ten things: Certainty, contentment,
patience, thankfulness, good relationship, cheerful nature, generosity,
modesty, valor and forbearance.[^1] Some narrators have added:
Truthfulness and trustworthiness. In the same book, in another tradition
from His Eminence (aj) it is mentioned that he said: “I like one who is
intelligent, understanding, thoughtful, forbearing, patient, truthful
and loyal’ Allah, the Mighty and Sublime chose the messengers especially
for these excellent qualities, thus one who has these traits should
praise the Almighty Allah and one who lacks them should pray that the
Almighty Allah bestows him these. The narrator says: May I be sacrificed
on you, what are those qualities? His Eminence replied: Piety,
contentment, patience, thankfulness, forbearance, modesty, generosity,
valor, self respect, goodness and truthfulness.[^2]

[^1]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 56, Tr. no. 2

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 56, Tr. no. 3


