56: We Should Not Sit In The Assembly Where Disrespect Is Caused To Imam (As)
=============================================================================

The believer is obliged to keep aloof from the gatherings of deviated
people where ridicule is directed towards Imam (as) or where he is being
criticized. Where people raise objections against him and deny his
existence, or even if they are ignoring his remembrance. It even applies
to situations where a believer is been ridiculed. The Almighty Allah
says regarding such matters:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ أَنْ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللَّهِ يُكْفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلَا تَقْعُدُوا مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ ۚ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِثْلُهُمْ ۗ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ جَامِعُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْكَافِرِينَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ
جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah’s communications disbelieved in and mocked at, do not sit with
them until they enter into some other discourse; surely then you would
be like them; surely Allah will gather together the hypocrites and the
unbelievers all in hell. (Qur’an, Surah Nisa 4:140)***

In *Tafseer Ali bin Ibrahim Qummi* it is mentioned that he said: Signs
of Allah, are the Holy Imams (as).[^1]

According to a traditional report of Al-Kafi, Imam (as) was asked
regarding the following Qur’anic verse:

***And indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah’s communications disbelieved in and mocked at…***

He (as) said, “When we learn that such and such person denies the truth
and utters unsuitable things about Imam (as), we must get up from there
at once, no matter who that person is.”[^2]

In the same book, in a correct report from His Eminence, it is mentioned
that he said: One who believes in Allah and the Judgment Day does not
sit at a place where an Imam is being criticized or a believer is being
degraded.[^3] In the same book, it is narrated from, His Eminence (aj)
that he said: There are three types of gatherings that Allah hates and
sends His chastisement to their participants; so you should never attend
these gatherings: One: It is a gathering in which one decides to lie
about his verdicts. Second: In which the remembrance of the enemies is
refreshed and our remembrance is forgotten; and (thirdly) a gathering in
which there is refusal to follow us, while you know that such a thing is
there in that gathering. The narrator says: After that the Imam (as)
recited three verses from the Book of Allah as if they were on the tip
of his tongue – or he said: As if they were in his fist:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَسُبُّوا الَّذِينَ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ فَيَسُبُّوا
اللَّهَ عَدْوًا بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest
exceeding the limits they should abuse Allah out of ignorance. (Qur’an,
Surah Anaam 6:108)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا رَأَيْتَ الَّذِينَ يَخُوضُونَ فِي آيَاتِنَا فَأَعْرِضْ
عَنْهُمْ حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when you see those who enter into false discourses about Our
communications, withdraw from them until they enter into some other
discourse. (Qur’an, Surah Anaam 6:68)***

*And, for what your tongues describe, do not utter the lie, (saying)
This is lawful and this is* *unlawful, in order to forge a lie against
Allah.*[^4]

In the same book, it is narrated from His Eminence (aj) that he said:
Whenever you are caught up among the Nasibis and their gatherings, be
like one who is on the surface of a red stone, till you leave that
company, because the Almighty Allah is inimical to them and curses them.
So if you see that they are talking ill of any of the Imams, you must
get up from there because divine wrath will strike them at that
place.[^5]

And in the same book, in a correct report it is narrated from His
Eminence (aj) that he said: One who sits in the company of one who
abuses a holy personality, he has indeed disobeyed the Almighty
Allah.[^6] And in the same book, it is also narrated from His Eminence
(aj) that he said: One who sits in a gathering in which one of the Imams
is being abused, and he could leave that place, but he does not, the
Almighty Allah will make him degraded in the world and punish him in the
Hereafter. And what he has been bestowed regarding our Marifat will be
taken away from him.[^7]

In *Tafseer Burhan*, quoting from Kishi through the author’s own chain
of narrators from Muhammad bin Asim it is mentioned that he said: I
heard His Eminence, Imam Reza (as) say: O Muhammad bin Asim, I have come
to know that you sit in the company of Waqifis? I said: Yes, may I be
sacrificed on you, I sit with them opposing their views. His Eminence
(aj) said: Don’t sit in their company, Allah, the Mighty and Sublime
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ نَزَّلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الْكِتَابِ أَنْ إِذَا سَمِعْتُمْ آيَاتِ
اللَّهِ يُكْفَرُ بِهَا وَيُسْتَهْزَأُ بِهَا فَلَا تَقْعُدُوا مَعَهُمْ
حَتَّىٰ يَخُوضُوا فِي حَدِيثٍ غَيْرِهِ ۚ إِنَّكُمْ إِذًا مِثْلُهُمْ ۗ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ جَامِعُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْكَافِرِينَ فِي جَهَنَّمَ
جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah’s communications disbelieved in and mocked at do not sit with them
until they enter into some other discourse; surely then you would be
like them; surely Allah will gather together the hypocrites and the
unbelievers all in hell.(Surah Nisa 4:140)***

It implies the successors of Prophet and it is the Waqifis who deny
them.[^8]

I say: We should remember that here Waqifis are only one of the
implications; in the same way, the mention of successors is only one of
the implications of signs of Allah.

**Note:** From what we have seen under the interpretation of these
verses and other traditional reports it is clear that it is prohibited
to sit in the gathering of deviated people, some kinds of whom are
mentioned in the beginning of this discussion. Rather it is not merely
prohibited, it is a greater sin as Allah, the Mighty and Sublime has
said: You will also be like them. Thus one who sits in their company
will also be considered same as they are.

Rather, one who sits with them will be a hypocrite and eligible for
Hellfire as mentioned in the verse: surely Allah will gather together
the hypocrites and the unbelievers all in hell. Thus it is clear that it
is a greater sin. I beseech Allah, the Mighty and Sublime to give us
Taufeeq to do that with which He is pleased and keep us away from that
which causes His fury and anger.

It is mentioned in a Dua: Or perchance You find me in a gathering of
falsehood and leave me among them.

I say: This much divine anger would be enough to destroy us. I beg the
Almighty to keep us safe from such a situation. In duty number
fifty-eight we will mention some points to illustrate this point
further, Insha Allah.

[^1]: Tafseer Qummi, Vol. 1, Pg. 156

[^2]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 377

[^3]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 377

[^4]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 378, Tr. no. 12

[^5]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 379, Tr. no. 13

[^6]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 379, Tr. no. 14

[^7]: Usool Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 379, Tr. no. 15

[^8]: Tafseer Burhan, Vol. 1, Pg. 423, Tr. no. 4.


