Chapter 9: Types of Polytheism
==============================

Polytheism, in its various respects, has different divisions, some of
which we will examine hereunder:

1. Polytheism in Divinity
-------------------------

Polytheism in divinity denotes believing that besides Allah, another
being is equally effective in the existing cosmos. This has previously
been treated in detail under “longitudinal and latitudinal polytheism”,
and we adduced many reasons to prove that idolaters used to believe that
idols can harm and benefit man as well as intercede on his behalf. For
this reason, their polytheism can be called ‘ideological idolatry’; it
can also be termed ‘manifest polytheism**’** because they used to openly
declare their idolatry.

2. Polytheism in obedience
--------------------------

In this type of idolatry, the polytheist does not believe in the
existence of effective beings besides Allah, but follows and obeys
another creature besides Allah. The axis of this kind of polytheism is
following and obeying other than Allah.

Obeying other than Allah is of three kinds:

**First:** Obeying other than Allah because Allah has ordered man to do
so; for instance, Allah has ordered that the Noble Prophet (*s*) and the
Imāms (*‘a*) ought to be obeyed. This kind of obedience is exactly the
same as obeying Allah:

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you. And if you dispute concerning anything,
refer it to Allah and the Last Day. That is better and more favorable in
outcome.”***[^1]

Here, we do not have two kinds of obedience, but one kind, and this is
tantamount to monotheism.

**Second:** Obeying other than Allah in permissible matters of which
Allah has not given specific orders; for example, drinking water in
instances where Allah has not issued any specific orders. Now, if
someone issues a definite order to drink water and we obey him, this
would amount to obeying other than Allah, despite that it is not
incompatible with monotheism because we have obeyed someone in a matter
which Allah has permitted, even if it is not like the first kind, which
is exactly like obeying Allah.

**Third:** Obeying other than Allah in a matter which conflicts and is
incompatible with obeying Allah; for example, Allah has given orders
that the ritual prayers ought to be performed, and someone else forbids
the prayers. In this case, not performing the ritual prayers on account
of obeying someone besides Allah is tantamount to polytheism in
obedience; that is to say, one has preferred to obey someone other than
Allah and has believed that obedience, which a prerogative of Allah,
pertains to someone other than Allah. In short, obeying someone who
opposes Allah denotes polytheism in obedience, and this is *harām* and
forbidden. Obeying Satan is also of this kind.

### Democracy and obedience to Allah

Obeying any law which is incompatible or contrary to Allah’s injunctions
is polytheism in obedience, even if that law is [put forward] in the
form of democracy. Democracy is approved when it is compatible with
Divine injunctions or anything that is permitted by Divine law, but
there is no democracy in the *wājib* (obligatory religious duties) and
the *harām* (inviolable religious things). Even if all people were to
vote that ritual prayers ought to be renounced, or that alcohol ought to
be legalized, their ballot does not have any value.

Allah has commanded obedience to the Infallible Imām (*‘a*), and during
his Occultation, the Islamic jurist. Obeying the Islamic jurist and
leader is exactly the same as monotheism in obedience and following
forbidden democracy is exactly the same as polytheism in obedience.

It is for this same reason that the Constitution of the Islamic Republic
of Iran states that after the president has been elected, the consent or
endorsement of the Islamic jurist and leader is necessary, because the
people’s vote does not by itself give him the religious authority to
rule and be obeyed. The endorsement of the Islamic jurist and leader
makes obeying the president tantamount to obeying Allah, and exactly the
same as monotheism.

### The prohibition of polytheism in obedience

The following verse proves the prohibition of polytheism in obedience:

#### First verse:

***“Among the people are those who set up compeers besides Allah, loving
them as if loving Allah—but the faithful have a more ardent love for
Allah—though the wrongdoers will see, when they sight the punishment,
that power, altogether, belongs to Allah, and that Allah is severe in
punishment.”***[^2]

It has been mentioned in “*Majma‘ al-Bayān*” that this verse means one
of the following two possibilities:

1. Most interpreters of the Holy Qur’an have said that ‘compeers’
[*indād*] means idols worshipped by polytheists, meaning that some of
the people love idols in the same way that they love Allah.

2. Some interpreters of the Holy Qur’an have said that ‘compeers’ means
leaders and elders of any community who are obeyed and followed by their
community. There is a *hadīth* transmitted from Imām al-Bāqir (*‘a*)
that ‘compeers’ means oppressive leaders and their followers.

It is clear that ‘compeers’ does not exclusively mean leaders of a
community, but also includes others, such as idols, which are followed
by human beings. According to the second possibility, the above quoted
verse will be interpreted in this way, “Some people love and obey their
leaders in the same way that they love and obey Allah.”

It has thus been written in “*Tafsīr al-Mīzān*”, “‘Compeers’ does not
mean idols only, but also includes angels and human beings whom people
have taken as their leaders and whom they obey without Allah’s
permission. The following verse proves this assertion:

***“When those who were followed will disown the followers, and they
will sight the punishment while all their means of recourse will be cut
off.”***[^3]

It can be deduced that because verse 166 pertains to leaders of a
community and the people who follow them, verse 165 also refers to
leaders of a community and does not exclusively pertain to idols. This
is also confirmed by the aforementioned *hadīth* transmitted from Imām
al-Bāqir (*‘a*) that all oppressive leaders are conceived as
‘compeers’.[^4]

According to the meaning of the verse, as has also been mentioned in
“*Tafsīr al-Mīzān*”, every person who is followed besides Allah is
considered a compeer [of Allah], and obeying him is polytheism, even if
he is an ordinary person and not a leader of the community, and even if
we obey him besides Allah only on one instance.

#### Second verse:

***“As for those who stay clear of the worship of the Rebel and turn
penitently to Allah, there is good news for them. So give good news to
My servants who listen to the word [of Allah] and follow the best
[sense] of it. They are the ones whom Allah has guided, and it is they
who posses intellect.”***[^5]

It has thus been written in “*Majma‘ al-Bayān*”, “The Rebel [in the
above quoted verse] means idols and Satan, and other interpreters of the
Holy Qur’an have said that the Rebel [*tāghūt*] denotes every individual
who leads people to other than Allah. Therefore, it can be inferred that
the above quoted verse means that there is good news for those who stay
clear of the worship and obedience of idols, Satan and all people who
lead people to other than Allah.” We will later prove that worship
denotes obedience.

It may be asked why it has been inferred that people who follow the
Rebel are polytheists? The response is that the verses preceding the
above quoted verse pertain to polytheists. Verses 17 and 18 explain the
attributes of monotheists, one of which is staying clear of the worship
and obedience of the Rebel. Therefore, it becomes clear that the
opposite of this is worshipping and obeying Satan, and this refers to
polytheists.

Of course, we do not intend to say that juristic laws like being impure
and others result or derive from polytheism in obedience, but we would
like to say that one kind of polytheism is polytheism in obedience.

3. Manifest and hidden polytheism
---------------------------------

The term hidden polytheism [*shirk khafī*] is found a lot in books of
ethics.

Hidden polytheism is sometimes called minor polytheism [*shirk asghar*].
These two terms are employed as opposites of manifest polytheism [*shirk
jallī*] and greater polytheism [*shirk akbar*].

Hidden polytheism and/or minor polytheism have not been mentioned in the
Holy Qur’an, but with the help of some *hadīth*s, some verses have been
interpreted as referring to this kind of polytheism. We will discuss
this later.

Hidden polytheism has not been defined in the *hadīth*s, but what has
been mentioned in the traditions are explanations about instances and
examples of hidden polytheism. One criterion [for hidden polytheism] has
to be deduced by studying various instances of hidden polytheism.
Therefore, it is necessary to initially adduce some of the *hadīth*s in
which hidden polytheism has been mentioned:

1. Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) stated, “Do not be sanctimonious in your deeds,
and do not perform your actions with the intention of showing someone
who is not able to make you live or die, and who is not capable of
solving any one of your problems because ostentation is a tree whose
fruit is nothing else but hidden polytheism.”[^6]

2. Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) interpreted the Noble Prophet’s (*s*) statement
that “Polytheism is more hidden than the movement of an ant on a black
stone in a dark night,” thus, “The believers used to curse or speak ill
about idols. This made idolaters also lose respect for Allah. Allah
forbade Muslims from cursing idols so that unbelievers may not speak ill
of Allah. Therefore, as a result of their cursing idols, the believers
had unknowingly believed in a partner for Allah.”[^7]

Muslims can be conceived as becoming polytheists in two ways:

a) They became polytheists by opposing Allah’s prohibition that they
ought not to curse idols. Of course, this is hidden polytheism.

b) They became polytheists because they incite idolaters to speak ill of
Allah and this by itself is a kind propagating idolatry unknowingly.

3. The Noble Prophet (*s*) stated, “Refrain from minor polytheism.” They
asked him what minor polytheism meant. He responded, “It means
sanctimony and ostentation.”[^8]

The following are the verses which have been interpreted as referring to
hidden polytheism:

### First verse:

***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without ascribing partners
to Him.”***

Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) thus interpreted this verse, “A man who says that
if so and so were not there [to help him], he would have been afflicted
with hardships and his family would have been exterminated, has ascribed
a partner to Allah; a partner in whom he puts faith and believes that he
provides sustenance and repels calamities.” The transmitter of [this]
*hadīth* says, “I asked Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*), ‘Is saying that I would
have been afflicted by hardships if Allah had not been merciful to me by
sending so and so to help me the same as ascribing a partner to Allah?’
Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) responded, ‘This is not forbidden’.”[^9]

### Second verse:

***“Say, “I am just a human being like you. It has been revealed to me
that your God is One God. So whoever expects to encounter his Lord—let
him act righteously, and not associate anyone with the worship of his
Lord’.”***[^10]

In regard to this verse, Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) stated, “This kind of
polytheism is sanctimony.”[^11]

In another *hadīth*, a transmitter of traditions has said, “I went to
see the Noble Prophet (*s*) and noticed that his face showed signs of
anger. I asked why he was angry. His Holiness [the Noble Prophet (s)]
responded, ‘I fear lest my community become polytheists.’ I asked, ‘Your
community will become polytheists after you have left?’ The Noble
Prophet (*s*) responded, ‘Beware! My community will not worship the sun,
the moon, idols and/or stones, but will be sanctimonious in their deeds,
and sanctimony is exactly the same as polytheism, which I fear will
engulf my community.’ Then, he recited this verse, *‘So whoever expects
to encounter his Lord*—*let him act righteously, and not associate
anyone with the worship of his Lord’*.”[^12]

Characteristics of manifest and hidden polytheism
-------------------------------------------------

It is proper to explain the characteristics of manifest polytheism so
that we may infer the meaning and criterion of its opposite namely,
hidden polytheism. Manifest polytheism though not clearly defined in
Qur’anic verses and the *hadīth*s means the polytheism which the
prophets (*‘a*) battled with and which made monotheists and polytheists
encounter each other at war.

Characteristics of manifest polytheism
--------------------------------------

Here, we will not mention or explain all the characteristics of manifest
polytheism, but only some of them:

1. A polytheist who is engulfed by manifest polytheism believes that,
besides Allah, there is another being in the existing cosmos which is
independently effective and conceives idols as independent gods besides
Allah.

2. Polytheists who are under the influence of manifest polytheism love
their idols intensely, and are antipathetic to monotheism.

***“When Allah is mentioned alone, [thereat] shrink away the hearts of
those who do not believe in the Hereafter, but when others are mentioned
besides Him, behold, they rejoice!”***[^13]

It can be concluded from this verse that idolaters used to become
disgusted when monotheism was mentioned. This can also be inferred from
the following two verses:

***“And We cast veils on their hearts, lest they should understand it,
and a deafness into their ears. When you mention your Lord alone in the
Qur’an, they turn their backs in aversion.”***[^14]

***“Do not abuse those whom they invoke besides Allah, lest they should
abuse Allah out of hostility,***[^15] ***without any knowledge. That is
how to every people We have made their conduct seem decorous. Then,
their return will be to their Lord and He will inform them concerning
what they used to do.”***[^16]

Therefore, aversion to monotheism is one of the best distinctive
features of those engulfed by manifest polytheism.

3. Manifest polytheism was expressed through such actions as placing
idols in houses and tabernacles, and giving idols names such as Lāt and
‘Uzzā.

Absence of the aforementioned characteristics in hidden polytheism
------------------------------------------------------------------

None of the three aforementioned characteristics are found in a person
who is engulfed in hidden polytheism. Therefore, a person who is
affected by hidden polytheism has the following three qualities:

1. A person who is under the influence of hidden polytheism never
believes that there is an effective being independent of Allah and
latitudinal with Him [in the existing cosmos]. He does not believe that
there is a being which is effective besides Allah. Of course, out of
heedlessness, he may sometimes conceive that someone besides Allah is
effective, but as soon as he is admonished, he realizes his mistake and
repents.

2. A person who is under the influence of hidden polytheism never has
aversion for monotheism. He is not hostile when the Oneness of Allah is
mentioned, but loves the Oneness of Allah.

3. A person who is engulfed by hidden polytheism does not make
tabernacles for idols but is affected by sanctimony or ostentation.

Now, taking into consideration the aforementioned issues, we have to
define and set up a criterion for hidden polytheism. Evidently, the most
comprehensive criterion of hidden polytheism has been put forward by
Qal‘ajī, who has said, “Minor polytheism denotes considering or taking
into view a being other than Allah when performing deeds.”[^17]

This is a very good criterion.

But in a *hadīth* transmitted from Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*), a higher
criterion has been mentioned:

A transmitter of *hadīth* says, “I asked Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*) what this
Qur’anic verse means, ‘The Day when neither wealth nor children will
avail except him who comes to Allah with a sound heart.’ His Holiness
(*‘a*) responded, ‘A sound heart is one which meets Allah while there is
nothing besides Allah in it. This is attainable only by those who have
decided to be ascetic in this world so that their hearts may be prepared
for the hereafter’.”[^18]

This *hadīth* too has stated that the criterion of hidden polytheism is
paying heed to other beings instead of Allah. What have been mentioned
in the aforementioned *hadīth*s are instances of hidden polytheism. Of
course, the religious injunction for hidden polytheism is not like the
injunction for manifest polytheism. Manifest polytheism makes one a
pagan and impure, and the *jihād* against him becomes *wājib*
(obligatory), in the same way that the *jihād* against idolaters is
*wājib* (obligatory) once ordered by an [Infallible] Imām.

Sanctimony and non-devotional deeds
-----------------------------------

Another difference between hidden polytheism and other kinds of
polytheism is that hidden polytheism is not *harām* (prohibited) in all
instances. To illustrate this point, we will quote what Shahīd Āyatullāh
Dastghayb said, “Worldly affairs which do not have an aspect of worship
have not been explicitly classified as *harām* (prohibited). That is why
jurists do not issue religious decrees stating that it is *harām*
(prohibited). But as a precautionary measure, believers have to abstain
from all kinds of sanctimony, even in worldly affairs.”[^19]

Sanctimony in deeds which Allah has enjoined, such as the ritual, is
*harām* (prohibited), but it is not *harām* (prohibited) in ordinary
issues, such as eating food; for instance, it is not *harām*
(prohibited) for one to eat less out of sanctimony.

[^1]: Sūrat al-Nisā’ 4:59.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:165.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:166.

[^4]: Tafsīr al-Mīzān, vol. 1, p. 405, exegesis of verse 165 of Sūrat
al-Baqarah.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:17-18.

[^6]: Mustadrik al-Wasā’il al-Shī‘ah, vol. 2, p. 107, as quoted from
“Misbāh al-Sharī‘ah”.

[^7]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 69, p. 93, as quoted from “Tafsīr Qummī”.

[^8]: Kishāf, exegesis of verse 110 of Sūrat al-Kahf.

[^9]: Majma‘ al-Bayān, vol. 5, p. 462.

[^10]: Sūrat al-Kahf 110.

[^11]: Mustadrik al-Wasā’il, vol. 1, p. 104.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 109.

[^13]: Sūrat al-Zumar 39:45.

[^14]: Sūrat al-Isrā’ (or Banī Isrā’īl) 17:46.

[^15]: Or ‘out of transgression,’ or ‘wrongfully.’

[^16]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:108.

[^17]: Mu‘jam Lughah al-Fuqahā’, p. 261.

[^18]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, section [bāb] al-Ikhlās, hadīth 5.

[^19]: Greater Sins, discourse on polytheism [shirk bi’llāh].


