Chapter 10: What is Tawhīd (Monotheism)?
========================================

It is now proper for us to briefly discuss monotheism so that we may
understand what the term monotheist, which is contrasted with
polytheist, means and who is called a monotheist.

In “*Nahj al-Balāghah*”, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) said, “Monotheism denotes not
conjecturing about Him and justice means not accusing Him.”[^1]

It can be deduced from this statement that monotheism is the opposite of
polytheism, which denotes conjecturing about Allah. This *hadīth*
alludes to the root of idolatry and polytheism, which derive from
conjecture and fantasy. A polytheist imagines that Allah has partners.
This is confirmed by a *hadīth* transmitted from Imām al-Sādiq (*‘a*)
that, “Every person who imagines that Allah is like any one of His
creatures is a polytheist, because neither is Allah like a thing [from
among His creatures] nor is a thing [from among His creatures] like Him.
Allah is other than whatever is imagined [in the mind].”[^2]

It is said that an ant imagines that Allah, just like itself, has two
feelers (antennae). That is to say, it imagines Allah according to its
mental perception. We too [as] human beings do not have the right to
liken Allah to creatures as conceived by our minds. Allah is contrary to
whatever we may imagine and what He is other than what we conjure up.
With respect to Allah, we only have to say that He is Pre-eternal,
Everlasting, All-mighty and nothing is like Him. In this regard, it is
befitting to recount what Shaykh Mufīd has transmitted from Shaykh
Sadūq:

“Know that our Shi‘ite conviction is that Allah is One, who is not like
any creature. He is Pre-eternal and Everlasting. He hears, sees, and
knows. He is Wise and Alive, and He rules over everything. He is an
Invincible Power. He is Immaculate and Impeccable. He is Needless. He
cannot be described, and He has no body or substance. He has no length,
breadth and surface. He is neither heavy nor light. He is neither
stationary nor mobile. He has neither time nor place.

“He is not affected by qualities of creatures and none is like Him. He
is a thing that is not like other things. He is absolutely needless. He
neither has an off-spring nor is He someone’s offspring. He neither has
an equal nor a partner. Eyes and minds cannot conceive Him, but He
conceives eyes and minds. Sleep and slumber do not overcome Him, and He
knows every delicate thing. He is the Creator of every thing. There is
no god besides Him. The whole creation and all affairs are under His
reign. And whoever believes that Allah has a likeness is a polytheist.

“Whoever ascribes to the Imamate Shī‘ah other than what has been said is
a liar. And any *hadīth* which contains issues other than what has been
recounted has to be rejected as a forged and false tradition. And any
*hadīth* which is contrary to the Holy Qur’an is a false tradition, even
if it is found in Shī‘ah books.”[^3]

It can be deduced from Shaykh Mufīd’s statement and the assertions of
other people that Allah has no likeness and has all the attributes of
perfection [*sifāt-i* *kamāl*].

Nothing more than this can be said with respect to Allah.

Some philosophers have said that the existence of possible or contingent
beings with respect to the existence of Allah belongs to the category of
analogical gradation; that is to say, our existence is a weaker level
and the existence of Allah is a higher [or stronger] level. For
instance, the light of a candle and the light of the sun are both
lights, but they have different levels. Existence, just like light, has
levels.

In my opinion, it is better for us to refrain from such kinds of
discourses with respect to the Essence of Allah and make no judgments.
At least, we have to be cautious [when we make assertions concerning the
Divine Essence of Allah]. What has been explained are reflections about
Allah’s effects; one can reflect as much as he can regarding the effects
of Allah, but it is prohibited to meditate about His Divine Essence.

The goal of creation is monotheism and refutation of polytheism
---------------------------------------------------------------

Concerning the goal of creation, Allah states:

*“I did not create the jinn and the humans except that they should
worship Me.”*[^4]

Devotional service to Allah means submission to His Divine will and
acknowledging His oneness in all aspects, whether in beliefs or acts of
worship, and forsaking every kind of polytheism and idolatry.

It has been recounted in some *hadīth*s that the above quoted verse
means that the goal of creation is acquisition of knowledge and knowing
the One God. It is to be concluded that the jinn and humans have been
created to attain monotheism, to know Allah, the One, and to submit to
Him.

Monotheism conforms to man’s primordial nature
----------------------------------------------

Contrary to polytheism, which is an inclination to defection and opposed
to man’s primordial nature, monotheism is precisely in conformity with
man’s innate disposition. The reason why monotheism is man’s innate
disposition has already been explained under the discussion about the
monotheism of idolaters when confronted by crises. Qur’anic verses
denote that idolaters used to invoke Allah when the sea became stormy
and they were afraid of drowning, and that they used to forsake their
idols during those moments.

Here, it is proper for us to quote this verse:

***“So set your face on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of Allah according to which He originated mankind (there is
no altering Allah’s creation; that is the upright religion, but most
people do not know).”***[^5]

‘*The origination of Allah*’ [in the above quoted verse] denotes
monotheism. It means that Allah created man’s soul with a natural
inclination to worship Allah. It has been recounted in a *hadīth*
transmitted from the Noble Prophet (*s*) that every person was born with
an innate disposition to monotheism and the worship of Allah, but it is
their parents who deviate them to Judaism, Christianity and
Zoroastrianism.[^6]

The goal of prophets (‘a) is monotheism
---------------------------------------

Prophets (*‘a*) were delegated to exterminate polytheism and revive
monotheism. Prophets (*‘a*) came to deliver man from idolatry and make
him a monotheist. There are many verses in the Holy Qur’an which
indicate this, some of which we will quote hereunder:

***“Then, after them We brought forth another generation, and We sent
them an apostle from among themselves, saying, ‘Worship Allah! You have
no other god besides Him. Will they not then be wary [of Him]?’ Said the
elite of his people, who were faithless and who denied the encounter of
the Hereafter and whom We had given affluence in the life of the world:
‘This is just a human being like you: he eats what you eat, and drinks
what you drink. If you obey a human being like yourselves, you will
indeed be losers’.”***[^7]

***“They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah is intent on perfecting His light though the faithless should be
averse.”***[^8]

***“We did not send any apostle before you but We revealed to him that
‘There is no god except Me; so worship Me’.”***[^9]

It can be inferred from the above quoted verses that the aim of
delegating prophets (*‘a*) is to preach monotheism to mankind and put an
end to any kind of polytheism and idolatry.

In the entire course of history, prophets (*‘a*) fought against
polytheism and polytheists. The Noble Prophet (*s*) too was charged with
fighting idolatry and going to war against polytheists.

***“Fight them until faithlessness***[^10] ***is no more, and religion
becomes [exclusively] for Allah. Then, if they relinquish, there shall
be no reprisal except against the wrongdoers.”***[^11]

‘*Al-fitnah*’ basically means a trial, and it is employed in one of the
following three instances: 1) tribulation, 2) retribution, and 3)
obstructing the way of Allah and religion.

In the above quoted verse, it means polytheism.

The above quoted verse means that continue fighting until monotheism is
established and accepted [by all]. There should be no war after
monotheism has been established and accepted.

It has thus been written in “*Tafsīr al-Mīzān*”, “This verse exclusively
pertains to polytheists, and does not include the People of the Book
(i.e. Jews and Christians). Religion [*al-dīn*] denotes establishing
monotheism and refuting polytheism, and this is accepted by the People
of the Book, even if their beliefs are in reality [a kind of]
polytheism. Islam is content with their paying the *jizyah*[^12] and
there is no need to go to war with them so that they may pronounce the
phrase ‘There is no god except Allah’ [*lā ilāha illā allāh*].”

In “*Tafsīr al-Durr al-Manthūr*”, it has been said that ‘*fitnah*’ means
polytheism and religion [*al-dīn*] means the pronouncement ‘There is no
god except Allah’. And the Noble Prophet (*s*) stated, “Allah has
ordered me to fight until monotheism is established, after which war is
unnecessary.”[^13]

In “*Majma‘ al-Bayān*”, a tradition has been transmitted from Imām
al-Sādiq (*‘a*) that he said, “‘*Fitnah*’ means polytheism and
‘*al-dīn*’ denotes obeying Allah and submitting to His orders.”

It can be deduced from the purport of the above quoted verse as well as
the traditions that polytheism is by no means acceptable to Allah.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balāghah, sermon [khutbah] no. 462.

[^2]: Tawhīd Sadūq, p. 80, hadīth 36.

[^3]: Shaykh Mufīd, I‘tiqādāt, p. 21.

[^4]: Sūrat al-Dhāriyāt 51:56.

[^5]: Sūrat al-Rūm 30:30.

[^6]: Tafsīr ‘Illīyyīn, p. 407, as quoted from “Majma‘ al-Bayān”.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Mu’minūn 23:31-34.

[^8]: Sūrat al-Tawbah (or Barā’ah) 9:32.

[^9]: Sūrat al-Anbiyā’ 21:25.

[^10]: Or ‘polytheism’.

[^11]: Sūrat al-Baqarah 2:193.

[^12]: Head tax imposed on all non-Muslims living under the protection
of an Islamic government.

[^13]: Tafsīr Al-Mīzān, vol. 2, p. 62, 72.


