Chapter 7: Causes of Idolatry
=============================

In the previous lesson, it has been explained that idolatry was not
based on any proof, whether rational or transmitted from heavenly books.
On this basis, we have to find out what factors led them to this creed.
A few causes can be inferred from Qur’anic verses:

1. Not knowing Allah
--------------------

The first cause of idolatry was not having the correct knowledge of
Allah therefore equating Him with created things. It can be deduced from
a number of verses that polytheists used to conceive that Allah was the
same as created beings and that He had a spouse and offspring. Jews used
to believe that Ezra was the son of Allah and Christians used to
maintain that Jesus Christ was the son of God. They even used to believe
that Allah had taken a spouse, as can be inferred from the following
verses:

***“Exalted be the majesty of our Lord, He has taken neither any spouse
nor son.”***[^1]

***“Say, ‘He is Allah, the One. Allah is the All-embracing. He neither
begat, nor was begotten, nor has He any equal’.”***[^2]

In “*Nahj al-Balāghah*”, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has excellently explained the
ignorance of polytheists:

***“He originated the creation without any example which He could follow
and without any specimen prepared by any known creator that was before
Him. He showed us the realm of His might, and such wonders which speak
of His wisdom. The confession of the created things that their existence
owes itself to Him made us realize that all argument has been finished
about knowing Him (so that there is no excuse against it.) The signs of
His creative power and standard of His wisdom are fixed in the wonderful
things He has created. Whatever He has created is an argument in His
favor and a guide towards Him. Even a silent thing is a guide towards
Him as though it speaks, and its guidance towards the Creator is
clear.***

***O Allah! I stand witness that he who likens Thee with the
separateness of the limbs or with the joining of the extremities of his
body did not acquaint his inner self with knowledge about Thee, and his
heart did not secure conviction to the effect that there is no partner
for Thee. It is as though he has not heard the (wrongful) followers
disclaiming their false gods by saying, ‘By Allah, we had indeed been in
manifest error, when we equated you with the Lord of all the
worlds!”***[^3]

“They are wrong who liken Thee to their idols, and dress Thee with the
apparel of the creatures with their imagination, attribute to Thee parts
of body of their own thinking and consider Thee after the creatures of
various types, through the working of their intelligence. I stand
witness that whoever equated Thee with anything out of Thy creation took
a match for Thee, and whoever takes a match for Thee is an unbeliever,
according to what is stated in Thy unambiguous verses and indicated by
the evidence of Thy clear arguments. (I also stand witness that) Thou
art that Allah who cannot be confined in (the fetters of) intelligence
so as to admit change of condition by entering its imagination nor in
the shackles of mind so as to become limited and an object of
alterations.”[^4]

In this sermon, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has clearly explained that on account
of not having correct knowledge, idolaters used to conceive Allah as
created things and their deficient intellects used to imagine that he
had limbs and body parts.

In the paragraph preceding the above quoted one, Imām ‘Alī (*‘a*) has
stated:

“…Then look on questioner, be confined to those of His attributes which
the Qur’an has described and seek light from the effulgence of its
guidance. Leave to Allah that knowledge which Satan has prompted you to
seek and which neither the Qur’an enjoins you to seek nor is there any
trace of it in the actions or sayings of the Noble Prophet (s) and other
Imāms of Guidance. This is the extreme limit of Allah’s claim upon you.
Know that firm in knowledge are those who refrain from opening the
curtains that lie against the unknown, and their acknowledgement of
ignorance about the details of the hidden unknown prevents them from
further probe. Allah praises them for their admission that they are
unable to get knowledge not allowed to them. They do not go deep into
discussion of what is not enjoined upon them about knowing Him and they
call it firmness. Be content with this and do not limit the greatness of
Allah after the measure of your own intelligence, or else you will be
among the destroyed ones. He is the Powerful, such that when imagination
shoots its arrows to comprehend the extremity of His power; or the mind,
making itself free of the dangers of thoughts, tries to find Him in the
depth of His realm; or hearts, longing to grasp realities of His
Attributes and openings of intelligence, penetrate beyond description in
order to secure knowledge about His Being and cross the dark pitfalls of
the unknown concentrating upon Him, He turns them back. They return
defeated, admitting that the reality of His knowledge cannot be
comprehended by such random efforts, nor can an iota of the sublimity of
His honor enter the understanding of thinkers.”[^5]

Two points can be deduced from Imām ‘Alī’s (*‘a*) statement:

1. A person who knows Allah in the way that prophets (*‘a*) and the
Imāms (*‘a*) have instructed mankind cannot believe that Allah has a
partner. In short, if a person believes that Allah created the earth and
the sky and that whatever is between them belongs to Him can never hold
that Allah has a partner and an equal. How can a rational man maintain
that Allah’s partner is one of His own creatures? These two beliefs
cannot co-exist.

2. Taking the first point into consideration, and also considering that
idolaters used to believe that it was Allah who created the earth and
the sky and whatever is between them, the question which comes to mind
is: how did polytheists come to believe that Allah had a partner? The
response to this question is that the root of their polytheistic beliefs
lay in their misconception that Allah was like created things. They
imagined that Allah had a partner in the same way that two created
beings could be one another’s partner in cosmic affairs.

2. Self-worship
---------------

It can be inferred from the Holy Qur’an that another cause of idolatry
was following carnal desires. A number of verses denote this:

### First verse:

***“Say, ‘I have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke besides
Allah.’ Say, ‘I do not follow your desires, for then I will have gone
astray, and I will not be among the [rightly] guided’.”***[^6]

This verse denotes that in their idolatry, idolaters were under the
influence of their carnal and sensual desires.

### Second verse:

***“These are but names which you have coined—you and your fathers—for
which Allah has not sent down any authority. They follow nothing but
conjectures and the desires of the [lower] soul, while there has already
come to them the guidance from their Lord.”***[^7]

3. Blindly following their forefathers
--------------------------------------

It can be inferred from many verses of the Holy Qur’an that idolaters
used to believe in polytheism on account of blindly following their
fathers and the customs of their forefathers. We will adduce some verses
in this regard:

### First verse:

***“He said, ‘You have taken idols [for worship] besides Allah for the
sake of [mutual] affection amongst yourselves in the life of the world.
Then, on the Day of Resurrection you will disown one another and curse
one another, and the Fire will be your abode, and you will not have any
supporters’.”***[^8]

In “*Tafsīr al-Mīzān*”, this verse has been interpreted as denoting that
idolaters used to worship idols on account of their mutual affection and
family relations. When they were asked why they were worshipping idols,
they used to respond that they were following in the footsteps of their
fathers. Therefore, some people were idolaters because their fathers had
been idolaters and thus descendants too became polytheists on account of
affection and love for their ancestors.

### Second verse:

***“When they are told, ‘Follow what Allah has sent down,’ they say, ‘We
will rather follow what we found our fathers following.’ What! Even if
Satan be calling them to the punishment of the Blaze?”***[^9]

[^1]: Sūrat al-Jinn 72:3.

[^2]: Sūrat al-Ikhlās 112:1-4.

[^3]: Sūrat al-Shu‘arā 26:97-98.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balāghah, sermon [khutbah] no. 90.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Sūrat al-An‘ām 6:56.

[^7]: Sūrat al-Najm 53:23.

[^8]: Sūrat al-‘Ankabūt 29:25.

[^9]: Sūrat Luqmān 31:21.


