Introduction
============

Society is defined as an enduring and co-operating social group whose
members have developed organized patterns of relationships through
interaction with one another. Our world is vast and made up of many
societies, each having their own special pattern of relationships
connected through language, customs or common interests. These societies
tend to close themselves to others who do not share these common
factors. This is true for all societies, except one.

Muslims come from many countries. Indeed, we cannot find any country on
earth today that does not boast a Muslim community of some size. They
speak different languages, have different customs, and generally,
because of their specific environment, have different interests and
goals. What makes this society of more than 1 billion people so special
is that they all share a common belief in a superior religion; a
religion based on brotherhood and peace. Therefore, a Muslim from
Nigeria has no fear or apprehension when meeting a Muslim from Chicago
or Venezuela.

The bond between all Muslims is the single phrase:

*“There is no god but Allah, and Muhammad is His Messenger.”*

So, we have one billion brothers and sisters across the world believing,
without deviation, in one single thought. This belief makes the Muslim
society, or ummah, one of the most unique and the largest in all
history.

A society, as we defined it, is enduring. What makes it so? Propagation
of its message and guidelines not only familiarises those who are
estranged to its ideas, but also helps the society itself to better
understand its own responsibilities.

Islam is not a closed society. It is open to all of God's creation and
invites all to partake of its refreshing and cleansing waters. What are
the responsibilities of this great society and what is the
responsibility of a Muslim in this society? This booklet answers these
questions and gives the reader, Muslim and non-Muslim, a clear
understanding of Islamic duties and responsibilities in our world today.
We pray to Almighty Allah that its message will guide those who are part
of this society and those who may enter it, God willing.

AI-Balagh Foundation


