Responsibility
==============

The Messenger of Allah (s) said:

“No foot of a servant (of Allah) will move on the Resurrection Day
before being asked about four things: his years and how he spent them,
his body and how he used it, his wealth and how he earned and spent it,
and about his love towards us, the Ahlul Bayt (a) [^1]  
 Explanation:

The Prophet of Allah, Muhammad (s), teaches us, through this glorious
tradition hadith, that it is obligatory to make use of the blessings and
bounties that Almighty Allah granted us. It also explains to us that we
are held accountable for the way we use our time, property, health and
strength, and we should use them properly in the life of this world.

Surely Allah, the Most High, created man and gave him life for a certain
time. He gave him wisdom, strength, free will, wealth, etc. to enable
him to use them in doing good and useful deeds, obtaining knowledge, and
worshipping Him.

If man wastes these blessings and bounties without taking any advantage
of them, undoubtedly he will be held responsible for them on the
Resurrection Day.

Accordingly, man must be aware of his responsibility. He must feel a
responsibility to Allah on the Resurrection Day. Thus Allah, the
Almighty, will hold him to account on that Day for the wealth that He
gave him and how he obtained and used it. Did he obtain it through
lawful means like agriculture, industry, trading and the like, or
through unlawful ways like deceiving others, robbery, oppression and the
like? If he earned it through unlawful actions, his lot will be
punishment and torture. If his wealth was gained through lawful means,
most surely Allah will reward him and be pleased with him.

On the Resurrection Day, man will be questioned about the property that
he owned in the life of this world and how he used it. Did he spend it
on forbidden deeds such as drinking alcohol, gambling, frivolous
entertainment, etc? Or, did he spend it on himself and his family,
participating in establishing useful and charitable projects and
foundations to help the poor and needy?

He will also be questioned in the Hereafter about his time and youthful
strength and health. Did he use them in doing good deeds and in
obedience to Allah?

He will also be questioned about his love for the Ahlul Bayt (the
Prophet's pure and sinless Household). Definitely, the love of Ahlul
Bayt (a) is an obligatory duty upon all Muslims.

Through the narrations and traditions of the Prophet of Allah (s) it is
clearly obligatory for every Muslim to love the Ahlul Bayt (a) and obey
them, be faithful to them and act according to their instructions and
guidance.

The Holy Qur'an also makes clear to us that the love of the Ahlul Bayt
(a) is obligatory:

***“...say: I do not ask of you any reward for it (the message) but love
for my near relatives...” Holy Qur'an (42:23)***

The Prophet of Allah (s) interpreted and explained this verse to the
Muslims by saying that 'near relatives' referred to the household of the
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (s).

When they heard this verse the Muslims asked the Holy Prophet (s), “Who
are your near relatives, whose love Allah has made obligatory on us?”
The Apostle of Allah replied: “Ali, Fatimah and her two sons (Hasan and
Hussein).”[^2]

So, we understand that love for Ahlul Bayt and their offspring is an
obligation upon all Muslims. On Judgement Day they will be questioned
about this love, and whoever departs from the love of Ahlul-Bait indeed
departs from one of the obligatory duties of his religion and becomes
distant from the Holy Prophet Muhammad (s).

*The Best wisdom is to Fear Allah.*

[^1]: This hadith is narrated by Suyyoti in Ihya' al Mayyit, p.36.

[^2]: Al-Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-Kashshaf.


