How to Act Upon the Holy Qur'an
===============================

Our Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) said:

“Whoever makes unlawful deeds lawful, never believed in the Qur'an”.
[^1]

The Holy Qur'an is Allah's message revealed to Prophet Muhammad (s)
through His angel Gabriel (a). Allah, the Almighty, ordered the Prophet
(s) to convey it to all people, to guide them towards peace and
goodness, to instruct them in useful actions and to teach them to
abstain from evil actions and corruption.

Thus, the Qur'an teaches us issues and matters related to our religion.
Among them are:

1. To believe in Allah, His angels, His prophets and the Day of
Judgement.

2. To develop good manners and behaviour like telling the truth, love,
co-operation, respect of parents, etc.

3. To show us what is lawful (permitted) and what is unlawful
(forbidden), urging us towards lawful deeds and forbidding us from
unlawful ones. For instance, Allah made the following deeds unlawful
(forbidden): robbery, suicide, gambling, lying, injustice, theft,
wronging our neighbours, helping oppressors and those guilty of
wrongdoing, eating dead animals or the flesh of swine (pork), and
drinking alcohol.

It is obligatory for us, as Muslims, to give up these forbidden deeds
and others that the Holy Qur'an specifies as forbidden *haram*. This is
so because we believe that everything which is forbidden is useless and
fruitless for us and for other people.

Therefore it does not please us to be beaten or have our property stolen
or to be deceived or oppressed. We abstain from such forbidden deeds. We
realize that every forbidden act is useless to us and if we indulge in
them we will suffer Allah's displeasure. It becomes obligatory for us to
give them up.

Indeed, whoever gives up deeds forbidden by the Holy Qur'an is a
truthful believer of the Qur'an as Allah's word and he always follows it
during his life. Whoever does not give up these forbidden actions and
does them as if they are lawful is one who does not believe that the
Qur'an is Allah's word revealed to His Prophet ...because he does not
give up what Allah, the Most High, has forbidden. Hence, we should
think, whether a certain act is lawful or unlawful, before saying or
doing anything. If it is lawful we may do it, but if it is unlawful we
must abstain from doing it. Our Prophet Muhammad (s) says: Man is never
a true believer unless he gives up deeds forbidden by the Qur'an.

***Most Surely it is an Honoured Qur'an, in a Preserved Book
(56:77-78) ***

[^1]: Al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-Uqool an aali al-Rasool, p. 39


