Calling To Islam
================

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) narrates:

Once the Messenger of Allah (s) sent Imam Ali (a) to Yemen to guide
people to Islam, teach them Islamic laws and regulations, and to spread
Islam among the people. He said to Imam Ali (a):

*“Do not declare war on any person unless you have first invited him to
Islam.”*

This meant that he should begin the mission by spreading Islam and
explaining its principles to non-Muslims through clear proofs and
reason. This is so because Islam is the religion of reason and
knowledge. If any enter the faith, they become your brothers in
religion. If they refuse Islam then he should fight them for persisting
in their infidelity and unbelief, and wanting to defend oppression and
corruption.

The Messenger of Allah (s) said to Imam Ali (a), after explaining to him
how to spread Islam and convey its message:

“...if Allah guides only one person through you, it will be better for
you than all that the sun has risen or set over.”[^1]

By this noble hadith, the Messenger of Allah (s) explains the
significance of Islamic call Da'wah and its great importance to Allah,
the Almighty. He also points out the greatness of those who invite or
call others to Islam. These missionaries undertake the task of spreading
Islam and inviting non-Muslims to enter into the faith, thus saving them
from disbelief, oppression and corruption. They also undertake the duty
of guiding every deviated one who has gone astray from the right path,
by teaching Islamic laws, education and thoughts. They also explain the
right Islamic concepts.

Surely, whoever guides a deviator, whether non-believer in Islam or a
Muslim who commits evil deeds but misunderstands Islam, gains more to
his own benefit than owning the whole world because the possessions of
the world perish while the reward of guiding people will remain
permanent with Allah and will be a cause of Allah's pleasure. The
believer who guides people will enter Paradise. Guiding others will gain
the reward of Paradise and Allah's pleasure, while possessing the whole
world with its property and wealth will gain nothing in the Hereafter.

It is obligatory for every Muslim to be a caller to Islam and to spread
the word of Islam in every corner of the world. Today there are more
than one billion Muslims! Believers, through calling others, can convey
the Islamic religion to mankind and spread its message to different
parts of the world. Such work guides and reforms man. Without calling
people to Islam no one would be guided and the true religion can not
spread to others.

Muslims themselves should learn about Islam and act according to its
laws and principles, inviting others to believe in Islam and act
accordingly. Indeed guiding one person is better than whatever man
possesses in this world because this guidance is a step towards saving
people and reforming them. The meaning of guidance and Islamic Call
*Da'wah* is to spread Islam among people and to teach them Islamic laws,
principles and ideologies, as well as how to act and believe according
to these laws.

[^1]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol. 6, Kitab al-Jihad, Bab
wujud al-Du'a ila al-Islam.


