Opposing the Oppressors and the Unjust
======================================

It is narrated that the great companion, Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari
quoted the Messenger of Allah (s) as saying:

“Whoever pleases an unjust ruler, and deviates from the right path, is
expelled from the religion of Allah.”[^1]

We all know that the social life of any community requires the
establishment of a government that undertakes the task of providing
schools, universities, hospitals, roads, bridges, law and order, state
security, national defence, etc. So, Allah ordered Muslims to have a
state, a government and to also have a leader (an Imam) who has power,
authority and sovereignty.

The leader of the Muslims, who has power over everything related to
strength and authority, should possess the following qualifications:

1. He should be a free man, sane, pubescent, and of legitimate birth.

2. He should be pious (God-fearing) and just in his rule over the
people.

3. He should rule and govern according to Allah's laws and regulations
i.e. the Qur'an and the sunnah (tradition) of the Prophet (s).

4. He should have the ability to run the affairs of the state and be
familiar with the principles of government and politics.

5. He should be faqih (jurisprudent) and familiar with Islamic laws and
teachings.

It is obligatory for all Muslims to obey such a Muslim leader who
possesses the necessary qualifications, and to act according to his
instructions and to carry out his orders. In this case, obeying him will
be an obligatory duty for Muslims as long as he obeys Allah's
regulations. If, God forbid, he disobeys Allah and acts against His
laws, he should not be obeyed nor co-operated with.

Accordingly, the Messenger of Allah (s) says:

*“Whoever commits evil deeds such as murder, losing his temper,
oppressing others, drinking alcohol, and giving or taking bribes to
please an unjust ruler, or co-operates with him, is not a true Muslim.
He is expelled from the religion because Islam forbids these actions and
deeds.”*

The Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (s) says:

*“Never obey anyone when your obedience to him is disobedience to the
Creator.”*

Indeed, man's social life will not be happy except by following the
Divine laws revealed in the Holy Qur'an and Prophetic Traditions. For
both of them bid us to discard the forbidden actions, and to perform the
obligatory actions, protecting people's rights, establishing justice,
seeking bounty in life, guarding the interests of the Muslim community
and setting people free from the control of the oppressors.

Thus through these Islamic laws and instructions, we form a developed
Islamic society in which justice, mercy, love and equality exist and in
which all kinds of corruption, crime and aggression disappear.

*There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.There
is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.*

[^1]: Al-Tabari, Mishkat al-Anwar, Fasil al-Dukhul ala al-Salatin wa
ahwalihim.


