Advice
======

The Messenger of Allah (s) said:

“Religion is pure truth and sincerity.” He was asked: 'To whom should
this be addressed?' He replied: 'To Allah, His Messenger, Muslim leaders
(Imams), and to all Muslim communities.'” [^1]

The Messenger of Allah (s), through this hadith, explains the importance
of giving advice to others and shows us how a Muslim can be a good
advisor in the cause of Allah and His Messenger. The meaning of giving
good advice is to preserve the Islamic religion and convey its Divine
Message to all people in order to guide them to the right path.

Surely the Muslim who maintains and guards the Book of Allah against
distortions and forgery is a good advisor for Allah, the Almighty. The
Muslim who protects the Prophet's traditions against innovation and
falsities is also a good advisor for the Holy Prophet (s).

It is obligatory for Muslims to be characterised by good Islamic morals
including giving sound advice to others for the sake of Allah and His
Messenger.

Our Holy Prophet, Muhammad (s), emphasizes to Muslims that our religion
is giving advice to others. He himself came to guide people towards what
is right and forbid them from what is wrong. In fact, all prophets
(peace be upon them) came with their Scriptures to advise and guide
people towards righteousness and goodness in this world and the
Hereafter. This is the real meaning of giving advice for Muslims and
their leaders, *Imams*.

The leaders of religion are those scholars *ulama*' of the Muslims, and
their rulers, who govern the people according to Islamic laws,
*shari'ah.*

Therefore every Muslim should advise leaders if they make mistakes, do
not rule with justice or if they are not familiar with, or misinterpret
some Islamic obligations.

Giving advice to other Muslims has two aspects:

1. Guiding Muslim rulers to govern with truth, justice and equality, and
not to oppress the people, not to refuse to correct their actions, or to
supply services to society such as building universities, schools,
hospitals, industries, mosques, etc.

2. If those rulers are not familiar with Islamic laws, or disagree with
them, or do not rule according to Islamic laws, Muslims should explain
to them the right way of Islam and its laws. They should guide the
leaders towards righteousness and should not fear any unjust authority,
because Mlah has already authorised the ruler to do his job, including
giving advice, enjoining what is right and good and forbidding what is
wrong and bad.

It is also obligatory for a Muslim to give advice to Muslim scholars
*ulama'* if they do not enjoin good and forbid evil, or if these
scholars give verdicts (legal opinions) which contradict Allah's
instructions in order to please the oppressors or seek the pleasure of
the unjust for worldly gain.

Among the benefits of giving advice for the rest of the Muslims is to
keep them united. Without dividing them we should direct them towards
acting according to Islamic laws and co-operating with each other. This
also preserves their interests.

A Muslim advisor to his nation is the one who loves doing good and is
covetous of the interest of Muslims. He is the one who, when given
responsibility, practising a profession, or assuming leadership,
preserves Muslim property and interests, and guides the Muslims towards
good acts and obedience to Allah, the Almighty.

Giving advice can be done through a good speech, sermon or lecture. It
can be done through publications and broadcasting.

In the event that our good and Islamic advice falls on deaf ears of
unjust rulers or deviated scholars, in that case, Muslims should cut
their relations with them and not cooperate with them. They should
strive to replace them with good and righteous persons.

[^1]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, vol. 6, Abwab fil al-Ma'roof, Bab wujub nasihat
al-Mu'min.


