Good And Bad Deeds
==================

The Prophet of Allah (s) says:

“Whoever prescribes a good commandment and people practice it, he will
reap its reward and the reward of those who do it and nothing will
decrease their reward. Whoever prescribes a bad commandment and people
follow it, he will suffer its heavy burden and the burden of those who
practice it and nothing will decrease its burden. [^1]

If we look at the people who live in a human society, among them we will
find those who do righteous deeds, goodness and favours to people
because they love goodness for all. For instance, there is one who
builds a school for his community or a hospital, or establishes a
charitable association to call people to Islam. He collects and
distributes charity to the poor. He founds a co-operative factory or
farm to provide employment. He does what is right and forbids what is
wrong.

When we see such a righteous and beneficent man, we cooperate and
participate with him in doing good deeds and try to follow his example.
People learn to do good deeds from his example. Certainly, this man is
the cause of others doing good deeds: it is he who awakens and guides
them towards doing such useful and good deeds. Without him, others might
not do such good actions. This man who prescribed the good commandment,
i.e., he enjoined righteous deeds among the people he knew, and started
useful beneficial projects for his community, deserves a reward
increased by the rewards of the people who are guided by him to do good
deeds because of his advice and example. This multiple reward is due to
him, for he directed and advised the people to do good deeds, and
without him no one might have been guided to righteousness. Thus the
Holy Prophet (s) says:

“Whoever guides (others) towards good is like the doer of it.”[^2]

Among the people we may also find one who is evil and wicked. He lives
in the community like a germ in the human body. He not only weakens
society but, being a contagious element, spreads evil to others. This
man causes corruption and evil actions that spread ugly deeds. He sets
up dens of evil and contrives to corrupt society. His corrupting actions
include wildly extravagant and grossly self-indulgent spending, deceit,
promiscuity, gambling, drinking alcohol, drug abuse, etc. As the people
follow his corrupt deeds, he is responsible not only for his own sinful
deeds, but also for the sins of those who follow his example. This is
because he advised them toward evil deeds. He is the main cause for the
existence of corruption, injustice and evil in a society. Without him,
this corruption and evil would not have spread.

Surely, we can see that Islam is the religion of reformation, goodness
and righteousness.

**Summary**

1. Islam is the religion of goodness and righteousness. It orders
Muslims to do good deeds so that others may follow them.

2. Whoever prescribes a good commandment for the people will have the
reward like the doer of the deed.

3. Whoever prescribes a bad commandment for the people will have the
punishment like the doer of the deed.

[^1]: Sunan Ibn Maj, Majma' al-Bayan, al-Tabrasi

[^2]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'a, vol. 6, Kitab al-Amr bil
al-Ma'roof


