Forbidding What Is Wrong
========================

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) narrates that the Messenger of Allah (s) said:

*“Surely Allah, the Almighty, dislikes the believer who is weak in his
faith” He was asked: 'Who is the believer who is weak in his faith?' He
answered: “The one who does not forbid what is wrong.”*[^1]

Human society contains people who like to do good and righteous deeds
that benefit all people and put right the wrong in society. These people
never do forbidden acts, neither do they abandon their obligations or
acts of charity.

On the other hand there are people who are wicked and corrupt. They seek
to spread corruption. They do sinful and harmful deeds in the society in
which they live, such as: deceiving, drinking alcohol, gambling,
hoarding food supplies, transgressing the rights of others, dealing
drugs, and spreading promiscuity. They take power over the society and
rule with oppression and enmity. They govern with injustice and disobey
the Islamic laws and system.

It is obligatory for all Muslims to stand against such corruption and
prevent it from continuing. These corrupt people disobey Allah's orders
and do not defend the laws of the Islamic society, nor do they respect
the rights of others.

Allah, the Just, will hold the Muslims accountable, and punish them on
the Day of Judgement if they keep silent against such people. Indeed,
whoever keeps silent against corruption, he encourages its spread! These
peddlers of corruption are like germs in the human body; they destroy it
completely and even contaminate others if they are not stopped.

The Holy Prophet of Allah (s) says, that whoever does not forbid what is
wrong is weak in faith and has no sincerity towards his religion. If a
Muslim is true and sincere in his belief, he will do his utmost to
prevent such wicked and harmful deeds.

Let us be truthful and sincere believers who do what is right and forbid
what is wrong. Such actions are among the qualities of the prophets
(peace be upon them). Let us not be weak in faith or be passive to what
is wrong.

**Summary**

1. Forbidding what is wrong is an obligation upon every Muslim who can
perform it. It is among the means of reforming and saving the society
from evil and corruption.

2. Among the qualifications of a believer is enjoining what is right and
forbidding what is wrong.

3. Whoever does not forbid what is wrong is weak in his faith, because
he does not defend Allah's religion.

4. Indeed Allah dislikes the one who keeps silent when seeing any
forbidden act.

[^1]: Al-Hurr al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'a Bab al-Amir bil Ma'roof.


