Acknowledgements
================

I have been reading about Orientalism for a number of years, but most of
this book was written during 1975-1976, which I spent as a Fellow at the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioural Sciences, Stanfort,
California. In this unique and generous institution, it was my good
fortune not only to have benefited agreeably froms several colleagues,
but also from the help of Joan Warmbrunn, Chris Hoth, Jane Kielsmeier,
Preston Cutler, and the center’s director, Gardner Lindzey. The list of
friends, colleagues, and students who read, or listened to, parts or the
whole of this manuscript is so long as to embarrass me, and now that it
has finally appeared as a book, perhaps even them, Nevertheless I should
mention with gratitude the always helpful encouragement of Janet and
Ibrahim Abu-Lughod, Noam Chomsky, and Roger Owen, who followed this
project from its beginning to its conclusion. Likewise I must gratefully
acknowledge the helpful and critical interest of the colleagues,
friends, and students in various places whose questions and discussion
sharpened the text considerably. Andre Schiffrin and Jeanne Morton of
Pantheon Books were ideal publisher and copy editor, respectively, and
made the ordeal (for the author, at least) of preparing the manuscript
an instructive and genuinely intelligent process. Marian Said helped me
a great deal with her research on the early modern history of
Orientalist institutions. Apart from that, though, her loving support
really made much of the work on this book not only enjoyable but
possible.

**E.W.S.**

**New York**

**Septemer-October 1977**

*They cannot represent themselves; they must be represented.*

*-Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire*

**   of Louis Bonaparte**

*The East is a career.*

**Benjamin Disraeli, Tancred**
