Introduction
============

I

On a visit to Beirut during the terrible civil war of 1975-1976 a French
journalist wrote regretfully of the gutted downtown area that “it had
once seemed to belong to ...the Orient of Chateaubriand and Nerval.”1 He
was right about the place, of course, especially so far as a European
was concerned. The Orient was almost a European invention, and had been
since antiquity ‘a place of romance, exotic beings, haunting memories
and landscapes, remarkable experiences. Now it was disappearing; in a
sense it had happened, its time was over. Perhaps it seemed irrelevant
that Orientals themselves had something at stake in the process, that
even in the time of Chateaubriand and Nerval Orientals had lived there,
and that now it was they who were suffering; the main thing for the
European visitor was a European representation of the Orient and its
contemporary fate, both of which had a privileged communal significance
for the journalist and his French readers.

Americans will not feel quite the same about the Orient, which for them
is much more likely to be associated very differently with the Far East
(China and Japan, mainly). Unlike the Americans, the French and the
British-less so the Germans, Russians, Spanish, Portuguese, Italians,
and Swiss-have had a long tradition of what I shall be calling
Orientation a way of coming to terms with the Orient that is based on
the Orient’s special place in European Western experience. The Orient is
not only adjacent to Europe; it is also the place of Europe’s greatest
and richest and oldest colonies, the source of its civilizations and
languages, its cultural contestant, and one of its deepest and most
recurring images of the other. In addition, the Orient has helped to
define Europe (or the West) as its contrasting image, idea, personality,
experience. Yet none of this Orient is merely imaginative. The Orient is
an integral of European material civilization and culture. Orientalism
expresses and represents that part culturally and even ideologically as
a mode of discourse with supporting institutions, vocabulary,
scholarship, imagery, doctrines, even colonial bureaucracies and
colonial styles. In contrast, the American understanding of the Orient
will seem considerably less dense, although our recent Japanese, Korean,
and Indochinese adventures ought now to be creating a more sober, more
realistic “Oriental” awareness. Moreover, the vastly expanded American
political and economic role in the Near East (the Middle East) makes
great claims on our understanding of that Orient.

It will be clear to the reader (and will become clearer still throughout
the many pages that follow) that by Orientalism I mean several things,
all of them, in my opinion, interdependent. The most ‘read adily
accepted designation for Orientalism is an academic one, and indeed the
label still serves in a number of academic institutions. Anyone who
teaches, writes about, or researches the Orient-and this applies whether
the person is an anthropologist, sociologist, historian, or
philologist-either in its specific or its general aspects, is an
Orientalist, and what he or she does is Orientalism. Compared with
Oriental studies or area studies, it is true that the term Orientalism
is less preferred by specialists today, both because it is too vague and
general and because it connotes the high-handed executive attitude of
nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century European colonialism.
Nevertheless books are written and congresses held with “the Orient” as
their main focus, with the Orientalist in his new or old guise as their
main authority. The point is that even if it does not survive as it once
did, Orientalism lives on academically through its doctrines and theses
about the Orient and the Oriental.

Related to this academic tradition, whose fortunes, transmigrations,
specializations, and transmissions are in part the subject of this
study, is a more general meaning for Orientalism. Orientalism is a style
of thought based upon an ontological and epistemological distinction
made between “the Orient” and (most of the time) “the Occident.” Thus a
very large mass of writers, among whom are poets, novelists,
philosophers, political theorists, economists, and imperial
administrators, have accepted the basic distinction between East and
West as the starting point for elaborate theories, epics, novels, epics,
social descriptions and political accounts concerning the Orient, its
people, customs, “mind,” destiny, and so on. This Orientalism can
accommodate Aeschylus, say, and Victor Hugo, Dante and Karl Marx. A
little later in this introduction I shall deal with the methodological
problems one encounters in so broadly construed a “field” as this.

The inter change between the academic and the more or less imaginative
meaning of Orientalism is a constant one, and since the late eighteenth
century there has been a considerable, quite disciplined-perhaps even
regulated-traffic between the two. Here I come to the third meaning of
Orientalism, which is something more historically and materially defined
than either of the other two. Taking the late eighteenth century as a
very roughly defined starting point Orientalism can be discussed and
analyzed as the corporate institution for dealing with the
Orient-dealing with it by making statements about it, authorizing views
of it, describing it, by teaching it settling it, ruling over it: in
short, Orientalism as a Western style for dominating restructuring, and
having authority over the Orient. I have found it useful here to employ
is a Foucault’s notion of a discourse, as described by him in The
Archaeology of Knowledge and in Discipline and Punish, to identify
Orientalism. My contention is that without examining Orientalism as a
discourse one cannot possibly understand the enormously systematic
discipline by which European culture was able to manage-and even
produce-the Orient politically , sociologically, militarily,
ideologically, scientifically, and imaginatively during the
post-Enlightenment period. Moreover, so authoritative a position did
Orientalism have that I believe no one writing, thinking, or acting on
the Orient could do so without taking account of the limitations on
thought and action imposed by Orientalism. In brief, because of
Orientalism the Orient was not (and is not) a free subject of thought or
action. This is not to say that Orientalism unilaterally determines what
can be said about the Orient, but that it is the-whole network of
interests inevitably brought to bear on (and therefore always involved)
any occasion when that peculiar entity “the Orient” is in question. How
this happens is what this book tries to demonstrate. It also tries to
show that European culture gained in strength and identity by setting
itself off against the Orient as a sort of surrogate an even underground
self. ,

Historically and culturally there is a quantitative as well as a
qualitative difference between the Franco-British involvement in the
Orient and-until the period of American ascendancy after World War
II-the involvement of every other European and Atlantic power. To speak
of Orientalism therefore is to speak mainly, although not exclusively,
of a British and French cultural enterprise a project whose dimensions
take in such disparate realms as the imagination itself, the whole of
India and the Levant, the Biblical texts and the Biblical lands, the
spice trade, colonial armies and a long tradition of colonial
administrators, a formidable scholarly corpus, innumerable Oriental
“experts” and “hands,” an Oriental professorate, a complex array of
“Oriental” ideas (Oriental despotism, Oriental splendor, cruelt ,
sensuality), many Eastern sects, philosophies, and wisdoms domesticated
for local European use-the list can be extended more or less
indefinitely. My point is that Orientalism derives from a particular
closeness experienced between Britain and France and the Orient, which
until the early nineteenth century had really meant only India and the
Bible lands. From the beginning of the nineteenth century until the end
of World War II France and Britain dominated the Orient and Orientalism;
since World War II America has dominated the Orient, and approaches it
as France and Britain once did. Out of that closeness whose dynamic is
enormously productive even if it always demonstrates the comparatively
greater strength of the Occident (British, French, or American), comes
the large body of texts I call Orientalist.

It should be said at once that even with the generous number of books
and authors that I examine, there is a much larger number that I simply
have had to leave out. My argument, however, depends neither upon an
exhaustive catalogue of texts dealing with the Orient nor upon a clearly
delimited set of texts, authors, and ideas that together make up the
Orientalist canon. I have depended instead upon a different
methodological alternative-whose backbone in a sense is the set of
historical generalizations I have so far been making in this
Introduction-and it is these I want now to discuss in more analytical
detail.

II

I have begun with the assumption that the Orient is not an inert fact of
nature. It is not merely there, just as the Occident itself is not just
there either: We must take seriously Vico’s great observation that men
make their own history, that what they can know is what they have made,
and extend it to geography: as both geographical and cultural
entities-to say nothing of historical entities -such locales, regions
geographical sectors as “Orient” and “Occident” are man-made. Therefore
as much as the West itself, the Orient is an idea that has a history and
a tradition of thought, imagery, and vocabulary that have given it
reality and presence in and for the West. The two geographical entities
thus support and to an extent reflect each other.

Having said that, one must go on to state a number of reasonable
qualifications. In the first place, it would be wrong to conclude that
the Orient was essentially an idea, or a creation with no corresponding
reality. When Disraeli said in his novel Tancred that the East was a
career, he meant that to be interested in the East was something bright
young Westerners would find to be an all consuming passion; he should
not be interpreted as saying that the East was only a career for
Westerners. There were-and are- cultures and nations whose location is
in the East, and their lives, histories, and customs have a brute
reality obviously greater than anything that could be said about them in
the West. About that fact this study of Orientalism has very little to
contribute, except to acknowledge it tacitly. But the phenomenon of
Orientalism as I study it here deals principally, not with a
correspondence between Orientalism and Orient, but with the internal
consistency of Orientalism and its ideas about the Orient (the East  as
career) despite or beyond  any correspondence, or lack thereof, with a
“real” Orient. My point is that Disraeli’s statement about the East
refers mainly to that created consistency, that regular constellation of
ideas as the pre-eminent thing about the Orient, and not to its mere
being, as Wallace Stevens’s phrase has it.

A second qualification is that ideas, cultures, and histories cannot
seriously be understood or studied without their force, or more
precisely their configurations of power, also being studied.To believe
that the Orient was created-or, as I call it, “Orientalized” -and to
believe that such things happen simply as a necessity of the
imagination, is to be disingenuous. The relationship between Occident
and Orient is a relationship of power, of domination, of varying degrees
of a compex hegemony an is quite accurately indicated in the title of K.
M. Panikkar’s classic Asia and Western Dominance.’ The Orient was
Orientalized not only because it was discovered to be “Oriental” in all
those ways considered common-place by an average nineteenth-century
European, but also because it could be-that is, submitted to being-made
Oriental. There is very  little  consent to be found, for example, in
the fact that Flau- bert’s encounter with an Egyptian courtesan produced
a widely in fluential model of the Oriental woman; she never spoke of
herself, she never represented her emotions, presence, or history. He
spoke for and represented her. He was foreign, comparatively wealthy,
male, and these were historical facts of domination that allowed him not
only to possess Kuchuk Hanem physically but to speak for her and tell
his readers in what way she was “typically Oriental.” My argument is
that Flaubert’s situation of strength in relation to Kuchuk Hanem was
not an isolated instance. It fairly stands for the pattern of relative
strength between East and West, and the discourse about the Orient that
it enabled.

This brings us to a third qualification. One ought never to assume that
the structure of Orientalism is nothing more an a structure of lies or
of myths which were the truth about them to be told, would simply blow
away. I myself believe that Orientalism is more particularly valuable as
a sign of European-Atlantic power over the Orient then it is as a
veridic discourse about the Orient (which is what, in its academic or
scholarly form, it claims to be). Never theless, what we must respect
and try to grasp is the sheer knitted together strength of Orientalist
discourse, its very close ties to the enabling socio-economic and
political institutions, and its redoubt- able durability. After all, any
system of ideas that can remain unchanged as teachable wisdom (in
academies, books, congresses, universities, foreign-service institutes)
from the period of Ernest Renan in the late 1840s until the present in
the United States must be something more formidable than a mere
collection of. lies. Orientalism, therefore, is not an airy European
fantasy about the Orient but a created body of theory and practice in
which, for many rations, there has been a considerable material
investment. Continued investment made Orientalism, as a system of
knowledge about the Orient, an accepted grid for filtering through the
Orient into Western consciousness, just as that same investment
multiplied-indeed, made truly productive-the statements proliferating
out from Orientalism into the general culture.

Gramsci has made the useful analytic distinction between civil and
political society in which the former is made up of voluntary (or
atleast rational and noncoercive) affiliations like schools, families,
and unions, the latter of state institutions (the army, the police, the
central bureaucracy) whose role in the polity is direct domination.
Culture, of course, is to be found operating within civil society, where
the influence of ideas, of institutions, and of other persons works not
through domination but by what Gramsci calls consent. In any society not
totalitarian, then, certain cultural forms predominate over others, just
as certain ideas are more in- fluential than others; the form of this
cultural leadership is what Gramsci has identified as hegemony, an
indispensable concept for any understanding of cultural life in the
industrial West. It is hegemony, or rather the result of cultural
hegemony at work, that gives Orientalism the durability and the strength
I have been speaking about so far. Orientalism is never far from what
Denys Hay has called the idea of Europe,3 a collective notion
identifying “us” Europeans as against all “those” non-Europeans, and
indeed it can be argued that the major component in European culture is
precisely what made that culture hegemonic both in and outside Europe:
the idea of European identiy as a superior one in comparison with all
the non-European peoples and cultures. There is in addition the hegemony
of European ideas about the Orient, themselves reiterating European
superiority over Orental backwardness usually overriding the possibility
that a more independent, or more skeptical, thinker might have had
different views on the matter.

In a quite constant way, Orientalism depends for its strategy on this
flexible positional superiority, which puts the Westerner in a whole
series of possible relationships with the Orient without ever losing him
the relative upper hand. And why should it have been otherwise,
especially during the period of extraordinary European ascendancy from
the late Renaissance to the present? The scientist, the scholar, the
missionary, the trader, or the soldier was in, or thought about, the
Orient because he could be there, or could think about it, with very
little resistance on the Orient’s part. Under the general heading of
knowledge of the Orient, and within the umbrella of Western hegemony
over the Orient during the period from the end of the eighteenth
century, there emerged a complex Orient suitable for study in the
academy, for display in the museum, for reconstruction in the colonial
office, for theoretical illustration in anthropological, biological,
linguistic, racial, and historical theses about mankind and the
universe, for instances of economic and sociological theories of
development, revolution, cultural personality, national or religious
character. Additionally, the imaginative examination of things Oriental
was based more or less exclusively upon a sovereign Western
consciousness out of whose unchallenged centrality an Oriental world
emerged, first according to general ideas about who or what was an
Oriental, then according to a detailed logic governed not simply by
empirical reality but by a battery of desires, regressions, investments,
and projections. If we can point to great Orientalist works of genuine
scholarship like Silvestre de Sacy’s Chrestomathie arabe or Edward
William Lane’s Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern
Egyptians, we need also to note that Renan’s and Gobineau’s racial ideas
came out of the same impulse, as did a great many Victorian pornographic
novels (see the analysis by Steven Marcus of “The Lustful Turk”4 \`).

And yet, one must repeatedly ask oneself whether what matters in
Orientalism is the general group of ideas overriding the mass of
material-about which who could  deny that they were shot through with
doctrines of European superiority, various kinds of racism, imperialism,
and the like, dogmatic views of “the Oriental” as a kind of ideal and
unchanging abstraction? - or the much more varied work produced by
almost uncountable individual writers, whom one would take up as
individual instances of authors dealing with the Orient. In a sense the
two alternatives, general and particular, are really two perspectives on
the same material: in both instances one would have to deal with
pioneers in the field like William Jones, with great artists like Nerval
or Flaubert. And why would it not be possible to employ both
perspectives together, or one after the other? Isn’t there an obvious
danger of distortion (of precisely the kind that academic Orientalism
has always been prone to) if either too general or too specific a level
of description is maintained systematically?

My two fears are distortion and inaccuracy, or rather the kind of
inaccuracy produced by too dogmatic a generality and too positivistic a
localized focus. In trying to deal with these problems I have tried to
deal with three main aspects of my own contemporary reality that seem to
me to point the way out of the methodological or perspectival
difficulties I have been discussing, difficulties that might force one,
in the first instance, into writing a coarse polemic on so unacceptably
general a level of description as not to be worth the effort, or in the
second instance, into writing so detailed and atomistic a series of
analyses as to lose all track of the general lines of force informing
the field, giving it its special cogency. How then to recognize
individuality and to reconcile it with its intelligent, and by no means
passive or merely dictatorial, general and hegemonic context?

III

I mentioned three aspects of my contemporary reality: I must explain and
briefly discuss them now, so that it can be seen how I was led to a
particular course of research and writing.

1. The distinction between pure and political knowledge. It is very easy
to argue that knowledge about Shakespeare or Wordsworth is not political
whereas knowledge about contemporary China or the Soviet Union is. My
own formal and professional designation is that of “humanist,” a title
which indicates the humanities as my field and therefore the unlikely
eventuality that there might be anything political about what I do in
that field. Of course, all these labels and terms are quite unnuanced as
I use them here, but the general truth of what I am pointing to is, I
think, widely held. One reason for saying that a humanist who writes
about Wordsworth, or an editor whose specialty is Keats, is not involved
in anything political is that what he does seems to have no direct
political effect upon reality in the everyday sense. A scholar whose
field is Soviet economics works in a highly charged area where there is
much government interest, and what he might produce in the way of
studies or proposals will be taken up by policymakers, government
officials, institutional economists, intelligence experts. The
distinction between “humanists” and persons whose work has policy
implications, or political significance, can be broadened further by
saying that the former’s ideological color is a matter of incidental
importance to politics (although possibly of great moment to his
colleagues in the field, who may object to his Stalinism or fascism or
too easy liberalism), whereas the ideology of the latter is woven
directly into his material-indeed, economics, politics, and sociology in
the modern -academy are ideological sciences-and- therefore taken for
granted as being “political.” .

Nevertheless the determining impingement on most knowledge produced in
the contemporary West (and here I speak mainly about the United States)
is that it be nonpolitical, that is, scholarly, academic, impartial,
above partisan or small-minded doctrinal belief. One can have no quarrel
with such an ambition in theory, perhaps, but in practice the reality is
much more problematic. No one has ever devised a method for detaching
the scholar from the circumstances of life, from the fact of his
involvement (conscious or unconscious) with a class, a set of beliefs, a
social position, or from the mere activity of being a member of a
society. These continue to bear on what he does professionally, even
though naturally enough his research and its fruits do attempt to reach
a level of relative freedom from the inhibitions and the restrictions of
brute, everyday reality.For there is such a thing as knowledge that is
less, rather than more, partial than the individual (with his entangling
and distracting life circumstances) who produces it. Yet this knowledge
is not therefore automatically nonpolitical.

Whether discussions of literature or of classical philology are fraught
with - or have unmediated-political significance is a very large
question that I have tried to treat in some detail elsewhere.’ What I am
interested in doing now is suggesting how the general liberal consensus
that “true” knowledge is fundamentally non political (and conversely,
that overtly political knowledge is not “true” knowledge) obscures the
highly if obscurely organized political circumstances obtaining when
knowledge is produced. No one is helped in understanding this today when
are adjective “political” is used as a label to discredit any work for
daring to violate the protocol of pretended suprapolitical objectivity.
We may say, first, that civil society recognizes a gradation of
political importance in the various fields of knowledge. To some extent
the political importance given a field comes from the possibility of its
direct translation into economic terms; but to a greater extent
political importance comes from the closeness of a field to
ascertainable sources of power in political society. Thus an economic
study of long-term Soviet energy potential and its effect on military
capability is likely to be commissioned by the Defense Department, and
thereafter to acquire a kind of political status impossible for a study
of Tolstoi’s early fiction financed in part by a foundation. Yet both
works belong in what civil society acknowledges to be a similar field,
Russian studies, even though one work may be done by a very conservative
economist, the other by a radical literary historian. My point here is
that “Russia” as a general subject matter has political priority over
nicer distinctions such as “economics” and “literary history,” because
political society in Gramsci’s sense reaches into such realms of civil
society as the academy and saturates them with significance of direct
concern to it.

I do not want to press all this any further on general theoretical
grounds: it seems to me that the value and credibility of my case can be
demonstrated by being much more specific, in the way, for example, Noam
Chomsky has studied the instrumental connection between the Vietnam War
and the notion of objective scholarship as it was applied To cover
state-sponsored military research. Now because Britain, France, and-
recently the United States are imperial powers, their political
societies impart to their civil societies a sense of urgency, a direct
political infusion as it were, where and whenever matters pertaining to
their imperial interests abroad are concerned. I doubt that it is
controversial, for example, to say that an Englishman in India or Egypt
in the later nineteenth century took an interest in those countries that
was never far from their status in his mind as British colonies. To say
this may seem quite different from saying that all academic knowledge
about India and Egypt is somehow tinged and impressed with, violated by,
the gross political fact-and that is what 1 am saying in this study of
Orientalism. For if it is true that no production of knowledge in the
human sciences can ever ignore or disclaim its author’s involvement as a
human subject in his own circumstances, then it must also be true that
for a European or American studying the Orient there can be no
disclaiming the maid circumstances of his actuality: that he comes up
against the Orient as a European or American first, as an individual
second. And to be a European or an American in such a situation is by no
means an inert fact. It meant and means being aware, however dimly, that
one belongs to a power with definite interests in the Orient, and more
important, that one belongs to a part of the earth with a definite
history of involvement in the Orient almost since the time of Homer.

Put in this way, these political actualities are still too undefined ltd
general to be really interesting. Anyone would agree to them without
necessarily agreeing also that they mattered very much, for instance, to
Flaubert as he wrote Salammbó, or to H. A. R. Gibb as he wrote Modern
Trends in Islam. The trouble is that there is too great a distance
between the big dominating fact, as I have described it, and the details
of everyday life that govern the minute discipline of a novel or a
scholarly text as each is being written. Yet if we eliminate from the
start any notion that “big” facts like imperial domination can be
applied mechanically and deterministically to such complex matters as
culture and ideas, then we will begin to approach an interesting kind of
study. My idea is that European and then American interest in the Orient
was political according to some of the obvious historical accounts of it
that I have given here, but that it was the culture that created that
interest, that acted dynamically along with brute political, economic,
and military rationales to make the Orient the varied and complicated
place that it obviously was in the field I call Orientalism.

Therefore, Orientalism is not a mere political subject matter or field
that is reflected passively by culture, scholarship, or institutions;
nor is it a large and diffuse collection of texts about the Orient; nor
is it representative and expressive of some nefarious “Western”
imperialist plot to hold down the “Oriental” world. It is rather a
distribution of geopolitical awareness into aesthetic, scholarly,
economic, sociological, historical, and philological texts; it is an
elaboration not only of a basic geographical distinction (the world is
made up of two unequal halves, Orient and Occident) but also of a whole
series of “interests” which, by such means as scholarly discovery,
philological reconstruction, psychological analysis, landscape and
sociological description, it not only creates but also maintains; it is,
rather than expresses, a certain will or intention to understand, in
some cases to control, manipulate, even to incorporate, what is a
manifestly different (or alternative and novel) world; it is, above all,
a discourse that is by no means in direct, corresponding relationship
with political power in the raw, but rather is produced and exists in an
uneven exchange with various kinds of power, shaped to a degree by the
exchange with power political (as with a colonial or imperial
establishment), power intellectual (as with reigning sciences like
comparative linguistics or anatomy, or any of the modern policy
sciences), power cultural (as with orthodoxies and canons of taste,
texts, values), power moral (as with ideas about what “we” do and what
“they” cannot do or understand as “we” do). Indeed, my real argument is
that Orientalism is-and does not simply represent-a considerable
dimension of modern political-intellectual culture, and as such has less
to do with the Orient than it does with “our” world.

Because Orientalism is a cultural and a political fact, then, it does
not exist in some archival vacuum; quite the contrary, I think it can be
shown that what is thought, said, or even done about the Orient follows
(perhaps occurs within) certain distinct and intellectually knowable
lines. Here too a considerable degree of nuance and elaboration can be
seen working as between the broad superstructural pressures and the
details of composition, the facts of textuality. Most humanistic
scholars are, I think, perfectly happy with the notion that texts exist
in contexts, that there is such a thing as intertextuality, that the
pressures of conventions, predecessors, and rhetorical styles limit what
Walter Benjamin once called the “overtaxing of the productive person in
the name of ...the principle of \`creativity,’ “in which the poet is
believed on his own, and out of his pure mind, to have brought forth his
work.’ Yet there is a reluctance to allow that political, institutional,
and ideological constraints act in the same manner on the individual
author. A humanist will believe it to be an interesting fact to any
interpreter of Balzac that he was influenced in the Comédie humaine by
the conflict between Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire and Cuvier, but the same
sort of pressure on Balzac of deeply reactionary monarchism is felt in
some vague way to demean his literary “genius” and therefore to be less
worth serious study. Similarly-as Harry Bracken has been tirelessly
showing-philosophers will conduct their discussions of Locke, Hume, and
empiricism without ever taking into account that there is an explicit
connection in these classic writers between their “philosophic”
doctrines racial theory, justifications of slavery, or arguments for
colonial exploitation.8 These are common enough ways by which
contemporary scholarship keeps itself pure.

Perhaps it is true that most attempts to rub culture’s nose in the mud
of politics have been crudely iconoclastic; per perhaps also the social
interpretation of literature in my own field has simply riot kept up
with the enormous technical advances in detailed textual analysis. But
there is no getting away from the fact that Weary studies in general,
and American Marxist theorists in particular, have avoided the effort of
seriously bridging the gap between the superstructural and the base
levels in textual, historical scholarship; on another occasion I have
gone so far as to say that the literary-cultural establishment as a
whole has declare the serious study of imperialism and culture off
limits.9 For Orientalism brings one up directly against that
question-that is, to realizing that political imperialism governs an
entire field of study, imagination, and scholarly institutions-in such a
way as to make its avoidance an intellectual and historical
impossibility. Yet there will always remain the perennial escape
mechanism of saying that a literary scholar and a philosopher, for
example, are trained in literature and philosophy respectively, not in
politics or ideological analysis. In other words, the specialist
argument can work quite effectively to block the larger and, in my
opinion, the more intellectually serious perspective.

Here it seems to me there is a simple two-part answer to be given, at
least so far as the study of imperialism and culture (or Orientalism) is
concerned. In the first place, nearly every nineteenth-century writer
(and the same is true enough of writers in earlier periods) was
extraordinarily well aware of the fact of empire: this is a subject not
very well studied, but it will not take a modern Victorian specialist
long  to admit that liberal cultural heroes like John Stuart Mill,
Arnold, Carlyle, Newman, Macaulay, Ruskin, George Eliot, and even
Dickens had definite views on race and imperialism, which are quite
easily to be found at work in their writing.So even a specialist must
deal with the knowledge that Mill, for example, made it clear in On
Libert and Representative Government that his views there could not be
applied to India (he was an India Office functionary for a good deal of
his life; after all) because the Indians were civilizationally, if not
racially, inferior. The same kind of paradox is to be found in Marx, as
I try to show in this book. In the second place, to believe that
politics in the form of imperialism bears upon the production of
literature, scholarship, social theory, and history writing is by no
means equivalent to saying that culture is therefore a demeaned or
denigrated thing. Quite the contrary: my whole point is to say that we
can better understand the persistence and the durability of saturating
hegemonic systems like culture when we realize that their internal
constraints upon writers and thinkers were productive, not unilaterally
inhibiting. It is this idea that Gramsci, certainly, and Foucault and
Raymond Williams in their very different ways have been trying to
illustrate. Even one or two pages by Williams on “the uses of the
Empire” in The Long Revolution tell us more about nineteenth-century
cultural richness than many volumes of hermetic textual analyses.10

Therefore I study Orientalism as a dynamic exchange between individual
authors and the large political concerns shaped by the three great
empires - British French, American-in whose intellectual and imaginative
territory the writing was produced. What interests me most as a scholar
is not the gross political verity but the detail, as indeed what
interests us in someone like Lane or Flaubert or Renan is not the (to
him) indisputable truth that Occidentals are superior to Orientals, but
the profoundly worked over and modulated evidence of his detailed work
within the very wide space opened up by that truth. One need only
remember that Lane’s Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians is a
classic of historical and anthropological observation because of its
style, its enormously intelligent and brilliant details, not because of
its simple reflection of racial superiority, to understand what I am
saying here.

The kind of political questions raised by Orientalism, then, are as
follows: What other sorts of intellectual, aesthetic, scholarly, and
cultural energies went into the making of an imperialist tradition like
the Orientalist one? How did philology, lexicography, history, biology,
political and economic theory, novel-writing, and lyric poetry come to
the service of Orientalism’s broadly imperialist view of the world? What
changes, modulations, refinements, even revolutions take place within
Orientalism? What is the meaning of originality, of continuity, of
individuality, in this context? How does Orientalism transmit or
reproduce itself from one epoch to another? In fine, how can we treat
the cultural, historical phenomenon of Orientalism as a kind of willed
human work-not of mere ,unconditioned ratiocination-in all its
historical complexity, detail, and worth without at the same time losing
sight of the alliance between cultural work, political tendencies, the
state, and the specific realities of domination? Governed by such
concerns a humanistic study can responsibly address itself to politics
and culture. But this is not to say that such a study establishes a
hard-and-fast rule about the relationship between knowledge and
politics. My argument is that each humanistic investigation must
formulate the nature of that connection in the specific context of the
study, the subject utter, and its historical circumstances.

2.    The methodological question. In a previous book I gave a deal of
thought and analysis to the methodological importance for work in the
human sciences of finding and formulating a first a point of departure,
a beginning principle.11 A major lesson I learned and tried to present
was that there is no such thing as a merely given,or simply available,
starting point: beginnings have to be made for each project in such a
way as to enable what follows from them. Nowhere in my experience has
the difficulty of this lesson been more consciously lived (with what
success-or failure -I cannot really say) than in this study of
Orientalism. The idea of beginning, indeed the act of beginning,
necessarily involves an act of delimitation by which something is cut
out of a great mass of material, separated from the mass, and made to
stand for, as well as be, a starting point, a beginning; for the student
of texts one such notion of inaugural delimitation is Louis Althusser’s
idea of the problematic, a specific determinate unity of a text, or
group of texts, which is something given rise to by analysis.12 Yet in
the case of Orientalism (as opposed to the case of Marx’s texts, which
is what Althusser studies) there is not simply the problem of finding a
point of departure, or problematic, but also the question of designating
which texts, authors, and periods are the ones best suited for study.

It has seemed to me foolish to attempt an encyclopedic narrative history
of Orientalism, first of all because if my guiding principle was to be
“the’ European idea of the Orient” there would be virtually no limit to
the material I would have had to deal with; second, because the
narrative model itself did not suit my descriptive and political
interests; third, because in such books as Raymond Schwab’s La
Renaissance orientale, Johann Fűck’s Die Arabischen Studien in Europa
bis in den Anfang des 20. Jahrhunderts, and more recently, Dorothee
Metlitzki’s The Matter of Araby in Medieval England13 there already
exist encyclopedic works on certain aspects of the European-Oriental
encounter such as make the critic’s job, in the general political and
intellectual context .I sketched above, a different one.

There still remained the problem of cutting down a very fat archive to
manageable dimensions, and more important, outlining something in the
nature of an intellectual order within that group of texts without at
the same time following a mindlessly chronological order. My starting
point therefore has been the British, French, and American experience of
the Orient taken as a unit, what made that experience possible by way of
historical and intellectual background, what the quality and character
of the experience has been. For reasons I shall discuss presently I
limited that already limited (but still inordinately large) set of
questions to the Anglo-French-American experience of the Arabs and
Islam, which for almost a thousand years together stood for the
Orient.Immediately upon doing that, a large part of the Orient seemed to
have been eliminated-India, Japan, China, and other sections of the Far
East-not because these regions were not important (they obviously have
been) but because one could discuss Europe’s experience of the Near
Orient, or of Islam, apart from its experience of the Far Orient. Yet at
certain moments of that general European history of interest in the
East, particular parts of the Orient like Egypt, Syria, and Arabia
cannot be discussed without also studying Europe’s involvement in the
more distant parts, of which Persia and India are the most important; a
notable case in point is the connection between Egypt and India so far
as eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Britain was concerned. Similarly
the French role in deciphering the Zend-Avesta, the pre-eminence of
Paris as a center of Sanskrit studies during the first decade of the
nineteenth century, the fact that Napoleon’s interest in the went was
contingent upon his sense of the British role in India: these Far
Eastern interests directly influenced French interest it the Near East,
Islam, and the Arabs.

Britain and France dominated the Eastern Mediterranean from out the end
of the seventeenth century on. Yet my discussion of that domination and
systematic interest does not do justice to (a) important contributions
to Orientalism of Germany, Italy, Spain, and Portugal and (b) the fact
that one of the important impulses toward the study of the Orient in the
eighteenth was the revolution in Biblical studies stimulated by such
variously interesting pioneers as Bishop Lowth, Eichhorn, Herder, and
Michaelis. In the first place, I had to focus rigorously upon the
British-French and later the American material because it seemed
inescapably true not only that Britain and France were their nations in
the Orient and in Oriental studies, but that these and positions were
held by virtue of the two greatest colonial networks in
pre-twentieth-century history; the American Orientaltion since World War
II has fit-I think, quite self-consciously\_in the places excavated by
the two earlier European powers. Alen too, I believe that the sheer
quality, consistency, and mass of British, French, and American writing
on the Orient lifts it the doubtless crucial work done in Germany,
Italy, Russia, elsewhere.But I think it is also true that the major
steps in Oriental scholarship were first taken in either Britain and
France, then elaborated upon by Germans. Silvestre de Sacy, for example,
was not only the first modern and institutional European Orientalist,
who worked on Islam, Arabic literature, the Druze religion, and Sassanid
Persia; he was also the teacher of Champollion and of Franz Bopp, the
founder of German comparative linguistics. A similar claim of priority
and subsequent preeminence can be made for William Jones and Edward
William Lane.

In the second place-and here the failings of my study of Orientalism are
amply made up for-there has been some important recent work on the
background in Biblical scholarship to the rise of what I have called
modern Orientalism. The best and the most illuminatingly relevant is E.
S. Shaffer’s impressive “Kubla Khan” and The Fall of Jerusalem,” an
indispensable study of the origins of Romanticism, and of the
intellectual activity underpinning a great deal of what goes on in
Coleridge, Browning, and George Eliot. To some degree Shaffer’s work
refines upon the outlines provided in Schwab, by articulating the
material of relevance to be found in the German Biblical scholars and
using that material to read, in an intelligent and always interesting
way, the work of three major British writers. Yet what is missing in the
book is some sense of the political as well as ideological edge given
the Oriental material by the British and French writers I am principally
concerned with; in addition, unlike Shaffer I attempt to elucidate
subsequent developments in academic as well as literary Orientalism that
bear on the connection between British and French Orientalism on the one
hand and the rise of an explicitly colonial-minded imperialism on the
other. Then too, I wish to show how all these earlier matters are
reproduced more or less in American Orientalism after the Second World
War.

Nevertheless there is a possibly misleading aspect to my study, where,
aside from an occasional reference, I do not exhaustively discuss the
German developments after the inaugural period dominated by Sacy. Any
work that seeks to provide an understanding of academic Orientalism and
pays little attention to scholars like Steinthal, Mdller, Becker,
Goldziher, Brockelmann, Noldeke-to mention only a handful-needs to be
reproached, and I freely reproach myself. I particularly regret not
taking more account of the great scientific prestige that accrued to
German scholarship by the middle of the nineteenth century, whose
neglect was made into a denunciation of insular British scholars by
George Eliot. I have in mind Eliot’s unforgettable portrait of Mr.
Casaubon in Middle-march.

One reason Casaubon cannot finish his Key to All Mythologies is,
according to his young cousin Will Ladislaw, that he is unacquainted
with German scholarship. For not only has Casaubon chosen a subject “as
changing as chemistry: new discoveries are constantly making new points
of view”: he is undertaking a job similar to a refutation of Paracelsus
because “he is not an Orientalist, you know.”15

Eliot was not wrong in implying that by about 1830, which is when
Middlemarch is set, German scholarship had fully attained its European
preeminence. Yet at no time in German scholarship during the first
two-thirds of the nineteenth century could a close partnership have
developed between Orientalists and a protracted, sustained national
interest in the Orient. There was nothing in Germany to correspond to
the Anglo-French presence in India, the Levant, North Africa. Moreover,
the German Orient was almost exclusively a scholarly, or at least a
classical, Orient: it was made the subject of lyrics, fantasies, and
even novels, but it was never actual, the way Egypt and Syria were
actual for Chateaubriand, Lane, Lamartine, Burton, Disraeli, or Nerval.
There is some significance in the fact that the two most renowned German
works on the Orient, Goethe’s Westöstlicher Diwan and Friedrich
Schlegel’s Über die Sprache and Weisheit der Indier, were based
respectively on a Rhine journey and on hours spent in Paris libraries.
What German Oriental scholarship did was to refine and elaborate
techniques whose application was to texts, myths, ideas, and languages
almost literally gathered from the Orient by imperial Britain and
France.

Yet what German Orientalism had in common with Anglo French and later
American Orientalism was a kind of intellectual authority over the
Orient within Western culture. This authority must in large part be the
subject of any description of Orientalism, and it is so in this study.
Even the name Orientalism suggests a serious, perhaps ponderous style of
expertise; when I apply it to modern American social scientists (since
they do not call themselves Orientalists, my use of the word is
anomalous), it is to draw attention to the way Middle East experts can
still draw on the vestiges of Orientalism’s intellectual position in
nineteenth-century Europe.

There is nothing mysterious or natural about authority. It is formed,
irradiated, disseminated; it is instrumental, it is persuasive; it has
status, it establishes canons of taste and value; it is virtually
indistinguishable from certain ideas it dignifies as true, and from
traditions, perceptions, and judgments it forms, transmits, reproduces.
Above all, authority can, indeed must, be analyzed. All these attributes
of authority apply to Orientalism, and much of what I do in this study
is to describe both the historical authority in and the personal
authorities of Orientalism.

My principal methodological devices for studying authority here are what
can be called strategic location, which is a way of describing the
author’s position in a text with regard to the Oriental material he
writes about, and strategic formation, which is a way of analyzing the
relationship between texts and the way in which groups of texts, types
of texts, even textual genres, acquire mass, density, and referential
power among themselves and thereafter in the culture at large. I use the
notion of strategy simply to identify the problem every writer on the
Orient has faced: how to get hold of it, how to approach it, how not to
be defeated or overwhelmed by its sublimity, its scope, its awful
dimensions. Everyone who writes about the Orient must locate himself
vis-à-vis the Orient; translated into his text, this location includes
the kind of narrative voice he adopts, the type of structure he builds,
the kinds of images, themes, motifs that circulate in his text all of
which add up to deliberate ways of addressing the reader, containing the
Orient, and finally, representing it or speaking in its behalf. None of
this takes place in the abstract, however. Every writer on the Orient
(and this is true even of Homer) assumes some Oriental precedent, some
previous knowledge of the Orient, to which he refers and on which he
relies. Additionally, each work on the Orient affiliates itself with
other works, with audiences, with institutions, with the Orient itself.
The ensemble of relationships between works, audiences, and some
particular aspects of the Orient therefore constitutes an analyzable
formation-for example, that of philological studies, of anthologies of
extracts from Oriental literature, of travel books, of Oriental
fantasies-whose presence in time, in discourse, in institutions
(schools, libraries, foreign services) gives it strength and authority.

It is clear, I hope, that my concern with authority does not entail
analysis of what lies hidden in the Orientalist text, but analysis
rather of the text’s surface, its exteriority to what it describes. I do
not think that this idea can be overemphasized. Orientalism is premised
upon exteriority, that is, on the fact that the Orientalist, poet or
scholar, makes the Orient speak, describes the Orient renders its
mysteries plain for and to the West. He is never concerned with the
Orient except as the first cause of what he says. What he says and
writes, by virtue of the fact that it is said or written, is meant to
indicate that the Orientalist is outside the Orient, both as an
existential and as a moral fact. The principal product of this
exteriority is of course, representation: as early as Aeschylus’s play
The Persians the Orient is transformed from a very far distant and often
threatening Otherness into figures that are relatively familiar (in
Aeschylus’s case, grieving Asiatic women). The dramatic immediacy of
representation in The Persians obscures the fact that the audience is
watching a highly artificial enactment of what a non-Oriental has made
into a symbol for the whole Orient. My analysis of the Orientalist text
therefore places emphasis on the evidence, which is by no means
invisible, for such representations as representations, not as “natural”
depictions of the Orient. This evidence is found just as prominently in
the so-called truthful text (histories, philological analyses, political
treatises) as in the avowedly artistic (i.e., openly imaginative) text.
The things to look at are style, figures of speech, setting, narrative
devices, historical and social circumstances, not the correctness of the
representation nor its fidelity to some great original. The exteriorly
of the representation is always governed by some version of the truism
that if the Orient could represent itself, it would; since it cannot,
the representation does the job, for the West, and faute de mieux, for
the poor Orient. “Sie können sich nicht vertreten, sie műssen vertre en
werden,” as Marx wrote in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.

Another reason for insisting upon exteriority is that I believe it needs
to be made clear about cultural discourse and exchange within a culture
that what is commonly circulated by it is not “truth” but
representations. It hardly needs to be demonstrated again that language
itself is a highly organized and encoded system, which employs many
devices to express, indicate, exchange messages and information,
represent, and so forth. In any instance of at least written language,
there is no such thing as a delivered presence, but a re-presence, or a
representation. The value, efficacy, strength, apparent veracity of a
written statement about the Orient therefore relies very little, and
cannot instrumentally depend, on the Orient as such. On the contrary,
the written statement is a presence to the reader by virtue of its
having excluded, displaced made supererogatory any such real thing as
“the Orient.” Thus all of Orientalism stands forth and away from the
Orient: that Orientalism makes sense at all depends more on the West
than on the Orient, and this sense is directly indebted to various
Western techniques of representation that make the Orient visible,
clear, “there” in discourse about it. And these representations rely
upon institutions, traditions, conventions, agreed-upon codes of
understanding for their effects, not upon a distant and amorphous
Orient.

The difference between representations of the Orient before the last
third of the eighteenth century and those after it (that is, those
belonging to what I call modern Orientalism) is that the range of
representation expanded enormously in the later period. It is true that
after William Jones and Anquetil-Duperron, and after Napoleon’s Egyptian
expedition, Europe came to know the Orient more scientifically, to live
in it with greater authority and discipline than ever before. But what
mattered to Europe was the expanded scope and the much greater
refinement given its techniques for receiving the Orient. When around
the turn of the eighteenth century the Orient definitively revealed the
age of its languages-thus outdating Hebrew’s divine pedigree-it was a
group of Europeans who made the discovery, passed it on to other
scholars, and preserved the discovery in the new science of
Indo-European philology. A new powerful science for viewing the
linguistic Orient was born, and with it, as Foucault has shown in The
Order of Things, a whole web of related scientific interests. Similarly
William Beckford, Byron, Goethe, and Hugo restructured the Orient by
their art and made its colors, lights, and people visible through their
images, rhythms, and motifs. At most, the “real” Orient provoked a
writer to his vision; it very rarely guided it.

Orientalism responded more to the culture that produced it than to its
putative object, which was also produced by the West. Thus the history
of Orientalism has both an internal consistency and a highly articulated
set of relationships to the dominant culture surrounding it. My analyses
consequently try to show the field’s shape and internal organization,
its pioneers, patriarchal authorities, canonical texts, doxological
ideas, exemplary figures, its followers, elaborators, and new
authorities; I try also to explain how Orientalism borrowed and was
frequently informed by “strong” ideas, doctrines, and trends ruling the
culture.Thus there was (and is) a linguistic Orient, a Freudian Orient,
a Spenglerian Orient, a Darwinian Orient, a racist Orient-and so on. Yet
never has there been such a thing as a pure, or unconditional, Orient;
similarly, never has there been a nonmaterial form of Orientalism, much
less something so innocent as an “idea” of the Orient. In this
underlying conviction and in its ensuing methodological consequences do
I differ from scholars who study the history of ideas.For the emphases
and the executive form, above all the material effectiveness, of
statements made by Orientalist discourse are possible in ways that any
hermetic history of ideas tends completely to scant. Without those
emphases and that material effectiveness Orientalism would be just
another idea, whereas it is and was much more than that. Therefore I set
out to examine not only scholarly works but also works of literature,
political tracts, journalistic texts, travel books, religious and
philological studies.In other words, my hybrid perspective is broadly
historical and “anthropological,” given that I believe all texts to be
worldly and circumstantial in (of course) ways that vary from genre to
genre, and from historical period to historical period.

Yet unlike Michel Foucault, to whose work I am greatly indebted, I do
believe in the determining imprint of individual writers upon the
otherwise anonymous collective body of texts constituting a discursive
formation like Orientalism. The unity of the large ensemble of texts I
analyze is due in part to the fact that they frequently refer to each
other: Orientalism is after all a system for citing works and authors.
Edward William Lane’s Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians was
read and cited by such diverse figures as Nerval, Flaubert, and Richard
Burton. He was an authority whose use was an imperative for anyone
writing or thinking about the Orient, not just about Egypt: when Nerval
borrows passages verbatim from Modern Egyptians it is to use Lane’s
authority to assist him in describing village scenes in Syria, not
Egypt. Lane’s authority and the opportunities provided for citing him
discriminately as well as indiscriminately were there because
Orientalism could give his text the kind of distributive currency that
he acquired. There is no way, however, of understanding Lane’s currency
without also understanding the peculiar features of his text; this is
equally true of Renan, Sacy, Lamartine, Schlegel, and a group of other
influential writers. Foucault believes that in general the individual
text or author counts for very little; empirically, in the case of
Orientalism (and perhaps nowhere else) I find this not to be so.
Accordingly my analyses employ close textual readings whose goal is to
reveal the dialectic between individual text or writer and the complex
collective formation to which his work is a contribution.

Yet even though it includes an ample selection of writers, this book is
still far from a complete history or general account of Orientalism. Of
this failing I am very conscious. The fabric of as thick a discourse as
Orientalism has survived and functioned in Western society because of
its richness: all I have done is to describe parts of that fabric at
certain moments, and merely to suggest the existence of a larger whole,
detailed, interesting, dotted with fascinating figures, texts, and
events. I have consoled myself with believing that this book is one
installment of several, and hope there are scholars and critics who
might want to write others. There is still a general essay to be written
on imperialism and culture; other studies would go more deeply into the
connection between Orientalism and pedagogy, or into Italian, Dutch,
German, and Swiss Orientalism, or into the dynamic between scholarship
and imaginative writing, or into the relationship between administrative
ideas and intellectual discipline. Perhaps the most important task of
all would be to undertake studies in contemporary alternatives to
Orientalism, to ask how one can study other cultures and peoples from a
libertarian, or a nonrepressive and nonmanipulative, perspective. But
then one would have to rethink the whole complex problem of knowledge
and power. These are all tasks left embarrassingly incomplete in this
study.

The last, perhaps self-flattering, observation on method that I want to
make here is that I have written this study with several audiences in
mind. For students of literature and criticism, Orientalism offers a
marvelous instance of the interrelations between society, history, and
textuality; moreover, the cultural role played by the Orient in the West
connects Orientalism with ideology, politics, and the logic of power,
matters of relevance, I think, to the literary community. For
contemporary students of the Orient, from university scholars to
policymakers, I have written with two ends in mind: one, to present
their intellectual genealogy to them in a way that has not been done;
two, to criticize-with the hope of stirring discussion-the often
unquestioned assumptions on which their work for the most part depends.
For the general reader, this study deals with matters that always compel
attention, all of them connected not only with Western conceptions and
treatments of the other but also with the singularly important role
played by Western culture in what Vico called the world of nations.
Lastly, for readers in the so-called Third World, this study proposes
itself as a step towards an understanding not so much of Western
politics and of the non-Western world in those politics as of
the*strength* of Western cultural discourse, a strength too often
mistaken as merely decorative or “superstructural.” My hope is to
illustrate the formidable structure of cultural domination and,
specifically for formerly colonized peoples, the dangers and temptations
of employing this structure upon themselves or upon others.

The three long chapters and twelve shorter units into which this book is
divided are intended to facilitate exposition as much as possible.
Chapter One, “The Scope of Orientalism,” draws a large circle around all
the dimensions of the subject, both in terms of historical time and
experiences and in terms of philosophical and political themes. Chapter
Two, “Orientalist Structures and Restructures,” attempts to trace the
development of modern Orientalism by a broadly chronological
description, and also by the description of a set of devices common to
the work of important poets, artists, and scholars. Chapter Three,
“Orientalism Now,” begins where its predecessor left off, at around
1870. This is the period of great colonial expansion into the Orient,
and it culminates in World War II. The very last section of Chapter
Three characterizes the shift from British and French to American
hegemony; I attempt there finally to sketch the present intellectual and
social realities of Orientalism in the United States.

3*The personal dimension* . In the*Prison Notebooks* Gramsci says: “The
starting-point of critical elaboration is the consciousness of what one
really is, and is \`knowing thyself’ as a product of the historical
process to date, which has deposited in you an infinity of traces,
without leaving an inventory.” The only available English translation
inexplicably leaves Gramsci’s comment at that, whereas is fact Gramsci’s
Italian text concludes by adding, “therefore it is imperative at the
outset to compile such an inventory.”16

Much of the personal investment in this study derives from my awareness
of being an “Oriental” as a child growing up in two British colonies.
All of my education, in those colonies (Palestine and Egypt) and in the
United States, has been Western, and yet that deep early awareness has
persisted. In many ways my study of 0rientalism has been an attempt to
inventory the traces upon me, the Oriental subject, of the culture whose
domination has been so powerful a factor in the life of all Orientals.
This is why for me the Islamic Orient has had to be the center of
attention. Whether what I have achieved is the inventory prescribed by
Gramsci is not for me to judge, although I have felt it important to be
conscious of trying to produce one. Along the way, as severely and as
rationally as I have been able, I have tried to maintain a critical
consciousness, as well as employing those instruments of historical,
humanistic, and cultural research of which my education has made me the
fortunate beneficiary. In none of that, however, have I ever lost hold
of the cultural reality of, the personal involvement in having been
constituted as, “an Oriental.”

The historical circumstances making such a study possible are fairly
complex, and I can only list them schematically here. Anyone resident in
the West since the 1950s, particularly in the United States, will have
lived through an era of extraordinary turbulence in the relations of
East and West. No one will have failed to note how “East” has always
signified danger and threat during this period, even as it has meant the
traditional Orient as well as Russia. In the universities a growing
establishment of area-studies programs and institutes has made the
scholarly study of the Orient a branch of national policy. Public
affairs in this country include a healthy interest in the Orient, as
much for its strategic and economic importance as for its traditional
exoticism. If the world has become immediately accessible to a Western
citizen living in the electronic age, the Orient too has drawn nearer to
him, and is now less a myth perhaps than a place crisscrossed by
Western, especially American, interests.

One aspect of the electronic, postmodern world is that there has been a
reinforcement of the stereotypes by which the Orient is viewed.
Television, the films, and all the media’s resources have forced
information into more and more standardized molds. So far as the Orient
is concerned, standardization and cultural stereotyping have intensified
the hold of the nineteenth-century academic and imaginative demonology
of “the mysterious Orient.” This is nowhere more true than in the ways
by which the Near East is grasped. Three things have contributed to
making even the simplest perception of the Arabs and Islam into a highly
politicized, almost raucous matter: one, the history of popular
anti-Arab and anti-Islamic prejudice in the West, which is immediately
reflected in the history of Orientalism; two, the struggle between the
Arabs and Israeli Zionism, and its effects upon American Jews as well as
upon both the liberal culture and the population at large; three, the
almost total absence of any cultural position making it possible either
to identify with or dispassionately to discuss the Arabs or Islam.
Furthermore, it hardly needs saying that because the Middle East is now
so identified with Great Power politics, oil economics, and the
simple-minded dichotomy of freedom-loving, democratic Israel and evil,
totalitarian, and terroristic Arabs, the chances of anything like a
clear view of what one talks about in talking about the Near East are
depressingly small.

My own experiences of these matters are in part what made me write this
book. The life of an Arab Palestinian in the West, particularly in
America, is disheartening. There exists here an almost unanimous
consensus that politically he does not exist, and when it is allowed
that he does, it is either as a nuisance or as an Oriental. The web of
racism, cultural stereotypes, political imperialism, dehumanizing
ideology holding in the Arab or the Muslim is very strong indeed, and it
is this web which every Palestinian has come to feel as his uniquely
punishing destiny. It has made matters worse for him to remark that no
person academically involved with the Near East-no Orientalist, that
is-has ever in the United States culturally and politically identified
himself wholeheartedly with the Arabs; certainly there have been
identifications on some level, but they have never taken an “acceptable”
form as has liberal American identification with Zionism, and all too
frequently they have been radically flawed by their association either
with discredited political and economic interests (oilcompany and State
Department Arabists, for example) or with religion.

The nexus of knowledge and power creating “the Oriental” and in a sense
obliterating him as a human being is therefore not for me an exclusively
academic matter. Yet it is an intellectual matter of some very obvious
importance. I have been able to put to use my humanistic and political
concerns for the analysis and description of a very worldly matter, the
rise, development, and consolidation of Orientalism. Too often
literature and culture are presumed to be politically, even historically
innocent; it has regularly seemed otherwise to me, and certainly my
study of Orientalism has convinced me (and I hope will convince my
literary colleagues) that society and literary culture can only be
understood and studied together. In addition, and by an almost
inescapable logic, I have found myself writing the history of a strange,
secret sharer of Western anti-Semitism. That anti-Semitism and, as I
have discussed it in its Islamic branch, Orientalism resemble each other
very closely is a historical, cultural, and political truth that needs
only to be mentioned to an Arab Palestinian for its irony to be
perfectly understood. But what I should like also to have contributed
here is a better understanding of the way cultural domination has
operated. If this stimulates a new kind of dealing with the Orient,
indeed if it eliminates the “Orient” and “Occident” altogether, then we
shall have advanced a little in the process of what Raymond Williams has
called the “unlearning” of “the inherent dominative mode.”16


