Chapter 1: The Scope of Orientalism
===================================

*… le génie inquiet et ambitieux de Europeens … impatient d’employer
les  nouveaux instruments de leur puissance…*

**Jean -Baptiste-Joseph Fourier, Preface historique (1809),**

**Description de l’Égypte**

I- Knowing the Oriental
-----------------------

On June 13, 1910, Arthur James Balfour lectured the House of Commons on
“the problems with which we have to deal in Egypt.” These, he said,
“belong to a wholly different category” than those “affecting the Isle
of Wight or the West Riding of Yorkshire.” He spoke with the authority
of a long-time member of Parliament, former private secretary to Lord
Salisbury, former chief secretary for Ireland, former secretary for
Scotland, former prime minister, veteran of numerous overseas crises,
achievements, and changes. During his involvement in imperial affairs
Balfour served a monarch who in 1876 had been declared Empress of India;
he had been especially well placed in positions of uncommon influence to
follow the Afghan and Zulu wars, the British occupation of Egypt in
1882, the death of General Gordon in the Sudan, the Fashoda Incident,
the battle of Omdurman, the Boer War, the Russo-Japanese War. In
addition his remarkable social eminence, the breadth of his learning and
wit-he could write on such varied subjects as Bergson, Handel, theism,
and golf-his education at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, and his
apparent command over imperial affairs all gave considerable authority
to what he told the Commons in June 1910. But there was still more to
Balfour’s tech, or at least to his need for giving it so didactically
and moralistically. Some members were questioning the necessity for
“England in Egypt,” the subject of Alfred Milner’s enthusiastic book of
1892, but here designating a once-profitable occupation that had become
a source of trouble now that Egyptian nationalism was on the rise and
the continuing British presence in Egypt no longer so easy to
defend.Balfour, then, to inform and explain.

Recalling the challenge of J. M. Robertson, the member of Tyneside,
Balfour himself put Robertson’s question again: “What tight have you to
take up these airs of superiority with regard to people whom you choose
to call Oriental?” The choice of “Oriental” was canonical; it had been
employed by Chaucer and Mandeville, by Shakespeare, Dryden, Pope, and
Byron. It designated Asia or the East, geographically, morally,
culturally. One could speak in Europe of an Oriental personality, an
Oriental atmosphere, an Oriental tale, Oriental despotism, or an
Oriental mode of production, and be understood. Marx had used the word,
and now Balfour was using it; his choice was understandable and called
for no comment whatever.

I take up no attitude of superiority. But I ask [Robertson and anyone
else] ...who has even the most superficial knowledge of history, if they
will look in the face the facts with which a British statesman has to
deal when he is put in a position of supremacy over great races like the
inhabitants of Egypt and countries in the East. We know the civilization
of Egypt better than we know the civilization of any other country. We
know it further back; we know it more intimately; we know more about it.
It goes far beyond the petty span of the history of our race, which is
lost in the prehistoric period at a time when the Egyptian civilisation
had already passed its prime. Look at all the Oriental countries. Do not
talk about superiority or inferiority.

Two great themes dominate his remarks here and in what will follow:
knowledge and power, the Baconian themes. As Balfour justifies the
necessity for British occupation of Egypt, supremacy in his mind is
associated with “our” knowledge of Egypt and not principally with
military or economic power. Knowledge to Balfour means surveying a
civilization from its origins to its prime to its decline-and of course,
it means*being able to do that.* Knowledge means rising above immediacy,
beyond self, into the foreign and distant. The object of such knowledge
is inherently vulnerable to scrutiny; this object is a “fact” which, if
it develops, changes; or otherwise transforms itself in the way that
civilizations frequently do, nevertheless is fundamentally, even
ontologically stable. To have such knowledge of such a thing is to
dominate it, to have authority over it. And authority here means for
“us” to deny autonomy to “it”-the Oriental country-since we know it and
it exists, in a sense, as we know it. British knowledge of Egypt is
Egypt for Balfour, and the burdens of knowledge make such questions as
inferiority and superiority seem petty ones. Balfour nowhere denies
British superiority and Egyptian inferiority; he takes them for granted
as he describes the consequences of knowledge.

First of all, look at the facts of the case. Western nations as soon as
they emerge into history show the beginnings of those capacities for
self-government having merits of their own.... You may look through the
whole history of the Orientals in what is called, broadly speaking, the
East, and you never find traces of self-government. All their great
centuries-and they have been very great-have been passed under
despotisms, under absolute government. All their great contributions to
civilisation-and they have been great-have been made under that form of
government. Conqueror has succeeded conqueror; one domination has
followed another; but never in all the revolutions of fate and fortune
have you seen one of those nations of its own motion establish what we,
from a Western point of view, call self-government. That is the fact. It
is not a question of superiority and inferiority. I suppose a true
Eastern sage would say that the working government which we have taken
upon ourselves in Egypt and elsewhere is not a work worthy of a
philosopher-that it is the dirty work, the inferior work, of carrying on
the necessary labour.

Since these facts are facts, Balfour must then go on to the next part of
his argument.

Is it a good thing for these great nations- I admit their
greatness --that this absolute government should be exercised by us? I
think it is a good thing. I think that experience shows that they have
got under it far better government than in the whole history of the
world they ever had before, and which not only is a benefit to them, but
is undoubtedly a benefit to the whole of the civilised West.... We are
in Egypt not merely for the sake of the Egyptians, though we are there
for their sake; we are there also for the sake of Europe at large.

Balfour produces no evidence that Egyptians and “the races with whom we
deal” appreciate or even understand the good that is being done them by
colonial occupation. It does not occur to Balfour, however, to let the
Egyptian speak for himself, since presumably any Egyptian who would
speak out is more likely to be “the agitator [who] wishes to raise
difficulties” than the good native who overlooks the “difficulties” of
foreign domination. And so, having settled the ethical problems, Balfour
turns at last to the practical ones. “If it is our business to govern,
with or without gratitude, with or without the real and genuine memory
of all the loss of which we have relieved the population [Balfour by no
means implies, as part of that loss, the loss or at least the indefinite
postponement of Egyptian independence] and no vivid imagination of All
the benefits which we have given to them; if that is our duty, bow is it
to be performed?” England exports “our very best to these dies.” These
selfless administrators do their work “amidst tens of thousands of
persons belonging to a different creed, a differentrace, a different
discipline, different conditions of life.” What makes their work of
governing possible is their sense of being supported at home by a
government that endorses what they do. Yet directly the native
populations have that instinctive feeling that those with whom they have
got to deal have not behind them the might, the authority, the sympathy,
the full and ungrudging support of the country which sent them there,
those populations lose all that sense of order which is the very basis
of their civilisation, just as our officers lose all that sense of power
and authority, which is the very basis of everything they can do for the
benefit of those among whom they have been sent.

Balfour’s logic here is interesting, not least for being completely
consistent with the premises of his entire speech. England knows Egypt;
Egypt is what England knows; England knows that Egypt cannot have
self-government; England confirms that by occupying Egypt; for the
Egyptians, Egypt is what England has occupied and now governs; foreign
occupation therefore becomes “the very basis” of contemporary Egyptian
civilization; Egypt requires, indeed insists upon, British occupation.
But if the special intimacy between governor and governed in Egypt is
disturbed by Parliament’s doubts at home, then “the authority of what
...is the dominant race and as I think ought to remain the dominant
race-has been undermined.” Not only does English prestige suffer; “it is
vain for a handful of British officials-endow them how you like, give
them all the qualities of character and genius you can imagine--it is
impossible for them to carry out the great task which in Egypt, not we
only, but the civilised world have imposed upon them.”1

As a rhetorical performance Balfour’s speech is significant for the way
in which he plays the part of and represents a variety of characters.
There are of course “the English,” for whom the pronoun “we” is used
with the full weight of a distinguished, powerful man who feels himself
to be representative of all that is best in his nation’s history.
Balfour can also speak for the civilized world, the West, and the
relatively small corps of colonial officials in Egypt. If he does not
speak directly for the Orientals, it is because they after all speak
another language; yet he knows how they feel since he knows their
history, their reliance upon such as he, and their expectations. Still,
he does speak for them in the sense that what they might have to say,
were they to be asked and might they be able to answer, would somewhat
uselessly confirm what is already evident: that they are a subject race,
dominated by a race that knows them and what is good for them better
than they could possibly know themselves. Their great moments were in
the past; they are useful in the modern world only because the powerful
and up-to-date empires have effectively brought them out of the
wretchedness of their decline and turned them into rehabilitated
residents of productive colonies.

Egypt in particular was an excellent case in point, and Balfour was
perfectly aware of how much right he had to speak as a member of his
country’s parliament on behalf of England, the West, Western
civilization, about modern Egypt. For Egypt was not just another colony:
it was the vindication of Western imperialism; it was, until its
annexation by England, an almost academic example of Oriental
backwardness; it was to become the triumph of English knowledge and
power. Between 1882, the year in which England occupied Egypt and put an
end to the nationalist rebellion of Colonel Arabi, and 1907, England’s
representative in Egypt, Egypt’s master, was Evelyn Baring (also known
as “Over-baring”), Lord Cromer. On July 30, 1907, it was Balfour in the
Commons who had supported the project to give Cromer a retirement prize
of fifty thousand pounds as a reward for what he had done in Egypt.
Cromer*made* Egypt, said Balfour:

Everything he has touched he has succeeded in Lord Cromer’s services
during the past quarter of a century have raised Egypt from the lowest
pitch of social and economic degradation until it now stands among
Oriental nations, I believe, absolutely alone in its prosperity,
financial and moral.2

How Egypt’s moral prosperity was measured, Balfour did not venture to
say. British exports to Egypt equaled those to the whole of Africa; that
certainly indicated a sort of financial prosperity, for Egypt and
England (somewhat unevenly) together. But what tally mattered was the
unbroken, all-embracing Western tutelage of an Oriental country, from
the scholars, missionaries, business-men, soldiers, and teachers who
prepared and then implemented the occupation to the high functionaries
like Cromer and Balfour who saw themselves as providing for, directing,
and sometimes even forcing Egypt’s rise from Oriental neglect to its
present lonely eminence.

If British success in Egypt was as exceptional as Balfour said, it was
by no means an inexplicable or irrational success. Egyptian affairs had
been controlled according to a general theory expressed both by Balfour
in his notions about Oriental civilization and by Cromer in his
management of everyday business in Egypt. The most important thing about
‘the theory during the first decade of the twentieth century was that it
worked, and worked staggeringly well. The argument, when reduced to its
simplest form, was clear, it was precise, it was easy to grasp. There
are Westerners, and there are Orientals. The former dominate; the latter
must be dominated, which usually means having their land occupied, their
internal affairs rigidly controlled, their blood and treasure put at the
disposal of one or another Western power. That Balfour and Cromer, as we
shall soon see, could strip humanity down to such ruthless cultural and
racial essences was not at all an indication of their particular
viciousness. Rather it was an indication of how streamlined a general
doctrine had become by the time they put it to use-how streamlined and
effective.

Unlike Balfour, whose theses on Orientals pretended to objective
universality, Cromer spoke about Orientals specifically as what he had
ruled or had to deal with, first in India, then for the twenty-five
years in Egypt during which he emerged as the paramount consulgeneral in
England’s empire. Balfour’s “Orientals” are Cromer’s “subject races,”
which he made the topic of a long essay published in the*Edinburgh
Review* in January 1908. Once again, knowledge of subject races or
Orientals is what makes their management easy and profitable; knowledge
gives power, more power requires more knowledge, and so on in an
increasingly profitable dialectic of information and control. Cromer’s
notion is that England’s empire will not dissolve if such things as
militarism and commercial egotism at home and “free institutions” in the
colony (as opposed to British government “according to the Code of
Christian morality”) are kept in check. For if, according to Cromer,
logic is something “the existence of which the Oriental is disposed
altogether to ignore,” the proper method of ruling is not to impose
ultrascientific measures upon him or to force him bodily to accept
logic. It is rather to understand his limitations and “endeavor to find,
in the contentment of the subject race, a more worthy and, it may be
hoped, a stronger bond of union between the rulers and the ruled.”
Lurking everywhere behind the pacification of the subject race is
imperial might, more effective for its refined understanding and
infrequent use than for its soldiers, brutal tax gatherers, and
incontinent force. In a word, the Empire must be wise; it must temper
its cupidity with selflessness, and its impatience with flexible
discipline.

To be more explicit, what is meant when it is said that the commercial
spirit should be under some control is this-that in dealing with Indians
or Egyptians, or Shilluks, or Zulus, the first question is to consider
what these people, who are all, nationally speaking, more or less in
statu pupillari, themselves think is best in their own interests,
although this is a point which deserves serious consideration. But it is
essential that each special issue should be decided mainly with
reference to what, by the light of Western knowledge and experience
tempered by local considerations, we conscientiously think is best for
the subject race, without reference to any real or supposed advantage
which may accrue to England as a nation, or-as is more frequently the
case-to the special interests represented by some one or more
influential classes of Englishmen. If the British nation as a whole
persistently bears this principle in mind, and insists sternly on its
application, though we can never create a patriotism akin to that based
on affinity of race or community of language, we may perhaps foster some
sort of cosmopolitan allegiance grounded on the respect always accorded
to superior talents and unselfish conduct, and on the gratitude derived
both from favours conferred and from those to come. There may then at
all events be some hope that the Egyptian will hesitate before he throws
in his lot with any future Arabi Even the Central African savage may
eventually learn to chant a hymn in honour of Astraea Redux, as
represented by the British official who denies him gin but gives him
justice. More than this, commerce will gain.3

How much “serious consideration” the ruler ought to give proposals from
the subject race was illustrated in Cromer’s total opposition to
Egyptian nationalism. Free native institutions, the absence of foreign
occupation, a self-sustaining national sovereignty: these unsurprising
demands were consistently rejected by Cromer, who asserted unambiguously
that “the real future of Egypt ...lies not in the direction of a narrow
nationalism, which will only embrace native Egyptians ...but rather in
that of an enlarged cosmopolitanism.”4 Subject races did not have it in
them to know what was good for them. Most of them were Orientals, of
whose characteristics Cromer was very knowledgeable since he had had
experience with them both in India and Egypt. One of the convenient
things about Orientals for Cromer was that managing them, although
circumstances might differ slightly here and there, was almost
everywhere nearly the same.5 This was, of course, because Orientals were
almost everywhere nearly the same.

Now at last we approach the long-developing core of essential knowledge,
knowledge both academic and practical, which Cromer and Balfour
inherited from a century of modern Western Orientalism: knowledge about
and knowledge of Orientals, their race, character, culture, history,
traditions, society, and possibilities. This knowledge was effective:
Cromer believed he had put it to use in governing Egypt. Moreover, it
was tested and unchanging knowledge, since “Orientals” for all practical
purposes were a Platonic essence, which any Orientalist (or ruler of
Orientals) might examine, understand, and expose. Thus in the
thirty-fourth chapter of his two-volume work*Modern Egypt,* the
magisterial record of his experience and achievement, Cromer puts down a
sort of personal canon of Orientalist wisdom:

Sir Alfred Lyall once said to me: “Accuracy is abhorrent to the Oriental
mind. Every Anglo-Indian should always remember that maxim.” Want of
accuracy, which easily degenerates into untruthfulness, is in fact the
main characteristic of the Oriental mind.

The European is a close reasoner; his statements of fact are devoid of
any ambiguity; he is a natural logician, albeit he may not have studied
logic; he is by nature sceptical and requires proof before he can accept
the truth of any proposition; his trained intelligence works like a
piece of mechanism. The mind of the Oriental, on the other hand, like
his picturesque streets, is eminently wanting in symmetry. His reasoning
is of the most slipshod description. Although the ancient Arabs acquired
in a somewhat higher degree the science of dialectics, their descendants
are singularly deficient in the logical faculty. They are often
incapable of drawing the most obvious conclusions from any simple
premises of which they may admit the truth. Endeavor to elicit a plain
statement of facts from any ordinary Egyptian. His explanation will
generally be lengthy, and wanting in lucidity. He will probably
contradict himself half-a-dozen times before he has finished his story.
He will often break down under the mildest process of cross-examination.

Orientals or Arabs are thereafter shown to be gullible, “devoid of
energy and initiative,” much given to “fulsome flattery,” intrigue,
cunning, and unkindness to animals; Orientals cannot walk on either a
road or a pavement (their disordered minds fail to understand what the
clever European grasps immediately, that roads and pavements are made
for walking); Orientals are inveterate liars, they are “lethargic and
suspicious,” and in everything oppose the clarity, directness, and
nobility of the Anglo-Saxon race.6

Cromer makes no effort to conceal that Orientals for him were always and
only the human material he governed in British colonies. “As I am only a
diplomatist and an administrator, whose proper study is also man, but
from the point of view of governing him,” Cromer says, “...I content
myself with noting the fact that somehow or other the Oriental generally
acts, speaks, and thinks in a manner exactly opposite to the European.”7
Cromer’s descriptions are of course based partly on direct observation,
yet here and there he refers to orthodox Orientalist authorities (in
particular Ernest Renan and Constantin de Volney) to support his views.
To these authorities he also defers when it comes to explaining why
Orientals are the way they are. He has no doubt that any knowledge of
the Oriental will confirm his views, which, to judge from his
description of the Egyptian breaking under cross-examination, find the
Oriental to be guilty. The crime was that the Oriental was an Oriental,
and it is an accurate sign of how commonly acceptable such a tautology
was that it could be written without even an appeal to European logic or
symmetry of mind. Thus any deviation from what were considered the norms
of Oriental behavior was believed to be unnatural; Cromer’s last annual
report from Egypt consequently proclaimed Egyptian nationalism to be an
“entirely novel idea” and “a plant of exotic rather than of indigenous
growth.”8

We would be wrong, I think, to underestimate the reservoir of accredited
knowledge, the codes of Orientalist orthodoxy, to which Cromer and
Balfour refer everywhere in their writing and in their public policy. To
say simply that Orientalism was a rationalization of colonial rule is to
ignore the extent to which colonial rule was justified in advance by
Orientalism, rather than after the fact. Men have always divided the
world up into regions having either real or imagined distinction from
each other. The absolute demarcation between East and West, which
Balfour and Cromer accept with such complacency, had been years, even
centuries, in the making. There were of course innumerable voyages of
discovery; there were contacts through trade and war. But more than
this, since the middle of the eighteenth century there had been two
principal elements in the relation between East and West. One was a
growing systematic knowledge in Europe about the Orient, knowledge
reinforced by the colonial encounter as well as by the widespread
interest in the alien and unusual, exploited by the developing sciences
of ethnology, comparative anatomy, philology, and history; furthermore,
to this systematic knowledge was added a sizable body of literature
produced by novelists, poets, translators, and gifted travelers. The
other feature of Oriental-European relations was that Europe was always
in a position of strength, not to say domination. There is no way of
putting this euphemistically. True, the relationship of strong to weak
could be disguised or mitigated, as when Balfour acknowledged the
“greatness” of Oriental civilizations. But the essential relationship,
on political, cultural, and even religious grounds, was seen-in the
West, which is what concerns us hereto be one between a strong and a
weak partner.

Many terms were used to express the relation: Balfour and Cromer,
typically, used several. The Oriental is irrational, depraved (fallen),
childlike, “different”; thus the European is rational, virtuous, mature,
“normal.” But the way of enlivening the relationship was everywhere to
stress the fact that the Oriental lived in a different but thoroughly
organized world of his own, a world with its own national, cultural, and
epistemological boundaries and principles of internal coherence. Yet
what gave the Oriental’s world its intelligibility and identity was not
the result of his own efforts but rather the whole complex series of
knowledgeable manipulations by which the Orient was identified by the
West. Thus the two features of cultural relationship I have been
discussing come together. Knowledge of the Orient, because generated out
of strength, in a sense*creates* the Orient, the Oriental, and his
world. In Cromer’s and Balfour’s language the Oriental is depicted as
something one judges (as in a court of law), something one studies and
depicts (as in a curriculum), something one disciplines (as in a school
or prison), something one illustrates (as in a zoological manual). The
point is that in each of these cases the Oriental is*contained*
and*represented* by dominating frameworks. Where do these come from?

Cultural strength is not something we can discuss very easilyand one of
the purposes of the present work is to illustrate, analyze, and reflect
upon Orientalism as an exercise of cultural strength. In other words, it
is better not to risk generalizations about so vague and yet so
important a notion as cultural strength until a good deal of material
has been analyzed first. But at the outset one can say that so far as
the West was concerned during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, an
assumption had been made that the Orient and everything in it was, if
not patently inferior to, then in need of corrective study by the West.
The Orient was viewed as if framed by the classroom, the criminal court,
the prison, the illustrated manual. Orientalism, then, is knowledge of
the Orient that places things Oriental in class, court, prison, or
manual for scrutiny, study, judgment, discipline, or governing.

During the early years of the twentieth century, men like Balfour and
Cromer could say what they said, in the way they did, because a still
earlier tradition of Orientalism than the nineteenth-century one
provided them with a vocabulary, imagery, rhetoric, and figures with
which to say it. Yet Orientalism reinforced, and was reinforced by, the
certain knowledge that Europe or the West literally commanded the vastly
greater part of the earth’s surface. The period of immense advance in
the institutions and content of Orientalism coincides exactly with the
period of unparalleled European expansion; from 1815 to 1914 European
direct colonial dominion expanded from about 35 percent of the earth’s
surface to about 85 percent of it.9 Every continent was affected, none
more so than Africa and Asia. The two greatest empires were the British
and the French; allies and partners in some things, in others they were
hostile rivals. In the Orient, from the eastern shores of the
Mediterranean to Indochina and Malaya, their colonial possessions and
imperial spheres of influence were adjacent, frequently overlapped,
often were fought over. But it was in the Near Orient, the lands of the
Arab Near East, where Islam was supposed to define teal and racial
characteristics, that the British and the French countered each other
and “the Orient” with the greatest intensity, familiarity, and
complexity. For much of the nineteenth century, as Lord Salisbury put it
in 1881, their common view of the Orient was intricately problematic:
“When you have got a ...faithful ally who id’ bent on meddling in a
country in which you are deeply interested ---you have three courses
open to you. You may renounce--or monopolize-or share. Renouncing would
have been to place the French across our road to India. Monopolizing
would have been very near the risk of war. So we resolved to share.”10

And share they did, in ways that we shall investigate presently. What
they shared, however, was not only land or profit or rule; it the kind
of intellectual power I have been calling Orientalism. Is a sense
Orientalism was a library or archive of information commonly and, in
some of its aspects, unanimously held. What bound the archive together
was a family of ideas11 and a unifying set of values proven in various
ways to be effective. These ideas explained the behavior of Orientals;
they supplied Orientals with a mentality, a genealogy, an atmosphere;
most important, they allowed Europeans to deal with and even to see
Orientals as a phenomenon possessing regular characteristics. But like
any set of durable ideas, Orientalist notions influenced the people who
were called Orientals as well as those called Occidental, European, or
Western; in short, Orientalism is better grasped as a set of constraints
upon and limitations of thought than it is simply as a positive
doctrine. If the essence of Orientalism is the ineradicable distinction
between Western superiority and Oriental inferiority, then we must be
prepared to note how in its development and subsequent history
Orientalism deepened and even hardened the distinction. When it became
common practice during the nineteenth century for Britain to retire its
administrators from India and elsewhere once they had reached the age of
fifty-five, then a further refinement in Orientalism had been achieved;
no Oriental was ever allowed to see a Westerner as he aged’ and
degenerated, just as no Westerner needed ever to see himself, mirrored
in the eyes of the subject race, as anything but a vigorous, rational,
ever-alert young Raj.12

Orientalist ideas took a number of different forms during the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries. First of all, in Europe there was a vast
literature about the Orient inherited from the European past. What is
distinctive about the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries,
which is where this study’ assumes modern Orientalism to have begun, is
that an Oriental renaissance took place, as Edgar Ouinet phrased it.13
Suddenly it seemed to a wide variety of thinkers, politicians, and
artists that a new awareness of the Orient, which extended from China to
the Mediterranean, had arisen. This awareness was partly the result of
newly discovered and translated Oriental texts in languages like
Sanskrit, Zend, and Arabic; it was also the result of a newly perceived
relationship between the Orient and the West. For my purposes here, the
keynote of the relationship was set for the Near East and Europe by the
Napoleonic invasion of Egypt in 1798; an invasion which was in many ways
the very model of a truly scientific appropriation of one culture by
another, apparently stronger one. For with Napoleon’s occupation of
Egypt processes were set in motion between East and West that still
dominate our contemporary cultural and political perspectives. And the
Napoleonic expedition, with its great collective monument of erudition,
the*Description de l’Egypte,* provided a scene or setting for
Orientalism, since Egypt and subsequently the other Islamic lands were
viewed as the live province, the laboratory, the theater of effective
Western knowledge about the Orient. I shall return to the Napoleonic
adventure a little later.

With such experiences as Napoleon’s the Orient as a body of knowledge in
the West was modernized, and this is a second form in which nineteenth-
and twentieth-century Orientalism existed. From the outset of the period
I shall be examining there was everywhere amongst Orientalists the
ambition to formulate their discoveries, experiences, and insights
suitably in modern terms, to put ideas about the Orient in very close
touch with modern realities. Renan’s linguistic investigations of
Semitic in 1848, for example, were couched in a style that drew heavily
for its authority upon contemporary comparative grammar, comparative
anatomy, and racial theory; these lent his Orientalism prestige and-the
other side of the coin-made Orientalism vulnerable, as it has been ever
since, to modish as well as seriously influential currents of thought in
the West. Orientalism has been subjected to imperialism, positivism,
utopianism, historicism, Darwinism, racism, Freudianism, Marxism,
Spenglerism. But Orientalism, like many of the natural and social
sciences, has had “paradigms” of research, its own learned societies,
its own Establishment. During the nineteenth century the field increased
enormously in prestige, as did also the reputation and influence of such
institutions as the Société asiatique, the Royal Asiatic Society, the
Deutsche Morgenländische Gesellschaft, and the American Oriental
Society. With the growth of these societies went also an increase, all
across Europe, in the number of professorships in Oriental studies;
consequently there was an expansion in the available means for
disseminating Orientalism. Orientalist periodicals, beginning with
the*Fundgraben des Orients* (1809), multiplied the quantity of knowledge
as well as the number of specialties.

Yet little of this activity and very few of these institutions existed
and flourished freely, for in a third form in which it existed,
Orientalism imposed limits upon thought about the Orient. Even the most
imaginative writers of an age, men like Flaubert, Nerval, or Scott, were
constrained in what they could either experience of or say about the
Orient.For Orientalism was ultimately a political vision of reality
whose structure promoted the difference between the familiar (Europe,
the West, “us”) and the strange (the Orient, the East, “them”). This
vision in a sense created and then served the two worlds thus conceived.
Orientals lived in their world,“we” lived in ours. The vision and
material reality propped each other up, kept each other going. A certain
freedom of intercourse was always the Westerner’s privilege; because his
was the stronger culture, he could penetrate, he could wrestle with, he
could give shape and meaning to the great Asiatic mystery, as Disraeli
once called it. Yet what has, I think, been previously overlooked is the
constricted vocabulary of such a privilege, and the comparative
limitations of such a vision. My argument takes it that the Orientalist
reality is both antihuman and persistent. Its scope, as much as its
institutions and all-pervasive influence, lasts up to the present.

But how did and does Orientalism work? How can one describe it all
together as a historical phenomenon, a way of thought, a contemporary
problem, and a material reality? Consider Cromer again, an accomplished
technician of empire but also a beneficiary of Orientalism. He can
furnish us with a rudimentary answer. In “The Government of Subject
Races” he wrestles with the problem of how Britain, a nation of
individuals, is to administer a wide-flung empire according to a number
of central principles. He contrasts the “local agent,” who has both a
specialist’s knowledge of the native and an Anglo-Saxon individuality,
with the central authority at home in London. The former may “treat
subjects of local interest in a manner calculated to damage, or even to
jeopardize, Imperial interests. The central authority is in a position
to obviate any danger arising from this cause.” Why? Because this
authority can “ensure the harmonious working of the different parts of
the machine” and “should endeavour, so far as is possible, to realise
the circumstances attendant on the government of the dependency.”14 The
language is vague and unattractive, but the point is not hard to grasp.
Cromer envisions a seat of power in the West, and radiating out from it
towards the East a great embracing machine, sustaining the central
authority yet commanded by it. What the machine’s branches feed into it
in the East-human material, material wealth, knowledge, what have you-is
processed by the machine, then converted into more power. The specialist
does the immediate translation of mere Oriental matter into useful
substance: the Oriental becomes, for example, a subject race, an example
of an “Oriental” mentality, all for the enhancement of the “authority”
at home. “Local interests” are Orientalist special interests, the
“central authority” is the general interest of the imperial society as a
whole. What Cromer quite accurately sees is the management of knowledge
by society, the fact that knowledge-no matter how special-is regulated
first by the local concerns of a specialist, later by the general
concerns of a social system of authority. The interplay between local
and central interests is intricate, but by no means indiscriminate.

In Cromer’s own case as an imperial administrator the “proper study is
also man,” he says. When Pope proclaimed the proper study of mankind to
be man, he meant all men, including “the poor Indian”; whereas Cromer’s
“also” reminds us that certain men, such as Orientals, can be singled
out as the subject for proper study. The proper study-in this sense-of
Orientals is Orientalism, properly separate from other forms of
knowledge, but finally useful (because finite) for the material and
social reality enclosing all knowledge at any time, supporting
knowledge, providing it with uses. An order of sovereignty is set up
from East to West, a mock chain of being whose clearest form was given
once by Kipling:

Mule, horse, elephant, or bullock, he obeys his driver, and the driver
his sergeant, and the sergeant his lieutenant, and the lieutenant his
captain, and the captain his major, and the major his colonel, and the
colonel his brigadier commanding three regiments, and the brigadier his
general, who obeys the Viceroy, who is the servant of the Empress.15

As deeply forged as is this monstrous chain of command, as strongly
managed as is Cromer’s “harmonious working,” Orientalism can also
express the strength of the West and the Orient’s weakness-as seen by
the West. Such strength and such weakness are as intrinsic to
Orientalism as they are to any view that divides the world into large
general divisions, entities that coexist in a state of tension produced
by what is believed to be radical difference.

For that is the main intellectual issue raised by Orientalism. Can one
divide human reality, as indeed human reality seems to be, genuinely
divided, into clearly different cultures, histories, traditions,
societies, even races, and survive the consequences humanly? By
surviving the consequences humanly, I mean to ask whether Oere is any
way of avoiding the hostility expressed by the division, say, of men
into “us” (Westerners) and “they” (Orientals). For such divisions are
generalities whose use historically and actually has been to press the
importance of the distinction between some men and some other men,
usually towards not especially admirable ands. When one uses categories
like Oriental and Western as both the starting and the and points of
analysis, research, public policy (as the categories were used by
Balfour and Cromer), the result is usually to polarize the
distinction-the Oriental becomes more Oriental, the Westerner more
Western-and limit the human encounter between different cultures,
traditions, and societies. In short, from its earliest modern history to
the present, Orientalism as a form of thought for dealing with the
foreign has typically shown the altogether regrettable tendency of any
knowledge based on such hard-and-fast distinctions as “East” and “West”:
to channel thought into a West or an East compartment. Because this
tendency is right at the center of Orientalist theory, practice, and
values found in the West, the sense of Western power over the Orient is
taken for granted as having the status of scientific truth.

A contemporary illustration or two should clarify this observation
perfectly. It is natural for men in power to survey from time to time
the world with which they must deal. Balfour did it frequently. Our
contemporary Henry Kissinger does it also, rarely with more express
frankness than in his essay “Domestic Structure and Foreign Policy.” The
drama he depicts is a real one, in which the United States must manage
its behavior in the world under the pressures of domestic forces on the
one hand and of foreign realities on the other. Kissinger’s discourse
must for that reason alone establish a polarity between the United
States and the world; in addition, of course, he speaks consciously as
an authoritative .voice for the major Western power, whose recent
history and present reality have placed it before a world that does not
easily accept its power and dominance. Kissinger feels that the United
States can deal less problematically with the industrial, developed West
than it can with the developing world. Again, the contemporary actuality
of relations between the United States and the so-called Third World
(which includes China, Indochina, the Near East, Africa, and Latin
America) is manifestly a thorny set of problems, which even Kissinger
cannot hide.

Kissinger’s method in the essay proceeds according to what linguists
call binary opposition: that is, he shows that there are two styles in
foreign policy (the prophetic and the political), two types of
technique, two periods, and so forth. When at the end of the historical
part of his argument he is brought face to face with the contemporary
world, he divides it accordingly into two halves, the developed and the
developing countries. The first half, which is the West, “is deeply
committed to the notion that the real world is external to the observer,
that knowledge consists of recording and classifying data-the more
accurately the better.” Kissinger’s proof for this is the Newtonian
revolution, which has not taken place in the developing world: “Cultures
which escaped the early impact of Newtonian thinking have retained the
essentially pre-Newtonian view that the real world is almost
completely*internal* to the observer.” Consequently, he adds, “empirical
reality has a much different significance for many of the new countries
than for the West because in a certain sense they never went through the
process of discovering it.”16

Unlike Cromer, Kissinger does not need to quote Sir Alfred Lyall on the
Oriental’s inability to be accurate; the point he makes is sufficiently
unarguable to require no special validation. We had our Newtonian
revolution; they didn’t. As thinkers we are better off than they are.
Good: the lines are drawn in much the same way, finally, as Balfour and
Cromer drew them. Yet sixty or more years have intervened between
Kissinger and the British imperialists. Numerous wars and revolutions
have proved conclusively that the pre-Newtonian prophetic style, which
Kissinger associates both with “inaccurate” developing countries and
with Europe before the Congress of Vienna, is not entirely without its
successes. Again unlike Balfour and Cromer, Kissinger therefore feels
obliged to aspect this pre-Newtonian perspective, since “it offers great
flexibility with respect to the contemporary revolutionary turmoil.”
Thus the duty of men in the post-Newtonian (real) world is to “construct
an international order*before* a crisis imposes it as a necessity”: in
other words,*we* must still find a way by which the developing world can
be contained. Is this not similar to Cromer’s vision of a harmoniously
working machine designed ultimately to benefit some central authority,
which opposes the developing world?

Kissinger may not have known on what fund of pedigreed knowledge he was
drawing when he cut the world up into pre-Newtonian and post-Newtonian
conceptions of reality. But his distinction is identical with the
orthodox one made by Orientalists, who separate Orientals from
Westerners. And like Orientalism’s distinction Xissinger’s is not
value-free, despite the apparent neutrality of his tone. Thus such words
as “prophetic,” “accuracy,” “internal,” “empirical reality,” and “order”
are scattered throughout his description, and they characterize either
attractive, familiar, desirable virtues or menacing, peculiar,
disorderly defects. Both the traditional Orientalist, as we shall see,
and Kissinger conceive of the difference between cultures, first, as
creating a battlefront that separates them, and second, as inviting the
West to control, contain, and otherwise govern (through superior
knowledge and accommodating power) the Other. With what effect and at
what considerable expense such militant divisions have been maintained,
no one at present needs to be reminded.

Another illustration dovetails neatly-perhaps too neatly-with
Kissinger’s analysis. In its February 1972 issue, the*American Journal
of Psychiatry* printed an essay by Harold W. Glidden, who is identified
as a retired member of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, United
States Department of State; the essay’s title (“The Arab World”), its
tone, and its content argue a highly characteristic Orientalist bent of
mind. Thus for his four-page, double-columned psychological portrait of
over 100 million people, considered for a period of 1,300 years, Glidden
cites exactly four sources for his views: a recent book on Tripoli, one
issue of the Egyptian newspaper*A1-Ahram,* the periodical*Oriente
Moderno,* and a book by Majid Khadduri, a well-known Orientalist. The
article itself purports to uncover “the inner workings of Arab
behavior,” which from*our* point of view is “aberrant” but for Arabs is
“normal.” After this auspicious start, we are told that Arabs stress
conformity; that Arabs inhabit a shame culture whose “prestige system’.”
involves the ability to attract followers and clients (as an aside we
are told that “Arab society is and always has been based on a system of
client-patron relationships”); that Arabs can function only in conflict
situations; that prestige is based solely on the ability to dominate
others; that a shame culture-and therefore Islam itself -makes a virtue
of revenge (here Glidden triumphantly cites the June 29, 1970*Ahram* to
show that “in 1969 [in Egypt] in 1070 cases of murder where the
perpetrators were apprehended, it was found that 20 percent of the
murders were based on a desire to wipe out shame, 30 percent on a desire
to satisfy real or imaginary wrongs, and 31 percent on a desire for
blood revenge”); that if from a Western point of view “the only rational
thing for the Arabs to do is to make peace ...for the Arabs the
situation is not governed by this kind of logic, for objectivity is not
a value in the Arab system.”

Glidden continues, now more enthusiastically: “it is a notable fact that
while the Arab value system demands absolute solidarity within the
group, it at the same time encourages among its members a kind of
rivalry that is destructive of that very solidarity”; in Arab society
only “success counts” and “the end justifies the means”; Arabs live
“naturally” in a world “characterized by anxiety expressed in
generalized suspicion and distrust, which has been labelled
free-floating hostility”; “the art of subterfuge is highly developed in
Arab life, as well as in Islam itself”; the Arab need for vengeance
overrides everything, otherwise the Arab would feel “ego-destroying”
shame. Therefore, if “Westerners consider peace to be high on the scale
of values” and if “we have a highly developed consciousness of the value
of time,” this is not true of Arabs. “In fact,” we are told, “in Arab
tribal society (where Arab values originated), strife, not peace, was
the normal state of affairs because raiding was one of the two main
supports of the economy.” The purpose of this learned disquisition is
merely to show how on the Western and Oriental scale of values”“the
relative position of the elements is quite different.” QED.17

This is the apogee of Orientalist confidence. No merely asserted
generality is denied the dignity of truth; no theoretical list of
Oriental attributes is without application to the behavior of Orientals
in the real world. On the one hand there are Westerners, and on the
other there are Arab-Orientals; the former are (in no particular order)
rational, peaceful, liberal, logical, capable of holding real values,
without natural suspicion; the latter are none of these things. Out of
what collective and yet particularized view of the Orient do these
statements emerge? What specialized skills, what imaginative pressures,
whht institutions and traditions, what cultural forces produce such
similarity in the descriptions of the Orient to be found in Cromer,
Balfour, and our ,contemporary statesmen?

II- Imaginative Geography and Its Representations: Orientalizing the Oriental
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Strictly speaking, Orientalism is a field of learned study. In the
Christian West, Orientalism is considered to have commenced its formal
existence with the decision of the Church Council of Vienne in 1312 to
establish a series of chairs in “Arabic, Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac at
Paris, Oxford, Bologna, Avignon, and Salamanca.”18 Yet any account of

Orientalism would have to consider not only the professional Orientalist
and his work but also the very notion of a field of study based on a
geographical, cultural, linguistic, and ethnic unit called the Orient.
Fields, of course, are made. They acquire coherence and integrity in
time because scholars devote themselves in different ways to what seems
to be a commonly agreed-upon subject matter. Yet it goes without saying
that a field of study is rarely as simply defined as even its most
committed partisans-usually scholars, professors, experts, and the
like -claim it is. Besides, a field can change so entirely, in even the
most traditional disciplines like philology, history, or theology, as to
make an all-purpose definition of subject matter almost impossible. This
is certainly true of Orientalism, for some interesting reasons.

To speak of scholarly specialization as a geographical “field” is, in
the case of Orientalism, fairly revealing since no one is likely to
imagine a field symmetrical to it called Occidentalism. Already the
special, perhaps even eccentric attitude of Orientalism becomes
apparent. For although many learned disciplines imply a position taken
towards, say,*human* material (a historian deals with the human past
from a special vantage point in the present), there is no real analogy
for taking a fixed, more or less total geographical position towards a
wide variety of social, linguistic, political, and historical realities.
A classicist, a Romance specialist, even an Americanist focuses on a
relatively modest portion of the world, not on a full half of it. But
Orientalism is a field with considerable geographical ambition. And
since Orientalists have traditionally occupied themselves with things
Oriental (a specialist in Islamic law, no less than an expert in Chinese
dialects or in Indian religions, is considered an Orientalist by people
who call themselves Orientalists), we must learn to accept enormous,
indiscriminate size plus an almost infinite capacity for subdivision as
one of the chief characteristics of Orientalism-one that is evidenced in
its confusing amalgam of imperial vagueness and precise detail.

All of this describes Orientalism as an academic discipline. The “ism”
in Orientalism serves to insist on the distinction of this discipline
from every other kind. The rule in its historical development as an
academic discipline has been its increasing scope, not its greater
selectiveness. Renaissance Orientalists like Erpenius and Guillaume
Postel were primarily specialists in the languages of the:

Biblical provinces, although Postel boasted that he could get across
Asia as far as China without needing an interpreter. By and large, until
the mid-eighteenth century Orientalists were Biblical scholars, is of
the Semitic languages, Islamic specialists, or, because the Jesuits had
opened up the new study of China, Sinologists. The whole middle expanse
of Asia was not academically conquered for Orientalism until, during the
later eighteenth century, Anquetil-Duperron and Sir William Jones were
able intelligibly to reveal the ordinary riches of Avestan and Sanskrit.
By the middle of the nineteenth century Orientalism was as vast a
treasure-house of ruing as one could imagine. There are two excellent
indices of this new, triumphant eclecticism. One is the encyclopedic
description of Orientalism roughly from 1765 to 1850 given by Raymond
Schwab in his*La Renaissance orientale* .19 Quite aside from the
scientific discoveries of things Oriental made by learned professionals
during this period in Europe, there was the virtual epidemic of
Orientalia affecting every major poet, essayist, and philosopher the
period. Schwab’s notion is that “Oriental” identifies an amateur or
professional enthusiasm for everything Asiatic, which was wonderfully
synonymous with the exotic, the mysterious, the profound, the seminal;
this is a later transposition eastwards of a similar enthusiasm in
Europe for Greek and Latin antiquity during the High Renaissance. In
1829 Victor Hugo put this change in ions as follows: “Au siècle de Louis
XIV on était helléniste, maintenant ant on est Orientaliste.”20 A
nineteenth-century Orientalist therefore either a scholar (a Sinologist,
an Islamicist, an Indo Europeanist) or a gifted enthusiast (Hugo in*Les
Orientales,* Goethe*the Westöstlicher Diwan),* or both (Richard Burton,
Edward Friedrich Schlegel).

The second index of how inclusive Orientalism had become the Council of
Vienne is to be found in nineteenth-century chronicles of the field
itself. The most thorough of its kind is Jules Mohl’s*Vingt-sept Ans
d’histoire des études orientales,* a two-volume longbook of everything
of note that took place in Orientalism be 1840 and 1867.21 Mohl was the
secretary of the Société asiatique in Paris, and for something more than
the first half of the nineteenth century Paris was the capital of the
Orientalist world (and, according to Walter Benjamin, of the nineteenth
century). Mohl’s position in the Société could not have been more
central the field of Orientalism. There is scarcely anything done by a
European scholar touching Asia during those twenty-seven years that Mohl
does not enter under “études orientales.” His entries of course concern
publications, but the range of published material of interest to
Orientalist scholars is awesome. Arabic, innumerable Indian dialects,
Hebrew, Pehlevi, Assyrian, Babylonian, Mongolian, Chinese, Burmese,
Mesopotamian, Javanese: the list of philological works considered
Orientalist is almost uncountable. Moreover, Orientalist studies
apparently cover everything from the editing and translation of texts to
numismatic, anthropological, archaeological, sociological, economic,
historical, literary, and cultural studies in every known Asiatic and
North African civilization, ancient and modern. Gustave Dugat’s*Histoire
des orientalistes de I’Europe du* XII*au* XIX*siècle* (1868-1870)22 is a
selective history of major figures, but the range represented is no less
immense than Mohl’s.

Such eclecticism as this had its blind spots, nevertheless. Academic
Orientalists for the most part were interested in the classical period
of whatever language or society it was that they studied. Not until
quite late in the century, with the single major exception of Napoleon’s
Institut d’Égypte, was much attention given to the academic study of the
modern, or actual, Orient. Moreover, the Orient studied was a textual
universe by and large; the impact of the Orient was made through books
and manuscripts, not, as in the impress of Greece on the Renaissance,
through mimetic artifacts like sculpture and pottery. Even the rapport
between an Orientalist and the Orient was textual, so much so that it is
reported of some of the early- nineteenth-century German Orientalists
that their first view of an eight-armed Indian statue cured them
completely of their Orientalist taste.23 When a learned Orientalist
traveled in the country of his specialization, it was always with
unshakable abstract maxims about the “civilization” he had studied;
rarely were Orientalists interested in anything except proving the
validity of these musty “truths” by applying them, without great
success, to uncomprehending, hence degenerate, natives. Finally, the
very power and scope of Orientalism produced not only a fair amount of
exact positive knowledge about the Orient but also a kind of
second-order knowledge- lurking in such places as the “Oriental” tale,
the mythology of the mysterious East, notions of Asian
inscrutability-with a life of its own, what V. G. Kiernan has aptly
called “Europe’s collective day-dream of the Orient.”24 One happy result
of this is that an estimable number of important writers during the
nineteenth century were Oriental enthusiasts:

It is perfectly correct, I think, to speak of a genre of Orientalist
writing as exemplified in the works of Hugo, Goethe, Nerval, Flaubert,
Fitzgerald, and the like. What inevitably goes with such work, however,
is a kind of free-floating mythology of the Orient, an Orient that
derives not only from contemporary attitudes and popular prejudices but
also from what Vico called the conceit of nations and of scholars. I
have already alluded to the political uses of such -material as it has
turned up in the twentieth century.

Today an Orientalist is less likely to call himself an Orientalist than
he was almost any time up to World War II. Yet the designation is still
useful, as when universities maintain programs or departments in
Oriental languages or Oriental civilizations. There is an Oriental
“faculty” at Oxford, and a department of Oriental studies at Princeton.
As recently as 1959, the British government empowered a commission “to
review developments in the Universities in the fields of Oriental,
Slavonic, East European and African studies ...and to consider, and
advise on, proposals for future development.”25 The Hayter Report, as it
was called when it appeared in 1961, seemed untroubled by the broad
designation of the word Oriental, which it found serviceably employed in
American universities as well. For even the greatest name in modern
Anglo American Islamic studies, H. A. R. Gibb, preferred to call himself
an Orientalist rather than an Arabist. Gibb himself, classicist that he
was, could use the ugly neologism “area study” for Orientalism as a way
of showing that area studies and Orientalism after all were
interchangeable geographical titles.26 But this, I think, ingenuously
belies a much more interesting relationship between knowledge and
geography. I should like to consider that relationship briefly.

Despite the distraction of a great many vague desires, impulses, and
images, the mind seems persistently to formulate what Claude
Levi-Strauss has called a science of the concrete.27 A primitive tribe,
for example, assigns a definite place, function, and significance “to
every leafy species in its immediate environment. Many of these grasses
and flowers have no practical use; but the point Levi Strauss makes is
that mind requires order, and order is achieved by discriminating and
taking note of everything, placing everything of which the mind is aware
in a secure, refindable place, therefore giving things some role to play
in the economy of objects and identities that make up an environment.
This kind of rudimentary classification has a logic to it, but the rules
of the logic by which a green fern in one society is a symbol of grace
and in another is considered maleficent are neither predictably rational
nor universal. There is always a measure of the purely arbitrary in the
way the distinctions between things are seen. And with these
distinctions go values whose history, if one could unearth it
completely, would probably show the same measure of arbitrariness. This
is evident enough in the case of fashion. Why do wigs, lace collars, and
high buckled shoes appear, then disappear, over a period of decades?
Some of the answer has to do with utility and some with the inherent
beauty of the fashion. But if we agree that all things in history, like
history itself, are made by men, then we will appreciate how possible it
is for many objects or places or times to be assigned roles and given
meanings that acquire objective validity only*after* the assignments are
made. This is especially true of relatively uncommon things, like
foreigners, mutants, or “abnormal” behavior.

It is perfectly possible to argue that some distinctive objects are made
by the mind, and that these objects, while appearing to exist
objectively, have only a fictional reality. A group of people living on
a few acres of land will set up boundaries between their land and its
immediate surroundings and the territory beyond, which they call “the
land of the barbarians.” In other words, this universal practice of
designating in one’s mind a familiar space which is “ours” and an
unfamiliar space beyond “ours” which is “theirs” is a way of making
geographical distinctions that can*be* entirely arbitrary. I use the
word “arbitrary” here because imaginative geography of the “our
land--barbarian land” variety does not require that the barbarians
acknowledge the distinction. It is enough for “us” to set up these
boundaries in our own minds; “they” become “they” accordingly, and both
their territory and their mentality are designated as different from
“ours.” To a certain extent modern and primitive societies seem thus to
derive a sense of their identities negatively. A fifth-century Athenian
was very likely to feel himself to be nonbarbarian as much as he
positively felt himself to be Athenian. The geographic boundaries
accompany the social, ethnic, and cultural ones in expected ways. Yet
often the sense in which someone feels himself to be not--foreign is
based on a very unrigorous idea of what is “out there,” beyond one’s own
territory. All kinds of suppositions, associations, and fictions appear
to crowd the unfamiliar space outside one’s own.

The French philosopher Gaston Bachelard once wrote an analysis of what
he called the poetics of space.28 The inside of a house, he said,
acquires a sense of intimacy, secrecy, security, real or imagined,
because of the experiences that come to seem appropriate for it. The
objective space of a house-its corners, corridors, cellar, rooms-is far
less important than what poetically it is endowed with, which is usually
a quality with an imaginative or figurative value we can name and feel:
thus a house may be haunted, or homelike, or prisonlike, or magical. So
space acquires emotional and even rational sense by a kind of poetic
process, whereby the vacant or anonymous reaches of distance are
converted into meaning for us here. The same process occurs when we deal
with time. Much of what we associate with or even know about such
periods as “long ago” or “the beginning” or “at the end of time” is
poetic-made up. For a historian of Middle Kingdom Egypt, “long ago” will
have a very clear sort of meaning, but even this meaning does not
totally dissipate the imaginative, quasi-fictional quality one senses
lurking in a time very different and distant from our own. For there is
no doubt that imaginative geography and history help the mind to
intensify its own sense of itself by dramatizing the distance and
difference between what is close to it and what is far away. This is no
less true of the feelings we often have that we would have been more “at
home” in the sixteenth century or in Tahiti.

Yet there is no use in pretending that all we know about time and Vace,
or rather history and geography, is more than anything else imaginative.
There are such things as positive history and positive geography which
in Europe and the United States have impressive achievements to point
to. Scholars now do know more about the world, its past and present,
than they did, for example, in Gibbon’s bate. Yet this is not to say
that they know all there is to know, nor, ‘more important, is it to say
that what they know has effectively dispelled the imaginative
geographical and historical knowledge I ‘have been considering. We need
not decide here whether this kind of imaginative knowledge infuses
history and geography, or whether some way it overrides them. Let us
just say for the time being that it is there as something more than what
appears to be merely positive knowledge.

Almost from earliest times in Europe the Orient was something more than
what was empirically known about it. At least until the ‘fly eighteenth
century, as R. W. Southern has so elegantly shown, European
understanding of one kind of Oriental culture, the Islamic, ignorant but
complex.29 For certain associations with the East--- not quite ignorant,
not quite informed---always seem to have gathered around the notion of
an Orient. Consider first the demarcation between Orient and West. It
already seems bold by the time of the*Iliad. Two* of the most profoundly
influential qualities associated with the East appear in Aeschylus’s*The
Persians,* the earliest Athenian play extant, and in*The Bacchae* of
Euripides, the very last one extant. Aeschylus portrays the sense of
disaster overcoming the Persians when they learn that their armies, led
by King Xerxes, have been destroyed by the Greeks. The chorus sings the
following ode:

Now all Asia’s land

Moans in emptiness.

Xerxes led forth, oh oh!

Xerxes destroyed, woe woe!

Xerxes’ plans have all miscarried

In ships of the sea.

Why did Darius then

Bring no harm to his men

When he led them into battle,

That beloved leader of men from Susa?30

What matters here is that Asia speaks through and by virtue of the
European imagination, which is depicted as victorious over Asia, that
hostile “other” world beyond the seas. To Asia are given the feelings of
emptiness, loss, and disaster that seem thereafter to reward Oriental
challenges to the West; and also, the lament that in some glorious past
Asia fared better, was itself victorious over Europe.

In*The Bacchae,* perhaps the most Asiatic of all the Attic dramas,
Dionysus is explicitly connected with his Asian origins and with the
strangely threatening excesses of Oriental mysteries. Pentheus, king of
Thebes, is destroyed by his mother, Agave, and her fellow bacchantes.
Having defied Dionysus by not recognizing either his power or his
divinity, Pentheus is thus horribly punished, and the play ends with a
general recognition of the eccentric god’s terrible power. Modern
commentators on*The Bacchae* have not failed to note the play’s
extraordinary range of intellectual and aesthetic effects; but there has
been no escaping the additional historical detail that Euripides “was
surely affected by the new aspect that the Dionysiac cults must have
assumed in the light of the foreign ecstatic religions of Bendis,
Cybele, Sabazius, Adonis, and Isis, which were introduced from Asia
Minor and the Levant and swept through Piraeus and Athens during the
frustrating and increasingly irrational years of the Peloponnesian
War.”31

The two aspects of the Orient that set it off from the West in this pair
of plays will remain essential motifs of European imaginative geography.
A line is drawn between two continents. Europe is powerful and
articulate; Asia is defeated and distant. Aeschylus*represents* Asia,
makes her speak in the person of the aged Persian queen, Xerxes’ mother.
It is Europe that articulates the Orient; this articulation is the
prerogative, not of a puppet master, but of a genuine creator, whose
life-giving power represents, animates, constitutes the otherwise silent
and dangerous space beyond familiar boundaries. There is an analogy
between Aeschylus’s orchestra, which contains the Asiatic world as the
playwright conceives it, and the learned envelope of Orientalist
scholarship, which also will hold in the vast, amorphous Asiatic sprawl
for sometimes sympathetic but always dominating scrutiny. Secondly,
there is the motif of the Orient as insinuating danger. Rationality is
undermined by Eastern excesses, those mysteriously attractive opposites
to what seem to be normal values. The difference separating East from
West is symbolized by the sternness with which, at first, Pentheus
rejects the hysterical bacchantes. When later he himself becomes a
bacchant, he is destroyed not so much for having given in to Dionysus as
for having incorrectly assessed Dionysus’s menace in the first place.
The lesson that Euripides intends is dramatized by the presence in the
play of Cadmus and Tiresias, knowledgeable older men who realize that
“sovereignty” alone does not rule men;32 tyre is such a thing as
judgment, they say, which means sizing up correctly the force of alien
powers and expertly coming to terms with them. Hereafter Oriental
mysteries will be taken seriously, not last because they challenge the
rational Western mind to new exercises of its enduring ambition and
power.

But one big division, as between West and Orient, leads to other smaller
ones, especially as the normal enterprises of civilization provoke such
outgoing activities as travel, conquest, new experiences. In classical
Greece and Rome geographers, historians, public figures like Caesar,
orators, and poets added to the fund of taxonomic lore separating races,
regions, nations, and minds from each other; much of that was
self-serving, and existed to prove that Romans and Greeks were superior
to other kinds of people. But concern with The Orient had its own
tradition of classification and hierarchy.  From at least the second
century B.C. on, it was lost on no traveler or eastward-looking and
ambitious Western potentate that Herodotus-historian, traveler,
inexhaustibly curious chronicler-and Alexander-king warrior, scientific
conqueror-had been in the Orient before. The Orient was therefore
subdivided into realms previously known, visited, conquered, by
Herodotus and Alexander as well as their epigones, and those realms not
previously known, visited, conquered. Christianity completed the setting
up of main intra-Oriental spheres: there was a Near Orient and a Far
Orient, a familiar Orient, which Rene Grousset calls “l’empire du
Levant,”33 and a novel Orient. The Orient therefore alternated in the
mind’s geography between being an Old World to which one returned, as to
Eden or Paradise, there to set up a new version of the old, and being a
wholly new place to which one came as Columbus came to America, in order
to set up a New World (although, ironically, Columbus himself thought
that he discovered a new part of the Old World). Certainly neither of
these Orients was purely one thing or the other: it is their
vacillations, their tempting suggestiveness, their capacity for
entertaining and confusing the mind, that are interesting.

Consider how the Orient, and in particular the Near Orient, became known
in the West as its great complementary opposite since antiquity. There
were the Bible and the rise of Christianity; there were travelers like
Marco Polo who charted the trade routes and patterned a regulated system
of commercial exchange, and after him Lodovico di Varthema and Pietro
della Valle; there were fabulists like Mandeville; there were the
redoubtable conquering Eastern movements, principally Islam, of course;
there were the militant pilgrims, chiefly the Crusaders. Altogether an
internally structured archive is built up from the literature that
belongs to these experiences. Out of this comes a restricted number of
typical encapsulations: the journey, the history, the fable, the
stereotype, the polemical confrontation. These are the lenses through
which the Orient is experienced, and they shape the language,
perception, and form of the encounter between East and West. What gives
the immense number of encounters some unity, however, is the vacillation
I was speaking about earlier. Something patently foreign and distant
acquires, for one reason or another, a status more rather than less
familiar. One tends to stop judging things either as completely novel or
as completely well known; a new median category emerges, a category that
allows one to see new things, things seen for the first time, as
versions of a previously known thing.

In essence such a category is not so much a way of receiving new
information as it is a method of controlling what seems to be a threat
to some established view of things. If the mind must suddenly deal with
what it takes to be a radically new form of life-as Islam appeared to
Europe in the early Middle. Ages-the response on the whole is
conservative and defensive. Islam is judged to be a fraudulent new
version of some previous experience, in this case Christianity. The
threat is muted, familiar values impose themselves, and in the end the
mind reduces the pressure upon it by accommodating things to itself as
either “original” or “repetitious.” Islam thereafter is “handled”: its
novelty and its suggestiveness are brought under control so that
relatively nuanced discriminations are now made that would have been
impossible had the raw novelty of Islam been left unattended. The Orient
at large, therefore, vacillates between the West’s contempt for what is
familiar and its shivers of delight in-or fear of-novelty.

Yet where Islam was concerned, European fear, if not always respect, was
in order. After Mohammed’s death in 632, the military and later the
cultural and religious hegemony of Islam grew enormously. First Persia,
Syria, and Egypt, then Turkey, then North Africa fell to the Muslim
armies; in the eighth and ninth centuries Spain, Sicily, and parts of
France were conquered. By the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries Islam
ruled as far east as India, Indonesia, and China. And to this
extraordinary assault Europe could respond with very little except fear
and a kind of awe. Christian authors witnessing the Islamic conquests
had scant interest in the learning, high culture, and frequent
magnificence of the Muslims, who were, as Gibbon said, “coeval with the
darkest and most slothful period of European annals.” (But with some
satisfaction he added, “since the sum of science has risen in the West,
it should seem that the Oriental studies have languished and
declined.”34 ) What Christians typically felt about the Eastern armies
was that they had “all the appearance of a swarm of bees, but with a
heavy hand ...they devastated everything”: so wrote Erchembert, a cleric
in Monte Cassino in the eleventh century.35

Not for nothing did Islam come to symbolize terror, devastation, the
demonic, hordes of hated barbarians. For Europe, Islam was a lasting
trauma. Until the end of the seventeenth century the “Ottoman peril”
lurked alongside Europe to represent for the whole of Christian
civilization a constant danger, and in time European civilization
incorporated that peril and its lore, its great events, figures,
virtues, and vices, as something woven into the fall of life. In
Renaissance England alone, as Samuel Chew recounts in his classic
study*The Crescent and the Rose,* “a marl of average education and
intelligence” had at his fingertips, and could Watch on the London
stage, a relatively large number of detailed events in the history of
Ottoman Islam and its encroachments upon Christian Europe.36 The point
is that what remained current about Islam was some necessarily
diminished version of those great dangerous forces that it symbolized
for Europe. Like Walter Scott’s Saracens, the European representation of
the Muslim, Ottoman, or Arab was always a way of controlling the
redoubtable Orient; and to a certain extent the same is true of the
methods of contemporary learned Orientalists, whose subject is not so
much the East itself as the East made known, and therefore less
fearsome, to the Western reading public.

There is nothing especially controversial or reprehensible about such
domestications of the exotic; they take place between all cultures,
certainly, and between all men. My point, however, is to emphasize the
truth that the Orientalist, as much as anyone in the European West who
thought about or experienced the Orient, performed this kind of mental
operation. But what is more important still is the limited vocabulary
and imagery that impose themselves as a consequence. The reception of
Islam in the West is a perfect case in point, and has been admirably
studied by Norman Daniel. One constraint acting upon Christian thinkers
who tried to understand Islam was an analogical one; since Christ is the
basis of Christian faith, it was assumed---quite incorrectly--- that
Mohammed was to Islam as Christ was to Christianity. Hence the polemic
name “Mohammedanism” given to Islam, and the automatic epithet
“imposter” applied to Mohammed.37 Out of such and many other
misconceptions “there formed a circle which was never broken by
imaginative exteriorisation The Christian concept of Islam was integral
and self-sufficient.”38 Islam became an image the word is Daniel’s but
it seems to me to have remarkable implications for Orientalism in
general whose function was not so much to represent Islam in itself as
to represent it for the medieval Christian.

The invariable tendency to neglect what the Qur’an meant, or what
Muslims thought it meant, or what Muslims thought or did in any given
circumstances, necessarily implies that Qur’anic and other Islamic
doctrine was presented in a form that would convince Christians; and
more and more extravagant forms would stand a chance of acceptance as
the distance of the writers and public from the Islamic border
increased. It was with very great reluctance that what Muslims said
Muslims believed was accepted as what they did believe. There was a
Christian picture in which the details (even under the pressure of
facts) were abandoned as little as possible, and in which the general
outline was never abandoned. There were shades of difference, but only
with a common framework. All the corrections that were made in the
interests of an increasing accuracy were only a defence of what had
newly been realised to be vulnerable, a shoring up of a weakened
structure. Christian opinion was an erection which could not be
demolished, even to be rebuilt.39

This rigorous Christian picture of Islam was intensified in innumerable
ways, including-during the Middle Ages and early Renaissance-a large
variety of poetry, learned controversy, and popular superstition.40 By
this time the Near Orient had been all but incorporated in the common
world-picture of Latin Christianity -as in the*Chanson de Roland* the
worship of Saracens is portrayed as embracing Mahomet*and* Apollo. By
the middle of the fifteenth century, as R. W. Southern has brilliantly
shown, it became apparent to serious European thinkers “that something
would have to be done about Islam,” which had turned the situation
around somewhat by itself arriving militarily in Eastern Europe.
Southern recounts a dramatic episode between 1450 and 1460 when four
learned men, John of Segovia, Nicholas of Cusa, Jean Germain, and Aeneas
Silvius (Pius II), attempted to deal with Islam through*contraferentia,*
or “conference.” The idea was John of Segovia’s: it was to have been a
staged conference with Islam in which Christians attempted the wholesale
conversion of Muslims. “He saw the conference as an instrument with a
political as well as a strictly religious function, and in words which
will strike a chord in modern breasts he exclaimed that even if it were
to last ten years it would be less expensive and less damaging than
war.” There was no agreement between the four men, but the episode is
crucial for having been a fairly sophisticated attempt-part of a general
European attempt from Bede to Luther-to put a representative Orient in
front of Europe, to*stage* the Orient and Europe together in some
coherent way, the idea being for Christians to make it clear to Muslims
that Islam was just a misguided version of Christianity. Southern’s
conclusion follows:

Most conspicuous to us is the inability of any of these systems of
thought [European Christian] to provide a fully satisfying explanation
of the phenomenon they had set out to explain [Islam] -still less to
influence the course of practical events in a decisive way. At a
practical level, events never turned out either so well or so ill as the
most intelligent observers predicted; and it is perhaps worth noticing
that they never turned out better than when the best judges confidently
expected a happy ending. Was there any progress [in Christian knowledge
of Islam]? I must express my conviction that there was. Even if the
solution of the problem remained obstinately hidden from sight, the
statement of the problem became more complex, more rational, and more
related to experience.... The scholars who labored at the problem of
Islam in the Middle Ages failed to find the solution they sought and
desired; but they developed habits of mind and powers of comprehension
which, in other men and in other fields, may yet deserve success.41

The best part of Southern’s analysis, here and elsewhere in his brief
history of Western views of Islam, is his demonstration that it is
finally Western ignorance which becomes more refined and complex, not
some body of positive Western knowledge which increases in size and
accuracy. For fictions have their own logic and their own dialectic of
growth or decline. Onto the character of Mohammed in the Middle Ages was
heaped a bundle of attributes that corresponded to the “character of the
[twelfth-century] prophets of the ‘Free Spirit’ who did actually arise
in Europe, and claim credence and collect followers.” Similarly, since
Mohammed was viewed as the disseminator of a false Revelation, he became
as well the epitome of lechery, debauchery, sodomy, and a whole battery
of assorted treacheries, all of which derived “logically” from his
doctrinal impostures.42 Thus the Orient acquired representatives, so to
speak, and representations, each one more concrete, more internally
congruent with some Western exigency, than the ones that preceded it. It
is as if, having once settled on the Orient as a locale suitable for
incarnating the infinite in a finite shape, Europe could not stop the
practice; the Orient and the Oriental, Arab, Islamic, Indian, Chinese,
or whatever, become repetitious pseudoincarnations of some great
original (Christ, Europe, the West) they were supposed to have been
imitating. Only the source of these rather narcissistic Western ideas
about the Orient changed in time, not their character. Thus we will find
it commonly believed in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries that Arabia
was “on the fringe of the Christian world, a natural asylum for
heretical outlaws,”43 and that Mohammed was a cunning apostate, whereas
in the twentieth century an Orientalist scholar, an erudite specialist,
will be the one to point out how Islam is really no more than
second-order Arian heresy.44

Our initial description of Orientalism as a learned field now acquires a
new concreteness. A field is often an enclosed space. The idea of
representation is a theatrical one: the Orient is the stage on which the
whole East is confined. On this stage will appear figures whose role it
is to represent the larger whole from which they emanate. The Orient
then seems to be, not an unlimited extension beyond the familiar
European world, but rather a closed field, a theatrical stage affixed to
Europe. An Orientalist is but the particular specialist in knowledge for
which Europe at large is responsible, in the way that an audience is
historically and culturally responsible for (and responsive to) dramas
technically put together by the dramatist. In the depths of this
Oriental stage stands a prodigious cultural repertoire whose individual
items evoke a fabulously rich world: the Sphinx, Cleopatra, Eden, Troy,
Sodom and Gomorrah, Astarte, Isis and Osiris, Sheba, Babylon, the Genii,
the Magi, Nineveh, Prester John, Mahomet, and dozens more; settings, in
some cases names only, half-imagined, half-known; monsters, devils,
heroes; terrors, pleasures, desires. The European imagination was
nourished extensively from this repertoire: between the Middle Ages and
the eighteenth century such major authors as Ariosto, Milton, Marlowe,
Tasso, Shakespeare, Cervantes, and the authors of the*Chanson de Roland*
and the*Poema del Cid* drew on the Orient’s riches for their
productions, in ways that sharpened the outlines of imagery, ideas, and
figures populating it. In addition, a great deal of what was considered
learned Orientalist scholarship in Europe pressed ideological myths into
service, even as knowledge seemed genuinely to be advancing.

A celebrated instance of how dramatic form and learned imagery come
together in the Orientalist theater is Barthélemy
d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque orientale,* published posthumously in 1697,
with a preface by Antoine Galland. The introduction of the
recent*Cambridge History of Islam* considers the*Bibliothéque,* along
with George Sale’s preliminary discourse to his translation of the Koran
(1734) and Simon Ockley’s*History of the Saracens* (1708, 1718), to be
“highly important” in widening

“the new understanding of Islam”

and conveying it “to a less academic readership.”45 This inadequately
describes d’Herbelot’s work, which was not restricted to Islam as Sale’s
and Ockley’s were. With the exception of Johann H. Hottinger’s
Historia*Orientalis,* which appeared in 1651, the*Bibliothèque* remained
the standard reference work in Europe until the early nineteenth
century. Its scope was truly epochal. Galland, who was the first
European translator of*The Thousand and One Nights* and an Arabist of
note, contrasted d’Herbelot’s achievement with every prior one by noting
the prodigious range of his enterprise. D’Herbelot read a great number
of works, Galland said, in Arabic, Persian, and Turkish, with the result
that he was able to find out about matters hitherto concealed from
Europeans.46 After first composing a dictionary of these three Oriental
languages, d’Herbelot went on to study Oriental history, theology,
geography, science, and art, in both their fabulous and their truthful
varieties. Thereafter he decided to compose two works, one
a*bibliothèque,* or “library,” an alphabetically arranged dictionary,
the second a*florilège,* or anthology. Only the first part was
completed.

Galland’s account of the*Bibliothèque* stated that “orientale” was
planned to include principally the Levant, although-Galland says
admiringly-the time period covered did not begin only with the creation
of Adam and end with the “temps où nous sommes”: d’Herbelot went even
further back, to a time described as “plus haut” in fabulous
histories-to the long period of the pre-Adamite Solimans. As Galland’s
description proceeds, we learn that the*Bibliothèque* was like “any
other” history of the world, for what it attempted was a complete
compendium of the knowledge available on such matters as the Creation,
the Deluge, the destruction of Babel, and so forth-with the difference
that d’Herbelot’s sources were Oriental. He divided history into two
types, sacred and profane (the Jews and Christians in the first, the
Muslims in the second), and two periods, pre- and postdiluvian. Thus
d’Herbelot was able to discuss such widely divergent histories as the
Mogul, the Tartar, the Turkish, and the Slavonic; he took in as well all
the provinces of the Muslim Empire, from the Extreme Orient to the
Pillars of Hercules, with their customs, rituals, traditions,
commentaries, dynasties, palaces, rivers, and flora. Such a work, even
though it included some attention to “la doctrine perverse de Mahomet,
qui a cause si grands dommages au Christianisme,” was more capaciously
thorough than any work before it. Galland concluded his “Discours” by
assuring the reader at length that d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque* was
uniquely “utile et agrèable”; other Orientalists, like Postel, Scaliger,
Golius, Pockoke, and Erpenius, produced Orientalist studies that were
too narrowly grammatical, lexicographigal, geographical, or the like.
Only d’Herbelot was able to write a work. capable of convincing European
readers that the study of Oriental culture was more than just thankless
and fruitless: only d’Herbelot, according to Galland, attempted to form
in the minds*of his* readers a sufficiently ample idea of what it meant
to know*and* study the Orient, an idea that would both fill the mind and
satisfy one’s great, previously conceived expectations.’’

In such efforts as d’Herbelot’s, Europe discovered its capacities for
encompassing and Orientalizing the Orient. A certain sense of
superiority appears here and there in what Galland had to say about
about*his* and d’Herbelot’s*materia orientalia;* as in the work of
seventeenth-century geographers like Raphael du Mans, Europeans :could
perceive that the Orient was being outstripped and outdated by Western
science.48 But what becomes evident is not only the advantage of a
Western perspective: there is also the triumphant technique*for* taking
the immense fecundity of the Orient and making if systematically, even
alphabetically, knowable by Western laymen. When Galland said of
d’Herbelot that he satisfied one’s expectations he meant, I think, that
the*Bibliothèque* did not attempt to revise commonly received ideas
about the Orient. For what the Orientalist does is to*confirm* the
Orient in his readers’ eyes; he neither*fries* nor wants to unsettle
already firm convictions. All the Bibliothèque*orientale* did was
represent the Orient more fully and More clearly; what may have been a
loose collection of randy acquired facts concerning vaguely Levantine
history, Biblical imagery, Islamic culture, place names, and so on were
tranformed into a rational Oriental panorama, from A to Z. Under*the
entry for* Mohammed, d’Herbelot first supplied all of the*Prophet’s
given* names, then proceeded to confirm Mohammed’s ideological and
doctrinal value as follows:

C’est le fameux imposteur Mahomet, Auteur et Fondateur d’une hérésie,
qui a pris le nom de religion, que noun appellons Mahometane.Voyez le
titre d’Eslam.

Les Interprètes de l’Alcoran et autres Docteurs de la Loy Musulmane ou
Mahometane ont appliqué à ce faux prophète tous*les é* loges, quo les
Ariens, Paulitiens ou Paulianistes & autres Hérétiques oat attribué A
Jésus-Christ, en lui ôtant sa Divinité ..49

(This is the famous imposter Mahomet, Author and Founder of a heresy,
which has taken on the name of religion, which we call Mohammedan. See
entry under Islam.

The interpreters of the Alcoran and other Doctors of Muslim or
Mohammedan Law have applied to this false prophet all the praises which
the Arians, Paulicians or Paulianists, and other Heretics have
attributed to Jesus Christ, while stripping him of his Divinity …)

“Mohammedan” is the relevant (and insulting) European designation;
“Islam,” which happens to be the correct Muslim name, is relegated to
another entry. The “heresy ...which we call Mohammedan” is “caught” as
the imitation of a Christian imitation of true religion. Then, in the
long historical account of Mohammed’s life, d’Herbelot can turn to more
or less straight narrative. But it is the*placing* of Mohammed that
counts in the*Bibliothèque.* The dangers of free-wheeling heresy are
removed when it is transformed into ideologically explicit matter for an
alphabetical item. Mohammed no longer roams the Eastern world as a
threatening, immoral debauchee; he sits quietly on his (admittedly
prominent) portion of the Orientalist stage.50 He’ is given a genealogy,
an explanation, even a development, all of which are subsumed under the
simple statements that prevent him from straying elsewhere.

Such “images” of the Orient as this are images in that they represent or
stand for a very large entity, otherwise impossibly diffuse, which they
enable one to grasp or see. They are also*characters,* related to such
types as the braggarts, misers, or gluttons produced by Theophrastus, La
Bruyère, or Selden. Perhaps it is not exactly correct to say that
one*sees* such characters as the*miles gloriosus* or Mahomet the
imposter, since the discursive confinement of a character is supposed at
best to let one apprehend a generic type without difficulty or
ambiguity. D’Herbelot’s character of Mahomet is an*image,* however,
because the false prophet is part of a general theatrical representation
called*orientale* whose totality is contained in the*Bibliothèque.*

The didactic quality of the Orientalist representation cannot be
detached from the rest of the performance. In a learned work like
the*Bibliothèque orientate,* which was the result of systematic study
and research, the author imposes a disciplinary order upon the material
he has worked on; in addition, he wants it made clear to the reader that
what the printed page delivers is an ordered, disciplined judgment of
the material. What is thus conveyed by the*Bibliothèque is* an idea of
Orientalism’s power and effectiveness, which everywhere remind the
reader that henceforth in order to get at the Orient he must pass
through the learned grids and codes provided by the Orientalist. Not
only is the Orient accommodated to the moral exigencies of Western
Christianity; it is also circumscribed by a series of attitudes and
judgments that send the Western mind, not first to Oriental sources for
correction and verification, but rather to other Orientalist works. The
Orientalist stage, as I have been calling it, becomes a system of moral
and epistemological rigor. As a discipline representing
institutionalized Western knowledge of the Orient, Orientalism thus
comes to exert a three-way force, on the Orient, on the Orientalist, and
on the Western “consumer” of Orientalism. It would be wrong, I think, to
underestimate the strength of the three-way relationship thus
established. For the Orient (“out there” towards the East) is corrected,
even penalized, for lying outside the boundaries of European society,
“our” world; the Orient is thus*Orientalized,* a process that not only
marks the Orient as the province of the Orientalist but also forces the
uninitiated Western reader to accept Orientalist codifications (like
d’Herbelot’s alphabetized*Bibliothèque)* as the*true* Orient. Truth, in
short, becomes a function of learned judgment, not of the material
itself, which in time seems to owe even its existence to the
Orientalist.

This whole didactic process is neither difficult to understand nor
difficult to explain. One ought again to remember that all cultures
impose corrections upon raw reality, changing it from free-floating
objects into units of knowledge. The problem is not that conversion
takes place. It is perfectly natural for the human mind to resist the
assault on it of untreated strangeness; therefore cultures have always
been inclined to impose complete transformations on other cultures,
receiving these other cultures not as they are but as, for the benefit
of the receiver, they ought to be. To the Westerner, however, the
Oriental was always*like* some aspect of the West; to some of the German
Romantics, for example, Indian religion was essentially an Oriental
version of Germano-Christian pantheism. Yet the Orientalist makes it his
work to be always converting the Orient from something into something
else: he does this for himself, for the sake of his culture, in some
cases for what he believes is the sake of the Oriental. This process of
conversion is a disciplined one: it is taught, it has its own societies,
periodicals, traditions, vocabulary, rhetoric, all in basic ways
connected to and supplied by the prevailing cultural and political norms
of the West. And, as I shall demonstrate, it tends to become more rather
than less total in what it tries to do, so much so that as one surveys
Orientalism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the overriding
impression is of Orientalism’s insensitive schematization of the entire
Orient.

How early this schematization began is clear from the examples I have
given of Western representations of the Orient in classical Greece. How
strongly articulated were later representations building on the earlier
ones, how inordinately careful their schematization, how dramatically
effective their placing in Western imaginative geography, can be
illustrated if we turn now to Dante’s*Inferno.* Dante’s achievement
in*The Divine Comedy* was to have seamlessly combined the realistic
portrayal of mundane reality with a universal and eternal system of
Christian values. What Dante the pilgrim sees as he walks through the
Inferno, Purgatorio, and Paradiso is a unique vision of judgment. Paolo
and Francesca, for instance, are seen as eternally confined to hell for
their sins, yet they are seen as enacting, indeed living, the very
characters and actions that put them where they will be for eternity.
Thus each of the figures in Dante’s vision not only represents himself
but is also a typical representation of his character and the fate meted
out to him.

“Maometto” - Mohammed - turns up in canto 28 of the*Inferno.* He is
located in the eighth of the nine circles of Hell, in the ninth of the
ten Bolgias of Malebolge, a circle of gloomy ditches surrounding Satan’s
stronghold in Hell. Thus before Dante reaches Mohammed, he passes
through circles containing people whose sins are of a lesser order: the
lustful, the avaricious, the gluttonous, the heretics, the wrathful, the
suicidal, the blasphemous. After Mohammed there are only the falsifiers
and the treacherous (who include Judas, Brutus, and Cassius) before one
arrives at the very bottom of Hell, which is where Satan himself is to
be found. Mohammed thus belongs to a rigid hierarchy of evils, in the
category of what Dante calls*seminator di scandalo a di scisma.*
Mohammed’s punishment, which is also his eternal fate, is a peculiarly
disgusting one: he is endlessly being cleft in two from his chin to his
anus like, Dante says, a cask whose staves are ripped apart. Dante’s
verse at this point spares the reader none of the eschatological detail
that so vivid a punishment entails: Mohammed’s entrails and his
excrement are described with unflinching accuracy. Mohammed explains his
punishment to Dante, pointing as well to Ali, who precedes him in the
line of sinners whom the attendant devil is splitting in two; he also
asks Dante to warn one Fra Dolcino, a renegade priest whose sect
advocated community of women and goods and who was accused of having a
mistress, of what will be in store for him. It will not have been lost
on the reader that Dante saw a parallel between Dolcino’s and Mohammed’s
revolting sensuality, and also between their pretensions to theological
eminence.

But this is not all that Dante has to say about Islam. Earlier in
the*Inferno,* a small group of Muslims turns up. Avicenna, Averroës, and
Saladin are among those virtuous heathens who, along with Hector,
Aeneas, Abraham, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, are confined to the
first circle of the Inferno, there to suffer a minimal (and even
honorable) punishment for not having had the benefit of Christian
revelation. Dante, of course, admires their great virtues and
accomplishments, but because they were, not Christians he must condemn
them, however lightly, to Hell. Eternity is a great leveler of
distinctions, it is true, but the special anachronisms and anomalies of
putting pre-Christian luminaries in the same category of “heathen”
damnation with post-Christian Muslims does not trouble Dante. Even
though the Koran specifies Jesus as a prophet, Dante chooses to consider
the great Muslim philosophers and king as having been fundamentally
ignorant of Christianity. That they can also inhabit the same
distinguished level as the heroes and sages of classical antiquity is an
ahistorical vision similar to Raphael’s in his fresco*The School of
Athens,* in which Averroës rubs elbows on the academy floor with
Socrates and Plato (similar to Fénelon’s*Dialogues des morts
[1700--1718],* where a discussion takes place between Socrates and
Confucius).

The discriminations and refinements of Dante’s poetic grasp of Islam are
an instance of the schematic, almost cosmological inevitability with
which Islam and its designated representatives are creatures of Western
geographical, historical, and above all, moral apprehension. Empirical
data about the Orient or about any of its parts count for very little;
what matters and is decisive is what I have been calling the Orientalist
vision, a vision by no means confined to the professional scholar, but
rather the common possession of all who have thought about the Orient in
the West. Danie’s powers as a poet intensify, make more rather than less
representative, these perspectives on the Orient. Mohammed, Saladin,
Averroës, and Avicenna are fixed in a visionary cosmology-fixed, laid
out, boxed in, imprisoned, without much regard for anything except their
“function” and the patterns they realize on the stage on which they
appear. Isaiah Berlin has described the effect of such attitudes in the
following way:

In [such a] ...cosmology the world of men (and, in some versions, the
entire universe) is a single, all-inclusive hierarchy; so that to
explain why each object in it is as, and where, and when it is, and does
what it does, is eo ipso to say what its goal is, how far it
successfully fulfills it, and what are the relations of coordination and
subordination between the goals of the various goal-pursuing entities in
the harmonious pyramid which they collectively form.If this is a true
picture of reality, then historical explanation, like every other form
of explanation, must consist, above all, in the attribution of
individuals, groups, nations, species, each to its own proper place in
the universal pattern. To know the “cosmic” place of a thing or a person
is to say what it is and what it does, and at the same time why it
should be and do as it is and does. Hence to be and to have value, to
exist and to have a function (and to fulfill it more or less
successfully) are one and the same. The pattern, and it alone, brings
into being and causes to pass away and confers purpose, that is to say,
value and meaning, on all there is. To understand is to perceive
patterns The more inevitable an event or an action or a character can be
exhibited as being, the better it has been understood, the profounder
the researcher’s insight, the nearer we are to the one ultimate truth.
This attitude is profoundly anti-empirical.51

And so, indeed, is the Orientalist attitude in general. It shares with
magic and with mythology the self-containing, self-reinforcing character
of a closed system, in which objects are what they are*because* they are
what they are, for once, for all time, for ontological reasons that no
empirical material can either dislodge or alter. The European encounter
with the Orient, and specifically with Islam, strengthened this system
of representing the Orient and, as has been suggested by Henri Pirenne,
turned Islam into the very epitome of an outsider against which the
whole of European civilization from the Middle Ages on was founded. The
decline of the Roman Empire as a result of the barbarian invasions had
the paradoxical effect of incorporating barbarian ways into Roman and
Mediterranean culture, Romania; whereas, Pirenne argues, the consequence
of the Islamic invasions beginning in the seventh century was to move
the center of European culture away from the Mediterranean, which was
then an Arab province, and towards the North. “Germanism began to play
its part in history. Hitherto the Roman tradition had been
uninterrupted. Now an original Romano-Germanic civilization was about to
develop.” Europe was shut in on itself: the Orient, when it was not
merely a place in which one traded, was culturally, intellectually,
spiritually*outside* Europe and European civilization, which, in
Pirenne’s words, became “one great Christian community, coterminous with
the*ecclesia The* Occident was now living its own life.”52 In Dante’s
poem, in the work of Peter the Venerable and other Cluniac Orientalists,
in the writings of the Christian polemicists against Islam from Guibert
of Nogent and Bede to Roger Bacon, William of Tripoli, Burchard of Mount
Syon, and Luther, in the*Poema del Cid,* in the*Chanson de Roland,* and
in Shakespeare’s*Othello* (that “abuser of the world”), the Orient and
Islam are always represented as outsiders having a special role to
play*inside* Europe.

Imaginative geography, from the vivid portraits to be found in
the*Inferno* to the prosaic niches of d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque
orientale,* legitimates a vocabulary, a universe of representative
discourse peculiar to the discussion and understanding of Islam and of
the Orient. What this discourse considers to be a fact-that Mohammed is
an imposter, for example-is a component of the discourse, a statement
the discourse compels one to make whenever the name Mohammed occurs.
Underlying all the different units of Orientalist discourse-by which I
mean simply the vocabulary employed whenever the Orient is spoken or
written about-is a set of representative figures, or tropes. These
figures are to the actual Orient-or Islam, which is my main concern
here-as stylized costumes are to characters in a play; they are like,
for example, the cross that Everyman will carry, or the particolored
costume worn by Harlequin  in a co*mmedia dell’arte* play. In other
words, we need not look for correspondence between the language used to
depict the Orient and the Orient itself, not so much because the
language is inaccurate but because it is not even trying to be accurate.
What it is trying to do, as Dante tried to do in the*Inferno, is* at one
and the same time to characterize the Orient as alien and to incorporate
it schematically on a theatrical stage whose audience, manager, and
actors are*for* Europe, and only for Europe. Hence the vacillation
between the familiar and the alien; Mohammed is always the imposter
(familiar, because he pretends to be like the Jesus we know) and always
the Oriental (alien, because although he is in some ways “like” Jesus,
he is after all not like him).

Rather than listing all the figures of speech associated with the
Orient-its strangeness, its difference, its exotic sensuousness, and so
forth-we can generalize about them as they were handed down through the
Renaissance. They are all declarative and self-evident; the tense they
employ is the timeless eternal; they convey an impression of repetition
and strength; they are always symmetrical to, and yet diametrically
inferior to, a European equivalent, which is sometimes specified,
sometimes not. For all these functions it is frequently enough to use
the simple copula is. Thus, Mohammed is an imposter, the very phrase
canonized in d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque* and dramatized in a sense by
Dante. No background need be given; the evidence necessary to convict
Mohammed is contained in the “is” One does not qualify the phrase,
neither does it seem necessary to say that Mohammed was an imposter, nor
need one consider for a moment that it may not be necessary to repeat
the statement. It is repeated, he is an imposter, and each time one says
it, he becomes more of an imposter and the author of the statement gains
a little more authority in having declared it. Thus Humphrey Prideaux’s
famous seventeenth-century biography of Mohammed is subtitled*The True
Nature of Imposture.* Finally, of course, such categories as imposter
(or Oriental, for that matter) imply, indeed require, an opposite that
is neither fraudulently something else nor endlessly in need of explicit
identification. And that opposite is “Occidental,” or in Mohammed’s
case, Jesus.

Philosophically, then, the kind of language, thought, and vision that I
have been calling Orientalism very generally is a form of radical
realism; anyone employing Orientalism, which is the habit for dealing
with questions, objects, qualities, and regions deemed Oriental, will
designate, name, point to, fix what he is talking or thinking about with
a word or phrase, which then is considered either to have acquired, or
more simply to be, reality. Rhetorically speaking, Orientalism is
absolutely anatomical and enumerative: to use its vocabulary is to
engage in the particularizing and dividing of things Oriental into
manageable parts. Psychologically, Orientalism is a form of paranoia,
knowledge of another kind, say, from ordinary historical knowledge.
These are a few of the results, I think, of imaginative geography and of
the dramatic boundaries it draws. There are some specifically modern
transmutations of these Orientalized results, however, to which I must
now turn.

III- Projects
-------------

It is necessary to examine the more flamboyant operational successes of
Orientalism if only to judge how exactly wrong (and how totally opposite
to the truth) was the grandly menacing idea expressed by Michelet, that
“the Orient advances, invincible, fatal to the gods of light by the
charm of its dreams, by the magic of its chiaroscuro.”53 Cultural,
material, and intellectual relations between Europe and the Orient have
gone through innumerable phases, even though the line between East and
West has made a certain constant impression upon Europe. Yet in general
it was the West that moved upon the East, not vice versa. Orieritalism
is the generic term that I have been employing to describe the Western
approach to the Orient; Orientalism is the discipline by which the
Orient was (and is) approached systematically, as a topic of learning,
discovery, and practice. But in addition I have been using the word to
designate that collection of dreams, images, and vocabularies available
to anyone who has tried to talk about what lies east of the dividing
line. These two aspects of Orientalism are not incongruent, since by use
of them both Europe could advance securely and unmetaphorically upon the
Orient. Here I should like principally to consider material evidence of
this advance.

Islam excepted, the Orient for Europe was until the nineteenth century a
domain with a continuous history of unchallenged Western dominance. This
is patently true of the British experience in India, the Portuguese
experience in the East Indies, China, and Japan, and the French and
Italian experiences in various regions of the Orient. There were
occasional instances of native intransigence to disturb the idyll, as
when in 1638-1639 a group of Japanese Christians threw the Portuguese
out of the area; by and large, however, only the Arab and Islamic Orient
presented Europe with an unresolved challenge on the political,
intellectual, and for a time, economic levels. For much of its history,
then, Orientalism carries within it the stamp of a problematic European
attitude towards Islam, and it is this acutely sensitive aspect of
Orientalism around which my interest in this study turns.

Doubtless Islam was a real provocation in many ways. It lay uneasily
close to Christianity, geographically and culturally. It drew on the
Judeo-Hellenic traditions, it borrowed creatively from Christianity, it
could boast of unrivaled military and political successes.Nor was this
all. The Islamic lands sit adjacent to and even on top of the Biblical
lands; moreover, the heart of the Islamic domain has always been the
region closest to Europe, what has been called the Near Orient or Near
East. Arabic and Hebrew are Semitic languages, and together they dispose
and redispose of material that is urgently important to Christianity.
From the end of the seventh century until the battle of Lepanto in 1571,
Islam in either its Arab, Ottoman, or North African and Spanish form
dominated or effectively threatened European Christianity. That Islam
outstripped and outshone Rome cannot have been absent from the mind of
any European past or present. Even Gibbon was no exception, as is
evident in the following passage from the Decline*and Fall:*

In the victorious days of the Roman republic it had been the aim of the
senate to confine their councils and legions to a single war, and
completely to suppress a first enemy before they provoked the
hostilities of a second. These timid maxims of policy were disdained by
the magnanimity or enthusiasm of the Arabian caliphs. With the same
vigour and success they invaded the successors of Augustus and
Artaxerxes; and the rival monarchies at the same instant became the prey
of an enemy whom they had so long been accustomed to despise. In the ten
years of the administration of Omar, the Saracens reduced to his
obedience thirty-six thousand cities or castles, destroyed four thousand
churches or temples of the unbelievers, and edified fourteen hundred
moschs for the exercise of the religion of Mohammed. One hundred years
after his flight from Mecca the arms and reign of his successors
extended from India to the Atlantic Ocean, over the various and distant
provinces …54

When the term Orient was not simply a synonym for the Asiatic East as a
whole, or taken as generally denoting the distant and exotic, it was
most rigorously understood as applying to the Islamic Orient.

This “militant” Orient came to stand for what Henri Baudet has called
“the Asiatic tidal wave.”55 Certainly this was the case in Europe
through the middle of the eighteenth century, the point at which
repositories of “Oriental” knowledge like d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque
orientale* stop meaning primarily Islam, the Arabs, or the Ottomans.
Until that time cultural memory gave understandable prominence to such
relatively distant events as the fall of Constantinople, the Crusades,
and the conquest of Sicily and Spain, but if these signified the
menacing Orient they did not at the same time efface what remained of
Asia.

For there was always India, where, after Portugal pioneered the first
bases of European presence in the early sixteenth century, Europe, and
primarily England after a long period (from 1600 to 1758) of essentially
commercial activity, dominated politically as an occupying force. Yet
India itself never provided an indigenous threat to Europe. Rather it
was because native authority crumbled there and opened the land to
inter-European rivalry and to outright European political control that
the Indian Orient could be treated by Europe with such proprietary
hauteur-never with the sense of danger reserved for Islam.56
Nevertheless, between this hauteur and anything like accurate positive
knowledge there existed a vast disparity. D’Herbelot’s entries for
Indo-Persian subjects in the*Bibliothèque* were all based on Islamic
sources, and it is true to say that until the early nineteenth century
“Oriental languages” was considered a synonym for “Semitic languages.”
The Oriental renaissance of which Quinet spoke served the function of
expanding some fairly narrow limits, in which Islam was the catchall
Oriental example.57 Sanskrit, Indian religion, and Indian history did
not acquire the status of scientific knowledge until after Sir William
Jones’s efforts in the late eighteenth century, and even Jones’s
interest in India came to him by way of his prior interest in and
knowledge of Islam.

It is not surprising, then, that the first major work of Oriental
scholarship after d’Herbelot’s*Bibliothèque* was Simon Ockley’s*History
of the Saracens,* whose first volume appeared in 1708. A recent
historian of Orientalism has opined that Ockley’s attitude towards the
Muslims-that to them is owed what was first known of philosophy by
European Christians-“shocked painfully” his European audience. For not
only did Ockley make this Islamic pre-eminence clear in his work; he
also “gave Europe its first authentic and substantial taste of the Arab
viewpoint touching the wars with Byzantium and Persia.”58 However,
Ockley was careful to dissociate himself from the infectious influence
of Islam, and unlike his colleague William Whiston (Newton’s successor
at Cambridge), he always made it clear that Islam was an outrageous
heresy. For his Islamic enthusiasm, on the other hand, Whiston was
expelled from Cambridge in 1709.

Access to Indian (Oriental) riches had always to be made by first
crossing the Islamic provinces and by withstanding the dangerous effect
of Islam as a system of quasi-Arian belief. And at least for the larger
segment of the eighteenth century, Britain and France were successful.
The Ottoman Empire had long since settled into a (for Europe)
comfortable senescence, to be inscribed in the nineteenth century as the
“Eastern Question.” Britain and France fought each other in India
between 1744 and 1748 and again between 1756 and 1763, until, in 1769,
the British emerged in practical economic and political control of the
subcontinent. What was more inevitable than that Napoleon should choose
to harass Britain’s Oriental empire by first intercepting its Islamic
throughway, Egypt?

Although it was almost immediately preceded by at least two major
Orientalist projects, Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 and his foray
into Syria have had by far the greater consequence for the modern
history of Orientalism. Before Napoleon only two efforts (both by
scholars) had been made to invade the Orient by stripping it of its
veils and also by going beyond the comparative shelter of the Biblical
Orient. The first was by Abraham-Hyacinthe Anquetil-Duperron
(1731-1805), an eccentric theoretician of egalitarianism, a man who
managed in his head to reconcile Jansenism with orthodox Catholicism and
Brahmanism, and who traveled to Asia in order to prove the actual
primitive existence of a Chosen People and of the Biblical genealogies.
Instead he overshot his early goal and traveled as far east as Surat,
there to find a cache of Avestan texts, there also to complete his
translation of the Avesta. Raymond Schwab has said of the mysterious
Avestan fragment that set Anquetil off on his voyages that whereas “the
scholars looked at the famous fragment of Oxford and then returned to
their studies, Anquetil looked, and then went to India.” Schwab also
remarks that Anquetil and Voltaire, though temperamentally and
ideologically at hopeless odds with each other, had a similar interest
in the Orient and the Bible, “the one to make the Bible more
indisputable, the other to make it more unbelievable.” Ironically,
Anquetil’s Avesta translations served Voltaire’s purposes, since
Anquetil’s discoveries “soon led to criticism of the very [Biblical]
texts which had hitherto been considered to be revealed texts.” The net
effect of Anquetil’s expedition is well described by Schwab:

In 1759, Anquetil finished his translation of the*Avesta* at Surat; in
1786 that of the*Upanishads* in Paris-he had dug a channel between the
hemispheres of human genius, correcting and expanding the old humanism
of the Mediterranean basin. Less than fifty years earlier, his
compatriots were asked what it was like to be Persian, when he taught
them how to compare the monuments of the Persians to those of the
Greeks. Before him, one looked for information on the remote past of our
planet exclusively among the great Latin, Greek, Jewish, and Arabic
writers. The Bible was regarded as a lonely rock, an aerolite. A
universe in writing was available, but scarcely anyone seemed to suspect
the immensity of those unknown lands. The realization began with his
translation of the*Avesta,* and reached dizzying heights owing to the
exploration in Central Asia of the languages that multiplied after
Babel. Into our schools, up to that time limited to the narrow
Grew-Latin heritage of the Renaissance [of which much had been
transmitted to Europe by Islam], he interjected a vision of innumerable
civilizations from ages past, of an infinity of literatures; moreover
the few European provinces were not the only places to have left their
mark in history.59

For the first time, the Orient was revealed to Europe in the materiality
of its texts, languages, and civilizations. Also for the first time,
Asia acquired a precise intellectual and historical dimension with which
to buttress the myths of its geographic distance and vastness. By one of
those inevitable contracting compensations for a sudden cultural
expansion, Anquetil’s Oriental labors were succeeded by William Jones’s,
the second of the pre-Napoleonic projects I mentioned above. Whereas
Anquetil opened large vistas, Jones closed them down, codifying,
tabulating, comparing. Before he left England for India in 1783, Jones
was already a master of Arabic, Hebrew, and Persian. These seemed
perhaps the least of his accomplishments: he was also a poet, a jurist,
a polyhistor, a classicist, and an indefatigable scholar whose powers
would recommend him to such as Benjamin Franklin, Edmund Burke, William
Pitt, and Samuel Johnson. In due course he was appointed to “an
honorable and profitable place in the Indies,” and immediately upon his
arrival there to take up a post with the East India Company began the
course of personal study that was to gather in, to rope off, to
domesticate the Orient and thereby turn it into a province of European
learning. For his personal work, entitled “Objects of Enquiry During My
Residence in Asia” he enumerated among the topics of his investigation
“the Laws of the Hindus and Mohammedans, Modern Politics and Geography
of Hindustan, Best Mode of Governing Bengal, Arithmetic and Geometry,
and Mixed Sciences of the Asiaticks, Medicine, Chemistry, Surgery, and
Anatomy of the Indians, Natural Productions of India, Poetry, Rhetoric
and Morality of Asia, Music of the Eastern Nations, Trade, Manufacture,
Agriculture, and Commerce of India,” and so forth. On August 17, 1787,
he wrote unassumingly to Lord Althorp that “it is my ambition to
know*India* better than any other European ever knew it.” Here is where
Balfour in 1910 could find the first adumbration of his claim as an
Englishman to know the Orient more and better than anyone else.

Jones’s official work was the law, an occupation with symbolic
significance for the history of Orientalism. Seven years before Jones
arrived in India, Warren Hastings had decided that Indians were to be
ruled by their own laws, a more enterprising project than it appears at
first glance since the Sanskrit code of laws existed then for practical
use only in a Persian translation, and no Englishman at the time knew
Sanskrit well enough to consult the original texts. A company official,
Charles Wilkins, first mastered Sanskrit, then began to translate
the*Institutes* of Manu; in this labor he was soon to be assisted by
Jones. (Wilkins, incidentally, was the first translator of the
Bhagavad-Gita.) In January 1784 Jones convened the inaugural meeting of
the Asiatic Society of Bengal, which was to be for India what the Royal
Society was for England. As first president of the society and as
magistrate, Jones acquired the effective knowledge of the Orient and of
Orientals that was later to make him the undisputed founder (the phrase
is A. J. Arberry’s) of Orientalism. To rule and to learn, then to
compare Orient with Occident: these were Jones’s goals, which, with an
irresistible impulse always to codify, to subdue the infinite variety of
the Orient to “a complete digest” of laws, figures, customs, and works,
he is believed to have achieved. His most famous pronouncement indicates
the extent to which modern Orientalism, even in its philosophical
beginnings, was a comparative discipline having for its principal goal
the grounding of the European languages in a distant, and harmless,
Oriental source:

The*Sanscrit* language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful
structure; more perfect than the*Greek,* more copious than the*Latin,*
and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a
stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in the forms of
grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong
indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three without
believing them to have sprung from some common source.60

Many of the early English Orientalists in India were, like Jones, legal
scholars, or else, interestingly enough, they were medical men with
strong missionary leanings. So far as one can tell, most of them were
imbued with the dual purpose of investigating “the sciences and the arts
of Asia, with the hope of facilitating ameliorations there and of
advancing knowledge and improving the arts at home”:61 so the common
Orientalist goal was stated in the*Centenary Volume* of the Royal
Asiatic Society founded in 1823 by Henry Thomas Colebrooke. In their
dealings with the modern Orientals, the early professional Orientalists
like Jones had only two roles to fulfill, yet we cannot today fault them
for strictures placed on their humanity by the official*Occidental*
character of their presence in the Orient. They were either judges or
they were doctors. Even Edgar Quinet, writing more metaphysically than
realistically, was dimly aware of this therapeutic relationship. “L’Asie
a les prophètes,” he said in*Le Génie des religions;* “L’Europe a les
docteurs.”62 Proper knowledge of the Orient proceeded from a thorough
study of the classical texts, and only after that to an application of
those texts to the modern Orient. Faced with the obvious decrepitude and
political impotence of the modern Oriental, the European Orientalist
found it his duty to rescue some portion of a lost, past classical
Oriental grandeur in order to “facilitate ameliorations” in the present
Orient. What the European took from the classical Oriental past was a
vision (and thousands of facts and artifacts) which only he could employ
to the best advantage; to the modern Oriental he gave facilitation and
amelioration-and, too, the benefit of his judgment as to what was best
for the modern Orient.

It was characteristic of all Orientalist projects before Napoleon’s that
very little could be done in advance of the project to prepare for its
success. Anquetil and Jones, for example, learned what they did about
the Orient only after they got there. They were confronting, as it were,
the whole Orient, and only after a while and after considerable
improvising could they whittle it down to a smaller province. Napoleon,
on the other hand, wanted nothing less than to take the whole of Egypt,
and his advance preparations were of unparalleled magnitude and
thoroughness. Even so, these preparations were almost fanatically
schematic and-if I may use the word textual, which are features that
will bear some analysis here. Three things above all else seem to have
been in Napoleon’s mind as he readied himself while in Italy in 1797 for
his next military move. First, aside from the still threatening power of
England, his military successes that had culminated in the Treaty of
Campo Formio left him no other place to turn for additional glory than
the East. Moreover, Talleyrand had recently animadverted on “les
avantages à retirer de colonies nouvelles dans les circonstances
présentes,” and this notion, along with the appealing prospect of
hurting Britain, drew him eastwards. Secondly, Napoleon had been
attracted to the Orient since his adolescence; his youthful manuscripts,
for example, contain a summary he made of Marigny’s*Histoire des
Arabes,* and it is evident from all of his writing and conversation that
he was steeped, as Jean Thiry has put it, in the memories and glories
that were attached to Alexander’s Orient generally and to Egypt in
particular.63 Thus the idea of reconquering Egypt as a new Alexander
proposed itself to him, allied with the additional benefit of acquiring
a new Islamic colony at England’s expense. Thirdly, Napoleon considered
Egypt a likely project precisely because he knew it tactically,
strategically, historically, and-not to be underestimated-textually,
that is, as something one read about and knew through the writings of
recent as well as classical European authorities. The point in all this
is that for Napoleon Egypt was a project that acquired reality in his
mind, and later in his preparations for its conquest, through
experiences that belong to the realm of ideas and myths culled from
texts, not empirical reality. His plans for Egypt therefore became the
first in a long series of European encounters with the Orient in which
the Orientalist’s special expertise was put directly to functional
colonial use; for at the crucial instant when an Orientalist had to
decide whether his loyalties and sympathies lay with the Orient or with
the conquering West, he always chose the latter, from Napoleon’s time
on. As for the emperor himself, he saw the Orient only as it had been
encoded first by classical texts and then by Orientalist experts, whose
vision, based on classical texts, seemed a useful substitute for any
actual encounter with the real Orient.

Napoleon’s enlistment of several dozen “savants” for his Egyptian
Expedition is too well known to require detail here. His idea was to
build a sort of living archive for the expedition, in the form of
studies conducted on all topics by the members of the Institut d’Égypte,
which he founded. What is perhaps less well known is Napoleon’s prior
reliance upon the work of the Comte de Volney, a French traveler
whose*Voyage en Égypte et en Syrie* appeared in two volumes in 1787.
Aside from a short personal preface informing the reader that the sudden
acquisition of some money (his inheritance) made it possible for him to
take the trip east in 1783, Volney’s*Voyage is* an almost oppressively
impersonal document. Volney evidently saw himself as a scientist, whose
job it was always to record the “état” of something he saw. The climax
of the*Voyage* occurs in the second volume, an account of Islam as a
religion.64 Volney’s views were canonically hostile to Islam as a
religion and as a system of political institutions; nevertheless
Napoleon found this work and Volney’s*Considérations sur la guerre
actuel de Turcs* (1788) of particular importance. For Volney after all
was a canny Frenchman, and-like Chateaubriand and Lamartine a quarter
century after him-he eyed the Near Orient as a likely place for the
realization of French colonial ambition. What Napoleon profited from in
Volney was the enumeration, in ascending order of difficulty, of the
obstacles to be faced in the Orient by any French expeditionary force.

Napoleon refers explicitly to Volney in his reflections on the Egyptian
expedition, the*Campagnes d’Égypte et de Syrie, 1798-1799,* which he
dictated to General Bertrand on Saint Helena. Volney, he said,
considered that there were three barriers to French hegemony in the
Orient and that any French force would therefore have to fight three
wars: one against England, a second against the Ottoman Porte, and a
third, the most difficult, against the Muslims.65 Volney’s assessment
was both shrewd and hard to fault since it was clear to Napoleon, as it
would be to anyone, who read Volney, that his*Voyage* and
the*Considérations* were effective texts to be used by any European
wishing to win in the Orient. In other words, Volney’s work constituted
a handbook for attenuating the human shock a European might feel as he
directly experienced the Orient: Read the books, seems to have been
Volney’s thesis, and far from being disoriented by the Orient, you will
compel it to you.

Napoleon took Volney almost literally, but in a characteristically
subtle way. From the first moment that the Armée d’Égypte appeared on
the Egyptian horizon, every effort was made to convince the Muslims that
“nous sommes les vrais musulmans,” as Bonaparte’s proclamation of July
2, 1798, put it to the people of Alexandria.66 Equipped with a team of
Orientalists (and sitting on board a flagship called the*Orient),*
Napoleon used Egyptian enmity towards the Mamelukes and appeals to the
revolutionary idea of equal opportunity for all to wage a uniquely
benign and selective war against Islam. What more than anything
impressed the first Arab chronicler of the expedition, Abd-al-Rahman
al-Jabarti, was Napoleon’s use of scholars to manage his contacts with
the natives -that and the impact of watching a modern European
intellectual establishment at close quarters.67 Napoleon tried
everywhere to prove that he was fighting*for* Islam; everything he said
was translated into Koranic Arabic, just as the French army was urged by
its command always to remember the Islamic sensibility. (Compare, in
this regard, Napoleon’s tactics in Egypt with the tactics of
the*Requerimiento, a* document drawn up in 1513-in Spanish-by the
Spaniards to be read aloud to the Indians: “We shall take you and your
wives and your children, and shall make slaves of them, and as such sell
and dispose of them as their Highnesses [the King and Queen of Spain]
may command; and we shall take away your goods, and shall do you all the
mischief and damage that we can, as to vassals who do not obey,” etc.
etc.”68 ) When it seemed obvious to Napoleon that his force was too
small to impose itself on the Egyptians, he then tried to make the local
imams, cadis, muftis, and ulemas interpret the Koran in favor of the
Grande Armée. To this end, the sixty ulemas who taught at the Azhar were
invited to his quarters, given full military honors, and then allowed to
be flattered by Napoleon’s admiration for Islam and Mohammed and by his
obvious veneration for the Koran, with which he seemed perfectly
familiar. This worked, and soon the population of Cairo seemed to have
lost its distrust of the occupiers.69 Napoleon later gave his deputy
Kleber strict instructions after he left always to administer Egypt
through the Orientalists and the religious Islamic leaders whom they
could win over; any other politics was too expensive and foolish.70 Hugo
thought that he grasped the tactful glory of Napoleon’s Oriental
expedition in his poem “Lui”:

Au Nil je le retrouve encore.

L’Égypte resplendit des feux de son aurore;

Son astre impérial se lève à l’orient

Vainqueur, enthousiaste, éclatant de prestiges,

Prodige, il étonna la terre des prodiges.

Les vieux scheiks vénéraient l’émir jeune et prudent;

Le peuple redoutait ses armes inouïes;

Sublime, il apparut aux tribus éblouies

Comme un Mahomet d’occident.71

(By the Nile, I find him once again.

Egypt shines with the fires of his dawn;

His imperial orb rises in the Orient.

Victor, enthusiast, bursting with achievements,

Prodigious, he stunned the land of prodigies.

The old sheikhs venerated the young and prudent emir.

The people dreaded his unprecedented arms;

Sublime, he appeared to the dazzled tribes

Like a Mahomet of the Occident.)

Such a triumph could only have been prepared*before* a military
expedition, perhaps only by someone who had no prior experience of the
Orient except what books and scholars told him. The idea of taking along
a full-scale academy is very much an aspect of this textual attitude to
the Orient. And this attitude in turn was bolstered by specific
Revolutionary decrees (particularly the one of 10 Germinal An III-March
30, 1793-establishing an*école publique* in the Bibliothèque nationale
to teach Arabic, Turkish, and Persian)72 whose object was the
rationalist one of dispelling mystery and institutionalizing even the
most recondite knowledge. Thus many of Napoleon’s Orientalist
translators were students of Sylvestre de Sacy, who, beginning in June
1796, was the first and only teacher of Arabic at the École publique des
langues orientales. Sacy later became the teacher of nearly every major
Orientalist in Europe, where his students dominated the field for about
three quarters of a century. Many of them were politically useful, in
the ways that several had been to Napoleon in Egypt.

But dealings with the Muslims were only a part of Napoleon’s project to
dominate Egypt. The other part was to render it completely open, to make
it totally accessible to European scrutiny. From being a land of
obscurity and a part of the Orient hitherto known at second hand through
the exploits of earlier travelers, scholars, and conquerors, Egypt was
to become a department of French learning. Here too the textual and
schematic attitudes are evident. The Institut, with its teams of
chemists, historians, biologists,

archaeologists, surgeons, and antiquarians, was the learned division of
the army. Its job was no less aggressive: to put Egypt into modern
French; and unlike the Abbé Le Mascrier’s 1735*Description de l’Égypte,*
Napoleon’s was to be a universal undertaking. Almost from the first
moments of- the occupation Napoleon saw to it that the Institut began
its meetings, its experiments-its fact-finding mission, as we would call
it today. Most important, everything said, seen, and studied was to be
recorded, and indeed was recorded in that great collective appropriation
of one country by another, the*Description de l’Égypte,* published in
twenty-three enormous volumes between 1809 and 1828.73

The*Description’s* uniqueness is not only in its size, or even in the
intelligence of its contributors, but in its attitude to its subject
matter, and it is this attitude that makes it of great interest for the
study of modern Orientalist projects. The first few pages of its*préface
historique,* written by Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Fourier, the Institut’s
secretary, make it clear that in “doing” Egypt the scholars were also
grappling directly with a kind of unadulterated cultural, geographical,
and historical significance. Egypt was the focal point of the
relationships between Africa and Asia, between Europe and the East,
between memory and actuality.

Placed between Africa and Asia, and communicating easily with Europe,
Egypt occupies the center of the ancient continent. This country
presents only great memories; it is the homeland of the arts and
conserves innumerable monuments; its principal temples and the palaces
inhabited by its kings still exist, even though its least ancient
edifices had already been built by the time of the Trojan War. Homer,
Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato all went to Egypt to study the
sciences, religion, and the laws. Alexander founded an opulent city
there, which for a long time enjoyed commercial supremacy and which
witnessed Pompey, Caesar, Mark Antony, and Augustus deciding between
them the fate of Rome arid that of the entire world. It is therefore
proper for this country to attract the attention of illustrious princes
who rule the destiny of nations.

No considerable power was ever amassed by any nation, whether in the
West or in Asia, that did not also turn that nation toward Egypt, which
was regarded in some measure as its natural lot.74

Because Egypt was saturated with meaning for the arts, sciences, and
government, its role was to be the stage on which actions of a
world-historical importance would take place. By taking Egypt, then, a
modern power would naturally demonstrate its strength and justify
history; Egypt’s own destiny was to be annexed, to Europe preferably. In
addition, this power would also enter a history whose common element was
defined by figures no less great than Homer, Alexander, Caesar, Plato,
Solon, and Pythagoras, who graced the Orient with their prior presence
there. The Orient, in short, existed as a set of values attached, not to
its modern realities, but to a series of valorized contacts it had had
with a distant European past. This is a pure example of the textual,
schematic attitude I have been referring to.

Fourier continues similarly for over a hundred pages (each page,
incidentally, is a square meter in size, as if the project and the size
of the page had been thought of as possessing comparable scale). Out of
the free-floating past, however, he must justify the Napoleonic
expedition as something that needed to be undertaken when it happened.
The dramatic perspective is never abandoned. Conscious of his European
audience and of the Oriental figures he was manipulating, he writes:

One remembers the impression made on the whole of Europe by the
astounding news that the French were in the Orient.... This great
project was meditated in silence, and was prepared with such activity
and secrecy that the worried vigilance of our enemies was deceived; only
at the moment that it happened did they learn that it had been
conceived, undertaken, and carried out successfully....

So dramatic a coup*de théátre* had its advantages for the Orient as
well:

This country, which has transmitted its knowledge to so many nations, is
today plunged into barbarism.

Only a hero could bring all these factors together, which is what
Fourier now describes:

Napoleon appreciated the influence that this event would have on the
relations between Europe, the Orient, and Africa, on Mediterranean
shipping, and on Asia’s destiny.... Napoleon wanted to offer a useful
European example to the Orient, and finally also to make the
inhabitants’ lives more pleasant, as well as to procure for them all the
advantages of a perfected civilization.

None of this would be possible without a continuous application to the
project of the arts and sciences.75

To restore a region from its present barbarism to its former classical
greatness; to instruct (for its own benefit) the Orient in the ways of
the modern West; to subordinate or underplay military power in order to
aggrandize the project of glorious knowledge acquired in the process of
political domination of the Orient; to formulate the Orient, to give it
shape, identity, definition with full recognition of its place in
memory, its importance to imperial strategy, and its “natural” role as
an appendage to Europe; to dignify all the knowledge collected during
colonial occupation with the title “contribution to modern learning”
when the natives had neither been consulted nor treated as anything
except as pretexts for a text whose usefulness was not to the natives;
to feel oneself as a European in command, almost at will, of Oriental
history, time, and geography; to institute new areas of specialization;
to establish new disciplines; to divide, deploy, schematize, tabulate,
index, and record everything in sight (and out of sight); to make out of
every observable detail a generalization and out of every generalization
an immutable law about the Oriental nature, temperament, mentality,
custom, or type; and, above all, to transmute living reality into the
stuff of texts, to possess (or think one possesses) actuality mainly
because nothing in the Orient seems to resist one’s powers: these are
the features of Orientalist projection entirely realized in
the*Description de l’Égypte,* itself enabled and reinforced by
Napoleon’s wholly Orientalist engulfment of Egypt by the instruments of
Western knowledge and power. Thus Fourier concludes his preface by
announcing that history will remember how “Égypte fut le théâtre de sa
[Napoleon’s] gloire, et préserve de l’oubli toutes les circonstances de
cet évènement extraordinaire.”76

The*Description* thereby displaces Egyptian of Oriental history as a
history possessing its own coherence, identity, and sense. Instead,
history as recorded in the*Description* supplants Egyptian or Oriental
history by identifying itself directly and immediately with world
history, a euphemism for European history. To save an event from
oblivion is in the Orientalist’s mind the equivalent of turning the
Orient into a theater for his representations of the Orient: this is
almost exactly what Fourier says. Moreover, the sheer power of having
described the Orient in modern Occidental terms lifts the Orient from
the realms of silent obscurity where it has lain neglected (except for
the inchoate murmurings of a vast but undefined sense of its own past)
into the clarity of modern European science. There this new Orient
figures as-for instance, in Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire’s biological theses
in the Description-the confirmation of laws of zoological specialization
formulated by Buffon.77 Or it serves as a “contraste frappante avec les
habitudes des nations Européennes,”78 in which the “bizarre jouissances”
of Orientals serve to highlight the sobriety and rationality of
Occidental habits. Or, to cite one more use for the Orient, equivalents
of those Oriental physiological characteristics that made possible the
successful embalming of bodies are sought for in European bodies, so
that chevaliers fallen on the field of honor can be preserved as
lifelike relics of Napoleon’s great Oriental campaign .79

Yet the military failure of Napoleon’s occupation of Egypt did not also
destroy the fertility of its over-all projection for Egypt or the rest
of the Orient. Quite literally, the occupation gave birth to the entire
modern experience of the Orient as interpreted from within the universe
of discourse founded by Napoleon in Egypt, whose agencies of domination
and dissemination included the Institut and the*Description. The* idea,
as it has been characterized by Charles-Roux, was that Egypt “restored
to prosperity, regenerated by wise and enlightened administration
...would shed its civilizing rays upon all its Oriental neighbors.”80
True, the other European powers would seek to compete in this mission,
none more than England. But what would happen as a continuing legacy of
the common Occidental mission to the Orient-despite inter-European
squabbling, indecent competition, or outright war-would be the creation
of new projects, new visions, new enterprises combining additional parts
of the old Orient with the conquering European spirit. After Napoleon,
then, the very language of Orientalism changed radically. Its
descriptive realism was upgraded and became not merely a style of
representation but a language, indeed a means of*creation.* Along with
the*langues mères,* as those forgotten dormant sources for the modern
European demotics were entitled by Antoine Fabre d’Olivet, the Orient
was reconstructed, reassembled, crafted, in short,*born* out of the
Orientalists’ efforts. The*Description* became the master type of all
further efforts to bring the Orient closer to Europe, thereafter to
absorb it entirely and centrally important-to cancel, or at least subdue
and reduce, its strangeness and, in the case of Islam, its hostility.
For the Islamic Orient would henceforth appear as a category denoting
the Orientalists’ power and not the Islamic people as humans nor their
history as history.

Thus out of the Napoleonic expedition there issued a whole series of
textual children, from Chateaubriand’s*Itinéraire* to Lamartine’s*Voyage
en Orient* to Flaubert’s*Salammbô,* and in the same tradition,
Lane’s*Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians* and Richard
Burton’s*Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to al-Madinah and Meccah.*
What binds them together is not only their common background in Oriental
legend and experience but also their learned reliance on the Orient as a
kind of womb out of which they were brought forth. If paradoxically
these creations turned out to be highly stylized simulacra, elaborately
wrought imitations of what a live Orient might be thought to look like,
that by no means detracts either from the strength of their imaginative
conception or from the strength of European mastery of the Orient, whose
prototypes respectively were Cagliostro, the great European impersonator
of the Orient, and Napoleon, its first modern conqueror. Artistic or
textual work was not the only product of the Napoleonic expedition.
There were, in addition and certainly more influential, the scientific
project, whose chief instance is Ernest Renan’s*Système comparé et
histoire générale des langues sémitiques,* completed in 1848 for-neatly
enough-the Prix Volney, and the geopolitical project, of which Ferdinand
de Lesseps’s Suez Canal and England’s occupation of Egypt in 1882 are
prime instances. The difference between the two is not only in manifest
scale but also in quality of Orientalist conviction. Renan truly
believed that he had re-created the Orient, as it really was, in his
work. De Lesseps, on the other hand, always was somewhat awed by the
newness his project had released out of the old Orient, and this sense
communicated itself to everyone for whom the opening of the canal in
1869 was no ordinary event. In his*Excursionist and Tourist Advertiser*
for July 1, 1869, Thomas Cook’s enthusiasm carries on de Lesseps’s:

On November the 17th, the greatest engineering feat of the present
century is to have its success celebrated by a magnificent inauguration
fete, at which nearly every European royal family will have its special
representative. Truly the occasion will be an exceptional one. The
formation of a line of water communication between Europe and the East,
has been the thought of centuries, occupying in turn the minds of
Greeks, Roman, Saxon and Gaul, but it was not until within the last few
years that modern civilization began seriously to set about emulating
the labours of the ancient Pharaohs, who, many centuries since,
constructed a canal between the two seas, traces of which remain to this
day.... Everything connected with [the modern] works are on the most
gigantic scale, and a perusal of a little pamphlet, descriptive of the
undertaking, from the pen of the Chevalier de St. Stoess, impresses us
most forcibly with the genius of the great Master-mind-M. Ferdinand de
Lesseps-to whose perseverance, calm daring and foresight, the dream of
ages has at last become a real and tangible fact ...the project for
bringing more closely together the countries of the West and the East,
and thus uniting the civilizations of different epochs.81

The combination of old ideas with new methods, the bringing together of
cultures whose relations to the nineteenth century were different, the
genuine imposition of the power of modern technology and intellectual
will upon formerly stable and divided geographical entities like East
and West: this is what Cook perceives and what, in his journals,
speeches, prospectuses, and letters, de Lesseps advertises.

Genealogically, Ferdinand’s start was auspicious. Mathieu de Lesseps,
his father, had come to Egypt with Napoleon and remained there (as
“unofficial French representative,” Marlowe says82 ) for four years
after the French evacuated it in 1801. Many of Ferdinand’s later
writings refer back to Napoleon’s own interest in digging a canal,
which, because he had been misinformed by experts, he never thought was
a realizable goal. Infected by the erratic history of canal projects
that included French schemes entertained by Richelieu and the
Saint-Simonians, de Lesseps returned to Egypt in 1854, there to embark
on the undertaking that was eventually completed fifteen years later. He
had no real engineering background. Only a tremendous faith in his
near-divine skills as builder, mover, and creator kept him going; as his
diplomatic and financial talents gained him Egyptian and European
support, he seems to have acquired the necessary knowledge to carry
matters to completion. More useful, perhaps, he learned how to plant his
potential contributors in the world- historical theater and make them
see what his “pensée morale,” as he called his project, really meant.
“Vous envisagez,” he told them in 1860, “les immenses services que le
rapprochement de l’occident et de l’orient doit rendre à la civilization
et au dèveloppement de la richesse générale. Le monde attend de vous un
grand progrès et vous voulez répondre à l’attente du monde.”83 In
accordance with such notions the name of the investment company formed
by de Lesseps in 1858 was a charged one and reflected the grandiose
plans he cherished: the Compagnie universelle. In 1862 the Académie
française offered a prize for an epic on the canal. Bornier, the winner,
delivered himself of such hyperbole as the following, none of it
fundamentally contradicting de Lesseps’s picture of what he was up to:

Au travail! Ouvriers que notre France envoie,

Tracez, pour l’univers, cette nouvelle voie!

Vos peres, les heros, sont venus jusqu’ici;

Soyez ferme comme aux intrepides,

Comme eux vows combattez aux pieds des pyramides,

Et leurs quatre mille ans vous contemplent aussi!

Oui, c’est pour l’univers! Pour l’Asie et l’Europe,

Pour ces climats lointain que la nuit enveloppe,

Pour le Chinois perfide et I’Indien demi-nu;

Pour les peuples heureux, libres, humains et braves,

Pour les peuples mechants, pour les peuples esclaves,

Pour ceux à qui le Christ est encore inconnu.84

De Lesseps was nowhere more eloquent and resourceful than when he was
called upon to justify the enormous expense in money and men the canal
would require. He could pour out statistics to enchant any ear; he would
quote Herodotus and maritime statistics with equal fluency. In his
journal entries for 1864 he cited with approbation Casimir Leconte’s
observation that an eccentric life would develop significant originality
in men, and from originality would come great and unusual exploits.85
Such exploits were their own justification. Despite its immemorial
pedigree of failures, its outrageous cost, its astounding ambitions for
altering the way Europe would handle the Orient, the canal was worth the
effort. It was a project uniquely able to override the objections of
those who were consulted and, in improving the Orient as a whole, to do
what scheming Egyptians, perfidious Chinese, and half-naked Indians
could never have done for themselves.

The opening ceremonies in November 1869 were an occasion which, no less
than the whole history of de Lesseps’s machinations, perfectly embodied
his ideas. For years his speeches, letters, and pamphlets were laden
with a vividly energetic and theatrical vocabulary. In the pursuit of
success, he could be found saying of himself (always in the first person
plural), we created, fought, disposed, achieved, acted, recognized,
persevered, advanced; nothing, he repeated on many occasions, could stop
us, nothing was impossible, nothing mattered finally except the
realization of “le résultat final, le grand but,” which he had
conceived, defined,  and finally executed. As the papal envoy to the
ceremonies spoke on November 16 to the assembled dignitaries, his speech
strove desperately to match the intellectual and imaginative spectacle
offered by de Lesseps’s canal:

Il est permis d’affirmer que l’heure qui vient de sonner est non
seulement une des plus solennelles de ce siècle, mais encore une des
plus grandes et des plus décisives qu’ait vues l’humanité, depuis
qu’elle a une histoire ci-bas. Ce lieu, où confinent-sans désormais y
toucher-l’Afrique et I’Asie, cette grande fête du genre humain, cette
assistance auguste et cosmopolite, toutes les races du globe, tous les
drapeaux, tous les pavillions, flottant joyeusement sous ce ciel radieux
et immense, la croix debout et respectée de tous en face du croissant,
que de merveilles, que de contrastes saississants, que de rêves réputés
chimériques devenus de palpables réalités! et, dans cet assemblage de
tant de prodiges, que de sujets de réflexions pour le penseur, que de
joies dans l’heure présente et, dans les perspectives de l’avenir, que
de glorieuses espérances! ...

Les deux extrémitiés du globe se rapprochent; en se rapprochant, elles
se reconnaissent; en se reconnaissant, tous les hommes, enfants d’un
seul et même Dieu, eprouvent le tressaillement joyeux de leur mutuelle
fraternité! O Occident! O Orient! rapprochez, regardez, reconnaissez,
saluez, étreignez-vous! ...

Mais derrière le phénomène matériel, le regard du penseur découvre des
horizons plus vastes que les espaces mésurables, les horizons sans
bornes où mouvent les plus hautes destinées, les plus glorieuses
conquêtes, les plus immortelles certitudes du genre humain ....

[Dieu] que votre souffle divin plane sur ces eaux! Qu’il y passe et
repasse, de l’Occident à l’Orient, de l’Orient à I’Occident! O Dieu!
Servez vous de cette voie pour rapprocher les hommes les uns des
autres!86

The whole world seemed crowded in to render homage to a scheme that God
could only bless and make use of himself. Old distinctions and
inhibitions were dissolved: the Cross faced down the Crescent, the West
had come to the Orient never to leave it (until, in July 1956, Gamal
Abdel Nasser would activate Egypt’s taking over of the canal by
pronouncing the name of de Lesseps).

In the Suez Canal idea we see the logical conclusion of Orientalist
thought and, more interesting, of Orientalist effort. To the West, Asia
had once represented silent distance and alienation; Islam was militant
hostility to European Christianity. To overcome such

redoubtable constants the Orient needed first to be known, then invaded
and possessed, then re-created by scholars, soldiers, and judges who
disinterred forgotten languages, histories, races, and cultures in order
to posit them-beyond the modern Oriental’s ken -as the true classical
Orient that could be used to judge and rule the modern Orient. The
obscurity faded to be replaced by hothouse entities; the Orient was a
scholar’s word, signifying what modern Europe had recently made of the
still peculiar East. De Lesseps and his canal finally destroyed the
Orient’s distance, its cloistered intimacy*away* from the West, its
perdurable exoticism. Just as a land barrier could be transmuted into a
liquid artery, so too the Orient was transubstantiated from resistant
hostility into obliging, and submissive, partnership. After de Lesseps
no one could speak of the Orient as belonging to another world, strictly
speaking. There was only “our” world, “one” world bound together because
the Suez Canal had frustrated those last provincials who still believed
in the difference between worlds. Thereafter the notion of “Oriental” is
an administrative or executive one, and it is subordinate to
demographic, economic, and sociological factors. For imperialists like
Balfour, or for anti-imperialists like J. A. Hobson, the Oriental, like
the African, is a member of a subject race and not exclusively an
inhabitant of a geographical area. De Lesseps had melted away the
Orient’s geographical identity by (almost literally) dragging the Orient
into the West and finally dispelling the threat of Islam. New categories
and experiences, including the imperialist ones, would emerge, and in
time Orientalism would adapt itself to them, but not without some
difficulty.

IV- Crisis
----------

It may appear strange to speak about something or someone as holding
a*textual* attitude, but a student of literature will understand the
phrase more easily if he will recall the kind of view attacked by
Voltaire in*Candide,* or even the attitude to reality satirized by
Cervantes in*Don Quixote.* What seems unexceptionable good sense to
these writers is that it is a fallacy to assume that the swarming,
unpredictable, and problematic mess in which human beings live can be
understood on the basis of what books-texts-say; to apply what one
learns out of a book literally to reality is to risk folly or ruin. One
would no more think of using*Amadis of Gaul* to understand
sixteenth-century (or present- day) Spain than one would use the Bible
to understand, say, the House of Commons. But clearly people have tried
and do try to use texts in so simple-minded a way, for
otherwise*Candide* and Don*Quixote* would not still have the appeal for
readers that they do today. It seems a common human failing to prefer
the schematic authority of a text to the disorientations of direct
encounters with the human. But is this failing constantly present, or
are there circumstances that, more than others, make the textual
attitude likely to prevail?

Two situations favor a textual attitude. One is when a human being
confronts at close quarters something relatively unknown and threatening
and previously distant. In such a case one has recourse not only to what
in one’s previous experience the novelty resembles but also to what one
has read about it. Travel books or guidebooks are about as “natural” a
kind of text, as logical in their composition and in their use, as any
book one can think of, precisely because of this human tendency to fall
back on a text when the uncertainties of travel in strange parts seem to
threaten one’s equanimity. Many travelers find themselves saying of an
experience in a new country that it wasn’t what they expected, meaning
that it wasn’t what a book said it would be. And of course many writers
of travel books or guidebooks compose them in order to say that a
country is like this, or better, that it is colorful, expensive,
interesting, and so forth. The idea in either case is that people,
places, and experiences can always be described by a book, so much so
that the book (or text) acquires a greater authority, and use, even than
the actuality it describes. The comedy of Fabrice del Dongo’s search for
the battle of Waterloo is not so much that he fails to find the battle,
but that he looks for it as something texts have told him about.

A second situation favoring the textual attitude is the appearance of
success. If one reads a book claiming that lions are fierce and then
encounters a fierce lion (I simplify, of course), the chances are that
one will be encouraged to read more books by that same author, and
believe them. But if, in addition, the lion book instructs one how to
deal with a fierce lion, and the instructions work perfectly, then not
only will the author be greatly believed, he will also be impelled to
try his hand at other kinds of written performance. There is a rather
complex dialectic of reinforcement by which the experiences of readers
in reality are determined by what they have read, and this in turn
influences writers to take up subjects defined in advance by readers’
experiences. A book on how to handle a fierce lion might then cause a
series of books to be produced on such subjects as the fierceness of
lions, the origins of fierceness, and so forth. Similarly, as the focus
of the text centers more narrowly on the subject-no longer lions but
their fierceness -we might expect that the ways by which it is
recommended that a lion’s fierceness be handled will actually*increase*
its fierceness, force it to be fierce since that is what it is, and that
is what in essence we know or can*only* know about it.

A text purporting to contain knowledge about something actual, and
arising out of circumstances similar to the ones I have just described,
is not easily dismissed. Expertise is attributed to it. The authority of
academics, institutions, and governments can accrue to it, surrounding
it with still greater prestige than its practical successes warrant.Most
important, such texts can*create* not only knowledge but also the very
reality they appear to describe. In time such knowledge and reality
produce a tradition, or what Michel Foucault calls a discourse, whose
material presence or weight, not the originality of a given author, is
really responsible for the texts produced out of it. This kind of text
is composed out of those preexisting units of information deposited by
Flaubert in the catalogue of*idées reçues.*

In the light of all this, consider Napoleon and de Lesseps. Everything
they knew, more or less, about the Orient came from books written in the
tradition of Orientalism, placed in its library of*idées reçues;* for
them the Orient, like the fierce lion, was something to be encountered
and dealt with to a certain extent*because* the texts made that Orient
possible. Such an Orient was silent, available to Europe for the
realization of projects that involved but were never directly
responsible to the native inhabitants, and unable to resist the
projects, images, or mere descriptions devised for it. Earlier in this
chapter I called such a relation between Western writing (and its
consequences) and Oriental silence the result of and the sign of the
West’s great cultural strength, its will to power over the Orient. But
there is another side to the strength, a side whose existence depends on
the pressures of the Orientalist tradition and its textual attitude to
the Orient; this side lives its own life, as books about fierce lions
will do until lions can talk back. The perspective rarely drawn on
Napoleon and de Lesseps-to take two among the many projectors who
hatched plans for the Orient-is the one that sees them carrying on in
the dimensionless silence of the Orient mainly because the discourse of
Orientalism, over and above the Orient’s powerlessness to do anything
about them, suffused their activity with meaning, intelligibility, and
reality. The discourse of Orientalism and what made it possible-in
Napoleon’s case, a West far more powerful militarily than the
Orient-gave them Orientals who could be described in such works as
the*Description de l’Égypte* and an Orient that could be cut across as
de Lesseps cut across Suez. Moreover, Orientalism gave them their
success-at least from their point of view, which had nothing to do with
that of the Oriental. Success, in other words, had all the actual human
interchange between Oriental and Westerner of the Judge’s “said I to
myself, said I” in*Trial by* Jury.

Once we begin to think of Orientalism as a kind of Western projection
onto and will to govern over the Orient, we will encounter few
surprises. For if it is true that historians like Michelet, Ranke,
Toqueville, and Burckhardt*emplot* their narratives “as a story of a
particular kind,”87 the same is also true of Orientalists who plotted
Oriental history, character, and destiny for hundreds of years. During
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the Orientalists became a more
serious quantity, because by then the reaches of imaginative and actual
geography had shrunk, because the Oriental European relationship was
determined by an unstoppable European expansion in search of markets,
resources, and colonies, and finally, because Orientalism had
accomplished its self-metamorphosis from a scholarly discourse to an
imperial institution. Evidence of this metamorphosis is already apparent
in what I have said of Napoleon, de Lesseps, Balfour, and Cromer. Their
projects in the Orient are understandable on only the most rudimentary
level as the efforts of men of vision and genius, heroes in Carlyle’s
sense. In fact Napoleon, de Lesseps, Cromer, and Balfour are far
more*regular,* far less unusual, if we recall the schemata of d’Herbelot
and Dante and add to them both a modernized, efficient engine (like the
nineteenth-century European empire) and a positive twist: since one
cannot ontologically obliterate the Orient (as d’Herbelot and Dante
perhaps realized), one does have the means to capture it, treat it,
describe it, improve it, radically alter it.

The point I am trying to make here is that the transition from a merely
textual apprehension, formulation, or definition of the Orient to the
putting of all this into practice in the Orient did take place, and that
Orientalism had much to do with that-if I may use the word in a literal
sense-preposterous transition. So far as its strictly scholarly work was
concerned (and I find the idea of strictly scholarly work as
disinterested and abstract hard to understand: still, we can allow it
intellectually), Orientalism did a great many things. During its great
age in the nineteenth century it produced scholars; it increased the
number of languages taught in the West and the quantity of manuscripts
edited, translated, and commented on; in many cases, it provided the
Orient with sympathetic, European students, genuinely interested in such
matters as Sanskrit grammar, Phoenician numismatics, and Arabic poetry.
Yet and here we must be very clear-Orientalism overrode the Orient. As a
system of thought about the Orient, it always rose from the specifically
human detail to the general transhuman one; an observation about a
tenth-century Arab poet multiplied itself into a policy towards (and
about) the Oriental mentality in Egypt, Iraq, or Arabia. Similarly a
verse from the Koran would be considered the best evidence of an
ineradicable Muslim sensuality. Orientalism assumed an unchanging
Orient, absolutely different (the reasons change from epoch to epoch)
from the West. And Orientalism, in its post-eighteenth-century form,
could never revise itself. All this makes Cromer and Balfour, as
observers and administrators of the Orient, inevitable.

The closeness between politics and Orientalism, or to put it more
circumspectly, the great likelihood that ideas about the Orient drawn
from Orientalism can be put to political use, is an important yet
extremely sensitive truth. It raises questions about the predisposition
towards innocence or guilt, scholarly disinterest or pressure-group
complicity, in such fields as black or women’s studies. It necessarily
provokes unrest in one’s conscience about cultural, racial, or
historical generalizations, their uses, value, degree of objectivity,
and fundamental intent. More than anything else, the political and
cultural circumstances in which Western Orientalism has flourished draw
attention to the debased position of the Orient or Oriental as an object
of study. Can any other than a political master-slave relation produce
the Orientalized Orient perfectly characterized by Anwar Abdel Malek?

a) On the level of the*position of the problem,* and the problematic
...the Orient and Orientals [are considered by Orientalism] as an
“object” of study, stamped with an otherness -as all that is different,
whether it be “subject” or object”-but of a constitutive otherness, of
an essentialist character This “object” of study will be, as is
customary, passive, non -participating, entered with a “historical”
subjectivity, above all, non-active, non-autonomous, non-sovereign with
regard to itself: the only Orient or Oriental or “subject” which could
be admitted, at the extreme limit, is the alienated being,
philosophically, that is, other than itself in relationship to itself,
posed, understood, defined - and acted--- by others.

b) On the level of the*thematic,* [the Orientalists] adopt an
essentialist conception of the countries, nations and peoples of the
Orient study, a conception which expresses itself through a
characterized ethnist typology ...and will soon proceed with it towards
racisim.

According to the traditional orientalists, an essence should
exist -sometimes even clearly described in metaphysical terms-which
constitutes the inalienable and common basis of all the beings
considered this essence is both “historical,” since it goes back to the
dawn of history, and fundamentally a-historical, since it transfixes the
being, “the object” of study, within its inalienable and nonevolutive
specificity, instead of defining it as all other beings, states,
nations, peoples, and cultures-as a product, a resultant of the vection
of the forces operating in the field of historical evolution.

Thus one ends with a typology-based on a real specificity, but detached
from history, and, consequently, conceived as being intangible
essential----which makes of the studied “object” another being with
rcgard to whom the studying subject is transcendent; we Will base a homo
Sinicus, a homo Arabicus (and why not a homo Aegypticus, etc.), a homo
Africanus, the man-the “normal man’ it is understood being the European
man of the historical period, that is, since Greek antiquity. One sees
how much, from the Eighteenth to the twentieth century, the hegemonism
of possessing Minorities, unveiled by Marx and Engels, and the
anthropocentrism dismantled by Freud are accompanied by europocentrism
in the area of human and social sciences, and more particularly is those
in direct relationship with non-European peoples.88

Abdel Malek sees Orientalism as having a history which, according the
“Oriental” of the late twentieth century, led it to the impasse
described above. Let us now briefly outline that history as it proceeded
through the nineteenth century to accumulate weight and power, “the
hegemonism of possessing minorities,” and anthropocentrism in alliance
with Europocentrism. From the last decades of the eighteenth century and
for at least a century and a half, Britain and France dominated
Orientalism as a discipline. The great philological discoveries in
comparative grammar made by Jones, Franz Bopp, Jakob Grimm, and others
were originally indebted to manuscripts brought from the East to Paris
and London. Almost without exception, every Orientalist began his career
as a philologist, and the revolution in philology that produced Bopp,
Sacy, Burnouf, and their students was a comparative science based on the
premise that languages belong to families, of which the Indo-European
and the Semitic are two great instances. From the outset, then,
Orientalism carried forward two traits: (1) a newly found scientific
self-consciousness based on the linguistic importance of the Orient to
Europe, and (2) a proclivity to divide, subdivide, and redivide its
subject matter without ever changing its mind about the Orient as being
always the same, unchanging, uniform, and radically peculiar object.

Friedrich Schlegel, who learned his Sanskrit in Paris, illustrates these
traits together. Although by the time he published his*Über die Sprache
and Weisheit der Indier* in 1808 Schlegel had practically renounced his
Orientalism, he still held that Sanskrit and Persian on the one hand and
Greek and German on the other had more affinities with each other than
with the Semitic, Chinese, American, or African languages. Moreover, the
Indo-European family was artistically simple and satisfactory in a way
the Semitic, for one, was not. Such abstractions as this did not trouble
Schlegel, for whom nations, races, minds, and peoples as things one
could talk about passionately-in the ever-narrowing perspective of
populism first adumbrated by Herder-held a lifelong fascination. Yet
nowhere does Schlegel talk about the living, contemporary Orient. When
he said in 1800, “It is in the Orient that we must search for the
highest Romanticism,” he meant the Orient of the*Sakuntala,* the
Zend-Avesta, and the Upanishads. As for the Semites, whose language was
agglutinative, unaesthetic, and mechanical, they were different,
inferior, backward. Schlegel’s lectures on language and on life,
history, and literature are full of these discriminations, which he made
without the slightest qualification. Hebrew, he said, was made for
prophetic utterance and divination; the Muslims, however, espoused a
“dead empty Theism, a merely negative Unitarian faith.”89

Much of the racism in Schlegel’s strictures upon the Semites and other
“low” Orientals was widely diffused in European culture. But nowhere
else, unless it be later in the nineteenth century among Darwinian
anthropologists and phrenologists, was it made the basis of a scientific
subject matter as it was in comparative linguistics or philology.
Language and race seemed inextricably tied, and the “good” Orient was
invariably a classical period somewhere in a long-gone India, whereas
the “bad” Orient lingered in present-day Asia, parts of North Africa,
and Islam everywhere. “Aryans” were confined to Europe and the ancient
Orient; as Leon Poliakov has shown (without once remarking, however,
that “Semites” were not only the Jews but the Muslims as well90 ), the
Aryan myth dominated historical and cultural anthropology at the expense
of the “lesser” peoples.

The official intellectual genealogy of Orientalism would certainly
include Gobineau, Renan, Humboldt, Steinthal, Burnouf, Remusat, Palmer,
Weil, Dozy, Muir, to mention a few famous names almost at random from
the nineteenth century. It would also include the diffusive capacity of
learned societies: the Societe asiatique, founded in 1822; the Royal
Asiatic Society, founded in 1823; the American Oriental Society, founded
in 1842; and so on. But it might perforce neglect the great contribution
of imaginative and travel literature, which strengthened the divisions
established by Orientalists between the various geographical, temporal,
and racial departments of the Orient. Such neglect would be incorrect,
since for the Islamic Orient this literature is especially rich and
makes a significant contribution to building the Orientalist discourse.
It includes work by Goethe, Hugo, Lamartine, Chateaubriand, Kinglake,
Nerval, Flaubert, Lane, Burton, Scott, Byron, Vigny, Disraeli, George
Eliot, Gautier. Later, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, we could add Doughty, Barrès, Loti, T. E. Lawrence, Forster.
All these writers give a bolder outline to Disraeli’s “great Asiatic
mystery.” In this enterprise there is considerable support not only from
the unearthing of dead Oriental civilizations (by -European excavators)
in Mesopotamia, Egypt, Syria, and Turkey, but also from major
geographical surveys done all through the Orient.

By the end of the nineteenth century these achievements were materially
abetted by the European occupation of the entire Near Orient (with the
exception of parts of the Ottoman Empire, which was swallowed up after
1918). The principal colonial powers once again were Britain and France,
although Russia and Germany played some role as well.91 To colonize
meant at first the identification-indeed, the creation-of interests;
these could be commercial, communicational, religious, military,
cultural. With regard to Islam and the Islamic territories, for example,
Britain felt that it had legitimate interests, as a Christian power, to
safeguard. A complex apparatus for tending these interests developed.
Such early organizations as the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge (1698 ) and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Foreign Parts (1701) were succeeded and later abetted by the Baptist
Missionary Society (1792) , the Church Missionary Society (1799), the
British and Foreign Bible Society (1804), the London Society for
Promoting Christianity Among the Jews (1808) These missions “openly
joined the expansion of Europe.”92 Add to these the trading societies,
learned societies, geographical exploration funds, translation funds,
the implantation in the Orient of schools, missions, consular offices,
factories, and sometimes large European communities, and the notion of
an interest” will acquire a good deal of sense. Thereafter interests
were defended with much zeal and expense.

So far my outline is a gross one. What of the typical experiences and
emotions that accompany both the scholarly advances of Orientalism and
the political conquests aided by Orientalism? First, there is
disappointment that the modern Orient is not at all like the texts. Here
is Gerard de Nerval writing to Theophile Gautier at the end of August
1843:

I have already lost, Kingdom after Kingdom, province after province, the
more beautiful half of the universe, and soon I will know of no place in
which I can find a refuge for my dreams; but it is Egypt that I most
regret having driven out of my imagination, now that I have sadly placed
it in my memory.93

This is by the author of a great*Voyage en Orient.* Nerval’s lament is a
common topic of Romanticism (the betrayed dream, as described by Albert
Béguin in*L’Ame romantique et le rêve)* and of travelers in the Biblical
Orient, from Chateaubriand to Mark Twain. Any direct experience of the
mundane Orient ironically comments on such valorizations of it as were
to be found in Goethe’s “Mahometsgesang” or Hugo’s “Adieux de l’hôtesse
arabe.” Memory of the modem Orient disputes imagination, sends one back
to the imagination as a place preferable, for the European sensibility,
to the real Orient. For a person who has never seen the Orient, Nerval
once said to Gautier, a lotus is still a lotus; for me it is only a kind
of onion. To write about the modem Orient is either to reveal an
upsetting demystification of images culled from texts, or to confine
oneself to the Orient of which Hugo spoke in his original preface to*Les
Orientales,* the Orient as “image” or “pensée,” symbols of “une sorte de
préoccupation générale.”94

If personal disenchantment and general preoccupation fairly map the
Orientalist sensibility at first, they entail certain other more
familiar habits of thought, feeling, and perception. The mind learns to
separate a general apprehension of the Orient from a specific experience
of it; each goes its separate way, so to speak. In Scott’s novel*The
Talisman* (1825), Sir Kenneth (of the Crouching Leopard) battles a
single Saracen to a standoff somewhere in the Palestinian desert; as the
Crusader and his opponent, who is Saladin in disguise, later engage in
conversation, the Christian discovers his Muslim antagonist to be not so
bad a fellow after all. Yet he remarks:

I well thought ...that your blinded race had their descent from the foul
fiend, without whose aid you would never have been able to maintain this
blessed land of Palestine against so many valiant soldiers of God. I
speak not thus of thee in particular, Saracen, but generally of thy
people and religion. Strange is it to me, however, not that you should
have the descent from the Evil One, but that you should boast of it.95

For indeed the Saracen does boast of tracing his race’s line back to
Eblis, the Muslim Lucifer. But what is truly curious is not the feeble
historicism by which Scott makes the scene “medieval,” letting Christian
attack Muslim theologically in a way nineteenth-century Europeans would
not (they would, though); rather, it is the airy condescension of
damning a whole people “generally” while mitigating the offense with a
cool “I don’t mean you in particular.”

Scott, however, was no expert on Islam (although H. A. R. Gibb, who was,
praised*The Talisman* for its insight into Islam and Saladin96 ), and he
was taking enormous liberties with Eblis’s role by turning him into a
hero for the faithful. Scott’s knowledge probably came from Byron and
Beckford, but it is enough for us here to note how strongly the general
character ascribed to things Oriental could withstand both the
rhetorical and the existential force of obvious exceptions. It is as if,
on the one hand, a bin called “Oriental” existed into which all the
authoritative, anonymous, and traditional Western attitudes to the East
were dumped unthinkingly, while on the other, true to the anecdotal
tradition of storytelling, one could nevertheless tell of experiences
with or in the Orient that had little to do with the generally
serviceable bin. But the very structure of Scott’s prose shows a closer
intertwining of the two than that. For the general category in advance
offers the specific instance a limited terrain in which to operate: no
matter how deep the specific exception, no matter how much a single
Oriental can escape the fences placed around him, he is*first* an
Oriental,*second* a human being, and*last* again an Oriental.

So general a category as “Oriental” is capable of quite interesting
variations. Disraeli’s enthusiasm for the Orient appeared first during a
trip East in 1831. In Cairo he wrote, “My eyes and mind yet ache with a
grandeur so little in unison with our own likeness.”97 General grandeur
and passion inspired a transcendent sense of things and little patience
for actual reality. His novel*Tancred is* steeped in racial and
geographical platitudes; everything is a matter of race, Sidonia states,
so much so that salvation can only be found in the Orient and amongst
its races. There, as a case in point, Druzes, Christians, Muslims, and
Jews hobnob easily because-someone quips-Arabs are simply Jews on
horseback, and all are Orientals at heart. The unisons are made between
general categories, not between categories and what they contain. An
Oriental lives in the Orient, he lives a life of Oriental ease, in a
state of Oriental despotism and sensuality, imbued with a feeling of
Oriental fatalism. Writers as different as Marx, Disraeli, Burton, and
Nerval could carry on a lengthy discussion between themselves, as it
were, using all those generalities unquestioningly and yet intelligibly.

With disenchantment and a generalized-not to say schizophrenic-view of
the Orient, there is usually another peculiarity. Because it is made
into a general object, the whole Orient can be made to serve as an
illustration of a particular form of eccentricity. Although the
individual Oriental cannot shake or disturb the general categories that
make sense of his oddness, his oddness can nevertheless be enjoyed for
its own sake. Here, for example, is Flaubert describing the spectacle of
the Orient:

To amuse the crowd, Mohammed Ali’s jester took a woman in a Cairo bazaar
one day, set her on the counter of a shop, and coupled with her publicly
while the shopkeeper calmly smoked his pipe.

On the road from Cairo to Shubra some time ago a young fellow had
himself publicly buggered by a large monkey-as in the story above, to
create a good opinion of himself and make people laugh.

A marabout died a while ago-an idiot-who had long passed as a saint
marked by God; all the Moslem women came to see him and masturbated
him-in the end he died of exhaustion-from morning to night it was a
perpetual jacking-off ....

*Quid dicis* of the following fact: some time ago a*santon* (ascetic
priest) used to walk through the streets of Cairo completely naked
except for a cap on his head and another on his prick. To piss he would
doff the prick-cap, and sterile-women who wanted children would run up,
put themselves under the parabola of his urine and rub themselves with
it.98

Flaubert frankly acknowledges that this is grotesquerie of a special
kind. “All the old comic business”-by which Flaubert meant the
well-known conventions of “the cudgeled slave ...the coarse trafficker
in women ...the thieving merchant”-acquire a new, “fresh ...genuine and
charming” meaning in the Orient. This meaning cannot be reproduced; it
can only be enjoyed on the spot and “brought back” very approximately.
The Orient is*watched,* since its almost (but never quite) offensive
behavior issues out of a reservoir of infinite peculiarity; the
European, whose sensibility tours the Orient, is a watcher, never
involved, always detached, always ready for new examples of what
the*Description de l’Égypte* called “bizarre jouissance.” The Orient
becomes a living tableau of queerness.

And this tableau quite logically becomes a special topic for texts. Thus
the circle is completed; from being exposed as what texts do not prepare
one for, the Orient can return as something one writes about in a
disciplined way. Its foreignness can be translated, its meanings
decoded, its hostility tamed; yet the*generality* assigned to the
Orient, the disenchantment that one feels after encountering it, the
unresolved eccentricity it displays, are all redistributed in what is
said or written about it. Islam, for example, was typically Oriental for
Orientalists of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Carl
Becker argued that although “Islam” (note the vast generality) inherited
the Hellenic tradition, it could neither grasp nor employ the Greek,
humanistic tradition; moreover, to understand Islam one needed above all
else to see it, not as an “original” religion, but as a sort of failed
Oriental attempt to employ Greek philosophy without the creative
inspiration that we find in Renaissance Europe.99 For Louis Massignon,
perhaps the most renowned and influential of modern French Orientalists,
Islam was a systematic rejection of the Christian incarnation, and its
greatest hero was not Mohammed or Averrods but al-Hallaj, a Muslim saint
who was crucified by the orthodox Muslims for having dared to
personalize Islam.100 What Becker and Massignon explicitly left out of
their studies was the eccentricity of the Orient, which they
backhandedly acknowledged by trying so hard to regularize it in Western
terms. Mohammed was thrown out, but al-Hallaj was made prominent because
he took himself to be a Christ -figure.

As a judge of the Orient, the modern Orientalist does not, as he
believes and even says, stand apart from it objectively. His human
detachment, whose sign is the absence of sympathy covered by
professional knowledge, is weighted heavily with all the orthodox
attitudes, perspectives, and moods of Orientalism that I have been
describing. His Orient is not the Orient as it is, but the Orient as it
has been Orientalized.An unbroken arc of knowledge and power connects
the European or Western statesman and the Western Orientalists; it forms
the rim of the stage containing the Orient.By the end of World War I
both Africa and the Orient formed not so much an intellectual spectacle
for the West as a privileged terrain for it. The scope of Orientalism
exactly matched the scope of empire, and it was this absolute unanimity
between the two that provoked the only crisis in the history of Western
thought about and dealings with the Orient. And this crisis continues
now.

Beginning in the twenties, and from one end of the Third World to the
other, the response to empire and imperialism has been dialectical. By
the time of the Bandung Conference in 1955 the entire Orient had gained
its political independence from the Western empires and confronted a new
configuration of imperial powers, the United States and the Soviet
Union. Unable to recognize “its” Orient in the new Third World,
Orientalism now faced a challenging and politically armed Orient. Two
alternatives opened before Orientalism. One was to carry on as if
nothing had happened. The second was to adapt the old ways to the new.
But to the Orientalist, who believes the Orient never changes, the new
is simply the old betrayed by new, misunderstanding*dis-Orientals* (we
can permit ourselves the neologism). A third, revisionist alternative,
to dispense with Orientalism altogether, was considered by only a tiny
minority. One index of the crisis, according to Abdel Malek, was not
simply that “national liberation movements in the ex-colonial” Orient
worked havoc with Orientalist conceptions of passive, fatalistic
“subject races”; there was in addition the fact that “specialists and
the public at large became aware of the time-lag, not only between
orientalist science and the material under study, but also-and this was
to be determining-between the conceptions, the methods and the
instruments of work in the human and social sciences and those of
orientalism.”101 The Orientalists-from Renan to Goldziher to Macdonald
to von Grunebaum, Gibb, and Bernard Lewis--saw Islam, for example, as a
“cultural synthesis” (the phrase is P. M. Holt’s) that could be studied
apart from the economics, sociology, and politics of the Islamic
peoples. For Orientalism, Islam had a meaning which, if one were to look
for its most succinct formulation, could be found in Renan’s first
treatise: in order best to be understood Islam had to be reduced to
“tent and tribe.” The impact of colonialism, of worldly circumstances,
of historical development: all these were to Orientalists as flies to
wanton boys, killed-or disregarded-for their sport, never taken
seriously enough to complicate the essential Islam.

The career of H. A. R. Gibb illustrates within itself the two
alternative approaches by which Orientalism has responded to the modern
Orient. In 1945 Gibb delivered the Haskell Lectures at the University of
Chicago. The world he surveyed was not the same one Balfour and Cromer
knew before World War I. Several revolutions, two world wars, and
innumerable economic, political, and social changes made the realities
of 1945 an unmistakably, even cataclysmically, new object. Yet we find
Gibb opening the lectures he called*Modern Trends in* Islam as follows:

The student of Arabic civilization is constantly brought up against the
striking contrast between the imaginative power displayed, for example,
in certain branches of Arabic literature and the literalism, the
pedantry, displayed in reasoning and exposition, even when it is devoted
to these same productions. It is true that there have been great
philosophers among the Muslim peoples and that some of them were Arabs,
but they were rare exceptions. The Arab mind, whether in relation to the
outer world or in relation to the processes of thought, cannot throw off
its intense feeling for the separateness and the individuality of the
concrete events.

This is, I believe, one of the main factors lying behind that “lack of a
sense of law” which Professor Macdonald regarded as the characteristic
difference in the Oriental.

It is this, too, which explains-what is so difficult for the Western
student to grasp [until it is explained to him by the Orientalist] -the
aversion of the Muslims from the thoughtprocesses of rationalism The
rejection of rationalist modes of thought and of the utilitarian ethic
which is inseparable from them has its roots, therefore, not in the
so-called “obscurantism” of the Muslim theologians but in the atomism
and discreteness of the Arab imagination.102

This is pure Orientalism, of course, but even if one acknowledges the
exceeding knowledge of institutional Islam that characterizes the rest
of the book, Gibb’s inaugural biases remain a formidable obstacle for
anyone hoping to understand modern Islam. What is fine meaning of
“difference” when the preposition “from” has dropped from sight
altogether? Are we not once again being asked to inspect the Oriental
Muslim as if his world, unlike ours-“differently” from it had never
ventured beyond the seventh century? As for modern aim itself, despite
the complexities of his otherwise magisterial understanding of it, why
must it be regarded with so implacable a hostility as Gibb’s? If Islam
is flawed from the start by virtue of its permanent disabilities, the
Orientalist will find himself opposing any Islamic attempts to reform
Islam, because, according to his views, reform is a betrayal of Islam:
this is exactly Gibb’s argument. How can an Oriental slip out from these
manacles into the modern world except by repeating with the Fool in*King
Lear,* “They’ll have me whipp’d for speaking true, thou’lt have me
whipp’d for lying; and sometimes I am whipp’d for holding my peace.”

Eighteen years later Gibb faced an audience of English compatriots, only
now he was speaking as the director of the Center for Middle Eastern
Studies at Harvard. His topic was “Area Studies Reconsidered,” in which,
among other*apercus,* he agreed that “the Orient is much too important
to be left to the Orientalists.” The new,or second alternative, approach
open to Orientalists was being announced, just as*Modern Trends*
exemplified the first, or traditional, approach. Gibb’s formula is
well-intentioned in “Area Studies Reconsidered,” so far, of course, as
the Western experts on the Orient are concerned, whose job it is to
prepare students for careers “in public life and business.” What we now
need, said Gibb, is the traditional Orientalist plus a good social
scientist working together: between them the two will do
interdisciplinary” work. Yet the traditional Orientalist will not bring
outdated knowledge to bear on the Orient; no, his expertise will serve
to remind his uninitiated colleagues in area studies that “to apply the
psychology and mechanics of Western political institutions to Asian or
Arab situations is pure Walt Disney..”103

In practice this notion has meant that when Orientals struggle against
colonial occupation, you must say (in order not to risk a Disneyism)
that Orientals have never understood the meaning of self-government the
way “we” do. When some Orientals oppose racial discrimination while
others practice it, you say “they’re all Orientals at bottom” and class
interest, political circumstances, economic factors are totally
irrelevant. Or with Bernard Lewis, you say that if Arab Palestinians
oppose Israeli settlement and occupation of their lands, then that is
merely “the return of Islam,” or, as a renowned contemporary Orientalist
defines it, Islamic opposition to non-Islamic peoples,104 a principle of
Islam enshrined in the seventh century. History, politics, and economics
do not matter. Islam is Islam, the Orient is the Orient, and please take
all your ideas about a left and a right wing, revolutions, and change
back to Disneyland.

If such tautologies, claims, and dismissals have not sounded familiar to
historians, sociologists, economists, and humanists in any other field
except Orientalism, the reason is patently obvious. For like its
putative subject matter, Orientalism has not allowed ideas to violate
its profound serenity. But modern Orientalists-or area experts, to give
them their new name-have not passively sequestered themselves in
language departments. On the contrary, they have profited from Gibb’s
advice. Most of them today are indistinguishable from other “experts”
and “advisers” in what Harold Lasswell has called the policy
sciences.105 Thus the military national-security possibilities of an
alliance, say, between a specialist in “national character analysis” and
an expert in Islamic institutions were soon recognized, for expediency’s
sake if for nothing else. After all, the “West” since World War II had
faced a clever totalitarian enemy who collected allies for itself among
gullible Oriental (African, Asian, undeveloped) nations. What better way
of outflanking that enemy than by playing to the Oriental’s illogical
mind in ways only an Orientalist could devise? Thus emerged such
masterful ploys as the stick-and-carrot technique, the Alliance for
Progress, SEATO, and so forth, all of them based on traditional
“knowledge” retooled for better manipulation of its supposed object.

Thus as revolutionary turmoil grips the Islamic Orient, sociologists
remind us that Arabs are addicted to “oral functions,”106 while
economists-recycled Orientalists-observe that for modern Islam neither
capitalism nor socialism is an adequate rubric.107 As anticolonialism
sweeps and indeed unifies the entire Oriental world, the Orientalist
damns the whole business not only as a nuisance but as an insult to the
Western democracies. As momentous, generally important issues face the
world-issues involving nuclear destruction, catastrophically scarce
resources, unprecedented human demands for equality, justice, and
economic parity-popular caricatures of the Orient are exploited by
politicians whose source of ideological supply is not only the
half-literate technocrat but the superliterate Orientalist. The
legendary Arabists in the State Department warn of Arab plans to take
over the world. The perfidious Chinese, half-naked Indians, and passive
Muslims are described as vultures for “our” largesse and are damned when
“we lose them” to communism, or to their unregenerate Oriental
instincts: the difference is scarcely significant.

These contemporary Orientalist attitudes flood the press and the popular
mind. Arabs, for example, are thought of as camelriding, terroristic,
hooknosed, venal lechers whose undeserved wealth is an affront to real
civilization. Always there lurks the assumption that although the
Western consumer belongs to a numerical minority, he is entitled either
to own or to expend (or both) the majority of the world resources. Why?
Because he, unlike the Oriental,is a true human being. No better
instance exists today of what Anwar Abdel Malek calls “the hegemonism of
possessing minorities” and anthropocentrism allied with Europocentrism:
a white middle-class Westerner believes it his human prerogative not
only to manage the nonwhite world but also to own it, just because by
definition “it” is not quite as human as “we” are. There is no purer
example than this of dehumanized thought.

In a sense the limitations of Orientalism are, as I said earlier, the
limitations that follow upon disregarding, essentializing, denuding the
humanity of another culture, people, or geographical region. But
Orientalism has taken a further step than that: it views the Orient as
something whose existence is not only displayed but has remained fixed
in time and place for the West. So impressive have the descriptive and
textual successes of Orientalism been that entire periods of the
Orient’s cultural, political, and social history are considered mere
responses to the West. The West is the actor, the Orient a passive
reactor. The West is the spectator, the judge and jury, of every facet
of Oriental behavior. Yet if history during the twentieth century has
provoked intrinsic change in and for the Orient, the Orientalist is
stunned: he cannot realize that to some extent

the new [Oriental] leaders, intellectuals or policy-makers, have learned
many lessons from the travail of their predecessors. They have also been
aided by the structural and institutional transformations accomplished
in the intervening period and by the fact that they are to a great
extent more at liberty to fashion the future of their countries. They
are also much more confident and perhaps slightly aggressive. No longer
do they have to function hoping to obtain a favorable verdict from the
invisible jury of the West. Their dialogue is not with the West, it is
with their fellow citizens.108

Moreover, the Orientalist assumes that what his texts have not prepared
him for is the result either of outside agitation in the Orient or of
the Orient’s misguided inanity. None of the innumerable Orientalist
texts on Islam, including their summa,*The Cambridge History of Islam,*
can prepare their reader for what has taken place since 1948 in Egypt,
Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, or the Yemens. When the dogmas about
Islam cannot serve, not even for the most Panglossian Orientalist, there
is recourse to an Orientalized social-science jargon, to such marketable
abstractions as elites, political stability, modernization, and
institutional development, all stamped with the cachet of Orientalist
wisdom. In the meantime a growing, more and more dangerous rift
separates Orient and Occident.

The present crisis dramatizes the disparity between texts and reality.
Yet in this study of Orientalism I wish not only to expose the sources
of Orientalism’s views but also to reflect on its importance, for the
contemporary intellectual rightly feels that to ignore a part of the
world now demonstrably encroaching upon him is to avoid reality.
Humanists have too often confined their attention to departmentalized
topics of research. They have neither watched nor learned from
disciplines like Orientalism whose unremitting ambition was to
master*all* of a world, not some easily delimited part of it such as an
author or a collection of texts. However, along with such academic
security-blankets as “history,” “literature,” or “the humanities,” and
despite its overreaching aspirations, Orientalism is involved in
worldly, historical circumstances which it has tried to conceal behind
an often pompous scientism and appeals to rationalism. The contemporary
intellectual can learn from Orientalism how, on the one hand, either to
limit or to enlarge realistically the scope of his discipline's claims,
and on the other, to see the human ground (the foul-rag-and-bone shop of
the heart, Yeats called it) in which texts, visions, methods, and
disciplines begin, grow, thrive, and degenerate. To investigate
Orientalism is also to propose intellectual ways for handling the
methodological problems that history has brought forward, so to speak,
in its subject matter, the Orient. But before that we must virtually see
the humanistic values that Orientalism, by its scope, experiences, and
structures, has all but eliminated.
