Chapter 2: Orientalist Structures and Restructures
==================================================

*When the seyyid 'Omar, the Nakeeb el-Ashráf (or chief of the
descendants of the Prophet) ...married a daughter, about forty-five
years since, there walked before the procession a young man who had made
an incision in his abdomen, and drawn out a large portion of his
intestines, which he carried before him on a silver tray. After the
procession, he restored them to their proper place, and remained in bed
many days before he recovered from the effects of this foolish and
disgusting act.*

**Edward William Lane,*An Account of the Manners and Customs of the
Modern Egyptians***

*...dans le cas de la chute de cet empire, soit par une révolution à
Constantinople, soit par un démembrement successif, lee puissances
européennes prendront chacune, à titre de protectorat, la partie de
l'empire qui lui sera assignée par les stipulations du congrès; que ces
protectorate, définis et limités, quant aux territoires, selon lee
voisinages, la sûreté des frontières, l'analogie de religions, de moeurs
et d'interêts ...ne consacreront que la suzeraineté des puissances.
Cette sorte de suzeraineté définie ainsi, et consacrée comme droit
européen, consistera principalement dans le droit d'occuper telle partie
du territoire ou des côtes, pour y fonder, soit des vines libres, soit
des colonies européennes, soit des ports et des échelles de commerce Ce
n'est qu'une tutelle armée et civilisatrice que chaque puissance
exercera sur son protectorat; elle garantira son existence et ses
éléments de nationalité, sous le drapeau d'une nationalité plus
forte....*

**Alphonse de Lamartine,*Voyage en Orient***

I- Redrawn Frontiers, Redefined Issues, Secularized Religion
------------------------------------------------------------

Gustave Flaubert died in 1880 without having finished Bouvard*et
Pécuchet,* his comic encyclopedic novel on the degeneration of knowledge
and the inanity of human effort. Nevertheless the essential outlines of
his vision are clear, and are clearly supported by the ample detail of
his novel. The two clerks are members of the bourgeoisie who, because
one of them is the unexpected beneficiary of a handsome will, retire
from the city to spend their lives on a country estate doing what they
please ("nous ferons tout ce que nous plaira!"). As Flaubert portrays
their experience, doing as they please involves Bouvard and Pecuchet in
a practical and theoretical jaunt through agriculture, history,
chemistry, education, archaeology, literature, always with less than
successful results; they move through fields of learning like travelers
in time and knowledge, experiencing the disappointments, disasters, and
letdowns of uninspired amateurs. What they move through, in fact, is the
whole disillusioning experience of the nineteenth century, whereby-in
Charles Moraze's phrase-"les bourgeois conquerants" turn out to be the
bumbling victims of their own leveling incompetence and mediocrity.
Every enthusiasm resolves itself into a boring cliche, and every
discipline or type of knowledge changes from hope and power into
disorder, ruin, and sorrow.

Among Flaubert's sketches for the conclusion of this panorama of despair
are two items of special interest to us here. The two men debate the
future of mankind. Pécuchet sees "the future of Humanity through a glass
darkly," whereas Bouvard sees it "brightly!"

Modern man is progressing, Europe will be regenerated by Asia. The
historical law that civilization moves from Orient to Occident...the two
forms of humanity will at last be soldered together.1

This obvious echo of Quinet represents the start of still another of the
cycles of enthusiasm and disillusionment through which the two men will
pass. Flaubert's notes indicate that like all his others, this
anticipated project of Bouvard's is rudely interrupted by reality-this
time by the sudden appearance of gendarmes who accuse him of debauchery.
A few lines later, however, the second item of interest turns up. The
two men simultaneously confess to each other that their secret desire is
once again to become copyists. They have a double desk made for them,
they buy books, pencils, erasers, and-as Flaubert concludes the sketch-
"ils s'y mettent": they turn to. From trying to live through and apply
knowledge more or less directly, Bouvard and Pecuchet are reduced
finally to transcribing it uncritically from one text to another.

Although Bouvard's vision of Europe regenerated by Asia is not fully
spelled out, it (and what it comes to on the copyist's desk) can be
glossed in several important ways. Like many of the two men's other
visions, this one is*global* and it is*reconstructive;* it represents
what Flaubert felt to be the nineteenth-century predilection for the
rebuilding of the world according to an imaginative vision, sometimes
accompanied by a special scientific technique. Among the visions
Flaubert has in mind are the utopias of Saint Simon and Fourier, the
scientific regenerations of mankind envisioned by Comte, and all the
technical or secular religions promoted by ideologues, positivists,
eclectics, occultists, traditionalists, and idealists such as Destutt de
Tracy, Cabanis, Michelet, Cousin, Proudhon, Cournot, Cabet, Janet, and
Lamennais.2 Throughout the novel Bouvard and Pecuchet espouse the
various causes of such figures; then, having ruined them, they move on
looking for newer ones, but with no better results.

The roots of such revisionist ambitions as these are Romantic in a very
specific way. We must remember the extent to which a major part of the
spiritual and intellectual project of the late eighteenth century was a
reconstituted theology-natural supernaturalism, as M. H. Abrams has
called it; this type of thought is carried forward by the typical
nineteenth-century attitudes Flaubert satirizes in*Bouvard et Pécuchet.*
The notion of regeneration therefore harks back to a conspicuous
Romantic tendency, after the rationalism and decorum of the
Enlightenment ...[to revert] to the stark drama and suprarational
mysteries of the Christian story and doctrines and to the violent
conflicts and abrupt reversals of the Christian inner life, turning on
the extremes of destruction and creation, hell and heaven, exile and
reunion, death and rebirth, dejection and joy, paradise lost and
paradise regained.... But since they lived, inescapably, after the
Enlightenment, Romantic writers revived these ancient matters with a
difference: they undertook to save the overview of human history and
destiny, the existential paradigms, and the cardinal values of their
religious heritage, by reconstituting them in a way that would make them
intellectually acceptable, as well as emotionally pertinent, for the
time being.3

What Bouvard has in mind-the regeneration of Europe by Asia-was a very
influential Romantic idea. Friedrich Schlegel and Novalis, for example,
urged upon their countrymen, and upon Europeans in general, a detailed
study of India because, they said, it was Indian culture and religion
that could defeat the materialism and mechanism (and republicanism) of
Occidental culture. And from this defeat would arise a new, revitalized
Europe: the Biblical imagery of death, rebirth, and redemption is
evident in this prescription. Moreover, the Romantic Orientalist project
was not merely a specific instance of a general tendency; it was a
powerful shaper of the tendency itself, as Raymond Schwab has so
convincingly argued in La*Renaissance orientale.* But what mattered was
not Asia so much as Asia's use to modern Europe. Thus anyone who, like
Schlegel or Franz Bopp, mastered an Oriental language was a spiritual
hero, a knight-errant bringing back to Europe a sense of the holy
mission it had now lost. It is precisely this sense that the later
secular religions portrayed by Flaubert carry on in the nineteenth
century. No less than Schlegel, Wordsworth, and Chateaubriand, Auguste
Comte-like Bouvard-was the adherent and proponent of a secular
post-Enlightenment myth whose outlines are unmistakably Christian.

In regularly allowing Bouvard and Pecuchet to go through revisionist
notions from start to comically debased finish, Flaubert drew attention
to the human flaw common to all projects. He saw perfectly well that
underneath the*idée reçue* "Europe-regenerated-by-Asia" lurked a very
insidious hubris. Neither "Europe" nor "Asia" was anything without the
visionaries' technique for turning vast geographical domains into
treatable, and manageable, entities. At bottom, therefore, Europe and
Asia were*our* Europe and*our* Asiaour will and*representation,* as
Schopenhauer had said. Historical laws were in reality*historians'*
laws, just as "the two forms of humanity" drew attention less to
actuality than to a European capacity for lending man-made distinctions
an air of inevitability. As for the other half of the phrase-"will at
last be soldered together"-there Flaubert mocked the blithe indifference
of science to actuality, a science which anatomized and melted human
entities as if they were so much inert matter. But it was not just any
science he mocked: it was enthusiastic, even messianic European science,
whose victories included failed revolutions, wars, oppression, and an
unteachable appetite for putting grand, bookish ideas quixotically to
work immediately. What such science or knowledge never reckoned with was
its own deeply ingrained and unselfconscious bad innocence and the
resistance to it of reality. When Bouvard plays the scientist he naively
assumes that science merely is, that reality is as the scientist says it
is, that it does not matter whether the scientist is a fool or a
visionary; he (or anyone who thinks like him) cannot see that the Orient
may not wish to regenerate Europe, or that Europe was not about to fuse
itself democratically with yellow or brown Asians. In short, such a
scientist does not recognize in his science the egoistic will to power
that feeds his endeavors and corrupts his ambitions.

Flaubert, of course, sees to it that his poor fools are made to rub
their noses in these difficulties. Bouvard and Pecuchet have learned
that it is better not to traffic in ideas and in reality together. The
novel's conclusion is a picture of the two of them now perfectly content
to copy their favorite ideas faithfully from book onto paper. Knowledge
no longer requires application to reality; knowledge is what gets passed
on silently, without comment, from one text to another. Ideas are
propagated and disseminated anonymously, they are repeated without
attribution; they have literally become*idées reçues:* what matters is
that they are*there,* to be repeated, echoed, and re-echoed
uncritically.

In a highly compressed form this brief episode, taken out of Flaubert's
notes for Bouvard*et Pécuchet,* frames the specifically modern
structures of Orientalism, which after all is one discipline among the
secular (and quasi-religious) faiths of nineteenth-century European
thought. We have already characterized the general scope of thought
about the Orient that was handed on through the medieval and Renaissance
periods, for which Islam was the essential Orient. During the eighteenth
century, however, there were a number of new, interlocking elements that
hinted at the coming evangelical phase, whose outlines Flaubert was
later to re-create.

For one, the Orient was being opened out considerably beyond the Islamic
lands. This quantitative change was to a large degree the result of
continuing, and expanding, European exploration of the rest of the
world. The increasing influence of travel literature, imaginary utopias,
moral voyages, and scientific reporting brought the Orient into sharper
and more extended focus. If Orientalism is indebted principally to the
fruitful Eastern discoveries of Anquetil and Jones during the latter
third of the century, these must be seen in the wider context created by
Cook and Bougainville, the voyages of Tournefort and Adanson, by the
President de Brosses's*Histoire des navigations aux terres australes,*
by French traders in the Pacific, by Jesuit missionaries in China and
the Americas, by William Dampier's explorations and reports, by
innumerable speculations on giants, Patagonians, savages, natives, and
monsters supposedly residing to the far east, west, south, and north of
Europe. But all such widening horizons had Europe firmly in the
privileged center, as main observer (or mainly observed, as in
Goldsmith's*Citizen of the World).* For even as Europe moved itself
outwards, its sense of cultural strength was fortified. From travelers'
tales, and not only from great institutions like the various India
companies, colonies were created and ethnocentric perspectives secured.4

For another, a more knowledgeable attitude towards the alien and exotic
was abetted not only by travelers and explorers but also by historians
for whom European experience could profitably be compared with other, as
well as older, civilizations. That powerful current in
eighteenth-century historical anthropology, described by scholars as the
confrontation of the gods, meant that Gibbon could read the lessons of
Rome's decline in the rise of Islam, just as Vico could understand
modern civilization in terms of the barbaric, poetic splendor of their
earliest beginnings.Whereas Renaissance historians judged the Orient
inflexibly as an enemy, those of the eighteenth century confronted the
Orient's peculiarities with some detachment and with some attempt at
dealing directly with Oriental source material, perhaps because such a
technique helped a European to know himself better. George Sale's
translation of the Koran and his accompanying preliminary discourse
illustrate the change. Unlike his predecessors, Sale tried to deal with
Arab history in terms of Arab sources; moreover, he let Muslim
commentators on the sacred text speak for themselves.5 In Sale, as
throughout the eighteenth century, simple comparatism was the early
phase of the comparative disciplines (philology, anatomy, jurisprudence,
religion) which were to become the boast of nineteenth-century method.

But there was a tendency among some thinkers to exceed comparative
study, and its judicious surveys of mankind from "China to Peru," by
sympathetic identification. This is a third eighteenthcentury element
preparing the way for modern Orientalism. What today we call historicism
is an eighteenth-century idea; Vico, Herder, and Hamann, among others,
believed that all cultures were organically and internally coherent,
bound together by a spirit, genius,*Klima,* or national idea which an
outsider could penetrate only by an act of historical sympathy. Thus
Herder's*Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit
(1784-1791)* was a panoramic display of various cultures, each permeated
by an inimical creative spirit, each accessible only to an observer who
sacrificed his prejudices to*Einfuhlung.* Imbued with the populist and
pluralist sense of history advocated by Herder and others,6 an
eighteenth-century mind could breach the doctrinal walls erected between
the West and Islam and see hidden elements of kinship between himself
and the Orient. Napoleon is a famous instance of this (usually
selective) identification by sympathy. Mozart is another;*The Magic
Flute* (in which Masonic codes intermingle with visions of .a benign
Orient) and*The Abduction from the Seraglio* locate a particularly
magnanimous form of humanity in the Orient. And this, much more than the
modish habits of "Turkish" music, drew Mozart sympathetically eastwards.

It is very difficult nonetheless to separate such intuitions of the
Orient as Mozart's from the entire range of pre-Romantic and Romantic
representations of the Orient as exotic locale. Popular Orientalism
during the late eighteenth century and the early nineteenth attained a
vogue of considerable intensity. But even this vogue, easily
identifiable in William Beckford, Byron, Thomas Moore, and Goethe,
cannot be simply detached from the interest taken in Gothic tales,
pseudomedieval idylls, visions of barbaric splendor and cruelty. Thus in
some cases the Oriental representation can be associated with Piranesi's
prisons, in others with Tiepolo's luxurious ambiences, in still others
with the exotic sublimity of late-eighteenth-century paintings.7 Later
in the nineteenth century, in the works of Delacroix and literally
dozens of other French and British painters, the Oriental genre tableau
carried representation into visual expression and a life of its own
(which this book unfortunately must scant). Sensuality, promise, terror,
sublimity, idyllic pleasure, intense energy: the Orient as a figure in
the pre-Romantic, pretechnical Orientalist imagination of
late-eighteenth-century Europe was really a chameleonlike quality called
(adjectivally) "Oriental."8 But this free-floating Orient would be
severely curtailed with the advent of academic Orientalism.

A fourth element preparing the way for modern Orientalist structures was
the whole impulse to classify nature and man into types. The greatest
names are, of course, Linnaeus and Buffon, but the intellectual process
by which bodily (and soon moral, intellectual, and spiritual)
extension-the typical materiality of an object-could be transformed from
mere spectacle to the precise measurement of characteristic elements was
very widespread. Linnaeus said that every note made about a natural type
"should be a product of number, of form, of proportion, of situation,"
and indeed, if one looks in Kant or Diderot or Johnson, there is
everywhere a similar penchant for dramatizing general features, for
reducing vast numbers of objects to a smaller number of orderable and
describable*types.* In natural history, in anthropology, in cultural
generalization, a type had a particular*character* which provided the
observer with a designation and, as Foucault says, "a controlled
derivation." These types and characters belonged to a system, a network
of related generalizations. Thus,

all designation must be accomplished by means of a certain relation to
all other possible designations. To know what properly appertains to one
individual is to have before one the classification-or the possibility
of classifying-all others.9

In the writing of philosophers, historians, encyclopedists, and
essayists we find character-as-designation appearing as
physiologicalmoral classification: there are, for example, the wild men,
the Europeans, the Asiatics, and so forth. These appear of course in
Linnaeus, but also in Montesquieu, in Johnson, in Blumenbach, in
Soemmerring, in Kant. Physiological and moral characteristics are
distributed more or less equally: the American is "red, choleric,
erect," the Asiatic is "yellow, melancholy, rigid," the African is
"black, phlegmatic, lax."10 But such designations gather power when,
later in the nineteenth century, they are allied with character as
derivation, as genetic type. In Vico and Rousseau, for example, the
force of moral generalization is enhanced by the precision with which
dramatic, almost archetypal figures-primitive man, giants, heroes-are
shown to be the genesis of current moral, philosophic, even linguistic
issues. Thus when an Oriental was referred to, it was in terms of such
genetic universals as his "primitive" state, his primary
characteristics, his particular spiritual background.

The four elements I have described--expansion, historical confrontation,
sympathy, classification-are the currents in eighteenth century thought
on whose presence the specific intellectual and institutional structures
of modern Orientalism depend. Without them Orientalism, as we shall see
presently, could not have occurred. Moreover, these elements had the
effect of releasing the Orient generally, and Islam in particular, from
the narrowly religious scrutiny by which it had hitherto been examined
(and judged) by the Christian West. In other words, modern Orientalism
derives from secularizing elements in eighteenth-century European
culture. One, the expansion of the Orient further east geographically
and further back temporally loosened, even dissolved, the Biblical
framework considerably. Reference points were no longer Christianity and
Judaism, with their fairly modest calendars and maps, but India, China,
Japan, and Sumer, Buddhism, Sanskrit, Zoroastrianism, and Manu. Two, the
capacity for dealing historically (and not reductively, as a topic of
ecclesiastical politics) with non-European and non-Judeo-Christian
cultures was strengthened as history itself was conceived of more
radically than before; to understand Europe properly meant also
understanding the objective relations between Europe and its own
previously unreachable temporal and cultural frontiers. In a sense, John
of Segovia's idea of*contraferentia* between Orient and Europe was
realized, but in a wholly secular way; Gibbon could treat Mohammed as a
historical figure who influenced Europe and not as a diabolical
miscreant hovering somewhere between magic and false prophecy. Three, a
selective identification with regions and cultures not one's own wore
down the obduracy of self and identity, which had been polarized into a
community of embattled believers facing barbarian hordes. The borders of
Christian Europe no longer served as a kind of custom house; the notions
of human association and of human possibility acquired a very wide
general-as opposed to parochial-legitimacy. Four, the classifications of
mankind were systematically multiplied as the possibilities of
designation and derivation were refined beyond the categories of what
Vico called gentile and sacred nations; race, color, origin,
temperament, character, and types overwhelmed the distinction between
Christians and everyone else.

But if these interconnected elements represent a secularizing tendency,
this is not to say that the old religious patterns of human history and
destiny and "the existential paradigms" were simply removed. Far from
it: they were reconstituted, redeployed, redistributed in the secular
frameworks just enumerated. For anyone who studied the Orient a secular
vocabulary in keeping with these frameworks was required. Yet if
Orientalism provided the vocabulary, the conceptual repertoire, the
techniques-for this is what, from the end of the eighteenth century on,
Orientalism did and what Orientalism was-it also retained, as an
undislodged current in its discourse, a reconstructed religious impulse,
a naturalized supernaturalism. What I shall try to show is that this
impulse in Orientalism resided in the Orientalist's conception of
himself, of the Orient, and of his discipline.

The modern Orientalist was, in his view, a hero rescuing the Orient from
the obscurity, alienation, and strangeness which he himself had properly
distinguished. His research reconstructed the Orient's lost languages,
mores, even mentalities, as Champollion reconstructed Egyptian
hieroglyphics out of the Rosetta Stone. The specific Orientalist
techniques-lexicography, grammar, translation, cultural
decoding-restored, fleshed out, reasserted the values both of an
ancient, classical Orient and of the traditional disciplines of
philology, history, rhetoric, and doctrinal polemic. But in the process,
the Orient and Orientalist disciplines changed dialectically, for they
could not survive in their original form. The Orient, even in the
"classic" form which the Orientalist usually studied, was modernized,
restored to the present; the traditional disciplines too were brought
into contemporary culture. Yet both bore the traces of power to have
resurrected, indeed created, the Orient, power that dwelt in the new,
scientifically advanced techniques of philology and of anthropological
generalization. In short, having transported the Orient into modernity,
the Orientalist could celebrate his method, and his position, as that of
a secular creator, a man who made new worlds as God had once made the
old. As for carrying on such methods and such positions beyond the
life-span of any individual Orientalist, there would be a secular
tradition of continuity, a lay order of disciplined methodologists,
whose brotherhood would be based, not on blood lineage, but upon a
common discourse, a praxis, a library, a set of received ideas, in
short, a doxology, common to everyone who entered the ranks. Flaubert
was prescient enough to see that in time the modern Orientalist would
become a copyist, like Bouvard and Pecuchet; but during the early days,
in the careers of Silvestre de Sacy and Ernest Renan, no such danger was
apparent.

My thesis is that the essential aspects of modern Orientalist theory and
praxis (from which present-day Orientalism derives) can be understood,
not as a sudden access of objective knowledge about the Orient, but as a
set of structures inherited from the past, secularized, redisposed, and
re-formed by such disciplines as philology, which in turn were
naturalized, modernized, and laicized substitutes for (or versions of)
Christian supernaturalism. In the form of new texts and ideas, the East
was accommodated to these structures. Linguists and explorers like Jones
and Anquetil were contributors to modern Orientalism, certainly, but
what distinguishes modern Orientalism as a field, a group of ideas, a
discourse, is the work of a later generation than theirs. If we use the
Napoleonic expedition (1798-1801) as a sort of first enabling experience
for modern Orientalism, we can consider its inaugural heroes-in Islamic
studies, Sacy and Renan and Lane-to be builders of the field, creators
of a tradition, progenitors of the Orientalist brotherhood. What Sacy,
Renan, and Lane did was to place Orientalism on a scientific and
rational basis. This entailed not only their own exemplary work but also
the creation of a vocabulary and ideas that could be used impersonally
by anyone who wished to become an Orientalist. Their inauguration of
Orientalism was a considerable feat. It made possible a scientific
terminology; it banished obscurity and instated a special form of
illumination for the Orient; it established the figure of the
Orientalist as central authority*for* the Orient; it legitimized a
special kind of specifically coherent Orientalist work; it put into
cultural circulation a form of discursive currency by whose presence the
Orient henceforth would be*spoken for;* above all, the work of the
inaugurators carved out a field of study and a family of ideas which in
turn could form a community of scholars whose lineage, traditions, and
ambitions were at once internal to the field and external enough for
general prestige. The more Europe encroached upon the Orient during the
nineteenth century, the more Orientalism gained in public confidence.
Yet if this gain coincided with a loss in originality, we should not be
entirely surprised, since its mode, from the beginning, was
reconstruction and repetition.

One final observation: The late-eighteenth-century and
nineteenth-century ideas, institutions, and figures I shall deal with in
this chapter are an important part, a crucial elaboration, of the first
phase of the greatest age of territorial acquisition ever known. By the
end of World War I Europe had colonized 85 percent of the earth. To say
simply that modern Orientalism has been an aspect of both imperialism
and colonialism is not to say anything very disputable. Yet it is not
enough to say it; it needs to be worked through analytically and
historically. I am interested in showing how modern Orientalism, unlike
the precolonial awareness of Dante and d'Herbelot, embodies a systematic
discipline of accumulation.And far from this being exclusively an
intellectual or theoretical feature, it made Orientalism fatally tend
towards the systematic accumulation of human beings and territories. To
reconstruct a dead or lost Oriental language meant ultimately to
reconstruct a dead or neglected Orient; it also meant that
reconstructive precision, science, even imagination could prepare the
way for what armies, administrations, and bureaucracies would later do
on the ground, in the Orient. In a sense, the vindication of Orientalism
was not only its intellectual or artistic successes but its later
effectiveness, its usefulness, its authority. Surely it deserves serious
attention on all those counts.

II- Silvestre de Sacy and Ernest Renan: Rational Anthropology and Philological Laboratory
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The two great themes of Silvestre de Sacy's life are heroic effort and a
dedicated sense of pedagogic and rational utility.Born in 1757 into a
Jansenist family whose occupation was traditionally that of notaire,
Antoine-Isaac-Silvestre was privately tutored at a Benedictine abbey,
first in Arabic, Syriac, and Chaldean, then in Hebrew. Arabic in
particular was the language that opened the Orient to him since it was
in Arabic, according to Joseph Reinaud, that Oriental material, both
sacred and profane, was then to be found in its oldest and most
instructive form.11 Although a legitimist, in 1769 he was appointed the
first teacher of Arabic at the newly created school of*langues
orientales vivantes,* of which he became director in 1824. In 1806 he
was named professor at the College de France, although from 1805 on he
was the resident Orientalist at the French Foreign Ministry. There his
work (unpaid until 1811) at first was to translate the bulletins of the
Grande Armee and Napoleon's*Manifesto* of 1806, in which it was hoped
that "Muslim fanaticism" could be excited against Russian Orthodoxy. But
for many years thereafter Sacy created interpreters for the French
Oriental dragomanate, as well as future scholars. When the French
occupied Algiers in 1830, it was Sacy who translated the proclamation to
the Algerians; he was regularly consulted on all diplomatic matters
relating to the Orient by the foreign minister, and on occasion by the
minister of war. At the age of seventy-five he replaced Dacier as
secretary of the Academie des Inscriptions, and also became curator of
Oriental manuscripts at the Bibliotheque royale. Throughout his long and
distinguished career his name was rightly associated with the
restructuring and re-forming of education (particularly in Oriental
studies) in post-Revolutionary France.12  With Cuvier, Sacy in 1832 was
made a new peer of France.

It was not only because he was the first president of the Societe
asiatique (founded in 1822) that Sacy's name is associated with the
beginning of modern Orientalism; it is because his work virtually put
before the profession an entire systematic body of texts, a pedagogic
practice, a scholarly tradition, and an important link between Oriental
scholarship and public policy. In Sacy's work, for the first time in
Europe since the Council of Vienne, there was a self-conscious
methodological principle at work as a coeval with scholarly discipline.
No less important, Sacy always felt himself to be a man standing at the
beginning of an important revisionist project. He was a self-aware
inaugurator, and more to the point of our general thesis, he acted in
his writing like a secularized ecclesiastic for whom his Orient and his
students were doctrine and parishioners respectively. The Duc de
Broglie, an admiring contemporary, said of Sacy's work that it
reconciled the manner of a scientist with that of a Biblical teacher,
and that Sacy was the one man able to reconcile "the goals of Leibniz
with the efforts of Bossuet."13 Consequently everything he wrote was
addressed specifically to students (in the case of his first work,
his*Principes de grammaire générale* of 1799, the student was his own
son) and presented, not as a novelty, but as a revised extract of the
best that had already been done, said, or written.

These two characteristics-the didactic presentation to students and the
avowed intention of repeating by revision and extract-are crucial.
Sacy's writing always conveys the tone of a voice speaking; his prose is
dotted with first-person pronouns, with personal qualifications, with
rhetorical presence. Even at his most recondite-as in a scholarly note
on third-century Sassanid numismatics-one senses not so much a pen
writing as a voice pronouncing. The keynote of his work is contained in
the opening lines of the dedication to his son of the*Principes de
grammaire générale:* "C'est à toi, mon cher Fils, que ce petit ouvrage a
été entrepris"-which is to say, I am writing (or speaking) to you
because you need to know these things, and since they don't exist in any
serviceable form, I have done the work myself for you. Direct address:
utility: effort: immediate and beneficent rationality. For Sacy believed
that everything could be made clear and reasonable, no matter how
difficult the task and how obscure the subject. Here are Bossuet's
sternness and Leibniz's abstract humanism, as well as the*tone* of
Rousseau, all together in the same style.

The effect of Sacy's tone is to form a circle sealing off him and his
audience from the world at large, the way a teacher and his pupils
together in a closed classroom also form a sealed space. Unlike the
matter of physics, philosophy, or classical literature, the matter of
Oriental studies is arcane; it is of import to people who already have
an interest in the Orient but want to know the Orient better, in a more
orderly way, and here the pedagogical discipline is more effective than
it is attractive. The didactic speaker, therefore,*displays* his
material to the disciples, whose role it is to receive what is given to
them in the form of carefully selected and arranged topics. Since the
Orient is old and distant, the teacher's display is a restoration, a
re-vision of what has disappeared from the wider ken. And since also the
vastly rich (in space, time, and cultures) Orient cannot be totally
exposed, only its most representative parts need be. Thus Sacy's focus
is the anthology, the chrestomathy, the tableau, the survey of general
principles, in which a relatively small set of powerful examples
delivers the Orient to the student. Such examples are powerful for two
reasons: one, because they reflect Sacy's powers as a Western authority
deliberately taking from the Orient what its distance and eccentricity
have hitherto kept hidden, and two, because these examples have the
semiotical power in them (or imparted to them by the Orientalist) to
signify the Orient.

All of Sacy's work is essentially compilatory; it is thus ceremoniously
didactic and painstakingly revisionist. Aside from the*Principes de*
grammaire générale, he produced a*Chrestomathie arabe in* three volumes
(1806 and 1827 ), an anthology of Arab grammatical writing (1825), an
Arabic grammar of 1810 (d*l'usage des élèves de l'Ecole spéciale),*
treatises on Arabic prosody and the Druze religion, and numerous short
works on Oriental numismatics, onomastics, epigraphy, geography,
history, and weights and measures. He did a fair number of translations
and two extended commentaries on*Calila and Dumna* and the*Maqamat of*
al-Hariri. As editor, memorialist, and historian of modem learning Sacy
was similarly energetic. There was very little of note in other related
disciplines with which he was not au*courant,* although his own writing
was single-minded and, in its non-Orientalist respects, of a narrow
positivist range.

Yet when in 1802 the Institut de France was commissioned by Napoleon to
form a*tableau générale on* the state and progress of the arts and
sciences since 1789, Sacy was chosen to be one of the team of writers:
he was the most rigorous of specialists and the most historical-minded
of generalists. Dacier's report, as it was known informally, embodied
many of Sacy's predilections as well as containing his contributions on
the state of Oriental learning. Its title*-Tableau historique de*
l'érudition française-announces the new historical (as opposed to
sacred) consciousness. Such consciousness is dramatic: learning can be
arranged on a stage set, as it were, where its totality can be readily
surveyed. Addressed to the king, Dacier's preface stated the theme
perfectly. Such a survey as this made it possible to do something no
other sovereign had attempted, namely to take in, with one coup*d'oeil,
the* whole of human knowledge. Had such a*tableau historique been*
undertaken in former times, Dacier continued, we might today have
possessed many masterpieces now either lost or destroyed; the interest
and utility of the tableau were that it preserved knowledge and made it
immediately accessible. Dacier intimated that such a task was simplified
by Napoleon's Oriental expedition, one of whose results was to heighten
the degree of modern geographical knowledge.14

(At no point more than in Dacier's entire discours do we see how the
dramatic form of a*tableau historique* has its use-equivalent in the
arcades and counters of a modern department store.)

The importance of the*Tableau historique* for an understanding of
Orientalism's inaugural phase is that it exteriorizes the form of
Orientalist knowledge. and its features, as it also describes the
Orientalist's relationship to his subject matter. In Sacy's pages on
Orientalism-as elsewhere in his writing-he speaks of his own work as
having*uncovered, brought to light, rescued* a vast amount of obscure
matter. Why? In order*to place it before* the student. For like all his
learned contemporaries Sacy considered a learned work a positive
addition to an edifice that all scholars erected together. Knowledge was
essentially the*making visible of* material, and the aim of a tableau
was the construction of a sort of Benthamite Panopticon. Scholarly
discipline was therefore a specific technology of power: it gained for
its user (and his students) tools and knowledge which (if he was a
historian) had hitherto been lost.15 And indeed the vocabulary of
specialized power and acquisition is particularly associated with Sacy's
reputation as a pioneer Orientalist. His heroism as a scholar was to
have dealt successfully with insurmountable difficulties; he acquired
the means to present a field to his students where there was none.
He*made* the books, the precepts, the examples, said the Duc de Broglie
of Sacy. The result was the production of material about the Orient,
methods for studying it, and exempla that even Orientals did not have.16

Compared with the labors of a Hellenist or a Latinist working on the
Institut team, Sacy's labors were awesome. They had the texts, the
conventions, the schools; he did not, and consequently had to go about
making them. The dynamic of primary loss and subsequent gain in Sacy's
writing is obsessional; his investment in it was truly heavy. Like his
colleagues in other fields he believed that knowledge is
seeing-pan-optically, so to speak-but unlike them he not only had to
identify the knowledge, he had to decipher it, interpret it, and most
difficult, make it available. Sacy's achievement was to have produced a
whole field. As a European he ransacked the Oriental archives, and he
could do so without leaving France. What texts he isolated, he then
brought back; he doctored them; then he annotated, codified, arranged,
and commented on them. In time, the Orient as such became less important
than what the Orientalist made of it; thus, drawn by Sacy into the
sealed discursive place of a pedagogical tableau, the Orientalist's
Orient was thereafter reluctant to emerge into reality.

Sacy was much too intelligent to let his views and his practice stand
without supporting argument. First of all, he always made it plain why
the "Orient" on its own could not survive a European's taste,
intelligence, or patience. Sacy defended the utility and interest of
such things as Arabic poetry, but what he was really saying was that
Arabic poetry had to be properly transformed by the Orientalist before
it could begin to be appreciated. The reasons were broadly
epistemological, but they also contained an Orientalistic
self-justification. Arabic poetry was produced by a completely strange
(to Europeans) people, under hugely different climatic, social, and
historical conditions from those a European knows; in addition, such
poetry as this was nourished by "opinions, prejudices, beliefs,
superstitions which we can acquire only after long and painful study."
Even if one does go through the rigors of specialized training, much of
the description in the poetry will not be accessible to Europeans "who
have attained to a higher degree of civilization." Yet what we can
master is of great value to us as Europeans accustomed to disguise our
exterior attributes, our bodily activity, and our relationship to
nature. Therefore, the Orientalist's use is to make available to his
compatriots a considerable range of unusual experience, and still more
valuable, a kind of literature capable of helping us understand the
"truly divine" poetry of the Hebrews.17

So if the Orientalist is necessary because he fishes some useful gems
out of the distant Oriental deep, and since the Orient cannot be known
without his mediation, it is also true that Oriental writing itself
ought not to be taken in whole. This is Sacy's introduction to his
theory of fragments, a common Romantic concern. Not only are Oriental
literary productions essentially alien to the European; they also do not
contain a sustained enough interest, nor are they written with enough
"taste and critical spirit," to merit publication except as
extracts*(pour meriter d'être publies autrement que par extrait).* 18
Therefore the Orientalist is required to*present* the Orient by a series
of representative fragments, fragments republished, explicated,
annotated, and surrounded with still more fragments. For such a
presentation a special genre is required: the chrestomathy, which is
where in Sacy's case the usefulness and interest of Orientalism are most
directly and profitably displayed. Sacy's most famous production was the
three-volume*Chrestomathie arabe,* which was sealed at the outset, so to
speak, with an internally rhyming Arabic couplet: "Kitab al-anis
al-mufid lil-Taleb al-mustafid;/wa gam'i al shathur min manthoum wa
manthur" (A book pleasant and profitable for the studious pupil;/it
collects fragments of both poetry and prose).

Sacy's anthologies were used very widely in Europe for several
generations. Although what they contain was claimed as typical, they
submerge and cover the censorship of the Orient exercised by the
Orientalist. Moreover, the internal order of their contents, the
arrangement of their parts, the choice of fragments, never reveal their
secret; one has the impression that if fragments were not chosen for
their importance, or for their chronological development, or for their
aesthetic beauty (as Sacy's were not), they must nevertheless embody a
certain Oriental naturalness, or typical inevitability. But this too is
never said. Sacy claims simply to have exerted himself on behalf of his
students, to make it unnecessary for them to purchase (or read) a
grotesquely large library of Oriental stuff. In time, the reader forgets
the Orientalist's effort and takes the restructuring of the Orient
signified by a chrestomathy as the Orient tout court. Objective
structure (designation of Orient) and subjective restructure
(representation of Orient by Orientalist) become interchangeable. The
Orient is overlaid with the Orientalist's rationality; its principles
become his. From being distant, it becomes available; from being
unsustainable on its own, it becomes pedagogically useful; from being
lost, it is found, even if its missing parts have been made to drop away
from it in the process. Sacy's anthologies not only supplement the
Orient; they supply it as Oriental presence to the West.19 Sacy's work
canonizes the Orient; it begets a canon of textual objects passed on
from one generation of students to the next.

And the living legacy of Sacy's disciples was astounding. Every major
Arabist in Europe during the nineteenth century traced his intellectual
authority back to him. Universities and academies in France, Spain,
Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and especially Germany were dotted with the
students who formed themselves at his feet and through the anthological
tableaux provided by his work.20 As with all intellectual patrimonies,
however, enrichments and restrictions were passed on simultaneously.
Sacy's genealogical originality was to have treated the Orient as
something to be restored not only because of but also despite the modern
Orient's disorderly and elusive presence. Sacy*placed* the Arabs in the
Orient, which was itself placed in the general tableau of modern
learning. Orientalism belonged therefore to European scholarship, but
its material had to be re-created by the Orientalist before it could
enter the arcades alongside Latinism and Hellenism. Each Orientalist
re-created his own Orient according to the fundamental epistemological
rules of loss and gain first supplied and enacted by Sacy. Just as he
was the father of Orientalism, he was also the discipline's first
sacrifice, for in translating new texts, fragments, and extracts
subsequent Orientalists entirely displaced Sacy's work by supplying
their own restored Orient. Nevertheless the process he started would
continue, as philology in particular developed systematic and
institutional powers Sacy had never exploited. This was Renan's
accomplishment: to have associated the Orient with the most recent
comparative disciplines, of which philology was one of the most eminent.

The difference between Sacy and Renan is the difference between
inauguration and continuity. Sacy is the originator, whose work
represents the field's emergence and its status as a nineteenth-century
discipline with roots in revolutionary Romanticism. Renan derives from
Orientalism's second generation: it was his task to solidify the
official discourse of Orientalism, to systematize its insights, and to
establish its intellectual and worldly institutions. For Sacy, it was
his personal efforts that launched and vitalized the field and its
structures; for Renan, it was his adaptation of Orientalism to philology
and both of them to the intellectual culture of his time that
perpetuated the Orientalist structures intellectually and gave them
greater visibility.

Renan was a figure in his own right neither of total originality nor of
absolute derivativeness. Therefore as a cultural force or as an
important Orientalist he cannot be reduced simply to his personality nor
to a set of schematic ideas in which he believed. Rather, Renan is best
grasped as a dynamic force whose opportunities were already created for
him by pioneers like Sacy, yet who brought their achievements into the
culture as a kind of currency which he circulated and recirculated with
(to force the image a little further) his own unmistakable re-currency.
Renan is a figure who must be grasped, in short, as a type of cultural
and intellectual praxis, as a style for making Orientalist statements
within what Michel Foucault would call the archive of his time.21 What
matters is not only the things that Renan said but also how he said
them, what, given his background and training,-he chose to use as his
subject matter, what to combine with what, and so forth. Renan's
relations with his Oriental subject matter, with his time and audience,
even with his own work, can be described, then, without resorting to
formulae that depend on an unexamined assumption of ontological
stability (e.g., the*Zeitgeist,* the history of ideas, life-and-times).
Instead we are able to read Renan as a writer doing something
describable, in a place defined temporally, spatially, and culturally
(hence archivally), for an audience and, no less important, for the
furtherance of his own position in the Orientalism of his era.

Renan came to Orientalism from philology, and it is the extraordinarily
rich and celebrated cultural position of that discipline that endowed
Orientalism with its most important technical characteristics. For
anyone to whom the word*philology* suggests dry-as-dust and
inconsequential word-study, however, Nietzsche's proclamation that along
with the greatest minds of the nineteenth century he is a philologist
will come as a surprise-though not if Balzac's*Louis Lambert is*
recalled:

What a marvelous book one would write by narrating the life and
adventures of a word! Undoubtedly a word has received various
impressions of the events for which it was used; depending on the places
it was used, a word has awakened different kinds of impressions in
different people; but is it not more grand still to consider a word in
its triple aspect of soul, body, and movement?22

What is the category, Nietzsche will ask later, that includes himself,
Wagner, Schopenhauer, Leopardi, all as philologists? The term seems to
include both a gift for exceptional spiritual insight into language and
the ability to produce work whose articulation is of aesthetic and
historical power.Although the profession of philology was born the day
in 1777 "when F. A. Wolf invented for himself the name of*stud.
philol.,"* Nietzsche is nevertheless at pains to show that professional
students of the Greek and Roman classics are commonly incapable of
understanding their discipline: "they never reach the*roots of the
matter:* they never adduce philology as a problem." For simply "as
knowledge of the ancient world philology cannot, of course, last
forever; its material is exhaustible."23 It is this that the herd of
philologists cannot understand. But what distinguishes the few
exceptional spirits whom Nietzsche deems worthy of praise-not
unambiguously, and not in the cursory way that I am now describing-is
their profound relation to modernity, a relation that is given them by
their practice of philology.

Philology problematizes-itself,its practitioner, the present. It
embodies a peculiar condition of being modern and European, since
neither of those two categories has true meaning without being related
to an earlier alien culture and time. What Nietzsche also sees is
philology as something born,*made* in the Viconian sense as a sign of
human enterprise, created as a category of human discovery,
self-discovery, and originality. Philology is a way of historically
setting oneself off, as great artists do, from one's time and an
immediate past even as, paradoxically and antinomically, one actually
characterizes one's modernity by so doing.

Between the Friedrich August Wolf of 1777 and the Friedrich Nietzsche of
1875 there is Ernest Renan, an Oriental philologist, also a man with a
complex and interesting sense of the way philology and modern culture
are involved in each other. In*L'Avenir de la science* (written in 1848
but not published till 1890) he wrote that "the founders of modern mind
are philologists." And what is modern mind, he said in the preceding
sentence, if not "rationalism, criticism, liberalism, [all of which]
were founded on the same day as philology?" Philology, he goes on to
say, is both a comparative discipline possessed only by moderns and a
symbol of modern (and European) superiority; every advance made by
humanity since the fifteenth century can b0 attributed to minds we
should call philological. The job of philology in modern culture (a
culture Renan calls philological) is to continue to see reality and
nature clearly, thus driving out supernaturalism, and to continue to
keep pace with discoveries in the physical sciences. But more than all
this, philology enables a general view of human life and of the system
of things: "Me, being there at the center, inhaling the perfume of
everything, judging, comparing, combining, inducing-in this way I shall
arrive at the very system of things." There is an unmistakable aura of
power about the philologist. And Renan makes his point about philology
and the natural sciences:

To do philosophy is to know things; following Cuvier's nice phrase,
philosophy*is instructing the world in theory.* Like Kant I believe that
every purely speculative demonstration has no more validity than a
mathematical demonstration, and can teach us nothing about existing
reality. Philology is the*exact science* of mental objects*[La
philologie est la science exacte des choses de* l'esprit]. It is to the
sciences of humanity what physics and chemistry are to the philosophic
sciences of bodies.24

I shall return to Renan's citation from Cuvier, as well as to the
constant references to natural science, a little later. For the time
being, we should remark that the whole middle section of*L'Avenir de la
science is* taken up with Renan's admiring accounts of philology, a
science he depicts as being at once the most difficult of all human
endeavors to characterize and the most precise of all disciplines. In
the aspirations of philology to a veritable science of humanity, Renan
associates himself explicitly with Vico, Herder, Wolf, and Montesquieu
as well as with such philological near- contemporaries as Wilhelm von
Humboldt, Bopp, and the great Orientalist Eugene Burnouf (to whom the
volume is dedicated). Renan locates philology centrally within what he
everywhere refers to as the march of knowledge, and indeed the book
itself is a manifesto of humanistic meliorism, which, considering its
subtitle ("Pensées de 1848") and other books of 1848 like*Bouvard et
Pécuchet* and*The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, is* no mean
irony. In a sense, then, the manifesto generally and Renan's accounts of
philology particularly-he had by then already written the massive
philological treatise on Semitic languages that had earned him the Prix
Volney-were designed to place Renan as an intellectual in a clearly
perceptible relationship to the great social issues raised by 1848. That
he should choose to fashion such a relationship on the basis of
the*least* immediate of all intellectual disciplines (philology), the
one with the least degree of apparent*popular* relevance, the most
conservative and the most traditional, suggests the extreme
deliberateness of Renan's position. For he did not really speak as one
man to all men but rather as a reflective, specialized voice that took,
as he put it in the 1890 preface, the inequality of races and the
necessary domination of the many by the few for granted as an
antidemocratic law of nature and society.25

But how was it possible for Renan to hold himself and what he was saying
in such a paradoxical position? For what was philology on the one hand
if not a science of all humanity, a science premised on the unity of the
human species and the worth of every human detail, and yet what was the
philologist on the other hand if notas Renan himself proved with his
notorious race prejudice against the very Oriental Semites whose study
had made his professional name26 --a harsh divider of men into superior
and inferior races, a liberal critic whose work harbored the most
esoteric notions of temporality, origins, development, relationship, and
human worth? Part of the answer to this question is that, as his early
letters of philological intent to Victor Cousin, Michelet, and Alexander
von Humboldt show,27 Renan had a strong guild sense as a professional
scholar, a professional Orientalist, in fact, a sense that put distance
between himself and the masses. But more important, I think, is Renan's
own conception of his role as an Oriental philologist within philology's
larger history, development, and objectives as he saw them. In other
words, what may to us seem like paradox was the expected result of how
Renan perceived his dynastic position within philology, its history and
inaugural discoveries, and what he, Renan, did within it. Therefore
Renan should be characterized, not as speaking about philology, but
rather as*speaking* philologically with all the force of an initiate
using the encoded language of a new prestigious science none of whose
pronouncements about language itself could be construed either directly
or naively.

As Renan understood, received, and was instructed in philology, the
discipline imposed a set of doxological rules upon him. To be a
philologist meant to be governed in one's activity first of all by a set
of recent revaluative discoveries that effectively began the science of
philology and gave it a distinctive epistemology of its own: I am
speaking here of the period roughly from the 1780s to the mid-1830s, the
latter part of which coincides with the period of Renan's beginning his
education. His memoirs record how the crisis of religious faith that
culminated in the loss of that faith led him in 1845 into a life of
scholarship: this was his initiation into philology, its world-view,
crises, and style. He believed that on a personal level his life
reflected the institutional life of philology. In his life, however, he
determined to be as Christian as he once was, only now without
Christianity and with what he called "la science laique" (lay
science).28

The best example of what a lay science could and could not do was
provided years later by Renan in a lecture given at the Sorbonne in
1878, "On the Services Rendered by Philology to the Historical
Sciences." What is revealing about this text is the way Renan clearly
had religion in mind when he spoke about philology-for example, what
philology, like religion, teaches us about the origins of humanity,
civilization, and language-only to make it evident to his hearers that
philology could deliver a far less coherent, less knitted together and
positive message than religion.29 Since Renan was irremediably
historical and, as he once put it, morphological in his outlook, it
stood to reason that the only way in which, as a very young man, he
could move out of religion into philological scholarship was to retain
in the new lay science the historical world-view he had gained from
religion. Hence, "one occupation alone seemed to me to be worthy of
filling my life; and that was to pursue my critical research into
Christianity [an allusion to Renan's major scholarly project on the
history and origins of Christianity] using those far ampler means
offered me by lay science."30 Renan had assimilated himself to philology
according to his own post Christian fashion.

The difference between the history offered internally by Christianity
and the history offered by philology, a relatively new discipline, is
precisely what made modern philology possible, and this Renan knew
perfectly. For whenever "philology" is spoken of around the end of the
eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth, we are to
understand the*new* philology, whose major successes include comparative
grammar, the reclassification of languages into families, and the final
rejection of the divine origins of language. It is no exaggeration to
say that these accomplishments were a more or less direct consequence of
the view that held language to be an entirely human phenomenon. And this
view became current once it was discovered empirically that the
so-called sacred languages (Hebrew, primarily) were neither of
primordial antiquity nor of divine provenance. What Foucault has called
the discovery of language was therefore a secular event that displaced a
religious conception of how God delivered language to man in Eden.31
Indeed, one of the consequences of this change, by which, an
etymological, dynastic notion of linguistic filiation was pushed aside
by the view of language as a domain all of its own held together with
jagged internal structures and coherences, is the dramatic subsidence of
interest in the problem of the origins of language. Whereas in the
1770s, which is when Herder's essay on the origins of language wont the
1772 medal from the Berlin Academy, it was all the rage to discuss that
problem, by the first decade of the new century it was all but banned as
a topic for learned dispute in Europe.

On all sides, and in many different ways, what William Jones stated in
his*Anniversary Discourses* (1785-1792), or what Franz Bopp put forward
in his*Vergleichende Grammatik* (1832), is that the divine dynasty of
language was ruptured definitively and discredited as an idea. A new
historical conception, in short, was needed, since Christianity seemed
unable to survive the empirical evidence that reduced the divine status
of its major text. For some, as Chateaubriand put it, faith was
unshakable despite new knowledge of how Sanskrit outdated Hebrew:
"Hélas! il est arrivé qu'une connaissance plus approfondie de la langue
savante de l'Inde a fait rentrer ces siècles innombrables dans le cercle
ètroit de la Bible.Bien m'en a pris d'etre redevenue croyant, avant
d'avoir éprouvé cette mortification."32 (Alas! it has happened that a
deeper knowledge of the learned language of India has forced innumerable
centuries into the narrow circle of the Bible. How lucky for me that I
have become a believer again before having had to experience this
mortification.) For others, especially philologists like the pioneering
Bopp himself, the study of language entailed its own history,
philosophy, and learning, all of which did away with any notion of a
primal language given by the Godhead to man in Eden. As the study of
Sanskrit and the expansive mood of the later eighteenth century seemed
to have moved the earliest beginnings of civilization very far east of
the Biblical lands, so too language became less of a continuity between
an outside power and the human speaker than an internal field created
and accomplished by language users among themselves. There was no first
language, just as---except by a method I shall discuss presently-there
was no simple language.

The legacy of these first-generation philologists was, to Renan, of the
highest importance, higher even than the work done by Sacy. Whenever he
discussed language and philology, whether at the beginning, middle, or
end of his long career, he repeated the lessons of the new philology, of
which the antidynastic, anticontinuous tenets of a technical (as opposed
to a divine) linguistic practice are the major pillar. For the linguist,
language cannot be pictured as the result of force emanating
unilaterally from God. As Coleridge put it, "Language is the armory of
the human mind; and at once contains the trophies of its past and the
weapons of its future conquests."33 The idea of a first Edenic language
gives way to the heuristic notion of a protolanguage (Indo-European,
Semitic) whose existence is never a subject of debate, since it is
acknowledged that such a language cannot be recaptured but can only be
reconstituted in the philological process. To the extent that one
language serves, again heuristically, as a touchstone for all the
others, it is Sanskrit in its earliest Indo-European form. The
terminology has also shifted: there are now*families* of languages (the
analogy with species and anatomical classifications is marked), there
is*perfect* linguistic form, which need not correspond to any "real"
language, and there are original languages only as a function of the
philological discourse, not because of nature.

But some writers shrewdly commented on how it was that Sanskrit and
things Indian in general simply took the place of Hebrew and the Edenic
fallacy. As early as 1804 Benjamin Constant noted in his*Journal intime*
that he was not about to discuss India in his*De la religion* because
the English who owned the place and the Germans who studied it
indefatigably had made India the*tons et origo* of everything; and then
there were the French who had decided after Napoleon and Champollion
that everything originated in Egypt and the new Orient.34 These
teleological enthusiasms were fueled after 1808 by Friedrich Schlegel's
celebrated Ü*ber die Sprache and Weisheit der Indier,* which seemed to
confirm his own pronouncement made in 1800 about the Orient being the
purest form of Romanticism.

What Renan's generation-educated from the mid-1830s to the late
1840s-retained from all this enthusiasm about the Orient was the
intellectual necessity of the Orient for the Occidental scholar of
languages, cultures, and religions.Here the key text was Edgar
Quinet's*Le Génie des religions* (1832), a work that announced the
Oriental Renaissance and placed the Orient and the West in a functional
relationship with each other. I have already referred to the vast
meaning of this relationship as analyzed comprehensively by Raymond
Schwab in*La Renaissance orientale;* my concern with it here is only to
note specific aspects of it that bear upon Renan's vocation as a
philologist and as an Orientalist. Quinet's association with Michelet,
their interest in Herder and Vico, respectively, impressed on them the
need for the scholar-historian to confront, almost in the manner of an
audience seeing a dramatic event unfold, or a believer witnessing a
revelation, the different, the strange, the distant. Quinet's
formulation was that the Orient proposes and the West disposes: Asia has
its prophets, Europe its doctors (its learned men, its scientists: the
pun is intended). Out of this encounter, a new dogma or god is born, but
Quinet's point is that both East and West fulfill their destinies and
confirm their identities in the encounter. As a scholarly attitude the
picture of a learned Westerner surveying as if from a peculiarly suited
vantage point the passive, seminal, feminine, even silent and supine
East, then going on to*articulate* the East, making the Orient deliver
up its secrets under the learned authority of a philologist whose power
derives from the ability to unlock secret, esoteric languages-this would
persist in Renan. What did not persist in Renan during the 1840s, when
he served his apprenticeship as a philologist, was the dramatic
attitude: that was replaced by the scientific attitude.

For Quinet and Michelet, history was a drama. Quinet suggestively
describes the whole world as a temple and human history as a sort of
religious rite. Both Michelet and Quinet saw the world they discussed.
The origin of-human history was something they could describe in the
same splendid and impassioned and dramatic terms used by Vico and
Rousseau to portray life on earth in primitive times. For Michelet and
Quinet there is no doubt that they belong to the communal European
Romantic undertaking "either in epic or some other major genre-in drama,
in prose romance, or in the visionary \`greater Ode'-radically to recast
into terms appropriate to the historical and intellectual circumstances
of their own age, the Christian pattern of the fall, the redemption, and
the emergence of a new earth which will constitute a restored
paradise."35 I think that for Quinet the idea of a new god being born
was tantamount to the filling of the place left by the old god; for
Renan, however, being a philologist meant the severance of any and all
connections with the old Christian god, so that instead a new
doctrine-probably science would stand free and in a new place, as it
were. Renan's whole career was devoted to the fleshing out of this
progress.

He put it very plainly at the end of his undistinguished essay on the
origins of language: man is no longer an inventor, and the age of
creation is definitely over.36 There was a period, at which we can only
guess, when man was literally transported from silence into words. After
that there was language, and for the true scientist the task is to
examine how language is, not how it came about. Yet if Renan dispels the
passionate creation of primitive times (which had excited Herder, Vico,
Rousseau, even Quinet and Michelet) he instates a new, and deliberate,
type of artificial creation, one that is performed as a result of
scientific analysis. In his*leçon inaugurale* at the College de France
(February 21, 1862) Renan proclaimed his lectures open to the public so
that it might see at first hand  "le laboratoire même de la science
philologique" (the very laboratory of philological science).37 Any
reader of Renan would have understood that such a statement was meant
also to carry a typical if rather limp irony, one less intended to shock
than passively to delight.For Renan was succeeding to the chair of
Hebrew, and his lecture was on the contribution of the Semitic peoples
to the history of civilization. What more subtle affront could there be
to "sacred" history than the substitution of a philological laboratory
for divine intervention in history; and what more telling way was there
of declaring the Orient's contemporary relevance to be simply as
material for European investigation?38 Sacy's comparatively lifeless
fragments arranged in tableaux were now being replaced with something
new.

The stirring peroration with which Renan concluded his*leçon* had
another function than simply to connect Oriental-Semitic philology with
the future and with science. Ĕtienne Quatremère, who immediately
preceded Renan in the chair of Hebrew, was a scholar who seemed to
exemplify the popular caricature of what a scholar was like. A man of
prodigiously industrious and pedantic habits, he went about his work,
Renan said in a relatively unfeeling memorial minute for the*Journal des
débats* in October 1857, like a laborious worker who even in rendering
immense services nevertheless could not see the whole edifice being
constructed. The edifice was nothing less than "la science historique de
l'esprit humain," now in the process of being built stone by stone.39
Just as Quatremère was not of this age, so Renan in his work was
determined to be of it. Moreover, if the Orient had been hitherto
identified exclusively and indiscriminately with India and China,
Renan's ambition was to carve out a new Oriental province for himself,
in this case the Semitic Orient. He had no doubt remarked the casual,
and surely current, confusion of Arabic with Sanskrit (as in Balzac's*La
Peau de chagrin,* where the fateful talisman's Arabic script is
described as Sanskrit), and he made it his job accordingly to do for the
Semitic languages what Bopp had done for the Indo-European: so he said
in the 1855 preface to the comparative Semitic treatise.40 Therefore
Renan's plans were to bring the Semitic languages into sharp and
glamorous focus à*la* Bopp, and in addition to elevate the study of
these neglected inferior languages to the level of a passionate new
science of mind à*la* Louis Lambert.

On more than one occasion Renan was quite explicit in his assertions
that Semites and Semitic were*creations of* Orientalist philological
study.41 Since he was the man who did the study, there was meant to be
little ambiguity about the centrality of his role in this new,
artificial creation. But how did Renan mean the word*creation* in these
instances? And how was this creation connected with either natural
creation, or the creation ascribed by Renan and others to the laboratory
and to the classificatory and natural sciences, principally what was
called philosophical anatomy? Here we must speculate a little.
Throughout his career Renan seemed to imagine the role of science in
human life as (and I quote in translation as literally as I
can)*"telling* (speaking or articulating) definitively to man the word
[logos?] of things."42 Science gives speech to things; better yet,
science brings out, causes to be pronounced, a potential speech within
things. The special value of linguistics (as the new philology was then
often called) is not that natural science resembles it, but rather that
it treats words as natural, otherwise silent objects, which are made to
give up their secrets. Remember that the major breakthrough in the study
of inscriptions and hieroglyphs was the discovery by Champollion that
the symbols on the Rosetta Stone had a*phonetic* as well as a semantic
component.43 To make objects speak was like making words speak, giving
them circumstantial value, and a precise place in a rule-governed order
of regularity. In its first sense,*creation,* as Renan used the word,
signified the articulation by which an object like*Semitic* could be
seen as a creature of sorts. Second, creation also signified the
setting -in the case of Semitic it meant Oriental history, culture,
race, mind-illuminated and brought forward from its reticence by the
scientist. Finally, creation was the formulation of a system of
classification by which it was possible to see the object in question
comparatively with other like objects; and by "comparatively" Renan
intended a complex network of paradigmatic relations that obtained
between Semitic and Indo-European languages.

If in what I have so far said I have insisted so much on Renan's
comparatively forgotten study of Semitic languages, it has been for
several important reasons. Semitic was the scientific study to which
Renan turned right after the loss of his Christian faith; I described
above how he came to see the study of Semitic as replacing his faith and
enabling .a critical future relation with it. The study of Semitic was
Renan's first full-length Orientalist and scientific study (finished in
1847, published first in 1855), and was as much a part of his late major
works on the origins of Christianity and the history of the Jews as it
was a propaedeutic for them. In intention, if not perhaps in
achievement-interestingly, few of the standard or contemporary works in
either linguistic history or the history of Orientalism cite Renan with
anything more than cursory attention44   ---his Semitic opus was
proposed as a philological breakthrough, from which in later years he
was always to draw retrospective authority for his positions (almost
always bad ones) on religion, race, and nationalism.45 Whenever Renan
wished to make a statement about either the Jews or the Muslims, for
example, it was always with his remarkably harsh (and unfounded, except
according to the science he was practicing) strictures on the Semites in
mind. Furthermore, Renan's Semitic was meant as a contribution both to
the development of Indo-European linguistics and to the differentiation
of Orientalisms. To the former Semitic was a degraded form, degraded in
both the moral and the biological sense, whereas to the latter Semitic
was a-if not the-stable form of cultural decadence. Lastly, Semitic was
Renan's first creation, a fiction invented by him in the philological
laboratory to satisfy his sense of public place and mission. It should
by no means be lost on us that Semitic was for Renan's ego the symbol of
European (and consequently his) dominion over the Orient and over his
own era.

Therefore, as a branch of the Orient, Semitic was not fully a natural
object  like a species of monkey, for instance-nor fully an unnatural or
a divine object, as it had once been considered. Rather, Semitic
occupied a median position, legitimated in its oddities (regularity
being defined by Indo-European) by an inverse relation to normal
languages, comprehended as an eccentric, quasimonstrous phenomenon
partly because libraries, laboratories, and museums could serve as its
place of exhibition and analysis. In his treatise, Renan adopted a tone
of voice and a method of exposition that drew the maximum from
book-learning and from natural observation as practiced by men like
Cuvier and the Geoffroy Saint-Hilaires père et fils. This is an
important stylistic achievement, for it allowed Renan consistently to
avail himself of the library, rather than either primitivity or divine
fiat, as a conceptual framework in which to understand language,
together with the museum, which is where the results of laboratory
observation. are delivered for exhibition, study, and teaching.46
Everywhere Renan treats of normal human facts-language, history,
culture, mind, imagination-as transformed into something else, as
something peculiarly deviant, because they are Semitic and Oriental, and
because they end up for analysis in the laboratory. Thus the Semites are
rabid monotheists who produced no mythology, no art, no commerce, no
civilization; their consciousness is a narrow and rigid one; all in all
they represent "une combinaison inférieure de la nature humaine."47 At
the same time Renan wants it understood that he speaks of a prototype,
.not a real Semitic type with actual existence (although he violated
this too by discussing present-day Jews and Muslims with less than
scientific detachment in many places in his writings).48 So on the one
hand we have the transformation of the human into the specimen, and on
the other the comparative judgment rendered by which the specimen
remains a specimen and a subject for philological, scientific study.

Scattered throughout the*Histoire générale et systéme comparé des
langues sémitiques* are reflections on the links between linguistics and
anatomy, and for Renan this is equally important-remarks on how these
links could be employed to do human history*(les sciences historiques).*
But first we should consider the implicit links. I do not think it wrong
or an exaggeration to say that a typical page of Renan's
Orientalist*Histoire générale* was constructed typographically and
structurally with a page of comparative philosophical anatomy, in the
style of Cuvier or Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, kept in mind. Both linguists
and anatomists purport to be speaking about matters not directly
obtainable or observable in nature; a skeleton and a detailed line
drawing of a muscle, as much as paradigms constituted by the linguists
out of a purely hypothetical proto-Semitic or proto-Indo-European, are
similarly products of the laboratory and of the library. The text of a
linguistic or an anatomical work bears the same general relation to
nature (or actuality) that a museum case exhibiting a specimen mammal or
organ does. What is given on the page and in the museum case is a
truncated exaggeration, like many of Sacy's Oriental extracts, whose
purpose is to exhibit a relationship between the science (or scientist)
and the object, not one between the object and nature. Read almost any
page by Renan on Arabic, Hebrew, Aramaic, or proto-Semitic and you read
a fact of power, by which the Orientalist philologist's authority
summons out of the library at will examples of man's speech, and ranges
them there surrounded by a suave European prose that points out defects,
virtues, barbarisms, and shortcomings in the language, the people, and
the civilization. The tone and the tense of the exhibition are cast
almost uniformly in the contemporary present, so that one is given an
impression of a pedagogical demonstration during which the
scholar-scientist stands before us on a lecture-laboratory platform,
creating, confining, and judging the material he discusses.

This anxiety on Renan's part to convey the sense of a demonstration
actually taking place is heightened when he remarks explicitly that
whereas anatomy employs stable and visible signs by which to consign
objects to classes, linguistics does not.49 Therefore the philologist
must make a given linguistic fact correspond in some way to a historical
period: hence the possibility of a classification. Yet, as Renan was
often to say, linguistic temporality and history are full of lacunae,
enormous discontinuities, hypothetical periods. Therefore linguistic
events occur in a nonlinear and essentially discontinuous temporal
dimension controlled by the linguist in a very particular way. That way,
as Renan's whole treatise on the Semitic branch of the Oriental
languages goes very far to show, is comparative: Indo-European is taken
as the living,*organic* norm, and Semitic Oriental languages are seen
comparatively to be*inorganic.* 50 Time is transformed into the space of
comparative classification, which at bottom is based on a rigid binary
opposition between organic and inorganic languages. So on the one hand
there is the organic, biologically generative process represented by
Indo-European, while on the other there is an inorganic, essentially
unregenerative process, ossified into Semitic: most important, Renan
makes it absolutely clear that such an imperious judgment is made by the
Oriental philologist in his laboratory, for distinctions of the kind he
has been concerned with are neither possible nor available for anyone
except the trained professional. "Nous refusons donc aux langues
sémitiques la faculté de se régénérer, toute en reconnaissant qu'elles
n'échappent pas plus que les autres oeuvres de la conscience humaine à
la néessité du changement et des modifications successives" (Therefore
we refuse to allow that the Semitic languages have the capacity to
regenerate themselves, even while recognizing that they do not
escape-any more than other products of human consciousness-the necessity
of change or of successive modifications).51

Yet behind even this radical opposition, there is another one working in
Renan's mind, and for several pages in the first chapter of book 5 he
exposes his position quite candidly to the reader. This occurs when he
introduces Saint-Hilaire's views on the "degradation of types."52
Although Renan does not specify which Saint-Hilaire he refers to, the
reference is clear enough. For both Étienne and his son Isidore were
biological speculators of extraordinary fame and influence, particularly
among literary intellectuals during the first half of the nineteenth
century in France. Étienne, we recall, had been a member of the
Napoleonic expedition, and Balzac dedicated an important section of the
preface for*La Comédie  humaine* to him; there is also much evidence
that Flaubert read both the father and the son and used their views in
his work.53 Not only were Étienne and Isidore legatees of the tradition
of "Romantic" biology, which included Goethe and Cuvier, with a strong
interest in analogy, homology, and organic ur-form among species, but
they were also specialists in the philosophy and anatomy of
monstrosity-teratology, as Isidore called it-in which the most
horrendous physiological aberrations were considered a result of
internal degradation within the species-life.54 I cannot here go into
the intricacies (as well as the macabre fascination) of teratology,
though it is enough to mention that both Etienne and Isidore exploited
the theoretical power of the linguistic paradigm to explain the
deviations possible within a biological system. Thus Étienne's notion
was that a monster is an*anomaly,* in the same sense that in language
words exist in analogical as well as anomalous relations with each
other: in linguistics the idea is at least as old as Varro's*De Lingua
Latina. No* anomaly can be considered simply as a gratuitous exception;
rather anomalies confirm the regular structure binding together all
members of the same class. Such a view is quite daring in anatomy. At
one moment in the "Préliminaire" to his*Philosophie anatomique É* tienne
says:

And, indeed, such is the character of our epoch that it becomes
impossible today to enclose oneself strictly within the framework of a
simple monograph. Study an object in isolation and you will only be able
to bring it back to itself; consequently you can never have perfect
knowledge of it. But see it in the midst of beings who are connected
with each other in many different ways, and which are isolated from each
other in different ways, and you will discover for this object a wider
scope of relationships. First of all, you will know it better, even in
its specificity: but more important, by considering it in the very
center of its own sphere of activity, you will know precisely how it
behaves in its own exterior world, and you will also know how its own
features are constituted in reaction to its surrounding milieu.55

Not only is Saint-Hilaire saying that it is the specific character of
contemporary study (he was writing in 1822) to examine phenomena
comparatively; he is also saying that for the scientist there is no such
thing as a phenomenon, no matter how aberrant and exceptional, that
cannot be explained with reference to other phenomena. Note also how
Saint-Hilaire employs the metaphor of centrality*(le centre de sa sphère
d'activitè)* used later by Renan in*L'Avenir de la science* to describe
the position occupied by any object in nature-including even the
philologist-once the object is scientifically*placed* there by the
examining scientist. Thereafter between the object and the scientist a
bond of sympathy is established. Of course, this can only take place
during the laboratory experience, and not elsewhere. The point being
made is that a scientist has at his disposal a sort of leverage by which
even the totally unusual occurrence can be seen naturally and known
scientifically, which in this case means without recourse to the
supernatural, and with recourse only to an enveloping environment
constituted by the scientist. As a result nature itself can be
reperceived as continuous, harmoniously coherent, and fundamentally
intelligible.

Thus for Renan Semitic is a phenomenon of arrested development in
comparison with the mature languages and cultures of the Indo-European
group, and even with the other Semitic Oriental languages.56 The paradox
that Renan sustains, however, is that even as he encourages us to see
languages as in some way corresponding to "etres vivants de la nature,"
he is everywhere else proving that his Oriental languages, the Semitic
languages, are inorganic, arrested, totally ossified, incapable of
self-regeneration; in other words, he proves that Semitic is not a live
language, and for that matter, neither are Semites live creatures.
Moreover, Indo-European language and culture are alive and
organic*because* of the laboratory, not despite it. But far from being a
marginal issue in Renan's work, this paradox stands, I believe, at the
very center of his entire work, his style, and his archival existence in
the culture of his time, a culture to which-as people so unlike each
other as Matthew Arnold, Oscar Wilde, James Frazer, and Marcel Proust
concurred -he was a very important contributor. To be able to sustain a
vision that incorporates and holds together life and quasi-living
creatures (Indo-European, European culture) as well as quasimonstrous,
parallel inorganic phenomena (Semitic, Oriental culture) is precisely
the achievement of the European scientist in his laboratory.
He*constructs,* and the very act of construction is a sign of imperial
power over recalcitrant phenomena, as well as a confirmation of the
dominating culture and its "naturalization." Indeed, it is not too much
to say that Renan's philological laboratory is the actual locale of his
European ethnocentrism; but what needs emphasis here is that the
philological laboratory has no existence outside the discourse, the
writing by which it is constantly produced and experienced. Thus even
the culture he calls organic and alive-Europe's-is also a*creature being
created* in the laboratory and by philology.

Renan's entire later career was European and cultural. Its
accomplishments were varied and celebrated. Whatever authority his style
possessed can, I think, be traced back to his technique for constructing
the inorganic (or the missing) and for giving it the appearance of life.
He was most famous, of course, for his*Vie de* Jésus, the work that
inaugurated his monumental histories of Christianity and the Jewish
people. Yet we must realize that the*Vie* was exactly the same type of
feat that the*Histoire générale* was, a construction enabled by the
historian's capacity for skillfully crafting a dead (dead for Renan in
the double sense of a dead faith and a lost, hence dead, historical
period) Oriental biography -and the paradox is immediately apparent-as
if*it were* the truthful narrative of a natural life. Whatever Renan
said had first passed through the philological laboratory; when it
appeared in print woven through the text, there was in it the
life-giving force of a contemporary cultural signature, which drew from
modernity all its scientific power and all its uncritical
self-approbation. For that sort of culture such genealogies as dynasty,
tradition, religion, ethnic communities were all simply functions of a
theory whose job was to instruct the world. In borrowing this latter
phrase from Cuvier, Renan was circumspectly placing scientific
demonstration over experience; temporality was relegated to the
scientifically useless realm of ordinary experience, while to the
special periodicity of culture and cultural comparativism (which spawned
ethnocentrism, racial theory, and economic oppression) were given powers
far in advance of moral vision.

Renan's style, his career as Orientalist and man of letters, the
circumstances of the meaning he communicates, his peculiarly intimate
relationship with the European scholarly and general culture of his
time-liberal, exclusivist, imperious, antihuman except in a very
conditional sense-all these are what I would call*celibate* and
scientific. Generation for him is consigned to the realm of*I'avenir,*
which in his famous manifesto he associated with science. Although as a
historian of culture he belongs to the school of men like Turgot,
Condorcet, Guizot, Cousin, Jouffroy, and Ballanche, and in scholarship
to the school of Sacy, Caussin de Perceval, Ozanam, Fauriel, and
Burnouf, Renan's is a peculiarly ravaged, ragingly masculine world of
history and learning; it is indeed the world, not of fathers, mothers,
and children, but of men like his Jesus, his Marcus Aurelius, his
Caliban, his solar god (the last as described in "Rêves" of
the*Dialogues philosophiques).* 57 He cherished the power of science and
Orientalist philology particularly; he sought its insights and its
techniques; he used it to intervene, often with considerable
effectiveness, in the life of his epoch. And yet his ideal role was that
of spectator.

According to Renan, a philologist ought to prefer*bonheur*
to*jouissance:* the preference expresses a choice of elevated, if
sterile, happiness over sexual pleasure. Words belong to the realm
of*bonheur,* as does the study of words, ideally speaking. To my
knowledge, there are very few moments in all of Renan's public writing
where a beneficent and instrumental role is assigned to women. One
occurs when Renan opines that foreign women (nurses, maids) must have
instructed the conquering Normans' children, and hence we can account
for the changes that take place in language. Note how productivity and
dissemination are not the functions aided, but rather internal change,
and a subsidiary one at that. "Man," he says at the end of the same
essay, "belongs neither to his language nor to his race; he belongs to
himself before all, since before all he is a free being and a moral
one."58 Man was free and moral, but enchained by race, history, and
science as Renan saw them, conditions imposed by the scholar on man.

The study of Oriental languages took Renan to the heart of these
conditions, and philology made it concretely apparent that knowledge of
man was-to paraphrase Ernst Cassirer-poetically transfiguring59 only if
it had been previously severed from raw actuality (as Sacy had
necessarily severed his Arabic fragments from their actuality) and then
put into a doxological straitjacket. By becoming*philology,* the study
of words as once practiced by Vico, Herder, Rousseau, Michelet, and
Quinet lost its plot and its dramatic presentational quality, as
Schelling once called it. Instead, philology became epistemologically
complex;*Sprachgefűhl* was no longer enough since words themselves
pertained less to the senses or the body (as they had for Vico) and more
to a sightless, imageless, and abstract realm ruled over by such
hothouse formulations as race, mind, culture, and nation. In that realm,
which was discursively constructed and called the Orient, certain kinds
of assertions could be made, all of them possessing the same- powerful
generality and cultural validity. For all of Renan's effort was to deny
Oriental culture the right to be generated, except artificially in the
philological laboratory. A man was not a child of the culture; that
dynastic conception had been too effectively challenged by philology.
Philology taught one how culture is a construct, an*articulation* (in
the sense that Dickens used the word for Mr. Venus's profession in*Our
Mutual Friend),* even a creation, but not anything more than a
quasi-organic structure.

What is specially interesting in Renan is how much he knew himself to be
a creature of his time and of his ethnocentric culture. On the occasion
of an academic response to a speech made by Ferdinand de Lesseps in
1885, Renan averred as how "it was so sad to be a wiser man than one's
nation One cannot feel bitterness towards one's homeland. Better to be
mistaken along with the nation than to be too right with those who tell
it hard truths."60 The economy of such a statement is almost too perfect
to be true. For does not the old Renan say that the best relationship is
one of parity with one's own culture, its morality, and its ethos during
one's time, that and not a dynastic relation by which one is either the
child of his times or their parent? And here we return to the
laboratory, for it is there-as Renan thought of it-that filial and
ultimately social responsibilities cease and scientific and Orientalist
ones take over. His laboratory was the platform from which as an
Orientalist he addressed the world; it mediated the statements he made,
gave them confidence and general precision, as well as continuity. Thus
the philological laboratory as Renan understood it redefined not only
his epoch and his culture, dating and shaping them in new ways; it gave
his Oriental subject matter a scholarly coherence, and more, it made him
(and later Orientalists in his tradition) into the Occidental*cultural*
figure he then became. We may well wonder whether this new autonomy
within the culture was the freedom Renan hoped his philological
Orientalist science would bring or whether, so far as a critical
historian of Orientalism is concerned, it set up a complex affiliation
between Orientalism and its putative human subject matter that is based
finally on power and not really on disinterested objectivity.

III- Oriental Residence and Scholarship: The Requirements of Lexicography and Imagination
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Renan's views of the Oriental Semites belong, of course, less to the
realm of popular prejudice and common anti- Semitism than they do to the
realm of scientific Oriental philology. When we read Renan and Sacy, we
readily observe the way cultural generalization had begun to acquire the
armor of scientific statement and the ambience of corrective study. Like
many academic specialties in their early phases, modern Orientalism held
its subject matter, which it defined, in a viselike grip which it did
almost everything in its power to sustain. Thus a knowing vocabulary
developed, and its functions, as much as its style, located the Orient
in a comparative framework, of the sort employed and manipulated by
Renan. Such comparatism is rarely descriptive; most often, it is both
evaluative and expository. Here is Renan comparing typically:

One sees that in all things the Semitic race appears to us to be an
incomplete race, by virtue of its simplicity. This race-if I dare use
the analogy-is to the Indo-European family what a pencil sketch is to
painting; it lacks that variety, that amplitude, that abundance of life
which is the condition of perfectibility. Like those individuals who
possess so little fecundity that, after a gracious childhood, they
attain only the most mediocre virility, the Semitic nations experienced
their fullest flowering in their first age and have never been able to
achieve true maturity.61

Indo-Europeans are the touchstone here, just as they are when Renan says
that the Semitic Oriental sensibility never reached the heights attained
by the Indo-Germanic races.

Whether this comparative attitude is principally a scholarly necessity
or whether it is disguised ethnocentric race prejudice, we cannot say
with absolute certainty. What we can say is that the two work together,
in support of each other. What Renan and Sacy tried to do was to reduce
the Orient to a kind of human flatness, which exposed its
characteristics easily to scrutiny and removed from it its complicating
humanity. In Renan's case, the legitimacy of his efforts was provided by
philology, whose ideological tenets encourage the reduction of a
language to its roots; thereafter, the philologist finds it possible to
connect those linguistics roots, as Renan and others did, to race, mind,
character, and temperament at their roots. The affinity between Renan
and Gobineau, for example, was acknowledged by Renan to be a common
philological and Orientalist perspective;62 in subsequent editions of
the*Histoire générale* he incorporated some of Gobineau's work within
his own. Thus did comparatism in the study of the Orient and Orientals
come to be synonymous with the apparent ontological inequality of
Occident and Orient.

The main traits of this inequality are worth recapitulating briefly. I
have already referred to Schlegel's enthusiasm for India, and then his
subsequent revulsion from it and of course from Islam. Many of the
earliest Oriental amateurs began by welcoming the Orient as a
salutary*dérangement* of their European habits of mind and spirit. The
Orient was overvalued for its pantheism, its spirituality, its
stability, its longevity, its primitivity, and so forth. Schelling, for
example, saw in Oriental polytheism a preparation of the way for
Judeo-Christian monotheism: Abraham was prefigured in Brahma. Yet almost
without exception such overesteem was followed by a counterresponse: the
Orient suddenly appeared lamentably underhumanized, antidemocratic,
backward, barbaric, and so forth. A swing of the pendulum in one
direction caused an equal and opposite swing back: the Orient was
undervalued. Orientalism as a profession grew out of these opposites, of
compensations and corrections based on inequality, ideas nourished by
and nourishing similar ideas in the culture at large. Indeed the very
project of restriction and restructuring associated with Orientalism can
be traced directly to the inequality by which the Orient's comparative
poverty (or wealth) besought scholarly, scientific treatment of the kind
to be found in disciplines like philology, biology, history,
anthropology, philosophy, or economics.

And thus the actual profession of Orientalist enshrined this inequality
and the special paradoxes it engendered. Most often an individual
entered the profession as a way of reckoning with the Orient's claim on
him; yet most often too his Orientalist training opened his eyes, so to
speak, and what he was left with was a sort of debunking project, by
which the Orient was reduced to considerably less than the eminence once
seen in it. How else is one to explain the enormous labors represented
by the work of William Muir (1819-1905 ), for example, or of Reinhart
Dozy (1820-1883 ), and the impressive antipathy in that work to the
Orient, Islam, and the Arabs? Characteristically, Renan was one of
Dozy's supporters, just as in Dozy's four-volume*Histoire des Mussulmans
d'Espagne, jusqu à la conquête de 1'Andalousie par les Almoravides*
(1861) there appear many of Renan's anti-Semitic strictures, compounded
in 1864 by a volume arguing that the Jews' primitive God was not Jahweh
but Baal, proof for which was to be found in Mecca, of all places.
Muir's*Life of Mahomet* (1858-1861) and his*The Caliphate, Its Rise,
Decline and Fall* (1891) are still considered reliable monuments of
scholarship, yet his attitude towards his subject matter was fairly put
by him when he slid that "the sword of Muhammed, and the Kor'ān, are the
most stubborn enemies of Civilisation, Liberty, and the Truth which the
world has yet known."63 Many of the same notions are to be found in the
work of Alfred Lyall, who was one of the authors cited approvingly by
Cromer.

Even if the Orientalist does not explicitly judge his material as Dozy
and Muir did, the principle of inequality exerts its influence
nevertheless. It remains the professional Orientalist's job to piece
together a portrait, a restored picture as it were, of the Orient or the
Oriental; fragments, such as those unearthed by Sacy, supply the
material, but the narrative shape, continuity, and figures are
constructed by the scholar, for whom scholarship consists of
circumventing the unruly (un-Occidental) nonhistory of the Orient with
orderly chronicle, portraits, and plots. Caussin de Perceval's*Essai sur
l'histoire des Arabes avant l'Islamisme, pendant l'époque de Mahomet*
(three volumes, 1847-1848) is a wholly professional study, depending for
its sources on documents made available*internally* to the field by
other Orientalists (principally Sacy, of course) or documents-like the
texts of ibn-Khaldun, upon whom Caussin relied very heavily-reposing in
Orientalist libraries in Europe. Caussin's thesis is that the Arabs were
made a people by Mohammed, Islam being essentially a political
instrument, not by any means a spiritual one. What Caussin strives for
is clarity amidst a huge mass of confusing detail. Thus what emerges out
of the study of Islam is quite literally a one-dimensional portrait of
Mohammed, who is made to appear at the end of the work (after his death
has been described) in precise photographic detail.64 Neither a demon,
nor a prototype of Cagliostro, Caussin's Mohammed is a man appropriated
to a history of Islam (the fittest version of it) as an exclusively
political movement, centralized by the innumerable citations that thrust
him up and, in a sense, out of the text. Caussin's intention was to
leave nothing unsaid about Mohammed; the Prophet is thereby seen in a
cold light, stripped both of his immense religious force and of any
residual powers to frighten Europeans. The point here is that as a
figure for his own time and place Mohammed is effaced, in order for a
very slight human miniature of him to be left standing.

A nonprofessional analogue to Caussin's Mohammed is Carlyle's, a
Mohammed forced to serve a thesis totally overlooking the historical and
cultural circumstances of the Prophet's own time and place. Although
Carlyle quotes Sacy, his essay is clearly the product of someone arguing
for some general ideas on sincerity, heroism, and prophethood. His
attitude is salutary: Mohammed is no legend, no shameful sensualist, no
laughable petty sorcerer who trained pigeons to pick peas out of his
ear. Rather he is a man of real vision and self-conviction, albeit an
author of a book, the Koran, that is "a wearisome confused jumble,
crude, incondite; endless iterations, long-windedness, entanglement;
most crude, incondite-insupportable stupidity, in short."65 Not a
paragon of lucidity and stylistic grace himself, Carlyle asserts these
things as a way of rescuing Mohammed from the Benthamite standards that
would have condemned both Mohammed and him together. Yet Mohammed is a
hero, transplanted into Europe out of the same barbaric Orient found
wanting by Lord Macaulay in his famous "Minute" of 1835, in which it was
asserted that "our native subjects" have more to learn from us than we
do from them.66

Both Caussin and Carlyle, in other words, show us that the Orient need
not cause us undue anxiety, so unequal are Oriental to European
achievements. The Orientalist and non-Orientalist perspectives coincide
here. For within the comparative field that Orientalism became after the
philological revolution of the early nineteenth century, and outside it,
either in popular stereotypes or in the figures made of the Orient by
philosophers like Carlyle and stereotypes like those of Macaulay, the
Orient in itself was subordinated intellectually to the West. As
material for study or reflection the Orient acquired all the marks of an
inherent weakness. It became subject to the vagaries of miscellaneous
theories that used it for illustration. Cardinal Newman, no great
Orientalist, used Oriental Islam as the basis of lectures in 1853
justifying British intervention in the Crimean War.67 Cuvier found the
Orient useful for his work*Le Règne animal* (1816). The Orient was
usefully employed as conversation in the various salons of Paris.68 The
list of references, borrowings, and transformations that overtook the
Oriental idea is immense, but at bottom what the early Orientalist
achieved, and what the non-Orientalist in the West exploited, was a
reduced model of the Orient suitable for the prevailing, dominant
culture and its theoretical (and hard after the theoretical, the
practical) exigencies. Occasionally one comes across exceptions, or if
not exceptions then interesting complications, to this unequal
partnership between East and West. Karl Marx identified the notion of an
Asiatic economic system in his 1853 analyses of British rule in India,
and then put beside that immediately the human depredation introduced
into this system by English colonial interference, rapacity, and
outright cruelty. In article after article he returned with increasing
conviction to the idea that even in destroying Asia, Britain was making
possible there a real social revolution. Marx's style pushes us right up
against the difficulty of reconciling our natural repugnance as fellow
creatures to the sufferings of Orientals while their society is being
violently transformed with the historical necessity of these
transformations.

Now, sickening as it must be to human feeling to witness those myriads
of industrious patriarchal and inoffensive social organizations
disorganized and dissolved into their units, thrown into a sea of woes,
and their individual members losing at the same time their ancient form
of civilization and their hereditary means of subsistence, we must not
forget that these idyllic village communities, inoffensive though they
may appear, had always been the solid foundation of Oriental despotism,
that they restrained the human mind within the smallest possible
compass, making it the unresisting tool of superstition, enslaving it
beneath the traditional rules, depriving it of all grandeur and
historical energies ....

England, it is true, in causing a social revolution in Hindustan was
actuated only by the vilest interests, and was stupid in her manner of
enforcing them. But that is not the question. The question is, can
mankind fulfil its destiny without a fundamental revolution in the
social state of Asia? If not, whatever may have been the crimes of
England she was the unconscious tool of history in bringing about that
revolution.

Then, whatever bitterness the spectacle of the crumbling of an ancient
world may have for our personal feelings, we have the right, in point of
history, to exclaim with Goethe:

Sollte these Qual uns qualen

Da she unsere Lust vermehrt

Hat nicht Myriaden Seelen

Timurs Herrschaft aufgeziehrt?69

(Should this torture then torment us

Since it brings us greater pleasure?

Were not through the rule of Timur

Souls devoured without measure?)

The quotation, which supports Marx's argument about torment producing
pleasure, comes from the*Westőstlicher Diwan* and identifies the sources
of Marx's conceptions about the Orient. These are Romantic and even
messianic: as human material the Orient is less important than as an
element in a Romantic redemptive project. Marx's economic analyses are
perfectly fitted thus to a standard Orientalist undertaking, even though
Marx's humanity, his sympathy for the misery of people, are clearly
engaged. Yet in the end it is the Romantic Orientalist vision that wins
out, as Marx's theoretical socio-economic views become submerged in this
classically standard image:

England has to fulfill a double mission in India: one destructive, the
other regenerating-the annihilation of the Asiatic society, and the
laying of the material foundations of Western society in Asia.70

The idea of regenerating a fundamentally lifeless Asia is a piece of
pure Romantic Orientalism, of course, but coming from the same writer
who could not easily forget the human suffering involved, the statement
is puzzling. It requires us first to ask how Marx's moral equation of
Asiatic loss with the British colonial rule he condemned gets skewed
back towards the old inequality between East and West we have so far
remarked. Second, it requires us to ask where the human sympathy has
gone, into what realm of thought it has disappeared while the
Orientalist vision takes its place.

We are immediately brought back to the realization that Orientalists,
like many other early-nineteenth-century thinkers, conceive of humanity
either in large collective terms or in abstract generalities.
Orientalists are neither interested in nor capable of discussing
individuals; instead artificial entities, perhaps with their

roots in Herderian populism, predominate. There are Orientals, Asiatics,
Semites, Muslims, Arabs, Jews, races, mentalities, nations, and the
like, some of them the product of learned operations of the type found
in Renan's work. Similarly, the age-old distinction between "Europe" and
"Asia" or "Occident" and "Orient" herds beneath very wide labels every
possible variety of human plurality, reducing it in the process to one
or two terminal, collective abstractions. Marx is no exception. The
collective Orient was easier for him to use in illustration of a theory
than existential human identities. For between Orient and Occident, as
if in a self-fulfilling proclamation, only the vast anonymous
collectivity mattered, or existed. No other type of exchange, severely
constrained though it may have been, was at hand.

That Marx was still able to sense some fellow feeling, to identify even
a little with poor Asia, suggests that something happened before the
labels took over, before he was dispatched to Goethe as a source of
wisdom on the Orient. It is as if the individual mind (Marx's, in this
case) could find a precollective, preofficial individuality in Asia-find
and give in to its pressures upon his emotions, feelings, senses-only to
give it up when he confronted a more formidable censor in the very
vocabulary he found himself forced to employ. What that censor did was
to stop and then chase away the sympathy, and this was accompanied by a
lapidary definition: Those people, it said, don't suffer-they are
Orientals and hence have to be treated in other ways than the ones
you've just been using. A wash of sentiment therefore disappeared as it
encountered the unshakable definitions built up by Orientalist science,
supported by "Oriental" lore (e.g., the Diwan) supposed to be
appropriate for it. The vocabulary of emotion dissipated as it submitted
to the lexicographical police action of Orientalist science and even
Orientalist art. An experience was dislodged by a dictionary definition:
one can almost see that happen in Marx's Indian essays, where what
finally occurs is that something forces him to scurry back to Goethe,
there to stand in his protective Orientalized Orient.

In part, of course, Marx was concerned with vindicating his own theses
on socio-economic revolution; but in part also he seems to have had easy
resource to a massed body of writing, both internally consolidated by
Orientalism and put forward by it beyond the field, that controlled any
statement made about the Orient. In Chapter One I tried to show how this
control had had a general cultural history in Europe since antiquity; in
this chapter my concern has been to show how in the nineteenth century a
modern professional terminology and practice were created whose
existence dominated discourse about the Orient, whether by Orientalists
or non-Orientalists. Sacy and Renan were instances of the way
Orientalism fashioned, respectively, a body of texts and a
philologically rooted process by which the Orient took on a discursive
identity that made it unequal with the West. In using Marx as the case
by which a non-Orientalist's human engagements were first dissolved,then
usurped by Orientalist generalizations, we find ourselves having to
consider the process of lexicographical and institutional consolidation
peculiar to Orientalism. What was this operation, by which whenever you
discussed the Orient a formidable mechanism of omnicompetent definitions
would present itself as the only one having suitable validity for your
discussion? And since we must also show how this mechanism operated
specifically (and effectively) upon personal human experiences that
otherwise contradicted it, we must also show where*they* went and what
forms*they* took, while they lasted.

All this is a very difficult and complex operation to describe, at least
as difficult and complex as the way any growing discipline crowds out
its competitors and acquires authority for its traditions, methods, and
institutions, as well as general cultural legitimacy for its statements,
personalities, and agencies. But we can simplify a great deal of the
sheer narrative complexity of the operation by specifying the kinds of
experiences that Orientalism typically employed for its own ends and
represented for its wider-than-professional audience. In essence these
experiences continue the ones I described as having taken place in Sacy
and Renan. But whereas those two scholars represent a wholly bookish
Orientalism, since neither claimed any particular expertise with the
Orient*in situ,* there is another tradition that claimed its legitimacy
from the peculiarly compelling fact of residence in, actual existential
contact with, the Orient. Anquetil, Jones, the Napoleonic expedition
define the tradition's earliest contours, of course, and these will
thereafter retain an unshakable influence on all Orientalist residents.
These contours are the ones of European power: to reside in the Orient
is to live the privileged life, not of an ordinary citizen, but of a
representative European whose empire (French or British)*contains* the
Orient in its military, economic, and above all, cultural arms.Oriental
residence, and its scholarly fruits, are thereby fed into the bookish
tradition of the textual attitudes we found in Renan and Sacy: together
the two experiences will constitute a formidable library against which
no one, not even Marx, can rebel and which no one can avoid.

Residence in the Orient involves personal experience and personal
testimony to a certain extent. Contributions to the library of
Orientalism and to its consolidation depend on how experience and
testimony get converted from a purely personal document into the
enabling codes of Orientalist science. In other words, within a text
there has to take place a metamorphosis from personal to official
statement; the record of Oriental residence and experience by a European
must shed, or at least minimize, its purely autobiographical and
indulgent descriptions in favor of descriptions on which Orientalism in
general and later Orientalists in particular can draw, build, and base
further scientific observation and description. So one of the things we
can watch for is a more explicit conversion than in Marx of personal
sentiments about the Orient into official Orientalist statements.

Now the situation is enriched and complicated by the fact that during
the entire nineteenth century the Orient, and especially the Near
Orient, was a favorite place for Europeans to travel in and write about.
Moreover, there developed a fairly large body of Oriental-style European
literature very frequently based on personal experiences in the Orient.
Flaubert comes to mind immediately as one prominent source of such
literature; Disraeli, Mark Twain, and Kinglake are three other obvious
examples. But what is of interest is the difference between writing that
is converted from personal to professional Orientalism, and the second
type, also based on residence and personal testimony, which remains
"literature" and not science: it is this difference that I now want to
explore.

To be a European in the Orient always involves being a consciousness set
apart from, and unequal with, its surroundings. But the main thing to
note is the intention of this consciousness: What is it in the Orient
for? Why does it set itself there even if, as is the case with writers
like Scott, Hugo, and Goethe, it travels to the Orient for a very
concrete sort of experience without actually leaving Europe? A small
number of intentional categories proposed themselves schematically. One:
the writer who intends to use his residence for the specific task of
providing professional Orientalism with scientific material, who
considers his residence a form of scientific observation. Two: the
writer who intends the same purpose but is less willing to sacrifice the
eccentricity and style of his individual consciousness to impersonal
Orientalist definitions. These latter do appear in his work, but they
are disentangled from the personal vagaries of style only with
difficulty. Three: the writer for whom a real or metaphorical trip to
the Orient is the fulfillment of some deeply felt and urgent project.
His text therefore is built on a personal aesthetic, fed and informed by
the project. In categories two and three there is considerably more
space than in one for the play of a personal-or at least
non-Orientalist-consciousness; if we take Edward William Lane's*Manners
and Customs of the Modern Egyptians* as the pre-eminent example of
category one, Burton's*Pilgrimage to al-Madinah and Meccah* as belonging
to category two, and Nerval's*Voyage en Orient* as representing category
three, the relative spaces left in the text for the exercise and display
of authorial presence will be clear.

Despite their differences, however, these three categories are not so
separate from each other as one would imagine. Nor does each category
contain "pure" representative types. For example, works in all three
categories rely upon the sheer egoistic powers of the European
consciousness at their center. In all cases the Orient is*for* the
European observer, and what is more, in the category that contains
Lane's*Egyptians,* the Orientalist ego is very much in evidence, however
much his style tries for impartial impersonality. Moreover, certain
motifs recur consistently in all three types. The Orient as a place of
pilgrimage is one; so too is the vision of Orient as spectacle,
or*tableau vivant.* Every work on the Orient in these categories tries
to characterize the place, of course, but what is of greater interest is
the extent to which the work's internal structure is in some measure
synonymous with a comprehensive*interpretation* (or an attempt at it) of
the Orient. Most of the time, not surprisingly, this interpretation is a
form of Romantic restructuring of the Orient, a re-vision of it, which
restores it redemptively to the present. Every interpretation, every
structure created for the Orient, then, is a reinterpretation, a
rebuilding of it.

Having said that,we return directly to differences between the
categories. Lane's book on the Egyptians was influential, it was
frequently read and cited (by Flaubert among others), and it established
its author's reputation as an eminent figure in Orientalist scholarship.
In other words, Lane's authority was gained, not by virtue simply of
what he said, but by virtue of how what he said could be adapted to
Orientalism. He is quoted as a source of knowledge about Egypt or
Arabia, whereas Burton or Flaubert were and are read for what they tell
us about Burton and Flaubert over and above their knowledge of the
Orient. The author-function in Lane's*Modern Egyptians is* less strong
than in the other categories because his work was disseminated into the
profession, consolidated by it, institutionalized with it. The authorial
identity in a work of professional discipline such as his is
subordinated to the demands of the field, as well as to the demands of
the subject matter. But this is not done simply, or without raising
problems.

Lane's classic,*An Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern
Egyptians* (1836), was the self-conscious result of a series of works
and of two periods of residence in Egypt (1825-1828 and 1833-1835). One
uses the phrase "self-conscious" with some emphasis here because the
impression Lane wished to give was that his study was a work of
immediate and direct, unadorned and neutral, description, whereas in
fact it was the product of considerable editing (the work he wrote was
not the one he finally published) and also of a considerable variety of
quite special efforts. Nothing in his birth or background seemed to
destine him for the Orient, except his methodical studiousness and his
capacity for classical studies and for mathematics, which somewhat
explain the apparent internal neatness of his book. His preface offers a
series of interesting clues about what it was that he did for the book.
He went to Egypt originally to study Arabic. Then, after making some
notes about modern Egypt, he was encouraged to produce a systematic work
on the country and its inhabitants by a committee of the Society for the
Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. From being a random set of observations
the work was changed into a document of useful knowledge, knowledge
arranged for and readily accessible to anyone wishing to know the
essentials of a foreign society. The preface makes it clear that such
knowledge must somehow dispose of pre-existing knowledge, as well as
claim for itself a particularly effective character: here Lane is the
subtle polemicist. He must show initially that he did what others before
him either could not or did not do, and then, that he was able to
acquire information both authentic and perfectly correct. And thus his
peculiar authority begins to emerge.

While Lane dallies in his preface with a Dr. Russell's "account of the
people of Aleppo" (a forgotten work), it is obvious that the*Description
de I'Égypte is* his main antecedent competition. But that work, confined
by Lane to a long footnote, is mentioned in contemptuous quotation marks
as "the great French work" on Egypt.

*That* work was at once too philosophically general and too careless,
Lane says; and Jacob Burckhardt's famous study was merely a collection
of proverbial Egyptian wisdom, "bad tests of the morality of a people."
Unlike the French and Burckhardt, Lane was able to submerge himself
amongst the natives, to live as they did, to conform to their habits,
and "to escape exciting, in strangers, any suspicion of ...being a
person who had no right to intrude among them." Lest that imply Lane's
having lost his objectivity, he goes on to say that he conformed only to
the words (his italics) of the Koran, and that he was always aware of
his difference from an essentially alien culture.71 Thus while one
portion of Lane's identity floats easily in the unsuspecting Muslim sea,
a submerged part retains its secret European power, to comment on,
acquire, possess everything around it.

The Orientalist can imitate the Orient without the opposite being true.
What he says about the Orient is therefore to be understood as
description obtained in a one-way exchange: as*they* spoke and
behaved,*he* observed and wrote down. His power was to have existed
amongst them as a native speaker, as it were, and also as a secret
writer. And what he wrote was intended as useful knowledge, not for
them, but for Europe and its various disseminative institutions. For
that is one thing that Lane's prose never lets us forget: that ego, the
first-person pronoun moving through Egyptian customs, rituals,
festivals, infancy, adulthood, and burial rites, is in reality both an
Oriental masquerade and an Orientalist device for capturing and
conveying valuable, otherwise inaccessible information. As narrator,
Lane is both exhibit and exhibitor, winning two confidences at once,
displaying two appetites for experience: the Oriental one for engaging
companionship (or so it seems) and the Western one for authoritative,
useful knowledge.

Nothing illustrates this better than the last tripartite episode in the
preface. Lane there describes his principal informant and friend, Sheikh
Ahmed, as companion and as curiosity. Together the two pretend that Lane
is a Muslim; yet only after Ahmed conquers his fear, inspired by Lane's
audacious mimicry, can he go through the motions of praying by his side
in a mosque. This final achievement is preceded by two scenes in which
Ahmed is portrayed as a bizarre glass-eater and a polygamist. 1n all
three portions of the Sheikh Ahmed episode the distance between the
Muslim and Lane increases, even as in the action itself it decreases. As
mediator and translator, so to speak, of Muslim behavior,Lane ironically
enters  the Muslim pattern only far enough to be able to describe it in
a sedate English prose. His identity as counterfeit believer and
privileged European is the very essence of bad faith, for the latter
undercuts the former in no uncertain way. Thus what seems to be factual
reporting of what*one* rather peculiar Muslim does is made to appear by
Lane as the candidly exposed center of*all* Muslim faith. No mind is
given by Lane to the betrayal of his friendship with Ahmed or with the
others who provide him with information.What matters is that the report
seem accurate, general, and dispassionate, that the English reader be
convinced that Lane was never infected with heresy or apostasy, and
finally, that Lane's text cancel the human content of its subject matter
in favor of its scientific validity.

It is for all these ends that the book is organized, not simply as the
narrative of Lane's residence in Egypt but as narrative structure
overwhelmed by Orientalist restructuring and detail. This, I think, is
the central achievement of Lane's work. In outline and shape*Modern
Egyptians* follows the routine of an eighteenth-century novel, say one
by Fielding. The book opens with an account of country and setting,
followed by chapters on 'Personal Characteristics" and "Infancy and
Early Education." Twenty-five chapters on such things as festivals,
laws, character, industry, magic, and domestic life precede the last
section, "Death and Funeral Rites." On the face of it, Lane's argument
is chronological and developmental. He writes about himself as the
observer of scenes that follow the major divisions in the human
lifetime: his model is the narrative pattern, as it is in*Tom* *Jones*
with the hero's birth, adventures, marriage, and implied death. Only in
Lane's text the narrative voice is ageless; his subject, however, the
modern Egyptian, goes through the individual life-cycle. This reversal,
by which a solitary individual endows himself with timeless faculties
and imposes on a society and people a personal life-span, is but the
first of several operations regulating what might have been the mere
narration of travels in foreign parts, turning an artless text into an
encyclopedia of exotic display and a playground for Orientalist
scrutiny.

Lane's control of his material is not only established through his
dramatized double presence (as fake Muslim and genuine Westerner) and
his manipulation of narrative voice and subject, but also through his
use of detail. Each major section in each chapter is invariably
introduced with some unsurprising general observation. For example, "it
is generally observed that many of the most remarkable peculiarities in
the manners, customs, and character of a nation are attributable to the
physical peculiarities of the country."72 What follows confirms this
easily-the Nile, Egypt's "remarkably salubrious" climate, the peasant's
"precise" labor. Yet instead of this leading to the next episode in
narrative order, the detail is added to, and consequently the narrative
fulfillment expected on purely formal grounds is not given. In other
words, although the gross outlines of Lane's text conform to the
narrative and causal sequence of birth-life-death, the special detail
introduced during the sequence itself foils narrative movement. From a
general observation, to a delineation of some aspect of Egyptian
character, to an account of Egyptian childhood, adolescence, maturity,
and senescence, Lane is always there with great detail to*prevent*
smooth transitions. Shortly after we hear about Egypt's salubrious
climate, for instance, we are informed that few Egyptians live beyond a
few years, because of fatal illness, the absence of medical aid, and
oppressive summer weather. Thereafter we are told that the heat "excites
the Egyptian [an unqualified generalization] to intemperance in sensual
enjoyments," and soon are bogged down in descriptions, complete with
charts and line drawings, of Cairene architecture, decoration,
fountains, and locks.When a narrative strain re-emerges, it is clearly
only as a formality.

What prevents narrative order, at the very same time that narrative
order is the dominating fiction of Lane's text, is sheer, overpowering,
monumental description. Lane's objective is to make Egypt and the
Egyptians totally visible, to keep nothing hidden from his reader, to
deliver the Egyptians without depth, in swollen detail. As rapporteur
his propensity is for sadomasochistic colossal tidbits: the
self-multilation of dervishes, the cruelty of judges, the blending of
religion with licentiousness among Muslims, the excess of libidinous
passions, and so on. Yet no matter how odd and perverse the event and
how lost we become in its dizzying detail, Lane is ubiquitous, his job
being to reassemble the pieces and enable us to move on, albeit jerkily.
To a certain extent he does this by just being a European who can
discursively control the passions and excitements to which the Muslims
are unhappily subject. But to an even greater extent, Lane's capacity to
rein in his profuse subject matter with an unyielding bridle of
discipline and detachment depends on his cold distance from Egyptian
life and Egyptian productivity.

The main symbolic moment occurs at the beginning of chapter 6, "Domestic
Life-Continued." By now Lane has adopted the narrative convention of
taking a walk through Egyptian life, and having reached the end of his
tour of the public rooms and habits of an Egyptian household (the social
and spatial worlds are mixed together by him), he begins to discuss the
intimate side of home life. Immediately, he "must give some account of
marriage and the marriage-ceremonies." As usual, the account begins with
a general observation: to abstain from marriage "when a man has attained
a sufficient age, and when there is no just impediment, is esteemed by
the Egyptians improper, and even disreputable." Without transition this
observation is applied by Lane to himself, and he is found guilty. For
one long paragraph he then recounts the pressures placed on him to get
married, which he unflinchingly refuses. Finally, after a native friend
even offers to arrange a*mariage de convenance,* also refused by Lane,
the whole sequence is abruptly terminated with a period and a dash.63 He
resumes his general discussion with another general observation.

Not only do we have here a typical Lane-esque interruption of the main
narrative with untidy detail, we have also a firm and literal
disengagement of the author from the productive processes of Oriental
society. The mini-narrative of his refusal to join the society he
describes concludes with a dramatic hiatus: his story cannot continue,
he seems to be saying, so long as he does not enter the intimacy of
domestic life, and so he drops from sight as a candidate for it. He
literally abolishes himself as a human subject by refusing to marry into
human society. Thus he preserves his authoritative identity as a mock
participant and bolsters the objectivity of his narrative. If we already
knew that Lane was a non-Muslim, we now know too that in order for him
to become an Orientalist-instead of an Oriental-he had to deny himself
the sensual enjoyments of domestic life. Moreover, he had also to avoid
dating himself by entering the human life-cycle. Only in this negative
way could he retain his timeless authority as observer.

Lane's choice was between living without "inconvenience and discomfort"
and accomplishing his study of the modern Egyptians. The result of his
choice is plainly to have made possible his definition of the Egyptians,
since had he become one of them, his perspective would no longer have
been antiseptically and asexually lexicographical. In two important and
urgent ways, therefore, Lane gains scholarly credibility and legitimacy.
First, by interfering with the ordinary narrative course of human life:
this is the function of his colossal detail, in which the observing
intelligence of a foreigner can introduce and then piece together
massive information. The Egyptians are disemboweled for exposition, so
to speak, then put together admonishingly by Lane. Second, by
disengaging from the generation of Egyptian-Oriental life: this is the
function of his subduing his animal appetite in the interest of
disseminating information, not in and for Egypt, but in and for European
learning at large. To have achieved both the imposition of a scholarly
will upon an untidy reality and an intentional shift away from the place
of his residence to the scene of his scholarly reputation is the source
of his great fame in the annals of Orientalism. Useful knowledge such as
his could only have been obtained, formulated, and diffused by such
denials.

Lane's two other major works, his never-completed Arabic lexicon and his
uninspired translation of the*Arabian Nights,* consolidated the system
of knowledge inaugurated by*Modern Egyptians.* In both of his later
works his individuality has disappeared entirely as a creative presence,
as of course has the very idea of a narrative work. Lane the man appears
only in the official persona of annotator and retranslator (the*Nights)*
and impersonal lexicographer. From being an author contemporary with his
subject matter, Lane became as Orientalist scholar of classical Arabic
and classical Islam-its survivor. But it is the form of that survival
which is of interest. For Lane's legacy as a scholar mattered not to the
Orient, of course, but to the institutions and agencies of his European
society. And these were either academic-the official Orientalist
societies, institutions, and agencies-or they were extraacademic in very
particular ways, figuring in the work of later Europeans resident in the
Orient.

If we read Lane's*Modern Egyptians,* not as a source of Oriental lore,
but as a work directed towards the growing organization of academic
Orientalism, we will find it illuminating. The subordination of genetic
ego to scholarly authority in Lane corresponds exactly to the increased
specialization and institutionalization of knowledge about the Orient
represented by the various Oriental societies. The Royal Asiatic Society
was founded a decade before Lane's book appeared, but its committee of
correspondence-whose "objects were to receive intelligence and inquiries
relating to the arts, sciences, literature, history and antiquities" of
the Orient74 --- the structural recipient of Lane's fund of information,
processed and formulated as it was. As for the diffusion of such work as
Lane's, there were not only the various societies of useful knowledge
but also, in an age when the original Orientalist program of aiding
commerce and trade with the Orient had become exhausted, the specialized
learned societies whose products were works displaying the potential (if
not actual) values of disinterested scholarship. Thus, a program of the
Societe asiatique states:

To compose or to print grammars, dictionaries, and other elementary
books recognized as useful or indispensable for the study of those
languages taught by appointed professors [of Oriental languages]; by
subscriptions or by other means to contribute to the publication of the
same kind of work undertaken in France or abroad; to acquire
manuscripts, or to copy either completely or in part those that are to
be found in Europe, to translate or to make extracts from them, to
multiply their number by reproducing them either by engraving or by
lithography; to make it possible for the authors of useful works on
geography, history, the arts, and the sciences to acquire the means for
the public to enjoy the fruits of their nocturnal labors; to draw the
attention of the public, by means of a periodic collection devoted to
Asiatic literature, to the scientific, literary, or poetic productions
of the Orient and those of the same sort that regularly are produced in
Europe, to those facts about the Orient that could be relevant to
Europe, to those discoveries and works of all kinds of which the
Oriental peoples could become the subject: these are the objectives
proposed for and by the Societe asiatique.

Orientalism organized itself systematically as the acquisition of
Oriental material and its regulated dissemination as a form of
specialized knowledge. One copied and printed works of grammar, one
acquired original texts, one multiplied their number and diffused them
widely, even dispensed knowledge in periodic form. It was into and for
this system that Lane wrote his work, and sacrificed his ego. The mode
in which his work persisted in the archives of Orientalism was provided
for also. There was to be a "museum," Sacy said,

a vast depot of objects of all kinds, of drawings, of original books,
maps, accounts of voyages, all offered to those who wish to give
themselves to the study of [the Orient]; in such a way that each of
these students would be able to feel himself transported as if by
enchantment into the midst of, say, a Mongolian tribe or of the Chinese
race, whichever he might have made the object of his studies.... It is
possible to say ...that after the publication of elementary books on
...the Oriental languages, nothing is more important than to lay the
cornerstone of this museum, which I consider a living commentary upon
and interpretation*[truchement]* of the dictionaries.75

*Truchement* derives nicely from the Arabic*turjaman,* meaning
"interpreter," "intermediary," or "spokesman." On the one hand,
Orientalism acquired the Orient as literally and as widely as possible;
on the other, it domesticated this knowledge to the West, filtering it
through regulatory codes, classifications, specimen cases, periodical
reviews, dictionaries, grammars, commentaries, editions, translations,
all of which together formed a simulacrum of the Orient and reproduced
it materially in the West, for the West. The Orient, in short, would be
converted from the personal, sometimes garbled testimony of intrepid
voyagers and residents into impersonal definition by a whole array of
scientific workers. It would be converted from the consecutive
experience of individual research into a sort of imaginary museum
without walls, where everything gathered from the huge distances and
varieties of Oriental culture became categorically*Oriental.* It would
be reconverted, restructured from the bundle of fragments brought back
piecemeal by explorers, expeditions, commissions, armies, and merchants
into lexicographical, bibliographical, departmentalized,
and*textualized* Orientalist sense. By the middle of the nineteenth
century the Orient had become, as Disraeli said, a career, one in which
one could remake and restore not only the Orient but also oneself.

IV- Pilgrims and Pilgrimages, British and French
------------------------------------------------

Every European traveler or resident in the Orient has had to protect
himself from its unsettling influences. Someone like Lane ultimately
rescheduled and resituated the Orient when he came to write about it.
The eccentricities of Oriental life, with its odd calendars, its exotic
spatial configurations, its hopelessly strange languages, its seemingly
perverse morality, were reduced considerably when they appeared as a
series of detailed items presented in a normative European prose style.
It is correct to say that in Orientalizing the Orient, Lane not only
defined but edited it; he excised from it what, in addition to his own
human sympathies, might have ruffled the European sensibility. In most
cases, the Orient seemed to have offended sexual propriety; everything
about the Orient-or at least Lane's Orient-in-Egypt-exuded dangerous
sex, threatened hygiene and domestic seemliness with an excessive
"freedom of intercourse," as Lane put it more irrepressibly than usual.

But there were other sorts of threats than sex. All of them wore away
the European discreteness and rationality of time, space, and personal
identity. In the Orient one suddenly confronted unimaginable antiquity,
inhuman beauty, boundless distance. These could be put to use more
innocently, as it were, if they were thought and written about, not
directly experienced. In Byron's "Giaour," in the*Westöstlicher Diwan,*
in Hugo's*Orientales,* the Orient is a form of release, a place of
original opportunity, whose keynote was struck in Goethe's "Hegire"

Nord and West Siid zersplittern,

Throne bersten, Reiche zittern,

Fluchte du, in reinen Osten

Patriarchenluft zu kosten!

(North, West, and South disintegrate,

Thrones burst, empires tremble.

Fly away, and in the pure East

Taste the Patriarchs' air.)

One always*returned* to the Orient "Dort, im Reinen and in Rechten/Will
ich menschlichen Geschlechten/In des Ursprungs Tiefe dringen" (There in
purity and righteousness will I go back to the profound origins of the
human race) seeing it as completion and confirmation of everything one
had imagined:

Gottes ist der Orient!

Gottes ist der Okzident!

Nord and sudliches Gelande

Ruht im Frieden seiner Hände.76

God is the Orient!

God is the Occident!

Northern and southern lands

Repose in the peace of His hands.)

The Orient, with its poetry, its atmosphere, its possibilities, was
represented by poets like*Hafiz-unbegrenzt,* boundless, Goethe said,
older and younger than we Europeans. And for Hugo, in "Cri de guerre du
mufti" and "La Douleur du pacha"77 the fierceness and the inordinate
melancholy of Orientals was mediated, not by actual fear for life or
disoriented lostness, but by Volney and George Sale, Whose learned work
translated barbarous splendor into usable information for the sublimely
talented poet.

What Orientalists like Lane, Sacy, Renan, Volney, Jones (not to mention
the*Description de l'Égypte),* and other pioneers made available, the
literary crowd exploited. We must recall now our earlier discussion of
the three types of work dealing with the Orient and based upon actual
residence there. The rigorous exigencies of knowledge purged from
Orientalist writing an authorial sensibility: hence Lane's
self-excision, and hence also the first kind of work we enumerated. As
for types two and three, the self is there prominently, subservient to a
voice whose job it is to dispense real knowledge (type two), or
dominating and mediating everything we are told about the Orient (type
three). Yet from one end of the nineteenth century to the other-after
Napoleon, that is-the Orient was a place of pilgrimage, and every major
work belonging to a genuine if not always to an academic Orientalism
took its form, style, and intention from the idea of pilgrimage there.
In this idea as in so many of the other forms of Orientalist writing we
have been discussing, the Romantic idea of restorative reconstruction
(natural supernaturalism) is the principal source.

Every pilgrim sees things his own way, but there are limits to what a
pilgrimage can be for, to what shape and form it can take, to what
truths it reveals. All pilgrimages to the Orient passed through, or had
to pass through, the Biblical lands; most of them in fact were attempts
either to relive or to liberate from the large, incredibly fecund Orient
some portion of Judeo-Christian/Greco-Roman actuality. For these
pilgrims the Orientalized Orient, the Orient of Orientalist scholars,
was a gauntlet to be run, just as the Bible, the Crusades, Islam,
Napoleon, and Alexander were redoubtable predecessors to be reckoned
with. Not only does a learned Orient inhibit the pilgrim's musings and
private fantasies; its very antecedence places barriers between the
contemporary traveler and his writing, unless, as was the case with
Nerval and Flaubert in their use of Lane, Orientalist work is severed
from the library and caught in the aesthetic project. Another inhibition
is that Orientalist writing is too circumscribed by the official
requirements of Orientalist learning. A pilgrim like Chateaubriand
claimed insolently that he undertook his voyages exclusively for his own
sake: "j'allais chercher des images: voilà tout."78 Flaubert, Vigny,
Nerval, Kinglake, Disraeli, Burton, all undertook their pilgrimages in
order to dispel the mustiness of the pre-existing Orientalist
archive.Their writing was to be a fresh new repository of Oriental
experience but, as we shall see, even this project usually (but not
always) resolved itself into the reductionism of the Orientalistic. The
reasons are complex, and they have very much to do with the nature of
the pilgrim, his mode of writing, and the intentional form of his work.

What was the Orient for the individual traveler in the nineteenth
century? Consider first the differences between an English speaker and a
French speaker. For the former the Orient was India, of course, an
actual British possession; to pass through the Near Orient was therefore
to pass en route to a major colony. Already, then, the room available
for imaginative play was limited by the realities of administration,
territorial legality, and executive power. Scott, Kinglake, Disraeli,
Warburton, Burton, and even George Eliot (in whose*Daniel Deronda* the
Orient has plans made for it) are writers, like Lane himself and Jones
before him, for whom the Orient was defined by material possession, by a
material imagination, as it were. England had defeated Napoleon, evicted
France: what the English mind surveyed was an imperial domain which by
the 1880s had become an unbroken patch of British-held territory, from
the Mediterranean to India. To write about Egypt, Syria, or Turkey, as
much as traveling in them, was a matter of touring the realm of
political will, political management, political definition. The
territorial imperative was extremely compelling, even for so
unrestrained a writer as Disraeli, whose*Tancred is* not merely an
Oriental lark but an exercise in the astute political management of
actual forces on actual territories.

In contrast, the French pilgrim was imbued with a sense of acute loss in
the Orient. He came there to a place in which France, unlike Britain,
had no sovereign presence. The Mediterranean echoed with the sounds of
French defeats, from the Crusades to Napoleon. What was to become known
as "la mission civilisatrice" began in the nineteenth century as a
political second best to Britain's presence. Consequently French
pilgrims from Volney on planned and projected for, imagined, ruminated
about places that were principally*in* *their minds;* they constructed
schemes for a typically French, perhaps even a European, concert in the
Orient, which of course they supposed would be orchestrated by them.
Theirs was the Orient of memories, suggestive ruins, forgotten secrets,
hidden correspondences, and an almost virtuosic style of being, an
Orient whose highest literary forms would be found in Nerval and
Flaubert, both of whose work was solidly fixed in an imaginative,
unrealizable (except aesthetically) dimension.

This was also true to a certain extent of scholarly French travelers in
the Orient. Most of them were interested in the Biblical past or in the
Crusades, as Henri Bordeaux has argued in his*Voyageurs* *d'Orient.* 79
*To* these names we must add (at Hassan al-Nouty's suggestion) the names
of Oriental Semiticists, including Quatrembre; Saulcy, the explorer of
the Dead Sea; Renan as Phoenician archaeologist; Judas, the student of
Phoenician languages; Catafago and Defremery, who studied the Ansarians,
Ismailis, and Seljuks; Clermont-Ganneau, who explored Judea; and the
Marquis de Vogue, whose work centered on Palmyrian epigraphy. In
addition there was the whole school of Egyptologists descended from
Champollion and Mariette, a school that would later include Maspero and
Legrain. As an index of the difference between British realities and
French fantasies, it is worthwhile recalling the words in Cairo of the
painter Ludovic Lepic, who commented sadly in 1884 (two years after the
British occupation had begun): "L'Orient est mort au Caire." Only Renan,
ever the realistic racist, condoned the British suppression of Arabi's
nationalist rebellion, which, out of his greater wisdom, he said was a
"disgrace to civilization."80

Unlike Volney and Napoleon, the nineteenth-century French pilgrims did
not seek a scientific so much as an exotic yet especially attractive
reality. This is obviously true of the literary pilgrims, beginning with
Chateaubriand, who found in the Orient a locale sympathetic to their
private myths, obsessions, and requirements. Here we notice how all the
pilgrims, but especially the French ones, exploit the Orient in their
work so as in some urgent way to justify their existential vocation.
Only when there is some additional cognitive purpose in writing about
the Orient does the outpouring of self seem more under control.
Lamartine, for instance, writes about himself, and also about France as
a power in the Orient; that second enterprise mutes and finally controls
imperatives heaped upon his style by*his soul, his* memory, and*his*
imagination. No pilgrim, French or English, could so ruthlessly dominate
his self or his subject as Lane did. Even Burton and T. E. Lawrence, of
whom the former fashioned a deliberately Muslim pilgrimage and the
latter what he called a reverse pilgrimage*away* from Mecca, delivered
masses of historical, political, and social Orientalism that were never
as free of their egos as Lane's were of his. This is why Burton,
Lawrence, and Charles Doughty occupy a middle position between Lane and
Chateaubriand.

Chateaubriand's*Itinéraire de Paris à Jérusalem, et de Jérusalem à*
Paris (1810-1811) records the details of a journey undertaken in
1805-1806, after he had traveled in North America. Its many hundreds of
pages bear witness to its author's admission that "je parle
eternellement de moi," so much so that Stendhal, no selfabnegating
writer himself, could find Chateaubriand's failure as a knowledgeable
traveler to be the result of his "stinking egotism." He brought a very
heavy load of personal objectives and suppositions to the Orient,
unloaded them there, and proceeded thereafter to push people, places,
and ideas around in the Orient as if nothing could resist his imperious
imagination. Chateaubriand came to the Orient as a constructed*figure,*
not as a true self. For him Bonaparte was the last Crusader; he in turn
was "the last Frenchman who left his country to travel in the Holy Land
with the ideas, the goals, and the sentiments of a pilgrim of former
times." But there were other reasons. Symmetry: having been to the New
World and seen its monuments of nature, he needed to complete his circle
of studies by visiting the Orient and its monuments of knowledge: as he
had studied Roman and Celtic antiquity, all that was left for him was
the ruins of Athens, Memphis, and Carthage. Self-completion: he needed
to replenish his stock of images. Confirmation of the importance of the
religious spirit: "religion is a kind of universal language understood
by all men," and where better to observe it than there in the Orient,
even in lands where a comparatively low religion like Islam held sway.
Above all, the need to see things, not as they were, but as
Chateaubriand supposed they were: the Koran was "le livre de Mahomet";
it contained "ni principe de civilisation, ni precepte qui puisse elever
le caractere." "This book," he continued, more or less freely inventing
as he went along, "preaches neither hatred of tyranny nor love of
liberty."81

To so preciously constituted a figure as Chateaubriand, the Orient was a
decrepit canvas awaiting his restorative efforts. The Oriental Arab was
"civilized man fallen again into a savage state": no wonder, then, that
as he watched Arabs trying to speak French, Chateaubriand felt like
Robinson Crusoe thrilled by hearing his parrot speak for the first time.
True, there were places like Bethlehem (whose etymological meaning
Chateaubriand got-completely wrong) in which one found again some
semblance of real -that is, European-civilization, but those were few
and far between. Everywhere, one encountered Orientals, Arabs whose
civilization, religion, and manners were so low, barbaric, and
antithetical as to merit reconquest. The Crusades, he argued, were not
aggression; they were a just Christian counterpart to Omar's arrival in
Europe. Besides, he added, even if the Crusades in their modern or
original form were aggression, the issue they raised transcended such
questions of ordinary mortality:

The Crusades were not only about the deliverance of the Holy Sepulchre,
but more about knowing which would win on the earth, a cult that was
civilization's enemy, systematically favorable to ignorance [this was
Islam, of course], to despotism, to slavery, or a cult that had caused
to reawaken in modern people the genius of a sage antiquity, and had
abolished base servitude?82

This is the first significant mention of an idea that will acquire an
almost unbearable, next to mindless authority in European writing: the
theme of Europe teaching the Orient the meaning of liberty, which is an
idea that Chateaubriand and everyone after him believed that Orientals,
and especially Muslims, knew nothing about.

Of liberty, they know nothing; of propriety, they have none: force is
their God. When they go for long periods without seeing conquerors who
do heavenly justice, they have the air of soldiers without a leader,
citizens without legislators, and a family without a father.83

Already in 1810 we have a European talking like Cromer in 1910, arguing
that Orientals require conquest, and finding it no paradox that a
Western conquest of the Orient was not conquest after all, but liberty.
Chateaubriand puts the whole idea in the Romantic redemptive terms of a
Christian mission to revive a dead world, to quicken in it a sense of
its own potential, one which only a European can discern underneath a
lifeless and degenerate surface. For the traveler this means that he
must use the Old Testament and the Gospels as his guide in Palestine;84
only in this way can the apparent degeneration of the modem Orient be
gotten beyond. Yet Chateaubriand senses no irony in the fact that his
tour and his vision will reveal nothing to him about the modern Oriental
and his destiny.

What matters about the Orient is what it lets happen to Chateaubriand,
what it allows his spirit to do, what it permits him to reveal about
himself, his ideas, his expectations.The liberty that so concerns him is
no more than his own release from the Orient's hostile wastes.

Where his release allows him to go is directly back into the realm of
imagination and imaginative interpretation. Description of the Orient is
obliterated by the designs and patterns foisted upon it by the imperial
ego, which makes no secret of its powers. If in Lane's prose we watch
the ego disappear so that the Orient may appear in all its realistic
detail, in Chateaubriand the ego dissolves itself in the contemplation
of wonders it creates, and then is reborn, stronger than ever, more able
to savor its powers and enjoy its interpretations.

When one travels in Judea, at first a great ennui grips the heart; but
when, passing from one solitary place to another, space stretches out
without limits before you, slowly the ennui dissipates, and one feels a
secret terror, which, far from depressing the soul, gives it courage and
elevates one's native genius. Extraordinary things are disclosed from
all parts of an earth worked over by miracles: the burning sun, the
impetuous eagle, the sterile fig tree; all of poetry, all the scenes
from Scripture are present there. Every name encloses a mystery; every
grotto declares the future; every summit retains within it the accents
of a prophet. God Himself has spoken from these shores: the arid
torrents, the riven rocks, the open tombs attest to the prodigy; the
desert still seems struck dumb with terror, and one would say that it
has still not been able to break the silence since it heard the voice of
the eternal.85

The process of thought in this passage is revealing. An experience of
Pascalian terror does not merely reduce one's self-confidence, it
miraculously stimulates it. The barren landscape stands forth like an
illuminated text presenting itself to the scrutiny of a very strong,
refortified ego. Chateaubriand has transcended the abject, if
frightening, reality of the contemporary Orient so that he may stand in
an original and creative relationship to it. By the end of the passage
he is no longer a modern man but a visionary seer more or less
contemporary with God; if the Judean desert has been silent since God
spoke there, it is Chateaubriand who can hear the silence, understand
its meaning, and-to his reader-make the desert speak again.

The great gifts of sympathetic intuition which had enabled Chateaubriand
to represent and interpret North American mysteries in*René* and Atala,
as well as Christianity in*Le Génie du Christianisme,* are aroused to
even greater feats of interpretation during the*Itinéraire.* No longer
is the author dealing with natural primitivity and romantic sentiment:
here he is dealing with eternal creativity and divine originality
themselves, for it is in the Biblical Orient that they were first
deposited, and they have remained there in unmediated and latent form.
Of course, they cannot be simply grasped; they must be aspired to and
achieved by Chateaubriand. And it is this ambitious purpose that
the*Itinéraire* is made to serve, just as in the text Chateaubriand's
ego must be reconstructed radically enough to get the job done. Unlike
Lane, Chateaubriand attempts to*consume* the Orient. He not only
appropriates it, he represents and speaks for it, not in history but
beyond history, in the timeless dimension of a completely healed world,
where men and lands, God and men, are as one. In Jerusalem, therefore,
at the center of his vision and at the ultimate end of his pilgrimage,
he grants himself a sort of total reconciliation with the Orient, the
Orient as Jewish, Christian, Muslim, Greek, Persian, Roman, and finally
French. He is moved by the plight of the Jews, but he judges that they
too serve to illuminate his general vision, and as a further benefit,
they give the necessary poignance to his Christian vindictiveness. God,
he says, has chosen a new people, and it is not the Jews.86

He makes some other concessions to terrestrial reality, however. If
Jerusalem is booked into his itinerary as its final extraterrestrial
goal, Egypt provides him with material for a political excursus. His
ideas about Egypt supplement his pilgrimage nicely. The magnificent Nile
Delta moves him to assert that

I found only the memories of my glorious country worthy of those
magnificent plains; I saw the remains of monuments of a new
civilization, brought to the banks of the Nile by the genius of
France.87

But these ideas are put in a nostalgic mode because in Egypt
Chateaubriand believes he can equate the absence of France with the
absence of a free government ruling a happy people. Besides, after
Jerusalem, Egypt appears to be only a kind of spiritual anticlimax.
After political commentary on its sorry state, Chateaubriand asks
himself the routine question about "difference" as a result of
historical development: how can this degenerate stupid mob of
"Musulmans" have come to inhabit the same land whose vastly different
owners so impressed Herodotus and Diodorus?

This is a fitting valedictory to Egypt, which he leaves for Tunis,
Carthaginian ruins, and finally, home. Yet he does one last thing of
note in Egypt: unable to do more than look at the Pyramids from a
distance, he takes the trouble to send an emissary there, to have him
inscribe his (Chateaubriand's) name on the stone, adding for our
benefit, "one has to fulfill all the little obligations of a pious
traveler." We would not ordinarily give much more than amused attention
to this charming bit of touristic banality. As a preparation, however,
for the very last page of the*Itinéraire,* it appears more important
than at first glance. Reflecting on his twenty-year project to study
"tous les hasards et tous les chagrins" as an exile, Chateaubriand notes
elegiacally how every one of his books has been in fact a kind of
prolongation of his existence. A man with neither a home nor the
possibility of acquiring one, he finds himself now well past his youth.
If heaven accords him eternal rest, he says, he promises to dedicate
himself in silence to erecting a "monument a ma patrie." What he is left
with on earth, however, is his writing, which, if his name will live,
has been enough, and if it will not live, has been too much.88

These closing lines send us back to Chateaubriand's interest in getting
his name inscribed on the Pyramids. We will have understood that his
egoistic Oriental memoirs supply us with a constantly demonstrated, an
indefatigably performed experience of self. Writing was an act of life
for Chateaubriand, for whom nothing, not even a distant piece of stone,
must remain scriptively untouched by him if he was to stay alive. If the
order of Lane's narrative was to be violated by scientific authority and
enormous detail, then Chateaubriand's was to be transformed into the
asserted will of an egoistic, highly volatile individual. Whereas Lane
would sacrifice his ego to the Orientalist canon, Chateaubriand would
make everything he said about the Orient wholly dependent on his ego.
Yet neither writer could conceive of his posterity as continuing on
fruitfully after him. Lane entered the impersonality of a technical
discipline: his work would be used, but not as a human document.
Chateaubriand, on the other hand, saw that his writing, like the token
inscription of his name on a Pyramid, would signify his self; if not, if
he had not succeeded in prolonging his life by writing, it would be
merely excessive, superfluous.

Even if all travelers to the Orient after Chateaubriand and Lane have
taken their work into account (in some cases, even to the extent of
copying from them verbatim), their legacy embodies the fate of
Orientalism and the options to which it was limited. Either one wrote
science like Lane or personal utterance like Chateaubriand. The problems
with the former were its impersonal Western confidence that descriptions
of general, collective phenomena were possible, and its tendency to make
realities not so much out of the Orient as out of its own observations.
The problem with personal utterance was that it inevitably retreated
into a position equating the Orient with private fantasy, even if that
fantasy was of a very high order indeed, aesthetically speaking. In both
cases, of course, Orientalism enjoyed a powerful influence on how the
Orient was described and characterized. But what that influence always
prevented, even until today, was some sense of the Orient that was
neither impossibly general nor imperturbably private. To look into
Orientalism for a lively sense of an Oriental's human or even social
reality-as a contemporary inhabitant of the modern world-is to look in
vain.

The influence of the two options I have described, Lane's and
Chateaubriand's, British and French, is a great deal of the reason for
this omission. The growth of knowledge, particularly specialized
knowledge, is a very slow process. Far from being merely additive or
cumulative, the growth of knowledge is a process of selective
accumulation, displacement, deletion, rearrangement, and insistence
within what has been called a research consensus. The legitimacy of such
knowledge as Orientalism was during the nineteenth century stemmed not
from religious authority, as had been the case before the Enlightenment,
but from what we can call the restorative citation of antecedent
authority. Beginning with Sacy, the learned Orientalist's attitude was
that of a scientist who surveyed a series of textual fragments, which he
thereafter edited and arranged as a restorer of old sketches might put a
series of them together for the cumulative picture they implicitly
represent. Consequently, amongst themselves Orientalists treat each
other's work in the same citationary way. Burton, for example, would
deal with the Arabian*Nights* or with Egypt indirectly,*through* Lane's
work, by citing his predecessor, challenging him even though he was
granting him very great authority. Nerval's own voyage to the Orient was
by way of Lamartine's, and the latter's by way of Chateaubriand. In
short, as a form of growing knowledge Orientalism resorted mainly to
citations of predecessor scholars in the field for its nutriment. Even
when new materials came his way, the Orientalist judged them by
borrowing from predecessors (as scholars so often do) their
perspectives, ideologies, and guiding theses. In a fairly strict way,
then, Orientalists after Sacy and Lane rewrote Sacy and Lane; after
Chateaubriand, pilgrims rewrote him. From these complex rewritings the
actualities of the modern Orient were systematically excluded,
especially when gifted pilgrims like Nerval and Flaubert preferred
Lane's descriptions to what their eyes and minds showed them
immediately.

In the system of knowledge about the Orient, the Orient is less a place
than a*topos* , a set of references, a congeries of characteristics,
that seems to have its origin in a quotation, or a fragment of a text,
or a citation from someone's work on the Orient or some bit of previous
imagining, or an amalgam of all these. Direct observation or
circumstantial description of the Orient are the fictions presented by
writing on the Orient, yet invariably these are totally secondary to
systematic tasks of another sort. In Lamartine, Nerval, and Flaubert,
the Orient is a re-presentation of canonical material guided by an
aesthetic and executive will capable of producing interest in the
reader. Yet in all three writers, Orientalism or some aspect of it is
asserted, even though, as I said earlier, the narrative consciousness is
given a very large role to play. What we shall see is that for all its
eccentric individuality, this narrative consciousness will end up by
being aware, like Bouvard and Pecuchet, that pilgrimage is after all a
form of copying.

When he began his trip to the Orient in 1833, Lamartine did so, he said,
as something he had always dreamed about: "un voyage en Orient [etait]
comme un grand acte de ma vie interieure." He is a bundle of
predispositions, sympathies, biases: he hates the Romans and Carthage,
and loves Jews, Egyptians, and Hindus, whose Dante he claims he will
become. Armed with a formal verse "Adieu" to France, in which he lists
everything that he plans to do in the Orient, he embarks for the East.
At first everything he encounters either confirms his poetic predictions
or realizes his propensity for analogy. Lady Hester Stanhope is the
Circe of the desert; the Orient is the "patrie de mon imagination"; the
Arabs are a primitive people; Biblical poetry is engraved on the land of
Lebanon; the Orient testifies to the attractive largeness of Asia and to
Greece's comparative smallness. Soon after he reaches Palestine,
however, he becomes the incorrigible maker of an imaginary Orient.

He alleges that the plains of Canaan appear to best advantage in the
works of Poussin and Lorrain. From being a "translation," as he called
it earlier, his voyage is now turned into a prayer, which exercises his
memory, soul, and heart more than it does his eyes, mind, or spirit.89

This candid announcement completely unlooses Lamartine's analogic and
reconstructive (and undisciplined) zeal. Christianity is a religion of
imagination and recollection, and since Lamartine considers that he
typifies the pious believer, he indulges himself accordingly. A
catalogue of his tendentious "observations" would be interminable: a
woman he sees reminds him of Haidee in Don Juan; the relationship
between Jesus and Palestine is like that between Rousseau and Geneva;
the actual river Jordan is less important than the "mysteries" it gives
rise to in one's soul; Orientals, and Muslims in particular, are lazy,
their politics are capricious, passionate, and futureless; another woman
reminds him of a passage in Atala; neither Tasso nor Chateaubriand
(whose antecedent travels seem often to harass Lamartine's otherwise
heedless egoism) got the Holy Land right-and on and on. His pages on
Arabic poetry, about which he discourses with supreme confidence, betray
no discomfort at his total ignorance of the language. All that matters
to him is that his travels in the Orient reveal to him how the Orient is
"la terre des cultes, des prodiges," and that he is its appointed poet
in the West. With no trace of self-irony he announces:

This Arab land is the land of prodigies; everything sprouts there, and
every credulous or fanatical man can become a prophet there in his
turn.90

He has become a prophet merely by the fact of residence in the Orient.

By the end of his narrative Lamartine has achieved the purpose of his
pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulchre, that beginning and end point of all
time and space. He has internalized reality enough to want to retreat
from it back into pure contemplation, solitude, philosophy, and
poetry.91

Rising above the merely geographical Orient, he is transformed into a
latter day Chateaubriand, surveying the East as if it were a personal
(or at the very least a French) province ready to be disposed of by
European powers. From being a traveler and pilgrim in real time and
space, Lamartine has become a transpersonal ego identifying itself in
power and consciousness with the whole of Europe. What he sees before
him is the Orient in the process of its inevitable future dismemberment,
being taken over and consecrated by European suzerainty. Thus in
Lamartine's climactic vision the Orient is reborn as European
right-to-power over it:

This sort of suzerainty thus defined, and consecrated as a European
right,*will* consist principally in the right to occupy one or another
territory, as well as the coasts, in order to found there either free
cities, or European colonies, or commercial ports of call ....

Nor does Lamartine stop at this. He climbs still higher to the point
where the Orient, what he has just seen and where he has just been, is
reduced to "nations without territory,*patrie,* rights, laws or security
...waiting anxiously for the shelter" of European occupation.92

In all the visions of the Orient fabricated by Orientalism there is no
recapitulation, literally, as entire as this one. For Lamartine a
pilgrimage to the Orient has involved not only the penetration of the
Orient by an imperious consciousness but also the virtual elimination of
that consciousness as a result of its accession to a kind of impersonal
and continental control over the Orient. The Orient's actual identity is
withered away into a set of consecutive fragments, Lamartine's
recollective observations, which are later to be gathered up and brought
forth as a restated Napoleonic dream of world hegemony. Whereas Lane's
human identity disappeared into the scientific grid of his Egyptian
classifications, Lamartine's consciousness transgresses its normal
bounds completely. In so doing, it repeats Chateaubriand's journey and
his visions only to move on beyond them, into the sphere of the
Shelleyan and Napoleonic abstract, by which worlds and populations are
moved about like so many cards on a table. What remains of the Orient in
Lamartine's prose is not very substantial at all. Its geopolitical
reality has been overlaid with his plans for it; the sites he has
visited, the people he has met, the experiences he has had, are reduced
to a few echoes in his pompous generalizations. The last traces of
particularity have been rubbed out in the "resume politique" with which
the*Voyage en Orient* concludes.

Against the transcendent quasi-national egoism of Lamartine we must
place Nerval and Flaubert in contrast. Their Oriental works play a
substantial role in their total*oeuvre,* a much greater one than
Lamartine's imperialist*Voyage* in his*oeuvre.* Yet both of them, like
Lamartine, came to the Orient prepared for it by voluminous reading in
the classics, modern literature, and academic Orientalism; about this
preparation Flaubert was much more candid than Nerval, who in*Les Filles
du feu* says disingenuously that all he knew about the Orient was a
half-forgotten memory from his school education.93 The evidence of
his*Voyage en Orient* flatly contradicts this, although it shows a much
less systematic and disciplined knowledge of Orientalia than Flaubert's.
More important, however, is the fact that both writers (Nerval
in*1842-1843* and Flaubert in*1849-1850)* had greater personal and
aesthetic uses for their visits to the Orient than any other
nineteenth-century travelers. It is not inconsequential that both were
geniuses to begin with, and that both were thoroughly steeped in aspects
of European culture that encouraged a sympathetic, if perverse, vision
of the Orient. Nerval and Flaubert belonged to that community of thought
and feeling described by Mario Praz in*The Romantic Agony,* a community
for which the imagery of exotic places, the cultivation of
sadomasochistic tastes (what Praz calls*algolagnia),* a fascination with
the macabre, with the notion of a Fatal Woman, with secrecy and
occultism, all combined to enable literary work of the sort produced by
Gautier (himself fascinated by the Orient), Swinburne, Baudelaire, and
Huysmans.94 For Nerval and Flaubert, such female figures as Cleopatra,
Salome, and Isis have a special significance; and it was by no means
accidental that in their work on the Orient, as well as in their visits
to it, they pre-eminently valorized and enhanced female types of this
legendary, richly suggestive, and associative sort.

In addition to their general cultural attitudes, Nerval and Flaubert
brought to the Orient a personal mythology whose concerns and even
structure required the Orient. Both men were touched by the Oriental
renaissance as Quinet and others had defined it: they sought the
invigoration provided by the fabulously antique and the exotic. For
each, however, the Oriental pilgrimage was a quest for something
relatively personal: Flaubert seeking a "homeland," as Jean Bruneau has
called it,95 in the locales of the origin of religions, visions, and
classical antiquity; Nerval seeking -or rather following-the traces of
his personal sentiments and dreams, like Sterne's Yorick before him. For
both writers the Orient was a place therefore of deja vu, and for both,
with the artistic economy typical of all major aesthetic imaginations,
it was a place often returned to after the actual voyage had been
completed. For neither of them was the Orient exhausted by their uses of
it, even if there is often a quality of disappointment, disenchantment,
or demystification to be found in their Oriental writings.

The paramount importance of Nerval and Flaubert to a study such as this
of the Orientalist mind in the nineteenth century is that they produced
work that is connected to and depends upon the kind of Orientalism we
have so far discussed, yet remains independent from it. First there is
the matter of their work's scope. Nerval produced his*Voyage en Orient*
as a collection of travel notes, sketches, stories, and fragments; his
preoccupation with the Orient is to be found as well in*Les Chimeres,*
in his letters, in some of his fiction and other prose writings.
Flaubert's writing both before and after his visit is soaked in the
Orient. The Orient appears in the*Carnets de Voyage* and in the first
version of*La Tentation de Saint Antoine* (and in the two later
versions), as well as in*Hérodias, Salammbô,* and the numerous reading
notes, scenarios, and unfinished stories still available to us, which
have been very intelligently studied by Bruneau.96 There are echoes of
Orientalism in Flaubert's other major novels, too. In all, both Nerval
and Flaubert continually elaborated their Oriental material and absorbed
it variously into the special structures of their personal aesthetic
projects. This is not to say, however, that the Orient is incidental to
their work. Rather-by contrast with such writers as Lane (from whom both
men borrowed shamelessly), Chateaubriand, Lamartine, Renan, Sacy-their
Orient was not so much grasped, appropriated, reduced, or codified as
lived in, exploited aesthetically and imaginatively as a roomy place
full of possibility. What mattered to them was the structure of their
work as an independent, aesthetic, and personal fact, and not the ways
by which, if one wanted to, one could effectively dominate or set down
the Orient graphically. Their egos never absorbed the Orient, nor
totally identified the Orient with documentary and textual knowledge of
it (with official Orientalism, in short).

On the one hand, therefore, the scope of their Oriental work exceeds the
limitations imposed by orthodox Orientalism. On the other hand, the
subject of their work is more than Oriental or Orientalistic (even
though they do their own Orientalizing of the Orient); it quite
consciously plays with the limitations and the challenges presented to
them by the Orient and by knowledge about it. Nerval, for example,
believes that he has to infuse what he sees with vitality since, he
says, Le ciel et la mer sont toujours là; le ciel d'Orient, la mer
d'Ionie se donnent chaque matin le saint baiser d'amour; mais la terre
est morte, morte sous la main de I'homme, et lea dieux se sont envolés!

(The sky and the sea are still there; the Oriental sky and the Ionian
sky give each other the sacred kiss of love each morning; but the earth
is dead, dead because man has killed it, and the gods have fled.)

If the Orient is to live at all, now that its gods have fled, it must be
through his fertile efforts. In the*Voyage en Orient* the narrative
consciousness is a constantly energetic voice, moving through the
labyrinths of Oriental existence armed-Nerval tells us-with two Arabic
words,*tayeb,* the word for assent, and*mafisch* , the word for
rejection. These two words enable him selectively to confront the
antithetical Oriental world, to confront it and draw out from it its
secret principles. He is predisposed to recognize that the Orient is "le
pays des rêves et de l'illision," which, like the veils he sees
everywhere in Cairo, conceal a deep, rich fund of female sexuality.
Nerval repeats Lane's experience of discovering the necessity for
marriage in an Islamic society, but unlike Lane he does attach himself
to a woman. His liaison with Zaynab is more than socially obligatory:

I must unite with a guileless young girl who is of this sacred soil,
which is our first homeland; I must bathe myself in the vivifying
springs of humanity, from which poetry and the faith of our fathers
flowed forth! ...I would like to lead my life like a novel, and I
willingly place myself in the situation of one of those active and
resolute heroes who wish at all costs to create a drama around them, a
knot of complexity, in a word, action.97

Nerval invests himself in the Orient, producing not so much a novelistic
narrative as an everlasting intention-never fully realized -to fuse mind
with physical action. This antinarrative, this parapilgrimage, is a
swerving away from discursive finality of the sort envisioned by
previous writers on the Orient.

Connected physically and sympathetically to the Orient, Nerval wanders
informally through its riches and its cultural (and principally
feminine) ambience, locating in Egypt especially that maternal "center,
at once mysterious and accessible" from which all wisdom derives.98 His
impressions, dreams, and memories alternate with sections of ornate,
mannered narrative done in the Oriental style; the hard realities of
travel-in Egypt, Lebanon, Turkey-mingle with the design of a deliberate
digression, as if Nerval were repeating Chateaubriand's*Itinéraire*
using an underground, though far less imperial and obvious, route.
Michel Butor puts it beautifully:

To Nerval's eyes, Chateaubriand's journey remains a voyage along the
surface, while his own is calculated, utilizing annex centers, lobbies
of ellipses englobing the principal centers; this allows him to place in
evidence, by parallax, all the dimensions of the snare harbored by the
normal centers. Wandering the streets or environs of Cairo, Beirut, or
Constantinople, Nerval is always lying in wait for anything that will
allow him to sense a cavern extending beneath Rome, Athens, and
Jerusalem [the principal cities of Chateaubriand's*Itinéraire]*

Just as the three cities of Chateaubriand are in communication -Rome,
with its emperors and popes, reassembling the heritage, the testament,
of Athens and Jerusalem-the caverns of Nerval ...become engaged in
intercourse.99

Even the two large plotted episodes, "The Tale of the Caliph Hakim" and
"The Tale of the Queen of the Morning," that will supposedly convey a
durable, solid narrative discourse seem to push Nerval away from
"overground" finality, edging him further and further into a haunting
internal world of paradox and dream. Both tales deal with multiple
.identity, one of whose motifs-explicitly stated-is incest, and both
return us to Nerval's quintessential Oriental world of uncertain, fluid
dreams infinitely multiplying themselves past resolution, definiteness,
materiality. When the journey is completed and Nerval arrives in Malta
on his way back to the European mainland, he realizes that he is now in
"le pays du froid et des orages, et déjà l'Orient n'est plus pour moi
qu'un de ses rêves du matin auxquels viennent bientôt succéder les
ennuis du jour."100 His*Voyage* incorporates numerous pages copied out
of Lane's*Modern Egyptians,* but even their lucid confidence seems to
dissolve in the endlessly decomposing, cavernous element which is
Nerval's Orient.

*His carnet* for the*Voyage* supplies us, I think, with two perfect
texts for understanding how his Orient untied itself from anything
resembling an Orientalist conception of the Orient, even though his work
depends on Orientalism to a certain extent. First, his appetites strive
to gather in experience and memory indiscriminately: "Je sens le besoin
de m'assimiler toute la nature (femmes térangères).Souvenirs d'y avoir
vécu." The second elaborates a bit on the first: "Les rêves et la folie
...Le désir de*l'Orient.* L'Europe s'élève.Le rêve se réalise ...Elle.Je
l'avais fuie, je l'avais perdue ...Vaisseau d'Orient."101 The Orient
symbolizes Nerval's dreamquest and the fugitive woman central to it,
both as desire and as loss. "Vaisseau d'Orient"---vessel of the
Orient-refers enigmatically either to the woman as the vessel carrying
the Orient, or possibly, to Nerval's own vessel for the Orient, his
prose*voyage.* In either case, the Orient is identified with
commemorative*absence.*

How else can we explain in the*Voyage,* a work of so original and
individual a mind, the lazy use of large swatches of Lane, incorporated
without a murmur by Nerval as his descriptions of the Orient? It is as
if having failed both in his search for a stable Oriental reality and in
his intent to give systematic order to his re-presentation of the
Orient, Nerval was employing the borrowed authority of a canonized
Orientalist text. After his voyage the earth remained dead, and aside
from its brilliantly crafted but fragmented embodiments in the*Voyage,*
his self was no less drugged and worn out than before. Therefore the
Orient seemed retrospectively to belong to a negative realm, in which
failed narratives, disordered chronicles, mere transcription of
scholarly texts, were its only possible vessel. At least Nerval did not
try to save his project by wholeheartedly giving himself up to French
designs on the Orient, although he did resort to Orientalism to make
some of his points.

In contrast to Nerval's negative vision of an emptied Orient, Flaubert's
is eminently corporeal. His travel notes and letters reveal a man
scrupulously reporting events, persons, and settings, delighting in
their*bizarreries,* never attempting to reduce the incongruities before
him. In what he writes (or perhaps because he writes), the premium is on
the eye-catching, translated into self-consciously worked-out phrases:
for example, "Inscriptions and bird droppings are the only two things in
Egypt that give any indication of life.102 His tastes run to the
perverse, whose form is often a combination of extreme animality, even
of grotesque nastiness, with extreme and sometimes intellectual
refinement. Yet this particular kind of perversity was not something
merely observed, it was also studied, and came to represent an essential
element in Flaubert's fiction. The familiar oppositions, or
ambivalences, as Harry Levin has called them, that roam through
Flaubert's writing-flesh versus mind, Salome versus Saint John, Salammbo
versus Saint Anthony103 ---are powerfully validated by what he saw in
the Orient, what, given his eclectic learning, he could see there of the
partnership between knowledge and carnal grossness. In Upper Egypt he
was taken with ancient Egyptian art, its preciosity and deliberate
lubricity: "so dirty pictures existed even so far back in antiquity?"
How much more the Orient really answered questions than it raised them
is evident in the following:

You [Flaubert's mother] ask me whether the Orient is up to what I
imagined it to be. Yes, it is; and more than that, it extends far beyond
the narrow idea I had of it. I have found, clearly delineated,
everything that was hazy in my mind. Facts have taken the place of
suppositions-so excellently so that it is often as though I were
suddenly coming upon old forgotten dreams.104

Flaubert's work is so complex and so vast as to make any simple account
of his Oriental writing very sketchy and hopelessly incomplete.
Nevertheless, in the context created by other writers on the Orient, a
certain number of main features in Flaubert's Orientalism can fairly be
described. Making allowances for the difference between candidly
personal writing (letters, travel notes, diary jottings) and formally
aesthetic writing (novels and tales), we can still remark that
Flaubert's Oriental perspective is rooted in an eastward and southward
search for a "visionary alternative," which "meant gorgeous color, in
contrast to the greyish tonality of the French provincial landscape. It
meant exciting spectacle instead of humdrum routine, the perennially
mysterious in place of the all too familiar."105 When he actually
visited it, however, this Orient impressed him with its decrepitude and
senescence. Like every other Orientalism, then, Flaubert's is
revivalist:*he* must bring the Orient to life, he must deliver it to
himself and to his readers, and it is his experience of it in books and
on the spot, and his language for it that will do the trick. His novels
of the Orient accordingly were labored historical and learned
reconstructions. Carthage in Salammbo and the products of Saint
Anthony's fevered imagination were authentic fruits of Flaubert's wide
reading in the (mainly Western) sources of Oriental religion, warfare,
ritual, and societies.

What the formal aesthetic work retains, over and above the marks of
Flaubert's voracious readings and recensions, are memories of Oriental
travel. The*Bibliothèque des idées reçues* has it that an Orientalist is
"un homme qui a beaucoup voyagé,"106 only unlike most other such
travelers Flaubert put his voyages to ingenious use. Most of his
experiences are conveyed in theatrical form. He is interested not only
in the content of what he sees but-like Renan -in*how* he sees, the way
by which the Orient, sometimes horribly but always attractively, seems
to present itself to him. Flaubert is its best audience:

...Kasr el-'Aini Hospital. Well maintained. The work of Clot Bey-his
hand is still to be seen. Pretty cases of syphilis; in the ward of
Abbas's Mamelukes, several have it in the arse. At a sign from the
doctor, they all stood up on their beds, undid their trouserbelts (it
was like army drill), and opened their anuses with their fingers to show
their chancres. Enormous infundibula; one had a growth of hair inside
his anus. One old man's prick entirely devoid of skin; I recoiled from
the stench. A rachitic: hands curved backward, nails as long as claws;
one could see the bone structure of his torso as clearly as a skeleton;
the rest of his body, too, was fantastically thin, and his head was
ringed with whitish leprosy.

Dissecting room: ...On the table an Arab cadaver, wide open; beautiful
black hair ….107

The lurid detail of this scene is related to many scenes in Flaubert's
novels, in which illness is presented to us as if in a clinical
theater.His fascination with dissection and beauty recalls, for
instance, the final scene of*Salammbô,* culminating in Mâtho's
ceremonial death. In such scenes, sentiments of repulsion or sympathy
are repressed entirely; what matters is the correct rendering of exact
detail.

The most celebrated moments in Flaubert's Oriental travel have to do
with Kuchuk Hanem, a famous Egyptian dancer and courtesan he encountered
in Wadi Halfa. He had read in Lane about the*almehs* and the*khawals,*
dancing girls and boys respectively, but it was his imagination rather
than Lane's that could immediately grasp as well as enjoy the almost
metaphysical paradox of the*almeh's* profession and the meaning of her
name. (In Victory, Joseph Conrad was to repeat Flaubert's observation by
making his musician heroine-Alma-irresistibly attractive and dangerous
to Axel Heyst.)*Alemah* in Arabic means a learned woman. It was the name
given to women in conservative eighteenth-century Egyptian society who
were accomplished reciters of poetry. By the mid-nineteenth century the
title was used as a sort of guild name for dancers who were also
prostitutes, and such was Kuchuk Hanem, whose dance "L'Abeille" Flaubert
watched before he slept with her. She was surely the prototype of
several of his novels' female characters in her learned sensuality,
delicacy, and (according to Flaubert) mindless coarseness. What he
especially liked about her was that she seemed to place no demands on
him, while the "nauseating odor" of her bedbugs mingled enchantingly
with "the scent of her skin, which was dripping with sandalwood."After
his voyage, he had written Louise Colet reassuringly that "the oriental
woman is no more than a machine: she makes no distinction between one
man and another man." Kuchuk's dumb and irreducible sexuality allowed
Flaubert's mind to wander in ruminations whose haunting power over him
reminds us somewhat of Deslauriers and Fréderic Moreau at the end
of*l'Education sentimentale:*

As for me, I scarcely shut my eyes. Watching that beautiful creature
asleep (she snored, her head against my arm: I had slipped my forefinger
under her necklace), my night was one long, infinitely intense
reverie--that was why I stayed. I thought of my nights in Paris
brothels-a whole series of old memories came back-and I thought of her,
of her dance, of her voice as she sang songs that for me were without
meaning and even without distinguishable words.108

The Oriental woman is an occasion and an opportunity for Flaubert's
musings; he is entranced by her self-sufficiency, by her emotional
carelessness, and also by what, lying next to him, she allows him to
think. Less a woman than a display of impressive but verbally
inexpressive femininity, Kuchuk is the prototype of Flaubert's Salammbô
and Salomé as well as of all the versions of carnal female temptation to
which his Saint Anthony is subject. Like the Queen of Sheba (who also
danced "The Bee") she could say-were she able to speak-"Je ne suis pas
une femme, je suis un monde."109 Looked at from another angle Kuchuk is
a disturbing symbol of fecundity, peculiarly Oriental in her luxuriant
and seemingly unbounded sexuality. Her home near the upper reaches of
the Nile occupied a position structurally similar to the place where the
veil of Tanit- the goddess described as*Omniféconde-is* concealed
in*Salammbô.* 110 Yet like Tanit, Salomé and Salammbô herself, Kuchuk
was doomed to remain barren, corrupting, without issue. How much she and
the Oriental world she lived in came to intensify for Flaubert his own
sense of barrenness is indicated in the following:

We have a large orchestra, a rich palette, a variety of resources. We
know many more tricks and dodges, probably, than were ever known before.
No, what we lack is the intrinsic principle, the soul of the thing, the
very idea of the subject. We take notes, we make journeys: emptiness!
emptiness! We become scholars, archaeologists, historians, doctors,
cobblers, people of taste. What is the good of all that? Where is the
heart, the verve, the sap? Where to start from? Where to go? We're good
at sucking, we play a lot of tongue-games, we pet for hours: but the
real thing! To ejaculate, beget the child!111

Woven through all of Flaubert's Oriental experiences, exciting or
disappointing, is an almost uniform association between the Orient and
sex. In making this association Flaubert was neither the first nor the
most exaggerated instance of a remarkably persistent motif in Western
attitudes to the Orient. And indeed, the motif itself is singularly
unvaried, although Flaubert's genius may have done more than anyone
else's could have to give it artistic dignity. Why the Orient seems
still to suggest not only fecundity but sexual promise (and threat),
untiring sensuality, unlimited desire, deep generative energies, is
something on which one could speculate: it is not the province of my
analysis here, alas, despite its frequently noted appearance.
Nevertheless one must acknowledge its importance as something eliciting
complex responses, sometimes even a frightening self-discovery, in the
Orientalists, and Flaubert was an interesting case in point.

The Orient threw him back on his own human and technical resources. It
did not respond, just as Kuchuk did not, to his presence. Standing
before its ongoing life Flaubert, like Lane before him, felt his
detached powerlessness, perhaps also his self-induced unwillingness, to
enter and become part of what he saw. This of course was Flaubert's
perennial problem; it had existed before he went East, and it remained
after the visit. Flaubert admitted the difficulty, the antidote to which
was in his work (especially in an Oriental work like La Tentation de
Saint Antoine) to stress the form of encyclopedic presentation of
material at the expense of human engagement in life. Indeed, Saint
Anthony is nothing if not a man for whom reality is a series of books,
spectacles, and pageants unrolling temptingly and at a distance before
his eyes. All of Flaubert's immense learning is structured-as Michel
Foucault has tellingly noted-like a theatrical, fantastic library,
parading before the anchorite's gaze;112 residually, the parade carries
in its form Flaubert's memories of Kasr el'Aini (the syphilitics' army
drill) and Kuchuk's dance. More to the point, however, is that Saint
Anthony is a celibate to whom temptations are primarily sexual. After
putting up with every sort of dangerous charm, he is finally given a
glimpse into the biological processes of life; he is delirious at being
able to see life being born, a scene for which Flaubert felt himself to
be incompetent during his Oriental sojourn. Yet because Anthony is
delirious, we are meant to read the scene ironically. What is granted to
him at the end, the desire to*become* matter, to become life, is at best
a desire-whether realizable and fulfillable or not, we cannot know.

Despite the energy of his intelligence and his enormous power, of
intellectual absorption, Flaubert felt in the Orient, first, that "the
more you concentrate on it [in detail] the less you grasp the whole,"
and then, second, that "the pieces fall into place of themselves."113 At
best, this produces a*spectacular* form, but it remains barred to the
Westerner's full participation in it. On one level this was a personal
predicament for Flaubert, and he devised means, some of which we have
discussed, for dealing with it. On a more general level, this was
an*epistemological* difficulty for which, of course, the discipline of
Orientalism existed. At one moment during his Oriental tour he
considered what the epistemological challenge could give rise to:
Without what he called spirit and style, the mind could "get lost in
archaeology": he was referring to a sort of regimented antiquarianism by
which the exotic and the strange would get formulated into lexicons,
codes, and finally cliches of the kind he was to ridicule in
the*Dictionnaire des idées reçues.* Under the influence of such an
attitude the world would be "regulated like a college. Teachers will be
the law. Everyone will be in uniform."114 As against such an imposed
discipline, he no doubt felt that his own treatments of exotic material,
notably the Oriental material he had both experienced and read about for
years, were infinitely preferable. In those at least there was room for
a sense of immediacy, imagination, and flair, whereas in the ranks of
archaeological tomes everything but "learning" had been squeezed out.
And more than most novelists Flaubert was acquainted with organized
learning, its products, and its results: these products are clearly
evident in the misfortunes of Bouvard and Pecuchet, but they would have
been as comically apparent in fields like Orientalism, whose textual
attitudes belonged to the world of*idées reçues.* Therefore one could
either construct the world with verve and style, or one could copy it
tirelessly according to impersonal academic rules of procedure.

In both cases, with regard to the Orient, there was a frank
acknowledgment that it was a world elsewhere, apart from the ordinary
attachments, sentiments, and values of our world in the West.

In all of his novels Flaubert associates the Orient with the escapism of
sexual fantasy. Emma Bovary and Fréderic Moreau pine for what in their
drab (or harried) bourgeois lives they do not have, and what they
realize they want comes easily to their daydreams packed inside Oriental
clichés: harems, princesses, princes, slaves, veils, dancing girls and
boys, sherbets, ointments, and so on. The repertoire is familiar, not so
much because it reminds us of Flaubert's own voyages in and obsession
with the Orient, but because, once again, the association is clearly
made between the Orient and the freedom of licentious sex. We may as
well recognize that for nineteenth-century Europe, with its
increasing*embourgeoisement,* sex had been institutionalized to a very
considerable degree. On the one hand, there was no such thing as "free"
sex, and on the other, sex in society entailed a web of legal, moral,
even political and economic obligations of a detailed and certainly
encumbering sort. Just as the various colonial possessions-quite apart
from their economic benefit to metropolitan Europe-were useful as places
to send wayward sons, superfluous populations of delinquents, poor
people, and other undesirables, so the Orient was a place where one
could look for sexual experience unobtainable in Europe. Virtually no
European writer who wrote on or traveled to the Orient in the period
after 1800 exempted himself or herself from this quest: Flaubert,
Nerval, "Dirty Dick" Burton, and Lane are only the most notable. In the
twentieth century one thinks of Gide, Conrad, Maugham, and dozens of
others. What they looked for often-correctly, I think-was a different
type of sexuality, perhaps more libertine and less guilt-ridden; but
even that quest, if repeated by enough people, could (and did) become as
regulated and uniform as learning itself. In time "Oriental sex" was as
standard a commodity as any other available in the mass culture, with
the result that readers and writers could have it if they wished without
necessarily going to the Orient.

It was certainly true that by the middle of the nineteenth century
France, no less than England and the rest of Europe, had a flourishing
knowledge industry of the sort that Flaubert feared. Great numbers of
texts were being produced, and more important, the agencies and
institutions for their dissemination and propagation were everywhere to
be found. As historians of science and knowledge have observed, the
organization of scientific and learned fields that took place during the
nineteenth century was both rigorous and all-encompassing. Research
became a regular activity; there was a regulated exchange of
information, and agreement on what the problems were as well as
consensus on the appropriate paradigms for research and its results.115
The apparatus serving Oriental studies was part of the scene, and this
was one thing that Flaubert surely had in mind when he proclaimed that
"everyone will be in uniform." An Orientalist was no longer a gifted
amateur enthusiast, or if he was, he would have trouble being taken
seriously as a scholar. To be an Orientalist meant university training
in Oriental studies (by 1850 every major European university had a fully
developed curriculum in one or another of the Orientalist disciplines),
it meant subvention for one's travel (perhaps by one of the Asiatic
societies or a geographical exploration fund or a government grant), it
meant publication in accredited form (perhaps under the imprint of a
learned society or an Oriental translation fund). And both within the
guild of Orientalist scholars and to the public at large, such uniform
accreditation as clothed the work of Orientalist scholarship, not
personal testimony nor subjective impressionism, meant Science.

Added to the oppressive regulation of Oriental matters was the
accelerated attention paid by the Powers (as the European empires were
called) to the Orient, and to the Levant in particular. Ever since the
Treaty of Chanak of 1806 between the Ottoman Empire and Great Britain,
the Eastern Question had hovered ever more prominently on Europe's
Mediterranean horizons. Britain's interests were more substantial in the
East than France's, but we must not forget Russia's movements into the
Orient (Samarkand and Bokhara were taken in 1868; the Transcaspian
Railroad was being extended systematically), nor Germany's and
Austria-Hungary's. France's North African interventions, however, were
not the only components of its Islamic policy. In 1860, during the
clashes between Maronites and Druzes in Lebanon (already predicted by
Lamartine and Nerval), France supported the Christians, England the
Druzes. For standing near the center of all European politics in the
East was the question of minorities, whose "interests" the Powers, each
in its own way, claimed to protect and represent. Jews, Greek and
Russian Orthodox, Druzes, Circassians, Armenians, Kurds, the various
small Christian sects: all these were studied, planned for, designed
upon by European Powers improvising as well as constructing their
Oriental policy.

I mention such matters simply as a way of keeping vivid the sense of
layer upon layer of interests, official learning, institutional
pressure, that covered the Orient as a subject matter and as a territory
during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Even the most
innocuous travel book-and there were literally hundreds written after
mid-century116 -contributed to the density of public awareness of the
Orient; a heavily marked dividing line separated the delights,
miscellaneous exploits, and testimonial portentousness of individual
pilgrims in the East (which included some American voyagers, among them
Mark Twain and Herman Melville117 ) from the authoritative reports of
scholarly travelers, missionaries, governmental functionaries, and other
expert witnesses. This dividing line existed clearly in Flaubert's mind,
as it must have for any individual consciousness that did not have an
innocent perspective on the Orient as a terrain for literary
exploitation.

English writers on the whole had a more pronounced and harder sense of
what Oriental pilgrimages might entail than the French. India was a
valuably real constant in this sense, and therefore all the territory
between the Mediterranean and India acquired a correspondingly weighty
importance. Romantic writers like Byron and Scott consequently had a
political vision of the Near Orient and a very combative awareness of
how relations between the Orient and Europe would have to be conducted.
Scott's historical sense in The*Talisman* and*Count Robert of Paris*
allowed him to set these novels in Crusader Palestine and
eleventh-century Byzantium, respectively, without at the same time
detracting from his canny political appreciation of the way powers act
abroad. The failure of Disraeli's*Tancred* can easily be ascribed to its
author's perhaps overdeveloped knowledge of Oriental politics and the
British Establishment's network of interests; Tancred's ingenuous desire
to go to Jerusalem very soon mires Disraeli in ludicrously complex
descriptions of how a Lebanese tribal chieftain tries to manage Druzes,
Muslims, Jews, slid Europeans to his political advantage. By the end of
the novel Tancred's Eastern quest has more or less disappeared because
there is nothing in Disraeli's material vision of Oriental realities to
nourish the pilgrim's somewhat capricious impulses. Even George Eliot,
who never visited the Orient herself, could not sustain the Jewish
equivalent of an Oriental pilgrimage in*Daniel Deronda (1876)* without
straying into the complexities of British realities as they decisively
affected the Eastern project.

Thus whenever the Oriental motif for the English writer was not
principally a stylistic matter (as in FitzGerald's*Rubaiyat* or in
Morier's*Adventures of Hajji Baba of Ispahan),* it forced him to
confront a set of imposing resistances to his individual fantasy. There
are no English equivalents to the Oriental works by Chateaubriand,
Lamartine, Nerval, and Flaubert, just as Lane's early Orientalist
counterparts--Sacy and Renan-were considerably more aware than he Was of
how much they were creating what they wrote about. The form of such
works as Kinglake's*Eothen* (1844) and Burton's*Personal Narrative of a
Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah and Meccah* (1855-1856) is rigidly
chronological and dutifully linear, as if what the authors were
describing was a shopping trip to an Oriental bazaar rather than an
adventure. Kinglake's undeservedly famous and popular work is a pathetic
catalogue of pompous ethnocentrisms and tiringly nondescript accounts of
the Englishman's East. His ostensible purpose in the book is to prove
that travel in the Orient is important to "moulding of your
character-that is, your very identity," but in fact this turns out to be
little more than solidifying "your" anti-Semitism, xenophobia, and
general allpurpose race prejudice. We are told, for instance, that
the*Arabian Nights* is too lively and inventive a work to have been
created by a "mere Oriental, who, for creative purposes, is a thing dead
and dry-a mental mummy." Although Kinglake blithely confesses to no
knowledge of any Oriental language, he is not constrained by ignorance
from making sweeping generalizations about the Orient, its culture,
mentality, and society. Many of the attitudes he repeats are canonical,
of course, but it is interesting how little the experience of actually
seeing the Orient affected his opinions. Like many other travelers he is
more interested in remaking himself and the Orient (dead and dry-a
mental mummy) than he is in seeing what there is to be seen. Every being
he encounters merely corroborates his belief that Easterners are best
dealt with when intimidated, and what better instrument of intimidation
than a sovereign Western ego? En route to Suez across the desert, alone,
he glories in his self-sufficiency and power: "I was here in this
African desert, and I*myself, and no other, had charge of my life."* 118
It is for the comparatively useless purpose of letting Kinglake take
hold of himself that the Orient serves him.

Like Lamartine before him, Kinglake comfortably identified his superior
consciousness with his nation's, the difference being that in the
Englishman's case his government was closer to settling in the rest of
the Orient than France was-for the time being. Flaubert saw this with
perfect accuracy:

It seems to me almost impossible that within a short time England won't
become mistress of Egypt. She already keeps Aden full of her troops, the
crossing of Suez will make it very easy for the redcoats to arrive in
Cairo one fine morning-the news will reach France two weeks later and
everyone will be very surprised! Remember my prediction: at the first
sign of trouble in Europe, England will take Egypt, Russia will take
Constantinople, and we, in retaliation, will get ourselves massacred in
the mountains of Syria.119

For all their vaunted individuality Kinglake's views express a public
and national will over the Orient; his ego is the instrument of this
will's expression, not by any means its master. There is no evidence in
his writing that he struggled to create a novel opinion of the Orient;
neither his knowledge nor his personality was adequate for that, and
this is the great difference between him and Richard Burton. As a
traveler, Burton was a real adventurer; as a scholar, he could hold his
own with any academic Orientalist in Europe; as a character, he was
fully aware of the necessity of combat between himself and the uniformed
teachers who ran Europe and European knowledge with such precise
anonymity and scientific firmness. Everything Burton wrote testifies to
this combativeness, rarely with more candid contempt for his opponents
than in the preface to his translation of the*Arabian Nights.* He seems
to have taken a special sort of infantile pleasure in demonstrating that
he knew more than any professional scholar, that he had acquired many
more details than they had, that he could handle the material with more
wit and tact and freshness than they.

As I said earlier, Burton's work based on his personal experience
occupies a median position between Orientalist genres represented on the
one hand by Lane and on the other by the French writers I have
discussed. His Oriental narratives are structured as pilgrimages and, in
the case of*The Land of Midian Revisited,* pilgrimages for a second time
to sites of sometimes religious, sometimes political and economic
significance. He is present as the principal character of these works,
as much the center of fantastic adventure and even fantasy (like the
French writers) as the authoritative commentator and detached Westerner
on Oriental society and customs (like Lane). He has been rightly
considered the first in a series of fiercely individualistic Victorian
travelers in the East (the others being Blunt and Doughty) by Thomas
Assad, who bases his work on the distance in tone and intelligence
between his writers' work and such works as Austen Layard's*Discoveries
in the Ruins* of*Nineveh and Babylon* (1851), Eliot Warburton's
celebrated*The Crescent and the Cross* (1844), Robert Curzon's*Visit to
the Monasteries* of*the Levant* (1849) , and (a work he does not
mention) Thackeray's moderately amusing*Notes* of*a Journey from
Cornhill to Grand Cairo* (1845).120 Yet Burton's legacy is more complex
than individualism precisely because in his writing we can find
exemplified the struggle between individualism and a strong feeling of
national identification with Europe (specifically England) as an
imperial power in the East. Assad sensitively points out that Burton was
an imperialist, for all his sympathetic self-association with the Arabs;
but what is more relevant is that Burton thought of himself both as a
rebel against authority (hence his identification with the East as a
place of freedom from Victorian moral authority) and as a potential
agent of authority in the East. It is the*manner* of that coexistence,
between two antagonistic roles for himself,that is of interest.

The problem finally reduces itself to the problem of knowledge of the
Orient, which is why a consideration of Burton's Orientalism ought to
conclude our account of Orientalist structures and restructures in most
of the nineteenth century. As a traveling adventurer Burton conceived of
himself as sharing the life of the people in whose lands he lived. Far
more successfully than T. E. Lawrence, he was able to become an
Oriental; he not only spoke the language flawlessly, he was able to
penetrate to the heart of Islam and, disguised as an Indian Muslim
doctor, accomplish the pilgrimage to Mecca. Yet Burton's most
extraordinary characteristic is, I believe, that he was preternaturally
knowledgeable about the degree to which human life in society was
governed by rules and codes. All of his vast information about the
Orient, which dots every page he wrote, reveals that he knew that the
Orient in general and Islam in particular were systems of information,
behavior, and belief, that to be an Oriental or a Muslim was to know
certain things in a certain way, and that these were of course subject
to history, geography, and the development of society in circumstances
specific to it. Thus his accounts of travel in the East reveal to us a
consciousness aware of these things and able to steer a narrative course
through them: no man who did not know Arabic and Islam as well as Burton
could have gone as far as he did in actually becoming a pilgrim to Mecca
and Medina. So what we read in his prose is the history of a
consciousness negotiating its way through an alien culture by virtue of
having successfully absorbed its systems of information and behavior.
Burton's freedom was in having shaken himself loose of his European
origins enough to be able to live as an Oriental. Every scene in the
Pilgrimage reveals him as winning out over the obstacles confronting
him, a foreigner, in a strange place. He was able to do this because he
had sufficient knowledge of an alien society for this purpose.

In no writer on the Orient so much as in Burton do we feel that
generalizations about the Oriental-for example, the pages on the notion
of*Kayf for* the Arab or on how education is suited to the Oriental mind
(pages that are clearly meant as a rebuttal to Macaulay's simple-minded
assertions)121 -are the result of knowledge acquired about the Orient by
living there, actually seeing it firsthand, truly trying to see Oriental
life from the viewpoint of a person immersed in it. Yet what is never
far from the surface of Burton's prose is another sense it radiates, a
sense of assertion and domination over all the complexities of Oriental
life. Every one of Burton's footnotes, whether in the Pilgrimage or in
his translation of the*Arabian* *Nights (the* same is true of his
"Terminal Essay" for it122 ) was meant to be testimony to his victory
over the sometimes scandalous system of Oriental knowledge, a system he
had mastered by himself. For even in Burton's prose we are never
directly given the Orient; everything about it is presented to us by way
of Burton's knowledgeable (and often prurient) interventions, which
remind us repeatedly how he had taken over the management of Oriental
life for the purposes of his narrative. And it is this fact -for in the
Pilgrimage it is a fact-that elevates Burton's consciousness to a
position of supremacy over the Orient. In that position his
individuality perforce encounters, and indeed merges with, the voice of
Empire, which is itself a system of rules, codes, and concrete
epistemological habits. Thus when Burton tells us in the Pilgrimage that
"Egypt is a treasure to be won," that it "is the most tempting prize
which the East holds out to the ambition of Europe, not excepted even
the Golden Horn,123 we must recognize how the voice of the highly
idiosyncratic master of Oriental knowledge informs, feeds into the voice
of European ambition for rule over the Orient.

Burton's two voices blending into one presage the work of
Orientalists-cumimperial agents like T. E. Lawrence, Edward Henry
Palmer, D. G. Hogarth, Gertrude Bell, Ronald Storrs, St. John Philby,
and William Gifford Palgrave, to name only some English writers. The
doublepronged intention of Burton's work is at the same time to use his
Oriental residence for scientific observation*and* not easily to
sacrifice his individuality to that end. The second of these two
intentions leads him inevitably to submit to the first because, as will
appear increasingly obvious, he is a European for whom such knowledge of
Oriental society as he has is possible only for a European, with a
European's self-awareness of society as -a collection of rules and
practices. In other words, to be a European in the Orient, and to be one
knowledgeably, one must see and know the Orient as a domain ruled over
by Europe. Orieritalism, which is the system of European or Western
knowledge about the Orient, thus becomes synonymous with European
domination of the Orient, and this domination effectively overrules even
the eccentricities of Burton's personal style.

Burton took the assertion of personal, authentic, sympathetic, and
humanistic knowledge of the Orient as far as it would go in its struggle
with the archive of official European knowledge about the Orient. In the
history of nineteenth century attempts to restore, restructure, and
redeem all the various provinces of knowledge and life, Orientalism-like
all the other Romantically inspired learned disciplines-contributed an
important share. For not only did the field evolve from a system of
inspired observation into what Flaubert called a regulated college of
learning, it also reduced the personalities of even its most redoubtable
individualists like Burton to the role of imperial scribe. From being a
place, the Orient became a domain of actual scholarly rule and potential
imperial sway. The role of the early Orientalists like Renan, Sacy, and
Lane was to provide their work and the Orient together with a*mise en
scene;* later Orientalists, scholarly or imaginative, took firm hold of
the scene. Still later, as the scene required management, it became
clear that institutions and governments were better at the game of
management than individuals. This is the legacy of nineteenth-century
Orientalism to which the twentieth century has become inheritor. We must
now investigate as exactly as possible the way twentiethcentury
Orientalism-inaugurated by the long process of the West's occupation of
the Orient from the 1880s on-successfully controlled freedom and
knowledge; in short, the way Orientalism was fully formalized into a
repeatedly produced copy of itself.
