Chapter 3: Orientalism Now
==========================

*On les apercevait tenant leurs idoles entre leurs bras comme de grands
enfants paralytiques.*

**Gustave Flaubert, La Tentation de Saint Antoine**

*The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from
those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than
ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much. What
redeems it is the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a
sentimental pretence but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the
idea-something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a
sacrifice to…*

**Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness**

I- Latent and Manifest Orientalism
----------------------------------

In Chapter One, I tried to indicate the scope of thought and action
covered by the word Orientalism, using as privileged types the British
and French experiences of and with the Near Orient, Islam, and the
Arabs. In those experiences I discerned an intimate, perhaps even the
most intimate, and rich relationship between Occident and Orient. Those
experiences were part of a much wider European or Western relationship
with the Orient, but what seems to have influenced Orientalism most was
a fairly constant sense of confrontation felt by Westerners dealing with
the East. The boundary notion of East and West, the varying degrees of
projected inferiority and strength, the range of work done, the kinds of
characteristic features ascribed to the Orient: all these testify to a
willed imaginative and geographic division made between East and West,
and lived through during many centuries. In Chapter Two my focus
narrowed a good deal. I was interested in the earliest phases of what I
call modern Orientalism, which began during the latter part of the
eighteenth century and the early years of the nineteenth. Since I did
not intend my study to become a narrative chronicle of the development
of Oriental studies in the modern West, I proposed instead an account of
the rise, development, and institutions of Orientalism as they were
formed against a background of intellectual, cultural, and political
history until about 1870 or 1880. Although my interest in Orientalism
there included a decently ample variety of scholars and imaginative
writers, I cannot claim by any means to have presented more than a
portrait of the typical structures (and their ideological tendencies)
constituting the field, its associations with other fields, and the work
of some of its most influential scholars. My principal operating
assumptions were-and continue to be-that fields of learning, as much as
the works of even the most eccentric artist, are constrained and acted
upon by society, by cultural traditions, by worldly circumstance, and by
stabilizing influences like schools, libraries, and governments;
moreover, that both learned and imaginative writing are never free, but
are limited in their imagery, assumptions, and intentions; and finally,
that the advances made by a "science" like Orientalism in its academic
form are less objectively true than we often like to think. In short, my
study hitherto has tried to describe the*economy* that makes Orientalism
a coherent subject matter, even while allowing that as an idea, concept,
or image the word*Orient* has a considerable and interesting cultural
resonance in the West.

I realize that such assumptions are not without their controversial
side. Most of us assume in a general way that learning and scholarship
move forward; they get better, we feel, as time passes and as more
information is accumulated, methods are refined, and later generations
of scholars improve upon earlier ones. In addition, we entertain a
mythology of creation, in which it is believed that artistic genius, an
original talent, or a powerful intellect can leap beyond the confines of
its own time and place in order to put before the world a new work. It
would be pointless to deny that such ideas as these carry some truth.
Nevertheless the possibilities for work present in the culture to a
great and original mind are never unlimited, just as it is also true
that a great talent has a very healthy respect for what others have done
before it and for what the field already contains. The work of
predecessors, the institutional life of a scholarly field, the
collective nature of any learned enterprise: these, to say nothing of
economic and social circumstances, tend to diminish the effects of the
individual scholar's production. A field like Orientalism has a
cumulative and corporate identity, one that is particularly strong given
its associations with traditional learning (the classics, the Bible,
philology), public institutions (governments, trading companies,
geographical societies, universities), and generically determined
writing (travel books, books of exploration, fantasy, exotic
description). The result for Orientalism has been a sort of consensus:
certain things, certain types of statement, certain types of work have
seemed for the Orientalist correct. He has built his work and research
upon them, and they in turn have pressed hard upon new writers and
scholars. Orientalism can thus be regarded as a manner of regularized
(or Orientalized) writing, vision, and study, dominated by imperatives,
perspectives, and ideological biases ostensibly suited to the Orient.
The Orient is taught, researched, administered, and pronounced upon in
certain discrete ways.

The Orient that appears in Orientalism, then, is a system of
representations framed by a whole set of forces that brought the Orient
into Western learning, Western consciousness, and later, Western empire.
If this definition of Orientalism seems more political than not, that is
simply because I think Orientalism was itself a product of certain
political forces and activities. Orientalism is a school of
interpretation whose material happens to be the Orient, its
civilizations, peoples, and localities. Its objective discoveries-the
work of innumerable devoted scholars who edited texts and translated
them, codified grammars, wrote dictionaries, reconstructed dead epochs,
produced positivistically verifiable learning-are and always have been
conditioned by the fact that its truths, like any truths delivered by
language, are embodied in language, and what is the truth of language,
Nietzsche once said, but

a mobile army of metaphors, metonyms, and anthropomorphisms -in short, a
sum of human relations, which have been enhanced, transposed, and
embellished poetically and rhetorically, and which after long use seem
firm, canonical, and obligatory to a people: truths are illusions about
which one has forgotten that this is what they are.1

Perhaps such a view as Nietzsche's will strike us as too nihilistic, but
at least it will draw attention to the fact that so far as it existed in
the West's awareness, the Orient was a word which later accrued to it a
wide field of meanings, associations, and connotations, and that these
did not necessarily refer to the real Orient but to the field
surrounding the word.

Thus Orientalism is not only a positive doctrine about the Orient that
exists at any one time in the West; it is also an influential academic
tradition (when one refers to an academic specialist who is called an
Orientalist), as well as an area of concern defined by travelers,
commercial enterprises, governments, military expeditions, readers of
novels and accounts of exotic adventure, natural historians, and
pilgrims to whom the Orient is a specific kind of knowledge about
specific places, peoples, and civilizations. For the Orient idioms
became frequent, and these idioms took firm hold in European discourse.
Beneath the idioms there was a layer of doctrine about the Orient; this
doctrine was fashioned out of the experiences of many Europeans, all of
them converging upon such essential aspects of the Orient as the
Oriental character, Oriental despotism, Oriental sensuality, and the
like. For any European during the nineteenth century-and I think one can
say this almost without qualification-Orientalism was such a system of
truths, truths in Nietzsche's sense of the word. It is therefore correct
that every European, in what he could say about the Orient, was
consequently a racist, an imperialist, and almost totally ethnocentric.
Some of the immediate sting will be taken out of these labels if we
recall additionally that human societies, at least the more advanced
cultures, have rarely offered the individual anything but imperialism,
racism, and ethnocentrism for dealing with "other" cultures. So
Orientalism aided and was aided by general cultural pressures that
tended to make more rigid the sense of difference between the European
and Asiatic parts of the world. My contention is that Orientalism is
fundamentally a political doctrine willed over the Orient because the
Orient was weaker than the West, which elided the Orient's difference
with its weakness.

This proposition was introduced early in Chapter One, and nearly
everything in the pages that followed was intended in part as a
corroboration of it. The very presence of a "field" such as Orientalism,
with no corresponding equivalent in the Orient itself, suggests the
relative strength of Orient and Occident. A vast number of pages on the
Orient exist, and they of course signify a degree and quantity of
interaction with the Orient that are quite formidable; but the crucial
index of Western strength is that there is no possibility of comparing
the movement of Westerners eastwards (since the end of the eighteenth
century) with the movement of Easterners westwards. Leaving aside the
fact that Western armies, consular corps, merchants, and scientific and
archaeological expeditions were always going East, the number of
travelers from the Islamic East to Europe between 1800 and 1900 is
minuscule when compared with the number in the other direction.2
Moreover, the Eastern travelers in the West were there to learn from and
to gape at an advanced culture; the purposes of the Western travelers in
the Orient were, as we have seen, of quite a different order. In
addition, it has been estimated that around 60,000 books dealing with
the Near Orient were written between 1800 and 1950; there is no remotely
comparable figure for Oriental books about the West. As a cultural
apparatus Orientalism is all aggression, activity, judgment, will to
truth, and knowledge. The Orient existed for the West, or so it seemed
to countless Orientalists, whose attitude to what they worked on was
either paternalistic or candidly condescending-unless, of course, they
were antiquarians, in which case the "classical" Orient was a credit
to*them* and not to the lamentable modern Orient. And then, beefing up
the Western scholars' work, there were numerous agencies and
institutions with no parallels in Oriental society.

Such an imbalance between East and West is obviously a function of
changing historical patterns. During its political and military heyday
from the eighth century to the sixteenth, Islam dominated both East and
West. Then the center of power shifted westwards, and now in the late
twentieth century it seems to be directing itself back towards the East
again. My account of nineteenth-century Orientalism in Chapter Two
stopped at a particularly charged period in the latter part of the
century, when the often dilatory, abstract, and projective aspects of
Orientalism were about to take on a new sense of worldly mission in the
service of formal colonialism. It is this project and this moment that I
want now to describe, especially since it will furnish us with some
important background for the twentieth-century crises of Orientalism and
the resurgence of political and cultural strength in the East.

On several occasions I have alluded to the connections between
Orientalism as a body of ideas, beliefs, cliches, or learning about the
East, and other schools of thought at large in the culture. Now one of
the important developments in nineteenth-century Orientalism was the
distillation of essential ideas about the Orient-its sensuality, its
tendency to despotism, its aberrant mentality, its habits of inaccuracy,
its backwardness-into a separate and unchallenged coherence; thus for a
writer to use the word Oriental was a reference for the reader
sufficient to identify a specific body of information about the Orient.
This information seemed to be morally neutral and objectively valid; it
seemed to have an epistemological status equal to that of historical
chronology or geographical location. In its most basic form, then,
Oriental material could not really be violated by anyone's discoveries,
nor did it seem ever to be revaluated completely. Instead, the work of
various nineteenth-century scholars and of imaginative writers made this
essential body of knowledge more clear, more detailed, more
substantial-and more distinct from "Occidentalism." Yet Orientalist
ideas could enter into alliance with general philosophical theories
(such as those about the history of mankind and civilization) and
diffuse world-hypotheses, as philosophers sometimes call them; and in
many ways the professional contributors to Oriental knowledge were
anxious to couch their formulations and ideas, their scholarly work,
their considered contemporary observations, in language and terminology
whose cultural validity derived from other sciences and systems of
thought.

The distinction I am making is really between an almost unconscious (and
certainly an untouchable) positivity, which I shall call*latent*
Orientalism, and the various stated views about Oriental society,
languages, literatures, history, sociology, and so forth, which I shall
call*manifest* Orientalism. Whatever change occurs in knowledge of the
Orient is found almost exclusively in manifest Orientalism; the
unanimity, stability, and durability of latent Orientalism are more or
less constant. In the nineteenth-century writers I analyzed in Chapter
Two, the differences in their ideas about the Orient can be
characterized as exclusively manifest differences, differences in form
and personal style, rarely in basic content. Every one of them kept
intact the separateness of the Orient, its eccentricity, its
backwardness, its silent indifference, its feminine penetrability, its
supine malleability; this is why every writer on the Orient, from Renan
to Marx (ideologically speaking), or from the most rigorous scholars
(Lane and Sacy) to the most powerful imaginations (Flaubert and Nerval),
saw the Orient as a locale requiring Western attention, reconstruction,
even redemption. The Orient existed as a place isolated from the
mainstream of European progress in the sciences, arts, and commerce.
Thus whatever good or bad values were imputed to the Orient appeared to
be functions of some highly specialized Western interest in the Orient.
This was the situation from about the 1870s on through the early part of
the twentieth century-but let me give some examples that illustrate what
I mean.

Theses of Oriental backwardness, degeneracy, and inequality with the
West most easily associated themselves early in the nineteenth century
with ideas about the biological bases of racial inequality. Thus the
racial classifications found in Cuvier's*Le Regne animal,* Gobineau's
Essai*sur l'inégalité des races humaines,* and Robert Knox's*The Dark
Races of Man* found a willing partner in latent Orientalism. To these
ideas was added second-order Darwinism, which seemed to accentuate the
"scientific" validity of the division of races into advanced and
backward, or EuropeanAryan and Oriental-African. Thus the whole question
of imperialism, as it was debated in the late nineteenth century by
pro-imperialists and anti-imperialists alike, carried forward the binary
typology of advanced and backward (or subject) races, cultures, and
societies. John Westlake's*Chapters on the Principles of International
Law* (1894) argues, for example, that regions of the earth designated as
"uncivilized" (a word carrying the freight of Orientalist assumptions,
among others) ought to be annexed or occupied by advanced powers.
Similarly, the ideas of such writers as Carl Peters, Leopold de
Saussure, and Charles Temple draw on the advanced/backward binarism3 so
centrally advocated in latenineteenth-century Orientalism.

Along with all other peoples variously designated as backward,
degenerate, uncivilized, and retarded, the Orientals were viewed in a
framework constructed out of biological determinism and moral-political
admonishment. The Oriental was linked thus to elements in Western
society (delinquents, the insane, women, the poor) having in common an
identity best described as lamentably alien. Orientals were rarely seen
or looked at; they were seen through, analyzed not as citizens, or even
people, but as problems to be solved or confined or-as the colonial
powers openly coveted their territory-taken over. The point is that the
very designation of something as Oriental involved an already pronounced
evaluative judgment, and in the case of the peoples inhabiting the
decayed Ottoman Empire, an implicit program of action. Since the
Oriental was a member of a subject race, he had to be subjected: it was
that simple. The locus classicus for such judgment and action is to be
found in Gustave Le Bon's*Les Lois psychologiques de l'évolution des
peuples (1894).*

But there were other uses for latent Orientalism. If that group of ideas
allowed one to separate Orientals from advanced, civilizing powers, and
if the "classical" Orient served to justify both the Orientalist and his
disregard of modern Orientals, latent Orientalism also encouraged a
peculiarly (not to say invidiously) male conception of the world. I have
already referred to this in passing during my discussion of Renan. The
Oriental male was considered in isolation from the total community in
which he lived and which many Orientalists, following Lane, have viewed
with something resembling contempt and fear. Orientalism itself,
furthermore, was an exclusively male province; like so many professional
guilds during the modern period, it viewed itself and its subject matter
with sexist blinders. This is especially evident in the writing of
travelers and novelists: women are usually the creatures of a male
power-fantasy. They express unlimited sensuality, they are more or less
stupid, and above all they are willing. Flaubert's Kuchuk Hanem is the
prototype of such caricatures, which were common enough in pornographic
novels (e.g., Pierre Louys's*Aphrodite)* whose novelty draws on the
Orient for their interest. Moreover the male conception of the world, in
its effect upon the practicing Orientalist, tends to be static, frozen,
fixed eternally. The very possibility of development, transformation,
human movementin the deepest sense of the word-is denied the Orient and
the Oriental. As a known and ultimately an immobilized or unproductive
quality, they come to be identified with a bad sort of eternality:
hence, when the Orient is being approved, such phrases as "the wisdom of
the East."

Transferred from an implicit social evaluation to a grandly cultural
one, this static male Orientalism took on a variety of forms in the late
nineteenth century, especially when Islam was being discussed. General
cultural historians as respected as Leopold von Ranke and Jacob
Burckhardt assailed Islam as if they were dealing not so much with an
anthropomorphic abstraction as with a religiopolitical culture about
which deep generalizations were possible and warranted: in
his*Weltgeschichte* (1881-1888) Ranke spoke of Islam as defeated by the
Germanic-Romanic peoples, and in his "Historische Fragmente"
(unpublished notes, 1893) Burckhardt spoke of Islam as wretched, bare,
and trivial.4 Such intellectual operations were carried out with
considerably more flair and enthusiasm by Oswald Spengler, whose ideas
about a Magian personality (typified by the Muslim Oriental) infuse*Der
Untergang des Abendlandes* (1918-1922) and the "morphology" of cultures
it advocates.

What these widely diffused notions of the Orient depended on was the
almost total absence in contemporary Western culture of the Orient as a
genuinely felt and experienced force. For a number of evident reasons
the Orient was always in the position both of outsider and of
incorporated weak partner for the West. To the extent that Western
scholars were aware of contemporary Orientals or Oriental movements of
thought and culture, these were perceived either as silent shadows to be
animated by the Orientalist, brought into reality by him, or as a kind
of cultural and intellectual proletariat useful for the Orientalist's
grander interpretative activity, necessary for his performance as
superior judge, learned man, powerful cultural will. I mean to say that
in discussions of the Orient, the Orient is all absence, whereas one
feels the Orientalist and what he says as presence; yet we must not
forget that the Orientalist's presence is enabled by the Orient's
effective absence.

This fact of substitution and displacement, as we must call it, clearly
places on the Orientalist himself a certain pressure to reduce the
Orient in his work, even after he has devoted a good deal of time to
elucidating and exposing it. How else can one explain major scholarly
production of the type we associate with Julius Wellhausen and Theodor
Noldeke and, overriding it, those bare, sweeping statements that almost
totally denigrate their chosen subject matter? Thus Noldeke could
declare in 1887 that the sum total of his work as an Orientalist was to
confirm his "low opinion" of the Eastern peoples.5 And like Carl Becker,
Ndldeke was a philhellenist, who showed his love of Greece curiously by
displaying a positive dislike of the Orient, which after all was what he
studied as a scholar.

A very valuable and intelligent study of Orientalism-Jacques
Waardenburg's*L'Islam dans le miroir de l'Occident -- examines* five
important experts as makers of an image of Islam. Waardenburg's
mirror-image metaphor for late nineteenth- and earlytwentieth-century
Orientalism is apt. In the work of each of his eminent Orientalists
there is a highly tendentious-in four cases out of the five, even
hostile-vision of Islam, as if each man saw Islam as a reflection of his
own chosen weakness. Each scholar was profoundly learned, and the style
of his contribution was unique. The five Orientalists among them
exemplify what was best and strongest in the tradition during the period
roughly from the 1880s to the interwar years. Yet Ignaz Goldziher's
appreciation of Islam's tolerance towards other religions was undercut
by his dislike of Mohammed's anthropomorphisms and Islam's too-exterior
theology and jurisprudence; Duncan Black Macdonald's interest in Islamic
piety and orthodoxy was vitiated by his perception of what he considered
Islam's heretical Christianity; Carl Becker's understanding of Islamic
civilization made him see it as a sadly undeveloped one; C. Snouck
Hurgronje's highly refined studies of Islamic mysticism (which he
considered the essential part of Islam) led him to a harsh judgment of
its crippling limitations; and Louis Massignon's extraordinary
identification with Muslim theology, mystical passion, and poetic art
kept him curiously unforgiving to Islam for what he regarded as its
unregenerate revolt against the idea of incarnation. The manifest
differences in their methods emerge as less important than their
Orientalist consensus on Islam: latent inferiority.6

Waardenburg's study has the additional virtue of showing how these five
scholars shared a common intellectual and methodological tradition whose
unity was truly international. Ever since the first Orientalist congress
in 1873, scholars in the field have known each other's work and felt
each other's presence very directly. What Waardenburg does not stress
enough is that most of the latenineteenth-century Orientalists were
bound to each other politically as well. Snouck Hurgronje went directly
from his studies of Islam to being an adviser to the Dutch government on
handling its Muslim Indonesian colonies; Macdonald and Massignon were
widely sought after as experts on Islamic matters by colonial
administrators from North Africa to Pakistan; and, as Waardenburg says
(all too briefly) at one point, all five scholars shaped a coherent
vision of Islam that had a wide influence on government circles
throughout the Western world.7 What we must add to Waardenburg's
observation is that these scholars were completing, bringing to an
ultimate concrete refinement, the tendency since the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries to treat the Orient not only as a vague literary
problem but-according to Masson-Oursel-as "un ferme propos d'assimiler
adéquatement la valeur des langues pour pénétrer les moeurs et les
pensées, pour forcer même des secrets de l'histoire."8

I spoke earlier of incorporation and assimilation of the Orient, as
these activities were practiced by writers as different from each other
as Dante and d'Herbelot. Clearly there is a difference between those
efforts and what, by the end of the nineteenth century, had become a
truly formidable European cultural, political, and material enterprise.
The nineteenth-century colonial "scramble for Africa" was by no means
limited to Africa, of course. Neither was the penetration of the Orient
entirely a sudden, dramatic afterthought following years of scholarly
study of Asia. What we must reckon with is a long and slow process of
appropriation by which Europe, or the European awareness of the Orient,
transformed itself from being textual and contemplative into being
administrative, economic, and even military. The fundamental change was
a spatial and geographical one, or rather it was a change in the quality
of geographical and spatial apprehension so far as the Orient was
concerned. The centuries-old designation of geographical space to the
east of Europe as "Oriental" was partly political, partly doctrinal, and
partly imaginative; it implied no necessary connection between actual
experience of the Orient and knowledge of what is Oriental, and
certainly Dante and d'Herbelot made no claims about their Oriental ideas
except that they were corroborated by a long*learned* (and not
existential) tradition. But when Lane, Renan, Burton, and the many
hundreds of nineteenth-century European travelers and scholars discuss
the Orient, we can immediately note a far more intimate and even
proprietary attitude towards the Orient and things Oriental. In the
classical and often temporally remote form in which it was reconstructed
by the Orientalist, in the precisely actual form in which the modern
Orient was lived in, studied, or imagined, the*geographical space* of
the Orient was penetrated, worked over, taken hold of. The cumulative
effect of decades of so sovereign a Western handling turned the Orient
from alien into colonial space. What was important in the latter
nineteenth century was not*whether* the West had penetrated and
possessed the Orient, but rather*how* the British and French felt that
they had done it.

The British writer on the Orient, and even more so the British colonial
administrator, was dealing with territory about which there could be no
doubt that English power was truly in the ascendant, even if the natives
were on the face of it attracted to France and French modes of thought.
So far as the actual space of the Orient was concerned, however, England
was really there, France was not, except as a flighty temptress of the
Oriental yokels. There is no better indication of this qualitative
difference in spatial attitudes than to look at what Lord Cromer had to
say on the subject, one that was especially dear to his heart:

The reasons why French civilisation presents a special degree of
attraction to Asiatics and Levantines are plain. It is, as a matter of
fact, more attractive than the civilisations of England and Germany,
and, moreover,it is more easy of imitation. Compare the undemonstrative,
shy Englishman, with his social exclusiveness and insular habits, with
the vivacious and cosmopolitan Frenchman, who does not know what the
word shyness means, and who in ten minutes is apparently on terms of
intimate friendship with any casual acquaintance he may chance to make.
The semi-educated Oriental does not recognise that the former has, at
all events, the merit of sincerity, whilst the latter is often merely
acting a part. He looks coldly on the Englishman, and rushes into the
arms of the Frenchman.

The sexual innuendoes develop more or less naturally thereafter. The
Frenchman is all smiles, wit, grace, and fashion; the Englishman is
plodding, industrious, Baconian, precise. Cromer's case is of course
based on British solidity as opposed to a French seductiveness without
any real presence in Egyptian reality.

Can it be any matter for surprise [Cromer continues] that the Egyptian,
with his light intellectual ballast, fails to see that some fallacy
often lies at the bottom of the Frenchman's reasoning, or that he
prefers the rather superficial brilliancy of the Frenchman to the
plodding, unattractive industry of the Englishman or the Germ? Look,
again, at the theoretical perfection of French administrative systems,
at their elaborate detail, and at the provision which is apparently made
to meet every possible contingency which may arise. Compare these
features with the Englishman's practical systems, which lay down rules
as to a few main points, and leave a mass of detail to individual
discretion. The halfeducated Egyptian naturally prefers the Frenchman's
system, for it is to all outward appearance more perfect and more easy
of application. He fails, moreover, to see that the Englishman desires
to elaborate a system which will suit the facts with which he has to
deal, whereas the main objection to applying French administrative
procedures to Egypt is that the facts have but too often to conform to
the ready-made system.

Since there is a real British presence in Egypt, and since that
presence -according to Cromer-is there not so much to train the
Egyptian's mind as to "form his character," it follows therefore that
the ephemeral attractions of the French are those of a pretty damsel
with "somewhat artificial charms," whereas those of the British belong
to "a sober, elderly matron of perhaps somewhat greater moral worth, but
of less pleasing outward appearance."9

Underlying Cromer's contrast between the solid British nanny and the
French coquette is the sheer privilege of British emplacement in the
Orient. "The facts with which he [the Englishman] has to deal" are
altogether more complex and interesting, by virtue of their psion by
England, than anything the mercurial French could point to. Two years
after the publication of his*Modern Egypt* (1908), Cromer expatiated
philosophically in Ancient anal*Modern* Imperialism. Compared -wit\#
Roman imperialism, with its frankly assimilationist, exploitative, and
repressive policies, British imperialism seemed to Cromer to be
preferable, if somewhat more wishywashy. On certain points, however, the
British were clear enough, even if "after a rather dim, slipshod, but
characteristically Anglo Saxon fashion," their Empire seemed undecided
between "one of two bases-an extensive military occupation or the
principle of nationality [for subject races]." But this indecision was
academic finally, for in practice Cromer and Britain itself had opted
against "the principle of nationality." And then there; were other
things to be noted. One point was that the Empire was not going to be
given up. Another was that intermarriage between natives and English men
and women was undesirable. Third and most important, I think-Cromer
conceived of British imperial presence in the Eastern colonies as having
had a lasting, not to say cataclysmic, effect on the minds and societies
of the East. His metaphor for expressing this effect is almost
theological, so powerful in Cromer's mind was the idea of Western
penetration of Oriental expanses. "The country," he says, "over which
the breath of the West, heavily charged with scientific thought, has
once passed, and has, in passing, left an enduring mark, can never be
the same as it was before."10

In such respects as these, nonetheless, Cromer's was far from an
original intelligence.What he saw and how he expressed it were common
currency among his colleagues both in the imperial Establishment and in
the intellectual community. This consensus is notably true in the case
of Cromer's viceregal colleagues, Curzon, Swettenham, and Lugard. Lord
Curzon in particular always spoke the imperial lingua franca, and more
obtrusively even than Cromer he delineated the relationship between
Britain and the Orient in terms of possession, in terms of a large
geographical space wholly owned by an efficient colonial master. For
him, he said on one occasion, the Empire was not an "object of ambition"
but "first and foremost, a great historical and political and
sociological fact." In 1909 he reminded delegates to the Imperial Press
Conference meeting at Oxford that "we train here and we send out to you
your governors and administrators and judges, your teachers and
preachers and lawyers." And this almost pedagogical view of empire had,
for Curzon, a specific setting in Asia, which as he once put it, made
"one pause and think."

I sometimes like to picture to myself this great Imperial fabric as a
huge structure like some Tennysonian "Palace of Art," of which the
foundations are in this country, where they have been laid and must be
maintained by British hands, but of which the Colonies are the pillars,
and high above all floats the vastness of an Asiatic dome.11

With such a Tennysonian Palace of Art in mind, Curzon and Cromer were
enthusiastic members together of a departmental committee formed in 1909
to press for the creation of a school of Oriental studies. Aside from
remarking wistfully that had he known the vernacular he would have been
helped during his "famine tours" in India, Curzon argued for Oriental
studies as part of the British responsibility to the Orient.On September
27, 1909, he told the House of Lords that

our familiarity, not merely with the languages of the people of the East
but with their customs, their feelings, their traditions, their history
and religion, our capacity to understand what may be called the genius
of the East, is the sole basis upon which we are likely to be able to
maintain in the future the position we have won, and no step that can be
taken to strengthen that position can be considered undeserving of the
attention of His Majesty's Government or of a debate in the House of
Lords.

At a Mansion House conference on the subject five years later, Curzon
finally dotted the i's. Oriental studies were no intellectual luxury;
they were, he said,

a great Imperial obligation.In my view the creation of a school [of
Oriental studies-later to become the London University School of
Oriental and African Studies] like this in London is part of the
necessary furniture of Empire. Those of us who, in one way or another,
have spent a number of years in the East, who regard that as the
happiest portion of our lives, and who think that the work that we did
there, be it great or small, was the highest responsibility that can be
placed upon the shoulders of Englishmen, feel that there is a gap in our
national equipment which ought emphatically to be filled, and that those
in the City of London who, by financial support or by any other form of
active and practical assistance, take their part in filling that gap,
will be rendering a patriotic duty to the Empire and promoting the cause
and goodwill among mankind.12

To a very great extent Curzon's ideas about Oriental studies derive
logically from a good century of British utilitarian administration of
and philosophy about the Eastern colons. The influence of Bentham and
the Mills on British rule in the Orient (and India particularly) was
considerable, and was effective is doing away with too much regulation
and innovation; instead, as Eric stokes has convincingly shown,
utilitarianism combined with the legacies of liberalism and
evangelicalism as philosophies of British rule in the East stressed the
rational importance of a strong executive armed with various legal and
penal codes, a system of doctrines on such matters as frontiers and land
rents, and everywhere an irreducible supervisory imperial authority.13
The cornerstone of the whole system was a constantly refined knowledge
of the Orient, so that as traditional societies hastened forward and
became modern commercial societies, there would be no loss of paternal
British control, and no loss of revenue either. However, when Curzon
referred somewhat inelegantly to Oriental studies as "the necessary
furniture of Empire," he was putting into a static image the
transactions by which Englishmen and natives conducted their business
and kept their places. From the days of Sir William Jones the Orient had
been both what Britain ruled and what Britain knew about it: the
coincidence between geography, knowledge, and power, with Britain always
in the master's place, was complete. To have said, as Curzon once did,
that "the East is a University in which the scholar never takes his
degree" was another way of saying that the East required one's presence
there more or less forever.14

But then there were the other European powers, France and Russia among
them, that made the British presence always a (perhaps marginally)
threatened one. Curzon was certainly aware that all the major Western
powers felt towards the world as Britain did. The transformation of
geography from "dull and pedantic"Curzon's phrase for what had now
dropped out of geography as an academic subject-into "the most
cosmopolitan of all sciences" argued exactly that new Western and
widespread predilection. Not for nothing did Curzon in 1912 tell the
Geographical Society, of which he was president, that an absolute
revolution has occurred, not merely in the manner and methods of
teaching geography, but in the estimation in which it is held by public
opinion. Nowadays we regard geographical knowledge as an essential part
of knowledge in general. By the aid of geography, and in no other way,
do was understand the action of great natural forces, the distribution
of population, the growth of commerce, the expansion of frontiers, tape
development of States, the splendid achievements of less air in its
various manifestations.

We recognize geography as the handmaid of history … Geography, too, is a
sister science to economies and politics; and to any of us who have
attempted to study geography it is known that the moment you diverge
from the geographical field you find yourself crossing the frontiers of
geology, zoology, ethnology, chemistry, physics, and almost all the
kindred sciences. Therefore we are justified in saying that geography is
one of the first and foremost of the sciences: that it is part of the
equipment that is necessary for a proper conception of citizenship, and
is an indispensable adjunct to the production of a public man.15

Geography was essentially the material underpinning for knowledge about
the Orient. All the latent and unchanging characteristics of the Orient
stood upon, were rooted in, its geography. Thus on the one hand the
geographical Orient nourished its inhabitants, guaranteed their
characteristics, and defined their specificity; on the other hand, the
geographical Orient solicited the West's attention, even as-by one of
those paradoxes revealed so frequently by organized knowledge-East was
East and West was West. The cosmopolitanism of geography was, in
Curzon's mind, its universal importance to the whole of the West, whose
relationship to the rest of the world was one of frank covetousness. Yet
geographical appetite could also take on the moral neutrality of an
epistemological impulse to find out, to settle upon, to uncover-as when
in*Heart of Darkness* Marlow confesses to having a passion for maps.

I would look for hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia, and
lose myself in all the glories of exploration. At that time there were
many blank spaces on the earth, and when I saw one that looked
particularly inviting on a map (but they all look that) I would put my
finger on it and say, When I grow up I will go there.16

Seventy years or so before Marlow said this, it did not trouble
Lamartine that what on a map was a blank space was inhabited by natives;
nor, theoretically, had there been any reservation in the mind of Emer
de Vattel, the Swiss-Prussian authority on international law, when in
1758 he invited European states to take possession of territory
inhabited only by mere wandering tribes.17 The important thing was to
dignify simple conquest with an idea, to turn the appetite for more
geographical space into a theory about the special relationship between
geography on the one hand and civilized or uncivilized peoples on the
other. But to these rationalizations there was also a distinctively
French contribution.

By the end of the nineteenth century, political and intellectual
circumstances coincided sufficiently in France to make geography, and
geographical speculation (in both senses of that word), an attractive
national pastime. The general climate of opinion in Europe was
propitious; certainly the successes of British imperialism spoke loudly
enough for themselves. However, Britain always seemed to France and to
French thinkers on the subject to block even a relatively successful
French imperial role in the Orient. Before the Franco-Prussian War there
was a good deal of wishful political thinking about the Orient, and it
was not confined to poets and novelists. Here, for instance, is
Saint-Marc Girardin writing in the*Revue des Deux Mondes* on March
15,1862:

La France a beaucoup a faire en Orient, parce que l'Orient attend
beaucoup d'elle. 11 lui demande meme plus qu'elle ne peut faire; il lui
remettrait volontiers le soin entier de son avenir, ce qui serait pour
la France et pour I'Orient un grand danger: pour la France, parce que,
disposee a prendre en mains la cause des populations souffrantes, elle
se charge le plus souvent de plus d'obligations qu'elle n'en pent
remplir; pour I'Orient parce que tout peuple qui attend sa destinee de
l'etranger n'a jamais qu'une condition precaire et qu'il n'y a de salut
pour les nations que celui qu'elles se font ellesmemes.18

Of such views as this Disraeli would doubtless have said, as he often
did, that France had only "sentimental interests" in Syria (which is the
"Orient" of which Girardin was writing). The fiction of "populations
souffrantes" had of course been used by Napoleon when he appealed to the
Egyptians on their behalf against the Turks and for Islam. During the
thirties, forties, fifties, and sixties the suffering populations of the
Orient were limited to the Christian minorities in Syria. And there was
no record of "I'Orient" appealing to France for its salvation. It would
have been altogether more truthful to say that Britain stood in France's
way in the Orient, for even if France genuinely felt a sense of
obligation to the Orient (and there were some Frenchmen who did), there
was very little France could do to get between Britain and the huge land
mast it commanded from India to the Mediterranean.

Among the most remarkable consequences of the War of 1870 in France were
a tremendous efflorescence of geographical societies and a powerfully
renewed demand for territorial acquisition. At the end of 1871 the
Societe de geographie de Paris declared itself no longer confined to
"scientific speculation." It urged the citizenry not to "forget that our
former preponderance was contested from the day we ceased to compete
...in the conquests of civilization over barbarism." Guillaume Depping,
a leader of what has come to be called the geographical movement,
asserted in 1881 that during the 1870 war "it was the schoolmaster who
triumphed," meaning that the real triumphs were those of Prussian
scientific geography over French strategic sloppiness. The governments
Journal ofciel sponsored issue after issue centered on the virtues (and
profits) of geographical exploration and colonial adventure; a citizen
could learn in one issue from de Lesseps of "the opportunities in
Africa" and from Garnier of "the exploration of the Blue River."
Scientific geography soon gave way to "commercial geography," as the
connection between national pride in scientific and civilizational
achievement and the fairly .rudimentary profit motive was urged, to be
channeled into support for colonial acquisition. In the words of one
enthusiast, "The geographical societies are formed to break the fatal
charm that holds us enchained to our shores." In aid of this liberating
quest all sorts of schemes were spun out, including the enlisting of
Jules Verne--whose "unbelievable success," as it was called, ostensibly
displayed the scientific mind at a very high peak of ratiocination-to
head "a round-the-world campaign of scientific exploration," and a plan
for creating a vast new sea just south of the North African coast, as
well as a project for "binding" Algeria to Senegal by railroad-"a ribbon
of steel," as the projectors called it.19

Much of the expansionist fervor in France during the last third of the
nineteenth century was generated out of an explicit wish to compensate
for the Prussian victory in 1870-1871 and, no less important, the desire
to match British imperial achievements. So powerful was the latter
desire, and out of so long a tradition of Anglo-French rivalry in the
Orient did it derive, that France seemed literally haunted by Britain,
anxious in all things connected with the Orient to catch up with and
emulate the British. When in the late 1870s, the Societe academique
indo-chinoise reformulated its goals, it found it important to "bring
Indochina into the domain of Orientalism." Why?In order to turn Cochin
China into a "French India." The absence of substantial colonial
holdings was blamed by military men for that combination of military and
commercial weakness in the war with Prussia, to say nothing of
long-standing and pronounced colonial inferiority compared with Britain.

The "power of expansion of the Western races," argued a leading
geographer, La Ronciere Le Noury, "its superior causes, its elements,
its influences on human destinies, will be a beautiful study for future
historians." Yet only if the white races indulged their taste for
voyaging-a mark of their intellectual supremacy-could colonial expansion
occur.20

From such theses as this came the commonly held view of the Orient as a
geographical space to be cultivated, harvested, and guarded. The images
of agricultural care for and those of frank sexual attention to the
Orient proliferated accordingly. Here is a typical effusion by Gabriel
Charmes, writing in 1880:

On that day when we shall be no longer in the Orient, and when other
great European powers will be there, all will be at an end for our
commerce in the Mediterranean, for our future in Asia, for the traffic
of our southern ports.*One of the most fruitful sources of our national
wealth will be dried up.* (Emphasis added)

Another thinker, Leroy-Beaulieu, elaborated this philosophy still
further:

A society colonizes, when itself having reached a high degree of
maturity and of strength, it procreates, it protects, it places in good
conditions of development, and it brings to virility a new society to
which it has given birth. Colonization is one of the most complex and
delicate phenomena of social physiology.

This equation of self-reproduction with colonization led LeroyBeaulieu
to the somewhat sinister idea that whatever is lively in a modern
society is "magnified by this pouring out of its exuberant activity on
the outside." Therefore, he said,

Colonization is the expansive force of a people; it is its power of
reproduction;*it is its enlargement and its multiplication through
space;* it is the subjection of the universe or a vast part of it to
that people's language, customs, ideas, and laws.21

The point here is that the space of weaker or underdeveloped regions
like the Orient was viewed as something inviting French interest,
penetration, insemination-in short, colonization. Geographical
conceptions, literally and figuratively, did away with the discrete
entities held in by borders and frontiers. No less than entrepreneurial
visionaries like de Lesseps, whose plan was to liberate the Orient and
the Occident from their geographical bonds,

French scholars, administrators, geographers, and commercial agents
poured out their exuberant activity onto the fairly supine, feminine
Orient. There were the geographical societies, whose number and
membership outdid those of all Europe by a factor of two; there were
such powerful organizations as the Comite de l'Asie francaise and the
Comite d'Orient; there were the learned societies, chief among them the
Societe asiatique, with its organization and membership firmly embedded
in the universities, the institutes, and the government. Each in its own
way made French interests in the Orient more real, more substantial.
Almost an entire century of what now seemed passive study of the Orient
had had to end, as France faced up to its transnational responsibilities
during the last two decades of the nineteenth century.

In the only part of the Orient where British and French interests
literally overlapped, the territory of the now hopelessly ill Ottoman
Empire, the two antagonists managed their conflict with an almost
perfect and characteristic consistency. Britain was in Egypt and
Mesopotamia; through a series of quasi-fictional treaties with local
(and powerless) chiefs it controlled the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, and
the Suez Canal, as well as most of the intervening land mass between the
Mediterranean and India. France, on the other hand, seemed fated to
hover over the Orient, descending once in a while to carry out schemes
that repeated de Lesseps's success with the canal; for the most part
these schemes were railroad projects, such as the one planned across
more or less British territory, the Syrian-Mesopotamian line. In
addition France saw itself as the protector of Christian
minorities---Maronites, Chaldeans, Nestorians. Yet together, Britain and
France were agreed in principle on the necessity, when the time came,
for the partition of Asiatic Turkey. Both before and during World War I
secret diplomacy was bent on carving up the Near Orient first into
spheres of influence, then into mandated (or occupied) territories. In
France, much of the expansionist sentiment formed during the heyday of
the geographical movement focused itself on plans to partition Asiatic
Turkey, so much so that in Paris in 1914 "a spectacular press campaign
was launched" to this end.22 In England numerous committees were
empowered to study and recommend policy on the best ways of dividing up
the Orient. Out of such commissions as the Bunsen Committee would come
the joint Anglo-French teams of which the most famous was the one headed
by Mark Sykes and Georges Picot. Equitable division of geographical
space was the rule of these plans, which were deliberate attempts also
at calming Anglo-French rivalry. For, as -Sykes put it in a memorandum,

it was clear ...that an Arab rising was sooner or later to take place,
and that the French and ourselves ought to be on better terms if the
rising was not to be a curse instead of a blessing...23

The animosities remained. And to them was added the irritant provided by
the Wilsonian program for national self-determination, which, as Sykes
himself was to note, seemed to invalidate the whole skeleton of colonial
and partitionary schemes arrived at jointly between the Powers. It would
be out of place here to discuss the entire labyrinthine and deeply
controversial history of the Near Orient in the early twentieth century,
as its fate was being decided between the Powers, the native dynasties,
the various nationalist parties and movements, the Zionists. What
matters more immediately is the peculiar epistemological framework
through which the Orient was seen, and out of which the Powers acted.
For despite their differences, the British and the French saw the Orient
as a geographical-and cultural, political, demographical, sociological,
and historical-entity over whose destiny they believed themselves to
have traditional entitlement. The Orient to them was no sudden
discovery, no mere historical accident, but an area to the east of
Europe whose principal worth was uniformly defined in terms of Europe,
more particularly in terms specifically claiming for Europe-European
science, scholarship, understanding, and administration-the credit for
having made the Orient what it was now. And this had been the
achievement-inadvertent or not is beside the point-of modern
Orientalism.

There were two principal methods by which Orientalism delivered the
Orient to the West in the early twentieth century. One was by means of
the disseminative capacities of modern learning, its diffusive apparatus
in the learned professions, the universities, the professional
societies, the explorational and geographical organizations,the
publishing industry. All these, as we have seen, built upon the
prestigious authority of the pioneering scholars, travelers, and poets,
whose cumulative vision had shaped a quintessential Orient; the
doctrinal-or doxological - manifestation of such an Orient is what I
have been calling here latent Orientalism. So far as anyone wishing to
make a statement of any consequence about the Orient was concerned,
latent Orientalism supplied him with an enunciative capacity that could
be used, or rather mobilized, and turned into sensible discourse for the
concrete occasion at hand. Thus when Balfour spoke about the Oriental to
the House of Commons in 1910, he must surely have had in mind those
enunciative capacities in the current and acceptably rational language
of his time, by which something called an "Oriental" could be named and
talked about without danger of too much obscurity. But like all
enunciative capacities and the discourses they enable, latent
Orientalism was profoundly conservative-dedicated, that is, to its
self-preservation. Transmitted from one generation to another, it was a
part of the culture, as much a language about a part of reality as
geometry or physics. Orientalism staked its existence, not upon its
openness, its receptivity to the Orient, but rather on its internal,
repetitious consistency about its constitutive will-to-power over the
Orient. In such a way Orientalism was able to survive revolutions, world
wars, and the literal dismemberment of empires.

The second method by which Orientalism delivered the Orient to the West
was the result of an important convergence. For decades the Orientalists
had spoken about the Orient, they had translated texts, they had
explained civilizations, religions, dynasties, cultures, mentalities-as
academic objects, screened off from Europe by virtue of their inimitable
foreignness. The Orientalist was an expert, like Renan or Lane, whose
job in society was to interpret the Orient for his compatriots. The
relation between Orientalist and Orient was essentially hermeneutical:
standing before a distant, barely intelligible civilization or cultural
monument, the Orientalist scholar reduced the obscurity by translating,
sympathetically portraying, inwardly grasping the hard-to-reach object.
Yet the Orientalist remained outside the Orient, which, however much it
was made to appear intelligible, remained beyond the Occident. This
cultural, temporal, and geographical distance was expressed in metaphors
of depth, secrecy, and sexual promise: phrases like "the veils of an
Eastern bride" or "the inscrutable Orient" passed into the common
language.

Yet the distance between Orient and Occident was, almost paradoxically,
in the process of being reduced throughout the nineteenth century. As
the commercial, political, and other existential encounters between East
and West increased (in ways we have been discussing all along), a
tension developed between the dogmas of latent Orientalism, with its
support in studies of the "classical" Orient, and the descriptions of a
present, modern, manifest Orient articulated by travelers, pilgrims,
statesmen, and the like. At some moment impossible to determine
precisely, the tension caused a convergence of the two types of
Orientalism. Probably-and this is only a speculation-the convergence
occurred when Orientalists, beginning with Sacy, undertook to advise
governments on what the modern Orient was all about. Here the role of
the specially trained and equipped expert took on an added dimension:
the Orientalist could be regarded as the special agent of Western power
as it attempted policy vis-a-vis the Orient. Every learned (and not so
learned) European traveler in the Orient felt himself to be a
representative Westerner who had gotten beneath the films of obscurity.
This is obviously true of Burton, Lane, Doughty, Flaubert, and the other
major figures I have been discussing.

The discoveries of Westerners about the manifest and modern Orient
acquired a pressing urgency as Western territorial acquisition in the
Orient increased. Thus what the scholarly Orientalist defined as the
"essential" Orient was sometimes contradicted, but in many cases was
confirmed, when the Orient became an actual administrative obligation.
Certainly Cromer's theories about the Oriental-theories acquired from
the traditional Orientalist archive -were vindicated plentifully as he
ruled millions of Orientals in actual fact. This was no less true of the
French experience in Syria, North Africa, and elsewhere in the French
colonies, such as they were. But at no time did the convergence between
latent Orientalist doctrine and manifest Orientalist experience occur
more dramatically than when, as a result of World War I, Asiatic Turkey
was being surveyed by Britain and France for its dismemberment. There,
laid out on an operating table for surgery, was the Sick Man of Europe,
revealed in all his weakness, characteristics, and topographical
outline.

The Orientalist, with his special knowledge, played an inestimably
important part in this surgery. Already there had been intimations of
his crucial role as a kind of secret agent*inside* the Orient when the
British scholar Edward Henry Palmer was sent to the Sinai in 1882 to
gauge anti-British sentiment and its possible enlistment on behalf of
the Arabi revolt. Palmer was killed in the process, but he was only the
most unsuccessful of the many who performed similar services for the
Empire, now a serious and exacting business entrusted in part to the
regional "expert." Not for nothing was another Orientalist, D. G.
Hogarth, author of the famous account of the exploration of Arabia aptly
titled*The Penetration of Arabia (1904),* 24 made the head of the Arab
Bureau in Cairo during World War I. And neither was it by accident that
men and women like Gertrude Bell, T. E. Lawrence, and St. John Philby,
Oriental experts all, posted to the Orient as agents of empire, friends
of the Orient, formulators of policy alternatives because of their
intimate and expert knowledge of the Orient and of Orientals. They
formed a "band"-as Lawrence called it oncebound together by
contradictory notions and personal similarities: great individuality,
sympathy and intuitive identification with the Orient, a jealously
preserved sense of personal mission in the Orient, cultivated
eccentricity, a final disapproval of the Orient. For them all the Orient
was their direct, peculiar experience of it. In them Orientalism and an
effective praxis for handling the Orient received their final European
form, before the Empire disappeared and passed its legacy to other
candidates for the role of dominant power.

Such individualists as these were not academics. We shall soon see that
they were the beneficiaries of the academic study of the Orient, without
in any sense belonging to the official and professional company of
Orientalist scholars. Their role, however, was not to scant academic
Orientalism, nor to subvert it, but rather to make it effective. In
their genealogy were people like Lane and Burton, as much for their
encyclopedic autodidacticism as for the accurate, the quasi-scholarly
knowledge of the Orient they had obviously deployed when dealing with or
writing about Orientals. For the curricular study of the Orient they
substituted a sort of elaboration of latent Orientalism, which was
easily available to them in the imperial culture of their epoch. Their
scholarly frame of reference, such as it was, was fashioned by people
like William Muir, Anthony Bevan, D. S. Margoliouth, Charles Lyall, E.
G. Browne, R. A. Nicholson, Guy Le Strange, E. D. Ross, and Thomas
Arnold, who also followed directly in the line of descent from Lane.
Their imaginative perspectives were provided principally by their
illustrious contemporary Rudyard Kipling, who had sung so memorably of
holding "dominion over palm and pine."

The difference between Britain and France in such matters was perfectly
consistent with the history of each nation in the Orient: the British
were there; the French lamented the loss of India and the intervening
territories. By the end of the century, Syria had become the main focus
of French activity, but even there it was a matter of common consensus
that the French could not match the British either in quality of
personnel or in degree of political influence. The Anglo-French
competition over the Ottoman spoils was felt even on the field of battle
in the Hejaz, in Syria, in Mesopotamia-but in all these places, as
astute men like Edmond Bremond noted, the French Orientalists and local
experts were outclassed in brilliance and tactical maneuvering by their
British counterparts.25 Except for an occasional genius like Louis
Massignon, there were no French Lawrences or Sykeses or Bells. But there
were determined imperialists like Etienne Flandin and Franklin-Bouillon.
Lecturing to the Paris Alliance francaise in 1913, the Comte de
Cressaty, a vociferous imperialist, proclaimed Syria as France's own
Orient, the site of French political, moral, and economic
interests-interests, he added, that had to be defended during this "age
des envahissants imperialistes"; and yet Cressaty noted that even with
French commercial and industrial firms in the Orient, with by far the
largest number of native students enrolled in French schools, France was
invariably being pushed around in the Orient, threatened not only by
Britain but by Austria, Germany, and Russia. If France was to continue
to prevent "le retour de l'Islam," it had better take hold of the
Orient: this was an argument proposed by Cressaty and seconded by
Senator Paul Doumer.26 These views were repeated on numerous occasions,
and indeed France did well by itself in North Africa and in Syria after
World War I, but the special, concrete management of emerging Oriental
populations and theoretically independent territories with which the
British always credited themselves was something the French felt had
eluded them. Ultimately, perhaps, the difference one always feels
between modern British and modern French Orientalism is a stylistic one;
the import of the generalizations about Orient and Orientals, the sense
of distinction preserved between Orient and Occident, the desirability
of Occidental dominance over the Orient-all these are the same in both
traditions. For of the many elements making up what we customarily call
"expertise," style, which is the result of specific worldly
circumstances being molded by tradition, institutions, will, and
intelligence into formal articulation, is one of the most manifest. It
is to this determinant, to this perceptible and modernized refinement in
early-twentieth-century Orientalism in Britain and France,that we must
now turn.

II- Style, Expertise, Vision: Orientalism's Worldliness
-------------------------------------------------------

As he appears in several poems, in novels like Kim, and in too many
catchphrases to be an ironic fiction, Kipling's White Man, as an idea, a
persona, a style of being, seems to have served many Britishers while
they were abroad. The actual color of their skin set them off
dramatically and reassuringly from the sea of natives, but for the
Britisher who circulated amongst Indians, Africans, or Arabs there was
also the certain knowledge that he belonged to, and could draw upon the
empirical and spiritual reserves of, a long tradition of executive
responsibility towards the colored races. It was of this tradition, its
glories and difficulties,that Kipling wrote when he celebrated the
"road" taken by White Men in the colonies:

Now, this is the road that the White Men tread

When they go to clean a land

Iron underfoot and the vine overhead

And the deep on either hand.

We have trod that road-and a wet and windy road-

Our chosen star for guide.

Oh, well for the world when the

White Men tread

Their highway side by side!27

"Cleaning a land" is best done by White Men in delicate concert with
each other, an allusion to the present dangers of European rivalry in
the colonies; for failing in the attempt to coordinate policy, Kipling's
White Men are quite prepared to go to war: "Freedom for ourselves and
freedom for our sons/And, failing freedom, War." Behind the White Man's
mask of amiable leadership there is always the express willingness to
use force, to kill and be killed. What dignifies his mission is some
sense of intellectual dedication; he is a White Man, but not for mere
profit, since his "chosen star" presumably sits far above earthly gain.
Certainly many White Men often wondered what it was they fought for on
that "wet and windy road," and certainly a great number of them must
have been puzzled as to how the color of their skins gave them superior
ontological status plus great power over much of the inhabited world.

Yet in the end, being a White Man, for Kipling and for those whose
perceptions and rhetoric he influenced, was a selfconfirming business.
One became a White Man because one was a White Man; more important,
"drinking that cup," living that unalterable destiny in "the White Man's
day," left one little time for idle speculation on origins, causes,
historical logic.

Being a White Man was therefore an idea and a reality. It involved a
reasoned position towards both the white and the nonwhite worlds.It
meant-in the colonies--speaking in a certain way, behaving according to
a code of regulations, and even feeling certain things and not others.
It meant specific judgments, evaluations, gestures. It was a form of
authority before which nonwhites, and even whites themselves, were
expected to bend. In the institutional forms it took (colonial
governments, consular corps, commercial establishments) it was an agency
for the expression, diffusion, and implementation of policy towards the
world, and within this agency, although a certain personal latitude was
allowed, the impersonal communal idea of being a White Man ruled. Being
a White Man, in short, was a very concrete manner of being-in-the-world,
a way of taking hold of reality, language, and thought. It made a
specific style possible.

Kipling himself could not merely have happened; the same is true of his
White Man. Such ideas and their authors emerge out of complex historical
and cultural circumstances, at least two of which have much in common
with the history of Orientalism in the nineteenth century. One of them
is the culturally sanctioned habit of deploying large generalizations by
which reality is divided into various collectives: languages, races,
types, colors, mentalities, each category being not so much a neutral
designation as an evaluative interpretation. Underlying these categories
is the rigidly binomial opposition of "ours" and "theirs," with the
former always encroaching upon the latter (even to the point of making
"theirs" exclusively a function of "ours"). This opposition was
reinforced not only by anthropology, linguistics, and history but also,
of course, by the Darwinian theses on survival and natural selection,
and-no less decisive-by the rhetoric of high cultural humanism. What
gave writers like Renan and Arnold the right to generalities about race
was the official character of their formed cultural literacy. "Our"
values were (let us say) liberal, humane, correct; they were supported
by the tradition of belles-lettres, informed scholarship, rational
inquiry; as Europeans (and white men) "we" shared in them every time
their virtues were extolled. Nevertheless, the human partnerships formed
by reiterated cultural values excluded as much as they included. For
every idea about "our" art spoken for by Arnold, Ruskin, Mill, Newman,
Carlyle, Renan, Gobineau, or Comte, another link in the chain binding
"us" together was formed while another outsider was banished. Even if
this is always the result of such rhetoric, wherever and whenever it
occurs, we must remember that for nineteenth-century Europe an imposing
edifice of learning and culture was built, so to speak, in the face of
actual outsiders (the colonies, the poor, the delinquent), whose role in
the culture was to give definition to what*they* were constitutionally
unsuited for.28

The other circumstance common to the creation of the White Man and
Orientalism is the "field" commanded by each, as well as the sense that
such a field entails peculiar modes, even rituals, of behavior,
learning, and possession. Only an Occidental could speak of Orientals,
for example, just as it was the White Man who could designate and name
the coloreds, or nonwhites. Every statement made by Orientalists or
White Men (who were usually interchangeable) conveyed a sense of the
irreducible distance separating white from colored, or Occidental from
Oriental; moreover, behind each statement there resonated the tradition
of experience, learning, and education that kept the Oriental-colored to
his position of*object studied by the Occidental-white,* instead of vice
versa. Where one was in. a position of power-as Cromer was, for
example-the Oriental belonged to the system of rule whose principle was
simply to make sure that no Oriental was ever allowed to be independent
and rule himself. The premise there was that since the Orientals were
ignorant of self-government, they had better be kept that way for their
own good.

Since the White Man, like the Orientalist, lived very close to the line
of tension keeping the coloreds at bay, he felt it incumbent on him
readily to define and redefine the domain he surveyed. Passages of
narrative description regularly alternate with passages of rearticulated
definition and judgment that disrupt the narrative; this is a
characteristic style of the writing produced by Oriental experts who
operated using Kipling's White Man as a mask. Here is T. E. Lawrence,
writing to V. W. Richards in 1918:

…the Arab appealed to my imagination. It is the old, old civilisation,
which has refined itself clear of household gods, and half the trappings
which ours hastens to assume. The gospel of bareness in materials is a
good one, and it involves apparently a sort of moral bareness too. They
think for the moment, and endeavour to slip through life without turning
corners or climbing hills. In part it is a mental and moral fatigue, a
race trained out, and to avoid difficulties they have to jettison so
much that we think honorable and grave: and yet without in any way
sharing their point of view, I think I can understand it enough to look
at myself and other foreigners from their direction, and without
condemning it. I know I am a stranger to them, and always will be; but I
cannot believe them worse, any more than I could change to their ways.29

A similar perspective, however different the subject under discussion
may seem to be, is found in these remarks by Gertrude Bell:

How many thousand years this state of things has lasted [namely, that
Arabs live in "a state of war"], those who shall read the earliest
records of the inner desert will tell us, for it goes back to the first
of them, but in all the centuries the Arab has bought no wisdom from
experience. He is never safe, and yet he behaves as though security were
his daily bread.30

To which, as a gloss, we should add her further observation, this time
about life in Damascus:

I begin to see dimly what the civilisation of a great Eastern city
means, how they live, what they think; and I have got on to terms with
them. I believe the fact of my being English is a great help.... We have
gone up in the world since five years ago. The difference is very
marked. I think it is due to the success of our government in Egypt to a
great extent.... The defeat of Russia stands for a great deal, and my
impression is that the vigorous policy of Lord Curzon in the Persian
Gulf and on the India frontier stands for a great deal more. No one who
does not know the East can realise how it all hangs together. It is
scarcely an exaggeration to say that if the English mission had been
turned back from the gates of Kabul, the English tourist would be
frowned upon in the streets of Damascus.31

In such statements as these, we note immediately that "the Arab" or
"Arabs" have an aura of apartness, definiteness, and collective
self-consistency such as to wipe out any traces of individual Arabs with
narratable life histories. What appealed to Lawrence's imagination was
the clarity of the Arab, both as an image and as a supposed philosophy
(or attitude) towards life: in both cases what Lawrence fastens on is
the Arab as if seen from the cleansing perspective of one not an Arab,
and one for whom such unselfconscious primitive simplicity as the Arab
possesses is something defined by the observer, in this case the White
Man. Yet Arab refinement, which in its essentials corresponds to Yeats's
visions of Byzantium where

Flames that no faggot feeds, flint nor steel has lit,

Nor storm disturbs, flames begotten of flame,

Where blood-begotten spirits come

And all complexities of fury leave.32

is associated with Arab perdurability, as if the Arab had not been
subject to the ordinary processes of history. Paradoxically, the Arab
seems to Lawrence to have exhausted himself in his very temporal
persistence. The enormous age of Arab civilization has thus served to
refine the Arab down to his quintessential attributes, and to tire him
out morally in the process. What we are left with is Bell's Arab:
centuries of experience and no wisdom. As a collective entity, then, the
Arab accumulates no existential or even semantical thickness. He remains
the same, except for the exhausting refinements mentioned by Lawrence,
from one end to the other of "the records of the inner desert." We are
to assume that if an Arab feels joy, if he is sad at the death of his
child or parent, if he has a sense of the injustices of political
tyranny, then those experiences are necessarily subordinate to the
sheer, unadorned, and persistent fact of being an Arab.

The primitiveness of such a state exists simultaneously on at least two
levels: one,*in the definition,* which is reductive; and two (according
to Lawrence and Bell),*in reality.* This absolute coincidence was itself
no simple coincidence. For one, it could only have been made from the
outside by virtue of a vocabulary and epistemological instruments
designed both to get to the heart of things and to avoid the
distractions of accident, circumstance, or experience. For another, the
coincidence was a fact uniquely the result of method, tradition, and
politics all working together. Each in a sense obliterated the
distinctions between the*type--the Oriental, the Semite, the Arab, the
Orient* -and ordinary human reality, Yeats's "uncontrollable mystery on
the bestial floor," in which all human beings live. The scholarly
investigator took a type marked "Oriental" for the same thing as any
individual Oriental he might encounter. Years of tradition had encrusted
discourse about such matters as the Semitic or Oriental spirit with some
legitimacy. And political good sense taught, in Bell's marvelous phrase,
that in the East "it all hangs together." Primitiveness therefore
inhered in the Orient, was the Orient, an idea to which anyone dealing
with or writing about the Orient had to return, as if to a touchstone
outlasting time or experience.

There is an excellent way of understanding all this as it applied to the
white agents, experts, and advisers for the Orient. What mattered to
Lawrence and Bell was that their references to Arabs or Orientals
belonged to a recognizable, and authoritative, convention of
formulation, one that was able to subordinate detail to it. But from
where, more particularly, did "the Arab," "the Semite," or "the
Oriental" come?

We have remarked how, during the nineteenth century in such writers as
Renan, Lane, Flaubert, Caussin de Perceval, Marx, and Lamartine, a
generalization about "the Orient" drew its power from the presumed
representativeness of everything Oriental; each particle of the Orient
told of its Orientalness, so much so that the attribute of being
Oriental overrode any countervailing instance.An Oriental man was first
an Oriental and only second a man. Such radical typing was naturally
reinforced by sciences (or discourses, as I prefer to call them) that
took a backward and downward direction towards the species category,
which was supposed also to be an ontogenetic explanation for every
member of the species. Thus within broad, semipopular designations such
as "Oriental" there were some more scientifically valid distinctions
being made; most of these were based principally on language types -
e.g., Semitic, Dravidic, Hamitic-but they were quickly able to acquire
anthropological, psychological, biological, and cultural evidence in
their support. Renan's "Semitic," as an instance, was a linguistic
generalization which in Renan's hands could add to itself all sorts of
parallel ideas from anatomy, history, anthropology, and even geology.
"Semitic" could then be employed not only as a simple description or
designation; it could be applied to any complex of historical and
political events in order to pare them down to a nucleus both antecedent
to and inherent in them. "Semitic," therefore, was a transtemporal,
transindividual category, purporting to predict every discrete act of
"Semitic" behavior on the basis of some pre-existing "Semitic" essence,
and aiming as well to interpret all aspects of human life and activity
in terms of some common "Semitic" element.

The peculiar hold on late-nineteenth-century liberal European culture of
such relatively punitive ideas will seem mysterious unless it is
remembered that the appeal of sciences like linguistics, anthropology,
and biology was that they were empirical, and by no means speculative or
idealistic. Renan's Semitic, like Bopp's Indo-European, was a
constructed object, it is true, but it was considered logical and
inevitable as a protoform, given the scientifically apprehendable and
empirically analyzable data of specific Semitic languages. Thus, in
trying to formulate a prototypical and primitive linguistic type (as
well as a cultural, psychological, and historical one), there was also
an "attempt to define a primary human potential,33 out of which
completely specific instances of behavior uniformly derived. Now this
attempt would have been impossible had it not also been believed-in
classical empiricist terms-that mind and body were interdependent
realities, both determined originally by a given set of geographical,
biological, and quasihistorical conditions.34 From this set, which was
not available to the native for discovery or introspection, there was no
subsequent escape. The antiquarian bias of Orientalists was supported by
these empiricist ideas. In all their studies of "classical" Islam,
Buddhism, or Zoroastrianism they felt themselves, as George Eliot's Dr.
Casaubon confesses, to be acting "like the ghost of an ancient,
wandering about the world and trying mentally to construct it as it used
to be, in spite of ruin and confusing changes."35

Were these theses about linguistic, civilizational, and finally racial
characteristics merely one side of an academic debate amongst European
scientists and scholars, we might dismiss them as furnishing material
for an unimportant closet drama. The point is, however, that both the
terms of the debate and the debate itself had 'very wide circulation; in
late-nineteenth-century culture, as Lionel Trilling has said, "racial
theory, stimulated by a rising nationalism and a spreading imperialism,
supported by an incomplete and mal-assimilated science, was almost
undisputed."[36] Race theory, ideas about primitive origins and
primitive classifications, modern decadence, the progress of
civilization, the destiny of the white (or Aryan) races, the need for
colonial territories-all these were elements in the peculiar amalgam of
science, politics, and culture whose drift, almost without exception,
was always to raise Europe or a European race to dominion over
non-European portions of mankind. There was general agreement too that,
according to a strangely transformed variety of Darwinism sanctioned by
Darwin himself, the modern Orientals were degraded remnants of a former
greatness; the ancient, or "classical," civilizations of the Orient were
perceivable through the disorders of present decadence, but only (a)
because a white specialist, with highly refined scientific techniques
could do the sifting and reconstructing, and (b) because a vocabulary of
sweeping generalities (the Semites, the Aryans, the Orientals) referred
not to a set of fictions but rather to a whole array of seemingly
objective and agreed-upon distinctions. Thus a remark about what
Orientals were and were not capable of was supported by biological
"truths" such as those spelled out in P. Charles Michel's "A Biological
View of Our Foreign Policy" (1896), in Thomas Henry Huxley's*The
Struggle for Existence in Human Society* (1888), Benjamin Kidd's
Social*Evolution* (1894), John B. Crozier's*History of Intellectual
Development on the Lines of Modern Evolution* (1897-1901), and Charles
Harvey's*The Biology of British Politics* (1904)37 . It was assumed that
if languages were as distinct from each other as the linguists said they
were, then too the language users-their minds, cultures, potentials, and
even their bodies-were different in similar ways. And these distinctions
had the force of ontological, empirical truth behind them, together with
the convincing demonstration of such truth in studies of origins,
development, character, and destiny.

The point to be emphasized is that this truth about the distinctive
differences between races, civilizations, and languages was (or
pretended to be) radical and ineradicable. It went to the bottom of
things, it asserted that there was no escape from origins and the types
these origins enabled; it set the real boundaries between human beings,
on which races, nations, and civilizations were constructed; it ford
vision away from common, as well as plural, human realities like joy,
suffering, political organization, forcing attention instead in the
downward and backward direction of immutable origins. A scientist could
no more escape such origins in his research than an Oriental could
escape "the Semites" or "the Arabs" or "the Indians" from which his
present reality---debased, colonized, backward--excluded him, except for
the white researcher's didactic presentation.

The profession of specialized research conferred unique privileges. We
recall that Lane could appear to be an Oriental and yet retain his
scholarly detachment. The Orientals he studied became in fact*his*
Orientals, for he saw them not only as actual people but as
monumentalized objects in his account of them. This double perspective
encouraged a sort of structured irony. On the one hand, there was a
collection of people living in the present; on the other hand, these
people-as the subject of study--became "the Egyptians," "the Muslims,"
or "the Orientals." Only the scholar could see, and manipulate, the
discrepancy between the two levels. The tendency of the former was
always towards greater variety, yet this variety was always being
restrained, compressed downwards and backwards to the radical terminal
of the generality. Every modern, native instance of behavior became an
effusion to be sent back to the original terminal, which was
strengthened in the process. This kind of "dispatching" was precisely
the*discipline* of Orientalism.

Lane's ability to deal with the Egyptians as present beings and as
validations of*sui generis* labels was a function both of Orientalist
discipline and of generally held views about the Near Oriental Muslim or
Semite. In no people more than in the Oriental Semites was it possible
to see the present and the origin together. The Jews and the Muslims, as
subjects of Orientalist study, were readily understandable in view of
their primitive origins: this was (and to a certain extent still is) the
cornerstone of morn Orientalism. Renan had called the Semites an
instance of arrested development, and functionally speaking this came to
mean that for the Orientalist no modern Semite, however much he may have
believed himself to be morn, could ever outdistance the organizing
claims on him of his origins. This functional rule worked on the
temporal and spatial levels together. No Semite advanced in time beyond
the development of a "classical" period; no Semite could ever shake
loose the pastoral, desert environment of his tent and tribe. Every
manifestation of actual "Semitic" life could be, and ought to be,
referred back to the primitive explanatory category of "the Semitic."

The executive power of such a system of reference, by which each
discrete instance of real behavior could be reduced down and back to a
small number of explanatory "original" categories, was considerable by
the end of the nineteenth century. In Orientalism it was the equivalent
of bureaucracy in public administration. The department was more useful
than the individual file, and certainly the human being was significant
principally as the occasion for a file. We must imagine the Orientalist
at work in the role of a clerk putting together a very wide assortment
of files in a large cabinet marked "the Semites." Aided by recent
discoveries in comparative and primitive anthropology, a scholar like
William Robertson Smith could group together the inhabitants of the Near
Orient and write on their kinship and marriage customs, on the form and
content of their religious practice. The power of Smith's work is its
plainly radical demythologizing of the Semites. The nominal barriers
presented to the world by Islam or Judaism are swept aside; Smith uses
Semitic philology, mythology, and Orientalist scholarship "to
construct.. a hypothetical picture of the development of the social
systems, consistent with all the Arabian facts." If this picture
succeeds in revealing the antecedent, and still influential, roots of
monotheism in totemism or animal worship, then the scholar has been
successful. And this, Smith says, despite the fact that "our Mohammedan
sources draw a veil, as far as they can, over all details of the old
heathenism."[38]

Smith's work on the Semites covered such areas as theology, literature,
and history; it was done with a full awareness of work done by
Orientalists (see, for instance, Smith's savage attack in 1887 on
Renan's*Histoire du peuple d'Israël),* and more important, was intended
as an aid to the understanding of the modern Semites. For Smith, I
think, was a crucial link in the intellectual chain connecting the
White-Man-as-expert to the modern Orient. None of the encapsulated
wisdom delivered as Oriental expertise by Lawrence, Hogarth, Bell, and
the others would have been possible without Smith. And even Smith the
antiquarian scholar would not have had half the authority without his
additional and direct experience of "the Arabian facts." It was the
combination in Smith of the "grasp" of primitive categories with the
ability to see general truths behind the empirical vagaries of
contemporary Oriental behavior that .gave weight to his writing.
Moreover, it was this special combination that adumbrated the style of
expertise upon which Lawrence, Bell, and Philby built their reputation.

Like Burton and Charles Doughty before him, Smith voyaged in the Hejaz,
between 1880 and 1881. Arabia has been an especially privileged place
for the Orientalist, not only because Muslims treat Islam as Arabia's
genius loci, but also because the Hejaz appears historically as barren
and retarded as it is geographically; the Arabian desert is thus
considered to be a locale about which one can make statements regarding
the past in exactly the same form (and with the same content) that one
makes them regarding the present. In the Hejaz you can speak about
Muslims, modern Islam, and primitive Islam without bothering to make
distinctions. To this vocabulary devoid of historical grounding, Smith
was able to bring the cachet of additional authority provided by his
Semitic studies.

What we hear in his comments is the standpoint of a scholar commanding
all the antecedents for Islam, the Arabs, and Arabia. Hence:

It is characteristic of Mohammedanism that all national feeling assumes
a religious aspect, inasmuch as the whole polity and social forms of a
Moslem country are clothed in a religious dress. But it would be a
mistake to suppose that genuine religious feeling is at the bottom of
everything that justifies itself by taking a religious shape. The
prejudices of the Arab have their roots in a conservatism which lies
deeper than his belief in Islam. It is, indeed, a great fault of the
religion of the Prophet that it lends itself so easily to the prejudices
of the race among whom it was first promulgated, and that it has taken
under its protection so many barbarous and obsolete ideas, which even
Mohammed must have seen to have no religious worth, but which he carried
over into his system in order to facilitate the propagation of his
reformed doctrines. Yet many of the prejudices which seem to us most
distinctively Mohammedan have no basis in the Koran.39

The "us" in the last sentence of this amazing piece of logic defines the
White Man's vantage point explicitly. This allows "us" to say in the
first sentence that all political and social life are "clothed" in
religious dress (Islam can thus be characterized as totalitarian), then
to say in the second that religion is only a cover used by Muslims (in
other words, all Muslims are hypocrites essentially). In the third
sentence, the claim is made that Islam-even while laying hold upon the
Arab's faith-has not really reformed the Arab's basic pre-Islamic
conservatism.Nor is this all. For if Islam was successful as a religion
it was because it fecklessly allowed these "authentic" Arab prejudices
to creep in; for such a tactic (now we see that it was a tactic on
Islam's behalf) we must blame Mohammed, who was after all a ruthless
crypto-Jesuit. But all this is more or less wiped out in the last
sentence, when Smith assures "us" that everything he has said about
Islam is invalid, since the quintessential aspects of Islam known to the
West are not "Mohammedan" after all.

The principles of identity and noncontradiction clearly do not bind the
Orientalist. What overrides them is Orientalist expertise, which is
based on an irrefutable collective verity entirely within the
Orientalist's philosophical and rhetorical grasp. Smith is able without
the slightest trepidation to speak about "the jejune, practical
and...constitutionally irreligious habit of the Arabic mind," Islam as a
system of "organized hypocrisy," the impossibility of "feeling any
respect for Moslem devotion, in which formalism and vain repetition are
reduced to a system." His attacks on Islam are not relativist, for it is
clear to him that Europe's and Christianity's superiority is actual, not
imagined. At bottom, Smith's vision of the world is binary, as is
evident in such passages as the following:

The Arabian traveller is quite different from ourselves. The labour of
moving from place to place is a mere nuisance to him, he has no
enjoyment in effort [as "we" do], and grumbles at hunger or fatigue with
all his might [as "we" do not]. You will never persuade the Oriental
that, when you get off your camel, you can have any other wish than
immediately to squat on a rug and take your rest*(isterih),* smoking and
drinking. Moreover the Arab is little impressed by scenery [but "we"
are].40

"We" are this, "they" are that. Which Arab, which Islam, when, how,
according to what tests: these appear to be distinctions irrelevant to
Smith's scrutiny of and experience in the Hejaz. The crucial point is
that everything one can know or learn about "Semites" and "Orientals"
receives immediate corroboration, not merely in the archives, but
directly on the ground.

Out of such a coercive framework, by which a modern "colored" man is
chained irrevocably to the general truths formulated about his
prototypical linguistic, anthropological, and doctrinal forebears by a
white European scholar, the work of the great twentiethcentury Oriental
experts in England and France derived. To this framework these experts
also brought their private mythology and obsessions, which in writers
like Doughty and Lawrence have been studied with considerable energy.
Each-Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, Doughty, Lawrence, Bell, Hogarth, Philby,
Sykes, Storrs---believed his vision of things Oriental was individual,
self-created out of some intensely personal encounter with the Orient,
Islam, or the Arabs; each expressed general contempt for official
knowledge held about the East. "The sun made me an Arab," Doughty wrote
in Arabia Deserta, "but never warped me to Orientalism." Yet in the
final analysis they all (except Blunt) expressed the traditional Western
hostility to and fear of the Orient. Their views refined and gave a
personal twist to the academic style of modern Orientalism, with its
repertoire of grand generalizations, tendentious "science" from which
there was no appeal, reductive formulae. (Doughty again, on the same
page as his sneer at Orientalism: "The Semites are like to a man sitting
in a cloaca to the eyes, and whose brows touch heaven."[41]) They acted,
they promised, they recommended public policy on the basis of such
generalizations; and, by a remarkable irony, they acquired the identity
of White Orientals in their natal cultures-even as, in the instances of
Doughty, Lawrence, Hogarth, and Bell, their professional involvement
with the East (like Smith's) did not prevent them from despising it
thoroughly. The main issue for them was preserving the Orient and Islam
under the control of the White Man.

A new dialectic emerges out of this project. What is required of the
Oriental expert is no longer simply"understanding": now the Orient must
be made to perform, its power must be enlisted on the side of "our"
values, civilization, interests, goals. Knowledge of the Orient is
directly translated into activity, and the results give rise to new
currents of thought and action in the Orient. But these in turn will
require from the White Man a new assertion of control, this time not as
the author of a scholarly work on the Orient but as the maker of
contemporary history, of the Orient as urgent actuality (which, because
he began it, only the expert can understand adequately). The Orientalist
has now become a figure of Oriental history, indistinguishable from it,
its shaper, its characteristic sign for the West. Here is the dialectic
in brief:

Some Englishmen, of whom Kitchener was chief, believed that a rebellion
of Arabs against Turks would enable England, while fighting Germany,
simultaneously to defeat her ally Turkey. Their knowledge of the nature
and power and country of the Arabic-speaking peoples made them think
that the issue of such a rebellion would be happy: and indicated its
character and method. So they allowed it to begin, having obtained
formal assurances of help for it from the British Government. Yet none
the less the rebellion of the Sherif of Mecca came to most as a
surprise, and found the Allies unready. It aroused mixed feelings and
made strong friends and enemies, amid whose clashing jealousies its
affairs began to miscarry.42

This is Lawrence's own synopsis of chapter 1 of The Seven Pillars of
Wisdom. The "knowledge" of "some Englishmen" authors a movement in the
Orient whose "affairs" create a mixed progeny; the ambiguities, the
half-imagined, tragicomic results of this new, revived Orient become the
subject of expert writing, a new form of Orientalist discourse that
presents a vision of the contemporary Orient, not as narrative, but as
all complexity, problematics, betrayed hope-with the White Orientalist
author as its prophetic, articulate definition.

The defeat of narrative by vision-which is true even in so patently
storylike a work as*The Seven Pillars* -is something we have already
encountered in Lane's*Modern Egyptians* . A conflict between a holistic
view of the Orient (description, monumental record) and a narrative of
events in the Orient is a conflict on several levels, involving several
different issues. As the conflict is frequently renewed in the discourse
of Orientalism, it is worthwhile analyzing it here briefly. The
Orientalist surveys the Orient from above, with the aim of getting hold
of the whole sprawling panorama before him-culture, religion, mind,
history, society. To do this he must see every detail through the device
of a set of reductive categories (the Semites, the Muslim mind, the
Orient, and so forth). Since these categories are primarily schematic
and efficient ones, and since it is more or less assumed that no
Oriental can know himself the way an Orientalist can, any vision of the
Orient ultimately comes to rely for its coherence and force on the
person, institution, or discourse whose property it is. Any
comprehensive vision is fundamentally conservative, and we have noted
how in the history of ideas about the Near Orient in the West these
ideas have maintained themselves regardless of any evidence disputing
them. (Indeed, we can argue that these ideas produce evidence that
proves their validity.)

The Orientalist is principally a kind of agent of such comprehensive
visions; Lane is a typical instance of the way an individual believes
himself to have subordinated his ideas, or even what he sees, to the
exigencies of some "scientific" view of the whole phenomenon known
collectively as the Orient, or the Oriental nation. A vision therefore
is static, just as the scientific categories informing
late-nineteenth-century Orientalism are static: there is no recourse
beyond "the Semites" or "the Oriental mind"; these are final terminals
holding every variety of Oriental behavior within a general view of the
whole field. As a discipline, as a profession, as specialized language
or discourse, Orientalism is staked upon the permanence of the whole
Orient, for without "the Orient" there can be no consistent,
intelligible, and articulated knowledge called "Orientalism." Thus the
Orient belongs to Orientalism, just as it is assumed that there is
pertinent information belonging to (or about) the Orient.

Against this static system of"synchronic essentialism"43 I have called
vision because it presumes that the whole Orient can be seen
panoptically, there is a constant pressure. The source of pressure is
narrative, in that if any Oriental detail can be shown to move, or to
develop, diachrony is introduced into the system. What seemed stable-and
the Orient is synonymous with stability and unchanging eternality-now
appears unstable. Instability suggests that history, with its disruptive
detail, its currents of change, its tendency towards growth, decline, or
dramatic movement, is possible in the Orient and for the Orient. History
and the narrative by which history is represented argue that vision is
insufficient, that "the Orient" as an unconditional ontological category
does an injustice to the potential of reality for change.

Moreover, narrative is the specific form taken by written history to
counter the permanence of vision. Lane sensed the dangers of narrative
when he refused to give linear shape to himself and to his information,
preferring instead the monumental form of encyclopedic or
lexicographical vision. Narrative asserts the power of men to be born,
develop, and die, the tendency of institutions and actualities to
change, the likelihood that modernity and contemporaneity will finally
overtake "classical" civilizations; above all, it asserts that the
domination of reality by vision is no more than a will to power, a will
to truth and interpretation, and not an objective condition of history.
Narrative, in short, introduces an opposing point of view, perspective,
consciousness to the unitary web of vision; it violates the serene
Apollonian fictions asserted by vision.

When as a result of World War I the Orient was made to enter history, it
was the Orientalist-as-agent who did the work. Hannah Arendt has made
the brilliant observation that the counterpart of the bureaucracy is the
imperial agent,44 which is to say that if the collective academic
endeavor called Orientalism was a bureaucratic institution based on a
certain conservative vision of the Orient, then the servants of such a
vision in the Orient were imperial agents like T. E. Lawrence. In his
work we can see most clearly the conflict between narrative history and
vision, as-in his words--the "new Imperialism" attempted "an active tide
of imposing responsibility on the local peoples [of the Orient]."45 The
competition between the European Powers now caused them to prod the
Orient into active life, to press the Orient into service, to turn the
Orient from unchanging "Oriental" passivity into militant modern life.
It would be important, nevertheless, never to let the Orient go its own
way or get out of hand, the canonical view being that Orientals had no
tradition of freedom.

The great drama of Lawrence's work is that it symbolizes the struggle,
first, to stimulate the Orient (lifeless, timeless, forceless) into
movement; second, to impose upon that movement an essentially Western
shape; third, to contain the new and aroused Orient in a personal
vision, whose retrospective mode includes a powerful sense of failure
and betrayal.

I meant to make a new nation, to restore a lost influence, to give
twenty millions of Semites the foundation on which to build an inspired
dream-palace of their national thoughts All the subject provinces of the
Empire to me were not worth one dead English boy. If I have restored to
the East some self-respect, a goal, ideals: if I have made the standard
rule of white over red more exigent, I have fitted those peoples in a
degree for the new commonwealth in which the dominant races will forget
their brute achievements, and white and red and yellow and brown and
black will stand up together without side-glances in the service of the
world.46

None of this, whether as intention, as an actual undertaking, or as a
failed project, would have been remotely possible without the White
Orientalist perspective at the outset:

The Jew in the Metropole at Brighton, the miser, the worshipper of
Adonis, the lecher in the stews of Damascus were alike signs of the
Semitic capacity for enjoyment, and expressions of the same nerve which
gave us at the other pole the self-denial of the Essenes, or the early
Christians, or the first Khalifas, finding the ways to heaven fairest
for the poor in spirit. The Semite hovered between lust and self-denial.

Lawrence is backed in such statements by a respectable tradition
stretching like a lighthouse beam through the whole nineteenth century;
at its light-emanating center, of course, is "the Orient," and that is
powerful enough to light up both the gross and the refined topographies
within its range. The Jew, the worshipper of Adonis, the Damascene
lecher, are signs not so much of humanity, let us say, as of a semiotic
field called Semitic and built into coherence by the Semitic branch of
Orientalism. Inside this fold, certain things were possible:

Arabs could be swung on an idea as on a cord; for the unpledged
allegiance of their minds made them obedient servants. None of them
would escape the bond till success had come, and with it responsibility
and duty and engagement. Then the idea was gone and the work ended-in
ruins. Without a creed they could be taken to the four corners of the
world (but not to heaven) by being shown the riches of the earth and the
pleasures of it; but if on the road ...they met the prophet of an idea,
who had no where to lay his head and who depended for his food on
charity or birds, then they would all leave their wealth for his
inspiration They were as unstable as water, and like water would perhaps
finally prevail. Since the dawn of life, in successive waves they had
been dashing themselves against the coasts of flesh. Each wave was
broken One such wave (and not the least) I raised and rolled before the
breath of an idea, till it reached its crest, and toppled over and fell
at Damascus. The wash of that wave, thrown back by the resistance of
vested things, will provide the matter of the following wave, when in
fullness of time the sea shall be raised once more.

"Could," "would," and "if' are Lawrence's way inserting himself in the
field, as it were. Thus the possibility is prepared for the last
sentence, in which as manipulator of the Arabs Lawrence puts himself at
their head. Like Conrad's Kurtz, Lawrence has cut himself loose from the
earth so as to become identified with a new reality in order-he says
later-that he might be responsible for "hustling into form ...the new
Asia which time was inexorably bringing upon us."47

The Arab Revolt acquires meaning only as Lawrence designs meaning for
it; his meaning imparted thus to Asia was a triumph, "a mood of
enlargement ...in that we felt that we had assumed another's pain or
experience, his personality." The Orientalist has become now the
representative Oriental, unlike earlier participant observers such as
Lane, for whom the Orient was something kept carefully at bay. But there
is an unresolvable conflict in Lawrence between the White Man and the
Oriental, and although he does not explicitly say so, this conflict
essentially restages in his mind the historical conflict between East
and West. Conscious of his power over the Orient, conscious also of his
duplicity, unconscious of any thing in the Orient that would suggest to
him that history, after all, is history and that even without him the
Arabs would finally attend to their quarrel with the Turks, Lawrence
reduces the entire narrative of the revolt (its momentary successes and
its bitter failure) to his vision of himself as an unresolved, "standing
civil war":

Yet in reality we had borne the vicarious for our own sakes, or at least
because it was pointed for our benefit: and could escape from this
knowledge only by a make-belief in sense as well as in motive....

There seemed no straight walking for us leaders in this crooked lane of
conduct, ring within ring of unknown, shamefaced motives cancelling or
double-charging their precedents.48

To this intimate sense of defeat Lawrence was later to add a theory
about "the old men" who stole the triumph from him. In any event, what
matters to Lawrence is that as a white expert, the legatee of years of
academic and popular wisdom about the Orient, he is able to subordinate
his style of being to theirs, thereafter to assume the role of Oriental
prophet giving shape to a movement in "the new Asia." And when, for
whatever reason, the movement fails (it is taken over by others, its
aims are betrayed, its dream of independence invalidated), it*is
Lawrence's* disappointment that counts. So far from being a mere man
lost in the great rush of confusing events, Lawrence equates himself
fully with the struggle of the new Asia to be born.

Whereas Aeschylus had represented Asia mourning its losses, and Nerval
had espressed his disappointment in the Orient for not being more
glamorous than he had wanted, Lawrence*becomes* both the mourning
continent and a subjective consciousness expressing an almost cosmic
disenchantment. In the end Lawrence- and thanks not only to Lowell
Thomas and Robert Graves-and Lawrence's vision became the very symbol of
Oriental trouble: Lawrence, in short, had assumed responsibility for the
Orient by interspersing his knowing experience between the reader and
history. Indeed what Lawrence presents to the reader is an unmediated
expert power-the power to be, for a brief time, the Orient. All the
events putatively ascribed to the historical Arab Revolt are reduced
finally to Lawrence's experiences on its behalf.

In such a case, therefore, style is not only the power to symbolize such
enonnous generalities as Asia, the Orient, or the Arabs; it is also a
form of displacement and incorporation by which one voice becomes a
whole history, and-for the white Westerner, as reader or writer-the only
kind of Orient it is possible to know. Just as Renan had mapped the
field of possibility open to the Semites in culture, thought, and
language, so too Lawrence charts the space (and indeed, appropriates
that space) and time of modern Asia.

The effect of this style is that it brings Asia tantalizingly close to
the West, but only for a brief moment. We are left at the end with a
sense of the pathetic distance still separating "us" from an Orient
destined to bear its foreignness as a mark of its permanent estrangement
from the West. This is the disappointing conclusion corroborated
(contemporaneously) by the ending of E. M. Forster's*A Passage to
India,* where Aziz and Fielding attempt, and fail at, reconciliation:

"Why can't we be friends now?" said the other, holding him
affectionately. "It's what I want. It's what you want."

But the horses didn't want it-they swerved apart; the earth didn't want
it, sending up rocks through which riders must pass single file; the
temples, the tank, the jail, the palace, the birds, the carrion, the
Guest House, that came into view as they issued from the gap and saw Mau
beneath: they didn't want it, they said in their hundred voices, "No,
not yet," and the sky said, "No, not there."49

This style, this compact definition, is what the Orient will always come
up against.

Despite its pessimism, there is a positive political message behind its
phrases. The gulf between East and West can be modulated, as Cromer and
Balfour knew well, by superior Western knowledge and power. Lawrence's
vision is complemented in France by Maurice Barres's*Une Enquête aux
pays du Levant,* the record of a journey through the Near Orient in
1914. Like so many works before it, the*Enquête is* a work of
recapitulation whose author not only searches out sources and origins of
Western culture in the Orient but also redoes Nerval, Flaubert, and
Lamartine in their voyages to the Orient. For Barrès, however, there is
an additional political dimension to his journey: he seeks proof, and
conclusive evidence, for a constructive French role in the East. Yet the
difference between French and British expertise remains: the former
manages an actual conjunction of peoples and territory, whereas the
latter deals with a realm of spiritual possibility. For Barres the
French presence is best seen in French schools where, as he says of a
school in Alexandria; "It is ravishing to see those little Oriental
girls welcoming and so wonderfully reproducing the f*antaisie* and the
melody [in their spoken French] of the lle-de France." If France does
not actually have any colonies there, she is not entirely without
possessions:

There is, there in the Orient, a feeling about France which is so
religious and strong that it is capable of absorbing and reconciling all
our most diverse aspirations. In the Orient we represent spirituality,
justice, and the category of the ideal. England is powerful there;
Germany is all-powerful; but we possess Oriental souls.

Arguing vociferously with Jaures, this celebrated European doctor
proposes to vaccinate Asia against its own illnesses, to occidentalize
the Orientals, to bring them into salubrious contact with France. Yet
even in these projects Barres's vision preserves the very distinction
between East and West he claims to be mitigating.

How will we be able to form for ourselves an intellectual elite with
which we can work, made out of Orientals who would not be deracinated,
who would continue to evolve according to their own norms, who would
remain penetrated by family traditions, and who would thus form a link
between us and the mass of natives? How will we create relationships
with a view towards preparing the way for agreements and treaties which
would be the desirable form taken by our political future [in the
Orient]? All these things are finally all about soliciting in these
strange peoples the taste for maintaining contact with our
intelligence,*even* *though this taste may in fact come out of their own
sense of their national destiny.* 50

The emphasis in the last sentence is Barres's own. Since unlike Lawrence
and Hogarth (whose book The*Wandering Scholar is* the wholly informative
and unromantic record of two trips to the Levant in 1896 and 191051 ) he
writes of a world of distant probabilities; he is more prepared to
imagine the Orient as going its own way. Yet the bond (or leash) between
East and West that he advocates is designed to permit a constant variety
of intellectual pressure going from West to East.Barrens sees things,
not in terms of waves, battles, spiritual adventures, but in terms of
the cultivation of intellectual imperialism, as ineradicable as it, is
subtle. The British vision, exemplified by Lawrence, is of the
mainstream Orient, of peoples, political organizations, and movements
guided and held in check by the White Man's expert tutelage; the Orient
is "our" Orient, "our" people, "our" dominions. Discriminations between
elites and the masses are less likely to be made by the British than by
the French, whose perceptions and policy were always based on minorities
and on the insidious pressures of spiritual community between France and
its colonial children.

The British agent-Orientalist Lawrence, Bell, Philby, Storrs,
Hogarth -during and after World War I took over both the rule of
expert-adventurer-eccentric (created in the nineteenth century by Lane,
Burton, Hester Stanhope) and the role of colonial authority, whose
position is in a central place next to the indigenous ruler: Lawrence
with the Hashimites, Philby with the house of Saud, are the two
best-known instances. British Oriental expertise fashioned itself around
consensus and orthodoxy and sovereign authority; French Oriental
expertise between the wars concerned itself with heterodoxy, spiritual
ties, eccentrics. It is no accident, then, that the two major scholarly
careers of this period, one British, one French, were H. A. R. Gibb's
and Louis Massignon's, one whose interest was defined by the notion of
Sunna (or orthodoxy) in Islam, the other whose focus was on the
quasi-Christlike, theosophical Sufi figure, Mansur al-Hallaj. I shall
return to these two major Orientalists a little later.

If I have concentrated so much on imperial agents and policymakers
instead of scholars in this section, it was to accentuate the major
shift in Orientalism, knowledge about the Orient, intercourse with it,
from an academic to an*instrumental* attitude. What accompanies the
shift is a change in the attitude as well of the individual Orientalist,
who need no longer see himself-as Lane, Sacy, Renan, Caussin, Muller,
and others did-as belonging to a sort of guild community with its own
internal traditions and rituals. Now the Orientalist has become the
representative man of his Western culture, a man who compresses within
his own work a major duality of which that work (regardless of its
specific form) is the symbolic expression: Occidental consciousness,
knowledge, science taking hold of the furthest Oriental reaches as well
as the most minute Oriental particulars. Formally the Orientalist sees
himself as accomplishing the union of Orient and Occident, but mainly by
reasserting the technological, political, and cultural supremacy of the
West. History, in such a union, is radically attentuated if not
banished. Viewed as a current of development, as a narrative strand, or
as a dynamic force unfolding systematically and materially in time and
space, human history-of the East or the West -is subordinated to an
essentialist, idealist conception of Occident and Orient. Because he
feels himself to be standing at the very rim of the East-West divide,
the Orientalist not only speaks in vast generalities; he also seeks to
convert each aspect of Oriental or Occidental life into an unmediated
sign of one or the other geographical half.

The interchange in the Orientalist's writing between his expert self and
his testimonial, beholding self as Western representative is
pre-eminently worked out in visual terms. Here is a typical passage
(quoted by Gibb) from Duncan Macdonald's classic work*The Religious
Attitude and Life in Islam (1909):*

The Arabs show themselves not as especially easy of belief, but as
hard-headed, materialistic, questioning, doubting, scoffing at their own
superstitions and usages, fond of tests of the supernatural-and all this
in a curiously light-minded, almost childish fashion.52

The governing verb is*show,* which here gives us to understand that the
Arabs display themselves (willingly or unwillingly) to and for expert
scrutiny. The number of attributes ascribed to them, by its crowded set
of sheer appositions, causes "the Arabs" to acquire a sort of
existential weightlessness; thereby, "the Arabs" are made to rejoin the
very broad designation, common to modern anthropological thought, of
"the childish primitive." What Macdonald also implies is that for such
descriptions there is a peculiarly privileged position occupied by the
Western Orientalist, whose representative function is precisely to show
what needs to be seen. All specific history is capable of being seen
thus at the apex, or the sensitive frontier, of Orient and Occident
together. The complex dynamics of human life-what I have been calling
history as narrativebecomes either irrelevant or trivial in comparison
with the circular vision by which the details of Oriental life serve
merely to reassert the Orientalness of the subject and the Westernness
of the observer.

If such a vision in some ways recalls Dante's, we should by no means
fail to notice what an enormous difference there is between this Orient
and Dante's. Evidence here is meant to be (and probably is considered)
scientific; its pedigree, genealogically speaking, is European
intellectual and human science during the nineteenth century. Moreover,
the Orient is no simple marvel, or an enemy, or a branch of exotica; it
is a political actuality of great and significant moment. Like Lawrence,
Macdonald cannot really detach his representative characteristics as a
Westerner from his role as a scholar. Thus his vision of Islam, as much
as Lawrence's of the Arabs, implicates*definition* of the object with
the*identity* of the person defining. All Arab Orientals must be
accommodated to a vision of an Oriental type as constructed by the
Western scholar, as well as to a specific encounter with the Orient in
which the Westerner regrasps the Orient's essence as a consequence of
his intimate estrangement from it. For Lawrence as for Forster, this
latter sensation produces the despondency as well of personal failure;
for such scholars as Macdonald, it strengthens the Orientalist discourse
itself.

And it puts that discourse abroad in the world of culture, politics, and
actuality. In the period between the wars, as we can easily judge from,
say, Malraux's novels, the relations between East and West assumed a
currency that was both widespread and anxious. The signs of Oriental
claims for political independence were everywhere; certainly in the
dismembered Ottoman Empire they were encouraged by the Allies and, as is
perfectly evident in the whole Arab Revolt and its aftermath, quickly
became problematic. The Orient now appeared to constitute a challenge,
not just to the West in general, but to the West's spirit, knowledge,
and imperium. After a good century of constant intervention in (and
study of) the Orient, the West's role in an East itself responding to
the crises of modernity seemed considerably more delicate. There was the
issue of outright occupation; there was the issue of the mandated
territories; there was the issue of European competition in the Orient;
there was the issue of dealing with native elites, native popular
movements, and native demands for self-government and independence;
there was the issue of civilizational contacts between Orient and
Occident. Such issues forced reconsideration of Western knowledge of the
Orient. No less a personage than Sylvain Levi, president of the Société
asiatique between 1928 and 1935, professor of Sanskrit at the Collège de
France, reflected seriously in 1925 on the urgency of the East-West
problem:

Our duty is to understand Oriental civilization. The humanistic problem,
which consists, on an intellectual level, in making a sympathetic and
intelligent effort to understand foreign civilizations in both their
past and their future forms, is specifically posed for us Frenchmen
[although similar sentiments could have been expressed by an Englishman:
the problem was a European one] in a practical way with regard to our
great Asiatic colonies....

These peoples are the inheritors of a long tradition of history, of art,
and of religion, the sense of which they have not entirely lost and
which they are probably anxious to prolong. We have assumed the
responsibility of intervening in their development, sometimes without
consulting them, sometimes in answer to their request.... We claim,
rightly or wrongly, to represent a superior civilization, and because of
the right given us by virtue of this superiority, which we regularly
affirm with such assurance as makes it seem incontestable to the
natives, we have called in question all their native traditions ....

In a general way, then, wherever the European has intervened, the native
has perceived himself with a sort of general despair which was really
poignant since he felt that the sum of his wellbeing, in the moral
sphere more than in sheer material terms, instead of increasing had in
fact diminished. All of which has made the foundation of his social life
seem to be flimsy and to crumble under him, and the golden pillars on
which he had thought to rebuild his life now seem no more than tinseled
cardboard.

This disappointment has been translated into rancor from one end to the
other of the Orient, and this rancor is very close now to turning to
hate, and hate only waits for the right moment in order to turn into
action.

If because of laziness or incomprehension Europe does not make the
effort that its interests alone require from it,*then the Asiatic drama
will approach the crisis point.*

It is here that that science which is a form of life and an instrument
of policy-that is, wherever our interests are at stake-owes it to itself
to penetrate native civilization and life in their intimacy in order to
discover their fundamental values and durable characteristics rather
than to smother native life with the incoherent threat of European
civilizational imports. We must offer ourselves to these civilizations
as we do our other products, that is, on the local exchange market.
[Emphasis in original]53

Lévi has no difficulty in connecting Orientalism with politics, for the
long-or rather, the prolonged-Western intervention in the East cannot be
denied either in its consequences for knowledge or in its effect upon
the hapless native; together the two add up to what could be a menacing
future. For all his expressed humanism, his admirable concern for fellow
creatures, Lévi conceives the present juncture in unpleasantly
constricted terms. The Oriental is imagined to feel his world threatened
by a superior civilization; yet his motives are impelled, not by some
positive desire for freedom, political independence, or cultural
achievement on their own terms, but instead by rancor or jealous malice.
The panacea offered for this potentially ugly turn of affairs is that
the Orient be marketed for a Western consumer, be put before him as one
among numerous wares beseeching his attention. By a single stroke you
will defuse the Orient (by letting it think itself to be an "equal"
quantity on the Occidental marketplace of ideas), and you will appease
Western fears of an Oriental tidal wave. At bottom, of course, Lévi's
principal point-and his most telling confession-is that unless something
is done about the Orient, "the Asiatic drama will approach the crisis
point."

Asia suffers, yet in its suffering it threatens Europe: the eternal,
bristling frontier endures between East and West, almost unchanged since
classical antiquity. What Lévi says as the most august of modern
Orientalists is echoed with less subtlety by cultural humanists. Item:
in 1925 the French periodical Les*Cahiers du mois* conducted a survey
among notable intellectual figures; the writers canvassed included
Orientalists (Lévi, Émile Senart) as well as literary men like André
Gide, Paul Valéry, and Edmond Jaloux. The questions dealt with relations
between Orient and Occident in a timely, not to say brazenly
provocative, way, and this already indicates something about the
cultural ambience of the period. We will immediately recognize how ideas
of the sort promulgated in Orientalist scholarship have now reached the
level of accepted truth. One question asks whether Orient and Occident
are mutually impenetrable (the idea was Maeterlinck's) or not; another
asks whether or not Oriental influence represented "un peril grave"Henri
Massis's words-to French thought; a third asks about those values in
Occidental culture to which its superiority over the Orient can be
ascribed. Valéry's response seems to me worth quoting from, so
forthright are the lines of its argument and so time-honored, at least
in the early twentieth century:

From the cultural point of view, I do not think that we have much to
fear now from the Oriental influence. It is not unknown to us. We owe to
the Orient all the beginnings of our arts and of a great deal of our
knowledge. We can very well welcome what now comes out of the Orient, if
something new is coming out of there -which I very much doubt. This
doubt is precisely our guarantee and our European weapon.

Besides, the real question in such matters is to digest. But that has
always been, just as precisely, the great specialty of the European mind
through the ages. Our role is therefore to maintain this power of
choice, of universal comprehension, of the transformation of everything
into our own substance, powers which have made us what we are. The
Greeks and the Romans showed us how to deal with the monsters of Asia,
how to treat them by analysis, how to extract from them their
quintessence The Mediterranean basin seems to me to be like a closed
vessel where the essences of the vast Orient have always come in order
to be condensed. [Emphasis and ellipses in original]54

If European culture generally has digested the Orient, certainly Valéry
was aware that one specific agency for doing the job has been
Orientalism. In the world of Wilsonian principles of national self
determination, Valéry relies confidently on analyzing the Orient's
threat away. "The power of choice" is mainly for Europe first to
acknowledge the Orient as the origin of European science, then to treat
it as a superseded origin. Thus, in another context, Balfour could
regard the native inhabitants of Palestine as having priority on the
land, but nowhere near the subsequent authority to keep it; the mere
wishes of 700,000 Arabs, he said, were of no moment compared to the
destiny of an essentially European colonial Movement.55

Asia represented, then, the unpleasant likelihood of a sudden eruption
that would destroy "our" world; as John Buchan put it in 1922:

The earth is seething with incoherent power and unorganized
intelligence. Have you ever reflected on the case of China? There you
have millions of quick brains stiffed in trumpery crafts. They have no
direction, no driving power, so the sum of their efforts is futile, and
the world laughs at China.56

But if China organized itself (as it would), it would be no laughing
matter. Europe's effort therefore was to maintain itself as what Valery
called "une machine puissante,"57 absorbing what it could from outside
Europe, converting everything to its use, intellectually and materially,
keeping the Orient selectively organized (or disorganized). Yet this
could be done only through clarity of vision and analysis. Unless the
Orient was seen for what it was, its power -military, material,
spiritual-would sooner or later overwhelm Europe. The great colonial
empires, great systems of systematic repression, existed to fend off the
feared eventuality. Colonial subjects, as George Orwell saw them in
Marrakech in 1939, must not be seen except as a kind of continental
emanation, African, Asian, Oriental:

When you walk through a town like this-two hundred thousand inhabitants,
of whom at least twenty thousand own literally nothing except the rags
they stand up in-when you see how the people live, and still more, how
easily they die, it is always difficult to believe that you are walking
among human beings. All colonial empires are in reality founded upon
that fact. The people have brown faces-besides they have so many of
them! Are they really the same flesh as yourself? Do they even have
names? Or are they merely a kind of undifferentiated brown stuff, about
as individual as bees or coral insects? They arise out of the earth,
they sweat and starve for a few years, and then they sink back into the
nameless mounds of the graveyard and nobody notices that they are gone.
And even the graves themselves soon fade back into the soil.58

Aside from the picturesque characters offered European readers in the
exotic fiction of minor writers (Pierre Loti, Marmaduke Pickthall, and
the like), the non-European known to Europeans is precisely what Orwell
says about him. He is either a figure of fun, or an atom in a vast
collectivity designated in ordinary or cultivated discourse as an
undifferentiated type called Oriental, African, yellow, brown, or
Muslim. To such abstractions Orientalism had contributed its power of
generalization, converting instances of a civilization into ideal
bearers of its values, ideas, and positions, which in turn the
Orientalists had found in "the Orient" and transformed into common
cultural currency.

If we reflect that Raymond Schwab brought out his brilliant biography of
Anquetil-Duperron in 1934-and began those studies which were to put
Orientalism in its proper cultural context-we must also remark that what
he did was in stark contrast to his fellow artists and intellectuals,
for whom Orient and Occident were still the secondhand abstractions they
were for Valery. Not that Pound, Eliot, Yeats, Arthur Waley, Fenollosa,
Paul Claudel (in his*Connaissance de l’est),* Victor Ségalen, and others
were ignoring "the wisdom of the East," as Max Willer had called it a
few generations earlier. Rather the culture viewed the Orient, and Islam
in particular, with the mistrust with which, its learned attitude to the
Orient had always been freighted. A suitable instance of this
contemporary attitude at its most explicit is to be found in a series of
lectures given at the University of Chicago in 1924 on "The Occident and
the Orient" by Valentine Chirol, a well-known European newspaperman of
great experience in the East; his purpose was to make clear to educated
Americans that the Orient was not as far off as perhaps they believed.
His line is a simple one: that Orient and Occident are irreducibly
opposed to each other, and that the Orient-in particular
"Mohammedanism"--is one of "the great world-forces" responsible for "the
deepest lines of cleavage" in the world.59 Chirol's sweeping
generalizations are, I think, adequately represented by the titles of
his six lectures: "Their Ancient Battleground"; "The Passing of the
Ottoman Empire, the Peculiar Case of Egypt"; "The Great British
Experiment in Egypt"; "Protectorates and Mandates"; "The New Factor of
Bolshevism"; and "Some General Conclusions."

To such relatively popular accounts of the Orient as Chirol's, we can
add a testimonial by Élie Faure, who in his ruminations draws, like
Chirol, on history, cultural expertise, and the familiar contrast
between White Occidentalism and colored Orientalism. While delivering
himself of paradoxes like "le carnage permanent de l'indifférence
orientale" (for, unlike "us," "they" have no conception of peace), Faure
goes on to show that the Orientals' bodies are lazy, that the Orient has
no conception of history, of the nation, or of*patrie,* that the Orient
is essentially mystical-and so on. Faure argues that unless the Oriental
learns to be rational, to develop techniques of knowledge and
positivity, there can be no*rapprochement* between East and West.60 A
far more subtle and learned account of the East-West dilemma can be
found in Fernand Baldensperger's essay "Où s'affrontent I'Orient et
l'Occident intellectuels," but he too speaks of an inherent Oriental
disdain for the idea, for mental discipline, for rational
interpretation.61

Spoken as they are out of the depths of European culture, by writers who
actually believe themselves to be speaking on behalf of that culture,
such commonplaces (for they are perfect*idées reçues)* cannot be
explained simply as examples of provincial chauvinism. They are not
that, and-as will be evident to anyone who knows anything about Faure's
and Baldensperger's other work-are the more paradoxical for not being
that. Their background is the transformation of the exacting,
professional science of Orientalism, whose function in
nineteenth-century culture had been the restoration to Europe of a lost
portion of humanity, but which had become in the twentieth century both
an instrument of policy and, more important, a code by which Europe
could interpret both itself and the Orient to itself. For reasons
discussed earlier in this book, modem Orientalism already carried within
itself the imprint of the great European fear of Islam, and this was
aggravated by the political challenges of the*entre-deux-guerres.* My
point is that the metamorphosis of a relatively innocuous philological
subspecialty into a capacity for managing political movements,
administering colonies, making nearly apocalyptic statements
representing the White Man's difficult civilizing mission-all this is
something at work within a purportedly liberal culture, one full of
concern for its vaunted norms of catholicity, plurality, and
open-mindedness. In fact, what took place was the very opposite of
liberal: the hardening of doctrine and meaning, imparted by "science,"
into "truth." For if such truth reserved for itself the right to judge
the Orient as immutably Oriental in the ways I have indicated, then
liberality was no more than a form of oppression and mentalistic
prejudice.

The extent of such illiberality was not-and is not-often recognized from
within the culture, for reasons that this book is trying to explore. It
is heartening, nevertheless, that such illiberality has occasionally
been challenged. Here is an instance from I. A. Richards's foreword to
his*Mencius on the Mind* (1932); we can quite easily substitute
"Oriental" for "Chinese" in what follows.

As to the effects of an increased knowledge of Chinese thought upon the
West, it is interesting to notice that a writer so unlikely to be
thought either ignorant or careless as M. Etienne Gilson can yet, in the
English Preface of his*The Philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas,* speak of
Thomistic Philosophy as "accepting and gathering up the whole of human
tradition." This is how we all think, to us the Western world is still
the World [or the part of the World that counts]; but an impartial
observer would perhaps say that such provincialism is dangerous. And we
are not yet so happy in the West that we can be sure that we are not
suffering from its effects.62

Richards's argument advances claims for the exercise of what he calls
Multiple Definition, a genuine type of pluralism, with the combativeness
of systems of definition eliminated. Whether or not we accept his
counter to Gilson's provincialism, we can accept the proposition that
liberal humanism, of which Orientalism has historically been one
department,*retards* the process of enlarged and enlarging meaning
through which true understanding can be attained. What took the place of
enlarged meaning in twentieth century Orientalism-that is, within the
technical field-is the subject most immediately at hand.

III- Modern Anglo-French Orientalism in Fullest Flower
------------------------------------------------------

Because we have become accustomed to think of a contemporary expert on
some branch of the Orient, or some aspect of its life, as a specialist
in "area studies," we have lost a vivid sense of how, until around World
War II, the Orientalist was considered to be a generalist (with a great
deal of specific knowledge, of course) who had highly developed skills
for making summational statements. By summational statements I mean that
in formulating a relatively uncomplicated idea, say, about Arabic
grammar or Indian religion, the Orientalist would be understood (and
would understand himself) as also making a statement about the Orient as
a whole, thereby summing it up. Thus every discrete study of one bit of
Oriental material would also confirm in a summary way the profound
Orientality of the material. And since it was commonly believed that the
whole Orient hung together in some profoundly organic way, it made
perfectly good hermeneutical sense for the Orientalist scholar to regard
the material evidence he dealt with as ultimately leading to a better
understanding of such things as the Oriental character, mind, ethos, or
world-spirit.

Most of the first two chapters of this book have made similar arguments
about earlier periods in the history of Orientalist thought. The
differentiation in its later history that concerns us here, however, is
the one between the periods immediately before and after World War I. In
both instances, as with the earlier periods, the Orient is Oriental no
matter the specific case, and no matter the style or technique used to
describe it; the difference between the two periods in question is
the*reason* given by the Orientalist for seeing the essential
Orientality of the Orient. A good example of the prewar rationale can be
found in the following passage by Snouck Hurgronje, taken from his 1899
review of Eduard Sachau's*Muhammedanisches Recht:*

… the law, which in practice had to make ever greater concessions to the
use and customs of the people and the arbitrariness of their rulers,
nevertheless retained a considerable influence on the intellectual life
of the Muslims. Therefore it remains, and still is for us too, an
important subject of study, not only for abstract reasons connected with
the history of law, civilization and religion, but also for practical
purposes. The more intimate the relations of Europe with the Muslim East
become, the more Muslim countries fall under European suzerainty, the
more important it is for us Europeans to become acquainted with the
intellectual life, the religious law, and the conceptual background of
Islam.63

Although Hurgronje allows that something so abstract as "Islamic law"
did occasionally yield to the pressure of history and society, he is
more interested than not in retaining the abstraction for intellectual
use because in its broad outline "Islamic law" confirms the disparity
between East and West. For Hurgronje the distinction between Orient and
Occident was no mere academic or popular cliche: quite the contrary. For
him it signified the essential, historical power relationship between
the two. Knowledge of the Orient either proves, enhances, or deepens the
difference by which European suzerainty (the phrase has a venerable
nineteenth-century pedigree) is extended effectively over Asia. To know
the Orient as a whole, then, is to know it because it is entrusted to
one's keeping, if one is a Westerner.

An almost symmetrical passage to Hurgronje's is to be found in the
concluding paragraph of Gibb's article "Literature" in*The Legacy of
Islam,* published in 1931. After having described the three casual
contacts between East and West up till the eighteenth century, Gibb then
proceeds to the nineteenth century:

Following on these three moments of casual contact, the German romantics
turned again to the East, and for the first time made it their conscious
aim to open a way for the real heritage of oriental poetry to enter into
the poetry of Europe. The nineteenth century, with its new sense of
power and superiority, seemed to clang the gate decisively in the face
of their design. Today, on the other hand, there are signs of a change.
Oriental literature has begun to be studied again for its own sake, and
a new understanding of the East is being gained. As this knowledge
spreads and the East recovers its rightful place in the life of
humanity, oriental literature may once again perform its historic
function, and assist us to liberate ourselves from the narrow and
oppressive conceptions which would limit all that is significant in
literature, thought, and history to our own segment of the globe.64

Gibb's phrase "for its own sake" is in diametrical opposition to the
string of reasons subordinated to Hurgronje's declaration about European
suzerainty over the East. What remains, nevertheless, is that seemingly
inviolable over all identity of something called "the East" and
something else called "the West." Such entities have a use for each
other, and it is plainly Gibb's laudable intention to show that the
influence on Western of Oriental literature need not be (in its results)
what Brunetière had called "a national disgrace." Rather, the East could
be confronted as a sort of humanistic challenge to the local confines of
Western ethnocentricity.

His earlier solicitation of Goethe's idea of*Welditeratur*
notwithstanding, Gibb's call for humanistic interinanimation between
East and West reflects the changed political and cultural realities of
the postwar era. European suzerainty over the Orient had not passed; but
it had evolved-in British Egypt-from a more or less placid acceptance by
the natives into a more and more contested political issue compounded by
fractious native demands for independence. These were the years of
constant British trouble with Zaghlul, the Wafd party, and the like.65
Moreover, since 1925 there had been a worldwide economic recession, and
this too increased the sense of tension that Gibb's prose reflects. But
the specifically cultural message in what he says is the most
compelling. Heed the Orient, he seems to be telling his reader, for its
use to the Western mind in the struggle to overcome narrowness,
oppressive specialization, and limited perspectives.

The ground had shifted considerably from Hurgronje to Gibb, as had the
priorities. No longer did it go without much controversy that Europe's
domination over the Orient was almost a fact of nature; nor was it
assumed that the Orient was in need of Western enlightenment. What
mattered during the interwar years was a cultural self-definition that
transcended the provincial and the xenophobic. For Gibb, the West has
need of the Orient as something to be studied because it releases the
spirit from sterile specialization, it eases the affliction of excessive
parochial and nationalistic selfcenteredness, it increases one's grasp
of the really central issues in the study of culture. If the Orient
appears more a partner in this new rising dialectic of cultural
self-consciousness, it is, first, because the Orient is more of a
challenge now than it was before, and second, because the West is
entering a relatively new phase of cultural crisis, caused in part by
the diminishment of Western suzerainty over the rest of the world.

Therefore, in the best Orientalist work done during the interwar period
represented in the impressive careers of Massignon and Gibb himself-we
will find elements in common with the best humanistic scholarship of the
period. Thus the summational attitude of which I spoke earlier can be
regarded as the Orientalist equivalent of attempts in the purely Western
humanities to understand culture*as a whole,* antipositivistically,
intuitively, sympathetically. Both the Orientalist and the
non-Orientalist begin with the sense that Western culture is passing
through an important phase, whose main feature is the crisis imposed on
it by such threats as barbarism, narrow technical concerns, moral
aridity, strident nationalism, and so forth. The idea of using specific
texts, for instance, to work from the specific to the general (to
understand the whole life of a period and consequently of a culture) is
common to those humanists in the West inspired by the work of Wilhelm
Dilthey, as well as to towering Orientalist scholars like Massignon and
Gibb. The project of revitalizing philology-as it is found in the work
of Curtius, Vossler, Auerbach, Spitzer, Gundolf, Hofmannsthal66 -has its
counterpart therefore in the invigorations provided to strictly
technical Orientalist philology by Massignon's studies of what he called
the mystical lexicon, the vocabulary of Islamic devotion, and so on.

But there is another, more interesting conjunction between Orientalism
in this phase of its history and the European sciences of man*(sciences
de l'homme),* the*Geisteswissenschaften* contemporary with it. We must
note, first, that non-Orientalist cultural studies were perforce more
immediately responsive to the threats to humanistic culture of a
self-aggrandizing, amoral technical specialization represented, in part
at least, by the rise of fascism in Europe. This response extended the
concerns of the interwar period into the period following World War II
as well. An eloquent scholarly and personal testimonial to this response
can be found in Erich Auerbach's magisterial*Mimesis,* and in his last
methodological reflections as a Philolog.67 He tells us that*Mimesis
was* written during his exile in Turkey and was meant to be in large
measure an attempt virtually*to see* the development of Western culture
at almost the last moment when that culture still had its integrity and
civilizational coherence; therefore, he set himself the task of writing
a general work based on specific textual analyses in such a way as to
lay out the principles of Western literary performance in all their
variety, richness, and fertility. The aim was a synthesis of Western
culture in which the synthesis itself was matched in importance by the
very gesture of doing it, which Auerbach believed was made possible by
what he called "late bourgeois humanism."68 The discrete particular was
thus converted into a highly mediated symbol of the world -historical
process.

No less important for Auerbach-and this fact is of immediate relevance
to Orientalism-was the humanistic tradition of involvement in a national
culture or literature not one's own. Auerbach's example was Curtius,
whose prodigious output testified to his deliberate choice as a German
to dedicate himself professionally to the Romance literatures. Not for
nothing, then, did Auerbach end his autumnal reflections with a
significant quotation from Hugo of St. Victor's*Didascalicon:* "The man
who finds his homeland sweet is still a tender beginner; he to whom
every soil is as his native one is already strong; but he is perfect to
whom the entire world is as a foreign land."69 The more one is able to
leave one's cultural home, the more easily is one able to judge it, and
the whole world as well, with the spiritual detachment*and* generosity
necessary for true vision. The more easily, too, does one assess oneself
and alien cultures with the same combination of intimacy and distance.

No less important and methodologically formative a cultural force was
the use in the social sciences of "types" both as an analytical device
and as a way of seeing familiar things in a new way. The precise history
of the "type" as it is to be found in earlytwentieth-century thinkers
like Weber, Durkheim, Lukacs, Mannheim, and the other sociologists of
knowledge has been examined often enough:70 yet it has not been
remarked, I think, that Weber's studies of Protestantism, Judaism, and
Buddhism blew him (perhaps unwittingly) into the very territory
originally charted and claimed by the Orientalists. There he found
encouragement amongst all those nineteenth-century thinkers who believed
that there was a sort of ontological difference between Eastern and
Western economic (as well as religious) "mentalities." Although he never
thoroughly studied Islam, Weber nevertheless influenced the field
considerably, mainly because his notions of type were simply an
"outside" confirmation of many of the canonical theses held by
Orientalists, whose economic ideas never extended beyond asserting the
Oriental's fundamental incapacity for trade, commerce, and economic
rationality. In the Islamic field those cliches held good for literally
hundreds of years-until Maxime Rodinson's important study*Islam and
Capitalism* appeared in 1966. Still, the notion of a type Oriental,
Islamic, Arab, or whatever-endures and is nourished by similar kinds of
abstractions or paradigms or types as they emerge out of the modern
social sciences.

I have often spoken in this book of the sense of estrangement
experienced by Orientalists as they dealt with or lived in a culture so
profoundly different from their own. Now one of the striking differences
between Orientalism in its Islamic version and all the other humanistic
disciplines where Auerbach's notions on the necessity of estrangement
have some validity is that Islamic Orientalists never saw their
estrangement from Islam either as salutary or as an attitude with
implications for the better understanding of their own culture. Rather,
their estrangement from Islam simply intensified their feelings of
superiority about European culture, even as their antipathy spread to
include the entire Orient, of which Islam was considered a degraded (and
usually, a virulently dangerous) representative. Such tendencies-it has
also been my argument-became built into the very traditions of
Orientalist study throughout the nineteenth century, and in time became
a standard component of most Orientalist training, handed on from
generation to generation. In addition, I think, the likelihood was very
great that European scholars would continue to see the Near Orient
through the perspective of its Biblical "origins," that is, as a place
of unshakably influential religious primacy. Given its special
relationship to both Christianity and Judaism, Islam remained forever
the Orientalist's idea (or type) of original cultural effrontery,
aggravated naturally by the fear that Islamic civilization originally
(as well as contemporaneously) continued to stand somehow opposed to the
Christian West.

For these reasons, Islamic Orientalism between the wars shared in the
general sense of cultural crisis adumbrated by Auerbach and the others I
have spoken of briefly, without at the same time developing in the same
way as the other human sciences. Because Islamic Orientalism also
preserved within it the peculiarly polemical religious attitude it had
had from the beginning, it remained fixed in certain methodological
tracks, so to speak. Its cultural alienation, for one, needed to be
preserved from modern history and socio-political circumstance, as well
as from the necessary revisions imposed on any theoretical or historical
"type" by new data. For another, the abstractions offered by Orientalism
(or rather, the opportunity for making abstractions) in the case of
Islamic civilization were considered to have acquired a new validity;
since it was assumed that Islam worked the way Orientalists said it did
(without reference to actuality, but only to a set of "classical"
principles), it was also assumed that modern Islam would be nothing more
than a reasserted version of the old, especially since it was also
supposed that modernity for Islam was less of a challenge than an
insult. (The very large number of assumptions and suppositions in this
description, incidentally, are intended to portray the rather eccentric
twists and turns necessary for Orientalism to have maintained its
peculiar way of seeing human reality.) Finally, if the synthesizing
ambition in philology (as conceived by Auerbach or. Curtius) was to lead
to an enlargement of the scholar's awareness, of his sense of the
brotherhood of man, of the universality of certain principles of human
behavior, in Islamic Orientalism synthesis led to a sharpened sense of
difference between Orient and Occident as reflected in Islam.

What I am describing, then, is something that will characterize Islamic
Orientalism until the present day: its retrogressive position when
compared with the other human sciences (and even with the other branches
of Orientalism), its general methodological and ideological
backwardness, and its comparative insularity from developments both in
the other humanities and in the real world of historical, economic,
social, and political circumstances.71 Some awareness of this lag in
Islamic (or Semitic) Orientalism was already present towards the end of
the nineteenth century, perhaps because it was beginning to be apparent
to some observers how very little either Semitic or Islamic Orientalism
had shaken itself loose from the religious background from which it
originally derived. The first Orientalist congress was organized and
held in Paris in 1873, and almost from the outset it was evident to
other scholars that the Semiticists and Islamicists were in intellectual
arrears, generally speaking. Writing a survey of all the congresses that
had been held between 1873 and 1897, the English scholar R. N. Cust had
this to say about the Semitic-Islamic subfield:

Such meetings [as those held in the ancient-Semitic field], indeed,
advance Oriental learning.

The same cannot be said with regard to the modern-Semitic section; it
was crowded, but the subjects discussed were of the smallest literary
interest, such as would occupy the minds of the dilettanti scholars of
the old school, not the great class of "indicatores" of the nineteenth
century. I am forced to go back to Pliny to find a word. There was an
absence from this section both of the modern philological and
archeological spirit, and the report reads more like that of a congress
of University tutors of the last century met to discuss the reading of a
passage in a Greek play, or the accentuation of a vowel, before the dawn
of Comparative Philology had swept away the cobwebs of the Scholiasts.
Was it worth while to discuss whether Mahomet could hold a pen or
write?72

To some extent the polemical antiquarianism that Cust described was a
scholarly version of European anti-Semitism. Even the designation
"modern-Semitic," which was meant to include both Muslims and Jews (and
which had its origin in the so-called ancient-Semitic field pioneered by
Renan), carried its racist banner with what was doubtless meant to be a
decent ostentation. A little later in his report Cust comments on how in
the same meeting " \`the Aryan' supplied much material for reflection."
Clearly "the Aryan" is a counterabstraction to "the Semite," but for
some of the reasons I listed earlier, such atavistic labels were felt to
be especially pertinent to Semites-with what expensive moral and human
consequences for the human community as a whole, the history of the
twentieth century amply demonstrates. Yet what has not been sufficiently
stressed in histories of modern anti-Semitism has been the legitimation
of such atavistic designations by Orientalism, and more important for my
purposes here, the way this academic and intellectual legitimation has
persisted right through the modern age in discussions of Islam, the
Arabs, or the Near Orient. For whereas it is no longer possible to write
learned (or even popular) disquisitions on either "the Negro mind" or
"the Jewish personality," it is perfectly possible to engage in such
research as "the Islamic mind," or "the Arab character"-but of this
subject more later.

Thus, in order properly to understand the intellectual genealogy of
interwar Islamic Orientalism-as it is most interestingly and
satisfyingly seen (no irony intended) in the careers of Massignon and
Gibb-we must be able to understand the differences between the
Orientalist's summational attitude towards his material and the kind of
attitude to which it bears a strong cultural resemblance, that in the
work of philologists such as Auerbach and Curtius. The intellectual
crisis in Islamic Orientalism was another aspect of the spiritual crisis
of "late bourgeois humanism"; in its form and style, however, Islamic
Orientalism viewed the problems of mankind as separable into the
categories called "Oriental" or "Occidental." It was believed, then,
that for the Oriental, liberation, self-expression, and self-enlargement
were not the issues that they were for the Occidental. Instead, the
Islamic Orientalist expressed his ideas about Islam in such a way as to
emphasize his, as well as putatively the Muslim's,*resistance* to
change, to mutual comprehension between East and West, to the
development of men and women out of archaic, primitive classical
institutions and into modernity. Indeed, so fierce was this sense of
resistance to change, and so universal were the powers ascribed to it,
that in reading the Orientalists one understands that the apocalypse to
be feared was not the destruction of Western civilization but rather the
destruction of the barriers that kept East and West from each other.
When Gibb opposed nationalism in the modern Islamic states, he did so
because he felt that nationalism would corrode the inner structures
keeping Islam Oriental; the net result of secular nationalism would be
to make the Orient no different from the West. Yet it is a tribute to
Gibb's extraordinarily sympathetic powers of identification with an
alien religion that he put his disapproval in such a way as to seem to
be*speaking for* the Islamic orthodox community. How much such pleading
was a reversion to the old Orientalist habit of speaking for the natives
and how much it was a sincere attempt at speaking in Islam's best
interests is a question whose answer lies somewhere between the two
alternatives.

No scholar or thinker, of course, is a perfect representative of some
ideal type or school in which, by virtue of national origin or the
accidents of history, he participates. Yet in so relatively insulated
and specialized a tradition as Orientalism, I think there is in each
scholar some awareness, partly conscious and partly nonconscious, of
national tradition, if not of national ideology. This is particularly
true in Orientalism, additionally so because of the direct political
involvement of European nations in the affairs of one or another
Oriental country: the case of Snouck Hurgronje, to cite a non-British
and non-French instance where the scholar's sense of national identity
is simple and clear, comes to mind immediately.73 Yet even after making
all the proper qualifications about the difference between an individual
and a type (or between an individual and a tradition), it is
nevertheless striking to note the extent to which Gibb and
Massignon*were* representative types. Perhaps it would be better to say
that Gibb and Massignon fulfilled all the expectations created for them
by their national traditions, by the politics of their nations, by the
internal history of their national "schools" of Orientalism.

Sylvain Levi put the distinction between the two schools trenchantly:

The political interest that ties England to India holds British work to
a sustained contact with concrete realities, and maintains the cohesion
between representations of the past and the spectacle of the present.

Nourished by classical traditions, France seeks out the human mind as it
manifests itself in India in the same way that it is interested in
China.74

It would be too easy to say that this polarity results, on the one hand,
in work that is sober, efficient, concrete, and on the other, in work
that is universalistic, speculative, brilliant. Yet the polarity serves
to illuminate two long and extremely distinguished careers that between
them dominated French and Anglo-American Islamic Orientalism until the
1960s; if the domination makes any sense at all, it is because each
scholar derived from and worked in a self-conscious tradition whose
constraints (or limits, intellectually and politically speaking) can be
described as Lévi describes them above.

Gibb was born in Egypt, Massignon in France. Both were to become deeply
religious men, students not so much of society as of the religious life
in society. Both were also profoundly worldly; one of their greatest
achievements was putting traditional scholarship to use in the modem
political world.Yet the range of their work the texture of it, almost-is
vastly different, even allowing for the obvious disparities in their
schooling and religious education. In his lifelong devotion, to the work
of al-Hallaj-- "whose traces," Gibb said in his obituary notice for
Massignon in 1962, he "never ceased to seek out in later Islamic
literature and devotion"-Massignon's almost unrestricted range of
research would lead him virtually everywhere, finding evidence for
"l'esprit humaine a travers l'espace et le temps." In an*oeuvre* that
took "in every aspect and region of contemporary Muslim life and
thought," Massignon's presence in Orientalism was a constant challenge
to his colleagues. Certainly Gibb for one admired-but finally drew back
from-the way Massignon pursued themes that in some way linked the
spiritual life of Muslims and Catholics [and enabled him to find] a
congenial element in the veneration of Fatima, and consequently a
special field of interest in the study of Shi'ite thought in many of its
manifestations, or again in the community of Abrahamanic origins and
such themes as the Seven Sleepers. His writings on these subjects have
acquired from the qualities that he brought to them a permanent
significance in Islamic studies. But just because of these qualities
they are composed, as it were, in two registers. One was at the ordinary
level of objective scholarship, seeking to elucidate the nature of the
given phenomenon by a masterly use of established tools of academic
research. The other was at a level on which objective data and
understanding were absorbed and transformed by an individual intuition
of spiritual dimensions. It was not always easy to draw a dividing line
between the former and the transfiguration that resulted from the
outpouring of the riches of his own personality.

There is a hint here that Catholics are more likely to be drawn to a
study of "the veneration of Fatima" than Protestants, but there is no
mistaking Gibb's suspicion of anyone who blurred the distinction between
"objective" scholarship and one based on (even an elaborate) "individual
intuition of spiritual dimensions." Gibb was right, however, in the next
paragraph of the obituary to acknowledge Massignon's "fertility" of mind
in such diverse fields as "the symbolism of Muslim art, the structure of
Muslim logic, the intricacies of medieval finance, and the organization
of artisan corporations"; and he was right also, immediately after, to
characterize Massignon's early interest in the Semitic languages as
giving rise to "elliptic studies that to the uninitiate almost rivalled
the mysteries of the ancient Hermetica." Nevertheless, Gibb ends on a
generous note, remarking that

for us, the lesson which by his example he impressed upon the
Orientalists of his generation was that even classical Orientalism is no
longer adequate without some degree of committedness to the vital forces
that have given meaning and value to the diverse aspects of Eastern
cultures.75

That, of course, was Massignon's greatest contribution, and it is true
that in contemporary French Islamology (as it is sometimes called) there
has grown up a tradition of identifying with "the vital forces"
informing "Eastern culture"; one need only mention the extraordinary
achievements of scholars like Jacques Berque, Maxime Rodinson, Yves
Lacoste, Roger Arnaldez-all of them differing widely among themselves in
approach and intention-to be struck with the seminal example of
Massignon, whose intellectual impress upon them all is unmistakable.

Yet in choosing to focus his comments almost anecdotally upon
Massignon's various strengths and weaknesses, Gibb misses the obvious
things about Massignon, things that make him so different from Gibb and
yet, when taken as a whole, make him the mature symbol of so crucial a
development within French Orientalism. One is Massignon's personal
background, which quite beautifully illustrates the simple truth of
Lévi's description of French Orientalism. The very idea of "un esprit
humain" was something more or less foreign to the intellectual and
religious background out of which Gibb, like so many modern British
Orientalists, developed: in Massignon's case the notion of "esprit," as
an aesthetic as well as religious, moral, and historical reality, was
something he seemed to have been nourished upon from childhood. His
family was friendly with such people as Huysmans, and in nearly
everything he wrote Massignon's early education in the intellectual
ambience as well as the ideas of late Symbolisme is evident, even to the
particular brand of Catholicism (and Sufi mysticism) in which he was
interested. There is no austerity in Massignon's work, which is
formulated in one of the great French styles of the century. His ideas
about human experience draw plentifully upon thinkers and artists
contemporary with him, and it is the very wide cultural range of his
style itself that puts him in a different category altogether from
Gibb's. His early ideas come out of the period of so-called aesthetic
decadence, but they are also indebted to people like Bergson, Durkheim,
and Mauss. His first contact with Orientalism came through Renan, whose
lectures he heard as a young man; he was also a student of Sylvain Levi,
and came to include among his friends such figures as Paul Claudel,
Gabriel Bounoure, Jacques and Raissa Maritain, and Charles de Foucauld.
Later he was able to absorb work done in such relatively recent fields
as urban sociology, structural linguistics, psychoanalysis, contemporary
anthropology, and the New History. His essays, to say nothing of the
monumental study of al-Hallaj, draw effortlessly on the entire corpus of
Islamic literature; his mystifying erudition and almost familiar
personality sometimes make him appear to be a scholar invented by Jorge
Luis Borges. He was very sensitive to "Oriental" themes in European
literature; this was one of Gibb's interests, too, but unlike Gibb,
Massignon was attracted primarily neither to European writers who
"understood" the Orient nor to European texts that were independent
artistic corroborations of what later Orientalist scholars would reveal
(e.g., Gibb's interest in Scott as a source for the study of Saladin).
Massignon's "Orient" was completely consonant with the world of the
Seven Sleepers or of the Abrahamanic prayers (which are the two themes
singled out by Gibb as distinctive marks of Massignon's unorthodox view
of Islam): offbeat, slightly peculiar, wholly responsive to the dazzling
interpretative gifts which Massignon brought to it (and which in a sense
made it up as a subject). If Gibb liked Scott's Saladin, then
Massignon's symmetrical predilection was for Nerval, as suicide, poète
maudit, psychological oddity. This is not to say that Massignon was
essentially a student of the past; on the contrary, he was a major
presence in Islamic-French relations, in politics as well as culture. He
was obviously a passionate man who believed that the world of Islam
could be penetrated, not by scholarship exclusively, but by devotion to
all of its activities, not the least of which was the world of Eastern
Christianity subsumed within Islam, one of whose subgroups, the Badaliya
Sodality, was warmly encouraged by Massignon.

Massignon's considerable literary gifts sometimes give his scholarly
work an appearance of capricious, overly cosmopolitan, and often private
speculation. This appearance is misleading, and in fact is rarely
adequate as a description of his writing. What he wished deliberately to
avoid was what he called "l'analyse analytique et statique de
l'orientalisme,"76 a sort of inert piling up, on a supposed Islamic text
or problem, of sources, origins, proofs, demonstrations, and the like.
Everywhere his attempt is to include as much of the context of a text or
problem as possible, to animate it, to surprise his reader, almost, with
the glancing insights available to anyone who, like Massignon, is
willing to cross disciplinary and traditional boundaries in order to
penetrate to the human heart of any text. No modern Orientalist-and
certainly not Gibb, his closest peer in achievement and influence-could
refer so easily (and accurately) in an essay to a host of Islamic
mystics and to Jung, Heisenberg, Mallarme, and Kierkegaard; and
certainly very few Orientalists had that range together with the
concrete political experience of which he was able to speak in his 1952
essay "L'Occident devant l'Orient: Primauté d'une solution
culturelle."77 And yet his intellectual world was a clearly defined one.
It had a definite structure, intact from the beginning to the end of his
career, and it was laced up, despite its almost unparalleled richness of
scope and reference, in a set of basically unchanging ideas. Let us
briefly describe the structure and list the ideas in a summary fashion.

Massignon took as his starting point the existence of the three
Abrahamanic religions, of which Islam is the religion of Ishmael, the
monotheism of a people excluded from the divine promise made to Isaac.
Islam is therefore a religion of resistance (to God the Father, to
Christ the Incarnation), which yet keeps within it the sadness that
began in Hagar's tears. Arabic as a result is the very language of
tears, just as the whole notion of*jihad* in Islam (which Massignon
explicitly says is the epic form in Islam that Renan could not see or
understand) has an important intellectual dimension whose mission is war
against Christianity and Judaism as exterior enemies, and against heresy
as an interior enemy. Yet within Islam, Massignon believed he was able
to discern a type of countercurrent, which it became his chief
intellectual mission to study, embodied in mysticism, a road towards
divine grace. The principal feature of mysticism was of course its
subjective character, whose nonrational and even inexplicable tendencies
were towards the singular, the individual, the momentary experience of
participation in the Divine. All of Massignon's extraordinary work on
mysticism was thus an attempt to describe the itinerary of souls out of
the limiting consensus imposed on them by the orthodox Islamic
community, or Sunna. An Iranian mystic was more intrepid than an Arab
one, partly because he was Aryan (the old nineteenth-century labels
"Aryan" and "Semitic" have a compelling urgency for Massignon, as does
also the legitimacy of Schlegel's binary opposition between the two
language families") and partly because he was a man seeking the Perfect;
the Arab mystic, in Massignon's view, inclined towards what Waardenburg
calls a testimonial monism. The exemplary figure for Massignon was
al-Hallaj, who sought liberation for himself outside the orthodox
community by asking for, and finally getting, the very crucifixion
refused by Islam as a whole; Mohammed, according to Massignon, had
deliberately rejected the opportunity offered him to bridge the gap
separating him from God. Al-Hallaj's achievement was therefore to have
achieved a mystical union with God against the grain of Islam.

The rest of the orthodox community lives in a condition of what
Massignon calls "soif ontologique"-ontological thirst. God presents
himself to man as a kind of absence, a refusal to be present, yet the
devout Muslim's consciousness of his submission to God's will (Islam)
gives rise to a jealous sense of God's transcendence and an intolerance
of idolatry of any sort. The seat of these ideas, according to
Massignon, is the "circumcised heart," which while it is in the grip of
its testimonial Muslim fervor can, as is the case with mystics like
al-Hallaj, also be inflamed with a divine passion or love of God. In
either case, God's transcendental unity*(tawhid)* is something to be
achieved and understood over and over by the devout Muslim, either
through testifying to it or through mystic love of God: and this,
Massignon wrote in a complex essay, defines the "intention" of Islam."
Clearly Massignon's sympathies lay with the mystic vocation in Islam, as
much for its closeness to his own temperament as a devout Catholic as
for its disrupting influence within the orthodox body of beliefs.
Massignon's image of Islam is of a religion ceaselessly implicated in
its refusals, its latecoming (with reference to the other Abrahamanic
creeds), its comparatively barren sense of worldly reality, its massive
structures of defense against "psychic commotions" of the sort practiced
by al-Hallaj and other Sufi mystics, its loneliness as the only
remaining "Oriental" religion of the three great monotheisms.80

But so obviously stern a view of Islam, with its "invariants simples"81
(especially for so luxuriant a thought as Massignon's), entailed no deep
hostility towards it on his part. In reading Massignon one is struck by
his repeated insistence on the need for complex reading-injunctions
whose absolute sincerity it is impossible to doubt. He wrote in 1951
that his kind of Orientalism was "ni une manie d'exotisme, ni un
reniement de l'Europe, mais une wise au niveau entre nos méthodes de
recherches et les traditions vécues d'antiques civilisations."82 Put
into practice in the reading of an Arabic or Islamic text, this kind of
Orientalism produced interpretations of an almost overwhelming
intelligence; one would be foolish not to respect the sheer genius and
novelty of Massignon's mind. Yet what must catch our attention in his
definition of his Orientalism are two phrases: "nos méthodes de
recherches" and "les traditions vécues d'antiques civilisations."
Massignon saw what he did as the synthesis of two roughly opposed
quantities, yet it is the peculiar asymmetry between them that troubles
one, and not merely the fact of the opposition between Europe and
Orient. Massignon's implication is that the essence of the difference
between East and West is between modernity and ancient tradition.And
indeed in his writings on political and contemporary problems, which is
where one can see most immediately the limitations of Massignon's
method, the East-West opposition turns up in a most peculiar way.

At its best, Massignon's vision of the East-West encounter assigned
great responsibility to the West for its invasion of the East, its
colonialism, its relentless attacks on Islam. Massignon was a tireless
fighter on behalf of Muslim civilization and, as his numerous essays and
letters after 1948 testify, in support of Palestinian refugees, in the
defense of Arab Muslim and Christian rights in Palestine against
Zionism, against what, with reference to something said by Abba Eban, he
scathingly called Israeli "bourgeois colonialism.83 Yet the framework in
which Massignon's vision was held also assigned the Islamic Orient to an
essentially ancient time and the West to modernity. Like Robertson
Smith, Massignon considered the Oriental to be not a modern man but a
Semite; this reductive category had a powerful grip on his thought.
When, for example, in 1960 he and Jacques Berque, his colleague at the
College de France, published their dialogue on "the Arabs" in*Esprit,* a
good deal of the time was spent in arguing whether the best way to look
at the problems of the contemporary Arabs was simply to say, in the main
instance; that the Arab-Israeli conflict was really a*Semitic* problem.
Berque tried to demur gently, and to nudge Massignon towards the
possibility that like the rest of the world the Arabs had undergone what
he called an "anthropological variation": Massignon refused the notion
out of hand.84 His repeated efforts to understand and report on the
Palestine conflict, for all their profound humanism, never really got
past the quarrel between Isaac and Ishmael or, so far as his quarrel
with Israel was concerned, the tension between Judaism and Christianity.
When Arab cities and villages were captured by the Zionists, it was
Massignon's religious sensibilities that were offended.

Europe, and France in particular, were seen as*contemporary* realities.
Partly because of his initial political encounter with the British
during the First World War, Massignon retained a pronounced dislike of
England and English policy; Lawrence and his type represented a
too-complex policy which he, Massignon, opposed in his dealings with
Faisal. "Je cherchais avec Faysal ...à pénétrer dans le sens même de sa
tradition à lui." The British seemed to represent "expansion" in the
Orient, amoral economic policy, and an outdated philosophy of political
influence.85 The Frenchman was a more modern man, who was obliged to get
from the Orient what he had lost in spirituality, traditional values,
and the like. Massignon's investment in this view came, I think, by way
of the entire nineteenth-century tradition of the Orient as therapeutic
for the West, a tradition whose earliest adumbration is to be found in
Quinet. In Massignon, it was joined to a sense of Christian compassion:

So far as Orientals are concerned, we ought to have recourse to this
science of compassion, to this "participation"- even in the construction
of their language and of their mental structure, in which indeed we must
participate: because ultimately this science bears witness either to
verities that are ours too, or else to verities that we have lost and
must regain. Finally, because in a profound sense everything that exists
is good in some way, and those poor colonized people do not exist only
for our purposes but in and for themselves [en soil].86

Nevertheless the Oriental,*en soi,* was incapable of appreciating or
understanding himself. Partly because of what Europe had done to him, he
had lost his religion and his*philosophie;* Muslims had "un vide
immense" within them; they were close to anarchy and suicide. It became
France's obligation, then, to associate itself with the Muslims' desire
to defend their traditional culture, the rule of their dynastic life,
and the patrimony of believers.87

No scholar, not even a Massignon, can resist the pressures on him of his
nation or of the scholarly tradition in which he works. In a great deal
of what he said of the Orient and its relationship with the Occident,
Massignon seemed to refine and yet to repeat the ideas of other French
Orientalists. We must allow, however, that the refinements, the personal
style, the individual genius, may finally supersede the political
restraints operating impersonally through tradition and through the
national ambience. Even so, in Massignon's case we must also recognize
that in one direction his ideas about the Orient remained thoroughly
traditional and Orientalist, their personality and remarkable
eccentricity notwithstanding. According to him, the Islamic Orient was
spiritual, Semitic, tribalistic, radically monotheistic, yin-Aryan: the
adjectives resemble a catalogue of late-nineteenth-century
anthropological descriptions. The relatively earthbound experiences of
war, colonialism, imperialism, economic oppression, love, death, and
cultural exchange seem always in Massignon's eyes to be filtered through
metaphysical, ultimately dehumanized lenses: they are Semitic, European,
Oriental, Occidental, Aryan, and so on. The categories structured his
world and gave what he said a kind of deep senseto him, at least. In the
other direction, among the individual and immensely detailed ideas of
the scholarly world, Massignon maneuvered himself into a special
position. He reconstructed and defended Islam against Europe on the one
hand and against its own orthodoxy on the other. This intervention-for
it was that-into the Orient as animator and champion symbolized his own
acceptance of the Orient's difference, as well as his efforts to change
it into what he wanted. Both together, the will to knowledge over the
Orient and on its behalf in Massignon are very strong. His al-Hallaj
represents that will perfectly. The disproportionate importance accorded
al-Hallaj by Massignon signifies first, the scholar's decision to
promote one figure above his sustaining culture, and second, the fact
that al-Hallaj had come to represent a constant challenge, even an
irritant, to the Western Christian for whom belief was not (and perhaps
could not be) the extreme self-sacrifice it was for the Sufi. In either
case, Massignon's al-Hallaj was intended literally to embody, to
incarnate, values essentially outlawed by the main doctrinal system of
Islam, a system that Massignon himself described mainly in order to
circumvent it with al-Hallaj.

Nevertheless we need not say immediately of Massignon's work that it was
perverse, or that its greatest weakness was that it misrepresented Islam
as an "average" or "common" Muslim might adhere to the faith. A
distinguished Muslim scholar has argued precisely for this last
position, although his argument did not name Massignon as an offender.88
Much as one may be inclined to agree with such theses-since, as this
book has tried to demonstrate, Islam has been fundamentally
misrepresented in the West-the real issue is whether indeed ire can be a
true representation of anything, or whether any and all representations,
because they are representations, are embedded first in the language and
then in the culture, institutions, and political ambience of the
representer. If the latter alternative is the correct one (as I believe
it is), then we must be prepared to accept the fact that a
representation is eo ipso implicated, intertwined, embedded, interwoven
with a great many other things besides the "truth," which is itself a
representation.  What this must lead us to methodologically is to view
representations (or misrepresentations-the distinction is at best a
matter of degree) as inhabiting a common field of play defined for than,
not by some inherent common subject matter alone, but by some common
history, tradition, universe of discourse. Within this field, which no
single scholar can create but which each, scholar receives and in which
he then finds a place for himself, the individual researcher makes his
contribution. Such contributions, even for the exceptional genius, are
strategies of redisposing material within the field; even the scholar
who unearths a oncelost manuscript produces the "found" text in a
context already prepared for it, for that is the real meaning
of*finding* a new text. Thus each individual contribution first causes
changes within the field and then promotes a new stability, in the way
that on a surface covered with twenty compasses the introduction of a
twenty-first will cause all the others to quiver, then to settle into a
new accommodating configuration.

The representations of Orientalism in European culture amount to what we
can call a discursive consistency, one that has not only history but
material (and institutional) presence to show for itself. As I said in
connection with Renan, such a consistency was a form of cultural praxis,
a system of opportunities for making statements about the Orient. My
whole point about this system is not that it is a misrepresentation of
some Oriental essence-in which I do not for a moment believe-but that it
operates as representations usually do, for a purpose, according to a
tendency, in a specific historical, intellectual, and even economic
setting. In other words, representations have purposes, they are
effective much of the time they accomplish one or many tasks.
Representations are formations, or as Roland Barthes has said of all the
operations of language, they are deformations.The Orient as, a
representation in Europe is formed-or deformed-out of a more and more
specific sensitivity towards a geographical region called "the East."
Specialists in this region do their work on it, so to speak, because in
time their profession as Orientalists requires that they present their
society with images of the Orient, knowledge about it, insight into it.
And to a very large extent the Orientalist provides his own society with
representations of the Orient (a) that bear his distinctive imprint, (b)
that illustrate his conception of what the Orient can or ought to be,
(c) that consciously contest someone else's view of the Orient, (d) that
provide Orientalist discourse with what, at that moment, it seems most
in need of, and (e) that respond to certain cultural, professional,
national, political, and economic requirements of the epoch. It will be
evident that even though it will never be absent, the role of positive
knowledge is far from absolute. Rather, "knowledge"--never raw,
unmediated, or simply objective-is what the five attributes of
Orientalist representation listed above*distribute,* and redistribute.

Seen in such a way, Massignon is less a mythologized "genius" than he is
a kind of system for producing certain kinds of statements, disseminated
into the large mass of discursive formations that together make up the
archive, or cultural material, of his time. I do not think that we
dehumanize Massignon if we recognize this, nor do we reduce him to being
subject to vulgar determinism. On the contrary, we will see in a sense
how a very human being had, and was able to acquire more of, a cultural
and productive capacity that had an institutional, or extrahuman,
dimension to it: and this surely is what the finite human being must
aspire to if he is not to be content with his merely mortal presence in
time and space. When Massignon said "nous sommes tous des Smites" he was
indicating the range of his ideas over his society, showing the extent
to which his ideas about the Orient could transcend the local anecdotal
circumstances of a Frenchman and of French society. The category of
Semite drew its nourishment out of Massignon's Orientalism, but its
force derived from its tendency to extend out of the confines of the
discipline, out into a broader history and anthropology, where it seemed
to have a certain validity and power.89

On one level at least, Massignon's formulations and his representations
of the Orient did have a direct influence, if not an unquestioned
validity: among the guild of professional Orientalists. As I said above,
Gibb's recognition of Massignon's achievement constitutes an awareness
that as an alternative to Gibb's own work (by implication, that is),
Massignon was to be dealt with. I am of course imputing things to Gibb's
obituary that are there only as traces, not as actual statements, but
they are obviously important if we look now at Gibb's own career as a
foil for Massignon's. Albert Hourani's memorial essay on Gibb for the
British Academy (to which I have referred several times) admirably
summarizes the man's career, his leading ideas, and the importance of
his work: with Hourani's assessment, in its broad lines, I have no
disagreement. Yet something is missing from it, although this lack is
partly made up for in a lesser piece on Gibb, William Polk's "Sir
Hamilton Gibb Between Orientalism and History."90 Hourani tends to view
Gibb as the product of personal encounters, personal influences, and the
like; whereas Polk, who is far less subtle in his general understanding
of Gibb than Hourani, sees Gibb as the culmination of a specific
academic tradition, what-to use an expression that does not occur in
Polk's prose-we can call an academic-research consensus or paradigm.

Borrowed in this rather gross fashion from Thomas Kuhn, the idea has a
worthwhile relevance to Gibb, who as Hourani reminds us was in many ways
a profoundly institutional figure. Everything that Gibb said or did,
from his early career at London to the middle years at Oxford to his
influential years as director of Harvard's Center for Middle Eastern
Studies, bears the unmistakable stamp of a mind operating with great
ease inside established institutions. Massignon was irremediably the
outsider, Gibb the insider. Both men, in any case, achieved the very
pinnacle of prestige and influence in French and Anglo-American
Orientalism, respectively The Orient for Gibb was not a place one
encountered directly; it was something one read about, studied, wrote
about within the confines of learned societies, the university, the
scholarly conference. Like Massignon, Gibb boasted of friendships with
Muslims, but they seemed-like Lane's-to have been useful friendships,
not determining ones. Consequently Gibb is a dynastic figure within the
academic framework of British (and later of American) Orientalism, a
scholar whose work quite consciously demonstrated the national
tendencies of an academic tradition, set inside universities,
governments, and research foundations.

One index of this is that in his mature years Gibb was often to be met
with speaking and writing for policy-determining organizations. In 1951,
for instance, he contributed an essay to a book significantly
entitled*The Near East and the Great Powers,* in which he tried to
explain the need for an expansion in Anglo-American programs of Oriental
studies:

...the whole situation of the Western countries in regard to the
countries of Asia and Africa has changed. We can no longer rely on that
factor of prestige which seemed to play a large part in prewar thinking,
neither can we any longer expect the peoples of Asia and Africa or of
Eastern Europe to come to us and learn from us, while we sit back. We
have to learn about them so that we can learn to work with them in a
relationship that is closer to terms of mutuality.91

The terms of this new relationship were spelled out later in "Area
Studies Reconsidered." Oriental studies were to be thought of not so
much as scholarly activities but as instruments of national policy
towards the newly independent, and possibly intractable, nations of the
postcolonial world. Armed with a refocused awareness of his importance
to the Atlantic commonwealth, the Orientalist was to be the guide of
policymakers, of businessmen, of a fresh generation of scholars.

What counted most in Gibb's later vision was not the Orientalist's
positive work as a scholar (for example, the kind of scholar Gibb had
been in his youth when he studied the Muslim invasions of Central Asia)
but its adaptability for use in the public world. Hourani puts this
well:

...it became clear to him [Gibb] that modern governments and elites were
acting in ignorance or rejection of their own traditions of social life
and morality, and that their failures sprang from this. Henceforth his
main efforts were given to the elucidation, by careful study of the
past, of the specific nature of Muslim society and the beliefs and
culture which lay at the heart of it. Even this problem he tended to see
at first mainly in political terms.92

Yet no such later vision could have been possible without a fairly
rigorous amount of preparation in Gibb's earlier work, and it is there
that we must first seek to understand his ideas. Among Gibb's earliest
influences was Duncan Macdonald, from whose work Gibb clearly derived
the concept that Islam was a coherent system of life, a system made
coherent not so much by the people who led that life as by virtue of
some body of doctrine, method of religious practice, idea of order, in
which all the Muslim people participated. Between the people and "Islam"
there was obviously a dynamic encounter of sorts, yet what mattered to
the Western student was the supervening power of Islam to make
intelligible the experiences of the Islamic people, not the other way
around.

For Macdonald and subsequently for Gibb, the epistemological and
methodological difficulties of "Islam" as an object (about which large,
extremely general statements could be made) are never tackled. Macdonald
for his part believed that in Islam one could perceive aspects of a
still more portentous abstraction, the Oriental mentality. The entire
opening chapter of his most influential book (whose importance for Gibb
cannot be minimized), The Religious*Attitude and Life in Islam, is* an
anthology of unarguable declaratives about the Eastern or Oriental mind.
He begins by saying that "it is plain, I think,and admitted that the
conception of the Unseen is much more immediate and real to the Oriental
than to the western peoples." The "large modifying elements which seem,
from time to time, almost to upset the general law" do not upset it, nor
do they upset the other equally sweeping and general laws governing the
Oriental mind. "The essential difference in the Oriental mind is not
credulity as to unseen things, but inability to construct a system as to
seen things." Another aspect of this difficulty-which Gibb was later to
blame for the absence of form in Arabic literature and for the Muslim's
essentially atomistic view of reality-is "that the difference in the
Oriental is not essentially religiosity, but the lack of the sense of
law. For him, there is no immovable order of nature." If such a "fact"
seems not to account for the extraordinary achievements of Islamic
science, upon which a great deal in modern Western science is based,
then Macdonald remains silent. He continues his catalogue: "It is
evident that anything is possible to the Oriental. The supernatural is
so near that it may touch him at any moment." That an occasion-namely,
the historical and geographical birth of monotheism in the Orient-should
in Macdonald's argument become an entire theory off difference between
East and West signifies the degree of intensity to which "Orientalism"
has committed Macdonald. Here is his summary:

Inability, then, to see life steadily, and see it whole, to understand
that a theory of life must cover all the facts, and liability to be
stampeded by a single idea and blinded to everything else-therein, I
believe, is the difference between the East and the West.93

None of this, of course, is particularly new. From Schlegel to Renan,
from Robertson Smith to T. E. Lawrence, these ideas get repeated and
re-repeated. They represent a decision about the Orient, not by any
means a fact of nature. Anyone who, like Macdonald and Gibb, consciously
entered a profession called Orientalism did so on the basis of a
decision made: that the Orient was the Orient, that it was different,
and so forth. The elaborations, refinements, consequent articulations of
the field therefore sustain and prolong the decision to confine the
Orient. There is no perceivable irony in Macdonald's (or Gibb's) views
about Oriental liability to be stampeded by a single idea; neither man
seems able to recognize the extent of Orientalism's liability to be
stampeded by the single idea of Oriental difference. And neither man is
concerned by such wholesale designations as "Islam" or "the Orient"
being used as proper nouns, with adjectives attached and verbs streaming
forth, as if they referred to persons and not to Platonic ideas.

It is no accident, therefore, that Gibb's master theme, in almost
everything he wrote about Islam and the Arabs, was the tension between
"Islam" as a transcendent, compelling Oriental fact and the realities of
everyday human experience. His investment as a scholar and as a devout
Christian was in "Islam," not so much in the (to him) relatively trivial
complications introduced into Islam by nationalism, class struggle, the
individualizing experiences of love, anger, or human work. Nowhere is
the impoverishing character of this investment more evident than
in*Whither Islam?,* a volume edited and contributed to, in the title
essay, by Gibb in 1932. (It also includes an impressive article on North
African Islam by Massignon.) Gibb's task as he saw it was to assess
Islam, its present situation, its possible future course. In such a task
the individual and manifestly different regions of the Islamic world
were to be, not refutations of Islam's unity, but examples of it. Gibb
himself proposed an introductory definition of Islam; then, in the
concluding essay, he sought 'to pronounce on its actuality and its real
future. Like Macdonald, Gibb seems entirely comfortable with the idea of
a monolithic East, whose existential circumstances cannot easily be
reduced to race or racial theory; in resolutely denying the value of
racial generalization Gibb rises above what had been most reprehensible
in preceding generations of Orientalists. Gibb has a correspondingly
generous and sympathetic view of Islam's universalism and tolerance in
letting diverse ethnic and religious communities coexist peacefully and
democratically within its imperium. There is a note of grim prophecy in
Gibb's singling out the Zionists and the Maronite Christians, alone
amongst ethnic communities in the Islamic world, for their inability to
accept coexistence.94

But the heart of Gibb's argument is that Islam, perhaps because it
finally represents the Oriental's exclusive concern not with nature but
with the Unseen, has an ultimate precedence and domination over all life
in the Islamic Orient. For Gibb Islam is Islamic orthodoxy, is also the
community of believers is life, unity, intelligibility, values. It is
law and order too, the unsavory disruptions of jihadists and communist
agitators notwithstanding. In page after page of Gibb's prose in*Whither
Islam?,* we learn that the new commercial banks in Egypt and Syria are
facts of Islam or an Islamic initiative; schools and an increasing
literacy rate are Islamic facts, too, as are journalism, Westernization,
and intellectual societies. At no point does Gibb speak of European
colonialism when he discusses the rise of nationalism and its "toxins."
That the history of modern Islam might be more intelligible for its
resistance, political and nonpolitical, to colonialism, never occurs to
Gibb, just as it seems to him finally irrelevant to note whether the
"Islamic" governments he discusses are republican, feudal, or
monarchical.

"Islam" for Gibb is a sort of superstructure imperiled both by politics
(nationalism, communist agitation, Westernization) and by dangerous
Muslim attempts to tamper with its intellectual sovereignty. In the
passage that follows, note how the word*religion* and its cognates are
made to color the tone of Gibb's prose, so much so that we feel a
decorous annoyance at the mundane pressures directed at "Islam":

Islam, as a religion, has lost little of its force, but Islam as the
arbiter of social life [in the modern world] is being dethroned;
alongside it, or above it, new forces exert an authority which is
sometimes in contradiction to its traditions and its social
prescriptions, but nevertheless forces its way in their teeth. To put
the position in its simplest terms, what has happened is this. Until
recently, the ordinary Muslim citizen and cultivator had no political
interests or functions, and no literature of easy access except
religious literature, had no festivals and no communal life except in
connection with religion, saw little or nothing of the outside world
except through religious glasses.*To him, in consequence, religion meant
everything. Now,* however, more in all the advanced countries, his
interests have expanded and his activities are no longer bounded by
religion. He has political questions thrust on his notice; he reads, or
has read to him, a mass of articles on subjects of all kinds which have
nothing to do with religion, and in which the religious point of view
may not be discussed at all and the verdict held to lie with some quite
different principles [Emphasis added] 95

Admittedly, the picture is a little difficult to see, since unlike any
other religion*Islam is or means everything.* As a description of a
human phenomenon the hyperbole is, I think, unique to Orientalism.Life
itself-politics, literature, energy, activity, growth -is an intrusion
upon this (to a Westerner) unimaginable Oriental totality. Yet as "a
complement and counterbalance to European civilisation" Islam in its
modern form is nevertheless a useful object: this is the core of Gibb's
proposition about modern Islam. For "in the broadest aspect of history,
what is now happening between Europe and Islam is the reintegration of
western civilization, artificially sundered at the Renaissance and now
reasserting its unity with overwhelming force.96

Unlike Massignon, who made no effort to conceal his metaphysical
speculations, Gibb delivered such observations as this as if they were
objective knowledge (a category he found wanting in Massignon). Yet by
almost any standards most of Gibb's general works on Islam*are*
metaphysical, not only because he uses abstractions like "Islam" as if
they have a clear and distinct meaning but also because it is simply
never clear where in concrete time and space Gibb's "Islam" is taking
place. If on the one hand, following Macdonald, he puts Islam
definitively outside the West, on the other hand, in much of his work,
he is to be found "reintegrating" it with the West. In 1955 he made this
inside-outside question a bit clearer: the West took from Islam only
those nonscientific elements that it had originally derived from the
West, whereas in borrowing much from Islamic science, the West was
merely following the law making "natural science and technology
...indefinitely transmissible."97 The net result is to make Islam in
"art, aesthetics, philosophy and religious thought" a second-order
phenomenon (since those came from the West), and so far as science and
technology are concerned, a mere conduit for elements that are not
sui*generis* Islamic.

Any clarity about what Islam is in Gibb's thought ought to be
found*within* these metaphysical constraints, and indeed his two
important works of the forties,*Modern Trends in Islam*
and*Mohammedanism: An Historical Survey,* flesh out matters
considerably. In both books Gibb is at great pains to discuss the
present crisis in Islam, opposing its inherent, essential being to
modern attempts at modifying it. I have already mentioned Gibb's
hostility to modernizing currents in Islam and his stubborn commitment
to Islamic orthodoxy. Now it is time to mention Gibb's preference for
the word*Mohammedanism* over*Islam* (since he says that Islam is really
based upon an idea of apostolic succession culminating in Mohammed) and
his assertion that the Islamic master science is law, which early on
replaced theology. The curious thing about these statements is that they
are assertions made about Islam, not on the basis of evidence internal
to Islam, but rather on the basis of a logic deliberately outside Islam.
No Muslim would call himself a Mohammedan, nor so far as is known would
he necessarily feel the importance of law over theology. But what Gibb
does is to situate himself as a scholar within contradictions he himself
discerns, at that point in "Islam" where "there is a certain unexpressed
dislocation between the formal outward process and the inner
realities.”98

The Orientalist, then, sees his task as expressing the dislocation and
consequently speaking the truth about Islam, which by definition-since
its contradictions inhibit its powers of self-discernment -it cannot
express. Most of Gibb's general statements about Islam supply concepts
to Islam that the religion or culture, again by his definition, is
incapable of grasping: "Oriental philosophy had never appreciated the
fundamental idea of justice in Greek philosophy." As for Oriental
societies, "in contrast to most western societies, [they] have generally
devoted [themselves] to building stable social organizations [more than]
to constructing ideal systems of philosophical thought." The principal
internal weakness of Islam is the "breaking of association between the
religious orders and the Muslim upper and middle classes." But Gibb is
also aware that Islam has never remained isolated from the rest of the
world and therefore must stand in a series of external dislocations,
insufficiencies, and disjunctions between itself and the world. Thus he
says that modern Islam is the result of a classical religion coming into
disynchronous contact with Romantic Western ideas. In reaction to this
assault, Islam developed a school of modernists whose ideas everywhere
reveal hopelessness, ideas unsuited to the modern world: Mahdism,
nationalism, a revived caliphate. Yet the conservative reaction to
modernism is no less unsuited to modernity, for it has produced a kind
of stubborn Luddism. Well then, we ask, what is Islam finally, if it
cannot conquer its internal dislocations nor deal satisfactorily with
its external surroundings? The answer can be sought in the following
central passage from*Modern Trends:*

Islam is a living and vital religion, appealing to the hearts, minds,
and consciences of tens and hundreds of millions, setting them a
standard by which to live honest, sober, and god-fearing lives. It is
not Islam that is petrified, but its orthodox formulations, its
systematic theology, its social apologetic. It is here that the
dislocation lies, that the dissatisfaction is felt among a large
proportion of its most educated and intelligent adherents, and that the
danger for the future is most evident. No religion can ultimately resist
disintegration if there is a perpetual gulf between its demands upon the
will and its appeal to the intellect of its followers.

That for the vast majority of Muslims the problem of dislocation has not
yet arisen justifies the ulema in refusing to be rushed into the hasty
measures which the modernists prescribe; but the spread of modernism is
a warning that re-formulation cannot be indefinitely shelved.

In trying to determine the origins and causes of this petrifaction of
the formulas of Islam, we may possibly also find a clue to the answer to
the question which the modernists are asking, but have so far failed to
resolve the question, that is, of the way in which the fundamental
principles of Islam may be re-formulated without affecting their
essential elements.100

The last part of this passage is familiar enough: it suggests the now
traditional Orientalist ability to reconstruct and reformulate the
Orient, given the Orient's inability to do so for itself. In part, then,
Gibb's Islam exists*ahead of* Islam as it is practiced, studied, or
preached in the Orient. Yet this prospective Islam is no mere
Orientalist fiction, spun out of his ideas: it is based on an "Islam"
that-since it cannot truly exist-appeals to a whole community of
believers. The reason that "Islam" can exist in some more or less future
Orientalist formulation of it is that in the Orient Islam is usurped and
traduced by the language of its clergy, whose claim is upon the
community's mind. So long as it is silent in its appeal, Islam is safe;
the moment the reforming clergy takes on its (legitimate) role of
reformulating Islam in order for it to be able to enter modernity, the
trouble starts. And that trouble, of course, is dislocation.

Dislocation in Gibb's work identifies something far more significant
than a putative intellectual difficulty within Islam. It identifies, I
think, the very privilege, the very ground on which the Orientalist
places himself so as to write about, legislate for, and reformulate
Islam. Far from being a chance discernment of Gibb's, dislocation is the
epistemological passageway into his subject, and subsequently, the
observation platform from which in all his writing, and in every one of
the influential positions he filled, he could survey Islam. Between the
silent appeal of Islam to a monolithic community of orthodox believers
and a whole merely verbal articulation of Islam by misled corps of
political activists, desperate clerks, and opportunistic reformers:
there Gibb stood, wrote, reformulated. His writing said either what
Islam could not say or what its clerics would not say. What Gibb wrote
was in one sense temporally ahead of Islam, in that he allowed that at
some point in the future Islam would be able to say what it could not
say now. In another important sense, however, Gibb's writings on Islam
predated the religion as a coherent body of "living" beliefs, since his
writing was able to get hold of "Islam" as a silent appeal made to
Muslims*before* their faith became a matter for worldly argument,
practice, or debate.

The contradiction in Gibb's work-for it is a contradiction to speak of
"Islam" as neither what its clerical adherents in fact say it is nor
what, if they could, its lay followers would say about itis muted
somewhat by the metaphysical attitude governing his work, and indeed
governing the whole history of modern Orientalism which he inherited,
through mentors like Macdonald. The Orient and Islam have a kind of
extrareal, phenomenologically reduced status that puts them out of reach
of everyone except the Western expert. From the beginning of Western
speculation about the Orient, the one thing the Orient could not do was
to represent itself. Evidence of the Orient was credible only after it
had passed through and been made firm by the refining fire of the
Orientalist's work. Gibb's*oeuvre* purports to be Islam (or
Mohammedanism) both*as it is* and*as it might be.* Metaphysically-and
only metaphysically-essence and potential are made one. Only a
metaphysical attitude could produce such famous Gibb essays as "The
Structure of Religious Thought in Islam" or "An Interpretation of
Islamic History" without being troubled by the distinction made between
objective and subjective knowledge in Gibb's criticism of Massignon.101
The statements about "Islam" are made with a confidence and a serenity
that are truly Olympian. There is no dislocation, no felt discontinuity
between Gibb's page and the phenomenon it describes, for each, according
to Gibb himself, is ultimately reducible to the other. As such, "Islam"
and Gibb's description of it have a calm, discursive plainness whose
common element is the English scholar's orderly page.

I attach a great deal of significance to the appearance of and to the
intended model for the Orientalist's page as a printed object. I have
spoken in this book about d'Herbelot's alphabetic encyclopedia, the
gigantic leaves of the*Description de l'Égypte,* Renan's
laboratory-museum notebook, the ellipses and short episodes of
Lane's*Modern Egyptians,* Sacy's anthological excerpts, and so forth.
These pages are signs of some Orient, and of some
Orientalist,*presented* to the reader. There is an order to these pages
by which the reader apprehends not only the "Orient" but also the
Orientalist, as interpreter, exhibitor, personality, mediator,
representative (and representing) expert. In a remarkable way Gibb and
Massignon produced pages that recapitulate the history of Orientalist
writing in the West as that history has been embodied in a varied
generic and topographical style, reduced finally to a scholarly,
monographic uniformity. The Oriental specimen; the Oriental excess; the
Oriental lexicographic unit; the Oriental series; the Oriental exemplum:
all these have been subordinated in Gibb and Massignon to the linear
prose authority of discursive analysis, presented in essay, short
article,scholarly book. In their time, from the end of World War I till
the early sixties, three principal forms of Orientalist writing were
radically transformed: the encyclopedia, the anthology, the personal
record. Their authority was redistributed or dispersed or dissipated: to
a committee of experts*(The Encyclopedia of Islam, The Cambridge History
of Islam);* to a lower order of service (elementary instruction in
language, which would prepare one not for diplomacy, as was the case
with Sacy's*Chrestomathie,* but for the study of sociology, economics,
or history), to the realm of sensational revelation (having more to do
with personalities or governments-Lawrence is the obvious example-than
with knowledge). Gibb, with his quietly heedless but profoundly
sequential prose; Massignon, with the flair of an artist for whom no
reference is too extravagant so long as it is governed by an eccentric
interpretative gift: the two scholars took the essentially*ecumenical*
authority of European Orientalism as far as it could go. After them, the
new reality-the new specialized style was, broadly speaking,
Anglo-American, and more narrowly speaking, it was American Social
Scientese. In it, the old Orientalism was broken into many parts; yet
all of them still served the traditional Orientalist dogmas.

IV- The Latest Phase
--------------------

Since World War II, and more noticeably after each of the Arab-Israeli
wars, the Arab Muslim has become a figure in American popular culture,
even as in the academic world, in the policy planner's world, and in the
world of business very serious attention is being paid the Arab. This
symbolizes a major change in the international configuration of forces.
France and Britain no longer occupy center stage in world politics; the
American imperium has displaced them. A vast web of interests now links
all parts of the former colonial world to the United States, just as a
proliferation of academic subspecialties divides (and yet connects) all
the former philological and European-based disciplines like Orientalism.
The area specialist, as he is now called, lays claims to regional
expertise, which is put at the service of government or business or
both. The massive, quasimaterial knowledge stored in the annals of
modern European Orientalism-as recorded, for example, in Jules Mohl's
nineteenth-century logbook of the field-has been dissolved and released
into new forms. A wide variety of hybrid representations of the Orient
now roam the culture. Japan, Indochina, China, India, Pakistan: their
representations have had, and continue to have, wide repercussions, and
they have been discussed in many places for obvious reasons. Islam and
the Arabs have their own representations, too, and we shall treat them
here as they occur in that fragmentary-yet powerfully and ideologically
coherent-persistence, a far less frequently discussed one, into which,
in the United States, traditional European Orientalism disbursed itself.

*1. Popular images and social science representations.* Here are a few
examples of how the Arab is often represented today. Note how readily
"the Arab" seems to accommodate the transformations and reductions-all
of a simply tendentious kind-into which he is continually being forced.
The costume for Princeton's tenthreunion class in 1967 had been planned
before the June War. The motif-for it would be wrong to describe the
costume as more than crudely suggestive-was to have been Arab: robes,
headgear, sandals. Immediately after the war, when it had become clear
that the Arab motif was an embarrassment, a change in the reunion plans
was decreed. Wearing the costume as had been originally planned, the
class was now to walk in procession, hands above heads in a gesture of
abject defeat. This was what the Arab had become. From a faintly
outlined stereotype as a camel-riding nomad to an accepted caricature as
the embodiment of incompetence and easy defeat: that was all the scope
given the Arab.

Yet after the 1973 war the Arab appeared everywhere as something more
menacing. Cartoons depicting an Arab sheik standing behind a gasoline
pump turned up consistently. These Arabs, however, were clearly
"Semitic": their sharply hooked noses, the evil mustachioed leer on
their faces, were obvious reminders (to a largely non-Semitic
population) that "Semites" were at the bottom of all "our" troubles,
which in this case was principally a gasoline shortage. The transference
of a popular anti- Semitic animus from a Jewish to an Arab target was
made smoothly, since the figure was essentially the same.

Thus if the Arab occupies space enough for attention, it is as a
negative value. He is seen as the disrupter of Israel's and the West's
existence, or in another view of the same thing, as a surmountable
obstacle to Israel's creation in 1948. Insofar as this Arab has any
history, it is part of the history given him (or taken from him: the
difference is slight) by the Orientalist tradition, and later, the
Zionist tradition. Palestine was seen-by Lamartine and the early
Zionists -as an empty desert waiting to burst into bloom; such
inhabitants as it had were supposed to be inconsequential nomads
possessing no real claim on the land and therefore no cultural or
national reality. Thus the Arab is conceived of now as a shadow that
dogs the Jew. In that shadow-because Arabs and Jews are Oriental
Semites-can be placed whatever traditional, latent mistrust a Westerner
feels towards the Oriental. For the Jew of pre-Nazi Europe has
bifurcated: what we have now is a Jewish hero, constructed out of a
reconstructed cult of the adventurer-pioneer-Orientalist (Burton, Lane,
Renan), and his creeping, mysteriously fearsome shadow, the Arab
Oriental. Isolated from everything except the past created for him by
Orientalist polemic, the Arab is chained to a destiny that fixes him and
dooms him to a series of reactions periodically chastised by what
Barbara Tuchman gives the theological name "Israel's terrible swift
sword."

Aside from his anti-Zionism, the Arab is an oil supplier. This is
another negative characteristic, since most accounts of Arab oil equate
the oil boycott of 1973-1974 (which principally benefitted Western oil
companies and a small ruling Arab elite) with the absence of any Arab
moral qualifications for owning such vast oil reserves. Without the
usual euphemisms, the question most often being asked is why such people
as the Arabs are entitled to keep the developed (free, democratic,
moral) world threatened. From such questions comes the frequent
suggestion that the Arab oil fields be invaded by the marines.

In the films and television the Arab is associated either with lechery
or bloodthirsty dishonesty. He appears as an oversexed degenerate,
capable, it is true, of cleverly devious intrigues, but essentially
sadistic, treacherous, low. Slave trader, camel driver, moneychanger,
colorful scoundrel: these are some traditional Arab roles in the cinema.
The Arab leader (of marauders, pirates, "native" insurgents) can often
be seen snarling at the captured Western hero and the blond girl (both
of them steeped in whole-someness), "My men are going to kill you,
but-they like to amuse themselves before." He leers suggestively as he
speaks: this is a current debasement of Valentino's Sheik. In newsreels
or newsphotos, the Arab is always shown in large numbers. No
individuality, no personal characteristics or experiences. Most of the
pictures represent mass rage and misery, or irrational (hence hopelessly
eccentric) gestures. Lurking behind all of these images is the menace
of*jihad.* Consequence: a fear that the Muslims (or Arabs) will take
over the world.

Books and articles are regularly published on Islam and the Arabs that
represent absolutely no change over the virulent anti-Islamic polemics
of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. For no other ethnic or religious
group is it true that virtually anything can be written or said about
it, without challenge or demurral. The 1975 course guide put out by the
Columbia College undergraduates said about the Arabic course that every
other word in the language had to do with violence, and that the Arab
mind as "reflected" in the language was unremittingly bombastic. A
recent article by Emmett Tyrrell in*Harper's* magazine was even more
slanderous and racist, arguing that Arabs are basically murderers and
that violence and deceit are carried in the Arab genes.102 A survey
entitled*The Arabs in American Textbooks* reveals the most astonishing
misinformation, or rather the most callous representations of an
ethnic-religious group. One book asserts that "few people of this [Arab]
area even know that there is a better way to live," and then goes on to
ask disarmingly, "What links the people of the Middle East together?"
The answer, given unhesitatingly, is, "The last link is the Arab's
hostility-hatred-toward the Jews and the nation of Israel." Along with
such material goes this about Islam, in another book: "The Moslem
religion, called Islam, began in the seventh century. It was started by
a wealthy businessman of Arabia, called Mohammed. He claimed that he was
a prophet. He found followers among other Arabs. He told them that they
were picked to rule the world." This bit of knowledge is followed by
another, equally accurate: "Shortly after Mohammed's death, his
teachings were recorded in a book called the Koran. It became the holy
book of Islam."103

These crude ideas are supported, not contradicted, by the academic whose
business is the study of the Arab Near East. (It is worth noting
incidentally that the Princeton event I referred to above took place in
a university that prides itself on its department of Near Eastern
Studies founded in 1927, the oldest such department in the country.)
Take as an instance the report produced in 1967 by Morroe Berger, a
professor of sociology and Near Eastern studies at Princeton, at the
behest of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; he was then
president of the Middle East Studies Association (MESA), the
professional association of scholars concerned with all aspects of the
Near East, "primarily since the rise of Islam and from the viewpoint of
the social science and humanistic disciplines,"104 and founded in 1967.
He called his paper "Middle Eastern and North African Studies:
Developments and Needs," and had it published in the second issue of
the*MESA Bulletin.* After surveying the strategic, economic, and
political importance of the region to the United States, and after
endorsing the various United States government and private foundation
projects to support programs in universities-the National Defense
Education Act of 1958 (a directly Sputnik-inspired initiative), the
establishing of links between the Social Science Research Council and
Middle Eastern studies, and so on Berger came to the following
conclusions:

The modern Middle East and North Africa is not a center of great
cultural achievement, nor is it likely to become one in the near future.
The study of the region or its languages, therefore, does not constitute
its own reward so far as modern culture is concerned.

...Our region is not a center of great political power nor does it have
the potential to become one.... The Middle East (less so North Africa)
has been receding in immediate political importance to the U.S. (and
even in "headline" or "nuisance" value) relative to Africa, Latin
America and the Far East.

...The contemporary Middle East, thus, has only in small degree the
kinds of traits that seem to be important in attracting scholarly
attention. This does not diminish the validity and intellectual value of
studying the area or affect the quality of work scholars do on it. It
does, however, put limits, of which we should be aware, on the field's
capacity for growth in the numbers who study and teach.105

As a prophecy, of course, this is fairly lamentable; what makes it even
more unfortunate is that Berger was commissioned not only because he was
an expert on the modern Near East but also-as is clear from the report's
conclusion-because he was expected to be in a good position to predict
its future, and the future of policy. His failure to see that the Middle
East was of great political significance, and potentially of great
political power, was no chance aberration of judgment, I think. Both of
Berger's main mistakes derive from the first and last paragraphs, whose
genealogy is the history of Orientalism as we have been studying it. In
what Berger has to say about the absence of great cultural achievement,
and in what he concludes about future study-that the Middle East does
not attract scholarly attention because of its intrinsic weaknesses we
have an almost exact duplication of the canonical Orientalist opinion
that the Semites never produced a great culture and that, as Renan
frequently said, the Semitic world was too impoverished ever to attract
universal attention. Moreover, in making such timehonored judgments and
in being totally blind to what is before his eyes-after all, Berger was
not writing fifty years ago, but during a period when the United States
was already importing about 10 percent of its oil from the Middle East
and when its strategic and economic investments in the area were
unimaginably huge-Berger was ensuring the centrality of his own position
as Orientalist. For what he says, in effect, is that without people such
as he the Middle East would be neglected; and that without his
mediating, interpretative role the place would not be understood, partly
because what little there is to understand is fairly peculiar, and
partly because only the Orientalist can interpret the Orient, the Orient
being radically incapable of interpreting itself.

The fact that Berger was not so much a classical Orientalist when he
wrote (he wasn't and isn't) as he was a professional sociologist does
not minimize the extent of his indebtedness to Orientalism and its
ideas. Among those ideas is the specially legitimated antipathy towards
and downgrading of the material forming the main basis of his study. So
strong is this in Berger that it obscures the actualities before his
eyes. And more impressively still, it makes it unnecessary for him to
ask himself why, if the Middle East "is not a center of great cultural
achievement," he should recommend that anyone devote his life, as he
has, to the study of its culture. Scholars more than, say, doctors-study
what they like and what interests them; only an exaggerated sense of
cultural duty drives a scholar to the study of what he does not think
well of. Yet it is just such a sense of duty Orientalism has fostered,
because for generations the culture at large put the Orientalist at the
barricades, where in his professional work he confronted the East-its
barbarities, its eccentricities, its unruliness-and held it at bay on
behalf of the West.

I mention Berger as an instance of the academic attitude towards the
Islamic Orient, as an instance of how a learned perspective can support
the caricatures propagated in the popular culture. Yet Berger stands
also for the most current transformation overtaking Orientalism: its
conversion from a fundamentally philological discipline and a vaguely
general apprehension of the Orient into a social science specialty. No
longer does an Orientalist try first to master the esoteric languages of
the Orient; he begins instead as a trained social scientist and
"applies" his science to the Orient, or anywhere else. This is the
specifically American contribution to the history of Orientalism, and it
can be dated roughly from the period immediately following World War II,
when the United States found itself in the position recently vacated by
Britain and France. The American experience of the Orient prior to that
exceptional moment was limited. Cultural isolatos like Melville were
interested in it; cynics like Mark Twain visited and wrote about it; the
American Transcendentalists saw affinities between Indian thought and
their own; a few theologians and Biblical students studied the Biblical
Oriental languages; there were occasional diplomatic and military
encounters with Barbary pirates and the like, the odd naval expedition
to the Far Orient, and of course the ubiquitous missionary to the
Orient. But there was no deeply invested tradition of Orientalism, and
consequently in the United States knowledge of the Orient never passed
through the refining and reticulating and reconstructing processes,
whose beginning was in philological study, that it went through in
Europe. Furthermore, the imaginative investment was never made either,
perhaps because the American frontier, the one that counted, was the
westward one. Immediately after World War II, then, the Orient became,
not a broad catholic issue as it had been for centuries in Europe, but
an administrative one, a matter for policy. Enter the social scientist
and the new expert, on whose somewhat narrower shoulders was to fall the
mantle of Orientalism. In their turn, as we shall see, they made such
changes in it that it became scarcely recognizable. In any event, the
new Orientalist took over the attitudes of cultural hostility and kept
them.

One of the striking aspects of the new American social-science attention
to the Orient is its singular avoidance of literature. You can read
through reams of expert writing on the modern Near East and never
encounter a single reference to literature. What seem to matter far more
to the regional expert are "facts," of which a literary text is perhaps
a disturber. The net effect of this remarkable omission in modern
American awareness of the Arab or Islamic Orient is to keep the region
and its people conceptually emasculated, reduced to "attitudes,"
"trends," statistics: in short, dehumanized. Since an Arab poet or
novelist-and there are many-writes of his experiences, of his values, of
his humanity (however strange that may be), he effectively disrupts the
various patterns (images, cliches, abstractions) by which the Orient is
represented. A literary text speaks more or less directly of a living
reality. Its force is not that it is Arab, or French, or English; its
force is in the power and vitality of words that, to mix in Flaubert's
metaphor from La*Tentation de Saint Antoine,* tip the idols out of the
Orientalists' arms and make them drop those great paralytic
children-which are their ideas of the Orient-that attempt to pass for
the Orient.

The absence of literature and the relatively weak position of philology
in contemporary American studies of the Near East are illustrations of a
new eccentricity in Orientalism, where indeed my use of the word itself
is anomalous. For there is very little in what academic experts on the
Near East do now that resembles traditional Orientalism of the sort that
ended with Gibb and Massignon; the main things that are reproduced are,
as I said, a certain cultural hostility and a sense based not so much on
philology as on "expertise." Genealogically speaking, modern American
Orientalism derives from such things as the army language schools
established during and after the war, sudden government and corporate
interest in the non-Western world during the postwar period, Cold War
competition with the Soviet Union, and a residual missionary attitude
towards Orientals who are considered ripe for reform and reeducation.
The nonphilological study of esoteric Oriental languages is useful for
obvious rudimentary strategic reasons; but it is also useful for giving
a cachet of authority, almost a mystique, to the "expert" who appears
able to deal with hopelessly obscure material with firsthand skill.

In the social-science order of things, language study is a mere tool for
higher aims, certainly not for reading literary texts. In 1958, for
example, the Middle East Institute-a quasi-governmental body founded to
oversee and sponsor research interest in the Middle East-produced
a*Report* on Current*Research.* The contribution "Present State of
Arabic Studies in the United States" (done, interestingly enough, by a
professor of Hebrew) is prefaced by an epigraph announcing that "no
longer is knowledge of foreign languages, for instance, the sole
province of the scholars in the humanities. It is a working tool of the
engineer, the economist, the social scientist, and many other
specialists." The whole report stresses the importance of Arabic to
oil-company executives, technicians, and military personnel. But the
report's main talking point is this trio of sentences: "Russian
universities are now producing fluent Arabic speakers. Russia has
realized the importance of appealing to men through their minds, by
using their own language. The United States need wait no longer in
developing its foreign language program."106 Thus Oriental languages are
part of some policy objective-as to a certain extent they have always
been---or part of a sustained propaganda effort. In both these aims the
study of Oriental languages becomes the instrument carrying out Harold
Lasswell's theses about propaganda, in which what counts is not what
people are or think but what they can be made to be and think.

The propagandist outlook in fact combines respect for individuality with
indifference to formal democracy. The respect for individuality arises
from the dependence of large scale operations upon the support of the
mass and upon experience with the variability of human preferences....
This regard for men in the mass rests upon no democratic dogmatisms
about men being the best judges of their own interests. The modern
propagandist, like the modern psychologist, recognizes that men are
often poor judges of their own interests, flitting from one alternative
to the next without solid reason or clinging timorously to the fragments
of some mossy rock of ages. Calculating the prospect of securing a
permanent change in habits and values involves much more than the
estimation of the preferences of men in general. It means taking account
of the tissue of relations in which men are webbed, searching for signs
of preference which may reflect no deliberation and directing a program
towards a solution which fits in fact.... With respect to those
adjustments which do require mass action the task of the propagandist is
that of inventing goal symbols which serve the double function of
facilitating adoption and adaptation. The symbols must induce acceptance
spontaneously It follows that the management ideal is control of a
situation not by imposition but by divination.... The propagandist takes
it for granted that the world is completely caused but that it is only
partly predictable....107

The acquired foreign language is therefore made part of a subtle assault
upon populations, just as the study of a foreign region like the Orient
is turned into a program for control by divination.

Yet such programs must always have a liberal veneer, and usually this is
left to scholars, men of good will, enthusiasts to attend to. The idea
encouraged is that in studying Orientals, Muslims, or Arabs "we" can get
to know another people, their way of life and thought, and so on. To
this end it is always better to let them speak for themselves, to
represent themselves (even though underlying this fiction stands Marx's
phrase-with which Lasswell is in agreement-for Louis Napoleon: "They
cannot represent themselves; they must be represented").But only up to a
point, and in a special way. In 1973, during the anxious days of the
October Arab-Israeli War, the*New York Times Magazine* commissioned two
articles, one representing the Israeli and one the Arab side of the
conflict. The Israeli side was presented by an Israeli lawyer; the Arab
side, by an American former ambassador to an Arab country who had no
formal training iii Oriental studies. Lest we jump immediately to the
simple conclusion that the Arabs were believed incapable of representing
themselves, we would do well to remember that both Arabs and Jews in
this instance were Semites (in the broad cultural designation I have
been discussing) and that both*were being made to be* represented for a
Western audience. It is worthwhile here to remember this passage from
Proust, in which the sudden appearance of a Jew into an aristocratic
salon is described as follows:

The Rumanians, the Egyptians, the Turks may hate the*Jews.* But in a
French drawing-room the differences between those people are not so
apparent, and an Israelite making his entry as though he were emerging
from the heart of the desert, his body crouching like a hyaena's, his
neck thrust obliquely forward, spreading himself in proud "salaams,"
completely satisfies a certain taste for the oriental*[un* goŭt*pour
l'orientalisme].* 108

*2. Cultural relations* policy. While it is true to say that the United
States did not in fact become a world empire until the twentieth
century, it is also true that during the nineteenth century the United
States was concerned with the Orient in ways that prepared for its
later, overtly imperial concern. Leaving aside the campaigns against the
Barbary pirates in 1801 and 1815, let us consider the founding of the
American Oriental Society in 1842. At its first annual meeting in 1843
its president, John Pickering, made the very clear point that America
proposed for itself the study of the Orient in order to follow the
example of the imperial European powers. Pickering's message was that
the framework of Oriental studies-then as now-was political, not simply
scholarly. Note in the following summary how the lines of argument for
Orientalism leave little room for doubt as to their intention:

At the first annual meeting of the American Society in 1843, President
Pickering began a remarkable sketch of the field it was proposed to
cultivate by calling attention to the especially favorable circumstances
of the time, the peace that reigned everywhere, the freer access to
Oriental countries, and the greater facilities for communication. The
earth seemed quiet in the days of Metternich and Louis Philippe. The
treaty of Nanking had opened Chinese ports. The screw-propellor had been
adopted in oceangoing vessels; Morse had completed his telegraph and he
had already suggested the laying of a trans-Atlantic cable. The objects
of the Society were to cultivate learning in Asiatic, African, and
Polynesian language, and in everything concerning the Orient, to create
a taste for Oriental Studies in this country, to publish texts,
translations and communications, and to collect a library and cabinet.
Most of the work has been done in the Asiatic field, and particularly in
Sanskrit and the Semitic languages.109

Metternich, Louis-Philippe, the Treaty of Nanking, the screw propellor:
all suggest the imperial constellation facilitating Euro-American
penetration of the Orient. This has never stopped. Even the legendary
American missionaries to the Near East during the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries took their role as set not so much by God as
by*their* God,*their* culture, and*their* destiny.110 The early
missionary institutions-printing presses, schools, universities,
hospitals, and the like-contributed of course to the area's wellbeing,
but in their specifically imperial character and their support by the
United States government, these institutions were no different from
their French and British counterparts in the Orient. During the First
World War, what was to become a major United States policy interest in
Zionism and the colonization of Palestine played an estimable role in
getting the United States into the war; British discussions prior to and
after the Balfour Declaration (November 1917) reflect the seriousness
with which the declaration was taken by the United States.111 During and
after the Second World War, the escalation in United States interest in
the Middle East was remarkable. Cairo, Teheran, and North Africa were
important arenas of war, and in that setting, with the exploitation of
its oil, strategic, and human resources pioneered by Britain and France,
the United States prepared for its new postwar imperial role.

Not the least aspect of this role was "a cultural relations policy," as
it was defined by Mortimer Graves in 1950. Part of this policy was, he
said, the attempt to acquire "every significant publication in every
important Near Eastern language published since 1900," an attempt "which
our Congress ought to recognize as a measure of our national security."
For what was clearly at stake, Graves argued (to very receptive ears, by
the way), was the need for "much better American understanding of the
forces which are contending with the American idea for acceptance by the
Near East. The principal of these are, of course, communism and
Islam."112 Out of such a concern, and as a contemporary adjunct to the
more backward-looking American Oriental Society, was born the entire
vast apparatus for research on the Middle East. The model, both in its
frankly strategic attitude and in its sensitivity to public security and
policy (not, as is often postured, to pure scholarship), was the Middle
East Institute, founded May 1946 in Washington under the aegis of, if
not entirely within or by, the federal government.113 Out of such
organizations grew the Middle East Studies Association, the powerful
support of the Ford and other foundations, the various federal programs
of support to universities, the various federal research projects,
research projects carried out by such entities as the Defense
Department, the RAND Corporation, and the Hudson Institute, and the
consultative and lobbying efforts of banks, oil companies,
multinationals, and the like. It is no reduction to say of all this that
it retains, in most of its general as well as its detailed functioning,
the traditional Orientalist outlook which had been developed in Europe.

The parallel between European and American imperial designs on the
Orient (Near and Far) is obvious. What is perhaps less obvious is (a)
the extent to which the European tradition of Orientalist scholarship
was, if not taken over, then accommodated, normalized, domesticated, and
popularized and fed into the postwar efflorescence of Near Eastern
studies in the United States; and (b) the extent to which the European
tradition has given rise in the United States to a coherent- attitude
among most scholars, institutions, styles of discourse, and
orientations, despite the contemporary appearance of refinement, as well
as the use of (again) highly sophisticated-appearing social-science
techniques. I have already discussed Gibb's ideas; it needs to be
pointed out, however, that in the middle 1950s he became director of the
Harvard Center for Middle East Studies, from which position his ideas
and style exerted an important influence. Gibb's presence in the United
States was different in what it did for the field from Philip Hitti's
presence at Princeton since the late 1920s. The Princeton department
produced a large group of important scholars, and its brand of Oriental
studies stimulated great scholarly interest in the field. Gibb, on the
other hand, was more truly in touch with the public-policy aspect of
Orientalism, and far more than Hitti's at Princeton his position at
Harvard focused Orientalism on a Cold War area-studies approach.

Gibb's own work, nevertheless, did not overtly employ the language of
cultural discourse in the tradition of Renan, Becker, and Massignon. Yet
this discourse, its intellectual apparatus, and its dogmas were
impressively present, principally (although not exclusively) in the work
and institutional authority, at Chicago and then at UCLA, of Gustave von
Grunebaum. He came to the United States as part of the intellectual
immigration of European scholars fleeing fascism."114 Thereafter he
produced a solid Orientalist oeuvre that concentrated on Islam as a
holistic culture about which, from beginning to end of his career, he
continued to make the same set of essentially reductive, negative
generalizations. His style, which bore often chaotic evidence of his
Austro-Germanic polymathy, of his absorption of the canonical
pseudoscientific prejudices of French, British, and Italian Orientalism,
as well as of an almost desperate effort to remain the impartial
scholar-observer, was next to unreadable. A typical page of his on the
Islamic self-image will jam together half-a-dozen references to Islamic
texts drawn from as many periods as possible, references as well to
Husserl and the pre-Socratics, references to Lévi-Strauss and various
American social scientists. All this, nevertheless, does not obscure von
Grunebaum's almost virulent dislike of Islam. He has no difficulty
presuming that Islam is a unitary phenomenon, unlike any other religion
or civilization, and thereafter he shows it to be antihuman, incapable
of development, self-knowledge, or objectivity, as well as uncreative,
unscientific, and authoritarian. Here are two typical excerpts-and we
must remember that von Grunebaum wrote with the unique authority of a
European scholar in the United States, teaching, administering,giving
grants to a large network of scholars in the field.

It is essential to realize that Muslim civilization is a cultural entity
that does not share our primary aspirations. It is not vitally
interested in the structured study of other cultures, either as an end
in itself or as a means towards clearer understanding of its own
character and history. If this observation were to be valid merely for
contemporary Islam, one might be inclined to connect it with the
profoundly disturbed state of Islam, which does not permit it to look
beyond itself unless forced to do so. But as it is valid for the past as
well, one may perhaps seek to connect it with the basic anti-humanism of
this [Islamic] civilization, that is, the determined refusal to accept
man to any extent whatever as the arbiter or the measure of things, and
the tendency to be satisfied with the truth as the description of mental
structures, or in other words, with psychological truth.

[Arab or Islamic nationalism] lacks, in spite of its occasional use as a
catchword, the concept of the divine right of a nation, it lacks a
formative ethic, it also lacks, it would seem, the later nineteenth
century belief in mechanistic progress; above all it lacks the
intellectual vigor of a primary phenomenon. Both power and the will to
power are ends in themselves. [This sentence seems to serve no purpose
in the argument; yet it doubtless gives von Grunebaum the security of a
philosophical-sounding nonsentence, as if to assure himself that he
speaks wisely, not disparagingly, of Islam.] The resentment of political
slights [felt by Islam] engenders impatience and impedes long-range
analysis and planning in the intellectual sphere.115

In most other contexts such writing would politely be called polemical.
For Orientalism, of course, it is relatively orthodox, and it passed for
canonical wisdom in American study of the Middle East after World War
II, mainly because of the cultural prestige associated with European
scholars. The point is, however, that von Grunebaum's work is accepted
uncritically by the field, even though the field itself today cannot
reproduce people like him. Yet only one scholar has undertaken a serious
critique of von Grunebaum's views: Abdullah Laroui, a Moroccan historian
and political theorist.

Using the motif of reductive repetition in von Grunebaum's work as a
practical tool of critical anti-Orientalist study, Laroui manages his
case impressively on the whole. He asks himself what it is that caused
von Grunebaum's work, despite the enormous mass of its detail and its
apparent range, to remain reductive. As Laroui says, "the adjectives
that von Grunebaum affixes to the word Islam (medieval, classical,
modern) are neutral or even superfluous: there is no difference between
classical Islam and medieval Islam or Islam plain and simple There is
therefore [for von Grunebaum] only*one* Islam that changes within
itself."116 Modern Islam, according to von Grunebaum, has turned away
from the West because it remains faithful to its original sense of
itself; and yet Islam can modernize itself only by a
self-reinterpretation from a Western point of view-which, of course, von
Grunebaum shows is impossible. In describing von Grunebaum's
conclusions, which add up to a portrait of Islam as a culture incapable
of innovation, Laroui does not mention that the need for Islam to use
Western methods to improve itself has, as an idea, perhaps because of
von Grunebaum's wide influence, become almost a truism in Middle Eastern
studies. (For example, David Gordon, in*Self-Determination and History
in the Third World* ,117 urges "maturity" on Arabs, Africans, and
Asians; he argues that this can be gained only by learning from Western
objectivity.)

Laroui's analysis shows also how von Grunebaum employed A. L. Kroeber's
culturalist theory to understand Islam, and how this tool necessarily
entailed a series of reductions and eliminations by which Islam could be
represented as a closed system of exclusions. Thus, each of the many
diverse aspects of Islamic culture could be seen by von Grunebaum as a
direct reflection of an unvarying matrix, a particular theory of God,
that compels them all into meaning and order: development, history,
tradition, reality in Islam are therefore interchangeable. Laroui
rightly maintains that history as a complex order of events,
temporalities, and meanings cannot be reduced to such a notion of
culture, in the same way that culture cannot be reduced to ideology,nor
ideology to theology. Von Grunebaum has fallen prey both to the
Orientalist dogmas he inherited and to a particular feature of Islam
which he has chosen to interpret as a shortcoming: that there is to be
found in Islam a highly articulated theory of religion and yet very few
accounts of religious experience, highly articulate political theory and
few precise political documents, a theory of social structure and very
few individualized actions, a theory of history and very few dated
events, an articulated theory of economics and very few quantified
series, and so on."118 The net result is a historical vision of Islam
entirely hobbled by the theory of a culture incapable of doing justice
to, or even examining, its existential reality in the experience of its
adherents. Von Grunebaum's Islam, after all, is the Islam of the earlier
European Orientalists monolithic, scornful of ordinary human experience,
gross, reductive, unchanging.

At bottom such a view of Islam is political, not even euphemistically
impartial. The strength of its hold on the new Orientalist (younger,
that is, than von Grunebaum) is due in part to its traditional
authority, and in part to its use-value as a handle for grasping a vast
region of the world and proclaiming it an entirely coherent phenomenon.
Since Islam has never easily been encompassed by the West
politically-and certainly since World War II Arab nationalism has been a
movement openly declaring its hostility to Western imperialism-the
desire to assert intellectually satisfying things about Islam in
retaliation increases. One authority has said of Islam (without
specifying which Islam or aspect of Islam he means) that it is "one
prototype of closed traditional societies." Note here the edifying use
of the word Islam to signify all at once a society, a religion, a
prototype, and an actuality. But all this will be subordinated by the
same scholar to the notion that, unlike normal ("our") societies, Islam
and Middle Eastern societies are totally "political," an adjective meant
as a reproach to Islam for not being "liberal," for not being able to
separate (as "we" do) politics from culture. The result is an
invidiously ideological portrait of "us" and "them":

To understand Middle Eastern society as a whole must remain our great
aim. Only a society [like "ours"] that has already achieved a dynamic
stability can afford to think of politics, economics, or culture as
genuinely autonomous realms of existence and not merely convenient
divisions for study. In a traditional society that does not separate the
things of Caesar from those of God, or that is entirely in flux, the
connection between, say, politics and all other aspects of life is the
heart of the issue. Today, for example, whether a man is to marry four
wives or one, fast or eat, gain or lose land, rely on revelation or
reason, have all become political issues in the Middle East No less than
the Moslem himself, the new Orientalist must inquire anew what the
significant structures and relationships of Islamic society may be.119

The triviality of most of the examples (marrying four wives, fasting or
eating, etc.) is meant as evidence of Islam's all-inclusiveness, and its
tyranny. As to where this is supposed to be happening, we are not told.
But we are reminded of the doubtless nonpolitical fact that Orientalists
"are largely responsible for having given Middle Easterners themselves
an accurate appreciation of their past,"120 just in case we might forget
that Orientalists know things by definition that Orientals cannot know
on their own.

If this sums up the "hard" school of the new American Orientalism, the
"soft" school emphasizes the fact that traditional Orientalists have
given us the basic outlines of Islamic history, religion, and society
but have been "all too often content to sum up the meaning of a
civilization on the basis of a few manuscripts."121 Against the
traditional Orientalist, therefore, the new area-studies specialist
argues philosophically:

Research methodology and disciplinary paradigms are not to determine
what is selected for study, and they are not to limit observation. Area
studies, from this perspective, hold that true knowledge is only
possible of things that exist, while methods and theories are
abstractions, which order observations and offer explanations according
to non-empirical criteria.122

Good. But how does one know the "things that exist," and to what extent
are the "things that exist" constituted by the knower? This is left
moot, as the new value-free apprehension of the Orient as something that
exists is institutionalized in area-studies programs. Without
tendentious theorizing, Islam is rarely studied, rarely researched,
rarely known: the naiveté of this conception scarcely conceals what
ideologically it means, the absurd theses that man plays no part in
setting up both the material and the processes of knowledge, that the
Oriental reality is static and "exists," that only a messianic
revolutionary (in Dr. Kissinger's vocabulary) will not admit the
difference between reality out there and in his head.

Between the hard and soft schools, however, more or less diluted
versions of the old Orientalism flourish-in the new academic jargons in
some cases, in the old ones in others. But the principal dogmas of
Orientalism exist in their purest form today in studies of the Arabs and
Islam. Let us recapitulate them here: one is the absolute and systematic
difference between the West, which is rational, developed, humane,
superior, and the Orient, which is aberrant, undeveloped inferior.
Another dogma is that abstractions about the Orient, particularly those
based on texts representing a "classical" Oriental civilization, are
always preferable to direct evidence drawn from modern Oriental
realities. A third dogma is that the Orient is eternal, uniform, and
incapable of defining itself; therefore it is assumed that a highly
generalized and systematic vocabulary for describing the Orient from a
Western standpoint is inevitable and even scientifically "objective." A
fourth dogma is that the Orient is at bottom something either to be
feared (the Yellow Peril, the Mongol hordes, the brown dominions) or to
be controlled (by pacification, research and development, outright
occupation whenever possible).

The extraordinary thing is that these notions persist without
significant challenge in the academic and governmental study of the
modern Near Orient. Lamentably, there has been no demonstrable effect-if
there has been a challenging gesture at all-made by Islamic or Arab
scholars' work disputing the dogmas of Orientalism; an isolated article
here or there, while important for its time and place, cannot possibly
affect the course of an imposing research consensus maintained by all
sorts of agencies, institutions, and traditions. The point of this is
that Islamic Orientalism has led a contemporary fife quite different
from that of the other Orientalist subdisciplines. The Committee of
Concerned Asia Scholars (who are primarily Americans) led a revolution
during the 1960s in the ranks of East Asia specialists; the African
studies specialists were similarly challenged by revisionists; so too
were other Third World area specialists. Only the Arabists and
Islamologists still function unrevised. For them there are still such
things as an Islamic society, an Arab mind, an Oriental psyche. Even the
ones whose specialty is the modern Islamic world anachronistically use
texts like the Koran to read into every facet of contemporary Egyptian
or Algerian society. Islam, or a seventh century ideal of it constituted
by the Orientalist, is assumed to possess the unity that eludes the more
recent and important influences of colonialism, imperialism, and even
ordinary politics. Cliches about how Muslims (or Mohammedans, as they
are still sometimes called) behave are bandied about with a nonchalance
no one would risk in talking about blacks or Jews. At best, the Muslim
is a "native informant" for the Orientalist. Secretly, however, he
remains a despised heretic who for his sins must additionally endure the
entirely thankless position of being known-negatively, that is-as an
anti-Zionist.

There is of course a Middle East studies establishment, a pool of
interests, "old boy" or "expert" networks linking corporate business,
the foundations, the oil companies, the missions, the military, the
foreign service, the intelligence community together with the academic
world. There are grants and other rewards, there are organizations,
there are hierarchies, there are institutes, centers, faculties,
departments, all devoted to legitimizing and maintaining the authority
of a. handful of basic, basically unchanging ideas about Islam, the
Orient, and the Arabs. A recent critical analysis of the Middle East
studies operation in the United States shows, not that the field is
"monolithic," but that it is complex, that it contains oldstyle
Orientalists, deliberately marginal specialists, counterinsurgency
specialists, policymakers, as well as "a small minority ...of academic
power brokers."123 In any event, the core of Orientalist dogma persists.

As an instance of what, in its highest and most intellectually
prestigious form, the field now produces, let us consider briefly the
two-volume*Cambridge History of Islam,* which was first published in
England in 1970 and is a regular summa of Orientalist orthodoxy. To say
of this work by numerous luminaries that it is an intellectual failure
by any standards other than those of Orientalism is to say that it could
have been a different and better history of Islam. In fact, as several
more thoughtful scholars have noted,124 this kind of history was already
doomed when first planned and could not have been different or better in
execution: too many ideas were uncritically accepted by its editors;
there was too much reliance on vague concepts; little emphasis was
placed on methodological issues (which were left as they have been
standing in Orientalist discourse for almost two centuries); and no
effort was put forth to make even the idea of Islam seem interesting.
Moreover, not only does*The Cambridge History of Islam* radically
misconceive and misrepresent Islam as a religion; it also has no
corporate idea of itself as a history. Of few such enormous enterprises
can it be true, as it is of this one, that ideas and methodological
intelligence are almost entirely absent from it.

Erfan Shahid's chapter on pre-Islamic Arabia, which opens the history,
intelligently sketches the fruitful consonance between topography and
human economy out of which Islam appeared in the seventh century. But
what can one fairly say of a history of Islam, defined by P. M. Holt's
introduction rather airily as a "cultural synthesis,"125 that proceeds
directly from pre-Islamic Arabia to a chapter on Mohammed, then to a
chapter on the Patriarchal and Umayyad caliphates, and entirely bypasses
any account of Islam as a system of belief, faith, or doctrine? For
hundreds of pages in volume 1, Islam is understood to mean an unrelieved
chronology of battles, reigns, and deaths, rises and heydays, comings
and passings, written for the most part in a ghastly monotone.

Take the Abbasid period from the eighth to the eleventh century as an
instance. Anyone who has the slightest acquaintance with Arab or Islamic
history will know that it was a high point of Islamic civilization, as
brilliant a period of cultural history as the High Renaissance in Italy.
Yet nowhere in the forty pages of description does one get an inkling of
any richness; what is found instead is sentences like this: "Once master
of the caliphate, [al-Ma'mun] seemed henceforth to shrink from contact
with Baghdad society and remained settled at Merv, entrusting the
government of Iraq to one of his trusted men, al-Hasan b. Sahl, the
brother of al-Fadl, who was faced almost at once with a serious Shi'i
revolt, that of Abu'l-Saraya, who in Jumada lI 199/January 815 sent out
a call to arms from Kufa in support of the Hasanid Ibn Tabataba."126 A
non-Islamicist will not know at this point what a Shi'i or a Hasanid is.
He will have no idea what Jumada 11 is, except that it clearly
designates a date of some sort. And of course he will believe that the
Abbasids, including Harun al-Rashid, were an incorrigibly dull and
murderous lot, as they sat sulking in Merv.

The Central Islamic lands are defined as excluding North Africa and
Andalusia, and*their* history is an orderly march from the past till
modern times. In volume 1, therefore, Islam is a geographical
designation applied chronologically and selectively as it suits the
experts. But nowhere in the chapters on classical Islam is there an
adequate preparation for the disappointments in store for us when we
come to "recent times," as they are called. The chapter on the modern
Arab lands is written without the slightest understanding of the
revolutionary developments in the area. The author takes a
schoolmarmish, openly reactionary attitude towards the Arabs ("it must
be said that during this period the educated and uneducated youth of the
Arab countries, with their enthusiasm and idealism, became a fertile
soil for political exploitation and, at times, perhaps without realizing
it, the tools of unscrupulous extremists and agitators"127 ), tempered
by occasional praise of Lebanese nationalism (although we are never told
that the appeal of fascism to a small number of Arabs during the
thirties also infected the Lebanese Maronites, who in 1936 founded the
Falanges libanaises as a copy of Mussolini's Black Shirts). "Unrest and
agitation" are ascribed to 1936 without a mention of Zionism, and the
very notions of anticolonialism and antiimperialism are never allowed to
violate the serenity of the narrative. As for the chapters on "the
political impact of the West" and "economic and social change"-ideas
left no more specific than that they are tacked on as reluctant
concessions to Islam as having something to do with "our" world in
general. Change is unilaterally equated with modernization, even though
it is nowhere made clear why other kinds of change need be so
imperiously dismissed. Since it is assumed that Islam's only worthwhile
relations have been with the West, the importance of Bandung or of
Africa or of the Third World generally is ignored; this blithe
indifference to a good three-quarters of reality somewhat explains the
amazingly cheerful statement that "the historical ground has been
cleared [by whom, for what, in what way?] for a new relationship between
the West and Islam ...based on equality and cooperation."128

If by the end of volume 1 we are mired in a number of contradictions and
difficulties about what Islam really is, there is no help to be had in
volume 2. Half the book is devoted to covering the tenth to the
twentieth centuries in India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Spain, North Africa,
and Sicily; there is more distinction in the chapters on North Africa,
although the same combination of professional Orientalist jargon with
unguided historical detail prevails pretty much everywhere. So far,
after approximately twelve hundred pages of dense prose, "Islam" appears
to be no more a cultural synthesis than any other roll call of kings,
battles, and dynasties. But in the last half of volume 2, the great
synthesis completes itself with articles on "The Geographical Setting,"
"Sources of Islamic Civilization," "Religion and Culture," and
"Warfare."

Now one's legitimate questions and objections seem more justified. Why
is a chapter commissioned on Islamic warfare when what is really
discussed (interestingly, by the way) is the sociology of some Islamic
armies? Is one to assume that there is an Islamic mode of war different,
say, from Christian warfare? Communist war versus capitalist war
proposes itself as a suitably analogous topic, Of what use for the
understanding of Islam--except as a display of Gustave von Grunebaum's
indiscriminate eruditionare the opaque quotations from Leopold von Ranke
which, along with other equally ponderous and irrelevant material, dot
his pages on Islamic civilization? Is it not mendacious thus to disguise
the real Grunebaumian thesis, that Islamic civilization rests on an
unprincipled borrowing by Muslims from the Judeo-Christian, Hellenistic,
and Austro-Germanic civilizations? Compare with this idea that Islam is
by definition a plagiaristic culture-the one put forward in volume 1
that "so-called Arabic literature" was written by Persians (no proof
offered, no names cited). When Louis Gardet treats "Religion and
Culture," we are told summarily that only the first five centuries of
Islam are to be discussed; does this mean that religion and culture in
"modern times" cannot be "synthesized," or does it mean that Islam
achieved its final form in the twelfth century? Is there really such a
thing as "Islamic geography," which seems to include the "planned
anarchy" of Muslim cities, or is it mainly an invented subject to
demonstrate a rigid theory of geographical-racial determinism? As a hint
we are reminded of "the Ramadan fast with its active nights," from which
we are expected to conclude that Islam is a religion "designed for town
.dwellers." This is explanation in need of explanation.

The sections on economic and social institutions, on law and justice,
mysticism, art and architecture, science, and the various Islamic
literatures are on an altogether higher level than most of the*History.*
Yet nowhere is there evidence that their authors have much in common
with modern humanists or social scientists in other disciplines: the
techniques of the conventional history of ideas, of Marxist analysis, of
the New History, are noticeably absent. Islam, in short, seems to its
historians to be best suited to a rather Platonic and antiquarian bias.
To some writers of the*History* Islam is a politics and a religion; to
others it is a style of being; to others it is "distinguishable from
Muslim society"; to still others it is a mysteriously known essence; to
all the authors Islam is a remote, tensionless thing, without much to
teach us about the complexities of today's Muslims. Hanging over the
whole disjointed enterprise which is*The Cambridge History of Islam is*
the old Orientalist truism that Islam is about texts, not about people.

The fundamental question raised by such contemporary Orientalist texts
as*The Cambridge History* is whether ethnic origins and religion are the
best, or at least the most useful, basic, and clear, definitions of
human experience. Does it matter more in understanding contemporary
politics to know that X and Y are disadvantaged in certain very concrete
ways, or that they are Muslims or Jews? This is of course a debatable
question, and we are very likely in rational terms to insist on both the
religious-ethnic and the socio-economic descriptions; Orientalism,
however, clearly posits the Islamic category as the dominant one, and
this is the main consideration about its retrograde intellectual
tactics.

*3. Merely Islam. So* deeply entrenched is the theory of Semitic
simplicity as it is to be found in modern Orientalism that it operates
with little differentiation in such well-known anti-Semitic European
writings as*The Protocols of the Elders of* Dori and in remarks such as
these by Chaim Weizmann to Arthur Balfour on May 30, 1918:

The Arabs, who are superficially clever and quick witted, worship one
thing, and one thing only-power and success.... The British authorities
...knowing as they do the treacherous nature of the Arabs ...have to
watch carefully and constantly.... The fairer the English regime tries
to be, the more arrogant the Arab becomes.... The present state of
affairs would necessarily tend toward the creation of an Arab Palestine,
if there were an Arab people in Palestine. It will not in fact produce
that result because the fellah is at least four centuries behind the
times, and the effendi ...is dishonest, uneducated, greedy, and as
unpatriotic as he is inefficient.129

The common denominator between Weizmann and the European anti-Semite is
the Orientalist perspective, seeing Semites (or subdivisions thereof) as
by nature lacking the desirable qualities of Occidentals. Yet the
difference between Renan and Weizmann is that the latter had already
gathered behind his rhetoric the solidity of institutions whereas the
former had not. Is there not in twentieth-century Orientalism that same
unaging "gracious childhood heedlessly allied now with scholarship, now
with a state and all its institutions-that Renan saw as the Semites'
unchanging mode of being?

Yet with what greater harm has the twentieth-century version of the myth
been maintained. It has produced a picture of the Arab as seen by an
"advanced" quasi-Occidental society. In his resistance to foreign
colonialists the Palestinian was either a stupid savage, or a negligible
quantity, morally and even existentially. According to Israeli law only
a Jew has full civic rights and unqualified immigration privileges; even
though they are the land's inhabitants, Arabs are given less, more
simple rights: they cannot immigrate, and if they seem not to have the
same rights, it is because they are "less developed." Orientalism
governs Israeli policy towards the Arabs throughout, as the recently
published Koenig Report amply proves. There are good Arabs (the ones who
do as they are told) and bad Arabs (who do not, and are therefore
terrorists). Most of all there are all those Arabs who, once defeated,
can be expected to sit obediently behind an infallibly fortified line,
manned by the smallest possible number of men, on the theory that Arabs
have had to accept the myth of Israeli superiority and will never dare
attack. One need only glance through the pages of General Yehoshafat
Harkabi's*Arab Attitudes to Israel* to see how-as Robert Alter put it in
admiring language in Commentary130 - the Arab mind, depraved,
anti-Semitic to the core, violent, unbalanced, could produce only
rhetoric and little more. One myth supports and produces another. They
answer each other, tending towards symmetries and patterns of the sort
that as Orientals the Arabs themselves can be expected to produce, but
that as a human being no Arab can truly sustain.

Of itself, in itself, as a set of beliefs, as a method of analysis,
Orientalism cannot develop. Indeed, it is the doctrinal antithesis of
development. Its central argument is the myth of the arrested
development of the Semites. From this matrix other myths pour forth,
each of them showing the Semite to be the opposite of the Westerner and
irremediably the victim of his own weaknesses. By a concatenation of
events and circumstances the Semitic myth bifurcated in the Zionist
movement; one Semite went the way of Orientalism, the other, the Arab,
was forced to go the way of the Oriental. Each time tent and tribe are
solicited, the myth is being employed; each time the concept of Arab
national character is evoked, the myth is being employed. The hold these
instruments have on the mind is increased by the institutions built
around them. For every Orientalist, quite literally, there is a support
system of staggering power, considering the ephemerality of the myths
that Orientalism propagates. This system now culminates in the very
institutions of the state. To write about the Arab Oriental world,
therefore, is to write with the authority of a nation, and not with the
affirmation of a strident ideology but with the unquestioning certainty
of absolute truth backed by absolute force.

In its February 1974 issue Commentary gave its readers an article by
Professor Gil Carl Alroy entitled "Do the Arabs Want Peace?" Alroy is a
professor of political science and is the author of two works,*Attitudes
Towards Jewish Statehood in the Arab* World and*Images of Middle East*
Conflict; he is a man who professes to "know" the Arabs, and is
obviously an expert on image making. His argument is quite predictable:
that the Arabs want to destroy Israel, that the Arabs really say what
they mean (and Alroy makes ostentatious use of his ability to cite
evidence from Egyptian newspapers, evidence he everywhere identifies
with "Arabs" as if the two, Arabs and Egyptian newspapers, were one),
and so on and on, with unflagging, one-eyed zeal. Quite the center of
his article, as it is the center of previous work by other "Arabists"
(synonymous with "Orientalists"), like General Harkabi, whose province
is the "Arab mind," is a working hypothesis on what Arabs, if one peels
off all the outer nonsense, are really like. In other words, Alroy must
prove that because Arabs are, first of all, as one in their bent for
bloody vengeance, second, psychologically incapable of peace, and third,
congenitally tied to a concept of justice that means the opposite of
that, they are not to be trusted and must be fought interminably as one
fights any other fatal disease. For evidence Alroy's principal exhibit
is a quotation taken from Harold W. Glidden's essay "The Arab World" (to
which I referred in Chapter One). Alroy finds Glidden able to have
"captured the cultural differences between the Western and the Arab
view" of things "very well." Alroy's argument is clinched, therefore-the
Arabs are unregenerate savages-and thus an authority on the Arab mind
has told a wide audience of presumably concerned Jews that they must
continue to watch out. And he has done it academically, dispassionately,
fairly, using evidence taken from the Arabs themselves -who, he says
with Olympian assurance, have "emphatically ruled out ...real peace"-and
from psychoanalysis.131

One can explain such statements by recognizing that a still more
implicit and powerful difference posited by the Orientalist as against
the Oriental is that the former*writes* about, whereas the latter
is*written* about. For the latter, passivity is the presumed role; for
the former, the power to observe, study, and so forth; as Roland Barthes
has said, a myth (and its perpetuators) can invent itself (themselves)
ceaselessly."132 The Oriental is given as fixed, stable, in need of
investigation, in need even of knowledge about himself. No dialectic is
either desired or allowed. There is a source of information (the
Oriental) and a source of knowledge (the Orientalist), in short, a
writer and a subject matter otherwise inert. The relationship between
the two is radically a matter of power, for which there are numerous
images. Here is an instance taken from Raphael Patai's*Golden River to
Golden Road:*

In order properly to evaluate what Middle Eastern culture will*willingly
accept* from the embarrassingly rich storehouses of Western
civilization, a better and sounder understanding of Middle Eastern
culture*must first be acquired. The* same prerequisite is necessary in
order*to gauge* the probable effects of*newly introduced* traits on the
cultural context of tradition directed peoples. Also, the ways and means
in which new cultural offerings can be made palatable must be studied
much more thoroughly than was hitherto the case. In brief, the only way
in which the Gordian knot of resistance to Westernization in the Middle
East can be unraveled is that of studying the Middle East, of obtaining
a fuller picture of its traditional ulture, a better understanding of
the processes of change taking place in it at present, and a deeper
insight into the psychology of human groups brought up in Middle Eastern
culture. The task is taxing, but the prize, harmony between the West and
a neighboring world area of crucial importance, is well worth it.133

The metaphorical figures propping up this passage (I have indicated them
by italics) come from a variety of human activities, some commercial,
some horticultural, some religious, some veterinary, some historical.
Yet in each case the relation between the Middle East and the West is
really defined as sexual: as I said earlier in discussing Flaubert, the
association between the Orient and sex is remarkably persistent. The
Middle East is resistant, as any virgin would be, but the male scholar
wins the prize by bursting open, penetrating through the Gordian knot
despite "the taxing task." "Harmony" is the result of the conquest of
maidenly coyness; it is not by any means the coexistence of equals. The
underlying power relation between scholar and subject matter is never
once altered: it is uniformly favorable to the Orientalist. Study,
understanding, knowledge, evaluation, masked as blandishments to
"harmony," are instruments of conquest.

The verbal operations in such writing as Patai's (who has outstripped
even his previous work in his recent The Arab Mind134 ) aim at a very
particular sort of compression and reduction. Much of his paraphernalia
is anthropological-he describes the Middle East as a "culture area"-but
the result is to eradicate the plurality of differences among the Arabs
(whoever they may be in fact) in the interest of one difference, that
one setting Arabs off from everyone else. As a subject matter for study
and analysis, they can be controlled more readily. Moreover, thus
reduced they can be made to permit, legitimate, and valorize general
nonsense of the sort one finds in works such as Sania Hamady's
Temperament and Character of the Arabs. Item:

The Arabs so far have demonstrated an incapacity for disciplined and
abiding unity. They experience collective outbursts of enthusiasm but do
not pursue patiently collective endeavors, which are usually embraced
half-heartedly.They show lack of coordination and harmony in
organization and function, nor have they revealed an ability for
cooperation. Any collective action for common benefit or mutual profit
is alien to them.135

The style of this prose tells more perhaps than Hamady intends. Verbs
like "demonstrate," "reveal," "show," are used without an indirect
object: to whom are the Arabs revealing, demonstrating, showing? To no
one in particular, obviously, but to everyone in general. This is
another way of saying that these truths are selfevident only to a
privileged or initiated observer, since nowhere does Hamady cite
generally available evidence for her observations. Besides, given the
inanity of the observations, what sort of evidence could there be? As
her prose moves along, her tone increases in confidence: "Any collective
action ...is alien to them." The categories harden, the assertions are
more unyielding, and the Arabs have been totally transformed from people
into no more than the putative subject of Hamady's style. The Arabs
exist only as an occasion for the tyrannical observer: "The world is my
idea."

And so it is throughout the work of the contemporary Orientalist:
assertions of the most bizarre sort dot his or her pages, whether it is
a Manfred Halpern arguing that even though all human thought processes
can be reduced to eight, the Islamic mind is capable of only four,136 or
a Morroe Berger presuming that since the Arabic language is much given
to rhetoric Arabs are consequently incapable of true thought."137 One
can call these assertions myths in their function and structure, and yet
one must try to understand what other imperatives govern their use. Here
one is speculating, of course. Orientalist generalizations about the
Arabs are very detailed when it comes to itemizing Arab characteristics
critically, far less so when it comes to analyzing Arab strengths. The
Arab family, Arab rhetoric, the Arab character, despite copious
descriptions by the Orientalist, appear denatured, without human
potency, even as these same descriptions possess a fullness and depth in
their sweeping power over the subject matter. Hamady again:

Thus, the Arab lives in a hard and frustrating environment. He has
little chance to develop his potentialities and define his position in
society, holds little belief in progress and change, and finds salvation
only in the hereafter.138

What the Arab cannot achieve himself is to be found in the writing about
him. The Orientalist is supremely certain of his potential, is not a
pessimist, is able to define his position, his own and the Arab's. The
picture of the Arab Oriental that emerges is determinedly negative; yet,
we ask, why this endless series of works on him? What grips the
Orientalist, if it is not-as it certainly is not-love of Arab science,
mind, society, achievement? In other words, what is the nature of Arab
presence in mythic discourse about him?

Two things: number and generative power. Both qualities are reducible to
each other ultimately, but we ought to separate them for the purposes of
analysis. Almost without exception, every contemporary work of
Orientalist scholarship (especially in the social sciences) has a great
deal to say about the family, its maledominated structure, its
all-pervasive influence in the society. Patai's work is a typical
example. A silent paradox immediately presents itself, for if the family
is an institution for whose general failures the only remedy is the
placebo of "modernization," we must acknowledge that the family
continues to produce itself, is fertile, and is the source of Arab
existence in the world, such as it is. What Berger refers to as "the
great value men place upon their own sexual prowess"139 suggests the
lurking power behind Arab presence in the world. If Arab society is
represented in almost completely negative and generally passive terms,
to be ravished and won by the Orientalist hero, we can assume that such
a representation is a way of dealing with the great variety and potency
of Arab diversity, whose source is, if not intellectual and social, then
sexual and biological. Yet the absolutely inviolable taboo in
Orientalist discourse is that that very sexuality must never be taken
seriously. It can never be explicitly blamed for the absence of
achievement and "real" rational sophistication the Orientalist
everywhere discovers among the Arabs. And yet this is, I think, the
missing link in arguments whose main object is criticism of
"traditional" Arab society, such as Hamady's, Berger's, and Lerner's.
They recognize the power of the family, note the weaknesses of the Arab
mind, remark the "importance" of the Oriental world to the West, but
never say what their discourse implies, that what is really left to the
Arab after all is said and done is an undifferentiated sexual drive. On
rare occasions-as in the work of Leon Mugniery-we do find the implicit
made clear: that there is a "powerful sexual appetite ...characteristic
of those hot-blooded southerners."140 Most of the time, however, the
belittlement of Arab society and its reduction of platitudes
inconceivable for any except the racially inferior are carried on over
an undercurrent of sexual exaggeration: the Arab produces himself,
endlessly, sexually, and little else. The Orientalist says nothing about
this, although his argument depends on it: "But co-operation in the Near
East is still largely a family affair and little of it is found outside
the blood group or village.141 Which is to say that the only way in
which Arabs count is as mere biological beings; institutionally,
politically, culturally they are nil, or next to nil. Numerically and as
the producers of families, Arabs are actual.

The difficulty with this view is that it complicates the passivity
amongst Arabs assumed by Orientalists like Patai and even Hamady and the
others. But it is in the logic of myths, like dreams, exactly to welcome
radical antitheses. For a myth does not analyze or solve problems. It
represents them as already analyzed and solved; that is, it presents
them as already assembled images, in the way a scarecrow is assembled
from bric-a-brac and then made to stand for a man. Since the image*uses*
all material to its own end, and since by definition the myth displaces
life, the antithesis between an overfertile Arab and a passive doll is
not functional. The discourse papers over the antithesis. An Arab
Oriental is that impossible creature whose libidinal energy drives him
to paroxysms of overstimulation- and yet, he is as a puppet in the eyes
of the world, staring vacantly out at a modern landscape he can neither
understand nor cope with.

It is in recent discussions of Oriental political behavior that such an
image of the Arab seems to be relevant, and it is often occasioned by
scholarly discussion of those two recent favorites of Orientalist
expertise, revolution and modernization. Under the auspices of the
School of Oriental and African Studies there appeared in 1972 a volume
entitled*Revolution in the Middle East and Other Case Studies,* edited
by P. J. Vatikiotis. The title is overtly medical, for we are expected
to think of Orientalists as finally being given the benefit of what
"traditional" Orientalism usually avoided: psychoclinical attention.
Vatikiotis sets the tone of the collection with a quasi-medical
definition of revolution, but since Arab revolution is in his mind and
in his readers', the hostility of the definition seems acceptable. There
is a very clever irony here about which I shall speak later.
Vatikiotis's theoretical support is Camus-whose colonial mentality was
no friend of revolution or of the Arabs, as Conor Cruise O'Brien has
recently shown-but the phrase "revolution destroys both men and
principles" is accepted from Camus as having "fundamental sense."
Vatikiotis continues:

...all revolutionary ideology is in direct conflict with (actually, is a
head-on attack upon) man's rational, biological and psychological
make-up.

Committed as it is to a methodical metastasis, revolutionary ideology
demands fanaticism from its adherents. Politics for the revolutionary is
not only a question of belief, or a substitute for religious belief. It
must stop being what it has always been, namely, an adaptive activity in
time for survival. Metastatic, soteriological politics abhors
adaptiveness, for how else can it eschew the difficulties, ignore and
bypass the obstacles of the complex biological-psychological dimension
of man, or mesmerize his subtle though limited and vulnerable
rationality? It fears and shins the concrete and discrete nature of
human problems and the preoccupations of political life: it thrives on
the abstract and the Promethean. It subordinates all tangible values to
the one supreme value: the harnessing of man and history in a grand
design of human liberation. It is not satisfied with human politics,
which has so many irritating limitations. It wishes instead to create a
new world, not adaptively, precariously, delicately, that is, humanly,
but by a terrifying act of Olympian pseudo-divine creation. Politics in
the service of man is a formula that is unacceptable to the
revolutionary ideologue. Rather man exists to serve a politically
contrived and brutally decreed order.142

Whatever else this passage says-purple writing of the most extreme sort,
counterrevolutionary zealotry-it is saying nothing less than that
revolution is a bad kind of sexuality (pseudo-divine act of creation),
and also a cancerous disease. Whatever is done by the "human," according
to Vatikiotis, is rational, right, subtle, discrete, concrete; whatever
the revolutionary proclaims is brutal, irrational, mesmeric, cancerous.
Procreation, change, and continuity are identified not only with
sexuality and with madness but, a little paradoxically, with
abstraction.

Vatikiotis's terms are weighted and colored emotionally by appeals (from
the right) to humanity and decency and by appeals (against the left)
safeguarding humanity from sexuality, cancer, madness, irrational
violence, revolution. Since it is Arab revolution that is in question,
we are, to read the passage as follows: This is what revolution is, and
if the Arabs want it, then that is a fairly telling comment on them, on
the kind of inferior race they are. They are only capable of sexual
incitement and not of Olympian (Western, modern) reason. The irony of
which I spoke earlier now comes into play, for a few pages later we find
that the Arabs are so inept that they cannot even aspire to, let alone
consummate, the ambitions of revolution. By implication, Arab sexuality
need not be feared for itself but for its failure. In short, Vatikiotis
asks his reader to believe that revolution in the Middle East is a
threat precisely because revolution cannot be attained.

The major source of political conflict and potential revolution in many
countries of the Middle East, as well as Africa and Asia today, is the
inability of so-called radical nationalist regimes and movements to
manage, let alone resolve, the social, economic and political problems
of independence.... Until the states in the Middle East can control
their economic activity and create or produce their own technology,
their access to revolutionary experience will remain limited. The very
political categories essential to a revolution will be lacking.143

Damned if you do, and damned if you don't. In this series of dissolving
definitions revolutions emerge as figments of sexually crazed minds
which on closer analysis turn out not to be capable even of the
craziness Vatikiotis truly respects-which is human, not Arab, concrete,
not abstract, asexual, not sexual.

The scholarly centerpiece of Vatikiotis's collection is Bernard Lewis's
essay "Islamic Concepts of Revolution." The strategy here appears
refined. Many readers will know that for Arabic speakers today the
word*thawra* and its immediate cognates mean revolution; they will know
this also from Vatikiotis's introduction. Yet Lewis does not describe
the meaning of*thawra* until the very end of his article, after he has
discussed concepts such as*dawla, fitna,* and*bughat* in their
historical and mostly religious context. The point there is mainly that
"the Western doctrine of the right to resist bad government is alien to
Islamic thought," which leads to "defeatism" and "quietism" as political
attitudes. At no point in the essay is one sure where all these terms
are supposed to be taking place except somewhere in the history of
words. Then near the end of the essay we have this:

In the Arabic-speaking countries a different word was used for
[revolution]*thawra.* The root*th-w-r* in classical Arabic meant to rise
up (e.g. of a camel), to be stirred or excited, and hence, especially in
Maghribi usage, to rebel. It is often used in the context of
establishing a petty, independent sovereignty; thus, for example, the
so-called party kings who ruled in eleventh century Spain after the
break-up of the Caliphate of Cordova are called*thuwwar*
(sing.*tha'ir).* The noun*thawra* at first means excitement, as in the
phrase, cited in the Sihah, a standard medieval Arabic
dictionary,*intazir hatta taskun hadhihi 'lthawra,* wait till this
excitement dies down-a very apt recommendation. The verb is used by
al-Iji, in the form of*thawaran* or*itharat fitna,* stirring up
sedition, as one of the dangers which should discourage a man from
practising the duty of resistance to bad government.*Thawra* is the term
used by Arabic writers in the nineteenth century for the French
Revolution, and by their successors for the approved revolutions,
domestic and foreign, of our own time.144

The entire passage is full of condescension and bad faith. Why introduce
the idea of a camel rising as an etymological root for modern Arab
revolution except as a clever way of discrediting the modern? Lewis's
reason is patently to bring down revolution from its contemporary
valuation to nothing more noble (or beautiful) than a camel about to
raise itself from the ground. Revolution is excitement, sedition,
setting up a petty sovereignty-nothing more; the best counsel (which
presumably only a Western scholar and gentleman can give) is "wait till
the excitement dies down." One wouldn't know from this slighting account
of*thawra* that innumerable people have an active commitment to it, in
ways too complex for even Lewis's sarcastic scholarship to comprehend.
But it is this kind of essentialized description that is natural for
students and policymakers concerned with the Middle East: that
revolutionary stirrings among "the Arabs" are about as consequential as
a camel's getting up, as worthy of attention as the babblings of yokels.
All the canonical Orientalist literature will for the same ideological
reason be unable to explain or prepare one for the confirming
revolutionary upheaval in the Arab world in the twentieth century.

Lewis's association of*thawra* with a camel rising and generally with
excitement (and not with a struggle on behalf of values) hints much more
broadly than is usual for him that the Arab is scarcely more than a
neurotic sexual being. Each of the words or phrases he uses to describe
revolution is tinged with sexuality:*stirred, excited, rising up.* But
for the most part it is a "bad" sexuality he ascribes to the Arab. In
the end, since Arabs are really not equipped for serious action, their
sexual excitement is no more noble than a camel's rising up.Instead of
revolution there is sedition, setting up a petty sovereignty, and more
excitement, which is as much as saying that instead of copulation the
Arab can only achieve foreplay, masturbation, coitus interruptus. These,
I think, are Lewis's implications, no matter how innocent his sir of
learning, or parlorlike his language.For since he is so sensitive to the
nuances of words, he must be aware that his words have nuances as well.

Lewis is an interesting case to examine further because his standing in
the political world of the Anglo-American Middle Eastern Establishment
is that of the learned Orientalist, and everything he writes is steeped
in the "authority" of the field. Yet for at least a decade and a half
his work in the main has been aggressively ideological, despite his
various attempts at subtlety and irony. I mention his recent writing as
a perfect exemplification of the academic whose work purports to be
liberal objective scholarship but is in reality very close to being
propaganda against his subject material. But this should come as no
surprise to anyone familiar with the history of Orientalism; it is only
the latest-and in the West, the most uncriticized-of the scandals of
"scholarship."

So intent has Lewis become upon his project to debunk, to whittle down,
and to discredit the Arabs and Islam that even his energies as a scholar
and historian seem to have failed him. He will, for example, publish a
chapter called "The Revolt of Islam" in a book in 1964, then republish
much of the same material twelve years later, slightly altered to suit
the new place of publication (in this case Commentary) and retitled "The
Return of Islam." From "Revolt" to "Return" is of course a change for
the worse, a change intended by Lewis to explain to his latest public
why it is that the Muslims (or Arabs) still will not settle down and
accept Israeli hegemony over the Near East.

Let us look more closely at how he does this. In both of his pieces he
mentions an anti-imperialist riot in Cairo in 1945, which in both cases
he describes as anti-Jewish. Yet in neither instance does he tell us how
it was anti-Jewish; in fact, as his material evidence for
anti-Jewishness, he produces the somewhat surprising intelligence that
"several churches, Catholic, Armenian and Greek Orthodox, were attacked
and damaged." Consider the first version, done in 1964:

On November 2, 1945 political leaders in Egypt called for demonstrations
on the anniversary of the Balfour Declaration.These rapidly developed
into anti-Jewish riots, in the course of which a Catholic, an Armenian,
and a Greek Orthodox church were attacked and damaged. What, it may be
asked, had Catholics, Armenians and Greeks to do with the Balfour
Declaration?145

And now the*Commentary* version, done in 1976:

As the nationalist movement has become genuinely popular, so it has
become less national and more religious-in other words less Arab and
more Islamic. In moments of crisis-and these have been many in recent
decades-it is the instinctive communal loyalty which outweighs all
others. A few examples may suffice. On November 2, 1945, demonstrations
were held in Egypt [note here how the phrase "demonstrations were held"
is an attempt to show instinctive loyalties; in the previous version
"political leaders" were responsible for the deed] on the anniversary of
the issue by the British Government of the Balfour Declaration. Though
this was certainly not the intention of the political leaders who
sponsored it, the demonstration soon developed into an anti-Jewish riot
and the anti-Jewish riot into a more general outbreak in the course of
which several churches, Catholic, Armenian, and Greek Orthodox [another
instructive change: the impression here is that many churches, of three
kinds, were attacked; the earlier version is specific about three
churches], were attacked and damaged.146

Lewis's polemical, not scholarly, purpose is to show, here and
elsewhere, that Islam is an anti-Semitic ideology, not merely a
religion. He has a little logical difficulty in trying to assert that
Islam is a fearful mass phenomenon and at the same time "not genuinely
popular," but this problem does not detain him long. As the second
version of his tendentious anecdote shows, he goes on to proclaim that
Islam is an irrational herd or mass phenomenon, ruling Muslims by
passions, instincts, and unreflecting hatreds. The whole point of his
exposition is to frighten his audience, to make it never yield an inch
to Islam. According to Lewis, Islam does not develop, and neither do
Muslims; they merely are, and they are to be watched, on account of that
pure essence of theirs (according to Lewis), which happens to include a
long-standing hatred of Christians and Jews. Lewis everywhere restrains
himself from making such inflammatory statements fiat out; he always
takes care to say that of course the Muslims are not anti-Semitic the
way the Nazis were, but their religion can too easily accommodate itself
to anti-Semitism and has done so.Similarly with regard to Islam and
racism, slavery, and other more or less "Western" evils. The core of
Lewis's ideology about Islam is that it never changes, and his whole
mission is now to inform conservative segments of the Jewish reading
public, and anyone else who cares to listen, that any political,
historical, and scholarly account of Muslims must begin and end with the
fact that Muslims are Muslims.

For to admit that an entire civilization can have religion as its
primary loyalty is too much.Even to suggest such a thing is regarded as
offensive by liberal opinion, always ready to take protective umbrage on
behalf of those whom it regards as its wards. This is reflected in the
present inability, political, journalistic, and scholarly alike, to
recognize the importance of the factor of religion in the current
affairs of the Muslim world and in the consequent recourse to the
language of left-wing and rightwing, progressive and conservative, and
the rest of the Western terminology, the use of which in explaining
Muslim political phenomena is about as accurate and as enlightening as
an account of a cricket match by a baseball correspondent. [Lewis is so
fond of this last simile that he quotes it verbatim from his 1964
polemic.]147

In a later work Lewis tells us what terminology is more accurate and
useful, although the terminology seems no less "Western" (whatever
"Western" means): Muslims, like most other former colonial peoples, are
incapable of telling the truth or even of seeing it.According to Lewis,
they are addicted to mythology, along with "the so-called revisionist
school in the United States, which look back to a golden age of American
virtue and ascribe virtually all the sins and crimes of the world to the
present establishment in their country.148 Aside from being a
mischievous and totally inaccurate account of revisionist history, this
kind of remark is designed to put Lewis as a great historian above the
petty underdevelopment of mere Muslims and revisionists.

Yet so far as being accurate is concerned, and so far as living up to
his own rule that "the scholar, however, will not give way to his
prejudices,"149 Lewis is cavalier with himself and with his cause. He
will, for example, recite the Arab case against Zionism (using the "in"
language of the Arab nationalist) without at the same time
mentioning-anywhere, in any of his writings-that there was such a thing
as a Zionist invasion and colonization of Palestine despite and in
conflict with the native Arab inhabitants. No Israeli would deny this,
but Lewis the Orientalist historian simply leaves it out. He will speak
of the absence of democracy in the Middle East, except for Israel,
without ever mentioning the Emergency Defense Regulations used in Israel
to rule the Arabs; nor has he anything to say about "preventive
detention" of Arabs in Israel, nor about the dozens of illegal
settlements on the militarily occupied West Bank of Gaza, nor about the
absence of human rights for Arabs, principal among them the right of
immigration, in former Palestine. Instead, Lewis allows himself the
scholarly liberty to say that "imperialism and Zionism [so far as the
Arabs are concerned were] long familiar under their older names as the
Christians and Jews."150 He quotes T. E. Lawrence on "the Semites" to
bolster his case against Islam, he never discusses Zionism in parallel
with Islam (as if Zionism were a French, not a religious, movement), and
he tries everywhere to demonstrate that any revolution anywhere is at
best a form of "secular millenarianism."

One would find this kind of procedure less objectionable as political
propaganda-which is what it is, of course--were it not accompanied by
sermons on the objectivity, the fairness, the impartiality of a real
historian, the implication always being that Muslims and Arabs cannot be
objective but that Orientalists like Lewis writing about Muslims and
Arabs are, by definition, by training, by the mere fact of their
Westernness. This is the culmination of Orientalism as a dogma that not
only degrades its subject matter but also blinds its practitioners. But
let us listen finally to Lewis telling us how the historian ought to
conduct himself. We may well ask whether it is only the Orientals who
are subject to the prejudices he chastises.

[The historian's] loyalties may well influence his choice of subject of
research; they should not influence his treatment of it. If, in the
course of his researches, he finds that the group with which he
identifies himself is always right, and those other groups with which it
is in conflict are always wrong, then he would be well advised to
question his conclusions, and to reexamine the hypothesis on the basis
of which he selected and interpreted his evidence; for it is not in the
nature of human communities [presumably, also, the community of
Orientalists] always to be right.

Finally the historian must be fair and honest in the way he presents his
story. That is not to say that he must confine himself to a bare recital
of definitely established facts. At many stages in his work the
historian must formulate hypotheses and make judgments. The important
thing is that he should do so consciously and explicitly, reviewing the
evidence for and against his conclusions, examining the various possible
interpretations, and stating explicitly what his decision is, and how
and why he reached it.151

To look for a conscious, fair, and explicit judgment by Lewis of the
Islam he has treated as he has treated it is to look in vain. He prefers
to work, as we have seen, by suggestion and insinuation. One suspects,
however, that he is unaware of doing this (except perhaps with regard to
"political" matters like pro-Zionism, anti-Arab nationalism, and
strident Cold Warriorism), since he would be certain to say that the
whole history of Orientalism, of whom he is the beneficiary, has made
these insinuations and hypotheses into indisputable truths.

Perhaps the most indisputable of these rock-bottom "truths," and the
most peculiar (since it is hard to believe it could be maintained for
any other language), is that Arabic as a language is a dangerous
ideology. The contemporary locus classicus for this view of Arabic is E.
Shouby's essay "The Influence of the Arabic Language on the Psychology
of the Arabs."152 The author is described as "a psychologist with
training in both Clinical and Social Psychology," and one presumes that
a main reason his views have such wide currency is that he is an Arab
himself (a self-incriminating one, at that). The argument he proposes is
lamentably simpleminded, perhaps because he has no notion of what
language is and how it operates. Nevertheless the subheadings of his
essay tell a good deal of his story; Arabic is characterized by "General
vagueness of Thought," "Overemphasis on Linguistic Signs,"
"Overassertion and Exaggeration." Shouby is frequently quoted as an
authority because he speaks like one and because what he hypostasizes is
a sort of mute Arab who at the same time is a great word-master playing
games without much seriousness or purpose. Muteness is an important part
of what Shouby is talking about, since in his entire paper he never once
quotes from the literature of which the Arab is so inordinately proud.
Where, then, does Arabic influence the Arab mind? Exclusively within the
mythological world created for the Arab by Orientalism. The Arab is a
sign for dumbness combined with hopeless overarticulateness, poverty
combined with excess. That such a result can be attained by philological
means testifies to the sad end of a formerly complex philological
tradition, exemplified today only in very rare individuals. The reliance
of today's Orientalist on "philology" is the last infirmity of a
scholarly discipline completely transformed into social-science
ideological expertise.

In everything I have been discussing, the language of Orientalism plays
the dominant role. It brings opposites together as "natural," it
presents human types in scholarly idioms and methodologies, it ascribes
reality and reference to objects (other words) of its own making. Mythic
language is discourse, that is, it cannot be anything but systematic;
one does not really make discourse at will, or statements in it, without
first belonging-in some cases unconsciously, but at any rate
involuntarily-to the ideology and the institutions that guarantee its
existence. These latter ate always the institutions of an advanced
society dealing with a less advanced society, a strong culture
encountering a weak one. The principal feature of mythic discourse is
that it conceals its own origins as well as those of what it describes.
"Arabs" are presented in the imagery of static, almost ideal types, and
neither as creatures with a potential in the process of being realized
nor as history being made. The exaggerated value heaped upon Arabic as a
language permits the Orientalist to make the language equivalent to
mind, society, history, and nature. For the Orientalist the language
speaks the Arab Oriental, not vice versa.

4. Orientals Orientals Orientals. The system of ideological fictions I
have been calling Orientalism has serious implications not only because
it is intellectually discreditable. For the United States today is
heavily invested in the Middle East, more heavily than anywhere else on
earth: the Middle East experts who advise policy-makers are imbued with
Orientalism almost to a person. Most of this investment, appropriately
enough, is built on foundations of sand, since the experts instruct
policy on the basis of such marketable abstractions as political elites,
modernization, and stability, most of which are simply the old
Orientalist stereotypes dressed up in policy jargon, and most of which
have been completely inadequate to describe what took place recently in
Lebanon or earlier in Palestinian popular resistance to Israel. The
Orientalist now tries to see the Orient as an imitation West which,
according to Bernard Lewis, can only improve itself when its nationalism
"is prepared to come to terms with the West."153 If in the meantime the
Arabs, the Muslims, or the Third and Fourth Worlds go unexpected ways
after all, we will not be surprised to have an Orientalist tell us that
this testifies to the incorrigibility of Orientals and therefore proves
that they are not to be trusted.

The methodological failures of Orientalism cannot be accounted for
either by saying that the real Orient is different from Orientalist
portraits of it, or by saying that since Orientalists are Westerners for
the most part, they cannot be expected to have an inner sense of what
the Orient is all about. Both of these propositions are false. It is not
the thesis of this book to suggest that there is such a thing as a real
or true Orient (Islam, Arab, or whatever); nor is it to make an
assertion about the necessary privilege of an "insider" perspective over
an "outsider" one, to use Robert K. Merton's useful distinction.[154] On
the contrary, I have been arguing that "the Orient" is itself a
constituted entity, and that the notion that there are geographical
spaces with indigenous, radically "different" inhabitants who can be
defined on the basis of some religion, culture, or racial essence proper
to that geographical space is equally a highly debatable idea. I
certainly do not believe the limited proposition that only a black can
write about blacks, a Muslim about Muslims, and so forth.

And yet despite its failures, its lamentable jargon, its scarcely
concealed racism, its paper-thin intellectual apparatus, Orientalism
flourishes today in the forms I have tried to describe. Indeed, there is
some reason for alarm in the fact that its influence has spread to "the
Orient" itself: the pages of books and journals in Arabic (and doubtless
in Japanese, various Indian dialects, and other Oriental languages) are
filled with second-order analyses by Arabs of "the Arab mind," "Islam,"
and other myths. Orientalism has also spread in the United States now
that Arab money and resources have added considerable glamour to the
traditional "concern" felt for the strategically important Orient. The
fact is that Orientalism has been successfully accommodated to the new
imperialism, where its ruling paradigms do not contest, and even
confirm, the continuing imperial design to dominate Asia.

In the one part of the Orient that I can speak about with some direct
knowledge, the accommodation between the intellectual class and the new
imperialism might very well be accounted one of the special triumphs of
Orientalism. The Arab world today is an intellectual, political, and
cultural satellite of the United States. This is not in itself something
to be lamented; the specific form of the satellite relationship,
however, is. Consider first of all that universities in the Arab world
are generally run according to some pattern inherited from, or once
directly imposed by, a former colonial power. New circumstances make the
curricular actualities almost grotesque: classes populated with hundreds
of students, badly trained, overworked, and underpaid faculty, political
appointments, the almost total absence of advanced research and of
research facilities, and most important, the lack of a single decent
library in the entire region. Whereas Britain and France once dominated
intellectual horizons in the East by virtue of their prominence and
wealth, it is now the United States that occupies that place, with the
result that the few promising students who manage to make it through the
system are encouraged to come to the United States to continue their
advanced work. And while it is certainly true that some students from
the Arab world continue to go to Europe to study, the sheer numerical
preponderance comes to the United States; this is as true of students
from so-called radical states as it is of students from conservative
states like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Besides, the patronage system in
scholarship, business, and research makes the United States a virtual
hegemonic commander of affairs; the source, however much it may not be a
real source, is considered to be the United States.

Two factors make the situation even more obviously a triumph of
Orientalism. Insofar as one can make a sweeping generalization, the felt
tendencies of contemporary culture in the Near East are guided by
European and American models. When Taha Hussein said of modern Arab
culture in 1936 that it was European, not Eastern, he was registering
the identity of the Egyptian cultural elite, of which he was so
distinguished a member. The same is true of the Arab cultural elite
today, although the powerful current of anti-imperialist Third World
ideas that has gripped the region since the early 1950s has tempered the
Western edge of the dominant culture. In addition, the Arab and Islamic
world remains a second-order power in terms of the production of
culture, knowledge, and scholarship. Here one must be completely
realistic about using the terminology of power politics to describe the
situation that obtains. No Arab or Islamic scholar can afford to ignore
what goes on in scholarly journals, .institutes, and universities in the
United States and Europe; the converse is not true. For example, there
is no major journal of Arab studies published in the Arab world today,
just as there is no Arab educational institution capable of challenging
places like Oxford, Harvard, or UCLA in the study of the Arab world,
much less in any non-Oriental subject matter. The predictable result of
all this is that Oriental students (and Oriental professors) still want
to come and sit at the feet of American Orientalists, and later to
repeat to their local audiences the clichés I have been characterizing
as Orientalist dogmas. Such a system of reproduction makes it inevitable
that the Oriental scholar will use his American training to feel
superior to his own people because he is able to "manage" the
Orientalist system; in his relations with his superiors, the European or
American Orientalists, he will remain only a "native informant." And
indeed this is his role in the West, should he be fortunate enough to
remain there after his advanced training. Most elementary courses in
Oriental languages are taught by "native informants" in United States
universities today; also, power in the system (in universities,
foundations, and the like) is held almost exclusively by non-Orientals,
although the numerical ratio of Oriental to non-Oriental resident
professionals does not favor the latter so overwhelmingly.

There are all kinds of other indications of how the cultural domination
is maintained, as much by Oriental consent as by direct and crude
economic pressure from the United States. It is sobering to find, for
instance, that while there are dozens of organizations in the United
States for studying the Arab and Islamic Orient, there are none in the
Orient itself for studying the United States, by far the greatest
economic and political influence in the region. Worse, there are
scarcely any institutes of even modest stature in the Orient devoted to
study of the Orient. But all this, I think, is small in comparison with
the second factor contributing to the triumph of Orientalism: the fact
of consumerism in the Orient. The Arab and Islamic world as a whole is
hooked into the Western market system. No one needs to be reminded that
oil, the region's greatest resource, has been totally absorbed into the
United States economy.By that I mean not only that the great oil
companies are controlled by the American economic system; I mean also
that Arab oil revenues, to say nothing of marketing, research, and
industry management, are based in the United States. This has
effectively made the oil-rich Arabs into huge customers of American
exports: this is as true of states in the Persian Gulf as it is of
Libya, Iraq, and Algeriaradical states all. My point is that the
relationship is a one-sided one, with the United States a selective
customer of a very few products (oil and cheap manpower, mainly), the
Arabs highly diversified consumers of a vast range of United States
products, material and ideological:

This has had many consequences. There is a vast standardization of taste
in the region, symbolized not only by transistors, blue jeans, and
Coca-Cola but also by cultural images of the Orient supplied by American
mass media and consumed unthinkingly by the mass television audience.
The paradox of an Arab regarding himself as an "Arab" of the sort put
out by Hollywood is but the simplest result of what I am referring to.
Another result is that the Western market economy and its
consumer.Orientation have produced (and are producing at an accelerating
rate) a class of educated people whose intellectual formation is
directed to satisfying market needs. There is a heavy emphasis on
engineering, business, and economics, obviously enough; but the
intelligentsia itself is auxiliary to what it considers to be the main
trends stamped out in the West. Its role has been prescribed and set for
it as a "modernizing" one, which means that it gives legitimacy and
authority to ideas about modemization, progress, and culture that it
receives from the United States for the most part. Impressive evidence
for this is found in the social sciences and, surprisingly enough, among
radical intellectuals whose Marxism is taken wholesale from Marx's own
homogenizing view of the Third World, as I discussed it earlier in this
book. So if all told there is an intellectual acquiescence in the images
and doctrines of Orientalism, there is also a very powerful
reinforcement of this in economic, political, and social exchange: the
modern Orient, in short, participates in its own Orientalizing.

But in conclusion, what of some alternative to Orientalism? Is this book
an argument only against something, and not for something positive? Here
and there in the course of this book I have spoken about
"decolonializing" new departures in the so-called area studies-the work
of Anwar Abdel Malek, the studies published by members of the Hull group
on Middle Eastern studies, the innovative analyses and proposals of
various scholars in Europe, the United States, and the Near East155 -but
I have not attempted to do more than mention them or allude to them
quickly. My project has been to describe a particular system of ideas,
not by any means to displace the system with a new one. In addition, I
have attempted to raise a whole set of questions that are relevant in
discussing the problems of human experience: How does one represent
other cultures? What is another culture? Is the notion of a distinct
culture (or race, or religion, or civilization) a useful one, or does it
always get involved either in self-congratulation (when one discusses
one's own) or hostility and aggression (when one discusses the "other")?
Do cultural, religious, and racial differences matter more than
socio-economic categories, or politicohistorical ones? How do ideas
acquire authority, "normality," and even the status of "natural" truth?
What is the role of the intellectual? Is he there to validate the
culture and state of which he is a part? What importance must he give to
an independent critical consciousness, an oppositional critical
consciousness?

I hope that some of my answers to these questions have been implicit in
the foregoing, but perhaps I can speak a little more explicitly about
some of them here. As I have characterized it in this study, Orientalism
calls in question not only the possibility of nonpolitical scholarship
but also the advisability of too close a relationship between the
scholar and the state. It is equally apparent, I think, that the
circumstances making Orientalism a continuingly persuasive type of
thought will persist: a rather depressing matter on the whole.
Nevertheless there is some rational expectation in my own mind that
Orientalism need not always be so unchallenged, intellectually,
ideologically, and politically, as it has been. .

I would not have undertaken a book of this sort if I did not also
believe that there is scholarship that is not as corrupt, or at least as
blind to human reality, as the kind I have been mainly depicting. Today
there are many individual scholars working in such fields as Islamic
history, religion, civilization, sociology, and anthropology whose
production is deeply valuable as scholarship. The trouble sets in when
the guild tradition of Orientalism takes over the scholar who is not
vigilant, whose individual consciousness as a scholar is not on guard
against idées reçues all too easily handed down in the profession. Thus
interesting work is most likely to be produced by scholars whose
allegiance is to a discipline defined intellectually and not to a
"field" like Orientalism defined either canonically, imperially, or
geographically. An excellent recent instance is the anthropology of
Clifford Geertz, whose interest in Islam is discrete and concrete enough
to be animated by the specific societies and problems he studies and not
by the rituals, preconceptions, and doctrines of Orientalism.

On the other hand, scholars and critics who are trained in the
traditional Orientalist disciplines are perfectly capable of freeing
themselves from the old ideological straitjacket. Jacques Berque's and
Maxime Rodinson's training ranks with the most rigorous available, but
what invigorates their investigations even of traditional problems is
their methodological self-consciousness. For if Orientalism has
historically been too smug, too insulated, too positivistically
confident in its ways and its premises; then one way of opening oneself
to what one studies in or about the Orient is reflexively to submit
one's method to critical scrutiny. This is what characterizes Berque and
Rodinson, each in his own way. What one finds in their work is always,
first of all, a direct sensitivity to the material before them, and then
a continual self-examination of their methodology and practice, a
constant attempt to keep their work responsive to the material and not
to a doctrinal preconception. Certainly Berque and Rodinson, as well as
Abdel Malek and Roger Owen, are aware too that the study of man and
society-whether Oriental or not-is best conducted in the broad field of
all the human sciences; therefore these scholars are critical readers,
and students of what goes on in other fields. Berque's attention to
recent discoveries in structural anthropology, Rodinson's to sociology
and political theory, Owen's to economic history: all these are
instructive correctives brought from the contemporary human sciences to
the study of so-called Oriental problems.

But there is no avoiding the fact that even if we disregard the
Orientalist distinctions between "them" and "us," a powerful series of
political and ultimately ideological realities inform scholarship today.
No one can escape dealing with, if not the East/West division, then the
North/South one, the have/have-not one, the imperialist/anti-imperialist
one, the white/colored one. We cannot get around them all by pretending
they do not exist; on the contrary, contemporary Orientalism teaches us
a great deal about the intellectual dishonesty of dissembling on that
score, the result of which is to intensify the divisions and make them
both vicious and permanent. Yet an openly polemical and right-minded
"progressive" scholarship can very easily degenerate into dogmatic
slumber, a prospect that is not edifying either.

My own sense of the problem is fairly shown by the kinds of questions I
formulated above. Modern thought and experience have taught us to be
sensitive to what is involved in representation, in studying the other,
in racial thinking, in unthinking and uncritical acceptance of authority
and authoritative ideas, in the sociopolitical role of intellectuals, in
the great value of a skeptical critical consciousness. Perhaps if we
remember that the study of human experience usually has an ethical, to
say nothing of a political, consequence in either the best or worst
sense, we will not be indifferent to what we do as scholars.And what
better norm for the scholar than human freedom and knowledge? Perhaps
too we should remember that the study of man in society is based on
concrete human history and experience, not on donnish abstractions, or
on obscure laws or arbitrary systems. The problem then is to make the
study fit and in some way be shaped by the experience, which would be
illuminated and perhaps changed by the study. At all costs, the goal of
Orientalizing the Orient again and again is to be avoided, with
consequences that cannot help but refine knowledge and reduce the
scholar's conceit. Without "the Orient" there would be scholars,
critics, intellectuals, human beings, for whom the racial, ethnic, and
national distinctions were less important than the common enterprise of
promoting human community.

Positively, I do believe-and in my other work have tried to show -that
enough is being done today in the human sciences to provide the
contemporary scholar with insights, methods, and ideas that could
dispense with racial, ideological, and imperialist stereotypes of the
sort provided during its historical ascendancy by Orientalism. I
consider Orientalism's failure to have been a human as much as an
intellectual one; for in having to take up a position of irreducible
opposition to a region of the world it considered alien to its own,
Orientalism failed to identify with human experience, failed also to see
it as human experience. The worldwide hegemony of Orientalism and all it
stands for can now be challenged, if we can benefit properly from, the
general twentieth-century rise to political and historical awareness of
so many of the earth's peoples. If this book has any future use, it will
be as a modest contribution to that challenge, and as a warning: that
systems of thought like Orientalism, discourses of power, ideological
fictionsmind-forg'd manacles-are all too easily made, applied, and
guarded. Above all, I hope to have shown my reader that the answer to
Orientalism is not Occidentalism. No former "Oriental" will be comforted
by the thought that having been an Oriental himself he is likely-too
likely-to study new "Orientals"-or "Occidentals"-of his own making. If
the knowledge of Orientalism has any meaning, it is in being a reminder
of the seductive degradation of knowledge, of any knowledge, anywhere,
at any time.Now perhaps more than before.
