About the Author
================

Edward W. Said, one of the country's most distinguished literary
critics, is Parr Professor of English and Comparative Literature at
Columbia University. He was Visiting Professor in Comparative Literature
at Harvard and a Fellow of the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences at Stanford, and delivered the Gauss lectures in
criticism at Princeton in 1977. In 1976 his book*Beginnings: Intention
and Method* won the first annual Lionel Trilling Award given at Columbia
University.

Also by Edward W. Said

THE QUESTION OF PALESTINE

*In this study of one of the most intractable of international problems,
Said formulates a plea to the West to recognize the real problems of
Palestine and its people, particularly with reference to the
Palestinian-Israeli war. To many Israel; s, Palestine is not only a
threat to national security, it is aiso an unmentionable subject.
TheWestern media, Said argues, have largely concurred in the view of the
Palestinian as either a refugee, an extremist, or a terrorist; he shows
that this derives from an entrenched cultural attitude towards
Palestinians, revealing age-old prejudices about Islam, the Arabs and
the Orient. There is no other way, as Said shows, to explain how
fundamental concepts of freedom, such as self-determination from
colonialism, and freedom of information, are denied the Palestinians in
the councils of the West.*

Available in cloth only

*Printed in Great Britain*

*For copyright reasons, this book may not be sold or iss loan or
otherwise disposed of except in its original paper cover.*
