Part One: Mahdaviyat and Imam Mahdi from the view point of Muslim thinkers
==========================================================================

Here we will discuss about Mahdaviyat and Imam Mahdi from the viewpoint
of Muslim thinkers from different perspectives.

Muslim Community and Imam Mahdi
-------------------------------

All Muslims believe that Muslim community has a Mahdi. There is no
difference among Muslims about it. The Holy Prophet (s) informed Muslims
about his reappearance, telling his names, attributes, appellations and
peculiarities.

The traditions narrated in this regard in Shiite and Sunni sources are
far above the standard of succession (tawatur). That is the reason why
there is no difference among Muslims in this connection. Anyone who is
aware of such traditions and their accuracy and despite that refutes the
doctrine of Mahdaviyat, rejects the words said by the Holy Prophet (s).

Shiite and Sunni hadith collections contain traditions in this regard.
Great present and past scholars have compiled works on this issue,
touching the traditions said by the Holy Prophet (s) concerning Imam
Mahdi (a.s.).

Moreover, there are numerous verses in the*Holy Quran* that on some
interpretations deal with Imam Mahdi (a.s.).

Given all these, one cannot pay heed to what a few historians such as
Ibn Khaldun have pinpointed.[^14] Ibn Khaldun's opinion in this regard
is so queer and strange that even some Sunni scholars have also rejected
it.

### Imam Mahdi and famous Sunni writers

###

Here are the names of some of the most famous Sunni writers who have
recorded traditions concerning Imam Mahdi throughout history.

Abu Bakr bin Abi Khaithama (d. 279 AH)

Na'aeem bin Hamad Maruzi (d. 288 AH)

Abu Husain bin Munadi (d. 336 AH)

Abu Na'aeem Isfahani (d. 430 AH)

Abu Ula 'Attar Hamadani (d. 569 AH)

Abd al-Ghani Maqdisi (d. 600 AH).

Ibn 'Arabi Andulusi (d. 638 AH)

Sa'ad al-Din Hamuvi (d. 650 AH)

Abu Abdullah Ganji Sha'fi'ai (d. 658 AH)

Yusuf bin Yahya Maqdisi (d.658 AH)

Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya (d. 685 AH)

Ibn Kathir Demishqi (d. 774 AH)

Jalal al-Din Suyuti (d. 911 AH)

Shahab al-Din Ibn Hajar Makki (d. 974 AH)

Ali bin Hisam al-Din Muttaqi Hindi (d. 975 AH)

Nur al-Din Ali Qari Hiravi (d. 1014 AH)

Muhammad bin Ali Shukani Qazi (1250 AH)

Ahmad bin Saddiq Ghamari (d. 1380 AH)

These are some of the most popular Sunni writers who have written books
on traditions concerning Imam Mahdi (a.s). At present as well, there

are writers who have written books on this issue. There is however no
need to mention these books.

### Companions as narrators of traditions on Imam Mahdi (a.s)

###

As mentioned above, there are traditions said by the Messenger of Allah
(s) on Mahdviyat and imamate of Imam Mahdi (a.s). These traditions are
reported by many of his great companions. Muslim scholars have narrated
these traditions from the companions of the Apostle of Allah. Since
their names are too many, we suffice to mentioning some of them.

Imam Ali, commander of the faithful (a.s)

Fatima al-Zahra (daughter of the Holy Prophet)

Imam Hasan Mujtaba (Prophet's grandson)

Imam Husain (Prophet's grandson)

Abdullah bin Mas'ud

Abudar Ghaffari

Abu Ayyub Ansari

Abdullah bin Abbas

'Ammar bin Yasir

Abu Sa'aeed Khadri

Hudayfa bin Yaman

Umar bin Khattab

Abd al-Rahman bin 'Awf

Uthman bin 'Afan

Talha bin Ubaidullah

Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari

Umm al-Mu'amineen Umm Salama

'Aisha, daughter of Abu Bakr

### Sunni Scholars and the successively reported traditions on Imam Mahdi (a.s.)

###

There are many Sunni scholars who have dealt with the issue of the
succession of traditions on Imam Mahdi (a.s), throughout different
centuries in history. Below are the names of some of these scholars:

Hafiz Jamal al-Din Mazzi (d. 742 AH)[^15]

Qurtubi, a great jurist and exegete (d. 671 AH)[^16]

Ibn Qayyim Jawziyya (d. 751 AH)[^17]

Ibn Hajar 'Asqalani (d. 852 AH)[^18]

Jalal al-Din Suyuti (d. 911 AH)[^19]

Ibn Hajar Makki (d. 974 AH)[^20]

Sheikh Ali Muttaqi Hindi (d.975 AH)[^21]

Faqih Ahmad Zaini Dahlan Shaf'ae (d. 1304 AH)[^22]

### Sunni scholars and authenticity of traditions on Mahdi

###

There are other Sunni scholars who (have not narrated these traditions
in their books but) have however confirmed that these traditions are
authentic. Among such scholars are:

Timidhi, author of*al-Sunan* , one the six sahih collections.

Muhammad bin Husain Abri (d. 363 AH)

Abu Bakr Baihaqi, author of*al-Sunanal-Kubra*

Farra Baghvi Muhyi al-Sunna

Ibn Athir Jazari

Shams al-Din Dahabi

Nur al-Din Haithami

Given all these, there is no place for controversy over the doctrine of
Mahdaviyat in Islam. Thus anyone who denies the existence of Imam Mahdi
(a.s) is no longer according to all, a Muslim.


