Part Two: Counter-traditions
============================

There are traditions in some Sunni books that run counter to previous
traditions successively reported from the Holy Prophet (s). Relying on
such traditions and claiming that they are opposed to previous
traditions, some try to undermine the authority of the previous
successively reported traditions.

We will devote this part of our book to assessing such traditions in
order to further enrich our discussion and remove the doubts about the
doctrine of Madaviyat (the belief in ultimate Savior), which is
unanimously accepted by all Muslims. Let's now deal with these
traditions.

1. Mahdi is the same as Jesus
=============================

In a tradition narrated by Sunnis, it is said that Mahdi is the same as
Jesus Christ. This tradition is reported only by Ibn Maja. According to
him, Yunus bin Abdulali narrates from Muhammad bin Idris Shafi'ai from
Ibn Khalid Janadi from Aban bin Salih from Hasan from Anas bin Malik who
quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying: "The more the world gets advanced
the more will be the problems. The situation will turn adverse and men
will become more miserly. Resurrection will happen at a time people are
used to doing bad things and Mahdi is the same as Jesus Christ."[^69]

### Unauthentic tradition and unreliable narrators

###

In our point of view, the traditions reported from Prophet's progeny and
other traditions successively reported by Sunni narrators prove that
this tradition is false. That is the reason why Hakim Nayshaburi,
Bayhaqi and others have dealt with the said tradition as weak.[^70]

### Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi

###

Moreover Sunni scholars have also criticized the narrators of the
afore-mentioned tradition. According to them, Muhammad bin Khalid
Janadi, is the only person who has narrated this tradition. That is why
they have touched this tradition while dealing his biography. Mazzi says
that Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi and San'ani Mu'azzin have narrated from
Aban bin Salih from Hasan from Anas who has said that Mahdi is the same
as Jesus Christ…

This tradition is recorded by Ibn Maja… According to Abu Bakr bin Ziyad
this tradition is queer. According to him, Hafiz Abu Bakr Bayhaqi says
that this tradition is reported only by Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi. On
the view of Abu Abdullah Hafiz Muhammad bin Khalid, Janadi is unknown
and scholars differ on Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi who narrates this
tradition from the Messenger of Allah (s).[^71]

Commenting on this tradition, Zahabi says Shaf'ai narrates traditions
from Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi who narrates traditions from Aban bin
Salih. Based on what Azdi says his traditions are not acceptable.
According to Abu Abdullah Hakim Nayshaburi he is unknown whereas on the
view of Zahabi the tradition reported by Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi,
according to which Mahdi is the same as Jesus Christ, is unknown and
rejected.[^72]

According to Ibn Hajar, Muhammad bin Khalid Janadi Mu'azzin is unaknown
included among the seventh class of reporters. He is among the narrators
relied on by Ibn Maja Qazvini.[^73]

### Aban bin Salih

###

Though Sunni scholars are of the view that all their scholars hold that
Aban bin Salih is reliable and trustworthy his is considered as weak by
Ibn Abdulbarr and Hafiz bin Hazm.[^74]

Based on what Zahabi says according to Ibn Salih in his*Amali* , Aban
bin Salih has reported no tradition from Hasan.

### Hasan Basri

###

He is the same as the popular Hasan Basri, who is considered by some as
one of the enemies of Ali (a.s). That is why some traditions (regarded
as successively reported by some), reported from Prophet's progeny
rebuke him.[^75]

Though Sunnis have narrated from him some traditions in their six hadith
collections considering him among eight pious people, they have
nevertheless stress that many traditions he reported are mursal (broken)
and that he used to do tadlish[^76] . [^77]

### Yunus bin Abduala

###

Though Sunni scholars haveconsidered him as reliable he is accused of
telling lies while reporting the above-mentioned tradition.

Commenting on him, Hafiz Mazzi says that Hafiz Abu al-Qasim in*Tarikh
Madina Demishq* , using his own chain of transmitters, narrates from
Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Rashdin from Abu al-Hasan Ali bin Ubaidullah
Wasiti who says:

I saw Muhmmad bin Idris Shafi'ai in a dream. He told me that Yunus in
Janadi's tradition – a tradition reported by Hasan from Anas from the
Holy Prophet (s) concerning Imam Mahdi – has attributed a false
tradition to me.

According to Shafi'ai this tradition is not among his traditions and he
has not narrated it. Yunus has wrongly attributed it to him.[^78]

Moreover, on Zahabi's point of view, this tradition suffers from another
weakness as well which is …[^79]

### Jesus Christ in presence of Imam Mahdi

###

Contrary to this fabricated tradition, there are many authentic
traditions that say that when Imam Mahdi (a.s) appears Jesus Christ
descends from heaven and follows him in prayer. Let's now study some of
these traditions.

Bukhar and Muslim, using their own chains of transmitters, quote the
Holy Prophet (s) as saying:[^80] کیف انتم اذا نزل ابن مریم فیکم و امامکم
منکم؟

How do you feel when Jesus Christ lands among you and your imam is from
among you?

Using his how chain of reporters, Ahmad bin Hanbal Shaybani also
narrates a tradition that contains the name of 'Dajjal'. He quotes the
Holy Prophet (s) as saying:

<p dir="rtl">
فاذا هم بعیسی بن مریم فتقام الصلاه فیقال له: تقدم یا روح الله! فیقول:
لیتقدم امامکم فیصل بکم
</p>

Then they see Jesus Christ when it is the time of offering prayer. Jesus
is told to lead the prayer but he refuses saying that their [Muslims']
Imam has to lead the prayer.[^81]

According to Manawi, Christ (a.s) descends in the morning at a white
minaret in eastern Damascus. He finds Imam Mahdi (a.s) making
preparation for offering prayer. By now Imam senses that he is present
over there. He gets back in order to allow Jesus to lead prayer, but
Jesus asks him to lead prayer and he himself offers his prayer after
him. This brings Muslim community a great deal of pride and
dignity.[^82]

Commenting on Imam Mahdi (a.s) Abu al-Hasan Abri says: "Many narrators
have narrated traditions that are successively reported from the Holy
Prophet (s) regarding Imam Mahdi (a.s). According to these traditions,
Mahdi is a member of Prophet's progeny. He rules for seven years and
establishes justice and equity in the world. It is at this time that
Jesus Christ appears. He joins Mahdi at Lad gate in Palestine in order
to help him kill Dajjal. Mahdi is now a prayer leader of Muslim
community and Jesus Christ offers his prayer after him."[^83]

Answering those who reject this issue, Jalal al-Din Suyuti says: "Their
words are very strange and surprising. This is because many authentic
prophetic traditions state that Jesus (a.s) offers his prayer after
Mahdi (a.s). The Messenger of Allah is truthful and his truthfulness is
accepted by all. Thus whatever he foresaid will come true.[^84]

### Taftazani's opinion rejected

###

Based on what we quoted from different scholars, it becomes clear that
what Sa'ad al-Din Taftazani says is wrong and unacceptable. Taftazani
says that it is not correct and reliable to say that Jesus offers his
prayer after Mahdi or vice versa.[^85]

2. Mahdi is from the offspring of Hasan
---------------------------------------

Another fabricated tradition states that Mahdi (a.s) is from the
offspring of Imam Hasan (a.s.). Abu Ishaq, author of*al-Mishkat* ,
maintains:

One day looking at his son, Hasan, Ali (a.s) said that he according to a
saying of the Holy Prophet will be a leader and a man will come from his
offspring who will be prophet's namesake and though his ethics will
resemble prophet's his complexion will be different from that of him… He
then relates that he will establish justice and equity in the world.

Abu Dawood has mentioned this tradition though he has not touched the
said story.[^86]

Commenting on this tradition, in his Sharh Mishkat al-Masabih, Qari
says:

This tradition clearly confirms our point of view maintaining that Mahdi
is from the offspring of Hasan. To reconcile between this tradition and
other traditions it has to be said that Mahdi is related to Imam Husain
only via his mother. Thus Shias' opinion that Mahdi, Muhammad bin Hasan
Askari is

the awaited Imam, for according to all Mahdi is from the descendants of
Husain, is not credible.

If it is said that Ali might have spoken about someone other than Mahdi
(a.s), in reply, it has to be said that the phrase 'he will establish
justice and equity in the world' falsifies this claim, for among Husaini
and Hasani sayyids, it is only the promised Mahdi who is known for
establishing justice and equity in the world.[^87]

### An assessment of this opinion

###

In Sunnis' six hadith collections, there is no tradition other than the
tradition mentioned, that says that Mahdi is from the descendants of
Hasan. The said tradition has appeared only in*Sunan* Abi Dawood.

According to Ibn Athir, Abu Dawood Ishaq 'Amr bin Abdullah Subai'ai
says: Ali (a.s) looked at his son, Hasan and said … He then said that it
is he who will establish justice and equity in the world. Abu Sawood has
mentioned this tradition though not mentioning the said story.[^88]

### Sheikh Mansur's opinion

###

He says: It is said that one day Ali (a.s) looking at his son Hasan
(a.s) said: This son of mine is as the Holy Prophet (s) pointed out, a
master and leader and a man will appear from his descendants, who is
your Prophet's namesake. Though his ethics will resemble prophet's his
complexion will be different from that of him.

In another tradition Imam Ali (a.s) quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as
saying: A man will rise from Transoxiana…

These two traditions are narrated by Abu Dawood.[^89]

### An evaluation of the chain of this tradition

###

In our point of view, this tradition is the only reason appealed to by
those who regard Mahdi as a descendent of Imam Hasan (a.s). Thus it is
inevitable to give a look at the chain and text of this tradition and
evaluate them.

As to the chain of this tradition, it has to be said that in his*Sunan*
, Abu Dawood mentions: حدثت عن هارون بن مغیره قال: حدثنا عمرو بن ابی قیس
عن شعیب بن خالد عن ابی اسحاق قال: قال: علی (ع) ثم ذکر قصه یملاء الارض
عدلا.[^90] I am told that Harun bin Mughayra narrated from 'Amr bin Abi
Qays from Shu'ayb bin Khalid from Abu Ishaq who said: Ali (a.s) said …
Then he mentioned that he will establish justice and equity in the
world.

To know that this tradition is weak it is enough to give a look at the
starting and finishing points of the chain of this tradition. Abu Dawood
says that he received a tradition from Harun. Now the question is: Who
has narrated this tradition to Abu Dawood? In the end of the chain of
this tradition we see the name Abu Ishaq Sabi'ai who has just once met
Ali (a.s) without talking to him. Thus there is no doubt that Ibn Ishaq
has heard this tradition from someone else, though he has not mentioned
his name while mentioning the tradition.

Moreover, it is narrated from Hafiz Manzari*in Hashiya Jami'a al-Usul* ,
that this tradition is munqati'a[^91] .

### An evaluation of the text of this tradition

###

As to the text of this tradition, it has to be said that its starting
and finishing parts are reported very differently, to the extent that
its starting part contains sometimes the name of Hasan and sometimes the
name of Husain.

Qunduzi Hanafi says that Ali (a.s) has reportedly looking at his son,
Hasan, said: This son of mine is a master and a leader… Then he
mentioned that he will establish justice and equity in the world. Abu
Dawood has narrated this tradition but he has not mentioned the story in
full.[^92]

Quoting from Abu Dawood,*Jami'a al-Usul* and*al-Mishkat* have mentioned
the very same tradition. The only difference we observe here is that the
name of Hasan is replaced by Husain.

Other traditions available in other sources concerning this issue face
the same problem. For example, in his*'Aqd al-Durar fi Akhbar
al-Muntazar* , Sullami Shafi'ai narrates Abu Ishaq's tradition from
A'amash from Abu Wael, but versions of this book are different from each
other. According to the original work as well as its copies Ali (a.s)
looks at Husain whereas according to some other versions of this book
Ali looks at Hasan.

Quoting from*Sifat al-Mahdi* authored by Hafiz Abu Na'eem Isfahani,
Sullami Shafi narrates Huzayfa's tradition which is taken from*Zakhaer
al-U'qba* . The original work written by Sullami Shafi'ai as well as its
copy, however contain that Ali (a.s) pated Husain's shoulder.

Other versions however contain the name of Hasan.[^93]

Is this difference the result of resemblance that exists between the
words 'Hasan' and 'Husain' or is it the work of some self-interested
people who purposely distorted it so as to deprive people from the
realities explained by Prophet's progeny who were more than anyone else
knowledgeable and were aware of Prophet's conduct?

Though the first possibility is not however improbable, the second
possibility seems to be more correct, for there is a great deal of
evidence in the conduct of Prophet's progeny that supports it.

In this particular case, there is solid evidence that shows some Sunni
scholars tried their best to conceal this fact that Mahdi is from the
offspring of Imam Husain (a.s). At least, they did not want to relate it
correctly. As to the real motive of these scholars, it is Allah alone
who knows better. For instance, Abu al-Husain Ahmad bin Ja'afar bin
Munadi and Abu Abdullah bin Hammad both of whom are among Sunni leaders,
narrate from Qatada who says: I told Sa'aeed bin Mussayyib as to whether
Mahdi was right. He answered in the affirmative. "From which tribe?",
said I. "From Quraish", he said. "From which family?" I asked. "From
Bani Hashim", he replied. "From which one of Bani Hashim?" I said. "From
the descendants of Abd al-Mutallib", he replied. "From which descendants
of Abd al-Mutallib?" I questioned. "From the descendants of Fatima" he
answered. "From which descendants of Fatima?" I asked. "Here it is
enough", he answered.

Now it has to be asked as to why he says 'here it is enough'. Let's thus
now assess the last part of this tradition. As mentioned before, Abu
Dawood says: "Then he mentioned that he will establish justice and
equity in the world". The question is: "Who mentioned that he will
establish justice and

equity in the world?" As pointed out by Ibn Athir, Khatib Tabrizi,
author of*al-Mishkat* and others, it is not Abu Dawood who has mentioned
this point (he will establish justice …). What is the matter then?

Author of*al-Taj* , has however utterly omitted this part of tradition
(that he will establish justice and equity in the world). This by itself
shows that this part of tradition is not a part of this tradition.

To prove this point of view, it is enough to mention that in
his*al-Ba'ath wa al-Nushur,* Bayhaqi narrates the said tradition from
Abu Ishaq. Without mentioning the said point (that he will establish
justice and equity in the world), he winds up the tradition with the
saying that his ethics resemble that of the Holy Prophet (s), though his
complexion is different from that of him. [^94]

### An inquiry into the meaning of this tradition

###

Regarding the content of this tradition, it has to be said that it is
not reliable and trustworthy. This is because as we learnt before, the
text of this tradition does not have a unified form and structure. Thus
it is pointless to pay heed to what Sheikh Ali Qari pointed out, saying
that Shia's opinion is not acceptable.

Similarly his point that Ali might have mentioned the name of Hasan
(instead of Husain) is not acceptable. This is because even if the word
'Hasan' is mentioned in this tradition, it is not clear that it is Ali
(a.s) who said the last point (he will establish justice and equity in
the world).

3. His father is the namesake of Prophet's father
-------------------------------------------------

The third tradition narrated from the Holy Prophet (a.s) states that his
father is the namesake of Prophet's father.

We will study this tradition under the following:

The Holy Prophet said: "He is my namesake"; he did not say: "His father
is the namesake of my father".

Who are the reporters of the tradition: his father is the namesake of my
father. Can we rely on them?

### Being Prophet's namesake

###

In his*Musnad,* Ahmad narrates from Abdullah bin Mas'ud, from Umar bin
Ubaid from 'Asim bin Abi al-Nujud from Zarrin Habish from Abullah who
quotes the Holy Prophet as saying:

لا تنقضی الایام و لا یذهب الدهر حتی یملک رجل من اهل بیتی اسمه یواطئ
اسمی[^95]

The world will not end unless a man appears, who belongs to my progeny
and who is my namesake.

He goes no narrating from Yahya bin Sa'eed from Sufyan from 'Asim from
Zar from Abdullah who quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying: لا تذهب
الدنیا او قال: لا تنقضی الدنیا حتی یملک العرب رجل من اهل بیتی و یواطیء
اسمه اسمی[^96] The world will not end or perish unless a man rules
Arabs, a man who belongs to my progeny and who is my namesake.

Elsewhere he has mentioned this tradition with the same chain and
wording.[^97] Elsewhere in his*Musnad* , he relates this tradition with
the firstly

mentioned wording, from Umar bin Ubaid Tanafisi from 'Asim from Zar from
Abdullah.[^98]

Tirmidhi narrates this tradition from Ubaid bin Asbat bin Muhammad
Qarshi Kufi from his father from Sufyan Thawri from Asim bin Bahdala
from Zar from Abdullah who quotes the Holy Prophet (s) as saying: لا
تذهب الدنیا حتی یملک العرب رجل من اهل بیتی و یواطیء اسمه اسمی[^99] The
world will not come to an end unless a man rules Arabs, a man who
belongs to my progeny and who is my namesake.

According to Abu Isa there are traditions in this regard narrated from
Ali, Abu Sa'eed, Um Salama and Abu Huraira. Thus the said tradition is
hasan[^100] and authentic. [^101]

### His name is the same as the name of my father

###

This tradition (that states that his name is the same as that of the
Prophet's father) is narrated by Abu Dawood in the same way. In one of
his narrations, it is stated that his father's name is the same as that
of the Prophet's father. Here is what Abu Dawood, in his*Sunan* that is
compiled by his son, says: Musaddid narrates from Umar bin Ubaid…

Muhammad bin Ala narrates from Abu Bakr –i.e. Ibn Ayyash- ….

Musaddid narrates from Yahya from Sufya …

Ahmad bin Ibrahim narrates from Ubaidullah bin Musa from Zaeda …

Ahmad bin Ibrahim narrates from Fatar from Zar from Abdullah who quotes
the Holy Prophet (s) as saying: لو لم یبق من الدنیا الا یوم If only one
day is left for this world … Zaeda adds: لطول الله ذلک الیوم حتی یبعث
فیه رجل منی او اهل بیتی یواطیء اسمه اسمی و اسم ابیه اسم ابی Allah will
prolong that day until a man is sent from my family or my progeny whose
name is the same as mine and whose father's name is the same as my
father's name.

The narration quoted by Fatar, contains: یملاء الارض قسطا و عدلا کما
ملئت ظلما و جورا He will fill in the world with justice and equity just
as it was filled in with injustice and cruelty.

The narration quoted by Sufyan contains: لا تذهب - لا تنقضی - الدنیا حتی
یملک العرب رجل من اهل بیتی و یواطیء اسمه اسمی. The world will not end or
perish unless a man rules Arabs, a man who belongs to my progeny and who
is my namesake.

According to Abu Dawood, the text of the tradition reported by Umar and
Abu Bakr is the same as that of the tradition reported by Sufyan.[^102]

Thus it is clear that Ahmad, Tirmidhi and Abu Dawood have narrated the
narration reported by Abdullah bin Mas'ud in a similar manner. This is
something that agrees with what Shias hold.

On the other hand, many Sunni scholars have introduced Mahdi as
'Muhammad bin Hasan Askari', implying that his name is the same as that
of his ancestor, the Holy Prophet (s).

From among the Sunni scholars, it is only Abu Dawood who has reported
the said tradition on the basis of a chain that contains a reporter
named 'Zaeda'. According to Abu Dawood's narration, the tradition
contains the phrase 'that his father's name is the same as my father's
name'.

Shia and Sunni scholars have equally criticized this part of Abu
Dawood's narration, putting its chain to question.

Thus it is not necessary to further dwell on this issue, for it is a
proven fact that queer traditions have to put aside and replaced by
indisputable traditions.


