Summary
=======

*In Knowledge and the Sacred Nasr analyzes humanity’s pursuit of
knowledge and proposes that in every culture throughout human history
humanity’s quest for knowledge has been a sacred activity as men and
women seek to discover the Divine. Drawing from many traditions
including philosophy, Islam, Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism, Hinduism,
Confucianism, and Zoroastrianism, Nasr explores humanity’s quest for
knowledge and quest for the Divine and how these quests relate to one
another throughout history.*

**KEY WORDS: Islam, Iran, Sacred, Secular, Tradition, Knowledge,
Science, History, Oriental, Philosophy**

<p dir="rtl">
• • • • •
</p>

In Knowledge and the Sacred Nasr explores the human quest for knowledge
and proposes that throughout human history men and women have searched
for knowledge which through time and in various cultures has been a
sacred activity to discover the Divine. In chapter 1*Knowledge and
Desacralization* Nasr explores human knowledge and how modern women and
men have lost the sense of awe, wonder and the sacred. “Today modern man
has lost the sense of wonder, which results from his loss of the sense
of the sacred, to such a degree that he is hardly aware how miraculous
is the mystery of intelligence, of human subjectivity as well as the
power of objectivity and the possibility of knowing objectively.” He
argues that every human has the ability to know the sacred because
“consciousness is itself proof of the primacy of the Spirit or Divine
Consciousness of which human consciousness is a reflection and echo.
Nasr traces the historical process of the desacralization of knowledge
and language and how the separation of the sacred and the profane has
influenced modern humanity.

In chapter 2*What is Tradition?* Nasr explains the impact of the
desacralization of knowledge had on human knowledge. “Truth had to be
stated anew and reformulated in the name of tradition precisely because
of the nearly total eclipse and loss of that reality which has
constituted the matrix of life of normal humanity over the ages.” He
states, “Tradition, like religion, is at once truth and presence. It
concerns the subject which knows and the object which is known. It comes
from the Source from which everything originates and to which everything
returns.”

In chapter 3*The Rediscovery of the Sacred: The Revival of Tradition*
Nasr explores the recent return to humanity’s understanding the sacred
by returning to tradition. “The overall harmony and equilibrium of the
cosmos required a movement within the heart and soul of at least a
number of contemporary men to rediscover the sacred at the very moment
when the process of secularization seemed to be reaching its logical
conclusion in removing the presence of the sacred altogether from all
aspects of human life and thought.”

Chapter 4*Scientia Sacra* describes the sacred knowledge that humanity
from various faith communities has rediscovered by returning to their
traditional teachings. “Scientia sacra is not the fruit of human
intelligence speculating upon or reasoning about the content of an
inspiration or a spiritual experience which itself is not of an
intellectual character. Rather,

what is received through inspiration is itself of an intellectual
nature; it is sacred knowledge.” Nasr explores human knowledge gained by
the texts from various religions, and explores how human cognition is
influenced by philosophy and science.

In chapter 5*Man, Pontifical and Promethean* Nasr investigates the
concept of men and women being pontiffs or bridges between heaven and
earth against the concept of men and women being Promethean creatures
who rebel against heaven and earth. By looking at historical
developments in several faith traditions, Nasr traces the development of
humanity’s self awareness from being a pontifical creature to rebelling
against humanity’s role as a bridge between the sacred and the profane.
Nasr argues that men and women need to regain their sense of pontifical
calling because “man is fully man only when he realizes who he is and in
doing so fulfills not only his own destiny and reaches his entelechy but
also illuminates the world about him.”

In chapter 6*The Cosmos as Theophany* Nasr explores the natural world
(and the fields of natural sciences) and its significant role in human
knowledge of the Divine in many cultures. The cosmos and cosmic laws
throughout history have had corresponded to humanity’s quest for the
Divine, until recent attempts to divorce natural science from
metaphysics and religious understanding. Nasr urges men and women to
view the cosmos as a theophany to understand their role as pontiffs
serving to bridge heaven and earth as we see the manifestation of God’s
presence around us.

Chapter 7 Eternity and the Temporal Order seeks to understand humanity
within the vertical and horizontal axes of existence by drawing upon the
concepts of eternity and time found in many faith traditions.

In chapter 8*Traditional Art as the Fountain of Knowledge and Grace*
Nasr explores various forms of art (including liturgical acts, created
pieces for contemplation and education, verbal art of music and poetry,
buildings and places of worship, and written texts) of both traditional
and sacred character. He states that “traditional art is inseparable
from sacred knowledge because it is based upon a science of the cosmic
which is of a sacred and inward character and in turn is the vehicle for
the transmission of a knowledge which is of a sacred nature.” Sacred art
“has a sacramental function and is, like religion itself, at once truth
and presence…” Nasr understands that art transmits knowledge and grace
because men and women serve as artistic creators that create art through
the revelation of divine inspiration.

Chapter 9*Principal Knowledge and the Multiplicity of Sacred Forms*
explores how the various religions of the world relate to each other
through the concept of “sacred forms.” Historically religions have
conflicted with each other rather than compliment one another. Nasr
seeks to articulate how the common and unique elements of various faith
traditions can be understood to relate to each other in complimentary
ways. “Each revelation is in fact the manifestation of an archetype
which represents some aspect of the Divine Nature.” He explains,
“although one religion may emphasize love, another knowledge, one mercy
and the other self-sacrifice, all the major elements of religion must in
one way or another manifest themselves

in an integral tradition.” Understanding how various religions each
contain truth and seek knowledge of the Divine while at the same time
acknowledging the differences among faiths allows people of various
religious communities to firmly advocate their own doctrinal truths
while respecting the teachings and traditions of others.

In the final chapter,*Knowledge of the Sacred as Deliverance* , Nasr
discusses how knowledge of the sacred leads to freedom and deliverance
from bondage and limitation. By overcoming ignorance and understanding
our role within history and within the cosmos men and women gain
knowledge of the sacred. “The goal of sacred knowledge is deliverance
and union, its instrument the whole being of man and its meaning the
fulfillment of the end for which man and in fact the cosmos were
created.” Nasr explains, “Through this sacred knowledge man becomes
aware of the purpose for which he was created and gains that illimitable
spiritual freedom and liberation which alone is worthy of man if only he
were to realize who he is.”

**Heather McDivitt, University of Edinburgh**


