Chapter Eight: Traditional Art as Fountain of Knowledge and Grace
=================================================================

*Law and art are the children of the Intellect.*

**Plato, LAWS**

*Beauty absolutely is the cause of all things being in harmony
(consonantia) and of illumination (claritas); because, moreover, in the
likeness of light it sends forth to everything the beautifying
distributives of its over fontal raying; and for that it summons all
things to itself.*

**Dionysius the Areopagite, DE DIVINIS NOMINIBUS**

Tradition speaks to man not only through human words but also through
other forms of art. Its message is written not only upon pages of books
and within the grand phenomena of nature but also upon the face of those
works of traditional and especially sacred art which, like the words of
sacred scripture and the forms of nature, are ultimately a revelation
from that Reality which is the source of both tradition and the cosmos.
Traditional art is inseparable from sacred knowledge because it is based
upon a science of the cosmic which is of a sacred and inward character
and in turn is the vehicle for the transmission of a knowledge which is
of a sacred nature. Traditional art is at once based upon and is a
channel for both knowledge and grace or that scientia sacra which is
both knowledge and of a sacred character. Sacred art which lies at the
heart of traditional art has a sacramental function and is, like
religion itself, at once truth and presence, and this quality is
transmitted even to those aspects of traditional art which are not
strictly speaking sacred art, that is, are not directly concerned with
the liturgical, ritual, cultic, and esoteric elements of the tradition
in question but which nevertheless are created according to traditional
norms and principles.1

To understand how traditional art is related to knowledge of the sacred
and sacred knowledge, it is necessary first of all to clarify what is
meant by traditional art. Since we have already identified religion with
that which binds man to God and which lies at the heart of tradition, it
might be thought that traditional art is simply religious art. This is
not at all the case, however, especially since in the West from the
Renaissance onward, traditional art has ceased to exist while religious
art continues. Religious art is considered religious because of the
subject or function with which it is concerned and not because of its
style, manner of execution, symbolism, and nonindividual origin.
Traditional art, however, is traditional not because of its subject
matter but because of its conformity to cosmic laws of forms, to the
laws of symbolism, to the formal genius of the particular spiritual
universe in which it has been created, its hieratic style, its
conformity to the nature of the material used, and, finally, its
conformity to the truth within the particular domain of reality with
which it is concerned.2 A naturalistic painting of Christ is religious
art but not at all traditional art whereas a medieval sword, book cover,
or even stable is traditional art but not directly religious art
although, because of the nature of tradition, indirectly even pots and
pans produced in a traditional civilization are related to the religion
which lies at the heart of that tradition.3

Traditional art is concerned with the truths contained in the tradition
of which it is the artistic and formal expression. Its origin therefore
is not purely human. Moreover, this art must conform to the symbolism
inherent in the object with which it is concerned as well as the
symbolism directly related to the revelation whose inner dimension this
art manifests. Such an art is aware of the essential nature of things
rather than their accidental aspects. It is in conformity with the
harmony which pervades the cosmos and the hierarchy of existence which
lies above the material plane with which art deals, and yet penetrates
into this plane. Such an art is based on the real and not the illusory
so that it remains conformable to the nature of the object with which it
is concerned rather than imposing a subjective and illusory veil upon
it.

Traditional art, moreover, is functional in the most profound sense of
this term, namely, that it is made for a particular use whether it be
the worshiping of God in a liturgical act or the eating of a meal. It
is, therefore, utilitarian but not with the limited meaning of utility
identified with purely earthly man in mind. Its utility concerns
pontifical man for whom beauty is as essential a dimension of life and a
need as the house that shelters man during the winter cold. There is no
place here for such an idea as “art for art's sake,” and traditional
civilizations have never had museums nor ever produced a work of art
just for itself.4 Traditional art might be said to be based on the idea
of art for man's sake, which, in the traditional context where man is
God's vicegerent on earth, the axial being on this plane of reality,
means ultimately art for God's sake, for to make something for man as a
theomorphic being is to make it for God. In traditional art there is a
blending of beauty and utility which makes of every object of
traditional art, provided it belongs to a thriving traditional
civilization not in the stage of decay, something at once useful and
beautiful.

It is through its art that tradition forges and forms an ambience in
which its truths are reflected everywhere, in which men breathe and live
in a universe of meaning in conformity with the reality of the tradition
in question. That is why, in nearly every case of which we have a
historical record, the tradition has created and formalized its sacred
art before elaborating its theologies and philosophies. Saint Augustine
appears long after the sarcophagus art of the catacombs which marks the
beginning of Christian art, as Buddhist architecture and sculpture came
long before Nāgarjuna. Even in Islam, which developed its theological
and philosophical schools rapidly, even the early Mu‘tazilites, not to
speak of the Ash‘arites or al-Kindī and the earliest Islamic
philosophers, follow upon the wake of the construction of the first
Islamic mosques which were already distinctly Islamic in character. In
order to breathe and function in a world, religion must remold that
world not only mentally but also formally; and since most human beings
are much more receptive to material forms than to ideas and material
forms leave the deepest effect upon the human soul even beyond the
mental plane, it is the traditional art which is first created by the
tradition in question. This is especially true of sacred art which
exists already at the beginning of the tradition for it is related to
those liturgical and cultic practices which emanate directly from the
revelation.

Therefore, the first icon is painted by Saint Luke through the
inspiration of the angel, the traditional chanting of the Vedas is
“revealed” with the Vedas, the Quranic psalmody originates with the
Prophet himself, etc. The role of traditional art in the forging of a
particular mentality and the creation of an atmosphere in which
contemplation of the most profound metaphysical truths is made possible
are fundamental to the understanding of both the character of
traditional art and the sapiential dimension of tradition itself.

From this point of view art is seen as a veil that hides but also
reveals God. There are always within every tradition those who have
belittled the significance of forms of art in that they have gone beyond
them, but this has always been in a world in which these forms have
existed, not where they have been cast aside and destroyed. Those who
have eschewed forms of art have been certain types of contemplatives who
have realized the supraformal realities, those who, to use the language
of Sufism, having broken the nutshell and eaten the nut inside, cast the
shell aside. But obviously one cannot throw away a shell that one does
not even possess. To go beyond forms is one thing and to fall below them
another. To pierce beyond the phenomenal surface to the noumenal
reality, hence to see God through forms and not forms as veils of the
Divine is one thing and to reject forms of traditional art in the name
of an imagined abstract reality above formalism is quite another. Sacred
knowledge in contrast to desacralized mental activity is concerned with
the supraformal Essence but is perfectly aware of the vital significance
of forms in the attainment of the knowledge of that Essence. This
knowledge even when speaking of the Supreme Reality above all forms does
so in a chant which is in conformity with the laws of cosmic harmony and
in a language which, whether prose or poetry, is itself an art form.5
That is why the possessor of such a knowledge in its realized aspect is
the first person to confirm the significance of forms of traditional art
and the relation of this art to the truth and the sacred; for art
reflects the truth to the extent that it is sacred, and it emanates the
presence of the sacred to the extent that it is true.

It is of course pontifical or traditional man who is the maker of
traditional art; therefore, his theomorphic nature is directly related
to this art and its significance. Being a theomorphic creature, man is
himself a work of art. The human soul when purified and dressed in the
garment of spiritual virtues6 is itself the highest kind of beauty in
this world, reflecting directly the Divine Beauty. Even the human body
in both its male and female forms is a perfect work of art, reflecting
something of the essentiality of the human state. Moreover, there is no
more striking reflection of Divine Beauty on earth than a human face in
which physical and spiritual beauty are combined. Now man is a work of
art because God is the Supreme Artist. That is why He is called
al-muṣawwir in Islam, that is, He who creates forms,7 why Śiva brought
the arts down from Heaven, why in the medieval craft initiations, as in
Freemasonry, God is called the Grand Architect of the Universe. But God
is not only the Grand Architect or Geometer; He is also the Poet, the
Painter, the Musician, This is the reason for man's ability to build,
write poetry, paint, or compose music, although not all forms of art
have been necessarily cultivated in all traditions-the types of art
developed

depending upon the spiritual and also ethnic genius of a traditional
world and humanity.

Being “created in the image of God” and therefore a supreme work of art,
man is also an artist who, in imitating the creative powers of his
Maker, realizes his own theomorphic nature. The spiritual man, aware of
his vocation, is not only the musician who plucks the lyre to create
music. He is himself the lyre upon which the Divine Artist plays,
creating the music which reverberates throughout the cosmos, for as Rūmī
says, “We are like the lyre which thou plucketh.”8 If Promethean man
creates art not in imitation but in competition with God, hence the
naturalism in Promethean art which tries to imitate the outward form of
nature, pontifical man creates art in full consciousness of his
imitating God's creativity through not competition with but submission
to the Divine Model which tradition provides for him. He therefore
imitates nature not in its external forms but in its manner of operation
as asserted so categorically by Saint Thomas. If in knowing God man
fulfills his essential nature as homo sapiens, in creating art he also
fulfills another aspect of that nature as homo faber. In creating art in
conformity with cosmic laws and in imitation of realities of the
archetypal world, man realizes himself, his theomorphic nature as a work
of art made by the hands of God; and likewise in creating an art based
on his revolt against Heaven, he separates himself even further from his
own Divine Origin. The role of art in the fall of Promethean man in the
modern world has been central in that this art has been both an index of
the new stages of the inner fall of man from his sacred norm and a major
element in the actualization of this fall, for man comes to identify
himself with what he makes.

It is not at all accidental that the break up of the unity of the
Christian tradition in the West coincided with the rise of the
Reformation. Nor is it accidental that the philosophical and scientific
revolts against the medieval Christian world view were contemporary with
the nearly complete destruction of traditional Christian art and its
replacement by a Promethean and humanistic art which soon decayed into
that unintelligible nightmare of baroque and rococo religious art that
drove many an intelligent believer out of the church. The same
phenomenon can be observed in ancient Greece and the modern Orient. When
the sapiential dimension of the Greek tradition began to decay, Greek
art became humanistic and this-worldly, the art which is already
criticized by Plato who held the sacerdotal, traditional art of ancient
Egypt in such high esteem. Likewise, in the modern East, intellectual
decline has everywhere been accompanied by artistic decline. Conversely,
wherever one does observe major artistic creations of a traditional
character, there must be a living intellectual and sapiential tradition
present even if nothing is known of it externally. Even if at least
until very recently the West knew nothing of the intellectual life of
Safavid Persia,9 one could be sure that the creation of even one dome
like that of the Shaykh Luṭfallāh mosque or the Shāh mosque, which are
among the greatest masterpieces of traditional art and architecture,
would be itself proof that such an intellectual life existed at that
time. A living orthodox tradition with its sapiential dimension intact
is essential and necessary for the production

of major works of traditional art, especially sacred art, because of
that inner nexus which exists between traditional art and sacred
knowledge.

Traditional art is brought into being through such a knowledge and is
able to convey and transmit this knowledge. It is the vehicle of an
intellectual intuition and a sapiential message which transcends both
the individual artist and the collective psyche of the world to which he
belongs. On the contrary, humanistic art is able to convey only
individualistic inspirations or at best something of the collective
psyche to which the individual artist belongs but never an intellectual
message, the sapience which is our concern. It can never become the
fountain of either knowledge or grace because of its divorce from those
cosmic laws and the spiritual presence which characterize traditional
art.

Knowledge is transmitted by traditional art through its symbolism, its
correspondence with cosmic laws, its techniques, and even the means
whereby it is taught through the traditional craft guilds which in
various traditional civilizations have combined technical training in
the crafts with spiritual instruction. The presence of the medieval
European guilds,10 the Islamic guilds (aṣnāf and fuṭuwwāt), some of
which survive to this day,11 the training of potters by Zen masters,12
or of metallurgists in initiatic circles in certain primitive
societies,13 all indicate the close nexus that has existed between the
teaching of the techniques of the traditional arts or crafts, which are
the same as the arts in a traditional world, and the transmission of
knowledge of a cosmological and sometimes metaphysical order.

But in addition to these processes for the transmission of knowledge
related to the actual act of creating a work or of explaining the
symbolism involved, there is an innate rapport between artistic creation
in the traditional sense and sapience. This rapport is based on the
nature of man himself as the reflection of the Divine Norm, and also on
the inversion which exists between the principial and the manifested
order. Man and the world in which he lives both reflect the archetypal
world directly and inversely according to the well-known principle of
inverse analogy. In the principial order God creates by externalizing.
His “artistic” activity is the fashioning of His own “image” or “form.”
On the human plane this relation is reversed in that man's “artistic”
activity in the traditional sense involves not the fashioning of an
image in the cosmogonic sense but a return to his own essence in
conformity with the nature of the state of being in which he lives.
Therefore, the “art” of God implies an externalization and the art of
man an internalization. God fashions what God makes and man is fashioned
by what man makes;14 and since this process implies a return to man's
own essence, it is inalienably related to spiritual realization and the
attainment of knowledge. In a sense, Promethean art is based on the
neglect of this principle of inverse analogy. It seeks to create the
image of Promethean man outwardly, as if man were God. Hence, the very
“creative process” becomes not a means of interiorization and
recollection but a further separation from the Source leading step by
step to the mutilation of the image of man as imago Dei, to the world of
subrealism-rather than surrealism-and to purely individualistic
subjectivism. This subjectivism is as far removed from the theomorphic
image of man as possible; the art it creates cannot in any way

act as a vehicle for the transmission of knowledge or grace, although
certain cosmic qualities occasionally manifest themselves even in the
nontraditional forms of art, since these qualities are like the rays of
the sun which finally shine through some crack or opening no matter how
much one tries to shut one's living space from the illumination of the
light of that Sun which is both light and heat, knowledge, love and
grace.15

To understand the meaning of traditional art in its relation to
knowledge, it is essential to grasp fully the significance of the
meaning of form as used in the traditional context (as forma, morphē,
nāma, ṣūrah, etc.). In modern thought dominated by a quantitative
science, the significance of form as that which contains the reality of
an object has been nearly lost. It is therefore necessary to recall the
traditional meaning of form and remember the attempts made by not only
traditional authors but also certain contemporary philosophers and
scholars to bring out the ontological significance of form.16 According
to the profound doctrine of Aristotelian hylomorphism, which serves so
well for the exposition of the metaphysics of art because it originated
most likely as an intellectual intuition related to traditional art, an
object is composed of form and matter in such a way that the form
corresponds to that which is actual and matter to what is potential in
the object in question. Form is that by which an object is what it is.
Form is not accidental to the object but determines its very reality. It
is in fact the essence of the object which the more metaphysical
Neoplatonic commentators of Aristotle interpreted as the image or
reflection of the essence rather than the essence itself, the essence
belonging to the archetypal world. In any case, form is not accidental
but essential to an object whether it be natural or man-made. It has an
ontological reality and participates in the total economy of the cosmos
according to strict laws. There is a science of forms, a science of a
qualitative and not quantitative nature, which is nevertheless an exact
science, or objective knowledge, exactitude not being the prerogative of
the quantitative sciences alone.

From the point of view of hylomorphism, form is the reality of an object
on the material level of existence. But it is also, as the reflection of
an archetypal reality, the gate which opens inwardly and “upwardly” unto
the formless Essence. From another point of view, one can say that each
object possesses a form and a content which this form “contains” and
conveys. As far as sacred art is concerned, this content is always the
sacred or a sacred presence placed in particular forms by revelation
which sanctifies certain symbols, forms, and images to enable them to
become “containers” of this sacred presence and transforms them into
vehicles for the journey across the stream of becoming. Moreover, thanks
to those sacred forms which man is able to transcend from within, man is
able to penetrate into the inner dimension of his own being and, by
virtue of that process, to gain a vision of the inner dimension of all
forms. The three grand revelations of the Real, or theophanies, namely,
the cosmos or macrocosm, man or the microcosm, and religion, are all
comprised of forms which lead to the formless, but only the third
enables man to penetrate to the world beyond forms, to gain a vision of
forms of both the outer world and his own soul, not as veil but as
theophany. Only the sacred forms invested with the transforming power of
the sacred

through revelation and the Logos which is its instrument can enable man
to see God everywhere.

Since man lives in the world of forms, this direct manifestation of the
Logos which is revelation or religion in its origin cannot but make use
of forms within which man is located. It cannot but sanctify certain
forms in order to allow man to journey beyond them. To reach the
formless man has need of forms, The miracle of the sacred form lies in
fact in its power to aid man to transcend form itself. Traditional art
is present not only to remind man of the truths of religion which it
reflects in man's fundamental activity of making, as religious ethics or
religious law does for man's doing, but also to serve as a support for
the contemplation of the Beyond which alone gives ultimate significance
to both man's making and man's doing. To denigrate forms as understood
in traditional metaphysics is to misunderstand, by token of the same
error, the significance of the formless Essence.

At the root of this error which mistakes form for limitation and
considers “thought” or “idea” in its mental sense as being more
important than form is the abuse of the terms abstract and concrete in
modern thought.17 Modern man, having lost the vision of the Platonic
“ideas,” confuses the concrete reality of what scientia sacra considers
as idea with mental concept and then relegates the concrete to the
material level. As a result, the physical and the material are
automatically associated with the concrete, while ideas, thoughts, and
all that is universal, including even the Divinity, are associated with
the abstract. Metaphysically, the rapport is just the reverse. God is
the concrete Reality par excellence compared to Whom everything else is
an abstraction; and on a lower level the archetypal world is concrete
and the world below it abstract. The same relation continues until one
reaches the world of physical existence in which form is, relatively
speaking, concrete and matter the most abstract entity of all.

The identification of material objects with the concrete and mental
concepts with the abstract has had the effect of not only destroying the
significance of form vis-à-vis matter on the physical plane itself but
also obliterating the significance of the bodily and the corporeal as a
source of knowledge. This tendency seems to be the reverse of the
process of exteriorization and materialization of knowledge, but it is
in reality the other side of the same coin. The same civilization that
has produced the most materialistic type of thought has also shown the
least amount of interest in the “wisdom of the body,” in physical forms
as a source of knowledge, and in the noncerebral aspects of the human
microcosm as a whole. As mentioned already, those within the modern
world who have sought to regain knowledge of a sacred order have been
also those who have protested most vehemently against this overcerebral
interpretation of human experience and who have sought to rediscover the
“wisdom of the body,” even if this has led in many cases to all kinds of
excesses. One does not have to possess extraordinary perspicacity to
realize that there is much more intelligence and in fact “food for
thought” in the drumbeats of a traditional tribe in Africa than in many
a book of modern philosophy. Nor is there any reason why a Chinese
landscape painting should not bear a more direct and succinct
metaphysical message than not only a philosophical treatise which

is antimetaphysical but even one which favors metaphysics, but in which,
as a result of a weakness of logic or presentation, the truth of
metaphysical ideas is bearly discernible.

The consequence of this inversion of the rapport between the abstract
and the concrete has in any case been a major impediment in the
appreciation of the significance of forms in both the traditional arts
and sciences and the understanding of the possibility of forms of art as
vehicles for knowledge of the highest order. This mentality has also
prevented many people from appreciating the traditional doctrines of art
and the nonhuman and celestial origin of the forms with which
traditional art is concerned.

According to the principles of traditional art, the source of the forms
which are dealt with by the artist is ultimately divine. As Plato, who
along with Plotinus has provided some of the most profound teachings on
traditional art in the West, asserts, art is the imitation of paradigms
which, whether visible or invisible, reflect ultimately the world of
ideas.18 At the heart of tradition lies the doctrine that art is the
nemesis of paradeigma, the invisible model or exemplar. But to produce a
work of art which possesses beauty and perfection the artist must gaze
at the invisible for as Plato says, “The work of the creator, whenever
he looks to the unchangeable and fashions the form and nature of his
work after an unchangeable partem, must necessarily be made fair and
perfect, but when he looks to the created order only, and uses a created
pattern, it is not fair or perfect.”19

Likewise in India, the origin of the form later externalized by the
artist in stone or bronze, on wood or paper, has always been considered
to be of a supraindividual origin belonging to the level of reality
which Platonism identified with the world of ideas. The appropriate art
form is considered to be accessible only through contemplation and inner
purification. It is only through them that the artist is able to gain
that angelic vision which is the source of all traditional art for at
the beginning of the tradition the first works of sacred art, including
both the plastic and the sonoral, were made by the angels or devas
themselves. In the well-known Śukranītisāra of Śukrācarya, for example,
it is stated, “One should make use of the visual-formulae proper to the
angels whose images are to be made. It is for the successful
accomplishment of this practice (yoga) of visual-formulation that the
lineaments of images are prescribed. The human-imager should be expert
in this visual-contemplation, since thus, and in no other way, and
verily not by direct observation, [can the end be achieved].”20

The same type of teachings can be found in all traditions which have
produced a sacred art. If the origin of the forms used by this art were
not “celestial,” how could an Indian statue convey the very principle of
life from within? How could we look at an icon and experience ourselves
being looked upon by the gaze of eternity? How could a Chinese or
Japanese butterfly capture the very essence of the state of being a
butterfly? How could Islamic ornamentation reveal on the physical plane
the splendor of the mathematical world considered not as abstraction but
as concrete archetypal reality? How could one stand at the portal of the
Chartres Cathedral and experience standing in the center of the cosmic
order if the makers of that

cathedral had not had a vision of that center from whose perspective
they built the cathedral? Anyone who grasps the significance of
traditional art will understand that the origin of the forms with which
this art deals is nothing other than that immutable world of the
essences or ideas which are also the source of our thoughts and
knowledge. That is why the loss of sacred knowledge or gnosis and the
ability to think anagogically-not only analogically-goes hand in hand
with the destruction of traditional art and its hieratic formal style.21

The origin of forms in traditional art can perhaps be better understood
if the production of works of art is compared to the constitution of
natural objects. According to the Peripatetic philosophies of the
medieval period, whether Islamic, Judaic, or Christian, and following
Aristotle and his Neoplatonic commentators, objects are composed of form
and matter which in the sublunar region undergo constant change. Hence
this world is called that of generation and corruption. Whenever a new
object comes into being the old form “returns” to the Tenth Intellect,
which is called the “Giver of forms” (wahib al-ṣuwar in Arabic), and a
new form is cast by this Intellect upon the matter in question.22
Therefore, the origin of forms in the natural world is the Intellect.
Now, the form of art must be conceived in the same way as far as
traditional art is concerned. The source of these forms is the Intellect
which illuminates the mind of the artist or the original artist who is
emulated by members of a particular school; the artist in turn imposes
the form upon the matter in question, matter here being not the
philosophical hylē the material in question, whether it be stone, wood,
or anything else which is being fashioned.; In this way the artist
imitates the operation of nature23 rather than her external forms.

Moreover, the form which is wed with matter and the form which is the
“idea” in the mind of the artist are from the same origin and of the
same nature except on different levels of existence. The Greek eidos
expresses this doctrine of correspondence perfectly since it means at
once form and idea whose origin is ultimately the Logos.

Traditional art, therefore, is concerned with both knowledge and the
sacred. It is concerned with the sacred in as much as it is from the
domain of the sacred that issue both the tradition itself and the forms
and styles which define the formal homogeneity of a particular
traditional world.24

It is also concerned with knowledge in as much as man must know the
manner of operation of nature before being able to imitate it. The
traditional artist, whether he possesses direct knowledge of those
cosmic laws and principles which determine that “manner of operation” or
has simply an indirect knowledge which he has received through
transmission, needs such a knowledge of a purely intellectual nature
which only tradition can provide. Traditional art is essentially a
science just as traditional science is an art. The ars sine scientia
nihil of Saint Thomas holds true for all traditions and the scientia in
question here is none other than the scientia sacra and its cosmological
applications.

Anyone who has studied traditional art becomes aware of the presence of
an impressive amount of science which makes such an art possible. Some
of this science is of a technical character which nevertheless remains
both

amazing and mysterious. When one asks how Muslim or Byzantine architects
created the domes they did create with the endurance that they have had,
or how such perfect acoustics were developed in certain Greek
amphitheatres or cathedrals, or how the various angles of the pyramids
were made to correlate so exactly with astronomical configurations, or
how to build a shaking minaret in Isfahan which goes into sympathetic
vibration when the minaret next to it is shaken, one is already facing
knowledge of an extraordinary complexity which should at least remove
those who possessed it from the ranks of naive simpletons. Even on this
level, however, despite all the attempts at “demystification” by
positivist historians of art or science, there are amazing questions
which remain unanswered. The basic one is that these feats, even if they
were to be repeated today, could only be done according to physical laws
and discoveries which belong to the past two or three centuries and, as
far as we know, simply were not known when these structures were
constructed. This fact taken in itself implies that there must be other
sciences of nature upon which one can build monuments of outstanding
durability and remarkable quality. This would also hold for the
preparation of dyes whose colors are dazzling to the eye and which
cannot be reproduced today, or steel blades, the knowledge of whose
metallurgical processes has been lost.

But these are not the only sciences we have in mind. The scientia
without which art would be nothing is not just another kind of physics
which we happen to have forgotten. It is a science of cosmic harmony, of
correspondences, of the multidimensional reality of forms, of sympathy
between earthly forms and celestial influences, of the rapport between
colors, orientations, configurations, shapes, and also sounds and smells
and the soul of man. It is a science which differs from modern science
not only in its approach and method but in its nature. Yet it is a
science, essentially a sacred science accessible only in the cadre of
tradition which alone enables the intellect in its human reflection to
realize its full potentialities.25 The difference between this science
and modern science is that this science cannot be attained save through
intellectual intuition, which in turn requires a certain nobility of
character and the acquiring of virtues which are inseparable from
knowledge in the traditional context as attested to by the very manner
in which both the traditional arts and sciences are taught by the master
to the disciple. There are of course exceptions but that is only because
the “Spirit bloweth where it listeth.”

The scientia with which art is concerned is therefore related to the
esoteric dimension of tradition and not the exoteric. As man is a being
who acts and makes things, religion must provide principles and norms
for both the world of moral action and the activity of making. Usually
exoterism is concerned with that world in which man must act for the
good and against evil, but it is not concerned with those principles and
norms which govern the correct making of things. These principles cannot
but issue from the inner or esoteric dimension of the tradition. That is
why the most profound expositions of the meaning of Christian art are
found in the writings of such a figure as Meister Eckhart26 or the
masters of apophatic and mystical theology in the Orthodox Church.27
That is why also Western Islamicists

and historians of art have had such difficulty in finding sources for
the Islamic philosophy, or rather metaphysics, of art while they have
been searching in treatises of theology and jurisprudence. Besides the
oral tradition which still continues in some parts of the Islamic world,
as far as certain cosmological principles pertaining to art are
concerned, the written sources do also exist, except that they are not
usually seen for what they are. The most profound explanation of the
significance of Islamic art is to be found in a work such as the
Mathnawī of Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī and not in books of either jurisprudence
or kalām which, although very important, concern man's actions and
religious beliefs rather than the principles of an interiorizing art
which leads man back to the One. There are also treatises of an “occult”
nature concerning those arts which can be comprehended only in the light
of esoterism.28

Likewise, in Japan it is Zen which has produced the greatest
masterpieces of Japanese art, from rock gardens to screen paintings,
while those Sung paintings which are among the greatest masterpieces of
world art are products of Taoism and not the social aspect of the
Chinese tradition associated with Confucian ethics. As Wang Yu, the
Chi'ing painter said, “Although painting is only one of the fine arts,
it contains the Tao.”29 All art has its Tao, its principle which is
related to the principles which dominate the cosmos, while painting
being the traditional art par excellence in China manifests the Tao most
directly. To paint according to the Tao is not to emulate the outward
but the inner principles of things; hence again, the science with the
aid of which the Chinese painter captures the very essence of natural
forms is by definition related to the esoteric dimension of the
tradition. The fruit and application of such an inward science of the
cosmos is the Sung painting, the Hindu temple, the mosque or cathedral
or all the other masterpieces of traditional art which are immersed in a
beauty of celestial origin, while the application of an outward and
externalized science of nature which rebelled against the Christian
tradition once its esoteric dimension was eclipsed is the subway and the
skyscraper. Even when there is some element of beauty in the works
produced as a result of the applications of such a science, it is of a
fragmented nature and manifests itself only here and there because
beauty is an aspect of reality and cannot but manifest itself whenever
and wherever there is something which possesses a degree of reality.

There is, however, another basic reason why art which deals with the
material plane is related to the esoteric or most inward dimension of
tradition. According to the well-known Hermetic saying, “that which is
lowest symbolizes that which is highest,” material existence which is
the lowest level symbolizes and reflects the Intellect or the archetypal
essences which represent the highest level. Through this fundamental
cosmological law upon which the science of symbols is based, material
form reflects the Intellect in a more direct manner than the subtle
level or the pysche which is ontologically higher but which does not
reflect the highest level as directly. In various traditions it is
taught that the revelation descends not only into the mind and soul but
also into the body of the prophet or founder, not to speak of traditions
in which the founder as incarnation or avatār is himself the

message. In this case the avatār saves not only through his words and
thoughts but also through the beauty of his body which, in the case of
Buddhism, is the origin of the whole of Buddhist iconography. In
Christianity also it is the blood and body of Christ that is consumed in
the Eucharist and not his thoughts, which means that the revelation
penetrated into his bodily form.

Even in Islam where the message is clearly distinguished from the
messenger, traditional sources teach that the revelation did not only
enter the mind but also the body of the Prophet to the extent that, when
he received the revelation on horseback, his horse could hardly support
the weight and would buckle under it. Also the night of the descent of
the Quranic revelation, called “The Night of Power” (laylat al-qadr), is
associated with the very body of the Prophet while his nocturnal ascent
to Heaven (al-mi‘rāj) is also considered to have been bodily (al-mi‘rāj
al-jismānī) according to all traditional sources. All of these instances
point to the fact, fundamental for the understanding of traditional art,
that the material is the direct reflection of the highest level which is
the spiritual and not the intermediate psychic state and that art,
although concerned with the most outward plane of existence which is the
material, is related by token of this very principle of inversion to
what is most inward in a tradition. That is why a canvas as icon can
become the locus of Divine Presence and support for the contemplation of
the formless; why the mantle of the Holy Virgin performs miracles and
attracts pilgrims for centuries; why the face of the earthly beloved is
the perfect mirror wherein is reflected the face of that Beloved who is
above all form; why man can bow before a symbol of a material nature
which has become the locus for the manifestation of an angelic or divine
influence. It is also why traditional art and its principles are related
to the esoteric and inward dimension of tradition and why it is through
traditional art that the esoteric manifests itself upon the plane of the
collectivity and makes possible an equilibrium which the exoteric alone
could not maintain. It is through the channel of traditional art that a
knowledge of a sacred character manifests itself, outwardly cloaked in
the dress of beauty which attracts the sensibility of even those who are
not able to understand its tenets intellectually, while providing an
indispensible spiritual climate and contemplative support for those who
do understand its veridical message and whose vocation is to follow the
sapiential path.

Traditional art is of course concerned with beauty which, far from being
a luxury or a subjective state, is inseparable from reality and is
related to the inner dimension of the Real as such. As stated earlier,
scientia sacra sees the Ultimate Reality as the Absolute, the Infinite
and Perfection or Goodness. Beauty is related to all these hypostases of
the Real. It reflects absoluteness in its regularity and order, infinity
in its sense of inwardness and mystery, and demands perfection. A
masterpiece of traditional art is at once perfect, orderly, and
mysterious.30 It reflects the perfection and goodness of the Source, the
harmony and order which are also reflected in the cosmos and which are
the imprint of the absoluteness of the Principle in manifestation and
the mystery and inwardness which open unto the Divine Infinitude Itself.
In the sapiential dimension, it is this interiorizing power of beauty

that is emphasized and God is seen especially in His inward “dimension”
which is beauty. That is why that great masterpiece of Orthodox
spirituality is entitled Philokalia or love of beauty and the famous
ḥadīth asserts “God is beautiful and loves beauty.”31

Intelligence which is the instrument and also primary concern of the
sapiential path cannot be separated from beauty. Ugliness is also
unintelligibility. The illuminated human intellect cannot but be
intertwined with that beauty which removes from things their opacity and
enables them to shine forth as transparent images and reflections which
reveal rather than veil the archetypal realities that are the concern of
the intellect, the Logos or Divine Intellect which is the source of the
human intellect, being itself both order and mystery and in a sense, the
beauty of God. That is why beauty satisfies the human intelligence and
provides it with certitude and protection from doubt. There is no
skepticism in beauty. The rays of its splendor evaporate all shadows of
doubt and the wavering of the uncertain mind. Beauty bestows upon
intelligence that highest gift which is certitude. It also melts the
hardness of the human soul and brings about the taste of that union
which is the fruit of gnosis. The knowledge of the sacred cannot
therefore be separated from beauty. Beauty is of course both moral and
intellectual. That is why man must possess moral beauty in order to be
able to benefit fully from the sacramental function of intelligence. But
once the moral conditions are present and beauty becomes a divine
attraction rather than seduction, it is able to communicate something of
the Center in the periphery, of the Substance in accidents, of the
formless Essence in forms.32 In this sense beauty not only transmits
knowledge but is inseparable from knowledge of the sacred and sacred
knowledge.

Beauty attracts because it is true, for as Plato said, beauty is the
splendor of truth. Since beauty is ultimately related to the Infinite,
it accompanies that emanation and irradiation of the Real which
constitute the levels of existence down to the earthly. As māyā is the
shakti of Ātman, beauty as the Divine māyā or Divine Femininity may be
said to be the consort of the Real and the aura of the Absolute. All
manifestations of the Ultimate Reality are accompanied by this aura
which is beauty. One cannot speak of reality in the metaphysical sense
without this splendor and radiance which surround it like a halo and
which constitute beauty itself. That is why creation is overwhelmingly
beautiful. Being and its irradiation as existence cannot but be
beautiful, for ugliness, like evil,33 is nothing but the manifestation
of a relative nothingness. In the same way that goodness is more real
than evil, beauty is more real than ugliness. If one meditates on the
beauty of the vast heavens on a starry night and the inexhaustible
beauty of the earth during a shining day, one realizes how limited is
the domain of ugliness in relation to that beauty, how petty are the
ugly monstrosities of human invention through the productions of the
machine in comparison with the grandeur of the beauty of the cosmic
order, not to speak of the transcendent beauty of the Divine Order, a
glimpse of which is occasionally afforded to mortal men on those rare
occasions when the beauty of a human face, a natural scene, or a work of
sacred art leaves an indelible mark upon the human soul for the whole of
life and melts the hard shell of the human ego. That is why beauty

seen in the sapiential perspective, which always envisages beauty in its
rapport with God, is a sacrament that elevates man to the realm of the
sacred.

*Oh Lord thou knowest that even now and again*

*We never gazed except at Thy beautiful Face.*

*The beauties of this world are all mirrors of Thy Beauty*

*In these mirrors we only saw the Face of the King.34*

AWHAD AL-DĪN KIRMĀNĪ

It is in the nature of beauty to attract spiritual presence to itself
or, in the language of Neoplatonists, to receive the participation of
the World Soul. From the gnostic point of view, the earthly function of
beauty is therefore to guide man back to the source of this earthly
beauty, that is, back to the principial domain. Beautiful forms are an
occasion for the recollection of the essences in the Platonic sense.35
They are means of remembrance (anamnēsis) of what man is and the
celestial abode from which he has descended and which he carries still
within the depth of his being. In this sense, beauty is the means of
gaining knowledge; for certain human beings particularly sensitive to
beauty, the central means. That is why some of the masters of the
sapiential path have gone so far as to assert that a beautiful melody or
poem or for that matter any creation of traditional art can crystallize
a state of contemplation and bring about a degree of intuitive knowledge
in a single moment that would be impossible to even conceive through
long periods of study, provided of course the person in question has
already purified his soul and clothed it with the beauty of spiritual
virtues so as to be qualified for the appreciation of earthly beauty as
the reflection of celestial beauty. That is why traditional art is a
source of knowledge and grace. It makes possible a return to the world
of archetypes and the paradisal abode which is the source of both
principial knowledge and the sacred, for beauty is the reflection of the
Immutable in the stream of becoming.

Consider creation as pure and crystalline water

In which is reflected the Beauty of the Possessor of Majesty

Although the water of this stream continues to flow

The image of the moon and the stars remain reflected in it.36

RŪMĪ

The power of beauty to carry man upon its wing to the world of the
essences and toward the embrace of union with the Beloved is
particularly strong in those arts which are concerned with sonority and
movement, arts which for that reason are also the most dangerous for
those not qualified to bear the powerful attraction which they wield
upon the human soul. Such arts as music and dance, which are connected
with sound and movement, are like wine that can both inebriate in the
spiritual sense of removing the veil of separative consciousness and
cause the loss of even normal consciousness and bring about a further
fall toward negligence and forgetfulness. That is why in Islam wine is
forbidden in this world and reserved for paradise, while music and
dancing are confined to Sufism or the esoteric dimension of the
tradition, where they play an important role in the operative aspect of
the path.

*In memory of the banquet of union with Him, in yearning for His Beauty*

*They have fallen inebriated from the wine which Thou knowest.37*

RŪMĪ

Traditional music has a cosmological foundation and reflects the
structure of manifested reality. It commences from silence, the
unmanifested Reality and returns to silence. The musical work itself is
like the cosmos which issues from the One and returns to the One, except
that in music the tissues out of which the world is woven are sounds
that echo the primordial silence and reflect the harmony that
characterizes all that the absolute and infinite Reality manifests.38
Music is not only the first art brought by Śiva into the world, the art
through which the asrār-i alast or the mystery of the primordial
covenant between man and God in that preeternal dawn of the day of
cosmic manifestation is revealed;39 but it is also the key to the
understanding of the harmony that pervades the cosmos. It is the
handmaid of wisdom itself.40 Moreover, as described in a well-known
Muslim popular tale, the soul of Adam was wooed into the temple of the
body through the melody of a simple two-stringed instrument,41 and it is
through music that the soul is able to flee again from the prison of its
earthly confinement. The gnostic hears in music the melodies of the
paradise whose ecstasies the music brings about once again. That is why
music is like the mystical wine. It cures body and soul, but above all
it enables the contemplative to recollect the supernal realities which
lie within the root of the very substance of the human soul. Traditional
music is a powerful spiritual instrument and, for that very reason, also
one which poses a danger for those not prepared to receive its
liberating grace.42 That is why music which has turned against cosmic
laws and its celestial origins cannot but be an instrument for the
demonic and cannot but be the bearer of the dissolving influence of that
cacophany which the modern world knows only too well.

As for dance, it, like music, is a direct vehicle for the realization of
union. The sacred dance unifies man with the Divine at the meeting point
of time and space at that eternal now and immutable center which is the
locus of Divine Presence. From the sacred art of dance is born not only
those great masterpieces of Hindu art in which Śiva performs the cosmic
dance upon the body of his consort Parvati43 but also the temple dances
of Bali, the cosmic dances of the American Indians and the native
Africans, and, on the highest levels, those esoteric dances connected
with initiatic practices leading to union. Among these, one can mention
the Sufi dance where the art of sacred dance and music are combined in
bringing about recollection and placing man in a point above all time
and space in the Divine Presence.

In this form, traditional art complements the quintessence of spiritual
practice, which is the prayer of the heart, in actualizing the Divine
Light in the body of man seen as the temple of God and in placing man
beyond all forms in that now which is none other than eternity.

Since beauty is the splendor of truth, the expression of truth is always
accompanied by beauty. The grand expressions of metaphysics are clothed
in the garment of beauty whether they be in the language of plastic
forms or sounds-such as a Chinese landscape painting or a raga-or in
human words such as the Gīta or Sufi poetry. What in fact distinguishes
metaphysics and gnosis from profane philosophy is not only the question
of truth but also

beauty. Gnosis is the only common ground between poetry and logic,
whether formal or mathematical. Wherever one discovers a doctrine which
possesses at once mathematical and logical rigor and poetic beauty, it
must possess a gnostic aspect. If Khayyām was at once a great poet and
an outstanding mathematician, it was because he was first and foremost a
gnostic.44 It is only in gnosis or scientia sacra that the rigor of
logic and the perfume of poetry meet, for this science is concerned with
the truth. The great masterpieces of Oriental metaphysics such as the
works of Śankara or Ibn ‘Arabī are also literary masterpieces, a work
such as the Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam of Ibn ‘Arabī possessing a remarkable
perfection of form to complement the content.45

In the case of Sufism the wedding between truth and beauty is fully
manifested in the numerous works which are at once outstanding
expressions of sacred knowledge and masterpieces of art. The Gulshan-i
rāz (The Rose Garden of Divine Mysteries) of Maḥmūd Shabistarī, written
in a few days under direct inspiration of Heaven, is at once a summary
of metaphysics and a poem of unparalleled beauty. The poetry of Ibn
al-Fāriḍ in Arabic and the Divan of Ḥāfiẓ in Persian represent the most
harmonious wedding between expression of esoteric doctrines and
perfection of form with the result that this poetry is itself like the
wine which inebriates and transmutes the soul. The Mathnawī and Dīwān-i
Shams of Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī are oceans of gnosis whose every wave
reflects beauty of celestial origin. Its rhymes and rhythms, its
rhapsodic trance uplift the soul and elevate it to that peak where alone
it is able to grasp the sublime intellectual message of the great
poet-saint. In the traditional world, and especially in the Orient, it
has always been taken for granted that the truth descends upon the human
plane with the aura of beauty which radiates from its presence and
expression, like revelation itself which cannot but be beautiful whether
that revelation be in the form of the Arabic Quran, Hebrew Torah, and
Sanskrit Vedas, or the Buddha and Christ who are themselves considered
as the message in their own traditions.

To be sensitive to the beauty of forms, whether natural or belonging to
the domain of art, to see in the eye of the child, the wing of the
eagle, the crystalline peaks of the mountains which touch the void, as
well as in a page of Mamluk Quranic calligraphy, a Japanese Buddha
image, or the rosette of the Chartres Cathedral, the signs of the Divine
Hand, is to be blessed with a contemplative spirit. To remain aware of
the liberating beauty of forms of traditional art as channels of grace
of a particular tradition and to be open to the message of these forms
is to be blessed with the possibility of reception of sacred knowledge.
Traditional art is a source of this sacred knowledge and accompanies all
its authentic expressions. The person who has realized sacred knowledge
and who, through the path of knowledge, has reached the sacred is
himself the best witness to the inextricable bond between knowledge and
beauty, for such a person embodies in himself, by virtue of realized
sapience, beauty and grace. Realization of sacred knowledge enables man
to become himself a work of art, the supreme work of art of the Supreme
Artist. To become such a work of art is to become a fountain of
knowledge and grace, the prototype of all traditional art in which the
artist

emulates the Supreme Artisan and hence produces a work which is at once
support for the realization of sacred knowledge, means for its
transmission, and an externalization of the perfection which man himself
can be if only he were to become what he truly is.

To behold a masterpiece of traditional art is to gain a vision of that
reality which constitutes the inner nature of man as a work of the
Divine Artisan, of that inner nature which man can reach through
knowledge of the sacred and the realization of sacred knowledge. A great
work of traditional art is a testament to the beauty of God and an
exemplar of what man can be when he becomes himself, as God made him, a
perfect work of art, a fountain of knowledge, and a channel of grace for
the world in which he lives as the central and axial being that he is by
his nature and his destiny. For man to become himself a work of art, as
traditionally understood, is for him to become the pontifical man that
he is and cannot ultimately cease to be.

Notes
-----

[^1]: All sacred art is traditional art but not all traditional art is
sacred art. Sacred art lies at the heart of traditional art and is
concerned directly with the revelation and those theophanies which
constitute the core of the tradition. Sacred art involves the ritual and
cultic practices and practical and operative aspects of the paths of
spiritual realization within the bosom of the tradition in question.

“Within the framework of traditional civilization, there is without
doubt a distinction to be made between sacred art and profane art. The
purpose of the first is to communicate, on the one hand, spiritual
truths and, on the other hand, a celestial presence; sacerdotal art has
in principle a truly sacramental function.” F. Schuon, “The Degrees of
Art,” Studies in Comparative Religion, Autumn, 1976, p. 194; also in his
Esoterism as Principle and asWay, pp. 183-[^97]:

[^2]: On the principle characteristics of traditional art see Schuon,
The Transcendent Unity of Religions, pp. 66ff.

[^3]: On the definition of traditional art see Schuon, “Concerning Forms
in Art,” in his Transcendent Unity of Religions; and idem, Esoterism as
Principle and asWay, pt. 3, “Aesthetic and Theurgic Phenomenology,” pp.
177-225; Burckhardt, Sacred Art in East and West, intio.; and
Coomaraswamy, Figures of Speech or Figures of Thought; idem, The
Transformation of Nature in Art; and idem, “The Philosophy of Medieval
and Oriental Art,” in Zalmoxis 1 (1938): 20-49.

A contemporary Japanese artist writing as a Buddhist says concerning
art, “Son secret, sa raison d’être est d’aller jusqu’au fond même du
néant pour en rapporter l’affirmation flamboyante qui illuminera
l’univers.” Taro Okawoto, “Propos sur l’art et le Bouddhisme
ésotérique,” France-Ask, no. 187 (Autumn 1966);[^25]:

[^4]: Coomaraswamy has dealt with this theme in many of his works esp.
his wellknown essays, “Why Exhibit Works of Art?” in his Christian and
Oriental Philosophy of Art, pp. 7-22; and “What is the Use of Art,
Anyway?” in The Majority Report on Art, John Stevens Pamphlet no. 2,
Boston, 1937.

[^5]: The work of such masters of gnosis as ´Sankara and Jalal al-Dın
Rumı belonging to two very different kinds of traditions exemplifies the
wedding between knowledge of the highest order and beauty of expression.

[^6]: It is significant to note that in Arabic fad. l or fad.ılah means
at once beauty, grace, virtue, and knowledge.

[^7]: T. Burckhardt has dealt with this theme in his various works on
Islamic art.

[^8]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image020.jpg)

[^9]: Until two or three decades ago, even students of Islamic thought
in the West believed that the intellectual life of Islam had terminated
with Ibn Rushd, or shortly thereafter, and even limited Sufism to its
so-called classical expression in the sixth/twelfth and
seventh/thirteenth centuries. But even in this state of unawareness of
later Islamic intellectual life, a single dome of the quality and
perfection of the Shah mosque should have been intrinsic proof of the
existence of such an intellectual life if only the organic and
unbreachable link between sacred art and intellectuality in the sense
understood in this book had been understood. Since then the research of
Corbin, Ashtiyanı, and Nasr has provided the extrinsic proof of the
presence of such an intellectual and spiritual life. See Corbin,
“Confessions extatiques de Mîr Dâmâd,” in Mélanges Louis Massignon, vol.
1, Paris, 1956, pp. 331-78; Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. 4;Nasr, “The
School of Isfahan,” in M. M. Sharif (ed.), A History of Muslim
Philosophy, vol. 2, Wiesbaden, 1966, pp. 904-32; Nasr, “Philosophy,
Theology and Spiritual Movements,” in Cambridge History of Iran, vol. 6
(in press). A decade ago when Corbin and S. J.  Ashtiyanı thought of
compiling an anthology of the works of the metaphysicians and
philosophers of Persia from the Safavid period to the present, they
planned two or three volumes. Before Corbin’s death already seven
extensive volumes had been compiled of which only four have seen the
light of day. The unveiling of this rich intellectual heritage, produced
parallel with some of the greatest masterpieces of Islamic art, affords
an excellent historical case study for the relationship

between traditional art and intellectuality whose principial
relationship we have outlined in this chapter.

[^10]: It is these guilds which were at once depositories of technical
and esoteric knowledge even if it were primarily of a cosmological
order. Their secret organization and oral transmission made possible the
preservation of a knowledge of a sacred order wed to the crafts and
techniques of making and building. Only in this way can one explain the
creation of cathedrals which combine art of the highest order with
cosmological sciences and which display perfect unity although built by
more than one generation of architects and craftsmen. Speculative
Freemasonary came into being only when this esoteric knowledge became
divorced from the actual practice of the arts and crafts and reduced to
an occultism.

[^11]: In Islam as in Christianity one observes a close nexus between
the craft guilds and the Sufi orders, a relation which has survived to
this day in certain Muslim cities such as Fez in Morocco and Yazd in
Persia. The role of ‘Alı ibn Abı Talib as founder of the Islamic guilds
and at the same time primary representative of Islamic esoterism is very
significant as far as the relation of the guilds to esoteric knowledge
is concerned. On this question see Burckhardt, The Art of Islam; and Y.
Ibish, “Economic Institutions,” in R. B. Sargeant (ed.), The Islamic
City, Paris, 1980, pp. 114-25.

[^12]: Zen represents a perfect example of the wedding of spiritual
instruction to the crafts not only in the making of pottery but also in
landscape architecture, calligraphy, etc. See D. T. Suzuki, Zen and
Japanese Culture, Princeton, 1959.

[^13]: See M. Eliade, The Forge and the Crucible, chaps. 1 and 2.

[^14]: “There is here a metaphysical inversion of relation that we have
already pointed out: for God, His creature reflects an exteriorized
aspect of Himself; for the artist, on the contrary, the work is a
reflection of an inner reality of which he himself is only an outward
aspect; God creates His own image, while man, so to speak, fashions his
own essence, at least symbolically. On the principial plane, the inner
manifests itself in the outer, but on the manifested plane, the outer
fashions the inner, and a sufficient reason for all traditional art, no
matter of what kind, is the fact that in a certain sense the work is
greater than the artist himself, and brings back the latter, through the
mystery of artistic creation, to the proximity of his own Divine
Essence.” Schuon, The Transcendent Unity of Religions, pp. 72-73.

[^15]: See Schuon, “Principles and Criteria of Art,” in his Language of
the Self, pp.102-35, where he has discussed certain works of modern
painters like Van Gogh and Gaugin in which some of these qualities shine
forth despite their being of a nontraditional character.

[^16]: Among twentieth-century philosophers particularly concerned with
the meaning of forms may be mentioned E. Cassirer. See Die Philosophic
der Symbolischen Formen, 3 vols., Berlin, 1923-1929, trans. R. Manheim
as Philosophy of Symbolic Forms, 3 vols., New Haven, 1953-1957. His
appreciation of “symbolic forms” is, however, not the same as that of
the traditional authors.

Traditional texts of both Western and Orthodox Christianity are replete
with references to the fundamental significance of form and its effect
upon the human soul. For example, St. Photios of Constantinople writes,
“Just as speech is transmitted by hearing, so a form through sight is
printed upon the tablets of the soul.” Quoted in C. Cavarnos, Orthodox
Iconography, Belmont, Mass., 1977, p. [^30]: See also the essay of L.
Peter Kollar, Form, Sydney, 1980.

[^17]: See Schuon, “Abuse of the Ideas of the Concrete and the
Abstract,” in his Logic and Transcendence, pp. 19-32.

[^18]: “Art is iconography, the making of images or copies of some model
(paradeigma) whether visible (presented) or invisible (contemplated).”
From Plato’s Republic, 373B, trans. and quoted by Coomaraswamy in
Figures of Speech, Figures of Thought, p. 37.

[^19]: Timaeus 28A, B, trans. Jowett 20. Quoted in Coomaraswamy, The
Transformation of Nature in Art, p. 113.

[^21]: “There is a highly significant connection between the loss of a
sacred art and the loss of anagogy, as is shown by the Renaissance;
naturalism could not kill symbolism-sacred art-without humanism killing
anagogy and, with it, gnosis.

This is so because these two elements, anagogical science and symbolical
art are essentially related to pure intellectuality.” Schuon, Language
of the Self, p. [^111]:

[^22]: On the Tenth Intellect and its emanation of forms which are not
to be found in Aristotle but characterize medieval Peripatetic
philosophy see chap. 4, n. 3 above.

[^23]: St. Thomas insists that the artist must not imitate nature but
must be accomplished in “imitating nature in her manner of operation,”
(Summa Theologica, quest. 117, a.I).

[^24]: It is perhaps worthwhile to remember again the “definition” of
the sacred given earlier as being related to the Immutable and the
eternal Reality and Its manifestation in the world of becoming.

“It (the sacred] is the interference of the uncreated in the created, of
the eternal in time, of the infinite in space, of the supraformal in
forms; it is the mysterious introduction into one realm of existence of
a presence which in reality contains and transcends that realm and could
cause it to burst asunder in a sort of divine explosion,” Schuon,
language of the Self, p. [^106]:

[^25]: For reasons discussed already in earlier chaps.

[^26]: His views on art are summarized by Coomaraswamy in his
Transformation of Nature in Art, chap. 2, pp. 59-95.

[^27]: See V. Lossky, The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church,
London, 1957; and L. Ouspensky and V. Lossky, Der Sinn der Ikonen, Bern,
1952.

[^28]: T. Burckhardt in his The Art of Islam has explained for the first
time inWestern circles the meaning rather than just the history of
Islamic art and revealed its link with Islamic esoterism whose
“organizational” link to the artswas through the craft guilds whichwere
usually associated with the Sufi orders. We have also dealt with this
question in our forthcoming The Meaning of Islamic Art, New York, 1982.

[^29]: G. Rowley, Principles of Chinese Painting, Princeton, 1947, p. 5.

[^30]: In contrast for example to the humanistic art of late antiquity
which, although possessing order and harmony, lacks the element of depth
and mystery which would reflect the Infinite.

[^31]: See F. Schuon, “Foundations for an Integral Aesthetics,” Studies
in Comparative Religion, Summer 1976, pp. 130-35.

[^32]: Beauty possess this ambivalence, being at once means of
attraction and seduction as a result of the power of maya which is
operative in the cosmic domain everywhere. If the exteriorizing and
centrifugal tendencies associated with maya in its aspect of veil and
separation had not existed, tradition could rely on only beauty and not
also morality, on only aesthetics and not also ethics. But the ambiguity
of maya requires the ascetic phase before the soul can allow itself to
be attracted by the beauty of form toward the formless.

[^33]: It is of interest to note that in Arabic beauty and goodness are
both called husn and ugliness and evil qubh. .

[^34]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image021.jpg)

This poem, by one of the leading Sufis who emphasized the role of beauty
in spiritual realization summarizes the sacramental function of beauty.
Heart’s Witness, trans. B. M.Weischer and P. L.Wilson, Tehran, 1978, pp.
168-[^69]:

[^35]: “The cosmic, and more particularly the earthly function of beauty
is to actualize in the intelligent and sensitive creature the
recollection of essence, and thus to open the way to the luminous Night
of the one and infinite Essence.”

Schuon, “The Degrees of Art,” Studies in Comparative Religion, Autumn,
1976, pp. 194-[^207]:

On the Platonic and Neoplatonic doctrine of beauty see R. Lodge, Plato’s
Theory of Art, New York, 1975; P. M. Schuhl, Platan et l’ari de son
temps, Paris, 1934; W. J. Oates, Plato’s View of Art, New York, 1972; E.
Moutsopoulos, La Musique dans l’oeuvre de Platon, Paris, 1959; T.
Moretti-Costanzi, L’estetica di Platone. Sua attualità, Rome, 1948; J.
G.Wary, Greek Aesthetic Theory. A Study of Callistic and Aesthetic
Concepts in the Works of Plato and Aristotle, London, 1962; M. F.
Sciacca, Platone, 2 vols., Milan, 1967 (with extensive annotated
bibliography in vol. 2, pp. 351-427); H. Perls, L’Art et la beauté vus
par Platon, Paris, 1938; G. Faggin, Plotino, 2 vols., Milan, 1962; G. A.
Levi, “Il bello in

Plotino,” Humanitas 8 (1953): 233-39; F. Wehrli, “Die antike
Kunsttheorie und das Schopferische,” Museum Helveticum 14 (1957): 39-49.

[^36]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image022.jpg)

[^37]: Nicholson, Selected Poems from the Dıvani Shamsi Tabrız,ı 177.
The translation of Nicholson has been somewhat modified.

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E023%5D:jpg)

[^38]: See chap. 6, n. 21 above, where the relation between traditional
music and cosmology has been briefly discussed.

[^39]: Rumı says,

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E024%5D:jpg)

The musician began to play before the drunken Turk

Within the veil of melody the mysteries of the eternal covenant [asrar-i
alast].

See Nasr, “The Influence of Sufism on Traditional Persian Music,” in
Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, p. [^33]:

[^40]: This fundamental message of Pythagorean wisdom has now become a
matter of great interest among many people in search of rediscovery of
traditional knowledge as the works of H. Keyser, E. McClain, and others
mentioned in chap. 3 demonstrate.

[^41]: See Burckhardt, Sacred Art East and West, p. 9, where this story
is recounted from the mouth of a street singer whom the author had heard
in Morocco.

[^42]: Music, esp. of the spiritual kind, which has grown out of the
experience of the spiritual world and is meant to lead back to that
world, can become like an opium which would replace rather than
complement spiritual practice and give a false sense of satiation of
authentic spiritual thirst if it is cut off from its traditional context
and heard incessantly. That is why in Islam the classical schools of
music, all of which are of a completely inward and spiritual nature, are
reserved for the contemplative life and closely associated with Sufism.
See J. Nurbakhsh, In the Tavern of Ruin, New York, 1978, chap. 4, pp.
32-62; S.H. Nasr, “Islam and Music,” in Studies in Comparative
Religion,Winter 1976, pp. 37-45; idem, “The Influence of Sufism on
Persian Music”; and During, op.cit.

[^43]: On the symbolism of the dance of ´Siva see A. K. Coomaraswamy,
The Dance of ´Siva: Fourteen Indian Essays, London, 1918.

[^44]: On the relation between metaphysics, poetry, and logic see S. H.
Nasr, “Metaphysics, Poetry and Logic in the Oriental Tradition,” Sophia
Perennis 3/2 (Autumn 1977): 119-28.

[^45]: This is particularly true of the first two chaps which contain
the whole doctrine of Sufism and great beauty of expression. See Ibn
al-‘Arabı, Bezels of Wisdom, trans. R.W. J. Austin, pp. 47-70.
