Chapter Nine: Principal Knowledge and the Multiplicity of Sacred Forms
======================================================================

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image026.jpg)

***Verily, to every people there has been sent a prophet.***

**Quran**

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image027.jpg)

*I meditated upon religions, making great effort to*

*understand them,*

*And I came to realize that they are a unique Principle*

*with numerous ramifications.*

**Ḥallāj**

They worship me as One and as many, because they see that all is in me.

Bhagavad Gīta

One of the paradoxes of our age is that the manifestation of religion in
different worlds of form and meaning has been used by the already
desacralized type of knowledge, which has dominated the mental outlook
of Western man in recent times, to destroy further what little remains
of the sacred in the contemporary world. Modern man is encountering the
other worlds of sacred forms and meaning in their full reality at the
very moment when sacred knowledge and an interiorizing intelligence,
which would be able to penetrate into the inner meaning of alien forms,
having become so inaccessible. The result is that the multiplicity of
sacred forms, which is itself the most definitive evidence of the
reality of the sacred and the universality of the truth that each
universe of form and meaning transmits in its own manner, has been
employed, by those who deny the reality of the sacred as such, to
relativize what has survived of the Christian tradition. The
multiplicity of sacred forms has been used as an excuse to reject all
sacred forms, as well as the scientia sacra which lies behind and beyond
these forms. Had the West encountered other religions in a serious
manner while a veritable intellectual tradition in the sense understood
here still survived in its midst, the results would have been very
different from the spectacle that “comparative religion” presents to the
modern world.1 For an intelligence which has been illuminated by the
Intellect and a knowledge which is already blessed with the perfume of
the sacred sees in the multiplicity of sacred forms, not contradictions
which relativize, but a confirmation of the universality of the Truth
and the infinite creative power of the Real that unfolds Its
inexhaustible possibilities in worlds of meaning which, although
different, all reflect the unique Truth. That is why the revival of
tradition in modern times and the attempt to resacralize knowledge have
been accompanied from the beginning with concern with the multiplicity
of traditions and their inner unity.2

What is remarkable is that even in the study of the sacred, the
principle that only the like can know the like has been forgotten and
the secularized mind has adopted every possible path and method to study
the phenomenon

and reality of religion and religions, provided the nature of the sacred
as sacred is not considered seriously. That is why despite all the light
that the traditional perspective brings to bear upon the study of
religions, it is so widely neglected. Hardly anyone in Western
theological circles has made use of the keys which tradition alone
provides to unlock the door of the understanding of other worlds of
sacred form and meaning without destroying the absoluteness of religion;
for traditional metaphysics alone is able to see each religion as a
religion and the religion, “absolute” within its own universe, while
reconfirming that ultimately only the Absolute is absolute. The neglect
in official academic, and even theological and religious circles, in the
West of traditional doctrines concerning the study of religions, either
through chance or deliberately, is one of the most amazing phenomena in
a world which claims objectivity for its scientific approach and manner
of carrying out the study of any subject, but which usually mistakes the
reduction of all reality to what can be grasped by secularized reason
for objectivity resulting from the miraculous functioning of the
intelligence.3

If one meditates upon the structure of reality, consisting of the three
grand theophanies of the Principle as the cosmos, man, and revelation in
the sense of religion and also tradition, it becomes clear that since
manifestation implies externalization, the penetration into the meaning
of external forms in all three cases is essentially an esoteric
function. To go from the form to the essence, the exterior to the
interior, the symbol to the reality symbolized, whether concerning the
cosmos, man, or revelation, is itself an esoteric activity and is
dependent upon esoteric knowledge. To carry out the study of other
religions in depth, therefore, requires a penetration into the depth of
one's own being and an interiorizing and penetrating intelligence which
is already imbued with the sacred. Ecumenism if correctly understood
must be an esoteric activity if it is to avoid becoming the instrument
for simple relativization and further secularization.4

To be sure, in traditional worlds esoteric knowledge did not have to
concern itself with other universes of meaning and alien sacred forms,
except in very rare and exceptional conditions. Usually this
interiorizing knowledge concerned itself with the particular religious
world in which it functioned, as well as the soul of human beings and
the grand phenomena of nature. Traditional sages would speak of the
essence or meaning behind the form of a particular verse of their sacred
scripture or religious rite. Likewise, they might explain the symbolic
significance of the growth of a plant toward sunlight or certain images
and states of the human soul. Rarely would a Buddhist sage provide a
sapiential commentary upon the verses of the Quran or a Hindu be
concerned with the specific inner meaning of a particular Christian
rite, even if they would in a general way accept the universality of the
Truth in alien religious worlds. The exceptions did, however, exist, as
when Islam and Hinduism encountered each other in the Indian
subcontinent;5 but these cases remained more than anything else an
exception and even then were not carried out in a barren desert where a
living, homogeneous spiritual universe of form and meaning had ceased to
exist. The full application of scientia sacra to the study of religions
on a

worldwide scale had to be preserved for modern times as both a
compensation from Heaven for the secularization of human life and a
cyclic event of the greatest importance, which signified the unraveling
and explaining of the inner meaning of not one but all the living
traditions of mankind in the light of tradition itself before the
present human cycle terminates.

Strangely enough, although this traditional exposition of the various
religions, their doctrines, rites, and symbols, and their relation to
the Truth which they all contain inwardly and which they reflect has
been neglected to a large extent in the modern world, the concern with
the presence of other religions has been impossible to avoid. A
sensitive and intelligent person today who is touched by those
complicated sets of factors and forces which we call modernism cannot
but be concerned with the multiplicity of sacred forms. And the more
modernism spreads and the secularization of life increases, the more
does this concern and awareness grow and even change in nature and
kind.6 A Muslim in a traditional village in northern Syria or in Isfahan
is aware of the presence of Christianity in a manner which is by nature
different from the concern of a college student in America or Europe
for, let us say, Buddhism. Hence, the constant occupation of a large
number of scholars and theologians in the West and also in modernized
parts of the rest of the world with the study of other religions, which
is sometimes called the history of religions, sometimes comparative
religion, and sometimes by other names,7 and the endless debate that
continues about the appropriate method or methods to follow in the study
of this crucial subject.8

From this pressing demand to have the meaning of the multiplicity of
sacred forms explained, there have grown a number of approaches, most of
which succeed only in debasing and trivializing even the most exalted
subjects which they approach and which can explain the meaning of sacred
forms provided the sacred nature of these forms has been extracted from
them. In no domain, in fact, is the shortcoming of a secularized mind
trying to grapple with what is really beyond its scope and power more
evident than in the field of the study of religions, a shortcoming which
has already had dire effects for certain schools of Christian thought
and very disturbing consequences for the religious life of those who
have been affected by it.

The study of “other” religions as a scientific discipline, in contrast
to the kind of interest shown in Oriental doctrines as sources of
knowledge to which reference has been made already, began from the
background of a “scientism” which characterizes the early
Religionswissenschaft. Religion was studied as fact belonging to various
human cultures to be documented and described as one would study and
catalogue the fauna of a strange land. The question of faith was of
little importance; historical “facts,” myths, rites, and symbols were
more attractive since such aspects of religion could be made subjects
for scientific study more readily than what appeared as the nebulous
question of faith. It was as if music were to be studied in its purely
mathematical and physical aspects and then the results were to be
presented as the scientific, and thereby the only correct and legitimate
study of music because the qualitative or, properly speaking, musical
aspect could not be studied scientifically. This approach amassed a
great deal of information

about religions but rarely succeeded in providing meaning for what had
been studied. A world view devoid of meaning could not possibly have
provided meaning even for that which in itself was impregnated with
meaning. Soon, therefore, a Western world thirsty for the meaning of
religion realized the shortcoming of this approach and sought new ways
and methods for arriving at understanding of its meanings. Something of
this way of studying religion, however, has survived to this day and
also has left a negative imprint upon the study of non-Western religions
which cannot be removed so easily. This approach has provided many facts
about religion but has interpreted these facts in a totally secularized
manner, with the result that it has played no small role in the spread
of the process of the desacralization of knowledge itself. Parallel and
often in conjunction with this “scientific” study of religion, there
grew the purely historical treatment of religion based on the
nineteenth-century historicism which was usually combined with
evolutionism. According to this theory, all that appears in later
religions is the result of historical borrowing since there is no such
reality as revelation as traditionally understood. In this myopic
perspective in which there is no logical nexus between cause and effect,
no one bothers to ask how a person, no matter how clever, could
amalgamate a few influences from Judaism and Christianity in some far
away place in Arabia and create a movement which, in less than a hundred
years, would spread from the Pyrenees to the borders of China, and which
continues to give meaning to the lives of nearly a billion human beings
today. Nor do they ask how the experience of an Indian prince sitting
under a tree in northern India could change the whole life and culture
in eastern Asia for the next twenty-five centuries. This complete lack
of logic by those who claim to be using completely rational means of
inquiry would have been understandable at least in the case of agnostics
and atheists who, wanting to explain away the dazzling evidence of
revelation at the origin of every tradition, took recourse to
evolutionism. In this way, they hoped to explain the religious universe
through purely historical causes without having to take recourse in the
Transcendent in the same way that evolutionism in biology became
“scientific” because it was the only way of evading the obvious evidence
of the manifestation of a non-material reality or principle within the
world of nature.9

What is more difficult to comprehend is the adoption of this point of
view by many a Christian missionary or scholar who has written on
occasion of the evolution of religion from the primitive level to its
full development in Christianity and then has applied the historical
method in its fullness to refute the authenticity of Islam as a message
from Heaven.10 It is this perspective that has caused Islam to fare
worse than all other major religions in the field of the history of
religions or comparative religion; it is also the reason that scholars
in that field have made hardly any important contributions to the domain
of Islamic studies.11 But these scholars, who refute the authenticity of
hadīth on the basis of the lack of historical evidence12 or who consider
the Quran to be merely a collection of Judeo-Christian teachings
distorted because of a lack of authentic sources, hardly realize that
the same arguments could be turned against Christianity itself.

This has in fact been done by those who have tried to refute
Christianity or some of its major tenets because of the lack of
archaeological evidence, as if the Spirit needed any proof for its
existence other than its own nature which intelligence can comprehend
inately if it is not mutilated or veiled by extraneous factors.

The excesses of historicism, especially in the domain of the study of
religion, went so far in reducing that which is itself of innate
significance from the religious point of view into insignificant
historical influence, that a reaction began within the circle of modern
thought itself in the form of phenomenology. This school covers a rather
extensive spectrum which touches at one end the traditional perspective
itself13 but which in many of its modalities falls into an error
opposite to that of historicism, namely, the error of disregarding the
unique reality of each manifestation of the Logos, of each revelation
with the tradition, both historical and metahistorical which flows from
such an opening of Heaven. In its insistence upon the value and meaning
of each religious phenomenon in itself, irrespective of whatever
historical origin it may have had, some phenomenologists became more or
less collectors of religious ideas and symbols, as if they were going to
place them in a museum, rather than interpreters of these phenomena in
the light of the living tradition to which these phenomena belong.
Moreover, this approach has been much less successful in dealing with an
“abstract” tradition such as Islam than a mythological one. Likewise, it
has not been able to distinguish between major manifestations of the
Logos and less plenary ones, nor between living and thriving religions
and those that have decayed.14 Finally, for most phenomenologists of
religion there has been no metaphysical basis upon which they would be
able to interpret the phenomena as the phenomena of a noumenal reality.
Since phenomenon means appearance, it implies even etymologically a
reality of which it is the appearance.15 But the post-Kantian skepticism
of European philosophy made the knowledge of the noumena as being
impossible or even absurd to pose as a possibility open to the human
mind.

There have been those who have called themselves phenomenologists and
who have spoken of their method as the way to unveil the outward meaning
and to reach the noumenal or the inner essence of forms and phenomena
and who have even called the phenomenological method the “unveiling of
the hidden” (or the kashf al-maḥjūb of the Sufis).16 But they have been
the exception rather than the rule. By and large, phenomenology in
describing religious rites, symbols, images, and ideas has avoided the
error of historicism but it has fallen into another error by divorcing
these elements from the particular spiritual universe in which they
possess meaning. Altogether the phenomenological school of comparative
religion, especially as developed in Germany and the Scandinavian
countries, is the opposite but complementary pole of historicism and
belongs to the same world of desacralized knowledge which gave birth to
both of them.17 In the same way that history can be used legitimately
without falling into the error of historicism and that it is possible to
have a historical view which is not historical in the limited sense of
the term, it is possible to speak of phenomenology and use a method
which is phenomenological without

ending in that atmosphere of sterile fossil collecting which surrounds
so many supposedly phenomenological works on religion, works which are
themselves totally devoid of the sense of the sacred.

Yet another approach to the study of religions has been the one which
sees in all religions the same truth, not of a transcendent order as
tradition would assert but of an outward and sentimental kind which
cannot but reduce religions to their least common denominator.
Associated especially with certain movements which grew out of
modernized Hinduism, this type of approach has characterized many of the
modern syncretic and eclectic religious movements themselves, as well as
various congresses and associations founded usually with the positive
intention of creating understanding between religions but without the
necessary intellectual perspective which would make such an
understanding possible. What characterizes this type of approach is a
kind of sentimentalism which opposes intellectual discernment and
emphasis upon doctrine as being dogmatic and “anti-spiritual,” together
with a supposed universalism which opposes the particularity of each
tradition on the level of that particularity, thereby destroying the
sacred on the tangible level in the name of a vague and emotional
universalism which is in fact a parody of the universalism envisaged by
tradition. In its most positive form this type of approach is associated
with a kind of spirituality based upon bhakti or love that engulfs the
multiplicity of sacred forms in the warmth of its embrace without being
concerned with the distinctions inherent in these forms. At worst it is
feeble sentimentality which leads nowhere and which is devoid of any
substance. In any case, this approach is not capable of penetrating into
the meaning of sacred forms because it does not even accept the
significance of these forms on their own level. In a world permeated
with spirituality, such as traditional India, such a perspective could
exist as a possibility but it was always complemented by the perspective
based on discernment and, in any case, it was protected by the cadre of
tradition itself.18 In the modern world, it has usually served
indirectly to further the process of the desacralization of knowledge
and the destruction of the sacred itself by belittling the significance
of both knowledge and forms even if they be of a sacred character.

Needless to say this kind of approach usually bases itself upon the
mystical dimension of the religions which it studies, but its
appreciation of mysticism is in the best of circumstances limited to
that kind associated with love. In many cases, however, it treats that
type of debased “mysticism” which is almost synonymous with
incomprehension, unintelligibility, incoherence, and ambiguity and which
stands at the opposite pole of the sapiential perspective which can
itself be called mystical, if mysticism retains its positive character
as that which is concerned with the Divine Mysteries rather than as used
in its pejorative sense. It is against this oversentimentalized approach
to the study of religions on the basis of a so-called universal
spirituality, related to mysticism but devoid of intellectual content,
that a reaction set in among many scholars of religion who began to
point out the differences rather than the similarities between religions
and various sacred forms, while keeping a critical distance from any
claim of the

existence of the unity underlying formal diversity. But these scholars
have also usually been unable to distinguish between a unity which
transcends forms and a supposed unity which disregards forms or rather
seeks to melt them into a solution whose coagulation cannot but result
in those conglomerates of religious ideas which characterize the
so-called religious syntheses of the modern world. Metaphysically
speaking, unity lies at the opposite pole of uniformity,19 and the
reduction of religions to a least common denominator in the name of the
religious unity of mankind is no more than a parody of the “transcendent
unity of religions” which characterizes the traditional point of view.

Recently, a number of scholars have turned their attention to mysticism
itself to show that even mysticism is concerned with particulars of a
religion and its specific and exclusive forms and not with universal
ideas as claimed by the proponents of the kind of universality of
religion based on mysticism already mentioned.20 They claim that in
Judaism, for example, the Kabbalists are concerned with the most
detailed aspects of the Hebrew text of the Torah as are the Sufis with
the Arabic text of the Quran, rather than with “abstract,” universal
ideas. Such authors point to the importance of sacred language and
scripture as the fountainhead of mystical doctrines and teachings. They
underline the essential role played by the letters, words, sounds,
syntax, and other aspects of the language used in sacred texts for the
mysticism of the tradition in question. In a sense, such critics
reassert the significance of sacred forms; to that extent, their
criticism is just and is a necessary antidote to those ideas and
teachings which present mysticism as the formless without indicating the
crucial significance of sacred form as the absolutely necessary means
for the attainment of the formless. Where most of these critics fall
short is in their lack of awareness of precisely this fact, that sacred
form is not only form as particularity and limitation but also that it
opens unto the Infinite and the formless. The Kabbalists do begin with
the text of the Hebrew Bible and not with the Sanskrit Upanishads, but
when they speak of the En-Sof they are dealing with that Reality which
one can recognize as the same Reality with which the Advaitist school of
the Vedanta is concerned. The opposition of these scholars to the
sentimentalism of the syncretists is, therefore, although partly
correct, a pendular reaction to the other extreme and marks one more
instance in the series of actions and reactions which characterize so
much of mental life and scholarly activity in the modern world.

The reductionism inherent in what can be called the sentimentalist
approach toward the unity of religions has found a new expression in
many of the ecumenical movements within Christianity which have come to
the fore during the last few decades. This is true not only of ecumenism
within the Christian religion among various churches and dimensions but
also as far as the rapport of Christianity with other religions is
concerned.21 Although based often on the positive intention of creating
better understanding of other religions, most of the proponents of
ecumenism place mutual understanding above the total integrity of a
tradition to the extent that there are now those Christian theologians
who claim that Christians should stop believing in the incarnation in
order to understand

Muslims and have Muslims understand them.22 One could only ask why they
should then remain Christians and not embrace Islam altogether. Many
ecumenists expect people of different faiths to become transformed by
the very process of carrying out a religious dialogue and that, through
the continuity of such a process, religions themselves will become
transformed.23 One does not, however, usually bother to ask into what
they would be transformed, the assumption being that better
understanding in itself is the final goal rather than understanding of
another world of sacred form and meaning through the preservation of
one's own tradition.

Such a perspective finally replaces divine authority by human
understanding and cannot but fall into a kind of humanism which only
dilutes what remains of religion. It is really another form of
secularism and modernism despite the respect it has for other religions
and the fact that it is carried out by men and women of religious
faith.24 That is why the stronger the hold of religion upon a human
collectivity or individual, the less is there usually interest in what
is now called ecumenism in that circle or for that person. Rather than
the totality of the inhabited world, and hence engulfing the whole of
humanity, to which ecumenism should be directed by its very meaning
(oikoumenē), much of modern ecumenism has become like an engulfing
amorphous mass which aims at dissolving all forms and removing all
distinctions from several different realities by drawing them within a
single or at best composite substance. One can detect in this current
movement of ecumenism that same lack of distinction between the
supraformal and the informal which results from the loss of an integral
metaphysics in the West in modern times.

The creation of a closer relation between religions implied by ecumenism
has also had its direct or camouflaged political counterpart. Numerous
attempts have been made to create dialogue between two or several
religions with political goals in mind.25 This is especially true of
Christianity and Islam26 and more recently Judaism and Islam.27 But it
is also found in India as far as it concerns Hindus and Muslims and in
other regions of the world as well. Despite the nobility of all attempts
to create better understanding between people and the importance of
realizing the significance of religious elements as underlying political
and social realities, the use of religion as an instrument for political
ends has caused these types of interreligious studies to end in either
diplomatic and polite platitudes or false oversimplifications which have
simply glided over the differences existing between different sacred
forms. No amount of brotherly feeling is going to explain why Christians
paint icons and Muslims do not and why each should respect the
perspective of the other not through tolerance28 but through
understanding.

The result of the refusal to follow any of these paths of understanding
other religions is religious disputation, exdusivism, particularism, and
finally fanaticism of which the modern world does not certainly have a
shortage, since these traits are not simply the characteristics of
premodern men, as champions of progress would have claimed a century or
two ago. What is important to note is that usually those who are
exclusivist in their religious world view and who oppose other religions
are usually themselves of a religious bent. Their opposition to other
religions arises precisely from

the fact that they do possess faith and that religion does have a
meaning for them. Those who attack this group for being prejudiced or
fanatical and claim not to be so themselves because they have ceased to
take religion itself seriously carry no advantage over the first group
whatsoever. Nothing is easier than to be without prejudice about
something which does not concern us. The problem arises precisely when
one is deeply attached to a particular religion in which he has faith
and within which he finds meaning in the ultimate sense. The criticism
that can be made against the religious exclusivists is not that they
have strong faith in their religion. They possess faith but they lack
principial knowledge, that kind of knowledge which can penetrate into
foreign universes of form and bring out their inner meaning.29 There are
of course those who, discouraged by what appears to them as an
insurmountable obstacle to intellectual understanding, seek to emphasize
the pole of faith in interreligious dialogue,30 yet the element of
knowledge remains indispensable because of the basic relation between
knowledge and faith itself,31 as well as the role which knowledge alone
can play in making intelligible an alien religious world.

This rapid glance upon the landscape of religious studies today in as
much as they concern the variety and diversity of religious universes
reveals the shortcoming of each prevalent method from the perspective of
tradition and the sapiential view which lies at its heart, although each
approach may carry some positive aspect or feature. Today, one is given
the choice between an exclusivism which would destroy the very meaning
of Divine Justice and Mercy and a so-called universalism which would
destroy precious elements of a religion that the faithful believe to
have come from Heaven and which are of celestial origin. There is the
choice between an absolutism which neglects all the manifestations of
the Absolute other than one's own and a relativism which would destroy
the very meaning of absoluteness. One is presented with the possibility
of reducing all religious realities to historical influences or of
considering them as realities to be studied in themselves without
reference to the historical unfolding of a particular manifestation of
the Logos. One must either accept the other politely and for the sake of
convenience, or at best for the sake of charity, or contend and battle
with the other as an opponent to be rebutted and even destroyed, since
his view is based on error and not the truth. One is faced with the
alternatives of not studying other religions at all and remaining
devoutly religious within one's own tradition (although this is not a
viable alternative for those touched by the truth, grace, and beauty of
other religions) or of studying other religions at the expense of losing
one's own faith or at best having one's faith diluted and shaken.

Modern man faces these alternatives at a time when the presence of other
religions poses an existential problem for him which is very different
from what his ancestors confronted. In fact, if there is one really new
and significant dimension to the religious and spiritual life of man
today, it is this presence of other worlds of sacred form and meaning
not as archaeological or historical facts and phenomena but as religious
reality. It is this necessity of living within one solar system and
abiding by its laws yet knowing that there are other solar systems and
even, by participation,

coming to know something of their rhythms and harmonies, thereby gaining
a vision of the haunting beauty of each one as a planetary system which
is the planetary system for those living within it. It is to be
illuminated by the Sun of one's own planetary system and still to come
to know through the remarkable power of intelligence, to know by
anticipation and without “being there,” that each solar system has its
own sun, which again is both a sun and the Sun, for how can the sun
which rises every morning and illuminates our world be other than the
Sun itself?

It is with respect to this crucial significance of the study of
religions within multiple universes of sacred form that the pertinence
of the traditional perspective and the principial knowledge which lies
at its heart becomes clear for contemporary man faced with such a
profound “existential” problem. The key provided by tradition for the
understanding of the presence of different religions without
relativizing religion as such is the result of one of the most timely
applications of that sapience or principial knowledge which is itself
timeless. Only this kind of knowledge can perform such a task because it
is at once knowledge of a scared character and ultimately sacred
knowledge itself.

Tradition studies religions from the point of view of scientia sacra
which distinguishes between the Principle and manifestation, Essence and
form, Substance and accident, the inward and the outward. It places
absoluteness at the level of the Absolute, asserting categorically that
only the Absolute is absolute. It refuses to commit the cardinal error
of attributing absoluteness to the relative, the error which Hinduism
and Buddhism consider as the origin and root of all ignorance. Hence
every determination of the Absolute is already in the realm of
relativity. The unity of religions is to be found first and foremost in
this Absolute which is at once Truth and Reality and the origin of all
revelations and of all truth. When the Sufis exclaim that the doctrine
of Unity is unique (al-tawḥīdu wāḥid), they are asserting this
fundamental but often forgotten principle. Only at the level of the
Absolute are the teachings of the religions the same. Below that level
there are correspondences of the most profound order but not identity.
The different religions are like so many languages speaking of that
unique Truth as it manifests itself in different worlds according to its
inner archetypal possibilities, but the syntax of these languages is not
the same. Yet, because each religion comes from the Truth, everything in
the religion in question which is revealed by the Logos is sacred and
must be respected and cherished while being elucidated rather than being
discarded and reduced to insignificance in the name of some kind of
abstract universality.

The traditional method of studying religions, while asserting
categorically the “transcendent unity of religion” and the fact that
“all paths lead to the same summit,” is deeply respectful of every step
on each path, of every signpost which makes the journey possible and
without which the single summit could never be reached. It seeks to
penetrate into the meaning of rites, symbols, images, and doctrines
which constitute a particular religious universe but does not try to
cast aside these elements or to reduce them to anything other than what
they are within that distinct universe of meaning created by God through
a particular revelation of the Logos. It is

thus keenly aware, as are the studies of the phenomenologists, of the
value and meaning of a particular rite or symbol irrespective of its
historical origin and, at the same time, is fully cognizant of the
meaning of the revelation in both the temporal origin of a religion and
its subsequent unfolding in history. This perspective realizes what a
particular rite, idea, or symbol means in the context of a particular
tradition as it has become manifested in history and not just as
something by and in itself as abstracted from a particular spiritual
universe. It thus avoids the error of both historicism and that kind of
sterile phenomenology mentioned above which shares with historicism the
unpardonable defect of studying a sacred reality by abstracting the
sacred from it. It also opposes firmly every form of reductionism or the
sentimental unification or even rapprochement of religions, which would
do injustice to the existing differences and the unique and particular
spiritual perfume and genius of each tradition willed by God, to the
necessity of discernment and acceptance of all that comprises a
particular religion as coming from God and therefore not to be cast
aside for any reason of a human order.

A key concept in the understanding of the significance of the
multiplicity of religions is that of the “relatively absolute” which,
although it might appear to some as being contradictory, is impregnated
with meaning of crucial importance once it is fully comprehended. As
mentioned already, only the Absolute is absolute, but each manifestation
of the Absolute in the form of revelation creates a world of sacred
forms and meaning in which certain determinations, hypostases, Divine
Persons, or the Logos, appear within that particular world as absolute
without being the Absolute in itself. Within that world, that
“relatively absolute” reality, whether it be the Logos itself or a
particular determination of the Supreme Divinity, is absolute without
ultimately being the Absolute as such. If a Christian sees God as the
Trinity or Christ as the Logos and holds on to this belief in an
absolute sense, this is perfectly understandable from the religious
point of view while, metaphysically speaking, these are seen as the
relatively absolute since only the Godhead in Its Infinitude and Oneness
is above all relativity.

Principial knowledge can defend the absolute character which followers
of each religion see in their beliefs and tenets, without which human
beings would not follow a particular religion. Yet principial knowledge
continues to assert the primordial truth that only the Absolute is
absolute and hence what appears below the level of the Absolute in a
particular tradition as absolute is the “relatively absolute.” Thus the
founder of every religion is a manifestation of the Supreme Logos and
the Logos, its sacred book a particular manifestation of the supreme
book or what Islam calls the “mother of books” (umm al-kitāb) and the
sacred book, its theological and dogmatic formulation of the nature of
the Divinity and the Divinity as such. It is only esoterism which can
detect the trace of the Absolute in the multiple universes of sacred
form and meaning and yet see the Absolute beyond these forms in the
abode of the formless.

Each revelation is in fact the manifestation of an archetype which
represents some aspect of the Divine Nature. Each religion manifests on
earth the reflection of an archetype at whose heart resides the Divinity
Itself.

The total reality of each tradition, let us say Christianity or Islam,
as it exists metahistorically and also as it unfolds throughout its
destined historical life, is none other than what is contained in that
archetype. It is the difference in these archetypes which determines the
difference of character of each religion. Each archetype can be compared
to a regular geometric figure like the square and the hexagon which are
both regular geometric figures but which possess different characters
and properties. Yet the archetypes reflect a single Center and are
contained in a single all-encompassing circumference like so many
regular polygons inscribed within a circle. They thus each reflect the
Divine which is at once the Center and the all-comprehending circle
while differing from each other in their earthly reflections.

There is, moreover, a kind of interpretation of the reflection of one
archetype within the earthly reflection of another. If Christianity has
a distinct archetype and Islam another, then Shī‘ism appears in Islam as
a purely Islamic reality, yet reflecting that type of archetypal
religious reality associated with Christianity, while Lutheranism
represents a Christian reality but one which, it could be said, is the
result of the reflection of the Islamic archetype within the Christian
world.32 The same could be said of the bhakti movement in medieval
Hinduism vis-à-vis Islam. In all these cases, the interpenetration of
reflections of archetypal religious realities remains totally
independent of historical influences which belong to a completely
different order of cause and effect. It is in fact the lack of access to
sapiential or sacred knowledge in modern studies of religions which
makes it impossible to understand the reality of the archetypal world
and of the vertical chain of cause and effect, with the result that
every new phenomenon in a religious world is reduced to either
historical influences or, even worse, socioeconomic causes.

This manner of seeing religions themselves as possessing archetypal
realities with levels of manifestation down to the earthly and the
interpenetration of the reflections of these archetypal realities within
each other explains why each religion is both a religion and religion as
such. Each religion contains the basic doctrine concerning the
distinction between Truth and falsehood or Reality and illusion and a
means of enabling man to attach himself to the Real. Moreover, although
one religion may emphasize love, another knowledge, one mercy and the
other self-sacrifice, all the major elements of religion must in one way
or another manifest themselves in an integral tradition. Christianity as
a way of love must have its path of knowledge in its Eckharts and
Nicolas of Cusas. Islam which emphasizes direct access to God must have
its intercession in the Shī‘ite Imams. And even Buddhism which
emphasizes so much man's own effort in reaching nirvāna through
following the eightfold path must have room for mercy which appears in
both Tibetan Buddhism and Amidhism.33 It is for this reason that to have
lived any religion fully is to have lived all religions and that in fact
to realize all that can be realized from the religious point of view man
can in practice follow only one religion and one spiritual path which
are at the same time for that person the religion and the path as such.

This does not mean that at every moment of time all religions are
actually in possession of all the possibilities inherent in them.
Religions do not die since their archetype resides in the immutable
domain and they are all possibilities in the Divine Intellect. But their
earthly embodiments do have their life cycles. There are those religions
of which we have historical records but which are “dead” in the sense
that they can no longer be practiced. Although their forms and symbols
remain, the spirit which enlivened these forms and symbols has left them
and returned to the imperishable world of the Spirit, leaving behind a
cadaver. There are other religions which, although still alive, are not
fully and integrally alive in the sense that certain of their dimensions
have become inaccessible. And there are still other religions whose
ritual practices have decayed and in which the spiritual presence has
given place to psychic ones. Therefore, the assertion that to have lived
any religion fully is to have lived all religions does not mean that it
is possible de facto to live fully every religion which happens to
exist, especially as far as the esoteric dimension of tradition is
concerned. As for the availability of this aspect of tradition today,
surely one cannot assert that all religions can in fact be lived fully
to the same extent.34 At any event, it is only sapiential or principial
knowledge that can discern the actual state of a religion as the thirst
for such a knowledge can determine what religion or path a particular
person will in practice seek, without this choice in any way
contradicting in principle the “transcendent unity of religions” and the
authenticity of all orthodox traditions as coming from the same Source
and revealing messages at whose heart resides the same truth. The
“theoretical” (in the original Greek sense of theōria as “vision”) view
of the universality of truth as found within the precincts of different
worlds of sacred form is one thing, and the actual availability of means
of gaining access to that truth in a particular moment of time and point
in space quite another. In any case, from the initiatic point of view,
it is in reality the way that chooses man and not man who chooses the
way, whatever appearances might seem to convey from the perspective of
the seeker.

The concept of the “relatively absolute” permits the traditional study
of diverse religions to see the manifestation of the Logos in each
religious universe as both the Logos and yet in its outward form as an
aspect of the Logos as asserted already centuries ago by Ibn ‘Arabī in
his Fuṣuṣ al-ḥikam (The Wisdom of the Prophets)35 in which each prophet
is identified with an aspect of the wisdom issuing from the Logos, which
Sufism naturally identifies with the Muḥammadan Reality (al-ḥaqiqat
al-muḥammadiyyah).36 This key concept is also able to discern within
each religious universe the way in which the reality of the Logos is
reflected in the founder, or a sacred book, or the feminine consort of
the Divine Act, or other theophanic realities of a religion.

In contrast to outward methods of comparison which juxtapose the
prophets or founders, sacred books, etc., of different religions, the
traditional method realizes the different levels upon which the
“relative absolute” is to be found in each world of sacred forms. It
sees Christ not only in comparison with the Prophet of Islam but also
with the Quran, both the Quran and Christ being the Words of God in
Islam and Christianity

respectively. It sees the similarity of the role played by the Virgin
Mary as the ground from which the Word is born and the soul of the
Prophet which received and divulged God's Word as the Quran.37 It is
able to comprehend the necessity for the presence of the feminine
element of that reality which is the Logos in various traditions but in
different forms and according to different degrees and levels of
manifestations. It sees the presence of the Virgin in not only
Christianity but also Islam as manifestation of a reality of a
“relatively absolute” character in two sister religions and realizes the
rapport of this reality to the feminine Kwan-Yin or the various consorts
of Kṛṣna or Śiva in very different spiritual universes. It grasps the
inner significance of the similarity between Śiva and Dionysius or
certain aspects of Hermes and the Buddha. It might be asserted that
these similarities have also been detected by scholars of religion who
have in fact written much about them without any interest in, or claim
of possessing, principial knowledge. This is true on the level of
outward comparisons, but it is only principial knowledge or the
traditional perspective that allows these comparisons to be made in
depth and to be spiritually efficacious and to bring to light the
relation that exists between primordial and archetypal religious types
within different religious universes.

Another salient feature of much importance which needs to be repeated
here is that principial or sacred knowledge of religion sees the meaning
of each sacred form in the context of the spiritual universe to which it
belongs, without either denying the significance of such forms on their
own level or remaining bound to the world of forms as such. It sees the
rites, symbols, doctrinal formulations, ethical precepts, and other
aspects of a religion as part of a total economy within which alone
their significance can be fully understood. Yet because at the heart of
each religious universe resides the Logos which is also the root of
intelligence, human intelligence is able to penetrate into these forms
and comprehend their language as well as the innate significance of each
and every syllable and sound of that language. It neither denies nor
denigrates a single sacred symbol, rite, or practice in the name of some
kind of abstract universal truth, nor does it create a simple one to one
correspondence between various elements of the different religious
universes.38 At the same time, it realizes that beyond all these forms
there stands the one formless Essence and that the major elements of
religion as such are found in every religion despite this formal
difference. The traditional method of studying religions is concerned
with forms as they reveal that Essence, or with accidents which reflect
the Substance. It does not negate the significance of forms on their own
level of reality but considers their relativity only in the light of the
Essence which shines through forms and which can be reached only through
the acceptance and living of those forms.39

The very concept of tradition, as described already in earlier chapters,
implies the character to totality as long as a tradition has been
preserved in an integral manner. The great truths, which concern aspects
of the Divine Nature and also the nature of the recipient of revelation,
man, must manifest themselves in one way or another in each religion
despite the fact that each religion is the reflection of a particular
archetypal reality. There is no

religion without the sense of the loss of the perfection associated with
the Origin and Center and no religion without the means of regaining
that perfection. There is no religion without prayer in whatever mode it
might be envisaged, including of course contemplative prayer, and no
religion in which prayer is not considered as the means of remolding
man. There is no religion in which reality is limited to the temporal
and spatial experience of this world and in which there is not a Beyond
to which the soul of man journeys (including even the Buddhist doctrine
of no-self which implies a state beyond that of samsāric existence and
the possibility for man of reaching that state). There are numerous
other fundamental elements of religion which manifest themselves in one
way or another in all religions, although not in the same way.40 Still,
one cannot disregard in any way the fundamental differences which
distinguish families of religion such as the Abrahamic, Indian, Iranian,
or Shamanic from one another. But within these worlds with
characteristic differences, each world possessing its own spiritual
genius, the sapiential perspective is able to discern the presence of
certain fundamental elements and to apply conceptual keys which concern
the religious reality as such.

For example, there are three basic ways to God or relations between man
and God, one based on fear, one on love, and one on knowledge, which in
the practical spiritual life correspond to the three well-known mystical
stations of contraction, expansion, and union.41 In one way or another
these elements are to be found in all the great traditions of mankind,
although they manifest themselves in each case according to the genius
of the tradition in question, and even appear in time according to the
traits of the historical unfoldment of that tradition. In Judaism the
perspective of fear found in the Pentateuch is followed by that of love
found in the Song of Songs and the Psalms and, only many centuries
later, by that of the gnosis of the Kabbalists. In Christianity the
ascetic attitude of the Desert Fathers based on the perspective of fear
is followed rapidly by the spirituality of love; only toward the end of
the Middle Ages is it followed by the real flowering of the sapiential
dimension of Christianity whose full development was truncated by the
revolt against Christianity in the Renaissance. In Islam again, the same
cycle is to be seen but in a more rapid order, spirituality based on
knowledge appearing earlier in the tradition. With all the major
differences in the manner of appearance of these basic attitudes and
types of religious and spiritual life in each tradition, however, the
three elements of fear, love, and knowledge have had to be present in
every religion, although each religion has placed greater emphasis upon
one element: Judaism upon fear; Christianity upon love; Islam upon
knowledge. Nor have these elements been absent from Hinduism, where they
are characterized clearly as karma, bhakti, and jnîāni yoga, or
Buddhism, where they are seen in different combinations and
relationships in the Theravada, Vajrayana, and Mahayana schools, despite
the nontheistic perspective of Buddhism.

Another example of this kind of application of metaphysical concepts as
keys for the understanding of diverse religious phenomena can be found
in the elements of truth and presence which characterize all religion.
Every integral religion must possess both elements. It must possess a
truth which

delivers and saves and a presence which attracts, transforms, and serves
as the means for deliverance and salvation.42 But these fundamental
components of religion are not found in the same manner in every
tradition. For example, within the Abrahamic family Christianity, in a
sense, emphasizes presence and Islam truth, while truth is of course
indispensable to Christianity as is presence to Islam. And within the
Islamic tradition Sunnism places greater accent upon truth and Shī‘ism
upon presence. The same two elements are to be found in Hinduism and
Buddhism, where again certain schools emphasize one and certain schools
the other of these fundamental components of what constitutes the
reality of religion. Principial knowledge draws these keys from the
“invisible treasury” of the Intellect and applies them to different
worlds of sacred form in such a way as to make these worlds intelligible
without either violating their particular genius or making them appear
as opaque facts to be studied as either phenomena or historical
influences.

It is only this type of knowledge that can take into account the amazing
multiplicity of sacred forms and meaning without either becoming lost in
this forest of multiplicity or reducing this multiplicity to something
other than the sacred, thereby detroying its innate significance. It is
also principial or sacred knowledge alone which can combine a
perspective wed to the vision of a metahistorical reality with one
centered upon the deployment and unfoldment of this reality in the
matrix of time and history. Only this type of knowledge of religions can
remain respectful of all that is discovered historically-but of course
not as interpreted from the historicist point of view-without reducing
that which by nature comes from the Eternal and is the call of the
Eternal to that which is temporal and changing.

Needless to say, the study of other religions in this manner is
essentially of an esoteric character. Man cannot penetrate into the
inner meaning of a form except through inner or esoteric knowledge.
Principial knowledge in fact cannot be attained save through esoterism
in the sense that this term was defined and discussed earlier. One might
say that only serious esoterists can carry out interreligious studies on
the deepest level without sacrificing either the exoterism or the
certitude and “absoluteness” associated with a particular religious
world. Sages and gnostics would be perfect persons to choose for a
veritable inter-and intrareligious dialogue if only they were available.
One might say that total religious understanding and the complete
harmony and unity of religions can be found, to quote Schuon, only in
the Divine Stratosphere and not in the human atmosphere. Of course not
all the faithful or scholars who study another religion are esoterists
or saints and sages, but since man needs the stratosphere in order to
survive in the atmosphere, it is vital today more than ever before to
consider this view from the Divine Stratosphere in the question of
religious dialogue or confrontation. In this as in several other
domains, the presence of the esoteric dimension of a tradition is
indispensable for the preservation of the equilibrium of the tradition
in question, for it alone provides certain answers to questions of
crucial importance, some of the most important of which in the modern
world involve the multiplicity of religious universes and sacred forms.

In seeking to understand the significance of principial or sacred
knowledge for the understanding of religious diversity, it is
interesting to turn to those instances of religious encounter which do
not belong to the modern period and which involved knowledge of a
precisely sacred rather than profane character. Some of these encounters
have been of a polemical, theological nature of which many examples
abound especially in Jewish, Christian, and Islamic sources, there being
a whole category of writings of this kind in Arabic literature.43 With
these writings and their content we are not so much concerned here,
although they are also of great importance in showing to what extent the
intensity of faith in a world impregnated by the presence of the sacred
influences the rational faculty of veritable theologians when compared
with many a secularized mind which characterizes itself as theological
today. But of more immediate concern are the instances when a sage,
possessing principial knowledge and participating in a sapiential
tradition, has confronted another religious universe as can be found in
the case of a Nicolas of Cusa, Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī, and of course, in the
Indian world, the numerous Sufis who tried to gain a direct
understanding of Hinduism and vice versa. The translation of sacred
texts from Sanskrit into Persian by such figures as Dārā Shukūh or
commentaries written by a Muslim sage such as Mīr Findiriskī upon a
basic work of Hinduism such as the Yoga Vaiṣiśtha44 are not cultural
phenomena of passing interest. They represent episodes of human history
which are of great significance for contemporary men because they
present cases in which, far away from the secularist context of the
modern world, attempts were made by men of faith to understand other
religions even across major barriers such as those which separate the
Abrahamic world from the Indian. In this domain the Islamic tradition
presents a particularly rich heritage which is of importance not only
for contemporary Muslims, who sooner or later will become more seriously
concerned than they are today with what is called comparative religion,
but also for the West.45 Such instances can help Western scholars
distinguish, for the sake of their own studies of other religions,
between elements which concern the innately difficult task of crossing
religious frontiers and those which involve a secularized mind and a
desacralized concept of knowledge with the help of which many a modern
scholar is seeking to make the same journey often under more “urgent”
circumstances. These cases also present examples of how an intelligence
impregnated with the sense of the sacred has approached the presence of
other worlds of sacred form starting from a point of departure different
from that of most modern scholars of comparative religion, whether they
be themselves theologians or out and out secular scholars.

Even if these overneglected instances are fully studied however, still
there is no doubt that it is only in the modern world that principial
knowledge has been applied to the worlds of sacred form in detail in as
much as they concern contemporary man as a religious being. Since such
an undertaking would not have been necessary in normal times, it was
left until the hour of the setting of the sun for tradition to decipher
in principle and in detail the languages of diverse religions, which are
in reality different languages speaking of the same Truth, or even
dialects of the same Divine

Language. Thus it prepares the ground for the rising again of the Sun
which, according to the eschatological teachings of many a tradition
including the Islamic,46 will mark the unveiling of the inner meaning of
all sacred forms and their inner unity and the realization of the
religious unity of mankind.

The task achieved by tradition in the study of different religions is,
therefore, an indispensable element for the life of religion itself to
the extent that contemporary man experiences both the secularizing
influences of the modern world and other religious universes. It is only
the traditional method and way of studying religions, based on the
sacred conception of knowledge itself, that can go beyond both polite
platitudes and fanatical contentiousness. Only through an intelligence
rooted in the sacred and a knowledge which is of the principial order
and attached to the sacred can the sacred be studied without
desacralizing it in the process.

An immediate fruit of the resacralization of knowledge would be the
expansion of the type of study of religions already carried out by the
masters of traditional doctrine so that the study of various religions
would not be simply a relativizing process and in itself an
antireligious activity. Only a scientia sacra of religion, and not the
science of religions as usually understood, can make available to
contemporary man the unbelievable beauty and richness of other worlds of
sacred form and meaning without destroying the sacred character of one's
own world.

Sacred knowledge issuing from the One is able to penetrate into various
worlds of multiplicity which have also issued from the One and to find
therein not a negation of its own point of departure, of its own
traditional foundations, but the affirmation of the transcendent Truth
which shines through and across the different universes of sacred form
that this Truth has created. In this manner sacred knowledge provides
the most precious antidote for a world withered by the blight of the
depletion of the sense of the sacred from all life and thought, an
antidote which issues from the Divine Mercy itself.

Notes
-----

[^1]: One could say that had such a sapiential tradition survived, the
modern world would not have come about, the homogeneity of the Western
tradition would not have been broken, and the presence of other
religions would not have to be taken into consideration in a way at all
differing from what we observe in other epochs of history. There is no
doubt, in fact, that the presence of other traditions today as a reality
which concerns man in an “existential” manner is deeply related to the
special predicament of modern man. Therefore, we pose this condition
only theoretically in order to bring out the fundamental difference
between the evaluation of the sacred by a sanctified intellect and by a
secularized one.

[^2]: The significance of this theme in the writings of the traditional
authors is to be found already in the definition given of tradition
which concerns eternal truth or wisdom as such. The number of articles
and works by traditional authors on the study of religions and their
“comparison” also attests to the centrality of this subject as far as
tradition is concerned. See, for example, Guénon, Introduction to the
Study of Hindu Doctrines; Coomaraswamy, “Paths that Lead to the Same
Summit,” in the Bugbear of Literacy; and esp. the numerous works of
Schuon such as his Transcendent Unity of Religions and Formes et
substances dans les religions. See alo M. Pallis, “On Crossing Religious
Frontiers,” in his The Way and the Mountain, pp. 62-78.

[^3]: The opposition of objective knowledge to the sacred and the
destruction of the sacred quality of religion on the pretext of being
objective and scientific lie at the root of that error which was
originally responsible for the reduction of the intellect to reason and
metaphysics to a purely human form of knowledge that means ultimately
the subhuman.

[^4]: It is precisely in this sense of “esoteric ecumenism” that Schuon
deals in his latest book, Christianisme/Islam-Visions d’oeucuménisme
ésotérique (in press), with the Christian and Islamic traditions.

[^5]: This encounter, despite its exceptional qualities, is nevertheless
of great importance for the present day debates between religions of the
Abrahamic family and those of India, although it has not been taken as
much into consideration by those concerned with the theological and
philosophical implications of the relation between religions today as
one would expect.

[^6]: One can discern this phenomenon in Europe itself where in
countries such as Spain serious interest in other religions and the
study of comparative religion has increased to the extent that the hold
of Christianity upon the people has become weakened. Likewise, in the
Islamic world the study of comparative religion has attracted most
interest in those countries such as Turkey where modern educational
institutions have witnessed the greatest amount of development and where
there is a fairly extensive reading public which is already modernized
to some degree and not strictly within the traditional Islamic
framework.

[^7]: Including the “science of religions” in the sense of the German
Religionswissenschaft.

[^8]: The appropriate methodology for the study of religions has been of
concern to most of the leadingWestern scholars of comparative religion,
such figures as J. Wach, M. Eliade, H. Smith, and W. C. Smith. The last
has been particularly concerned with the appropriate method of studying
other religions in the light of its meaning as religious activity. See,
for example,W. C. Smith, The Meaning and End of Religion: A New Approach
to the Religious Traditions of Mankind, New York, 1963; The Faith of
Other Men, New York, 1963; and Towards a World Theology, Philadelphia,
1981, esp. pt. 3, which deals with the theological and “existential”
significance of the study of religions from the point of view not only
of Christianity but of other faiths as well.

[^9]: The use of methods and philosophies in the study of religion in a
fashion which parallels what one encounters in science is to be seen
from the nineteenth century onward and the founding of the so-called
science of religion which is imbued with the same positivism that
characterizes the prevalent scientific philosophies of the day. The same
can be said about the role of evolutionary concepts in the study of both
religion and nature.

[^10]: With the rise of evolutionary philosophy, and its application to
the study of religions, many Christians thought that they could use this
method to their own advantage by studying other religions as stages in
the gradual perfection and growth of religion

culminating in Christianity. This approach, however, left Islam as an
embarrassing postscript which, according to the same logic, had to be
more perfect than Christianity.

The purely historical and evolutionary approach cannot in fact be used
as the means of defending any religion, including Islam, in which
certain modern apologists have taken recourse to nearly the same
arguments as those used by nineteenth-century Christian apologists
concerning other religions. This is so because once a purely historical
argument, based on the perfection of religion in time, is offered, there
are those who claim that with the passage of time newer religious
messages become more suitable and go “beyond” Islam or that Islam itself
has to evolve into a higher form! The traditional Islamic doctrine of
Islam’s finality and perfection as the last religion of this cycle of
humanity must not be confused with this nineteenth-century evolutionism
which has infiltrated into the minds of many Muslim modernists anxious
to defend Islam before the onslaught ofWestern orientalism or the
attacks of certain Christian missionaires.

[^11]: This subject has been already dealt with by Ch. Adams in his,
“The History of Religions and the Study of Islam,” American Council of
Learned Societies Newsletter, no. 25, iii-iv (1974): 1-10.

[^12]: There is a principle in Islamic philosophy according to which the
lack of knowledge or awareness of something cannot be proof of the
nonexistence of that thing (‘adam al-wujdan la yadullu ‘ala ‘adom
al-wujud). Many modern scholars seem to ignore completely this
principle, in fact reversing its tenet and insisting that what is not
known historically could not have existed, thereby ignoring completely
oral tradition and the whole question of transmission of knowledge and
authority which lie at the heart of the very concept of tradition.

[^13]: The interpretation of H. Corbin of phenomenology as the unveiling
of the inner meaning of the truth (the ta’wıl of Islamic sources) and
some of the earlier works of Eliade He close to the traditional
perspective, while there are a number of Scandinavian scholars of
religion who call themselves phenomenologists but whose perspective is,
to say the least, very far from that of tradition with its concern for
the reality of revelation and the particular universe that each
revelation brings into being.

[^14]: This lack of discernment between plenary and minor manifestations
of the Spirit and the various stages of the actual condition of various
religions is to be found in theworks of even such an eminent scholar as
Eliade, who interestingly enough has made contributions to nearly every
field of religious studies except Islam.

[^15]: The contemporary philosopher O. Barfield has returned to this
traditional theme in his Saving the Appearances; a Study in Idolatry,
London, 1957, although treating it in an evolutionary context which
destroys the permanent relationship that exists between appearances and
their noumenal reality, irrespective of what Barfield calls the
transformation of human consciousness from original participation to
final participation. See his chap. 21.

[^16]: Such is the characterization given by Corbin of phenomenology.
See his En Islam iranien, vol. 1, p. xx.

[^17]: Structuralism, which is associated with the anthropological works
of C. Lévi-Strauss but which has now penetrated into the fields of
philosophy, literary criticism, history, etc., is based on the tenet
that all societies and cultures possess a permanent, unchanging, and
common structure. Some have interpreted this view as being conducive to
the traditional perspective and opposed to the antitraditional
historicism that has dominated the social sciences for so long. While
the latter part of this assertion is true, there is no guarantee
whatsoever that structuralism leads to the traditional teachings any
more than does phenomenology if the appropriate metaphysical knowledge
is not available. One can say, however, that if there is such a
knowledge then certain intuitions of structuralism can be integrated
into the framework of that knowledge as can those of phenomenology.

[^18]: For the Hindu bhaktis the tradition provided the necessary
intellectual cadre and, in a sense, the tradition thought for them. It
is for this reason that, once cut off from this essential framework and
its protective embrace, the type of bhakti spirituality can lead to
dangerous aberrations on the intellectual plane and finally to the kind
of perversion of tradition in the name of the unity of religions which
is so widespread today and which is most often identified with one
movement or another of Indian origin.

[^19]: On the fundamental distinction between unity and uniformity see
R. Guénon, The Reign of Quantity, pp. 63-69.

[^20]: See, for example, S. Katz, “Language, Epistemology, and
Mysticism,” in S. Katz (ed.), Mysticism and Philosophical Analysis,New
York, 1978, pp. 22-74; and also idem, “Models, Modeling and Religious
Traditions” {in press).

[^21]: Although at the beginning many of those, like L. Massignon, who
were concerned with ecumenism within the orbit of Christianity, were
genuinely interested in the spiritual significance of other religions,
soon ecumenism became identified practically with modernism within the
church. In many cases during the past two decades, ecumenism has become
the caricature of the concern of tradition for the transcendent unity of
religions.

[^22]: See, for example, J. Hick, “Whatever Path Men Choose is Mine,” in
Hick and B. Hebblethwaite (eds.), Christianity and Other Religions,
Philadelphia, 1980, pp. 171-90.

[^23]: L. Swidler, the editor of the Journal of Ecumenical Studies, one
of the leading journals in America on the question of dialogue between
religions, and a person earnestly interested in better understanding
between religions, writes:

By dialogue here we mean a conversation on a common subject among two or
more persons with differing views. The primary goal of dialogue is for
each participant to learn from the other.. . Each partner must listen to
the other as openly, sympathetically as he or she can in an attempt to
understand the other’s position as precisely and, as it were, from
within, as possible. Such an attitude automatically includes the
assumption that at any point we might find the other partner’s position
so persuasive that, if we would act with integrity, we would have to
change our own position accordingly. That means that there is a risk in
dialogue: we might have to change, and change can be disturbing. But of
course that is the point of dialogue, change and growth… .

In conclusion let me note that there are at least three phases in
interreligious dialogue. In the first phase we unlearn misinformation
about each other and begin to know each other as we truly are. In phase
two we begin to discern values in the partner’s tradition and wish to
appropriate them into our own tradition. For example, in the
Catholic-Protestant dialogue Catholics have learned to stress the Bible
and Protestants have learned to appreciate the sacramental approach to
Christian life, both values traditionally associated with the other
religious community. If we are serious, persistent and sensitive enough
in the dialogue we may at times enter into phase three. Here we together
begin to explore new areas of reality, of meaning, of truth which
neither of us had even been aware of before. We are brought face to face
with this new, unknown to us, dimension of Reality only because of
questions, insights, probings produced in the dialogue. We may thus dare
to say that patiently pursued dialogue can become an instrument of new
revelation. From the Foreword of Swidler to P. Lapide and J. Moltmann,
Jewish Monotheism and Christian Trinitarian Doctrine, Philadelphia,
1981, pp. 7-[^15]:

[^24]: We do not mean to imply that all movements for the rapprochement
of religions, which in an etymological sense are ecumenical, are part of
this type of ecumenism which comprises a distinct movement within both
the Catholic and the Protestant churches.

[^25]: This is not meant in a pejorative sense since it is perfectly
legitimate to use every possible means to create peace among peoples
provided that religious truth is not sacrificed in the process. The
truth cannot be sacrificed for anything even if it be peace, for a peace
based upon falsehood cannot be a worthwhile or lasting one.

[^26]: As far as Christianity and Islam are concerned, there have been
formal and official meetings and conferences involving the Catholic
church, theWorld Council of Churches, and individual Protestant churches
outside theWorld Council. See, for example, the journal
Islamochristiana, published by the Pontificio Instituto di Studi Arabi
in Rome, which contains exhaustive information about Christian-Islamic
conferences and dialogues as well as some articles of scholarly interest
on the subject. As for theWorld Council of Churches, and its activities
in this field, see S. Samartha and J. B. Taylor (eds.)/Christian-Muslim
Dialogue, Geneva, 1973; also Christians Meet Muslims: Ten Years of
Christian-Muslim Dialogue, Geneva, 1977. There are many other works of
concerned scholars in this domain including K. Cragg who has translated
into English the City of Wrong: A Friday in Jerusalem by Kamel Hussein,
Amsterdam, 1959, and written many works on Islamic-Christian themes
including Alive to God: Muslim and Christian Prayer, New York, 1970; and
The Call of the Minaret, New York, 1965;also D. Brown, Christianity and
Islam, 5

vols., London, 1967-70; and from the Islamic side H. Askari,
Inter-Religion, Aligarh, 1977. M. Talbi, M. Arkoun, and several other
Muslim scholars have also been active in this process during the past
few years, but strangely enough from both sides little use has been made
of the sapiential perspective in making the inner understanding of the
other religion possible.

One of the most devout Catholics and, at the same time, great scholars
of Islam whose concern with Christian-Islamic understanding could have
served as a beacon of light for later Catholic scholars, but who has not
been as much followed as one would expect, was L. Massignon. See G.
Bassetti-Sani, Louis Massignon-Christian Ecumenist, Chicago, 1974; also
Y. Moubarak (ed.), Verse et controverse, Paris, 1971 (the editor, here
pursuing a series of questions and responses with Muslim scholars, is a
former student of Massignon and tries to reflect some of his teacher’s
concerns for Islamic-Christian understanding.

[^27]: Serious religious dialogue between Islam and Judaism independent
of Christianity has begun in earnest only recently because of the
prevalent political conditions in the Middle East. But they are bound to
be of the greatest import if taken seriously and in the context of the
traditional framework of both traditions.

[^28]: Although tolerance is better than intolerance as far as religions
other than our own are concerned, it certainly is far from sufficient
for it implies that the other religion is false yet tolerated.
Understanding of different universes of sacred form means that we come
to accept other religions not because we want to tolerate our fellow
human beings but because those other religions are true and come from
God. This perspective does not of course mean that one should tolerate
falsehood on the pretext that someone or some group happens to believe
in it.

[^29]: In normal times when each humanity lived as a separate world,
obviously such a knowledge was not necessary except in exceptional
circumstances. The necessity of such a penetration into other worlds of
sacred form and meaning increases to the extent that the modern world
destroys the religious homogeneity of a human collectivity.

[^30]: W. C. Smith must be mentioned esp. as one of the most notable
among the academicWestern scholars of religion who have emphasized the
importance of faith in the study of religions. See, for example, his
Faith of Other Men; Belief and History, Charlottesville, Va., 1977; and
Faith and Belief.

[^31]: On the relation between faith and knowledge see Schuon, Stations
of Wisdom, chap. 2, “Nature and Argument of Faith,” and his Logic and
Transcendence, chap. 13, “Understanding and Believing.”

[^32]: This question is treated by Schuon in several of his recent works
including Formes et substance dans les religions.

[^33]: On this difficult question see M. Pallis, “Is There Room for
‘Grace’ in Buddhism?” in his A Buddhist Spectrum, chap. 4, pp. 52-71.

[^34]: There are of course many factors which determine an act as
profound as that of conversion, but from the point of view of the
universality of tradition, it can be said that conversion can be
perfectly legitimate for a person seeking a type of sapiential and
esoteric teaching or spiritual instruction not available in his or her
own tradition. In such a case the person makes the conversion without
refuting the truth of the tradition that he or she is leaving behind but
in fact with the hope of coming to know even that tradition better than
before. In any case, conversion from the sapiential point of view is
never wed to proselytism of any kind without its denying the reality of
the dynamics of religious missions, propagation, and conversion on the
exoteric level.

[^35]: See Ibn al-‘Arabı, Bezels of Wisdom, especially chap. 15. On his
Logos doctrine see Burckhardt, Introduction to Sufi Doctrine, pp. 70ff.,
and his introduction to De l’Homme universel of al-Jılı.

[^36]: On the “Muh. ammadan Reality” see Ibn al-‘Arabı, op. cit, pp.
272ff.

[^37]: Such profound morphological and metaphysical comparisons are to
be found in all traditional writings on comparative religion but most of
all in the works of F. Schuon, esp. his Transcendent Unity of Religions;
Dimensions of Islam; and Formes et substance dans les religions.

[^38]: For example, orientation in a sacred space is an essential part
of religious rites but it does not mean that it has the same
significance or even the same kind of significance let us say, in the
rites of the American Indians and in the Christian Mass.

[^39]: On this theme see Schuon, Formes et substance dans les religions,
esp. pp. 19ff.

[^40]: We do not of course mean that all elements are repeated in all
religions or that, for example, time, creation, or even eschatological
realities are the same in every religion.

[^41]: These phases are dealt with in a general manner as far as
Christian mysticism is concerned by E. Underhill in her Mysticism, A
Study in the Nature and Development of Man’s Spiritual Consciousness,
New York, 1960, pt 2.

[^42]: See Schuon, Islam and the Perennial Philosophy, chap. 1, “Truth
and Presence.”

[^43]: Called al-Milal wa’ l-nihal in Arabic of which the work of
al-Shahristanı is the most famous. Milal is the plural of millah and is
used here to refer to theological views of various religious
communities; and nih. al the plural of nih. lah meaning philosophical
school or perspective.

[^44]: The case ofMır Findiriskı, who taught Avicenna’s Shifa’ and Qanun
in Isfahan, composed an important work on alchemy, was an accomplished
metaphysical poet, and wrote a major commentary upon the Yoga
Vais.i´stha, is of particular interest in the encounter between Islamic
and Hindu intellectual traditions and deserves to be studied much more.
On Mır Findiriskı see Nasr, “The School of Isfahan,” in A History of
Muslim Philosophy, vol. 2, pp. 922ff. F. Mojtaba’ı undertook a most
interesting Ph. D. thesis at Harvard University onMır Findirisk ı and
his commentary upon this Sanskrit work, but as far as we know, his work
has never seen the light of day.

[^45]: See S. H. Nasr, “Islam and the Encounter of Religions,” in Sufi
Essays, New York, 1975, pp. 106-34.

[^46]: According to Islam when the Mahdı appears before the end of time,
not only will he reestablish peace but he will also uplift the outward
religious forms to unveil their inner meaning and their essential unity
through which he will then unify all religions. Similar accounts are to
be found in other traditions such as Hinduism where the eschatological
events at the end of the historical cycle are also related to the
unification of various religious forms.
