Chapter Ten: Knowledge of the Sacred as Deliverance
===================================================

*As by a jar is meant the clay and by cloth the threads of which it is
composed, so by the name of the world is denoted consciousness; negate
the world and know it.*

**Śankara, APAROKSHANUBHUTI** 1

*And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.*

**Gospel of John**

Knowledge of the sacred leads to freedom and deliverance from all
bondage and limitation because the Sacred is none other than the
limitless Infinite and the Eternal, while all bondage results from the
ignorance which attributes final and irreducible reality to that which
is devoid of reality in itself, reality in its ultimate sense belonging
to none other than the Real as such. That is why the sapiential
perspective envisages the role of knowledge as the means of deliverance
and freedom, of what Hinduism calls mokśa. To know is to be delivered.
Traditional knowledge is in fact always in quest of the rediscovery of
that which has been always known but forgotten, not that which is to be
discovered, for the Logos which was in the beginning possesses the
principles of all knowledge and this treasury of knowledge lies hidden
within the soul of man to be recovered through recollection.2 The
unknown is not out there beyond the present boundary of knowledge but at
the center of man's being here and now where it has always been. And it
is unknown only because of our forgetfulness of its presence. It is a
sun which has not ceased to shine simply because our blindness has made
us impervious to its light.

The traditional concept of knowledge is concerned with freedom and
deliverance precisely because it relates principial knowledge to the
Intellect, not merely to reason, and sees sacred knowledge in rapport
with an ever-present Reality which is at once Being and Knowledge, not
with a process of accumulation of facts and concepts through time and
based on gradual growth and development. Without denying this latter
type of knowledge which in fact has existed in all traditional
civilizations,3 tradition emphasizes that central knowledge of the
sacred and sacred knowledge which is the royal path toward deliverance
from the bondage of all limitation and ignorance, from the bondage of
the outside world which limits us physically and the human psyche which
imprisons the immortal soul within us.

While considering the ordinary knowing function of the mind connected
with what we receive through the senses and the rational analysis of
this empirical data,4 tradition refuses to limit the role of knowledge
to this level, or that of the intelligence to its analytical function.
It sees the nobility of the human intellect in its being able to attain
that knowledge which is beyond time and becoming, which, rather than
engrossing us ever further in the accumulation of details and facts,
elevates man to the level of that illimitable Being which is the source
of all existents yet beyond them. To know that Being is to know in
principle all that exists and hence to become free from the bondage of
all limitative existence.5 Ordinary knowledge is of properties and
conditions of things that exist. Although legitimate on its

own level, it does not lead to freedom and deliverance. On the contrary,
when combined with passion, it can engross man in the web of māyā and,
while leading him to ever greater knowledge of details and facts which
would appear to be an expansion of his knowledge, in reality imprison
him further within the limits of a particular level of cognition and
also of existence. The knowledge which delivers, however, is of the root
of existence itself. It is based on the fundamental distinction between
Ātman and māyā and the knowledge of māyā in the light of Ātman. It is
principial knowledge, the Lā ilāha illa‘Llāh, which containing all truth
and all knowledge, also delivers from all limitation. To know existence
through the piercing light of intelligence is to be free from concern
with the limited type of knowledge which engrosses but does not liberate
the mind.

In order for knowledge to deliver, it must be realized by the whole man
and engage all that constitutes the human microcosm. Intellectual
intuition, although a precious gift from Heaven, is not realized
knowledge. The truth held in the mind, although it is the truth and
therefore of the highest value, is one thing and its realization
another.6 Realized knowledge concerns not only the intelligence which is
the instrument par excellence of knowing but also the will and the
psyche. It requires the acquisition of spiritual virtues which is the
manner in which man participates in that truth which is itself
supra-human. Realized knowledge even affects the corporeal realm and
transforms it. The physical radiance of the sage, of the one delivered
through gnosis, is a reflection on the physical plane of the light of
sacred knowledge itself. Realized knowledge resides in the heart, which
is the principle of both the mind and the body and cannot but transform
both the mind and the body. It is a light which inundates the whole
being of man removing from him the veil of ignorance and clothing him in
the robe of resplendent luminosity which is the substance of that
knowledge itself. As the Prophet said, “Knowledge is light” (al-‘ilmuu
nūrun), and realized knowledge cannot but be the realization of that
light which not only illuminates the mind but also beautifies the soul
and irradiates the body while, from the operative point of view,
realization itself requires as its necessary and preliminary condition
the training of both body and soul, a training which prepares the human
microcosm for the reception of the “victorial light”7 of sacred
knowledge.

Man is imprisoned by his own passions which usually prevent the
intelligence within him from functioning in its “normal” fashion
according to man's primordial nature, or what Islam calls al-fiṭrah.8
Such infirmities as pride, pettiness, and falsehood are deformations of
the soul which are obstacles that stand before the realization of
knowledge. The sapiential perspective sees these evils or sins not only
from a moral point of view related to man's will but also from an
ontological point of view related to being and knowledge. Man should not
be proud but humble because God is and we are not and the neighbor
possesses certain perfections which we do not possess. The basis of
humility is therefore not sentimental but intellectual.9 The same is
true of charity, truthfulness, and the other cardinal virtues whose
absence or inversion marks the deformities of the soul and,
theologically speaking, leads to the commitment of sin. To realize
knowledge man must cultivate these virtues and embellish the soul in
such a

manner that it will become worthy of the visitation of the angel of
knowledge. To speak of sacred knowledge without mentioning the crucial
importance of the virtues as the conditio sine qua non for the
realization of this knowledge, is to misunderstand completely the
traditional sapiential perspective.10 The virtues are so important that
many a Sufi treatise which is concerned with gnosis deals most of all
with the virtues rather than with pure knowledge itself,11 thus
preparing the soul for the reception of pure gnosis which is then
described in terms of Unity or tawḥīd.

The sapiential perspective reduces all sins or deformities of the soul
to ignorance of one kind or another or false attribution whose cure is
knowledge, but that does not mean that the illness is not present and
that the cure must not be administered. The fact that the sapiential
perspective sees the root of pride in our ignorance of the truth that
God is everything and we are nothing does not mean that we can continue
to be proud with this theoretical knowledge in mind. That would be like
reading in a book that a particular medicine is the cure for a certain
illness. That knowledge in itself would not cure the illness. Somewhere
along the way the medicine has to be actually swallowed no matter how
bitter the taste. Likewise, man must actually cultivate the virtue of
humility even after he has become aware theoretically of its
intellectual rather than sentimental meaning. Only in actually becoming
humble does man realize in his own being the reality which underlies and
necessitates humility. The same holds true for the other virtues. Of
course the emphasis upon different sets of virtues depends upon the
structure of each tradition and the spiritual reality of the founder who
is always emulated in one way or another as exemplar and model. But the
cardinal virtues such as humility, charity, and truthfulness are present
everywhere since they correspond in depth to the very reality of the
human state and the stages of spiritual realization.12

The virtues are our way of participating in the truth. As already
mentioned, the sacred demands of man all that he is. This is most of all
true of sacred knowledge. Hence the necessity of the virtues which are
the embellishment of the soul in conformity with the truth. Needless to
say, metaphysically speaking, the attainment of supreme knowledge which
delivers means the realization of the relativity of all that is relative
including the soul and the virtues and the presenting of the soul as a
gift to God. But this going beyond the realm of the soul is not possible
save through the transformation of the soul itself, for one cannot
present to God a gift not worthy of His Majesty and not reflecting His
Beauty. The Sacred which is the Divine Presence itself transmutes the
soul and bestows upon it beauty, power, and intelligence but then and
only then does it take these gifts away to open the door to the inner
chamber of the Sacred Itself wherein man receives that illuminating and
unifying gnosis which melts away all otherness and separation. To
overlook or belittle the significance of virtues in the name of the
Supreme Identity is as much a fruit of ignorance or avidyā as rejecting
forms on their own level in the name of the formless, as if one could
ever cast aside what one does not possess or go beyond where one is not
even located.

The association of realized knowledge with the spiritual virtues
indicates how far removed this knowledge is from the purely mental grasp
of concepts and judgments made upon them. This difference is to be seen
also in the organic and inalienable nexus which exists between knowledge
as here understood and love in contrast to purely mental knowledge that
can and in fact does exist without any relation to love or to qualities
of the person who holds such a knowledge as far as love is concerned. In
the attainment of sacred knowledge there cannot but exist the element of
love because the goal of this knowledge is union and it embraces the
whole of man's being including the power of love within the human soul.
Although the path of love and knowledge are markedly different, the
gnostic, the jnîāni or al-‘ārif bi'-Llāh, cannot be devoid of what love
implies although his path does not limit itself to the I-thou duality
with which the spiritual way based purely on love or bhakti is
concerned. Christian mysticism is for the most part a mysticism of
love13 but, within the Christian tradition as elsewhere, the gnostic
perspective where it has existed has certainly not been devoid of the
dimension of love as seen in the case of a Dionysius or Eckhart.

Furthermore, in those traditions whose spirituality is predominantly
gnostic such as Islam, the element of love is constantly present as is
evident in the works of an Ibn ‘Arabī or Rūmī. The element of love is in
fact present even in the sapiential perspective of a tradition such as
Hinduism where the path of knowledge is more clearly delineated and
separated from that of love. It should never be forgotten that the
supreme master of Hindu gnosis, Śankara, who is the father of the
Advaita Vedanta school for which only Ātman is ultimately real, all else
being māyā to be pierced through by the light of knowledge and
discernment, composed devotional hymns to Śiva. As for Islam, an Ibn
‘Arabī, who formulated the doctrine of the Transcendent Unity of Being
(waḥdat al-wujūd), composed works based on the language of love which
were permeated with what the yearning through the power of the lover for
the Beloved implies, as can be seen in his Tarjumān al-ashwāq (The
Interpreter of Desires). Furthermore, he asserted that finally, after
the attainment of the highest state of realization, “the Lord remains
the Lord and the servant, the servant.”14 The pole of union, which is
related to the realization of the One through knowledge and by virtue of
passing through the gate of annihilation and nothingness, does not
abrogate the other pole based upon the relation between the lover and
the Beloved or the servant and the Lord, to use the expression of Ibn
‘Arabī. It is only through realized knowledge that man can reach this
truth and taste the actual experience of the One, which yet allows the
servant to have the awareness of his own nothingness in the light of the
One.15 Only gnosis can make possible the attainment of that sacred
knowledge, although pure knowledge is inseparable from love like the sun
itself whose rays are at once light and heat, the Sun which both
illuminates and vivifies. There is no common ground between the
knowledge of Ultimate Reality of which the gnostics speak and the
philosophical monism which would reduce the One to a mental concept
logically opposed to the I-thou duality and all the other principial
differentiations of which scientia sacra speaks, as there is no

common ground between the realization of the Truth and mental discourse
about it. The rapport between knowledge and love and the distinction
between theoretical knowledge of even a traditional character and
realized knowledge are brought out in Sufism in the manner in which such
masters as Rūmī, ‘Aṭṭār or Najm al-Dīn Rāzī16 speak of knowledge or
“intellect” (‘aql) and love (‘ishq). At first sight it seems that they
are simply speaking about the path of love, that their concern is with a
kind of mysticism based on love until we come across a verse of the
Mathnawī such as,

*We are non-being displaying existence;*

*Thou art Absolute Being, our very being.17*

Then we realize that when such Sufis denigrate “knowledge” in the name
of “love,” they are trying to indicate the crucial importance of
realization and the lack of common measure between theoretical and
realized knowledge. For them there is the stage of theoretical
knowledge, there is love, and then there is realized knowledge which
includes the element of love and which they call ‘ishq or love itself in
order to distinguish it from theoretical knowledge or ‘aql. Their
perspective, therefore, far from being opposed to the supremacy of
knowledge, is based on that knowledge as it has become actualized and
has consumed the totality of man's being. The whole rapport between
traditional knowledge of a theoretical kind, but in the positive sense
of theory as theōria or vision, and realized knowledge which the Sufis
of this school call ‘ishq is summarized by Ḥāfiẓ in a single verse,

The possessors of “intellect” [‘āqilān] are the pivotal point of the
compass of existence,

But love [‘ishq] knows that they are wandering in this circle in
bewilderment.18

Traditional knowledge, even of a theoretical kind, is related to the
center of existence and not to a peripheral point, but only realized
knowledge is aware of the relativity of every conceptualization and
every mental formulation vis-à-vis the Absolute and of that bewilderment
which is not the result of ignorance but of wonder before the Divine
Reality. For this bewilderment is none other than the one to which the
Prophet of Islam referred when he prayed, “O Lord, increase our
bewilderment in Thee.”19

Sacred knowledge is also not opposed to action but incorporates it on
the highest level as it encompasses the dimension of love. Today,
contemplation is often conceived of as being opposed to action. In the
modern world in which contemplation has been nearly completely
sacrificed for a life of totally exteriorized action, it is often
necessary to emphasize the independence and even opposition of
contemplation vis-à-vis action as currently understood. Yet, there is no
innate contradiction between them. The highest form of action is the
invocation of the Divine Name associated with the prayer of the heart
which requires the complete pariticipation of man's will and
concentration of the mind and which enables man to accomplish the most
perfect and powerful action possible, an action whose ultimate agent is
God Himself.20 But this action is also the source of knowledge and
inseparable from contemplation.21 On the highest level, therefore,
knowledge and action meet while on the level of action itself, the
gnostics and contemplatives have often produced prodigious feats of
action

ranging from the writing of voluminous works to the construction of
great works of art, not to speak of the founding of institutions of a
social and political nature. The prototype of this wedding between
knowledge and action is to be found of course in those plenary
manifestations of the Logos which are the great prophets and avatārs who
have both perfect and total knowledge and transform the life of a whole
humanity. The path of action, or what the Hindus call karma yoga, cannot
embrace that of knowledge because the lesser can never comprehend the
greater. But since knowledge is the highest means of spiritual
attainment, it embraces the path of action as it does that of love and
delivers man from the limitations of both concordant actions and
reactions and the duality associated with love understood as sentiment,
while incorporating unto itself all that is positive in the power of
both love and action which, like knowledge, belong to that theomorphic
being called man.

Having spoken of the structure and content of sacred knowledge in its
relation to the totality of the human state, it is necessary to say a
few words about the manner through which such knowledge is attained,
although the full treatment of such a subject requires a separate
extensive study of its own. How can one gain access to that knowledge
which sanctifies and delivers? Based on all that has been said so far,
our obvious response would be through tradition. But this answer,
although necessary, is not sufficient by itself since sacred knowledge
deals with matters of a veritable esoteric nature which, even in a
traditional context, cannot be taught to everyone and which can even be
harmful if transmitted to a person not prepared for its reception.
Moreover, such a knowledge can never be divorced from ethics. The moral
qualifications of the person who is to be taught must be considered, in
complete contrast to the situation in the modern world where the
transmission of knowledge has become divorced from considerations of the
moral qualifications of the recipient of such a knowledge. The
traditional view is completely otherwise, not only as far as sapience is
concerned but for every kind and form of knowledge. One can see that
even in the realm of the teaching of the arts and the crafts where the
training of the student is ethical as well as technical. No one can be
taught the knowledge associated with a particular craft without
possessing the required moral qualifications and also being trained to
practice certain ethical virtues along with the trade associated with
the craft itself. If the teaching of the techniques of a craft is based
on the moral qualifications of the pupil whom the master craftsman deems
fit to instruct, how much more is this true of sciences which are
ultimately of a divine character and which are not strictly speaking
man's to dispense with as he wishes? Also, to teach this type of
knowledge in an effective manner requires the actualization of certain
potentialities and energies in the human being to which ordinary man
does not have access and which can be reached only if, with the aid of
certain keys, the doors to the inner recesses of the soul and the higher
levels of being and of consciousness are unlocked.

All of these and many other considerations, which are in the very nature
of things, have led to the necessity, within traditions which possess
the possibility of providing means to attain sacred knowledge, of
channeling

these means through persons, orders, and organizations of an esoteric
character and initiatic nature. There is the need for spiritual
training, hence the master who knows and who can teach others, the
master who has climbed the dangerous path of the cosmic mountain to its
peak and who can instruct others to do the same. There is the
indispensable need for a special power or grace which cannot but come
from the source of the tradition in question and which can remain valid
only if there is regularity of transmission or in any case access to the
source of the tradition.22 There is the necessity of preserving and
protecting a teaching which cannot be taught to everyone and which, as
mentioned, can be harmful for those who are not qualified to receive it.
There is the necessity of preventing this kind of knowledge from
becoming profaned. All of these considerations have necessitated within
traditions belonging to the historical period, when cosmic conditions
have necessitated the separation of the exoteric and esoteric views,23
the creation within themselves of appropriated initiatic organizations,
means of transmission, instruction, and the like which one can still
observe in worlds as far apart as those of Japanese Zen and Moroccan
Sufism.

In normal times in fact, sacred knowledge was rarely divulged in books
and if it were, it appeared in a form which necessitated the traditional
oral commentary to unveil its true import.24 As Plato, himself a master
of gnosis, said, serious things are not to be found in books. Over the
millennia sacred knowledge survived not because the manuscripts by the
masters were preserved in well-kept libraries, but because the oral
transmission and a living spiritual presence continued, because in each
traditional world in which such a knowledge survived the Logos continued
to illuminate the minds and in fact the whole being of certain people
who belonged with all their heart and soul to the religion lying at the
heart of that traditional world. The realization of sacred knowledge
could not but be according to a disciplined practice kept hidden to
protect both that knowledge and those who, not ready to receive it,
might be harmed by it as a small child might suffer mortally from the
consumption of the food which constitutes the regular diet of adults.

The realization of sacred knowledge, therefore, has always been tied to
the possibilities which tradition makes available. Obviously, therefore,
if sacred knowledge is taken seriously both in its essence and as it has
existed in human history, it cannot be separated from revelation,
religion, tradition, and orthodoxy. The army of pseudo-masters who roam
the earth today cannot make a plant whose roots have been severed to
bloom no matter how many beautiful words or ideas they seek to draw from
the inexhaustible treasury of sapience to be found in both East and
West. The possibilities in the human intellect, which must be actualized
in order for man to attain in a real and permanent manner sacred
knowledge, cannot be actualized save by the Intellect, the Logos, and
those objective manifestations of the Logos which constitute the various
religions. Anyone who claims to perform such a function by himself and
independent of a living tradition is in reality claiming to be himself
the Logos or the manifestation of the Logos which, with what is to be
observed in the current scene, is as absurd as to claim to

be lightning without possessing either the light or the thunder which
must accompany it. In any case, a tree is judged by the fruit which it
bears. The scientia sacra which has issued from tradition and which is
the fruit of realization is imbued with the perfume of grace and robed
with forms of celestial beauty in total contrast to that type of
pretentious esoterism and occultism rampant today which, even if
possessing bits of traditional knowledge drawn from sundry sources, is
characterized by a singular lack of that grace and beauty which liberate
and which are inseparable from all authentic expressions of the Spirit.

The fact that sacred knowledge is by definition for the few does not
mean either that other human beings are deprived of salvation in the
religious sense or that the significance and import of such a knowledge
is thereby limited to the few. All traditions are based on a way of
living and dying which is for everyone in the humanity embraced by that
tradition and a way which enables each human being to live a life that
leads to either felicity in the hereafter or damnation, to the paradisal
or infernal states. The paths of action and love are accessible to all.
In religions with a Divine Law such as Islam, this Law or Sharī‘ah knows
of no exception and must be followed by everyone in his right mind from
the gnostics and sages like Junayd and Ḥallāj to the simple peasant in
the fields or cobbler in the bazaar. Divine Justice is therefore not
denied or negated if the sapiential path remains for an intellectual
elite, because there are other paths for those whose nature is not given
to what the path of knowledge requires.25

Nor is the significance of sacred knowledge limited because only a few
can follow its call. This is in fact true of all knowledge, even of the
profane kind. How many physicists are there in the world and how many
people can comprehend what goes on at the frontiers of physics today?
Yet the effect of what those few who deal with the frontiers of physics
theorize, devise, and discover has a far-reaching impact upon the life
of the planet. In the 1920s and 30s, when one could fit practically all
the physicists who were doing new work in physics into a single
auditorium or large lecture hall, new theories and techniques were
devised which soon shook the world, both figuratively and literally. In
the case of sacred knowledge the rapport between the impact of the
knowledge of the few and the lives of the many has always been even much
greater for numerous reasons, not the least of which is that modern
physics does not deal with ethics whereas sacred knowledge has been
always related to the ethical foundations of the religion in which the
particular form of sapience in question has flowered. Esoterism in each
tradition has been the esoteric dimension of the tradition in question,
not of something else. That is why the relation of the Taoist sage to
the life of Chinese society as a whole or of a Clement of Alexandria to
the Christian community or of a Sufi saint and gnostic like Shaykh
Abu'l-Ḥasan al-Shādhilī to the Islamic world is far more profound and
their influence far more extensive and enduring than that of
contemporary scientists vis-à-vis modern society. One need not even
speak of modern philosophers whose impact upon the world about them has
become reduced to practically nil unless they become propagators of
pseudoreligious ideologies such as Marxism, which would seek to replace
religion itself. In the latter case we

are no longer dealing with science or philosophy in the usual sense of
the word but ideologies of mass appeal whose very popularity excludes
their remaining of a strictly “intellectual” nature or concerned with
the realm of knowledge alone.

In any case, the quantitatively limited expansion of the domain of
sacred knowledge and the fact that its proponents have always been few
does not at all imply any limit upon its influence within a whole world.
A single lamp can illuminate a large area around it. In the same way the
very existence of sacred knowledge provides not only the possibility for
total liberation and deliverance for those who are able to follow its
demands and pursue a path of a sapiential nature, but also makes
available certain keys and answers which any religious collectivity
needs in order to preserve its equilibrium. Such a knowledge makes
available certain intellectual supports and props for faith and thereby
helps even those who are unable to heed its call directly to live in a
religious world protected from the mental doubt and skepticism which
finally turn against faith itself. This knowledge alone can engage the
mind in its totality and enable reason to become wed to faith rather
than the mind and its rational powers becoming servile to that
insatiable rationalism which devours and which like an acid burns the
living tissues of the world of man and nature. The bitter experience of
the modern world is categorical proof, if proof be needed, of what
happens to a world in which such kind of knowledge is so eclipsed as to
become practically inaccessible and, in any case, of such peripheral
concern that it no longer has a role to play in either what is called
the intellectual life or even the religious life of the community.

But let us return to the question of the realization of sacred knowledge
itself. The goal of this knowledge is the Ultimate Reality, the
Substance which is above all accidents, the Essence which is above all
forms. Since man lives in the world of forms, however, even for the path
of sapience which seeks the Highest Reality, forms are of great
significance and as already mentioned, it is in fact only the sapiential
perspective which can provide the key for the true significance of forms
and symbols. The lover of God can claim indifference to forms in his
state of spiritual drunkenness but the gnostic whose aim is to know
cannot but pierce into the meaning of forms in order to go beyond them.
That is why the metaphysics of sacred art in various traditions has been
expounded by the Platos, Plotinuses, Dionysiuses, Shih-T'aos, and the
like-all of whom belong to the sapiential perspective of their
tradition. Metaphysically speaking, the understanding of forms is an
aspect of the intellectual journey of the gnostic toward the formless,
while initiatically and operatively also forms play a crucial role as
support for this journey. Whether it be a particular symbol sanctified
by the tradition to which the gnostic in question belongs or a
particular work of sacred art or a natural feature such as a mountain,
tree, or lake with which he “identifies” himself, forms play a central
role in the life of those who have sung most eloquently and forcefully
of the formless. Śri Ramana Maharshi who asked simply, “Who am I?” in a
most direct jnîani manner, “identified” himself with the sacred mountain
Arunachala,26 while Ibn ‘Arabī wrote one of his most powerful works on
gnosis upon beholding the

beautiful face of a young Persian woman circumambulating the Ka‘bah.27
Those masters of sapience who have reached the other shore, the shore of
the formless, have done so on the wing of forms of whatever nature these
forms might have been. They have also been usually the type of spiritual
persons most sensitive to forms and those who have created works of
great beauty in their exposition of knowledge of the formless, as if
they wanted to demonstrate in their own being to the world about them
the metaphysical principle that beauty is the splendor of the Truth.

The basic form which carries the gnostic to the shore beyond all forms
is of course that central theophany at the heart of revelation which
constitutes prayer in its most inward and universal sense. The aspirant
to sacred knowledge prays like all human beings who are aware of their
human vocation. But he also performs that quintessential prayer which is
the prayer of the heart, the invocation of the Divine Name with its
appropriate meditative and contemplative techniques. Although there are
certainly other ways of spirtual realization based on different forms as
images and symbols, the meditation upon and invocation of the Name of
the Divinity, as found in the prayer of the heart of Orthodoxy, the
nimbutsu of Jodo-Shin Buddhism, japa yoga in Hinduism, or the dhikr in
Sufism, provides in this period of the cosmic cycle the primary path of
spiritual realization and the most accessible means for the attainment
of that knowledge which is sacred and which sanctifies.28 This
quintessential prayer which is the prayer of the gnostic is not in
reality the prayer of man to God. Rather, God Himself “prays” in man.
The invocation of the Divine Name is not by man qua man but by the
Divinity who invokes His own Name in the temple of the purified body and
soul of his theomorphic creature. In the same way the sacred knowledge
of God is not attained by man as such. Rather, man knows God through
God, he is the knower (or gnostic) by and through the Divinity and not
of the Divinity (the al-‘arif bi'Llāh of Islam).29

The great mystery of the operative aspect of the path of knowledge, as
in fact of all spirituality, is the power of sacred form to enable and
aid man to reach the formless, and this mystery is nowhere more directly
and powerfully manifested than in the case of that supreme sacred form
which is the Name of the Divinity as manifested through revelation in a
particular sacred, or sometimes liturgical, language. Here, a sound
system or mantra and a combination of letters unite in a cluster of
visual and sonorous forms which, while belonging in their external
aspect to the world of multiplicity and form, contain a presence which
transmutes the being of man and possess a power which carries man beyond
the formal order. In a sense, one can say that in His Blessed Name, God
provides, amidst the very waves of the sea of forms, the vessel which
enables man to pass beyond the sea of all forms and all becoming. The
formless Essence “becomes” form in order for form to “become” the
formless Essence. The gnostic seeks the formless but the gate to the
Infinite Empyrean of the formless is sacred form at the heart of which
lies the quintessential prayer associated with the invocation of the
Divine Name in its proper traditional and liturgical settings.30 The
Name is both the means toward knowledge and Knowledge itself; it is the
gate that opens toward the abode of the Truth in its ultimate sense and
the Truth

Itself. Through that inner mystery of the union of the Name and the
Named, of God and His Blessed Name, the attainment of the sacred form is
the attainment of the formless, for to live always in the Divine Name is
to live in God and to see all things in Him, as they really are. Sacred
form, especially the Divine Name, is thus not only the support of the
seeker of sacred knowledge but also his goal. Being the direct “form of
the Formless,” it not only leads to the abode beyond forms but is itself
in its inner infinitude the beyond here and now. In it the gnostic
rediscovers his original abode toward which all creatures wander in
their long cosmic journey but which only the realized human being
reaches even in this life while living among men and in this world.

Precisely because of the awareness of his origin and of his home, the
person in whom the fire of sacred knowledge has become inflamed and in
whom the search and quest for the knowledge of the sacred has become a
central concern is already a stranger to this world. He is an exile
constantly in quest of that land of nowhere which is yet the ubiquitous
Center and which constitutes his original homeland. The theme of the
stranger or exile runs like a golden thread through the sapiential and
gnostic literature of all traditions.31 As in the Hermetic Poimandres or
the Avicennan Ḥayy ibn Yaqẓān, the adept in quest of knowledge
encounters a luminous being, the Intellect, who recalls him to his own
origin and reminds him of his own estrangement in a world which is not
his own and in which he cannot but be a stranger and an exile.32 He must
therefore seek the fountain of life, led in this quest by the figure
whom Islamic esoterism calls Khiḍr, the guide upon the spiritual path,
the representative and symbol of the Eliatic function33 which cannot but
be always present. Having drunk of the water of immortality, which is
also the elixir of Divine Knowledge, man regains his original
consciousness and primordial abode. His wandering ceases and he arrives
after his long cosmic journey at that home from which his true self
never departed. The homeland of the gnostic is forever that spiritual
country that is nowhere and everywhere, the land about which Rūmī says,

That homeland is not Egypt, Iraq or Syria,

That homeland is the place which has no name.34

For man to become an exile in this world is already a sign of spiritual
awakening. To depart from the prison of limitation which this world is
in comparison with the illimitable expanses of the spiritual world and
finally the Divine Infinity is to be delivered through sacred knowledge.

The theme of the exile of the comtemplative and spiritual person in this
world is elaborated in combination with the theme of the Orient and the
Occident in the celebrated treatise Qiṣṣat al-ghurbat al-gharbiyyah (The
Story of the Occidental Exile)35 by Suhrawardī, the master of the School
of Illumination (al-ishrāq) in Islam. In this remarkable initiatic
narrative, the hero, who is the gnostic, hails from Yemen, the land of
the right hand, hence by implication the East and the place of the
rising sun or of light which is also being.36 But he is imprisoned in a
well in Qayrawān in the western extremity of the Islamic world, in the
world of the setting sun and of shadows. Only when the hoopoe, the bird
which symbolizes revelation, brings him news of his father, the king of
Yemen, is the hero awakened to

his call and he succeeds through numerous perils in reaching his
original abode.

The story of the “Occidental Exile” is that of every contemplative
imprisoned in the limited world of the senses and of physical forms. The
soul of man and the intellect which shines at the center of his being
come from the Orient of the universe, that is, from the spiritual
world.37 In this sense all men are Orientals; only the gnostic is aware
of his Oriental origin and hence remains in exile in a world which is
not his own, in that Occident which symbolizes the darkness of material
existence in its aspect of opacity and not symbol. The Prophet of Islam
has said, “The world is the prison of the faithful and the paradise of
the unbeliever.”38 The sapiential interpretation of this well-known
ḥadīth is that the person who possesses the intellectual intuition which
enables him to have a vision of the supernal realities cannot but be
alienated in a world characterized by material condensation,
coagulation, separation, and most of all illusion. For him, knowledge is
both the means of journeying from this world to the abode which
corresponds to his inner reality, and which is therefore his home, and
of seeing this world not as veil but as theophany, not as opacity but as
transparence. Whether the gnostic speaks of journeying to the Reality
beyond or living in that Reality here and now does not change the
significance of the condition of the spiritual man being in exile in
this world, for such a man is in exile as long as he is what he is and
the world is what it is. Now, through knowledge he can either journey
beyond the cosmos to that Metacosmic Reality in the light of which
nothing else possesses separative existence, or he can realize here and
now that the world as separation and veil did not even possess an
independent reality and that the experience of the world as prison was
itself a result of ignorance and false attribution. In either case the
realization of sacred or principial knowledge delivers man from the
bondage of that limitation which characterizes man's terrestrial
existence and makes him an exile removed from his original abode and his
true self.

The journey to the spiritual Orient by the person in quest of sacred
knowledge is the journey to the Tree of Life, to that tree whose fruit
bore for man the unitive knowledge from which he became deprived upon
tasting of the fruit of the Tree of Good and Evil or separative
knowledge. That is why Lurian Kabbala identifies the Orient with the
Tree of Life itself.39 To taste the fruit of this tree, which fallen man
has forgotten as a result of the series of descents from the primordial
perfection that mark his origin, is to experience that knowledge which
is “tasted knowledge,” savientia (literally from the Latin root meaning
“to taste”), the ḥikmah dhawqiyyah (the “tasted knowledge”) of the
Muslim sages such as Suhrawardī. To jouney to this Orient is to return
to the Origin, the Orient in its metaphysical sense, being none other
than the Origin.40

Moreover, the knowledge of this Orient is itself Oriental knowledge,
that is, one based on the sacramental function of the Intellect and its
illuminating power. To gain such a knowledge is to gain certitude, to be
saved from the doubt that causes aberration of the mind and destroys
inner peace. Sacred knowledge is based upon and leads to certitude
because it is not based on

conjecture or mental concepts but involves the whole of man's being.
Even when such a knowledge appears as theory, it is not in the modern
meaning of theory, but in its etymological sense as vision. It imposes
itself with blinding clarity upon the mind of the person who has been
given the possibility of such a vision through intellectual intuition.
Then as the process of realization of this knowledge unfolds, it begins
to encompass the whole of man and to consume him, leaving no locus
wherein doubt could linger. That is why Islamic gnosis, basing itself
directly upon the message and terminology of the Quran, which speaks so
often of certitude (‘al-yaqīn), envisages all the stages of the
acquiring of sacred knowledge as steps in the deepening of man's
certitude. It speaks of the “science of certainty” (‘ilm al-yaqīn), “the
vision of certainty” (‘ayn al-yaqīn), and the “truth of certainty” (ḥaqq
al-yaqīn) which are compared to hearing about the description of fire,
seeing fire, and being consumed by fire.41 Of course only he who has
been consumed by fire knows in the ultimate sense what fire is, but even
the description of fire provides him with some knowledge of it which,
coming from the source of traditional authority, is already combined
with an element of certitude. Therefore, from the beginning of the
process of acquiring knowledge of a sacred order, certitude is present.

This knowledge by its very nature encompasses all that man is and cannot
exclude either love or faith which are the participation of man in what
he does not know with immediacy but which he yet accepts with his mind
and heart. Knowledge which removes the veil of separation does not annul
this faith but comprehends it and bestows upon it a contemplative
quality.42 In any case he who has realized sacred knowledge and gained
certitude participates in it with the whole of his being and with all
that faith contains and implies in the religious sense. Far from being
opposed to faith, sacred knowledge is both its support and its protector
before that doubting mind which, cut off from both the Intellect and
revelation, loses the security and peace of certitude and, in its
attempt to embrace everything within the fold of its directionless
agitation, turns upon faith itself.

If sacred knowledge involves the whole being of man, it also concerns
the giving up of this being for its goal is union. The miracle of human
existence is that man can undo the existentiating and cosmogonic process
inwardly so as to cease to exist;43 man can experience that
“annihilation” (the fanā' of the Sufis) which enables him to experience
union in the ultimate sense. Although love, as the force “that moves the
heaven and the stars,” plays a major role in attracting man to the
“abode of the Beloved” and realized knowledge is never divorced from the
warmth of its rays, it is principial knowledge alone that can say neti
neti until the Intellect within man which is the divine spark at the
center of his being realizes the Oneness of the Reality which alone is,
the Reality before whose “Face” all things perish according to the
Quranic verse, “All things perish save His Face.”44 This knowledge, as
already stated, is strictly speaking not human. Man qua man cannot have
union with God. But man can, through spiritual realization and with the
aid of Heaven, participate in the lifting of that veil of separation so
that the immanent Divinity within him can say “I” and the illusion of a
separate self, which is the echo and reverberation upon the

planes of cosmic existence of principial possibilities contained in the
Source, ceases to assert itself as another and independent “I,” without
of course the essential reality of the person whose roots are contained
in the Divine Infinitude ever being annihilated.

*Between I and Thou, my “I-ness” is the source of torment.*

*Through Thy “I-ness” lift my “I-ness” from between us.45*

Ḥallāj

The goal of sacred knowledge is deliverence and union, its instrument
the whole being of man and its meaning the fulfillment of the end for
which man and in fact the cosmos were created. During the long millennia
of human history when men everywhere lived according to the dicta of
tradition, this knowledge was present as an ubiquitous light in the
inner dimension of various religions along with the appropriate means of
realization tied, through their doctrine, symbols, formal homogeneity,
and especially grace, to the source of the revelation in question. In
the unfolding of the history of the world it could not but be,
symbolically speaking, in the geographical West that this knowledge
would be first lost, leading to the desacralization of knowledge and
ultimately of all of life, including certain schools of theology. But
the shadows resulting from this setting of the Sun of gnosis were to
spread to the geographical Orient itself in reversal of the cosmic
movement of the sun from the East to the West, weakening but not
destroying the sources of such a knowledge even in those traditional
worlds of the East which have survived to this day.

Before the complete setting of the Sun, however, the seed of this Tree
of Life which is the spiritual Orient could not but be transplanted from
the geographical Orient to the soil of the land from which the
desacralization of knowledge had begun. Paradoxically enough, as those
lands of the Orient, which were Oriental both geographically and
symbolically, were to be covered completely by this shadow spreading
from the land of the setting sun, something of that Oriental knowledge
had to be reborn within the Occident itself. And as lands and areas of
the East considered as sacred by various traditions became more and more
desecrated in one way or another, the sacred land and spiritual homeland
has had to be carried to an ever greater degree within the hearts and
souls of human beings. The reinstatement of the traditional conception
of knowledge as related to the sacred cannot but be a step in the
rediscovery of that Orient which, although becoming ever more
inaccessible as a definable geographical area, remains a blinding
reality in the world of the Spirit.46 In that sense, all those who seek
such a knowledge are pilgrims to that Orient which will never cease to
be, an Orient which cannot but attract more pilgrims from the Occident
itself, pilgrims who, in making such a journey, resuscitate at the same
time the “Oriental knowledge” or sapiential dimension of the Western
tradition itself with all its depth and richness.

In this situation in which, as the shadows of a world marked by the loss
of the sense of the sacred extend to lands beyond the Occident, sacred
knowledge belonging to the Orient of universal existence becomes
implanted in an authentic fashion and despite countless aberrations in
the West and even the “Far West,” the Quranic image of the Blessed Olive
Tree

that is neither Oriental nor Occidental becomes particularly
meaningful.47 As the Quran asserts, it is the light emanating from the
oil of this celestial Olive Tree, which is neither of the East nor of
the West and which is the Light of God, that illuminates all realms of
existence. This Light is still accessible to man despite its apparent
eclipse. The knowledge which this Light makes possible can still be
realized and through it the sum of errors, which comprise modern thought
and which have resulted in the unparalleled disequilibrium that
characterizes the modern world, made to evaporate as the sun evaporates
the morning fog. It is still possible to realize that knowledge which
cannot and does not only resuscitate our minds and thoughts but which
transforms our being and finally delivers us from the limitations of
ourselves and of the world. Through such sacred knowledge, man ceases to
be what he appears to be to become what he really is in the eternal now
and what he has never ceased to be. Through this sacred knowledge man
becomes aware of the purpose for which he was created and gains that
illimitable spiritual freedom and liberation which alone is worthy of
man if only he were to realize who he is.

Qūlū lā ilāha'Llāh wa tufliḥū

*Say there is no divinity but the Divine and be delivered.*

*Ḥadīth of the Prophet of Islam*

*wa'Llāhu a‘lam*

Notes
-----

[^1]: Direct Experience of Reality, trans. Hari Prasad Shastri, London,
1975, p. 51.

[^2]: Principial knowledge is related to this immanent Logos in contrast
to external, cumulative knowledge which is identified for the most part
with science today. Moreover, the former is the root of the latter to
the extent that the latter represents some degree or kind of authentic
knowledge. To know the root is to know the whole in principle, if not in
detail, and hence to be delivered for ever from the never ending process
of the accumulation of details, of the knowledge of particulars or the
various applications of principles to the indefinite reverberations of
the One in the cosmic labyrinth.

[^3]: It is important to point out that the type of knowledge that is
called science today existed in traditional societies along with the,
properly speaking, traditional sciences whose significance is usually
misunderstood today, except that such “profane” sciences were never able
to occupy the center of the intellectual stage. Nevertheless, it is only
fair to add that not all the sciences cultivated in traditional
civilizations were traditional and cosmological sciences with symbolic
and metaphysical significance. Some were mere mental speculation or
imperfect empirical knowledge corrected by more perfect observation and
study in later centuries. One should not confuse the measurement of the
distance between the earth and the sun by Alexandrian astronomers, which
later astronomers were to refine, with the symbolic significance of
geometry and arithmetic as expounded by Proclus or Nicomachus.

[^4]: As mentioned in the first chap., even this function of the mind
has a divine aspect since logic is the reflection upon the mind of the
Logos and its categories are not at all arbitrary but ontologjcal.

[^5]: ‘Umar Khayyam who was at once a mathematician and poet and,
contrary to how he is seen in the West, a gnostic rather than a
hedonist, discussed various types of seekers of knowledge and modes of
knowing. He came to the conclusion that the best way to know, since life
is short and knowledge extensive, is to purify oneself so that the heart
becomes itself the mirror of all knowledge. He writes, after describing
other classes of knowers, “The Sufis do not seek knowledge by meditation
or discursive thinking, but by purgation of their inner being and the
purifying of their dispositions. They cleanse the rational soul of the
impurities of nature and bodily form, until it becomes pure substance.
It then comes face to face with the spiritual world, so that the forms
of that world become truly reflected in it, without doubt or ambiguity.
This is the best of all ways, because none of the perfections of God are
kept away from it, and there are no obstacles or veils before it.” Nasr,
Science and Civilization in Islam, pp. 33-34. The text is from the
treatise of Khayyam on being (Risala-yi wujud)-our translation.

[^6]: “Metaphysical knowledge is one thing; its actualization in the
mind quite another. All the knowledge which the brain can hold, even if
it is immeasurably rich from a human point of view, is nothing in the
sight of Truth.” Schuon, Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts, p. 9.

[^7]: The term is drawn from the powerfully suggestive terminology of
Suhrawardı who refers to the Divine Lights which illuminate the mind of
man as al-anwar al-qahirah (the “victorial lights”) and to the soul of
man himself as it is illuminated as al-nur al-isbahbadı (the “signeurial
light”). See Suhrawardı, Opera metaphysica et mystica, vol. 2, ed. by H.
Corbin, Tehran-Paris, 1977, prolegomena pt. 3; and Corbin, En Islam
iranien, vol. 2, pp. 64-65.

[^8]: We have had occasion to refer in earlier chap. to this basic
concept which constitutes the heart of the Islamic doctrine of man. The
fit.rah refers to what is essential and primordial in man and what
remains permanent and immutable despite all the different veils that
have covered this nature as a result of the gradual fall of man from
this perfection, which he nevertheless contains within himself.

[^9]: On the sapiential view of the virtues see Schuon, Spiritual
Perspectives and Human Facts, pp. 171ff.

[^10]: If in this present study more accent has not been placed upon
this question, it is because our subject has been knowledge itself in
its rapport with the sacred. But one should not gain the impression that
this knowledge can in any way be divorced from the moral and spiritual
virtues which the traditional texts never cease to emphasize.

[^11]: A well-known example of this kind of Sufi treatise is the Mah.
asin al-majalis of Ibn al-‘Arıf. But many an early treatise such as the
Kitab al-luma‘of Abu Nas.r al-Sarraj, the Qut al-qulub of Abu Turab
al-Makkı, and the celebrated Risalat al-qushayriyyahof Imam Abu’l-Qasim
al-Qushayrı would fall into the same category.

[^12]: Despite the many differences of technique and approach in various
paths of spiritual realization, there is in every process of realization
the three grand stages of purification, expansion, and union. Something
in man must die, something must expand, and only then the essence of man
is able to achieve that union concerning whichH.allaj said (Dıwan, p.
46),

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E028%5D:jpg)

In my annihilation my annihilation was annihilated,

And in my annihilation I found Thee.

These three universal stages of spiritual realization correspond to
humility, charity, and truthfulness if these virtues are understood in
the metaphysical and not simply moralistic sense. See Schuon, Spiritual
Perspectives and Human Facts, pt. [^5]:

[^13]: It is the particular emphasis upon love as the central path
ofmysticism in Christianity that makes the term mysticism itself
difficult to translate into Oriental languages, for example, Arabic, in
which neither ma‘rifah nor tas.awwuf means exactly mysticism; although
in its most universal sense, mysticism can be understood to incorporate
that reality which is tas.awwuf.

[^14]: On Ibn ‘Arabı’s doctrine of union see Nasr, Three Muslim Sages,
pp. 114-16;Burckhardt, Introduction to Sufi Doctrine, pp. 79ff; and Ibn
al-‘Arabı, Bezels of Wisdom, esp. pp. 272ff. See also H. Corbin,
Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn ‘Arabı, pt. 1, chap. 1.

[^15]: On this difficult metaphysical question see Schuon, Logic and
Transcendence, chap. 14, “The Servant and Union.”

[^16]: The author of the celebrated Mirsad al-‘ibad, one of the
masterpieces of Sufism;he is also known for his treatise ‘Aql wa ‘ishq
which deals directly with the relation between love and knowledge.

[^17]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image029.jpg)

[^18]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image030.jpg)

[^19]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image032.jpg)

Classical Sufi treatises dealing with spiritual states and stations
speak often of the state of bewilderment or*hayrah* which the adept
experiences in more advanced stages of the path.

[^20]: The sapiential teachings of all traditions in which the prayer of
the heart or quintessential prayer is practiced insist that it is
ultimately God Himself who invokes His Name within the heart of man and
through his tongue.

[^21]: On contemplation and action in their traditional context and as
considered within different religions see Y. K. Ibish and P.Wilson
(eds.), Traditional Modes of Contemplation and Action.

[^22]: This is especially emphasized in the Sufi orders, all of which
are based on the silsilah or chain going back to the Prophet of Islam.
See J. Spencer Trimingham, The Sufi Orders in Islam, Oxford, 1971, which
despite a historical rather than traditional approach, contains a wealth
of information on the Sufi orders and their chains. On the traditional
meaning of the Sufi silsilah see M. Lings, A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth
Century, Los Angeles, 1971, chap. 3, “Seen fromWithin.”

[^23]: The case of Christianity is quite special in that it was
originally an esoteric teaching which had to externalize itself in order
to become the religion of a whole civilization and thereby became an
eso-exoterism. What can be more esoteric than eating the Body and

Blood of the God-Man, which is what the Eucharist is for traditional
Christians. This particular situation did not prevent elements of a
veritable esoteric nature from becoming distinct organizations from time
to time as we see in the case of the Templars, Fedeli d’amore, Christian
Rosicrucians, Kabbalists, Hermeticists, etc. But the life of such groups
was always a precarious one as the history of Christianity has born out.
The esoteric dimension of course also manifested itself within the body
of Christian theology and philosophy as we had occasion to point out in
chap. 1.

[^24]: In the modern world where the normal channels of transmission of
esoteric knowledge are closed for many people, books play a role very
different from what they did in normal situations and certain teachings,
which had been preserved orally, begin to appear in writing as means of
guiding those for whom there is no other means of guidance. This
dispensation is a compensation for the loss of the traditional means of
transmission of knowledge of the sacred, at least in its theoretical
aspect, without there being any implication that even in this situation
all traditional knowledge somehow appears in books in a form readily
available to all.

[^25]: It is strange how in the modern world which suffers from the
stranglehold of a leveling egalitarianism, even on the intellectual
level, people do not consider it against justice and equality if someone
is a good mathematician or musician and another person has no gift in
these fields, but as soon as it comes to metaphysics, they have a
disdain for any kind of knowledge which is not comprehensible to
everyone, forgetting that in the domain of knowledge, even of a profane
kind, there is always a selective principle. There are simply those who
know and those who do not, which does not mean that the door to the
Divine Presence is not accessible for everyone born into the human
state.

[^26]: On the relationship of this great sage to the sacred mountain see
A. Osborne, Ramana Maharshi and the Path of Self-Knowledge, London,
1970.

[^27]: Ibn ‘Arabı is said to have composed his Tarjuman al-ashwaq upon
beholding the beauty of the face of the daughter of Abu Shaja’ Zahir ibn
Rustam of whom he writes, “This shaikh had a virgin daughter, a slender
child who captivated all who looked on her, whose presence gave luster
to gatherings, who amazed all she was with and ravished the senses of
all who beheld her. . she was a sage among the sages of the Holy
Places.” From the Tarjuman al-ashwaq, quoted by E. Austin in his introd.
to the Bezels of Wisdom, pp. 7-8.

[^28]: In Sufism which belongs to the last religion of this human cycle,
namely, Islam, the technique of dhikr is the central means for spiritual
realization and its centrality is confirmed in many verses of the Quran
and Hadıth as well, as in such classical treatises as Miftah. al-falah.
of Ibn ‘At.a’allah al-Iskandarı, while in the Vishnu-Dharma-Uttara, it
is stated explicitly that at the end of the Kali-Yuga the most
appropriate means of spiritual realization is invocation. The same truth
is implied by certain Biblical passages. See Schuon, The Transcendent
Unity of Religions, pp. 145-49, where many quotations from different
traditions bearing on this subject have been brought together.

[^29]: As mentioned already, al-‘arif bi’Llan means literally “he who
knows by God” rather than “he who knows God.”

[^30]: No Divine Name can be invoked which has not been invoked already
by the Logos as founder of a religion and sanctified by the grace which
issues from the revelation in question. Likewise, the quintessential
prayer cannot be practiced save under the instruction of a master and a
traditional cadre which goes back ultimately to the founder of the
tradition. This is a metaphysical necessity which would be obvious to
anyone with a knowledge of the nature of the spiritual life and
completely irrespective of whether historical records can be found of
such a link of transmission in time going back to the origin of the
religion in question.

[^31]: We do not imply here by gnosticism a particular sectarian
movement within early Christianity in which in fact this theme is also
strongly emphasized. See H. Jonas, Gnosis und spätantiker Geist, 2
vols., Gottingen, 1954; and his The Gnostic Religion: the Message of the
Alien God and the Beginnings of Christianity, Boston, 1970.

[^32]: See Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital, pp. 123ff.

[^33]: On the significance of the Eliatic function in the preservation
and dissemination of sacred knowledge see L. Schaya, “The Eliatic
Function,” Studies in Comparative Religion,Winter-Spring 1979, pp.
31-40.

[^34]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image034.jpg)

[^35]: See Suhrawardı, Oeuvres philosophiques et mystiques, vol. 2
(where the Arabic text is printed), and the analysis by Corbin of the
treatise in the French prolegomena; Also Corbin, En Islam iranien, pp.
258ff., where he discusses extensively the gnostic significance of the
treatise under the title “Le récit de I’exil occidental et la geste
gnostique.”

[^36]: Since in Arabic the root of the world Yemen is associated with
the right hand, this land means symbolically the land of light, and in
fact, if one stands facing the north, the right hand (al-yamın) is the
direction of the rising sun, while if one faces the sun itself the right
hand points at the direction of Yemen (of course from Arabia). This
obvious geographical symbolism has caused Islamic esoterism to identify
Yemen symbolically with the “Orient of Light” while even historically it
remained until recent times a center for the survival of the Islamic
tradition and many of its most authentic and precious spiritual and
artistic aspects.

[^37]: For the symbolism of this Orient in the writings of Suhrawardı
see Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, chap. 2; and Corbin, En Islam iranien,
vol. 2, pt. 2 and pt. 8.

[^38]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image036.jpg)

[^39]: This theme is treated by Ezra ben Salomon of Gerona in his
Mystery of the Tree of Knowledge in which he identifies the Tree of Life
with the Orient. See G. Scholem, Von der mystischen Gestalt der
Gottheit, Studien zu Grundlugriffen der Kabbah, Frankfurt, 1973, pp.
59ff.

[^40]: The root of the two words being the same.

[^41]: This doctrine is expounded with much beauty in Abu Bakr Siraj
al-Dın, The Book of Certainty, New York, 1974.

[^42]: In Islamic sources this knowledge is often called “the theosophy
based on faith (al-h. ikmat al-ımaniyyah) and contrasted with
rationalistic philosophy which some sources identify with Greek
rationalism (al-h. ikmat al-yunaniyyah). Moreover, theımaniyyah is often
assimilated phonetically into “yemeni” (ımaniyyah) and identified with
it.

[^43]: In the sense of ex-sistere, of separation from the ground of
Being.

[^44]: Sapiential commentaries upon the Quran usually interpret the
Quranic term “Face of God” (wajhallah) to mean the Divine Names and
Qualities, the externalization of whose reality through multiple levels
of existence-comprise the universe.

[^45]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image037.jpg)

L. Massignon (ed.), Le Dîvân d’Al-Hallâj, Paris, 1955, p. [^90]:

The theme which has been echoed in the works of many Sufis including Ibn
al-Farid. in his Naz.m al-suluk is also to be found in the famous poem
of Hafiz.,

There is no veil between the lover and the Beloved;

Thou art thine own veil o Hafiz. remove thyself.

[^46]: Sacred knowledge has survived to this day in the various Oriental
traditions despite the vicissitudes of history which have weakened,
destroyed, or mutilated the various traditional civilizations of the
East. Therefore, although the Orient is obviously not the perennial
traditional Orient which it has been over the millennia, even now
something remains in the geographical Orient of that Orient which has to
a large extent returned to the luminous empyrean from which it had
descended on earth.

[^47]: See chap. 2, n. 56.
