Preface
=======

Since the Gifford Lectures were first delivered at the University of
Edinburgh in 1889, they have been associated with the names of some of
the most celebrated theologians, philosophers, and scientists of Europe
and America, and have resulted in books which have wielded extensive
influence in the modern world. Moreover, most of these works have been
associated with specifically modern ideas which have characterized the
Western world since the Renaissance and which have been also spreading
into the East since the last century. When, therefore, some four years
ago we were invited to deliver these prestigious lectures, it marked for
us not only a singular honor but also an occasion to present the
traditional perspective of the millennial civilizations of the Orient
where we first received and accepted the invitation to deliver them.
Being the first Muslim and in fact the first Oriental to have the
occasion to deliver the Gifford Lectures since their inception at the
University of Edinburgh nearly a century ago, we felt it our duty to
present to the Western audience not a secondhand version of certain
modern ideas or isms in pseudo-Oriental dress as happens so often these
days, but in conformity with the world view which is our own, to expound
some aspect of that truth which lies at the heart of the Oriental
traditions and in fact of all tradition as such whether it be of the
East or the West.

In the Orient knowledge has always been related to the sacred and to
spiritual perfection. To know has meant ultimately to be transformed by
the very process of knowing, as the Western tradition was also to assert
over the ages before it was eclipsed by the postmedieval secularization
and humanism that forced the separation of knowing from being and
intelligence from the sacred. The Oriental sage has always embodied
spiritual perfection; intelligence has been seen ultimately as a
sacrament, and knowledge has been irrevocably related to the sacred and
its actualization in the being of the knower. And this relation
continues wherever and whenever tradition still survives despite all the
vicissitudes of the modern world.

During the past two centuries, countless Western students of the Orient
have been, whether intentionally or unintentionally, instrumental in the
process of the secularization of the East through the destruction of its
traditions by interpreting its sacred teachings through historicism,
evolutionism, scientism, and the many other means whereby the sacred is
reduced to the profane. The study of the East by the majority of those
so-called orientalists who have been themselves influenced by the
various waves of secularism in the West, far from being simply a
harmless, objective exercise in scholarship, has played no small role in
the transformation of the subject of their studies. Moreover, these
scholarly efforts have hardly been carried out through either love for
the subject or charity, despite many notable and honorable exceptions
which have been labors of love and which have produced valuable studies
of various aspects of Oriental civilization. Most modern scholarly works
concerned with the East are in fact the fruit of a secularized reason
analyzing and studying traditions of a sacred character.

In the present study our aim has been in a sense the reverse of this
process. It has been to aid in the resuscitation of the sacred quality
of knowledge and the revival of the veritable intellectual tradition of
the West with the aid of the still living traditions of the Orient where
knowledge has never become divorced from the sacred. Our aim has been to
deal first of all with an aspect of the truth as such which resides in
the very nature of intelligence and secondarily with the revival of the
sapiential perspective in the West, without which no civilization worthy
of the name can survive. If in the process we have been severely
critical of many aspects of things Western, our view has not been based
on disdain and hatred or a kind of “occidentalism” which would simply
reverse the role of a certain type of orientalism that has studied the
Orient with the hope of transforming its sacred patterns of life, if not
totally destroying all that has characterized the Orient as such over
the ages. In criticizing what from the traditional point of view is pure
and simple error, we have also tried to defend the millennial tradition
of the West itself and to bring to light once again that perennial
wisdom, or sophia perennis, which is both perennial and universal and
which is neither exclusively Eastern nor Western.

When the invitation to deliver the Gifford Lectures first reached us, we
were living in the shades of the southern slopes of the majestic Alborz
Mountains. Little did we imagine then that the text of the lectures
themselves would be written not in the proximity of those exalted peaks
but in sight of the green forests and blue seas of the eastern coast of
the United States. But man lives in the spirit and not in space and time
so that despite all the unbelievable dislocations and turmoil in our
personal life during this period, including the loss of our library and
the preliminary notes for this work, what appears in the following pages
has grown out of the seed originally conceived when we accepted to
deliver the lectures and represents a continuity of thought with the
intellectual genesis of this work even if the material and human
conditions altered markedly during the period of the realization of its
original idea.

Since this work seeks to be at once metaphysical and based on
scholarship, it consists of a text upon which the actually delivered
lectures were based as well as extensive footnotes which both complement
the text and serve as a guide for further research for those who are
attracted to the arguments and theses presented in the text. Upon
delivering the lectures in the stately capital of Scotland during the
spring when the city of Edinburgh blooms with flowers of great beauty,
we became convinced even more than before of the necessity of these
rather extensive footnotes. The lively reaction of the audience and many
meetings with its members after the lectures brought to light the keen
interest displayed by many of them in pursuing the arguments presented
in this work despite the fact that its point of view is that of
tradition and different from most of what has been the concern of most
of the other Gifford lecturers over the years.

In preparing this work we are indebted most of all to all of our
traditional masters in both East and West who over the years have guided
us to the fountainhead of sacred knowledge. We wish to express our
gratitude especially to Frithjof Schuon whose unparalleled exposition of
traditional

teachings is reflected, albeit imperfectly, upon many of the pages which
follow. We also wish to thank Miss Kathleen O'Brien who aided us in many
ways in preparing the manuscript for publication.


