Chapter One: Knowledge and Its Desacralization
==============================================

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image003.jpg)

***Are those who know and those who do not know equal?***

**Quran**

*Why standest Thou afar off, O Lord? Why hidest Thou Thyself in times of
trouble?*

**Psalms**

In the beginning Reality was at once being, knowledge, and bliss (the
sat, chit, and ānanda1 of the Hindu tradition or qudrah, ḥikmah, and
raḥmah which are among the Names of Allah in Islam) and in that “now”
which is the ever-present “in the beginning,” knowledge continues to
possess a profound relation with that principial and primordial Reality
which is the Sacred and the source of all that is sacred. Through the
downward flow of the river of time and the multiple refractions and
reflections of Reality upon the myriad mirrors of both macrocosmic and
microcosmic manifestation, knowledge has become separated from being and
the bliss or ecstasy which characterizes the union of knowledge and
being. Knowledge has become nearly completely externalized and
desacralized, especially among those segments of the human race which
have become transformed by the process of modernization, and that bliss
which is the fruit of union with the One and an aspect of the perfume of
the sacred has become well-nigh unattainable and beyond the grasp of the
vast majority of those who walk upon the earth. But the root and essence
of knowledge continues to be inseparable from the sacred for the very
substance of knowledge is the knowledge of that reality which is the
Supreme Substance, the Sacred as such, compared to which all levels of
existence and all forms of the manifold are but accidents.2
Intelligence, which is the instrument of knowledge within man, is
endowed with the possibility of knowing the Absolute. It is like a ray
which emanates from and returns to the Absolute and its miraculous
functioning is itself the best proof of that Reality which is at once
absolute and infinite.

In paradise man had tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Life which
symbolizes unitive knowledge.3 But he was also to taste of the Tree of
Good and Evil and to come to see things as externalized, in a state of
otherness and separation. The vision of duality blinded him to the
primordial knowledge which lies at the heart of his intelligence. But
precisely because this unitive vision resides at the center of his being
as well as lying at the root of his intelligence, knowledge continues to
be a means of access to the Sacred and sacred knowledge remains as the
supreme path of union with that Reality wherein knowledge, being and
bliss are united. Despite the tasting of the fruit of the Tree of Good
and Evil and all the subsequent falls of man recorded in different
manners by the various religions of the world, knowledge remains
potentially the supreme way to gain access to the Sacred, and
intelligence a ray which pierces the density and coagulation of cosmic
manifestation and which, in its actualized state, is none other than the
Divine light itself as it is reflected in man and, in fact, in all
things in different manners and modes.

It is, however, human intelligence which, despite the fall and all the
resulting impediments and obstacles existing within the human soul which
prevent intelligence from functioning fully in most instances, remains
the central theophany of this Divine Light and the direct means of
access to that Original Reality which “was” at once the source of cosmic
reality “at the beginning” and is the origin of all things in this
eternal “now,” in this moment that always is and never becomes, the
“now” which is the ever-recurring “in the beginning.”4

Today modern man has lost the sense of wonder, which results from his
loss of the sense of the sacred, to such a degree that he is hardly
aware how miraculous is the mystery of intelligence, of human
subjectivity as well as the power of objectivity and the possibility of
knowing objectively. Man is oblivious to the mystery that he can turn
inwardly upon the infinite world within himself and also objectivize the
world outside, to possess inner, subjective knowledge as well as
knowledge of a totally objective order. Man is endowed with this
precious gift of intelligence which allows him to know the Ultimate
Reality as the Transcendent the Beyond and the objective world as a
distinct reality on its own level, and the Ultimate Reality as the
Immanent, as the Supreme Self underlying all the veils of subjectivity
and the many “selves” or layers of consciousness within him. Knowledge
can attain the Sacred both beyond the subject which knows and at the
heart of this very subject, for finally that Ultimate Reality which is
the Sacred as such is both the knower and the known, inner consciousness
and outer reality, the pure immanent Subject and the Transcendent
Object, the Infinite Self and Absolute Being which does not exclude
Beyond Being. Despite the layers of the dross of forgetfulness that have
covered the “eye of the heart” or the seat of intelligence, as a result
of man's long journey in time, which is none other than the history of
forgetfulness with occasional reversals of the downward flow through
divine intervention in the cosmic and historical process, human
intelligence continues to be endowed with this miraculous gift of
knowledge of the inward and the outward, and human consciousness
continues to be blessed with the possibility of contemplating the
Reality which is completely other and yet none other than the very heart
of the self, the Self of oneself.

Consciousness is itself proof of the primacy of the Spirit or Divine
Consciousness of which human consciousness is a reflection and echo. The
very natural propensity of the human intelligence to regard the Spirit
as having primacy over the material and of consciousness as being on a
higher level of reality than even the largest material object in the
universe is itself proof of the primacy of the substance of knowledge
over that which it knows, for the raison d'être of intelligence is to
know reality objectively, totally, and adequately5 according to the
famous principle of adequation of the medieval Scholastics.6 Human
consciousness or subjectivity which makes knowledge possible is itself
proof that the Spirit is the Substance compared to which all material
manifestation, even what appears as the most substantial, is but an
accident. It is in the nature and destiny of man to know and ultimately
to know the Absolute and the Infinite through an

intelligence which is total and objective and which is inseparable from
the Sacred that is at once its origin and end.

Man is, of course, from a certain point of view the rational being
defined by the philosophers, but the rational faculty which is at once
an extension and reflection of the Intellect can become a ludferian
force and instrument if divorced from the Intellect and revelation which
alone bestow upon knowledge its numinous quality and sacred content.
Therefore, rather man defining him only as a “rational animal,” one can
define man in a more principial manner as a being endowed with a total
intelligence centered upon the Absolute and created to know the
Absolute. To be human is to know and also to transcend oneself. To know
means therefore ultimately to know the Supreme Substance which is at
once the source of all that comprises the objective world and the
Supreme Self which shines at the center of human consciousness and which
is related to intelligence as the sun is related to its rays. Despite
the partial loss and eclipse of this properly speaking intellectual
faculty and its replacement by reason, the roots of knowledge remain
sunk in the ground of the Sacred and sacred knowledge continues to be at
the heart of the concern of man for the sacred. It is not possible in
fact to rediscover the sacred without discovering once again the sacred
quality of principial knowledge. Moreover, this process can be
facilitated by tracing the trajectory which knowledge followed in its
fall from being the fruit of the Tree of Life to becoming limited to the
realm of profane knowledge, which in its expansion and even
totalitarianism only hastens man's fall from the state of wholeness and
the abode of grace, resulting finally in the desacralization of all of
human life to an ever greater degree. To reinstate man to his position
of humanity cannot occur without the rediscovery of the basic function
of intelligence as the means of access to that which is central and
essential, to the Reality from which issues all religion and all wisdom
but also the nonsapiential modes of perfection such as the way of good
works and love.

The reduction of the Intellect to reason and the limitation of
intelligence to cunning and cleverness in the modern world not only
caused sacred knowledge to become inaccessible and to some even
meaningless, but it also destroyed that natural theology which in the
Christian context represented at least a reflection of knowledge of a
sacred order, of the wisdom or sapientia which was the central means of
spiritual perfection and deliverance. Natural theology which was
originally sapientia as understood by Plato in the Republic and Laws,7
and which was later relegated by Saint Augustine and other Christian
authorities to an inferior but nevertheless valuable form of knowledge
of things divine, was completely banished from the citadel of both
science and faith as the process of the sacralization of knowledge and
the reduction of reason to a purely human and “this-worldly” instrument
of perception reached its terminal point with the last phases of
development of modern Western philosophy. To reinstate the
supernaturally natural function of intelligence, to wed reason (ratio)
to the Intellect (intellectus) once again, and to rediscover the
possibility of attaining to sacred knowledge include therefore also a
return to the appreciation of the importance of natural theology on its
own level, which is

of a lower order than what could be called scientia sacra, but which has
nevertheless been of much importance in the traditional intellectual
landscape of the Western world.

The eclipse of natural theology has also been accompanied by the casting
into oblivion of the essentially sacred character of both logical and
mathematical laws which are aspects of Being itself and, one might say,
the “ontology of the human microcosm”8 What is the origin of this
logical and mathematical certitude in the human mind and why do these
laws correspond to aspects of objective reality? The origin is none
other than the Divine Intellect whose reflection on the human plane
constitutes the certitude, coherence, and order of logical and
mathematical laws and which is, at the same time, the source of that
objective order and harmony which the human mind is able to study
through these laws. Logical laws, in contrast to subjective limitations
and individual idiosyncracies associated with the luciferian tendencies
of rationalism, are rooted in the Divine9 and possess an oncological
reality. They, as well as principial knowledge traditionally associated
with wisdom, are essentially of a sacred character whatever certain
antirational theologians, anxious to prevent rationalism from
overrunning the citadel of faith, may claim. As a result of the loss of
the sapiential perspective in modern times and the desacralization of
knowledge, however, not only has natural theology been cast aside as
irrelevant but logic and mathematics have been so divorced from concern
with the sacred that they have come to be used as the primary tools for
the secularization and profanation of the very act and process of
knowing. Many a theologian has taken a defensive position before the
achievements of the mathematical sciences, unaware that in the certitude
which the propagators of such sciences claim lies a reflection of that
Intellect10 which is the grand path to the Sacred and which itself is of
a sacred nature, the Intellect without whose reflection there would be
no logical and mathematical laws and all operations of the mind would be
reduced to sheer arbitrariness.

The depleting of knowledge of its sacred character and the creation of a
“profane” science which is then used to study even the most sacred
doctrines and forms at the heart of religion have led to a forgetting of
the primacy of the sapiential dimension within various traditions and
the neglect of the traditional doctrine of man which has envisaged him
as a being possessing the possibility of knowing things in principle and
the principles of all things leading finally to the knowledge of
Ultimate Reality. In fact, the sapiential perspective has been so
forgotten and the claims of rationalism, which reduces man's
intellectual faculty to only the extroverted and analytical function of
the mind that then turns against the very foundations of religion, so
emphasized, that many a religiously sensitive person in the West has
been led to take refuge in faith alone, leaving belief or doctrinal
creed to the mercy of ever-changing paradigms or theories caught in the
process of relativization and constant transformation.11 Without in any
way denying the central role of faith and the crucial significance of
revelation to actualize the possibilities inherent within the
microcosmic intellect, a point to which, in fact, we shall turn later in
this work, it must be remembered that in the sapiential perspective
faith itself is

inseparable from knowledge so that not only does the Anselmian dictum
credo ut intelligam hold true from a certain perspective but that one
can also assert intelligo ut credam which does not mean to reason first
but to “intellect” or use the intellectual faculty of which the rational
is only a reflection and extension.

Moreover, the basic teachings of the religions which are both the
background and the goal of faith contain in one way or another the
sapiential perspective which views knowledge as ultimately related to
the Divine Intellect and the Origin of all that is sacred. Even a rapid
glance at the different living traditions of mankind proves the validity
of this assertion. In Hinduism, that oldest of religions and the only
echo of the “primordial religion” to survive to this day, the sacred
texts which serve as the origin of the whole tradition, namely the
Vedas, are related to knowledge. Etymologically veda and vedānta derive
from the root vid which means “seeing” and “knowing” and which is
related to the Latin videre “to see” and the Greek oida “to know.”12 The
Upanishads which are hymns of the primordial soul of man yearning for
the Absolute mean literally “near-sitting,” which the master of Hindu
gnosis13 Śankara explains as that science or knowledge of Brahma which
“sets to rest” or destroys what appears as the world along with the
ignorance which is its root. The cause of all separation, division,
otherness, and ultimately suffering is ignorance (avidyā) and the cure
knowledge. The heart of the tradition is supreme knowledge (jñāna),14
while the various “schools” usually called philosophy, the darśanas, are
literally so many perspectives or points of view. The Hindu tradition,
without of course neglecting love and action, places the sacred
character of knowledge at the heart of its perspective and sees in the
innate power of man to discern between Ātman and māyā the key to
deliverance. Hinduism addresses itself to that element in man which is
already divine and which man can come to realize only by knowing
himself. The Sacred lies at the heart of man and is attainable most
directly through knowledge which pierces the veils of māyā to reach the
Supernal Sun which alone is. In this tradition where the knowledge of
God should properly be called autology rather than theology,15 the
function of knowledge as the royal path toward the Sacred and the
ultimately sacred character of all authentic knowledge is demonstrated
with blinding clarity over and over again in its sacred scripture and is
even reflected in the meaning of the names of the sacred texts which
serve as the foundations for the whole tradition.

Although Buddhism belongs to a very different perspective than Hinduism
and, in fact, began as a rebellion against many Brahmanical doctrines
and practices, it joins Hinduism in emphasizing the primacy of
knowledge. The supreme experience of the Buddha was illumination which
implies knowledge. The beginning of Buddhism is Boddhisattvayāna which
means “birth of awareness that all things are void.” At the heart of
Buddhism, therefore, lies knowledge that was to lead later to the
elaborate metaphysics of the Void which is the foundation of the whole
of Buddhism and which was championed by Nāgārjuna.16 Also all the
virtues of the Bodhisattva, the pāramitās, culminate in wisdom or
prajñā. They all

contribute to the dawning of this knowledge which liberates and which
lies as a possibility within the being of all humans. The Buddha image
itself reflects inward knowledge and that contemplation of the Void
which is the gate through which inner peace flows and inundates even
external manifestation while, from another point of view, this
contemplation serves as the support and “seat” for supreme knowledge.17
One can hardly conceive of Buddhism without becoming immediately aware
of the central role of knowledge, although of course the way of love and
mercy could not be absent from such a major religion as can be seen in
Amidhism and the figure of the Avalokiteśvara or Kwan Yin itself. As far
as the Chinese tradition is concerned, here again in both Confucianism
and Taoism the role of knowledge as the central means for the attainment
of perfection reigns supreme. This is to be seen especially in Taoism
where the perfect man is seen as one who knows the Tao and lives
according to this knowledge which means also that he lives according to
his own “nature.”18 As Chuang-Tzŭ says,

The man of virtue… can see where all is dark. He can hear where all is
still. In the darkness he alone can see light. In the stillness he alone
can detect harmony.19

It is the principial or sacred knowledge which allows the sage to “see
God everywhere,” to observe harmony where others see discord, and to see
light where others are blinded by darkness. The man of knowledge goes
beyond himself to reach Heaven and through this process the Tao of his
own self which is none other than the sacred ground of his own being,
the original “darkness” which is not dark because of the lack of light
but because of the excess of luminosity, like the sacred dark grotto of
medieval tales from which flows the spring of life.

The divine man rides upon the glory of the sky where his form can no
longer be discerned. This is called absorption into light. He fulfils
his destiny. He acts in accordance with his nature. He is at one with
God and man. For him all affairs cease to exist, and all things revert
to their original state. This is called envelopment in darkness.20

Turning to Western Asia, we discern the same concern for knowledge as
the key to the attainment of the sacred and the doctrine that the
substance of knowledge itself is sacred in Zoroastrianism and other
Iranian religions such as Manichaeism which bases the whole of religion
on the goal of freeing, through asceticism and knowledge, the particles
of light scattered through the cosmos as a result of the sacrifice of
the primordial man.21 Besides mystical tales of the quest of the gnostic
after knowledge which abound in Mazdaean literature, the whole of
Mazdaean angelology is based on the doctrine of illumihation of the soul
by various agencies of the Divine Intellect. All religious rites are an
aid in creating a closer link between man and the angelic world, and
man's felicity resides in union with his celestial and angelic
counterpart, the Fravarti.22 The religious life and all contact with the
sacred are dominated by angelic forces which are elements of light whose
function it is to illuminate and to guide. Concern with knowledge of the
sacred and sacred knowledge is at the heart of Zoroastrianism while the
more philosophical Mazdaean religious texts such as the Dēnkard have
dealt

in greater detail with the question of knowledge, thereby developing
more fully the doctrine of innate and acquired wisdom and their
complementarity and wedding which leads to the attainment of sacred
knowledge.23

Nor is this concern in any way absent from the Abrahamic traditions
although because of the desacralization of the instrument of knowing
itself in modern times, modern interpretations of Judaism and
Christianity have tended to neglect, belittle, or even negate the
sapiential dimensions of these religions. This process has even taken
place to some degree in the case of Islam which is based completely on
the primacy of knowledge and whose message is one concerning the nature
of Reality.

In Judaism the significance of ḥokhmah or wisdom can hardly be
overemphasized even in the legal dimension of the religion which is
naturally concerned more with correct action than with knowledge. In
Genesis (3:22) knowledge is considered as an essential attribute
belonging to God alone, and the wisdom writings emphasize praying to the
“Lord of Wisdom.” The Jewish people accepted the Proverbs, Job, and
Ecclesiastes as books of wisdom to which the Christians later added the
Psalms and the Song of Songs. In the Jewish wisdom literature although
wisdom belonged to God, it was also a divine gift to man and accessible
to those willing to submit to the discipline of the traditional teaching
methods consisting of instruction (musar) and persuasion (‘eṣah). This
means that Judaism considered the attainment of wisdom or sacred
knowledge as a possibility for the human intellect if man were to accept
the necessary discipline which such an undertaking required. This
doctrine was to be elaborated by later Jewish philosophers, Kabbalists,
and Hasidim in an elaborate fashion, but the roots of all their
expositions are to be found in the Bible itself where, in the three
books of Job, the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, the term ḥokhmah (later
translated as sophia) appears nearly a hundred times.24 Long before
these later elaborations were to appear, the maskilim of the Qumran
community were considered as recipients and dispensers of sacred
knowledge of the Divine Mysteries like the pneumatikoi mentioned by
Saint Paul.

The Jews also believed that the Torah itself was the embodiment of
wisdom and some works like the Wisdom of Ben Sira identified the Torah
with the preexistent wisdom of God while the Kabbalists considered the
primordial Torah to be the Ḥokhmah which is the second of the Sephiroth.
The whole Kabbalistic perspective is based on the possibility for the
inner man to attain sacred knowledge and the human mind to be opened to
the illumination of the spiritual world through which it can become
sanctified and united with its principle.25

The famous Chabad Chassidus text, the Liqquṭei Amarim [Tanya], says,
“Every soul consists of nefesh, ruaḥ and neshamah [the three traditional
elements of the soul]. Nevertheless, the root of every nefesh, ruaḥ and
neshamah, from the highest of all ranks to the lowest that is embodied
within the illiterate, and the most worthless, all derive, as it were,
from the Supreme Mind which is the Supernal Wisdom (Ḥokhmah Ila‘ah).”26
The same text continues.

In like manner does the neshamah of man, including the quality of ruaḥ
and nefesh, naturally desire and yearn to separate itself and depart
from the body in order to unite with its origin and source in God, the
fountain-head of all life, blessed be He.27

This propensity to unite with the One is “its will and desire by
nature,” and “this nature stems from the faculty of ḥokhmah found in the
soul, wherein abides the light of the blessed En Sof.”28

No more explicit expression of the presence of the spark of divine
knowledge in the very substance of the soul of man and the attainment of
the sacred through this very supernaturally natural faculty of
intellection within man could be found in a tradition which, although
based on the idea of a sacred people and a divine law promulgated by God
for this people, possessed from the beginning a revelation in which the
primacy of wisdom was certainly not forgotten. This doctrine was,
however, emphasized sometimes openly as in the Proverbs and sometimes
symbolically and esoterically as in the Song of Songs where the verses
“Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth: for thy love is better than
wine” and “I am black, but comely.…” certainly refer to esoteric or
sapiential knowledge (to Sophia identified later with the Virgin Mary)
and its transmission, although other meanings are not excluded. In the
day of profane knowledge certainly sacred wisdom appears as dark, and it
is through the mouth that the Name of God is uttered, the Name whose
invocation is the key to the treasury of all wisdom, the Name which
contains within itself that sacred knowledge whose realization is
accompanied by that supreme ecstasy of which the ecstasy of the kiss of
the earthly beloved is but a pale reflection.29

As for Islam, which like Judaism remains in its formal structure within
the mold of Abrahamic spirituality, the message of the revelation
revolves around the pole of knowledge and the revelation addresses man
as an intelligence capable of distinguishing between the real and the
unreal and of knowing the Absolute.30 Although the earthly container of
this message, that is the Semitic Arab mentality, has bestowed upon
certain manifestations of this religion an element of emotional fervor,
impetuosity, and a character of inspirationalism which on the
theological plane have appeared as an “antiintellectual” voluntarism
associated with the Ash‘arites, the content of the Islamic message
remains wed to the sapiential perspective and the primacy of knowledge.
The testimony of the faith Lā ilāha illa’Llāh (There is no divinity but
the Divine) is a statement concerning knowledge, not sentiments or the
will. It contains the quintessence of metaphysical knowledge concerning
the Principle and its manifestation. The Prophet of Islam has said, “Say
Lā ilāha illa’Llāh and be delivered” referring directly to the
sacramental quality of principial knowledge. The traditional names used
by the sacred scripture of Islam are all related to knowledge: al-qur’ān
“recitation,” al-furqān “discernment,” and umm al-kitāb “the mother of
books.” The Quran itself refers in practically every chapter to the
importance of intellection and knowledge, and the very first verses
revealed relate to recitation (iqra') which implies knowledge and to
science (‘ilm-hence ta‘līm, to teach-‘allama, taught),

***Recite [iqra']: In the name of thy Lord who createth,***

***Createth man from a clot.***

***Recite: And thy Lord is the Most Bounteous,***

***Who teacheth [‘allama] by the pen,***

***Teacheth man that which he knew not.***

*[XCVI; 1-5, Pickthall translation, slightly modified]*

Even the etymology of the Arabic word for Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh)
is related to intellection or knowing. In Islam and the civilization
which it created there was a veritable celebration of knowledge31 all of
whose forms were, in one way or another, related to the sacred extending
in a hierarchy from an “empirical” and rational mode of knowing to that
highest form of knowledge (al-ma‘rifah or ‘irfān) which is the unitive
knowledge of God not by man as an individual but by the divine center of
human intelligence which, at the level of gnosis, becomes the subject as
well as object of knowledge. That is why the gnostic or illuminated sage
is called al-‘ārif bi‘Llāh, the “gnostic who knows through or by God”
and not only the gnostic who knows God. The Arabic word for intellect
al-‘aql is related to the word “to bind,” for it is that which binds man
to his Origin; etymologically it could be compared to religion itself,
for in this case religio is also what binds and relates man to God. Even
the Arabic word for poetry (al-shi‘r) is related to the root meaning
consciousness and knowledge rather than making as is the case with
poiēsis. The Islamic tradition presents blinding evidence of the
ultimately sacred character of knowledge and the centrality of the
sapiental perspective in the spiritual life, a perspective which remains
faithful to and aware of the saving function of knowledge and the nature
of intelligence as a precious gift from God which, once actualized by
revelation, becomes the most important means of gaining access to the
Sacred, intelligence being itself ultimately of a sacred character.

Before turning to the Christian tradition which is of special concern in
this study because of the rise of a purely secular concept of knowledge
within a civilization which was Christian, a word must be said about the
Greek tradition. Usually this tradition is seen today either from the
point of view of modern rationalism or of the mainstream of early
Christianity which, having to save a whole humanity from the excesses of
rationalism and naturalism, emphasized more the contrast between Greek
wisdom as knowledge of a this-worldly nature and love and redemption
associated with and issuing from the grace of Christ and his incarnation
in human history. A reevaluation of the meaning of the Greek sophia and
philo-sophia as sacred knowledge in contrast to the sophistic and
skeptical forms of rationalism during the later life of Greek
civilization and religion will be carried out later, as will the
Christian appreciation of this aspect of the Greek legacy. Here suffice
it to say that the Orphic-Dionysian dimension of the Greek tradition,
which was to become crystallized later in the Pythagorean-Platonic
school, and also Hermeticism, which resulted from the wedding between
certain aspects of the Egyptian and the Greek traditions, must be
studied as sacred knowledge much like the metaphysical doctrines of
Hinduism, and not only as profane philosophy.32 These forms of wisdom
are related to the Greek religious tradition and should be viewed as
such and not

only in opposition to “revealed truth.”33 In the more universal sense of
“revelation,” they are in fact the fruit of revelation, that is, a
knowledge which derives not from a purely human agent but from the
Divine Intellect, as in fact they were viewed by the long tradition of
Islamic, Jewish, and Christian philosophy before modern times. There is
an aspect of Greek philosophy which is sapientia without whose
appreciation one cannot understand those sapiential schools within
Christianity and even Judaism which were based on a unity above and
beyond the current dichotomy between so-called Greek “intellectualism”
and Hebrew “inspirationalism.” A major problem in the rediscovery of the
sacred root of knowledge and knowledge of the sacred is the type of
interpretation of Greek philosophy which has dominated the mainstream of
Western thought in modern times and which has caused an eclipse of the
sapiential quality of certain aspects of the Greek intellectual heritage
and obliterated the real nature of the content and meaning of the
message of many Christian and Jewish sages who are simply excused away
as being “Neoplatonic,” as if this term would somehow magically annul
the inner significance of doctrines of a sapiential character.

As far as the Christian tradition is concerned, it is often referred to
as a way of love; especially in modern times its sapiential dimension
is, for the most part, forsaken as if it were simply an alien intrusion
into a purely ethical religious message based on divine and human love
and the central element of faith. To be sure, Christianity is more than
anything else a way of love; but being a total and integral religion, it
could not be completely divorced from the way of knowledge and sapience.
That is why the Johannine “In the beginning was the Word” was
interpreted for centuries as an affirmation of the primacy of the Logos
as source of both revelation and knowledge before the surgical knife of
so-called higher criticism, itself the product of a purely secularized
reason, anathemized the particular sapiential Gospel of John into a
gradual accretion of statements influenced by alien modes of thought
somewhat removed from the message and meaning of the “original”
historical Christ. Moreover, the Christian tradition, in accepting the
Old Testament as part of its sacred scripture, not only inherited the
Hebrew wisdom tradition but even emphasized certain books of the Bible
as source of wisdom even beyond what is found in the Judaic tradition.

In the Proverbs, chapter 8, Wisdom personified speaks in a famous
passage as follows:

I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty
inventions… I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the
paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance: and I will fill their treasures. The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there were
no depths, I was brought forth; where there were no fountains abounding
with water… While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor
the highest part of the dust of the world. When he prepared the heavens,
I was there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth; when he
established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the
deep:… Then I was by him, as one brought

up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;…
Now therefore harken unto me, O ye children: for blessed are they that
keep my ways.34

The Christians meditated upon this and similar passages as the revealed
sources of a sapiential path leading to the knowledge of God and
theosis. As late as the last century even a philosopher such as
Schelling was to call this passage “a breeze from a sacred, morning
dawn.” In early ante-Nicene Christianity charity itself was considered
by a figure such as Saint Maximus the Confessor as “a good disposition
of the soul which makes it prefer the knowledge of God above all
things,” as well as the bliss inhering in this knowledge and the love of
God as the source of the illumination of knowledge.35 Also the earlier
forms of Christology emphasized the role of Christ in illuminating the
human mind and bestowing divine knowledge upon the qualified.36

The early Christians, moreover, viewed Sophia as an almost “divine
being” unto herself, a “complement” to the Trinity. The Orthodox revered
her especially and built perhaps the most beautiful sacred structure of
early Christianity, the Hagia Sophia, in her honor. Sophia appeared in
the vision of saints and illuminated them with knowledge. She often
manifested herself as a woman of celestial beauty and was identified by
many sages and saints with the Virgin Mary in the same way that among
some of the Muslim sages wisdom appeared as a beautiful celestial figure
identified with Fāṭimah, the daughter of the Prophet, and a “second
Mary” within the more specific context of the Islamic tradition. For
Christians wisdom was at once related to the Son, to the Christ figure
itself, and to the feminine principle which was inseparable from the
inviolable purity and beauty of the Virgin. One should not forget that
that supreme poet of Christian spirituality, Dante, who was so
profoundly devoted to the Virgin, was guided in Paradiso by a woman, by
Beatrice, who symbolizes the feminine figure of Sophia, without this
fact detracting in any way from the role of Christ as dispenser and also
embodiment of wisdom. In Christianity as in other traditions there is
complementarity of the active and passive, or masculine and feminine
elements, in wisdom as well as in love.

Returning to the origins of the Christian tradition, we must remember
that the emphasis upon the sapiential dimension of Christianity is to be
seen in Saint Paul himself who saw Christ as the new Torah identified
with Divine Wisdom. The letters of Saint Paul contain references to the
possessors of sacred knowledge, the pneumatikoi, who speak the wisdom
(sophia) of God and who possess inner knowledge (gnosis), sophia and
gnosis being “pneumatic” gifts imparted to the pneumatics by God.
Although modern scholars have debated extensively about the meaning in 1
Corinthians (12:8) of “a word of wisdom… and a word of knowledge,”37
even profane methods based only on historical and philological evidence,
and ignoring the oral tradition, have not been able to prove a Greek or
some other kind of foreign origin for the Pauline doctrine of divine
knowledge.38 There is a gnosis in these texts of a definitely Christian
origin not to be confused with second-century gnosticism of a sectarian
nature, for as Saint Paul asserted, sacred knowledge is one of Christ's
most precious gifts, to be

sought earnestly by those qualified to receive and to transmit it. Had
there not been such a Christian gnosis, the Christian tradition would
have been able to integrate Greek wisdom and adopt Graeco-Alexandrian
metaphysical formulations for the expression of its own teachings.

The nearly two thousand years of Christian history were to be witness,
despite all obstacles, to the survival of this sapiential dimension of
the Christian tradition as well as its gradual eclipse, this latter
process leading to the secularization of the concept of knowledge
itself. To trace the history of this long tradition from the early
Church Fathers to recent times would require a separate study of
monumental proportions. Here is suffices to refer briefly to some of the
representatives of the sapiential perspectives within the Christian
tradition, figures who considered it possible for man to attain the
knowledge of the sacred and who saw the root of knowledge itself as
being sunk in the soil of the sacred and the holy. To reassert and
rediscover the sacramental quality of knowledge in the contemporary
West, it is certainly helpful to recall this long-neglected dimension of
the Christian tradition, a dimension which is either cast aside and
deliberately ignored in the more easily accessible works on Western
intellectual life or, when mentioned in such sources, treated in such a
way as to reduce it to a harmless borrowing, of interest only for the
history of thought. Of course, there is little wonder in the observation
of such a spectacle for only the like can know the like. How can a mind
totally depleted of the sense of the sacred grasp the significance of
the sacred as sacred?

The sapiential current in Christian spirituality, distinct from what
came to be known as gnosticism, is found among many of the major figures
of early Christianity such as Saint Gregory of Nyssa and Gregory of
Nazianzus as well as the early desert fathers and the community which
produced the Nag Hammadi texts. But it is especially strong among the
Alexandrian fathers whose writings are a fountainhead of Christian
gnosis and who stress the central role of sacred knowledge and knowledge
of the sacred in the attainment of sanctity. Among them none is more
important than Clement of Alexandria (140-c.220) who saw Christianity as
a way to wisdom.39 In his teachings Christ is identified with the
Universal Intellect which God has also placed at the center of the
cosmos and in the heart of man.40 Clement, who spent much of his life in
Alexandria, was well acquainted with Greek wisdom which he did not
oppose to Christianity but which he considered to have issued from the
same Intellect to which the Christians had full access through Christ.
For him true philosophy was not a “profane knowledge” to be opposed to
Christian faith but a knowledge of an ultimately sacred character
derived from the Intellect which God had revealed in Christ and through
sacred Scripture. The true sage, the person who has attained sacred
knowledge, is he who has first become pure and achieved moral
perfection,41 and subsequently become a “true gnostic.”42 Concerning
such a person, “one can no longer say that he has science or possesses
gnosis, but he is science and gnosis.”43

As far as the possibility of an actual initiatic path within
Christianity based on knowledge is concerned, the case of Clement
presents evidence of unusual interest, for Clement did not only possess
sacred knowledge, but

writes that he received it from a human dispenser of such knowledge.
While in Alexandria, he met a master named Pantaenus who, according to
Clement, “deposited pure gnosis” in the spirits of men and who had in
turn received it from those who had transmitted the esoteric knowledge
handed down to them orally and secretly by the apostles and ultimately
by Christ himself. Through this regular chain of transmission of a
“divine wisdom,” Clement had received that gnosis which implied
knowledge of God and the angelic world, science of the spiritual
significance of sacred Scripture, and the attainment of total certitude.
Clement was in turn to become a spiritual master as revealed by such
works as the Protrepticus and Stromateis, which are treatises of
spiritual guidance, as well as the resumé of his Hypotypsis as
summarized by Photius. But it is significant, as far as the later
history of the Christian tradition and the place of gnosis in it is
concerned, that he was not canonized as a saint and that the regularity
of transmission of sacred knowledge did not continue for long, although
Clement did train Origen, another of the important figures of early
Christianity who was concerned with sapience and the role of knowledge
in gaining access to the sacred.

Like Clement, Origen (185-253 or 254) was well acquainted with Greek
philosophy which he studied in Alexandria.44 In fact, his teacher was
the mysterious Ammonias Saccas, the teacher of Plotinus, and the
philosophical education of Origen paralleled closely that of Plotinus
who represents the most universal and central expression of the esoteric
and metaphysical aspects of Greek wisdom. As for Clement so for Origen,
Christianity itself was “philosophy” in the sense of wisdom, and Greek
philosophy a depository of that sacred knowledge which was to be found
in its fullness in the Christian message. Origen, in a sense, continued
the teachings of Clement as far as the relation between Christianity and
philosophy was concerned, although emphasizing more the importance of
asceticism.

The central depository of sacred knowledge for Origen is sacred
Scripture which nourishes the soul of man and provides for his need to
know. But Scripture is not only the literal text. Like man, sacred
Scripture is composed of body, soul, and spirit or the literal, moral,
and sapiential or spiritual dimensions.45 Not all readers can understand
the inner meaning present in the text, but even those who cannot grasp
this wisdom are aware that there issome kind of message hidden in the
Book of God.46 Origen relates sacred knowledge directly to sacred
Scripture and believes that it is the function of spiritual beings to
discover this inner meaning of revealed truth and to use their
intelligence in the contemplation of spiritual realities. The spiritual
life of man is none other than the gradual development of the power of
the soul to grasp the spiritual intelligence of Scripture which, like
Christ himself, feeds the soul.

It is the presence of the Logos in the heart of man and at the root of
his intelligence that makes it possible for man to grasp the inner
meaning of sacred Scripture and to become illuminated by this knowledge.
The Logos is the illuminator of souls,47 the light which makes
intellectual vision possible. In fact, the Logos which exists in divinis
is the root of intelligence in man and is the intermediary through which
man receives sacred knowledge.48 In as much as the Logos is the origin
of human intelligence and the source of

the human instrument of knowledge, knowledge of the sacred is the
ultimate ground of knowledge as such, as well as its goal.

As one of the outstanding representatives of those who composed
sapiential commentaries upon the Bible, Origen wrote extensive spiritual
and esoteric commentaries upon various parts of both the Old and the New
Testaments, wherein he sought to reveal the sacred knowledge which a
person whose intellect is already sanctified and illuminated by the
Logos can grasp. In Origen there is that harmonious wedding between a
sacramental conception of knowledge and study of sacred Scripture, which
became rather rare in later phases of Christian history with the result
that hermeneutics, as the science of penetration into the inner meaning
of sacred Scripture on the basis of a veritable scientia sacra and with
the aid of an intelligence which is already illuminated by the Word or
Logos, became reduced to the desacralization of the Holy Book itself by
a mentality which had lost the sense of the sacred. Origen's perspective
is, therefore, an especially precious one if the meaning of the
sapiential perspective in the Christian tradition is to be understood in
conjunction with the central reality of a revealed book. Origen's
commentaries include many direct allusions to the esoteric nature of
scriptural passages and the sacred knowledge which they convey to those
capable of grasping their message. For example, concerning the already
cited verse from the Song of Songs, “Let him kiss me with the kiss of
his mouth” (which is also of paramount importance in Jewish esoterism),
Origen writes,

But when she has begun to discern for herself what was obscure, to
unravel what was untangled, to unfold what was involved, to interpret
parables and riddles and the sayings of the wise along the lines of her
own expert thinking, then let her believe that she has now received the
kisses of the Spouse Himself, that is, the Word of God.49

Here again, the “kiss of his mouth” is seen as none other than the
transmission of inner knowledge through that organ which is endowed with
the power to invoke His Name and to utter His Word.

Although the crystallization of Western Christianity in the various
credal and theological formulations tended to emphasize the fall of man
and his sinfulness and to outline a type of Christology which did not
bring into focus the role of Christ as the source of knowledge and the
illuminator of the human mind but rather as the savior of man from his
sins, the significance of knowledge as a means of attaining the sacred
was not completely forgotten. Even Saint Augustine, whose anthropology
was rather pessimistic and who limited the nature of man to a fallen
creature immersed in sin, nevertheless accepted the innate power of the
intellect as given by God to man to receive divine illumination.50 To
think the truth, according to Saint Augustine, man needs the
illumination which proceeds from God.51 Augustine, therefore, despite
his emphasis upon faith as the key to salvation, preserves the
essentially sacramental function of intelligence, even if it is
envisaged in a somewhat more indirect manner. In him one does not
encounter the same antithesis between knowledge and faith that was to
characterize much of later Western Christian thought.

The sapiential dimension in Christianity was to find one of its most
eloquent and profound expositors in that mysterious figure, Dionysius
the Areopagite, whom an Indian metaphysician of the stature of A. K.
Coomaraswamy was to call the greatest of all Europeans with the possible
exception of Dante. This sage, who traced his lineage to Saint Paul and
whose writings are considered by modern scholars as belonging to the
fifth and sixth centuries, appears more as an intellectual function than
an individual. Translated into Latin by Hilduin and later by Scotus
Erigena, Dionysius was to influence not only the Christian sapiential
tradition through Erigena himself, the Victorine mystics, and the German
theosophers but also Christian art.52 The two hierarchies to which
Dionysius was to devote two of his works, namely the celestial or
angelic order and the ecclesiastical, are themselves related to degrees
of the sacred (taxis hiera) and of science epistēmē. For him sacramental
action leading to theosis or divinization of the being of man is
inseparable from progress in knowledge which, finally, in union reaches
that “unknowing” of the Ultimate Reality, that, although possessing many
names, is “Nameless” (anonymous). In Dionysius is to be found the root
of that sapiential perspective which based its method on “unknowing” but
which in reality is knowledge as rooted in the Sacred in its highest
sense and leading to the Sacred, the “unknowing” being the dissolution
of all limited and separative knowledge, of all vision of the periphery
that would blur the Center which is the Sacred as such.

The detailed exposition of the important elements of the teachings of
Dionysius, as they bear upon the destiny of the sapiential tradition
within Christianity, was to come in the ninth century in the work of his
Latin translator, John the Scot or Scotus Erigena, who was born in
Ireland and who wrote his major opus De divisione naturae (Periphyseon
in its Greek title) between 864 and 866.53 In this majestic statement of
Christian gnosis, long neglected and even feared because of its later
association with Albigensian and Cathari circles, is to be found a clear
statement of the central role and function of knowledge as rooted in the
sacred and as the means of gaining access to it. The Erigenian statement
remains of singular importance in the sapiential dimension of the
Christian tradition despite all the attempts to reduce it to a simple
Neoplatonist or pantheist position, as if the import of any truth could
be destroyed by simply characterizing it by a currently pejorative or
harmless title.54

Erigena was devoutly Christian but also one who saw at the heart of
Christianity a sacred knowledge or wisdom which for him was none other
than authentic philosophy. “True religion is true philosophy,” Erigena
would assert.55 In wisdom philosophy and religion become united, and
wisdom is a virtue common to man and angel.56 The source of this wisdom
lies in Christ in whom is to be found not only the divine Scripture but
even the liberal arts which are an image of Christ and which reflect his
wisdom.57

As would be expected, Erigenian teachings emphasize the role of the
Logos not only as the origin of revealed truth but as the source of
sacred knowledge here and now. The erat of in principio erat verbum is
interpreted by Erigena as est or “is,” for not only “In the beginning
was the Word” but also “In the beginning,” which as stated above is none
other than the present

“now,” is the Word. Although the Logos is ever present man, however, has
become separated from God and as a result divine knowledge is no longer
immediately available to man. The men of this age can no longer “speak
to God” and see things in divinis as did Adam in paradise or as did men
in the Golden Age. Yet, this light remains accessible through Scripture
and nature, the two grand books of divine knowledge and it can become
available to man even now, if he would and could only benefit from the
grace of the Light of God which resides within the very substance of
man.58 In a manner more typical of Greek theology which emphasizes the
presence of the Light of God in nature than of Western theology which
focuses upon the presence of God in history, Erigena saw in the book of
nature the means of discovering that sacred knowledge which lies within
the very substance of the human microcosm.59

According to Erigena, human perfection and the quest for the attainment
of sacred knowledge, which is in fact the end and final goal of this
perfection, begins with the awareness of the human mind that all causes
come from God. After this stage, scientia becomes transformed into
sapientia, and the soul of man becomes illuminated by God who, in fact,
contemplates Himself in those whom He has illumined.60 This illumination
in turn enables man to realize that the very essence of things is God's
knowledge of them61 and that there is a reciprocity and, finally,
identity between knowing and being. The intellect becomes transformed
into what it knows, the highest object of that knowledge being God. But
the knowledge of the Divinity is not immediately accessible to man in
his present state. Before the fall man possessed knowledge of everything
in divinis, in an inward manner as reflected in and reflecting God. But
after the fall his knowledge became externalized. To regain that sacred
knowledge, the soul must pass through the eight stages consisting of the
earthly body passing into vital motion, vital motion into senses, sense
into reason, reason into soul, soul into knowledge, knowledge into
wisdom, and finally the supernatural passage (occasus) of the purified
soul into God.62

The final goal is theosis, the attainment through gnosis comprised of
the stages of ephesis, erōs, and agapē of that Reality which neither
creates nor is created. The human intellect can reach this goal which is
the knowledge of God through the rediscovery of its own essence. This
rediscovery in turn cannot be achieved save through that “negative way”
which is a “cosmolytic” process that reverses the cosmogonic one.
Intelligence is already a gift of God (datum) which, through special
grace (Dostum), is able to reach thesis, the very goal of human
existence and the very substance of intelligence itself.63

Although singularly neglected, Erigena's doctrines were nevertheless to
influence such major figures as Richard and Hugo of Saint Victor,
Raymond Lull, and later Nicholas of Cusa. But he was not at the center
of the arena of European intellectual life which, after a period of
intense debate on the relation between faith and reason, turned toward
the formation of those major theological syntheses associated with the
names of Saint Bonaventure, Saint Thomas, and Duns Scotus. These masters
developed languages and systems of discourse which are perfectly
adequate for the

exposition of traditional metaphysics, and all were aware of the
sapiential dimension of the spiritual life-Saint Bonaventure having
developed a theology which rests upon the primacy of contemplation and
Saint Thomas having left his pen for contemplative silence which crowns
his vast theological and metaphysical edifice. Yet, these syntheses,
especially the Thomistic one, tended to become overrationalistic in
imprisoning intuitions of a metaphysical order in syllogistic categories
which were to hide, more than reveal, their properly speaking
intellectual rather than purely rational character. In fact, the purely
sapiential aspect of medieval Christianity is reflected perhaps more
directly in the medieval cathedrals and that central epiphany of
Christian spirituality, the Divine Comedy of Dante, itself a literary
cathedral, than in the theological syntheses which, while containing
Christian Sophia, also tended to veil it. These theologies, therefore,
although belonging in a certain sense to the sapiential dimension of the
Christian tradition, characterize the crucial intermediate stages of the
process whereby knowledge became desacralized and philosophy gradually
divorced from wisdom, despite the very synthesis in which such elements
were wed together by the powerful mind and pen of a figure such as Saint
Thomas.64

The great medieval theologians were men of both faith and knowledge and
cannot be blamed for the reaction of reason against faith which was to
follow soon after their syntheses saw the light of day. Yet, the
philosophical agnosticism which was to surface in Europe within two
centuries after Saint Thomas himself could not have come about had the
intellectual life of Christianity remained impregnated by gnosis; had
not the reality of knowledge as theosis become transformed into the
question of using rational knowledge to preserve faith from being
corroded or weakened by the attacks of rationalism; and had not the type
of intellectuality characterized by Saint Thomas's contemporary, Meister
Eckhart, remained more or less peripheral as far as the main line of
development of theology and philosophy in Christian Europe was
concerned.

The most powerful and majestic expression of Christian gnosis in the
medieval period is in fact associated with Meister Eckhart. His
teachings have attracted a great deal of attention during the past few
decades in a Western world in search of some doctrine of Western origin
which would correspond to the grand metaphysical teachings of the Orient
that are now becoming increasingly better known in the West. More and
more the German sage is becoming for many the authority par excellence
of Christian gnosis.65

For Eckhart the root of the intellect is grounded in the Divinity, for
the intellect is increatus et increabilis; in fact, God is first and
foremost intelligere and only secondarily esse. There exists within the
soul of man a spark which Eckhart calls Seelenfünklein.66 This spark is
the seat of consciousness through which man can reach knowledge of the
Divinity or the Grund. The soul has access to levels of knowledge
leading from sensual to “abstract” forms and, finally, the “spark” which
is both the heart or root of intelligence and the means whereby God is
known. This possibility lies in the nature of intelligence itself,
although there is need of grace for this knowledge to be actualized per
speculum et in lutnine.67 For Eckhart, the

eye with which man sees God is the eye with which God sees man. And this
eye is none other than that supernal intellect or intelligence which
relates man to the sacred in a direct manner and which enables knowledge
to become the central means of access to the sacred. There is no more
explicit formulation of the sacramental nature of intelligence and of
knowing in Western Christianity than that of Meister Eckhart who, thanks
to the functioning of the Fünklein at the center of his own soul, was
able to present one of the most remarkable expositions of that scientia
sacra which is and has always been the heart of traditional knowledge in
both East and West.

Although the Renaissance marked the beginning of the process of the
radical secularization of man and knowledge, resulting in the humanism
which characterizes this epoch, there is nevertheless a definite
reassertion, at this time, of the sapiential perspective-this being
almost as a cosmic reaction to the rapid disappearance of the
traditional world view in the West. From the efforts of Gemistus Plethon
and especially Marsiglio Ficino there grew a new appreciation of
Graeco-Alexandrian wisdom in its Pythagorean, Platonic, Neoplatonic, and
Hermetic forms, although much of this appreciation took place outside
the framework of the dominant tradition in the West which was
Christianity. But there were also specifically Christian forms of gnosis
such as Christian Hermeticism, doctrines of illumination which such
figures as Francesco Patrizzi called Cognitio matutina, and Christian
Kabbala of a definitely sapiential nature. The Renaissance was also
witness to one of the most outstanding masters of Christian sapiential
doctrines, namely, Nicholas of Cusa. He expounded a traditional
metaphysics of remarkable profundity based on an essentially gnostic
perspective, although emphasizing again the process of unknowing and the
doctrine of “ignorance” at the very moment when the newly discovered
humanism, which was ignorance of another kind, was about to dominate the
European scene.68

Nicholas of Cusa (1401-1464), who was a cosmologist, physicist, and
mathematician as well as metaphysician and theologian, felt obliged to
“dissolve” and “undo” the excessively confining and rationalistic
categories in which late medieval theology had dealt with the Divine,
before being able to expound metaphysics.69 He was also forced to take
into consideration the effect of the nominalism which preceded him
without his falling into the pitfall of doubt and nihilism. Although
nominalism was definitely a major factor in destroying the basis of
certitude upon which the earlier medieval philosophy had rested,70 more
recent research has tried to point to its positive features as a
theology which sought after divine immediacy.71 Be that as it may, Cusa
had to remove the conceptual limitations placed upon the notion of the
Godhead which were attacked by various forms of rationalism, theological
and otherwise, in order to be able to expound a knowledge of a truly
gnostic and metaphysical order, following at the same time upon the wake
of the earlier pre-Scholastic Christian masters such as Dionysius and
the members of the Victorine school. Cusa therefore emphasized that “the
highest wisdom consists in this, to know… how that which is unattainable
may be reached or attained unattainably.”72 Cusa explains in the
following lines what he means by knowledge as ignorance in

commenting upon the saying of Solomon that “the wisdom and the locality
of understanding lie hidden from the eyes of all the living”:

… we may be compared to owls trying to look at the sun; but since the
natural desire in us for knowledge is not without a purpose, its
immediate object is our own ignorance. Nothing could be more beneficial
for even the most zealous searcher for knowledge than his being in fact
most learned in that very ignorance which is peculiarly his own; and the
better a man will have known his own ignorance, the greater his learning
will be.73

This docta ignorantia is, however, directed toward that partial form of
knowledge which would seek to replace sacred knowledge as such. It
applies to reason not to the intellect which can know the coincidentia
oppositorum. Cusa in fact distinguishes rigorously between the power of
knowing identified as ars coincidentiarum and that relative and
desacralized knowledge which, according to him, is no more than
conjecture and which he identifies as ars conjecturarum.74 Man's
ignorance which parades as knowledge and which Cusa's learned ignorance
seeks to cure belongs to man's fall. Otherwise, Cusa, like the Christian
sages before him, believes in Divine Wisdom which is accessible to man
and which is identified with the Divine Word. This knowledge cannot,
however, be attained except through being experienced and tasted. It is
sapientia according to the etymological sense of the term (from the
Latin sapere meaning “to taste”).75 Certainly the Cusanian ignorance
does not lead to agnosticism or nihilism or to the denial of sacred
knowledge. On the contrary, it is a means of opening a path for the ray
of gnosis to shine upon a space already darkened by excessively
rationalistic categories which seemed to negate the very possibility of
unitive knowledge and which were leading to skepticism and even
nihilism. That is why, while emphasizing the importance of the process
of “unknowing” and the realization that our so-called positive knowledge
is ignorance, he confirms the reality and centrality of that wisdom with
respect to which all limited and limiting knowledge is ignorance.76
There is no doubt that the teachings of Nicholas of Cusa which in a
sense crown the school based on “unknowing” or “ignorance” represent a
major stand of the sapiential dimension of the Christian tradition.77

The century which followed Cusa and which was to lead to the modern
period, properly speaking, was marked by the major event of the rise of
Protestantism with its opposition to the Scholastic syntheses of the
Middle Ages as well as the types of mysticism associated with
Catholicism. There is no doubt that the later growth of Protestantism
was not unconnected to the process of the secularization of knowledge,
but it is also certain that the teachings of, at least, Luther possessed
certain aspects which are closely related to the sapiential dimension of
Christianity. Needless to say, Luther emphasized faith above everything
else as Catholicism has emphasized love. But in the same way that
Christian love is, or at least can be, related to knowledge through
union which is the goal of both love and knowledge, so is faith related
to knowledge through the fact that without some knowledge there cannot
be faith, for were there no knowledge one could have faith in just
anything and the object of faith would not matter.

In any case, Lutheran spirituality, with all of its emphasis upon faith
and negation of Catholic theology and the Christian sapiential tradition
as interpreted by the medieval Christian sages, nevertheless allowed the
possibility of a mysticism of an essentially sapiential nature.78 It is
known that there were many Lutheran Hermeticists and Rosicrucians-the
coat of arms of Luther himself having been the cross and the rose. The
evangelical movement begun by Luther included such figures as Sebastian
Franck, Paracelsus, V. Weigel, Jacob Boehme, G. Arnold, G. Gichtel, F.
C. Oetinger, and many other theosophers, mystics, and spiritual
alchemists and created a climate of a kind of “Abrahamic quality” in
which the wedding between faith and knowledge was a definite
possibility. The whole phenomenon of the existence of a theosophy, which
in its traditional sense is none other than sacred knowledge, in the
bosom of Lutheranism is a matter of great significance as far as the
question of the presence of a sapiential tradition in the West is
concerned.79 Even some of the music associated with the Lutheran
movement is of a contemplative quality in conformity with the sapiential
perspective.80 Therefore, although the breakup of the unity of the
Christian church during the Renaissance played a crucial role in the
secularization of the Western world, a spirituality based upon sacred
knowledge and knowledge of the sacred continued to survive even within
the Lutheran tradition with all its emphasis upon faith at the expense
of everything else.

With Jacob Boehme (1575-1624), who wrote that as a child he was loved by
the Divine Sophia, the sapiential dimension of the Christian tradition
reaches one of its peaks in recent history.81 Boehme was an avid reader
of the Bible upon which he wrote a commentary in his Mysterium Magnum in
1623, just before his death. Moreover, he considered himself to have
been illuminated by the Divine Sophia and enabled to penetrate into the
inner meaning of the sacred text by virtue of inner illumination (innere
Erleuchtungen). All that he wrote and said was from the point of view of
this sapientia received from both sacred Scripture and inner
illumination, or the objective and subjective modes of revelation.

Boehme sees man not only as the fallen being depicted in most works of
Christian theology but also as a creature in whom there is still an
element which is unaffected by the fall and which yearns for the
Infinite and the Eternal since it comes from that Divine Ground which is
both Infinite and Eternal.82 It is the state of purity and innocence
which he calls Tempratur. Likewise, there is an aspect of creation which
is still pure and paradisal, unaffected by that force of evil which is
personified in Satan, the aspect which Boehme calls “the holy or
paradisal element” (heiligesor paradiesische Elemente). But this element
remains inaccessible to most men except those who remain aware of their
own paradisal and primordial nature which seeks wisdom and the Eternal
spontaneously and naturally. This search for the Eternal is related to
the possibility of attaining perfect knowledge of God not only in
Himself but also in both nature and the human soul.83 The mission of man
in this world is in fact the attainment of this knowledge with the aid
of which he is able to decipher the various “signatures,” the sum of
which comprise the universe.84

While in paradise, man possessed the “natural language” which was at
once the language of paradise and the essential knowledge of all things.
The root of both human language and knowledge was identical with the
sacred or quintessential knowledge of creation itself. But consequent
upon the fall he lost the knowledge of this language, at least in that
part of his being which is identified with the consequences of the fall.
Yet, this primordial knowledge of a sacred order remains in the depth of
man's being, in that very aspect of his being which is still in the
state of paradisal innocence.85

This doctrine of language is closely associated with the role and
function which Boehme accords to intelligence as the instrument for the
attainment of knowledge of the sacred, an intelligence which becomes
operative only upon man's receiving inner illumination. Boehme also
reasserts the primary significance of wisdom or Sophia as the “fullness
of God's Universe”86 and an ontological reality of blinding splendor
which is the means of access to the Divine Presence in a universe
dominated by the sapiential perspective.

At the end of the Renaissance and in the face of seventeenth-century
rationalism, another branch of the tree of the Christian sapiential
tradition was to grow on the other side of the European continent in
England where the so-called school of Cambridge Platonists, whom
Coleridge called Plotinists, saw the light of day. There such figures as
Benjamin Whichcote, Ralph Cudworth, Henry More, and John Smith were to
express important elements of traditional wisdom especially as it
concerned knowledge of the “intermediate world,” the mundus
imaginalis,87 which More, one of the foremost members of this school,
calls spissitudo spiritualis. As far as sacred knowledge is concerned,
this school was also important in emphasizing the possibility of a
knowledge which is immediate like that of the senses but not sensuous in
the usual meaning of this term, thereby negating the epistomological
dualism of Cartesian origin which was so important in the secularization
of knowledge in the seventeenth century and also the empiricism which
was becoming prevalent in England. John Smith, in fact, speaks of
“spiritual sensation” meaning thereby immediate, concrete knowledge of
the sacred as against the “abstract” knowledge which the philosophy of
that period posited against the “concrete” seen only as that which is
related to external, sensual knowledge.88 He also reasserts the
traditional doctrine of sacred knowledge being attainable not through
the mind but the heart once it is purified and the “eye of the heart,”
as the Sufis would call it, opened.89 Through the purification of the
heart, according to John Smith and quoting Plotinus, “Contemplative man
knits his own center unto the center of Divine Being.”90 The school of
Cambridge Platonism represents a precious restatement of certain aspects
of sapience in a northern European climate, influenced in the religious
sphere by the kind of voluntarism associated with Calvin and, more
particularly, in an England which was turning nearly completely in the
direction of an empiricism in which the sanctifying function of
intellection possessed no meaning at all. It is worthwhile to remember
that, despite what was to occur later both philosophically and
theologically, the influence of this school, as well as other forms of
traditional doctrines, remained to some degree alive in

England, although at the periphery of the main arena of philosophical
and what today is called intellectual activity.

Although the influence of Boehme was to be felt far and wide, ranging
from French and German theosophers and esoterists to Russian
contemplatives, perhaps the most artistically powerful expression of
purely sapiential teachings deeply influenced by him are to be found in
those hymns of Christian gnosis which compromise the Cherubic Wanderer
(Der Cherubische Wandersmann) of Angelus Silesius (1624-1677), which are
also among the most remarkable works of German literature.91 This
collection, so close in both form and content to Sufi poetry, is based
upon the central theme of return to God through knowledge. The path of
the wanderer is none other than the path of knowledge;92 it is the al-ma
‘rifah of Islam jñāna of Hinduism and very much in accord with works of
such nature whether they be in Arabic and Persian or Sanskrit.93

For Silesius, man is the mirror in which God reflects Himself, His other
“self.”

J am God's other self. He findeth but in me

That which resembleth him eternally.94

This function man fulfills through sacred knowledge which is none other
than wisdom.

Eternal Wisdom builds:

I shall the palace be

When I in wisdom rest

And Wisdom rests in me.95

To attain this knowledge man must brush aside all accidents and return
to his center and essence which is pure consciousness and knowledge, the
eternal essence which survives all change and becoming.

Man should essential be;

For, when this world is gone

All accident is past

The essence still lives on.96

Moreover, the attainment of this center which means also the opening of
the “eye of the heart” and the vision of God is not to be postponed to
the posthumous state. The beatific vision must be attained here and now
through that spiritual death which makes of the gnostic “a dead man
walking” even in this life. The beatific vision belongs to the eternal
now which opens unto the Infinite at this very present moment.

“In good time we shall see

God and his light,” ye say.

Fools! Ye shall never see

What ye see not today!97

It is the function of man to know God here and now through the knowledge
which comes from God Himself. The grandeur of man and what places him
even above the angels is this possibility of unitive knowledge through
which he becomes the “bride” of God and attains beatific union.

The angels are in bliss.

But better is man's life

For no one of their kind

Can ever be God's wife.98

Despite the ever-tightening circle of rationalism and empiricism the
sapiential tradition expounded by Boehme and Silesius continued to
survive on the margin of European intellectual life, while the center of
the stage became occupied to an even greater degree by those who prided
themselves in being enlightened while denying to the mind all
possibility of illumination by the inner Intellect. As a matter of fact,
during the eighteenth century the teachings of such masters as Boehme
were revived in opposition to the so-called enlightenment by those who
sought to combat the stifling influence of the new all-encompassing
rationalism. As a result, one can observe alongside the well-known
philosophers of the Enlightenment or the Aufklaärung, the appearance of
illuminism on the Continent and an attempt made from several quarters to
stem the tide of rationalism, empiricism, mechanism, secularism of
science and the cosmos, and other prevalent ideas and isms of the day
through recourse to various types of esoteric teachings.99

In France and Germany numerous figures appeared whose significance is
only now being realized and who are gradually being brought out of
oblivion resulting from almost systematic neglect by later academic
scholarship. In France itself, which was the citadel of the new
rationalism associated with Descartes and Wolf, the eighteenth century
was witness to Martines de Pasqually, reviver of certain of the
traditional sciences and a Christian and Freemason at the same time;
Claude Saint-Martin, master of French prose and reviver of Boehme in
France; Joseph de Maistre, at once a Catholic and Freemason who saw
Christianity as an initiatic path; Fabre d'Olivet, a student of ancient
languages and wisdom and resuscitator of Pythagoreanism in which there
was much interest at that time; and Höné Wronski, of Polish origin but
residing in France, like Fabre d'Olivet attracted especially to
traditional mathematical doctrines and what has been called
“arithmasophy.”

In Germany there was even greater activity in the resuscitation and
continuation of esoteric and theosophic teachings centering around the
works and thought of Boehme. There was Friedrich Oetinger, initiated
into the Kabbala, who left Malebranche to study Boehme and who sought to
synthesize the teachings of Boehme and Lurian Kabbala; Jakob Obereit who
opposed esoteric knowledge to the skepticism of the Aufklärung and wrote
against many of the theses of Kant; Karl von Eckartshausen, scientist
and theosopher who sought to overcome the opposition created by Kant
between phenomena and noumena and to unite all levels of knowledge, and
numerous other figures.100 Boehmian doctrines even influenced well-known
literary and philosophical figures such as Novalis, whose fiancée,
Sophie von Kühn, who died as a youth, was identified by the poet with
Sophia; and Friedrich Schelling, the celebrated philosopher, who in his
later works, such as the Ages of the World, was influenced by earlier
German theosophers, especially Boehme.

In northern Europe the enigmatic figure of Swedenborg, both scientist
and visionary, was to cast much influence in England as well as in
Scandinavia and to propagate certain theosophic theses especially in
relation

to the “spiritual body” (Geistleiblichkeit) which were to lead to the
founding of a new Protestant church and which contained a strong
polemical aspect.101 In England itself, although the influence of Boehme
was less marked than in continental Europe, there were a few figures
like John Hutchinson who were deeply immersed in Boehmian teachings. But
perhaps the most notable figure who should be mentioned in this
connection is Sir Isaac Newton. The father of classical physics not only
composed the Principia which, despite the wishes of its author, had such
a major role to play in the secularization of the world and in
propagating scientific rationalism but also wrote the Observations upon
the Prophecies of Daniel and works on alchemy102 and is considered by
some scholars to have been a follower of Boehme.103 But as can be gauged
from the study of such figures, the influence of earlier masters of
wisdom no longer amounted to a continuation of a total and complete
knowledge of a sacred character but a partial and segmented one.

It is of interest to note in passing that the sapiential teachings of
the remarkable German cobbler were also to influence certain figures in
Russia which was now turning toward the West. Ivan Lopouchine, who was
both a Freemason and attracted to the Hesychast tradition within
Orthodox Christianity, was related to esoteric circles in France and
Germany, while Alexander Labzine translated Boehme into Russian.
Although the Orthodox world has possessed a rich tradition concerning
Sophia, which we cannot treat in this survey concerned mainly with the
West, it is of much interest to note that many of the followers of
sapiential teachings in the Occident were interested in bringing Western
Christianity closer to Orthodoxy and that the most notable influence of
Boehme in modern times has been on such Russian figures as P. Florensky,
V. Soloviev, and S. Boulgakov.

Of particular interest among the later representatives of the sapiential
perspective in Europe is Franz von Baader (1765-1841), perhaps the last
gnostic and theosopher in the West in the full sense of these terms
before the segmentation and obcuring of the sapiential tradition in the
nineteenth century, the figure whom A. W. Schlegel called Boehmius
redivivus and who, besides reconfirming Boehmian theosophy, sought
without success to bring the Catholic and Orthodox churches closer
together on the foundation of a common sapiential spirituality. Von
Baader was at first a student of medicine, mineralogy, and even
engineering but later turned to the study of philosophy and
metaphysics.104 He opposed the main theses of modern European philosophy
of his day, including both the cogito of Descartes and the “agnosticism”
of Kant,105 and sought to bestow once again upon knowledge its
sacramental quality. He asserted that, since God is reflected in all
things, all knowledge is in a sense the knowledge of some aspect of the
Divinity and has a sacred quality.106 Attracted deeply to the study of
nature, he considered his early philosophy as natural wisdom
(Naturweisheit) which was to lead directly to the theosophy he was to
develop later in life. In fact, in accordance with the sapiential
perspective he did not make an absolute distinction between the natural
and supernatural and saw in nature a reflection of the sacred which the
official theology had confined strictly to the supernatural realm.

Von Baader emphasized the sapiential aspect of both religious practice
and thought. Like Boehme, he identified Sophia with the Virgin Mary to
whom he was especially devoted. He also spoke of wisdom as the “image of
the Father” and emphasized the sacramental character of knowledge. For
him all authentic knowledge led ultimately to God, and he did not fail
to point to the positive function of reason and logic as channels
through which the light of the Intellect shines upon the human state and
which can lead man to the precinct of sacred knowledge.107 Yet, despite
his influence upon the rise of neo-Scholasticism, his voice as a
spokesman for the sapiential perspective was a lonely one in the
spiritual wilderness of the nineteenth century. Although there were a
few figures here and there such as Antonio Rosmini in Italy, who wrote
the Theosophia in the nineteenth century108 upon the wake of and in a
perspective akin to von Baader's works, the main arena of European
thought was now reaping the fruit of the secularization of knowledge in
the form of the antirationalistic philosophies which soon began to deny
even to reason the possibility of attaining some degree of knowledge and
certitude. As for sapiential teachings, what remained of them became
more and more of a fragmentary nature, separated from the grace of the
living Christian tradition, an “esoterism” which was properly speaking
an “occultism” and a knowledge which, although originally of a sacred
character, had become a body without a soul. It was the cadaver of
sacred knowledge depleted of sacred presence and confined mostly to the
cosmological rather than the purely metaphysical level. As for Christian
mysticism, it had become nearly completely emptied of intellectual and
metaphysical content, becoming a passive way of love which, although
precious from the general religious point of view, could not stem the
tide of the total desacralization of knowledge any more than could the
existing occultisms, some of which possessed partial knowledge of
traditional doctrines while others were impregnated with antitraditional
forces which stood opposed to all that the sacred signifies. But to
understand why such a phenomenon took place in the West, it is necessary
to return to the earlier centuries of European history and to trace the
process by which knowledge became gradually desacralized.

The process of desacralization of knowledge in the Occident begins
already with the ancient Greeks among whom the first instance of the
rise of an antitraditional society is to be seen in this cycle of human
history. The loss of the symbolist spirit already decried by Plato, the
emptying of the cosmos of its sacred content in the Olympian religion
leading to Ionian natural philosophy, the rise of rationalism as
independent of intellection, and many other important transformations
mark this process of desacralization. The Greek tradition, instead of
developing various intellectual perspectives like the darśanas of
Hinduism, was witness to the rise of Sophism, Epicurianism, Pyrrhonism,
the New Academy, and many other schools based on rationalism or
skepticism which eclipsed almost totally the sacramental function of
knowledge and reduced knowledge to either ratiocination or simple mental
acrobatics, thus making it necessary to distinguish between knowledge
and wisdom,109 as well as bringing about the reaction against Greek
philosophy as a whole which was to come with

Christianity. What the post-Renaissance came to call the “Greek miracle”
is, from the traditional point of view, a miracle in reverse because it
substituted reason for the intellect and sensuous knowledge for inner
illumination.110

There was, however, a veritable Greek miracle in the appearance in
Greece of those sapiential doctrines and systematic metaphysics deriving
from the Orphic and Dionysian mysteries. These were associated with such
figures as Pythagoras, Empedocles, Plato, the Neoplatonists, especially
Plotinus and Proclus, and even Aristotle, all of whom provided doctrines
of a veritable metaphysical nature, although Aristotle hid intellection
in a syllogistic mode and in a sense forms the link between metaphysics
and philosophy in its later sense.111 Certain Muslims have called Plato
a prophet and he, as well as figures such as Pythagoras and Plotinus,
must be considered as metaphysicians and seers like the ṛṣis of India
rather than as profane philosophers. Their doctrines are based on the
Intellect which illuminates rather than on simple ratiocination. With
them knowledge is still impregnated with its sacred quality and is the
means of attainment of theosis. These sages are gnostics whose teachings
were to provide providentially the doctrinal language for many of the
sapiential schools of Islam, Judaism, and Christianity. The rediscovery
of the sacred character of knowledge today would lead, almost before
anything else, to a rediscovery of Greek wisdom, of Plato, Plotinus, and
other Graeco-Alexandrian sages and writings such as Hermeticisn, not as
simply human philosophy but as sacred doctrines of divine inspiration to
be compared much more with the Hindu darśanas than with philosophical
schools as they are currently understood. The belief of Muslim
philosophers that the Greek philosophers had learned their doctrines
from the prophets, especially Solomon, and that “philosophy derives from
the niche of prophecy,”112 if not verifiable historically, nevertheless
contains a profound truth, namely, the relation of this wisdom to the
sacred and its origin in revelation, even if this revelation cannot be
confined in the strictly Abrahamic sense to a particular figure or
prophet.

Christianity expanded in a world already suffering from a rationalism
and naturalism which had stifled the spirit and hardened the heart as
the seat of intelligence, dividing reason from its ontological root. It
therefore had to present itself as a way of love which had to sweep
aside completely all the “ways of knowing” that lay before it, not
distinguishing in its general theological formulations between
intellection and ratiocination and preferring quite rightly a true
theology and a false cosmology to a false theology and a true
cosmology.113 In trying to overcome the prevalent danger of cosmolatry,
Christianity, in its widely accepted theological formulations, not only
drew an excessively tight boundary between the supernatural and the
natural, leading to an impoverished view of nature, but also caused the
eclipse of the supernaturally natural function of the Intellect. In the
dialogue between the Hellenist and the Christian in which both sides
presented an aspect of the truth and in which Christianity triumphed,
from a certain point of view, precisely because it was a new
dispensation from Heaven destined to save a whole world from the loss of
religious faith, the sapiential dimension of Greek wisdom was criticized
and dismissed along

with skepticism and rationalism.114 All knowledge appeared to a large
number of Christian theologians as “pride of intelligence” and a climate
was created which, from early days, was not completely favorable to the
sapiential perspective. Although as described earlier, Christian gnosis
existed from the beginning and continued through the centuries, the role
and function of the Intellect was never considered as central as in
certain other traditions such as Hinduism and Islam. As a result, the
mainstream of Christian theology, especially after the early centuries,
insisted upon the credo ut intelligam, a formula later identified with
Saint Anselm, while limiting the function of intellection to that of a
handmaid of faith rather than the means of sanctification, which of
course would not exclude the element of faith. What the prevalent
medieval Christian theology did exclude was the ecstatic or “rhapsodic
intellect”;115 the ecstasy resulting from intellection was dismissed as
a possibility and disdained religiously along with sexual ecstasy whose
spiritual significance was left outside of the perspective of the
official theology and which found its exposition in Christian Hermetic
writings as well as in the Kabbala.

As far as the early centuries are concerned, it must be remembered that
in the Acts of the Stone and the Twelve Apostles belonging to the Nag
Hammadi collection, which contains the oldest form of Christology,
Christ is described as the Christos Angelas, at once messenger and
angel.116 He is the celestial figure, the angel-man, the celestial
archetype of the human soul who, like the Fravarti of Zoroastrianism,
illuminates the soul and the mind and bestows upon it knowledge of a
sacred order. There is moreover a direct relation between this
Christology and alchemical and mineral symbolism and direct reference to
the pearl which is also found in the “Hymn of the Soul” in the Acts of
Thomas. The pearl is the universal symbol of the gnosis which purifies,
sanctifies, and delivers, the pearl which Christ instructed his
followers not to cast before swine. Throughout these early documents one
finds constant reference to a type of Christology which emphasizes the
gnostic character of both Christ himself as the bestower of wisdom and
of his message as containing an inner significance of a gnostic and
esoteric nature. To overcome the danger of various kinds of schisms
associated with gnosticism, an official Christology was formulated which
hid to some extent this aspect of the Christ nature and thereby
relegated the sapiential dimension of Christianity to a more marginal
and secondary function, without of course obliterating or destroying it
altogether.

A further eclipse of the sapiential dimension and the secularization of
knowledge was to come in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries with the
spread of Aristotelianism and Averroism in the West and their wedding
with various forms of Christian theology, especially those schools which
followed upon the wake of Saint Thomas. Until this period Augustianism
had still preserved the primacy of illumination in the act of knowledge,
whereas Saint Thomas, trying to preserve the primacy of Scripture,
denied the possibility of the illumination of the mind by the Intellect
and considered all knowledge as having a sensuous origin. Despite the
imposing theology created by Saint Thomas, his adoption of Aristotelian
categories for the expression of Christian doctrines and emphasis upon
the sensual

origin of knowledge played a role in the further desacralization of
knowledge, although Saint Thomas himself did not accept the separation
of faith and reason which he in' fact sought to harmonize.117 But the
harmony of faith and reason is one thing and the sanctifying function of
knowledge another. Had Thomism continued to be interpreted by a Meister
Eckhart, the intellectual destiny of the West would have been very
different. But as it happened, the excessively positive categories of
theology (or kataphatic theology) combined with a dimming of
intellectual intuition, which caused the very meaning of realism to be
soon forgotten, led to the nominalism that marked the swan song of
medieval Christianity and destroyed the harmony which had been
established between reason and faith in a world dominated by the sacred.

Thomism was certainly religious philosophy at its highest level and
Christian theology in a most mature and all-embracing form. But it was
not the pure sapientia based on the direct illumination of reason by the
Intellect, although even in this respect it provided a perfectly
suitable language and a world view which could lead to a purely
sapiential vision of things as one can in fact observe in Dante. But the
excessive emphasis upon reason at the expense of the Intellect in
Scholasticism combined with the destruction or disappearance of the
Order of the Temple, the fedeli d'amore, and other depositories of
Christian esoteric and gnostic teachings certainly helped to create an
atmosphere which was more conducive to the rise of rationalism and the
eclipse of a perspective of a truly intellectual nature. In the
intellectual life of a religious civilization such as that of
Christianity or Islam or for that matter in the Jewish tradition, one
can detect three and not just two major schools or ways of thinking:
philosophy, theology, and gnosis or metaphysics (or theosophy) in its
traditional sense. Saint Thomas was a great philosopher and certainly an
outstanding theologian. But even if he himself may have also been a
Christian gnostic when he put his pen down and chose silence, his works
provided the West more with traditional philosophy and theology than
with the kind of sapiential doctrines based directly on the sanctifying
function of the Intellect. In any case, men who criticize Saint Thomas
today are, for the most part, not those who are of such lofty
intellectual realization and metaphysical insight that they must simply
move beyond the confines of Thomistic categories but are usually those
who simply fail to comprehend what Saint Thomas is saying. A true
gnostic would be the first to realize the immense importance of Thomism,
as in Islam figures like Suhrawardī and Mullā Ṣadrā, who based their
epistemology on the sacramental function of knowledge and its
illumination by the Intellect, were the first to point to the importance
of Muslim Peripatetics (mashshā'īs) whose perspective was in many
respects close to that of Saint Thomas and whom the Angelic Doctor
quotes so often.

To understand the process of the gradual desacralization of knowledge in
the West the role of the teachings of Ibn Sīnā and Ibn Rushd in the
Latin world are of some importance.118 Avicennian philosophy which was
to serve in the Islamic world as the basis for the restatement of the
sacramental function of knowledge and intellection by Suhrawardī and
many later sages reached the West in only a truncated version and under
a much more

rationalistic garb.119 But even what did reach the West and led to what
has been called Latin Avicennism120 never enjoyed the same popularity or
influence as the more rationalistic Latin Averroism. Furthermore, even
in the case of Ibn Rushd (Averroes), who was much more rationalistic
than Ibn Sīnā and did not emphasize illumination of the mind by the
angel as did the latter, there is no doubt that again the Latin Averroes
is more of a secularized and rationalistic philosopher than the original
Ibn Rushd when read in Arabic. The study of the destiny of these two
masters of Islamic philosophy in the Islamic and Christian worlds
reveals to what extent the West was moving toward a more rationalistic
interpretation of this philosophic school while the Islamic world was
moving in the other direction to reaffirm the primacy of intellection
over ratiocination. The appearance of Suhrawardī and the school of
illumination (al-ishrāq) testifies to a new assertion of the sacred
quality of knowledge and the ultimately “illuminative” character of all
knowledge in the Islamic intellectual universe.121

In the Occident, however, it was not the doctrine of illumination of a
Suhrawardī which came to the fore but the nominalism which reacted
against the positive theology of the thirteenth century. Although as
already mentioned, a certain aspect of nominalism was instrumental in
preparing the ground for the type of apophatic and mystical theology
identified with Nicholas of Cusa, the movement as a whole marked the
final phase of cutting reason off from certitude. It thereby created a
philosophical agnosticism which even in the world of faith implied an
impoverishment of the power of reason and the function of knowing as
related to the sacred, causing a vacuum which had dire consequences for
the Christian world. Although religious faith was still too strong to
permit an open type of agnostic rationalism which was to appear during
later centuries, nominalism, in combination with certain other forces,
helped to eclipse the type of sacred knowledge which every religion
needs if it is to be total and complete and able to cater to the mental
and intellectual needs of all of its followers. The result was the
attempt on the part of certain Christians of an intellectual bent to
seek outside of Christianity for answers to quench their thirst for
causality and the explanation of the nature of things, answers which in
many cases only esoterism and veritable metaphysics can supply. This
quest in turn led to the breakup of the homogeneous and integral
Christian world view which had dominated the Middle Ages. Men then
sought certitude and a firm foundation for knowledge on another basis
and level; hence the establishment of modern philosophy, properly
speaking, with Descartes.122

During the Renaissance there was certainly a quest for primordial
wisdom, for lost knowledge, for a new foundation for certitude. Gemistus
Plethon whose influence was deeply felt in the Italian Renaissance had
spoken of Plato and Zoroaster as fathers of a sacred Sophia, while
Ficino set about to revive the whole corpus of Platonic wisdom and
translate it into Latin. There was renewed interest in Hermeticism and
even the ancient Oriental mysteries, but despite figures such as Ficino
and Cusa, much of the search for sacred knowledge was in reality being
carried out outside of the

mainstream of the Christian tradition in forms which were “pagan” in the
theological sense of the term. The subject studied was sacred knowledge
but the mind which set out to carry out this study was in many cases
being affected to an ever greater degree by an individualism and
humanism which could not but result in the total rationalism that soon
followed. Although there was a great deal of interest in Orphism and the
Orphica, which, like the Hermetica,123 was widespread during the
Renaissance, the “Orphic Christ” who was such an important figure of the
Latin literature of the earlier period124 ceased to be a central
influence as in days gone by. One could say that Orpheus went one way
and Christ another. Ancient wisdom based on the doctrine of the sanctity
of the Intellect began to appear independent of the living tradition of
the West which was Christianity. And since only a living tradition can
convey and bestow the quality of the sacred in an operative manner, the
very process of resuscitation of ancient wisdom had, to a large extent,
the result of further weakening what remained of the traditional
Christian intellectuality. As a result, despite the presence of groups
and circles which possessed authentic knowledge of a sacred character,
groups such as the Rosicrucians, the Kabbalists, the Hermeticists, and
the school of Paracelsus, the revival of ancient wisdom during the
Renaissance and even later and the opposition of most followers of this
“newly found” wisdom to Scholasticism did not result in the integration
of Scholasticism into a higher sapiential perspective within
Christianity,125 but in the destruction of Scholasticism from “below”
leading to the nearly complete secularization of knowledge in the main
currents of European philosophy in the seventeenth century. The
profusion of teachings of an esoteric and sapiential nature during the
Renaissance, much of which in fact was an externalization and
profanation of what had been known and preserved secretly during the
Middle Ages, did not lead to the reestablishment of the sapiential
dimension at the heart of the Christian tradition but to a further
breakup of the Christian intellectual world and the secularization of
reason resulting in the more or less radical separation of philosophy
from theology, reason from faith, and mysticism from gnosis, which has
characterized the main current of Western intellectual history since the
Renaissance.

Since man is by nature a being in quest of certainty, the philosophical
agnosticism following the nominalist attack against medieval philosophy
had to be overcome in one way or another. This feat was in fact
achieved, as far as later European history is concerned, not by the
revival of the ancient wisdom during the Renaissance, which in reality
contained all the necessary teachings if only their true nature had been
fully understood, but through recourse to the radical individualism and
rationalism which mark modern European philosophy as such. Descartes has
been quite rightly called the father of modern philosophy for it is he
more than his contemporaries, Spinoza and Leibniz, who epitomizes what
lies at the heart of modern philosophy and even modern science, namely,
the reduction of knowledge to the functioning of the individual reason
cut off from the Intellect, in both its microcosmic and macrocosmic
aspects.

In seeking a new basis for certain knowledge Descartes appealed neither
to the Intellect as it functions in the heart of man and as the source
of reason nor to revelation, but to the individual consciousness of the
thinking subject. The famous cogito could possibly have referred to the
primacy of the subject over the object in the sense that the Vedantists
consider Ātman to be the primary reality compared to which all
externalized existence and objectivizarion is māyā. The cogito ergo sum
in fact contains a profound metaphysical significance if understood in
this Vedantic sense. But in saying “I think, therefore I am,” Descartes
was not referring to the divine I who some seven centuries before
Descartes had uttered through the mouth of Manṣūr al-Ḥallāj,126 “I am
the Truth” (ana' l-Ḥaqq), the Divine Self which alone can say I. It was
Descartes's individual, and therefore from the gnostic point of view
“illusory” self, which was placing its experience and consciousness of
thinking as the foundation of all epistemology and ontology and the
source of certitude. Even being was subordinated to it and considered a
consequence of it, hence the ergo. Even if he did begin with the act of
thinking, Descartes could have concluded with est rather than sum,
asserting that my thinking and consciousness are themselves proofs that
God is, not that “I” as individual am.127 Had he done so, he would have
joined a particular perspective of traditional philosophy and preserved
the central role of ontology in philosophy.

As it was, he made the thinking of the individual ego the center of
reality and the criterion of all knowledge, turning philosophy into pure
rationalism and shifting the main concern of European philosophy from
ontology to epistemology. Henceforth, knowledge, even if it were to
extend to the farthest galaxies, was rooted in the cogito. The knowing
subject was bound to the realm of reason and separated from both the
Intellect and revelation, neither of which were henceforth considered as
possible sources of knowledge of an objective order. Knowing thus became
depleted of its sacred content to the extent that anything that partakes
of reality can become divorced from the sacred which is ultimately
inseparable from reality, the Ultimate Reality being the Sacred as such.
But to the mentality of those who were caught in the web of the newly
established rationalism, this most intelligent way of being
unintelligent, knowledge and science were henceforth totally separated
from the sacred even if the sacred were to be accepted as possessing a
reality. To this mentality the very concept of a scientia sacra appeared
as a contradiction in terms and, in fact, it still appears as either
contradictory or meaningless not only to those who either consciously or
unconsciously follow the rationalism inherent in Cartesian epistemology
but also to those who have rebelled against this rationalism from below
with the kinds of irrationalism which characterize so much of modern
thought.

After the seventeenth century, there was but a single step to Humean
doubt and the Kantian “agnostic” position which in a characteristically
subjective fashion denied to the intellect the possibility of knowing
the essence of things, as if to say that since my rational faculties
cannot know the noumena, reason as such is incapable of such knowledge,
and since my reason is not illuminated by the Intellect which would
permit me to know

the noumena through intellectual intuition, no one else can possess such
an intellectual faculty either.

In the case of both Descartes and Kant, however, the functioning of
reason as such is at least still accepted and the knowledge that it can
attain is considered to have an immutability which characterizes that
which is of an intellectual order. Although these philosophers did not
recognize the ultimately sacred character of the very categories of
logic which enables man to know even on the level of ordinary logic,
they still preserved a vision of permanence and immutability of logical
categories which, despite their own unawareness of its real nature, is
seen from the metaphysical point of view as a reflection of the sacred,
which is in fact the permanent and the eternal in itself and in its
reflections into the domains of change and becoming.

In the unfolding of this process of secularization, however, even this
reflection was to disappear with those nineteenth-century philosophies
such as Hegelianism and Marxism which based reality upon dialectical
becoming and change itself and transformed an immutable vision of things
into a constantly changing one, whether this process was taken as being
spiritual or material. Hegel has been, of course, interpreted in many
ways, and his complicated thoughts allow interpretations ranging all the
way from those of conservative theologians in nineteenth-century Germany
to agnostic leftists. But what characterizes the whole dialectical
thought process in its nineteenth-century development, and in contrast
to many traditional philosophies of change, is not its concern with
becoming or process but the reduction of reality to the temporal
process, of being to becoming, of the immutable categories of logic, not
to mention metaphysics, to ever-changing thought processes. This loss of
the sense of permanence in schools of philosophy standing in the
mainstream of modern Western thought marks, along with the crass
positivism of an Auguste Comte, a more advanced phase of not only the
desacralization of knowledge but also of the loss of the sense of the
sacred which characterizes modern, but not necessarily contemporary, man
as such. All that follows, either in the form of irrational philosophies
reacting against Hegelianism or various later forms of positivism or
analytical philosophy, carry out the final phases of the program to
destroy completely the sacred quality of knowledge by either totally
separating religion and the quest for the sacred from rationality and
logic or by depleting both language and thought processes, that are of
course related to language, from any significance of a metaphysical
order which may still lurk in some recess from days when man's concern
with knowledge was inseparable from his attachment to and quest for the
sacred.128 The result has been the creation of philosophies which, from
the traditional point of view, could only be called monstrous and which
can only be characterized as what the German scholar H. Türck has called
“misosophy,” that is, the hatred rather than love of wisdom and which
others have considered as “antiphilosophy.”129

Since only the like can know the like, the secularized reason which
became the sole instrument of knowing in modern times could not but
leave its mark and effect upon everything that it studied. All subjects
studied by a

secularized instrument of knowledge came out to be depleted and devoid
of the quality of the sacred. The profane point of view could only
observe a profane world in which the sacred did not play a role. The
quest of the typically modern man has been in fact to “kill the gods”
wherever he has been able to find them and to banish the sacred from a
world which has been rapidly woven into a new pattern drawn from the
strands issuing from a secularized mentality.

The effect of desacralized knowledge was to appear first of all in the
domain of thought itself. In contrast to the Christian Platonists and
Aristotelians, Renaissance Hermeticists like Ficino, who sought to
revive Hermetic gnosis to which Pico della Mirandola was to add a
Christianized version of the Kabbala,130 or even certain later
theosophers and esoterists, most of those who have studied such subjects
in the modern world have failed to distinguish between a sacred wisdom
based upon intellection and profane philosophy. The grandeur of
metaphysical doctrines has been reduced to the triviality of profane
thought, the conceptual category of “thought” like “culture” being
itself a modern invention which one is forced to use in contemporary
discourse. The most sublime form of wisdom has been transformed into
simple historical borrowing, Neoplatonism, as mentioned already, playing
the role of the ideal historical tag with which one could destroy the
significance of the most profound sapiential doctrines. It has been and
still is simply sufficient to call something Neoplatonic influence to
reduce it, spiritually speaking, to insignificance. And if that has not
been possible, then terms such as pantheistic, animistic, naturalistic,
monistic, and even mystical in the sense of ambiguous have been and
still are employed to characterize doctrines whose significance one
wishes to destroy or ignore. Plato, Plotinus, and Proclus are presented
as simple philosophers as if they were professors of philosophy in some
nearby university; and those among Christians who had adopted their
metaphysical formulations as people who went astray from “pure”
Christianity and therefore fell under the influence of Greek thought.
How different is the appreciation of Pythagoras, Plato, or even
Aristotle in al-Fārābī and even in the works of Thomas Taylor or K. S.
Guthrie than among those for whom all philosophy is the fruit of a
reason divorced from its roots and depleted of the sense of the sacred.
The rediscovery of tradition and the reconfirmation of the sacred
quality of knowledge would make possible not only the reappraisal of the
whole of philosophy and the reevaluation of Greek wisdom and philosophy,
but also enable contemporary man to understand the significance of the
providential role played by this philosophy in the three monotheistic
religions which were spread throughout the Mediterranean world and
Europe following the demise of Graeco-Roman civilization. The
reevaluation of the Greek intellectual heritage in the light of
tradition is one of the most important tasks which must be achieved in
the contemporary world, a task which if carried out fully would affect
profoundly the present state of the study of not only philosophy but
also theology and even comparative religion.

The secularization of the cosmos was also related to the secularization
of reason. Although there are numerous intellectual and historical
causes for

the desacralization of the cosmos,131 the reduction of the knowing mind
or the subject of the Cartesian cogito to the purely rationalistic level
was certainly one of the main ones. It is not accidental that the
mechanization of the cosmos and the emptying of the substance of the
world of its sacred quality took place at the same time as the
desacralization of knowledge and the final divorce between the reason
which “knows” scientifically from the world of faith on the one hand,
and the Intellect which knows principially and essentially on the other.
Some have even attributed the spiritual chaos of modern times to this
mechanization of the world in seventeenth-century science.132 It is of
singular interest to note that nearly all those philosophers and
theologians who were opposed to the reduction of knowledge to only the
level of reason also opposed the mechanistic conception of the world,133
and that those, such as the followers of Boehme in Germany, who sought
to continue his teachings based on the illumination of the mind by the
Intellect were also the foremost proponents of the Naturphilosophie
which opposed violently the mechanistic point of view.134 In any case
there is little doubt that the desacralization of knowledge was related
directly to the desacralization of the cosmos.

Nor was history and the temporal process spared the fate which befell
the cosmos. Reason cut off from its root in the permanent could not but
reduce reality to process, time to pure quantity, and history to a
process without a transcendent entelechy and, at the same time, the
mother and progenitor of all that the modern mentality considered as
reality. Time rather than eternity became the source of all things.
Ideas, rather than being considered as true or false in themselves, were
relegated completely to the domain of historical change and considered
significant only as historical events. A historicism was born which
resulted in the same kind of desacralization of history and the temporal
process itself that one finds in philosophy and science. Although many
contemporary critics have realized the poverty of historicism135 and
sought to envisage the historical process from other points of view,
historicism has continued to survive as a prevailing mode of thought in
a world where, for many people, reason remains divorced from the twin
source of permanence, namely, the Intellect and revelation, and all
permanence is reduced to becoming. Both the destruction of the
qualitative aspect of time and the reduction of all realities to their
reflection upon the stream of becoming are the result of the turning
away of man's mental faculties from his immutable Center to the
fluctuating periphery of his existence. Cut off from the heart which is
the seat of the Intellect, reason could not but become engrossed in
transience and change which then began to usurp the role and function of
the permanent. In reducing the Absolute to the relative and the
permanent to the changing, the profane point of view also depleted the
relative and the changing of the sacred quality which they possess on
their own level.

Since formulated knowledge is inseparable from language, the
desacralization of knowledge could not but affect the use of language.
If European languages have become less and less symbolic and ever more
unidimensional, losing much of the inward sense of classical languages,
it is because they have been associated with thought patterns of a

unidimensional character. The antimetaphysical bias of much of modern
philosophy is reflected in the attempt made to divest language of all
metaphysical significance, a process which, however, is impossible to
achieve completely because language like the cosmos is of an ultimately
divine origin and cannot be divorced totally from the metaphysical
significance embedded in its very roots and structures. Nevertheless,
already in the seventeenth century the rise of rationalism and the
mechanization of the world began to affect European languages almost
immediately in the direction of secularization. Galileo still accepted
the traditional idea that nature is a great book to be deciphered,136
but for him the language of this book was no longer the sacred language
of Saint Bonaventure, Dante, or the Kabbalists, associated with symbolic
and anagogical meaning, but mathematics understood in its purely
quantitative and not Pythagorean sense.137 Kepler also thought that
“quantity was the mode of God's expression” in the universe (Dico
quantitatum Deo propositam),138 although in contrast to Galileo he never
lost sight of the symbolic and qualitative aspect of mathematics, itself
associated with the Pythogorean philosophy of harmony and the symbolism
of numbers and geometric forms to which he was in fact deeply devoted.

Henceforth, many European philosophers even tried to create a language
based upon mathematics, and in the case of Mersenne upon music. It was
in fact this movement that underlaid the symbolic logic of Leibniz who
sought to connect thought to calculation whereas in the traditional
perspective it is thought and language which are inseparable from each
other. In many traditional sources logos and ragione (discourse) are
interconnected and in certain contexts refer to the same thing.

Be that as it may, the secularization of language and the attempt to
substitute pure quantity for the symbolic significance of language in
the reading of the cosmic text also reflected upon the language of
sacred Scripture itself, which until now had been considered as a gift
from God and which had been connected by certain Catholic and also
Protestant theologians with the book of nature. But now that human
language had become degraded and mathematics considered as the proper
language of nature, the language of sacred Scripture began to appear as
“more the slipshod invention of illiterate man than the gift of
omniscient God.”139 The link between divine language and human language
broke down,140 leaving the latter to undergo the successive “falls” or
stages of secularization which have resulted in the various forms of
bastardization of languages today and also, on another level, to the
sacrifice of the liturgical art connected with Latin in favor of
vernacular languages which have already moved a long way from their
sacred prototypes and become only too familiar as the everyday languages
of an already secularized world filled with experiences of triviality.
There is an almost one to one correspondence between the depleting of
knowledge of its sacred content and the desacralization of the language
associated with it; and also vice versa the attempt to elevate language
once again to its symbolic and anagogical level whenever there has been
a revival or reconfirmation of sacred knowledge or scientia sacra

which would then seek to have itself expressed in the language
available, but also appropriate, to it.141

Finally, the process of desacralization of knowledge has reached the
citadel of the sacred itself, that is, religion. As a result of the
final step taken by Hegel to reduce the whole process of knowledge to a
dialectic inseparable from change and becoming, the world of faith began
to appear as something totally separated by a chasm from the ground upon
which “thinking” men stood. The reaction to Hegel was Kierkegaard, and
from him grew both existential theology and existential philosophy
whether theistic or atheistic. For such figures as Jaspers, Marcel, and
even Heidegger there is despair in man's attempt to understand and make
sense of reality so that he must make a leap in order to make sense of
things. In theology likewise the thought of Karl Barth requires a leap
into “the upper story of faith.”142 Theology ceases to have contact with
either the world of nature or human history.143 The unifying vision
which related knowledge to love and faith, religion to science, and
theology to all the departments of intellectual concern is finally
completely lost, leaving a world of compartmentalization where there is
no wholeness because holiness has ceased to be of central concern, or is
at best reduced to sentimentality. In such a world those with spiritual
and intellectual perspicacity sought, outside of the confines of this
ambience, to rediscover their traditional roots and the total
functioning of the intelligence which would once again bestow upon
knowledge its sacramental function and enable men to reintegrate their
lives upon the basis of this unifying principle, which is inseparable
from both love and faith. For others, for whom such a criticism of the
modern world and rediscovery of the sacred was not possible but who, at
the same time, could not be lulled to sleep before the impoverished
intellectual and spiritual landscape which was presented to them as
modern life, there was only lament and despair which, in fact,
characterizes so much of modern literature and which the gifted Welsh
poet Dylan Thomas was to epitomize in the poem that was also to become
his elegy:

*Too proud to die, broken and blind he died*

*The darkest way, and did not turn away,*

*A cold kind man brave in his narrow pride*

*Being innocent, he dreaded that he died*

*Hating his God, but what he was was plain.*

*An old kind man brave in his burning pride.*

But because God is both merciful and just, the light of the Intellect
could not be completely eclipsed nor could this despair be the final
hymn of contemporary man.

Notes
-----

[^1]: The Hindu expression Sat-Chit Ananda is one of the Names of God.
Sat-Chit- Ananda is usually translated as “Being-Consciousness-Bliss,”
but the most “essential” translation-the one that makes most clear the
metaphysical meaning of these terms-is “Object-Subject-Union.” At the
highest level this ternary may also be expressed as
“Known-Knower-Knowledge” or “Beloved-Lover-Love.” This ternary also has
an operative or spiritual meaning related to invocatory prayer, such as
the Prayer of Jesus (Christianity), japa (Hinduism), and dhikr (Islam).
Here it takes the form of “Invoked-Invoker-Invocation” (in Islamic terms
madhkur-dhakir-dhikr).

[^2]: “The substance of knowledge is Knowledge of the Substance; that
is, the substance of human intelligence, in its most deeply real
function, is the perception of the Divine Substance.” “Atma-Maya,”
Studies in Comparative Religion, Summer 1973, p. 130.

[^3]: Gen. 2:17 and 3:24.

St. Bonaventure describes man in the state of unitive knowledge as
follows, “In the initial state of creation, man was made fit for the
quiet of contemplation, and therefore God placed him in a paradise of
delights (Gen. 2:15). But turning from the true light to changeable
good, man was bent over by his own fault, and the entire human race by
original sin, which infected human nature in two ways: the mind with
ignorance and the flesh with concupiscence. As a result, man, blinded
and bent over, sits in darkness and does not see the light of heaven
unless grace with justice come to his aid against concupiscence and
unless knowledge with wisdom come to his aid against ignorance.”
Bonaventure, The Soul’s Journey into God, trans. and introd. by E.
Cousins, New York, 1978, p. [^62]:

[^4]: The Muslim sages, when discussing metaphysical subjects,
especially if they concern the nature of God, state that it was so as so
and then add, often abruptly, al-an kama kan (“And it is now as it was
then.”), confirming the identity of the present “now” with that “then”
or moment “in the beginning” which was the origin of things in time yet
stood itself outside of time.

[^5]: “Ce qui est naturel à la conscience humaine prouve ipso facto sa
vérité essentielle, la raison d’être de l’intelligence étant
l’adéquation au réel.” F. Schuon, “Conséquences découlant du mystère de
la subjectivité,” Sophia Perennis 4/1 (Spring 1978): 12; also in the
author’s Du Divin à l’humain (in press).

[^6]: The well-known Scholastic principle is adaequatio rei et
iniellectus which St. Thomas comments upon in his saying, “knowledge
comes about in so far as the object known is within the knower.”

[^7]: Plato used theologia as the highest form of philosophy which was
to know the Supreme Good through the intellect. St. Augustine adopted
the term theologica naturalis in his De civitas Dei, basing himself on
M. Terentius Varro’s distinction between natural theology and ideas
related to myths and the state. From Augustinian teachings there issued
the distinction between revealed and natural theology which
Scholasticism treated as a branch of philosophy. See W. Jaeger, The
Theology of the Greek Thinkers, Oxford, 1947, pp. 1-5. It is significant
to note that with the radical secularization of reason and the process
of knowing natural theology was discarded, to be resuscitated in the
last few years along with the rise of interest in the more traditional
conception of reason in its relation to both the Intellect and
revelation.

[^8]: “Les lois de la logique sont sacrées,-comme aussi celles des
mathématiques,-car elles relèvent essentiellement de l’ontologie,
qu’elles appliquent à un domaine particulier: la logique est l’ontologie
de ce microcosme qu’est la raison humaine.” F. Schuon, “Pas de droit
sacré à l’absurdité,” Études Traditionnelles 79/460 (Avril-Mai-Juin
1978): 59.

[^9]: “Nous ajouterons-et c’est même ce qui import le plus-que les lois
de la logique se trouvent enracinées dans la nature divine, c’est-à-dire
qu’elles manifestent, dans l’esprit humain, des rapports ontologiques;
la délimitation même de la logique est extrinsèquement chose logique,
sans quoi elle est arbitraire. Que la logique soit inopérante en
l’absence des données objectives indispensables et des qualifications
subjectives, non moins nécessaires, c’est l’evidence même, et c’est ce
qui réduit à néant les constructions lucifériennes des rationalistes, et
aussi, sur un tout autre plan, certains spéculations sentimentales et
expéditives des théologiens.” F. Schuon, “L’enigme de l’Epiclèse,”
Études Traditionnelles 79/459 (Jan.-Feb.-Mar. 1978): 7; also in the
author’s Christianisme /Islam-Visions d’oeucuménisme ésotéruque (in
press).

[^10]: Schuon, “Pas de droit sacré à l’absurdité,” p. 52.

[^11]: See, for example,W. C. Smith, Faith and Belief, Princeton, 1979,
where a sharp distinction is made between faith and belief in the modern
sense of the word as it is shorn of all elements of doctrinal certitude
and separated from a knowledge which is rooted in the Divine. The author
quite rightly distinguishes between the meaning of belief as certain
knowledge in the traditional context and its reduction to conjecture and
knowledge mixed with doubt in the modern world.

[^12]: See R. Guénon, Man and His Becoming According to the Vedanta,
trans. R. C.Nicholson, London, 1945, p. 14.

[^13]: In this study gnosis is always used in the sense of sapiential
knowledge or wisdom, as the knowledge which unifies and sanctifies and
not in a sectarian sense as related to gnosticism or in a narrow
theological sense as employed by certain early Christian authors who
contrasted it with sophia.

[^14]: The term jnîana implies principial knowledge which leads to
deliverance and is related etymologically to gnosis, the root gn or kn
meaning knowledge in various Indo-European languages including English.

[^15]: See A. K. Coomaraswamy, Hinduism and Buddhism, New York, 1943.

[^16]: See T. R. V. Murti, The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, London,
1955; E.Conze, Buddhist Thought in India, London, 1964; F. I.
Stcherbatsky, The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana,NewYork, 1973; and K.
Venkata Ramanan, Nagarjuna,Siddha-Nagarjuna’s Philosophy as presented in
the Maha-prajnîa paramita-sastra, Rutland, Vt., 1966.

[^17]: “If one considers the canonical image of the Buddha, the
following observation can be made:. . if he is the supreme Knowledge,
the lotus will be contemplation, with all the virtues that are implied
in it.” F. Schuon, In the Tracks of Buddhism, trans. M. Pallis, London,
1968, p. 157.

[^18]: This “nature” could be interpreted in the Islamic tradition as
al-fit.rah or the primordial nature which is the nature possessed by man
when he lived in the proximity of the Tree of Life and ate the fruit of
unitive knowledge or wisdom and which he still carries at the center of
his being.

[^19]: H. A. Giles, Chuang-Tz˘u-Taoist Philosopher and Chinese Mystic,
London, 1961, p. 119.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 127. This is the Chinese manner of stating that
knowledge of principles allows man to see things in divinis and finally
return to the Divine Origin of all things himself. This theme is also
developed in many chapters of the Tao-Te Ching, concerning the perfect
man who is characterized by knowledge of principles which is of course
always combined with virtue. See C. Elorduy, Lao-Tse-La Gnosis Taoista
del Tao Te Ching, Ona, Burgos, 1961, esp. “El hombre perfecto,” pp.
53-58.The apparent opposition of Lao-Tze to wisdom is to ostentatious
“wisdom” and not knowledge as such as the verses of chap. 33, “He who
knows men has wisdom-He who is self-knowing is enlightened,” bear out.
Lao-Tze also emphasizes the “primordial nature” of man, the “uncarved
block,” and the importance of “unknowing” to reach that state. For
example, the verses of chap. 81 (trans. G. Feng and J. English, in
Lao-Tsu: Tao Te Ching, New York, 1972), Those who know are not learned,
Those who are learned do not know.Here learning means the assembling of
facts and worldly knowledge to which principial knowing is contrasted.
That is why (ibid., chap. 48)In the pursuit of tearning, every day
something is acquired. In the pursuit of Tao, every day something is
dropped.The “something dropped” refers to the process which is also
called “unknowing” and which is central in reaching sacred knowledge as
certain of the most important sapiential schools in theWest, to which we
shall turn shortly, have emphasized.

[^21]: On Manichaean gnosis see N. C. Puech, Le Manichéisme: son
fondateur, sa doctrine, Paris, 1949.

[^22]: On this doctrine and Zoroastrian angelology in general see A. V.
W. Jackson, Zoroastrian Studies, New York, 1928; R. C. Zaehner, Zurvan,
A Zoroastrian Dilemma, Oxford, 1955; G. Widengren, The Great Vohu Manah
and the Apostle of God: Studies in Iranian and Manichaean Religion,
Leipzig, 1945; idem, Die Religionen Irans, Stuttgart, 1965; M. Molé,
Culte, mythe et cosmologie dans l’Iran ancien; le problème zoroastrien
et la tradition mazdéenne, Paris, 1963; H. S. Nyberg, Die Religionen des
alten Iran, Leipzig, 1938; and many of the works of Corbin including his
En Islam iranien, 4 vols., Paris, 1971-

72; and Celestial Body and Spiritual Earth, from Mazdean Iran to Shi‘ite
Iran, trans. N. Pearson, Princeton, 1977.

[^23]: “There are many kinds of masculinity and femininity. Masculinity
and femininity are ever thus: innate wisdom and acquired wisdom.
Acquired wisdom occupies the place of the masculine, and innate wisdom
occupies the place of the feminine.. . Innate wisdom without acquired
wisdom is like a female without a male, who does not conceive and does
not bear fruit. A man who possesses acquired wisdom, but whose innate
wisdom is not perfect, is like a female who is not receptive to a male.”
Aturpat-i Emetan, The Wisdom of the Sasanian Sages (Denkard VI), trans.
S. Shaked, Boulder, 1979, p. 103.

[^24]: See G. von Rad, Wisdom in Israel, London, 1972.

[^25]: See L. Schaya, The Universal Meaning of the Kabbalah, trans. N.
Pearson, London, 1971.

[^26]: Liqqutei Amarim [Tanya] by Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Liadi, trans.
N. Mindel, Brooklyn, N.Y., 1965, pp. 26-27.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 113.

[^28]: Ibid., pp. 113-14.

[^29]: Jewish esoterism also speaks in an erotic language when
discussing the three Sefiroth, Chachma, Binah, Da‘ath, together
abbreviated as Chabad, which are wisdom, understanding, and knowledge in
both the principial, Divine Order and in the human microcosm considered
in its totality. Chachma is considered as the father, Binah as the
mother, and the Da‘ath as the son born of their union. (Da‘ath also
means sexual union, indicating the symbolic relation between the ecstasy
of sexual union and gnosis).

“Chachma is called Abba (Father), and Binah is called Imma (Mother).
Metaphorically speaking, the seed of Abba is implanted in the womb of
Imma, and there the rudimentary plant of the seed is developed,
expanded, externalised, and informed. Da‘ath is called Ben (Son), i.e.,
the offspring of this union of Chachma and Binah.” Rabbi Jacob Immanuel
Sebochet, Introduction to the English Translation of IGERETH HAKODESH,
Brooklyn, N.Y., 1968, p. [^35]:

[^30]: F. Schuon, Understanding Islam, trans. D. M. Matheson, London,
1963, chap. 1; and S. H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities in Islam, London,
1980, chap. 1. We have dealt extensively with the Islamic conception of
knowledge and the central role of intelligence as the means of access to
the Divinity in many of our other writings including Science and
Civilization in Islam, Cambridge, Mass., 1968; and An Introduction to
Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, London-Boulder, 1978.

[^31]: See F. Rosenthal, Knowledge Triumphant: The Concept of Knowledge
in Medieval Islam, Leiden, 1970, where this theme is treated from a
scholarly rather than a metaphysical point of view but with much
worthwhile documentation. Rosenthal, looking as a historian upon the
meaning of knowledge in the Islamic perspective as reflected in the
sayings of the Prophet, writes, “In the Prophet’s view of the world,
‘knowledge’ which in its totality is a matter of deepest concern to him
consists of two principal parts. There is human knowledge, that is, a
secular knowledge of an elementary or more advanced character and a
religious human knowledge; the latter constitutes the highest
development of knowledge attainable to man.. . But in addition to human
knowledge both secular and religious, there also exists a divine
knowledge. It is basically identical with human knowledge, still, it is
somehow of a higher order both quantitatively and qualitatively. The
most important features of these aspects of knowledge are felt and
respected by the Prophet as interlocking and interdependent.” Ibid., p.
31.

On the Islamic conception of knowledge see also ‘Abd al-H. alım Mah.mud,
“Islam and Knowledge,” Al-Azhar Academy of Islamic Research: First
Conference of the Academy of Islamic Research, Cairo, 1971, pp.
407-[^53]:

[^32]: The relation between Greek and Hindu wisdom as compared and
studied by such a figure as A. K. Coomaraswamy is principial and not
merely historical even if certain historical links may have existed
between them as asserted by many recent authors such as J. W. Sedlar,
India and the Greek World, Totowa, N.J., 1980.

[^33]: There are exceptional studies of much value which have remained
fully aware of the link between Greek philosophy and various dimensions
of Greek religion. See, for example, F. Cornford, Principium sapientiae:
the Origins of Greek Philosophical Thought, Cambridge, 1952; idem, From
Religion to Philosophy: a Study in the Origins of Western

Speculation, New York, 1957; and idem, The Unwritten Philosophy and
Other Essays, Cambridge, 1967.

[^34]: V. 12 on from the King James Version.

[^35]: Quoted by F. Schuon in Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts,
trans. D. M. Matheson, London, 1953, p. 153. “If the life of the spirit
is the illumination of knowledge and if it is love of God which produces
this illumination, then it is right to say: there is nothing higher than
love of God.” St. Maximus the Confessor, Centuries of Charity, And “Holy
knowledge draws the purified spirit, even as the magnet, by a natural
force it possesses, draws iron.” Evagrius of Ponticum, Centuries of
Charity (both cited from Schuon, Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts,
p. 153). The chap. “Love and Knowledge” in Spiritual Perspectives and
Human Facts contains the essence of the meaning of the way of knowledge
or the sapiential path in Christian spirituality as well as in other
traditions.

[^36]: There is no doubt that certain forms of Christology rejected
byWestern Christianity during later centuries in order to combat various
types of theological heresy, had a profound metaphysical significance
when interpreted not only theologically and literally but metaphysically
and symbolically. See F. Schuon, Logic and Transcendence, trans. P. N.
Townsend, New York, 1975, esp. pp. 96ff.

[^37]: See A. Feuillet, Le Christ sagesse de Dieu, Paris, 1966; and E.
E. Ellis, Prophecy and Hermeneutic in Early Christianity, Grand Rapids,
1978, esp. pp. 45ff.

[^38]: See, for example, J. Dupont, La Connaissance religieuse dans les
Epitres de Saint Paul, Paris, 1960.

[^39]: On Clement and his gnostic doctrines see T. Camelot, Foi et
gnose. Introduction à l’étude de la connaissance mystiaue chez Clément
d’Alexandrie, Paris, 1945; J. Daniélou, Histoire des doctrines
chrétiennes avant Nicée.t. II: Message evangélique et culture
hellénistique aux IIe et IIIe siècles, Paris, 1961; J. Munck,
Untersuchungen über Klemens von Alexandria, Copenhagen/Stuttgart, 1933;
E. F. Osborn, The Philosophy of Clement of Alexandria, Cambridge, 1954;
andW. Völker, Der wahre Gnostiker Clemens Alexandrianus, Berlin, 1952.
In this as in other similar instances in this book, the bibliographical
references do not mean to be  exhaustive but are simply a guide for
those who wish to pursue further study of the figure in question.
Needless to say, there is a vast literature on Clement, much of which is
indicated in the bibliographies contained in the scholarly works cited
above.

[^40]: Of course Intellect is used in this context and in fact
throughout this work in its original sense of intellectus or nous and as
distinct from reason or ratio which is its reflection.

[^41]: “He who is already pure in heart, not because of the
commandments, but for the sake of knowledge by itself,-that man is a
friend of God.” Clement of Alexandria Miscellanies Book VII, introd.,
translation and notes by F. J. A.Hort, London, 1902, p. 31.

[^42]: “It is our business then to prove that the gnostic alone is holy
and pious, worshipping the true God as befits him; and the worship which
befits God includes both loving God and being loved by him. To the
gnostic every kind of pre-eminence seems honourable in proportion to its
worth. In the world of sense rulers and parents and elders generally are
to be honoured; in matters of teaching, the most ancient philosophy and
the earliest prophecy; in the spiritual world, that which is elder in
origin, the Son, the beginning and first-fruit of all existing things,
himself timeless and without beginning; from whom the gnostic believes
that he receives the knowledge of the ultimate cause, the Father of the
universe, the earliest and most beneficent of all existences, no longer
reported by word of mouth, but worshipped and adored, as is his due,
with silent worship and holy awe; who was manifested indeed by the Lord
so far as it was possible for the learners to understand, but
apprehended by those whom the Lord has elected for knowledge, those,
says the apostle, who have their senses exercised.” Library of Christian
Classics, vol. II, Alexandrian Christianity, selected and trans. J. E.
L. Oulton and H. Chadwick, London, 1954.

[^43]: Stromateis IV. 6.

[^44]: On Origen see W. R. Inge, Origen, London, 1946; M. Harl, Origène
et la fonction révéllatrice du verbe incarné, Paris, 1958; H. de Lubac,
Histoire et Esprit, l’intelligence de l’Écriture d’après Origène, Paris,
1950; R. A. Greer (ed.), Origen, New York, 1979; J.

Oulton and H. Chadwick, Alexandrian Christianity; Selected Translations
of Clement and Origen, Philadelphia, 1954; H. Urs von Balthasar, Geist
und Feuer. Ein Aufbau aus seinen Schriften, Salzburg, 1951; and E. R.
Redepenning, Origenes. Eine Darstellung seines Lebens und seiner Lehre,
2 vols., Bonn, 1966.

[^45]: “Thus, just as a human being is said to be made up of body, soul
and spirit, so also is the Sacred Scripture, which has been granted by
God’s gracious dispensation for man’s salvation.” From First Principles,
book 4, cited in Greer, op. cit, p. 182.

[^46]: “And if anyone reads the revelations made to John, how can he
fail to be amazed at how great an obscurity of ineffable mysteries is
present here? It CHAPTER 1. KNOWLEDGE AND ITS DESACRALIZATION 46 is
evident that even those who cannot understand what lies hidden in them
nevertheless understand that something lies hidden. And indeed, the
letters of the apostles, which do seem to some clearer, are they not
filled with profound ideas that through them, as through some small
opening, the brightness of an immense light seems to be poured forth for
those who can understand the meaning of divine wisdom?” Ibid., p. 181.

[^47]: See de Lubac, op. cit. Origen devotes much of his First
Principles to the question of the Logos in its relation to the
attainment of knowledge by man. “. . das Christliche Leben sich für
Origenes als eine fortschneitende Laüterung und darauffolgende
Erkenntnis formt.” H. Koch, Pronoia und Paideusis, Berlin and Leipzig,
1932, p. 84. Koch gives an analysis of Origen’s “theory of knowledge” in
pp. 49-62 of this work.

[^48]: “Le logos est présent, en l’homme, chez qui il est
l’intelligence. Parce qu’il se trouve ê la fois en Dieu et en l’homme,
comme en deux extrémités, il peut les relier et il le fait, d’autant
mieux qu’il est également entre les deux, comme un intermédiaire de
connaissance. Il joue le rôle que joue la lumière pour la vision des
objets: la lumière rend l’objet lumineux et elle permet à l’oeil de
voir, elle est lumière de l’objet et lumière du sujet, intermédiaire de
vision. De la même façon, le logos est à la fois intelligibilité de Dieu
et l’agent d’intellection de l’homme, médiateur de connaissance.” Harl,
op. cit., p. 94.

[^49]: Origen, The Song of Songs-Commentary and Homilies, trans. and
annotated by R. P. Lawson, London, 1957, p. 61.

[^50]: “In as much as man is endowed with an intellect, he is by nature
a being illumined by God.” E. Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of Saint
Augustine, New York, 1960, p. 80.

[^51]: “Thus God does not take the place of our intellect when we think
the truth. His illumination is needed only to make our intellects
capable of thinking the truth, and this by virtue of a natural order of
things expressly established by Him.” Ibid., p. 79. This quotation also
shows that already in Augustinian epistemology the sacred character of
knowledge is perceived in a somewhat more indirect manner than what we
find in the “gnostic” perspective of the Alexandrian fathers.

[^52]: In describing the sapiential dimension in Christianity one could
practically confine oneself to Dionysius alone, seeing how important his
teachings were. But from the point of view of this cursory study it
suffices to emphasize the significance of his well-known doctrines whose
development can be seen in Erigena, Eckhart, Cusa, and so many other
laterWestern masters of sapience. On Dionysius, so unjustly referred to
as pseudo-Dionysius as if to detract from the significance of his works
through such an appelation, see M. de Gandillac (ed.), Oeuvres complètes
du pseudo-Denys d’Aréopagite, Paris, 1943; R. Roques, Structures
thélogigues de la gnose à Richard de Saint-Victor, Paris, 1962; idem,
L’Univers dionysien. Structure hiérarchique du monde selon le
pseudo-Denys, Paris, 1954; W. Voelker, Kontemplation und Ekstase bei
Pseudo-Dionysius Ar., Wiesbaden, 1954; and A. M. Greeley, Ecstasy: AWay
of Knowing, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1974.

[^53]: There is a great amount of literature on Erigena in various
European languages. See, for example, R. Roques, Libres sentiers vers
l’Erigénisme, Rome, 1975; G. Allegro, G. Scoto Eriugena-Antrolopogia,
Rome, 1976, esp. “Intelletto umano et intelletto angelico,” pp. 62ff.;
idem, G. Scoto Eriugena, Fede e ragione, Rome, 1974; J. J. O’Meara and
L. Bieler (eds.). The Mind of Erigena, Dublin, 1973; E.Jeanneau
(trans.), Jean Scot, Homelie sur le prologue de Jean, Paris, 1969, which
shows the degree of devotion of Erigena to John whom he almost divinizes
as being “superhuman”; G. Kaldenbach, Die Kosmologie des Johannes
Scottus Erigena, Munich, 1963; G. Bonafede, Scoto Eriugena, Palermo,
1969; C. Albanese, II Pensiero di Giovanni Eriugena, Messina, 1929; H.
Bert, Johannes Scotus Erigena, A Study in Medieval Philosophy,
Cambridge, 1925; A. Gardner, Studies in John

The Scot, New York, 1900; M. S. Taillandier, Scot Erigène et la
philosophic scholastique, Strasbourg-Paris, 1843; and T. Gregory,
Giovanni Scoto Eriugena, Tre studi, Florence, 1963.

[^54]: See, for example, W. Seul, Die Gotteserkenntnis bei Johannes
Skotus Eriugena, Bonn, 1932; and A. Schneider, Die Erkenntnislehre des
Johannes Erigena, Berlin and Leipzig, 1923, both of which give a rather
rationalistic interpretation of Erigena reducing Erigena’s doctrines to
a “harmless” Neoplatonist influence. Later studies have emphasized his
Christian character somewhat more but nevertheless still fail for the
most part to see in him a crystallization of something essential to the
sapiential dimension of Christianity.

[^55]: “Spesso ci si è cruduti costretti a doner scegliere una posizione
di fronte alla celebre riduzione, o identificazione, che Scoto compie
fra ‘vera religio’ e ‘vera philosophia’.” Allegro, G. Scoto Eriugena,
Fede e ragione, p. 63.

[^56]: “C’est la sagesse, la sapience, qui est cette vertu commune à
l’homme et à l’ange; c’est elle qui donne à l’esprit la pure
contemplation, et lui fait apercevoir l’Éternel, l’Immuable.”
Taillandier, op. cit., p. 84.

[^57]: “All the natural (liberal arts) concur in signifying Christ in a
symbolic manner, (these arts) in whose limits is included the totality
of Divine Scripture.” Expositiones super ierarchiam caelestiam sancti
Dionysii, ed. H. J. Floss in Patrologia Latina 122, I, 140A. Erigena
states that in the same way that nous is an image of God, artes is an
image of Christ. See Roques, Libres sentiers, p. 62.

[^58]: “When [our reason] possesses the presence of the Word of God, it
knows the intelligible realities and God Himself, but not by its own
means, rather by grace of the Divine Light that is infused in him.”
Jeanneau (trans.), op. cit., p. 266.

[^59]: See Allegro, G. Scoto Eriugena, Fede e ragione, “Il mondo come
teofania,” pp. 285ff. This relation between the sapiential perspective
and interest in the study of nature as the theater of divine activity is
to be seen throughout the whole sapiential tradition in theWest and is
one of the very few principles in which all of theWestern esoteric
schools of later centuries, even those whose knowledge remains partial,
are in accord.

[^60]: “Et puisque Dieu se crée dans sa manifestation, celle-ci se crée
elle-même sous la motion divine en exprimant Dieu et elle-même. Dieu
passe du Rien au Tout en suscitant les causes primordiales et l’esprit.
Indivisiblement, l’esprit crêe tire de cette nuit illurmnatrice le
déploiement qui le fait esprit, c’est-à-dire conscience du tout et de
soi-même. Il y a une noophanie ê l’interieur de la théophanie. Si bien
qu’on peut dire à la fois que Dieu se pense dans les esprits qu’il
illumine et que cette pensée est leur autoréalisation.” J. Trouillard,
“Erigène et la théophanie créatrice,” in O’Meara and Bieler (eds.), op.
cit., p. 99.

[^61]: Following the dictum of Dionysius, Cognito earum, quae sunt, ea
quae sunt, est.

[^62]: See Bett, op. cit., p. 86.

[^63]: See R. Roques, “Remarques sur la signification de Jean Scot
Erigène,” in Miscellanea A. Combes, Rome, 1967.

[^64]: There is no doubt that both St. Bonaventure and St. Thomas were
metaphysicians, properly speaking, as well as theologians as can be seen
when they are treated metaphysically and not only theologically by a
figure such as A. K.Coomaraswamy. But the fact remains that their purely
sapiential teachings (esp. that of St. Thomas) became more or less
veiled in a theology which, although of great value, also helped create
an intellectual climate in which gnosis appeared to be of less direct
concern and in fact less and less accessible to the extent that during
the Renaissance many figures had to search outside the prevalent
Christian theological orthodoxy for the kind of wisdom or gnosis which
had been more accessible within theWestern Christian tradition during
earlier centuries of Christian history. It seems that for St. Thomas
reason impregnated and supported by faith was of greater consequence
than intelligence in its sacramental function. St. Thomas was certainly
not opposed to intellection although he did not consider in a central
manner the role and function of the intelligence as a sacrament because
of his adoption of Aristotelianism which counters a penetrating and
interiorizing intelligence with an exteriorized and exteriorizing will.

“In the case of the Stagirite, the intelligence is penetrating but the
tendency of the will is exteriorizing, in conformity moreover with the
cosmolatry of the majority of the Greeks; it is this that enabled Saint
Thomas to support the religious thesis regarding the ‘natural’ character
of the intelligence, so called because it is neither revealed nor
sacramental, and

the reduction of intelligence to reason illuminated by faith, the latter
alone being granted the right to be ‘supernatural’.” F. Schuon, Logic
and Transcendence, pp. 174-75.

As for St. Bonaventure he remains closer to the Augustinian position
emphasizing illumination and that “cotuition,” to use his own
terminology, which for him is the sixth and crowning stage of the
journey of the mind to God even beyond the realm of the contemplation of
God as Being to the Divine Darkness. See St. Bonaventure, The Mind’s
journey to God-Itinerarium Mentis in Deum, trans. L. S. Cunningham,
Chicago, [^1975]:

In any case, any complete study of Christian sapiential teachings would
have to include certainly the theology of St. Bonaventure and also those
of St. Thomas, Duns Scotus, and others which this more cursory survey
has to leave aside. Another reason for our passing rapidly over medieval
theology is the fact that these schools are well-known in comparison
with the more directly gnostic teachings.

[^65]: On Eckhart’s doctrine of knowledge as related to the sacred see
E. Heinrich, Verklärung und Erlösung im Vedânta, bei Meister Eckhart und
bei Schelling, Munich, 1961, esp. “Von der Verklärung und von der Einung
mit der Gottheit,” pp. 80ff.; J. Kopper, Die Metaphysik Meister
Eckharts, Saarbrücken, 1955, esp. pp. 73-121; J. Hammerich, Über das
Wesen der Götterung bei Meister Eckhart, Speyer, 1939; H. Schlötermann,
“Logos und Ratio, Die platonische Kontinuität in der deutschen
Philosophie des Meister Eckhart,” in Zeitschrift für philosophische
Forschung 3 (1949): 219-39; O. Spann, “Meister Eckharts mystische
Erkenntnislehre,” in Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 3 (1949):
339-55; G. Stephenson, Gottheit und Gott in der spekulativen Mystik
Meister Eckharts, Bonn, 1954, esp. pp. 73-96; V. Lossky, Théologie
négative et connaissance de Dieu chez Maître Eckhart, Paris, 1960; J. M.
Clark, Meister Eckhart. An Introduction to the Study of His Works, New
York, 1957; E. Soudek, Meister Eckhart, Stuttgart, 1973; C. Clark, The
Great Human Mystics, Oxford, 1949; V. Brandstätter and E. Sulek, Meister
Eckharts mystische Philosophie, Graz, 1974; and F. Brunner, Maître
Eckhart, introduction, suivi de textes traduits pour la premier fois du
latin en français, Paris, 1969, which contains an exceptional treatment
of Meister Eckhart from the point of view of traditional metaphysics or
the scientia sacra with which we shall deal later.

The extent of recent interest in Eckhart can be gauged from the number
of current works on the master such as C. F. Kelley, Master Eckhart on
Divine Knowledge, New Haven, 1977; R. Shurmann, Meister Eckhart: Mystic
& Philosopher, Bloomington, Indiana, 1978; M. C.Walshe, Meister Eckhart:
Sermons and Treatises, London, 1980; and many new translations or
editions of older translations such as the well-known one by F. Pfeiffer
as well as numerous comparative studies which involve him and different
masters of Oriental wisdom. An incomparable and masterly work of this
kind is A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Transformation of Nature in Art, which
contains an exposition of the metaphysics of art of Meister Eckhart and
the traditional doctrines issuing from Hinduism.

[^66]: St. Thomas had used this term in Latin (scintilla animae) before
Eckhart, but this concept plays a more central role in Eckhart esp. as
far as epistemology is concerned.

[^67]: See V. Lossky, op. cit., p. 180, where one can find a masterly
analysis of many CHAPTER 1. KNOWLEDGE AND ITS DESACRALIZATION 50
Eckhartian theses.

[^68]: E. Cassirer, who was one of the major influences in the revival
of interest in Cusa, in fact believed that Cusa tried to create a third
way or school beside the Scholastic and humanist schools which were
combating each other during the Renaissance. See Cassirer, Individuum
und Kosmos in der Philosophie der Renaissance, Leipzig, 1927.

[^69]: On Cusa see, E. Van Steenberghe, he Cardinal Nicholas de Cues,
Paris, 1920; H.Bett, Nicholas of Cusa, London, 1932, esp. chap. 5 where
his theory of knowledge is discussed but somewhat rationalistically; P.
de Gandillac, La Philosophie de Nicholas de Cues, Paris, 1941; A.
Bonetti, La ricerca metafisica nel pensiero de Nicolo Cusano, Bresca,
1973; N. Herold, Menschliche Perspektive und Wahrheit, Munster, 1975; A.
Bruntrup, Konnen und Sein, Munich, 1973; G. Schneider, Gott-das
Nichtandere, Untersuchunger zum metaphysichen Grunde bei Nickolaus von
Kues, Munster, 1970; K. Jacobi, Die Methode der Cusanischen Philosophie,
Munich, 1969; N. Henke, Der Abbildbegriff in der Erkenntnislehre des
Nickolaus von Kues, Munster, 1967; and A. Lubke, Nikolaus von Kues,
Kirchenfurst zwinschen Mittelalter und Neuzeit, Munich, 1968.

[^70]: See E. Gilson, The Unity of Philosophical Experience, New York,
1937.

[^71]: See, for example, H. Oberman, “The Theology of Nominalism,”
Harvard Theological Review 53 (1960): 47-79.

[^72]: J. P. Dolan (ed.), Unity and Reform-SelectedWritings of Nicholas
of Cusa, Chicago, 1962, p. 105.

[^73]: Ibid., pp. 8-9.

[^74]: This is treated extensively by de Gandillac in his work cited in
n. 69 above.

[^75]: “Just as any knowledge of the taste of something we have never
tasted is quite empty until we do taste it, so the taste of this wisdom
cannot be acquired by hearsay but by one’s actually touching it with his
internal sense, and then he will bear witness not of what he has heard
but what he has experimentally tasted in himself.” From De sapientia,
quoted in Dolan, op. cit., pp. 111-12.

[^76]: “Wisdom is the infinite and never failing food of life upon which
our spirit lives eternally since it is not able to love anything other
than wisdom and truth. Every intellect seeks after being and its being
is living; its living is to understand; its understanding is nurtured on
wisdom and truth. Thus it is that the understanding that does not taste
clear wisdom is like an eye in the darkness. It is an eye but it does
not see because it is not in light. And because it lacks a delectable
life which for it consists in seeing, it is in pain and torment and this
is death rather than life. So too, the intellect that turns to anything
other than the food of eternal wisdom will find itself outside of life,
bound up in the darkness of ignorance, rather dead than alive. This is
the interminable torment, to have an intellect and never to understand.
For it is only the eternal wisdom in which every intellect can
understand.” Dolan, op. cit., pp. 108-9.

[^77]: See A. Conrad, “La docte ignorance cusaine,” Etudes
Traditionnelles 78/458 (Oct.-Dec. 1977): 164-71.

[^78]: See F. Schuon, “Le problème de l’evangélisme,” in his
Christianisme/Islam, chap. 3.

[^79]: It is of interest to note that this theosophy survived during the
past four centuries almost exclusively in Lutheran areas or those
influenced by Lutheranism. The German Lutheran mystic Tersteegen in fact
distinguishes clearly between Christian mystics and theosophers,
claiming all theosophers to be mystics but not all mystics to be
theosophers “whose spirit has explored the depths of the Divinity under
Divine guidance and whose spirit has known such marvels thanks to an
infallible vision.” From his Kurzer Bericht von der Mystik quoted by
Schuon (ibid.).

[^80]: The work of J. S. Bach is a perfect example of this type of music
in which the deepest yearning of the European soul for the sacred seems
to have taken refuge in an age when the other art forms had become so
depleted of the sense of the sacred. Even the Coffee Cantata of Bach is
of a more religious character than many a modern setting of the Psalms
to music. A work like the B Minor Mass has an archetectonic structure
impregnated with a powerful piety and sense of the sacred which make it
very akin and conformable to the sapiential perspective. On the
metaphysics of musical polyphony and counterpoint in which Bach was a
peerless master see M. Pallis, “Metaphysics of Musical Harmony,” in his
A Buddhist Spectrum, London, 1980, pp. 121ff.

[^81]: “Pour Böhme, la Sagesse est une Vierge éternelle, symbole de
Dieu, reflet du Ternaire, image dans laquelle ou par laquelle le
Seigneur s’exprime en dévoilant la richesse infinie de la virtualité.
Dans le mirroir de la Sagesse la volonté divine trace le plan, la figure
de son action créatrice. Elle ‘imagine’ dans ce mirroir, acte qui
représente l’acte magique par excellence. Ainsi s’accomplit le mystère
d’exprimer, de traduire, dans des images finies la pensée infinie de
Dieu.” A.Faivre, L’Ésotérisme au XVIIIe siècle en France et en
Allemagne, Paris, 1973, p.38.

On Boehme see A. Koyré, La Philosophie de Jacob Boehme, Paris, 1929;
E.Benz, “Über die Leiblichkeit des Geistigen zur Theologie der
Leiblichkeit bei Jacob Böhme,” in S. H. Nasr (ed.), Mélanges offerts à
Henry Corbin, Paris-Tehran, 1977, pp. 451-520; Benz, Der Vollkommene
Mensch nach Jacob Boehme, Stuttgart, 1937; Revue Hermès, (ed. J. Masui)
3 (1964-65), containing articles on Boehme; R. M. Jones, Spiritual
Reformers in the 16th and 17th Centuries, London, 1914, chaps. 9-11; H.
T. Martensen, Jacob Boehme: His Life and Teaching, trans. T. Rhys Evans,
London, 1885; H. Tesch, Vom Dreifachen Leben, Bietigheim/Württ., 1971;
G. Wehr, Jakob Böhme in Selbstzeugnissen und Bilddokumenten, Hamburg,
1971; V.Weiss, Die Gnosis Jakob Böhmes, Zurich, 1955; V. Hans Grunsky,

Jacob Boehme, Stuttgart, 1956; H. H. Brinton, The Mystic Will, New York,
1930; and A. J. Penny, Studies in Jacob Böhme, London, 1912.

[^82]: Boehme deals with this theme esp. in chap. 14 of his De signatura
rerum.

[^83]: According to A. Koyré, the desire for the Eternal is “aussi le
gage de la possibilité d’atteindre à une connaissance parfaite de Dieu,
et de le connaitre à la fois dans la nature par laquelle il s’exprime et
dans l’âme ou il habite, virtuellement au moins.” Koyré, La Philosophie
de Jacob Boehme, p. 454.

[^84]: This is the specifically Baaderian interpretation of Boehme, but
certainly implicit in his writings.

[^85]: Boehme treats this question in his Mysterium Magnum chap. XXXV,
60. The idea of a “natural language” of a sacred character can also be
found in other sapiential works of the period such as Confessio
Fraternitatis der Hochlöblichen Bruderschaft von Rosenkreutz. See Koyré,
op. cit., p. 457, n. 4.

[^86]: “When God recognizes and views Himself with holy delight, He
apprehends not only Himself, but also all His contents-the ‘fullness’ of
His universe. This fullness, which is best thought of as a universe of
ideas, streaming forth in multiplicity from the Father, is gathered by
the Son into intellectual unity, and is shaped by the Spirit into a
world of ideas, distinct from God, and yet inseparable from Him. We have
here what Boehme calls wisdom.” H. L. Martensen, Jacob Boehme, trans. T.
Rhys Evans, new ed. and notes by S. Hobhouse, London, 1949, p. 106.

[^87]: On the Cambridge Platonists see J. Tulloch, Rational Theology and
Christian Philosophy in England in the Seventeenth Century, 2 vols.,
London and Edinburgh, 1872; E. A. Burtt, The Metaphysical Foundations of
Modern Physical Science, London, 1925; F. J. Powicke, The Cambridge
Platonists, London, 1926; E. Cassirer, The Platonic Renaissance in
England, trans. J. P. Pettegrove, Edinburgh, 1953; C. E. Raven, Natural
Religion and Christian Theology, Cambridge, 1953; S. Hutin, Henry More,
Essai sur les doctrines théosophiques chez les Platoniciens de
Cambridge, Hildensheim, 1966, which treats this school more from a,
properly speaking, sapiential rather than merely philosophical and
rational point of view; and J. A. Passmore, Ralph Cudworth, Cambridge,
1951, where an extensive bibliography of earlier works is provided.

On the theme of Henry More’s spissitudo spiritualis in comparison with
doctrines developed by his Muslim contemporary Sadr al-Dın Shırazı see
H. Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. 4, p. [^158]: See also the “prélude à
la deuxième édition” of Corbin’s Corps Spirituel et terre céleste-de
l’iran mazdéen à l’iran shî‘ite, Paris, 1979.

[^88]: “Were I indeed to define Divinity, I should rather call it a
Divine life, than a Divine science; it being something rather to be
understood by a Spiritual sensation, than by any Verbal description.”
John Smith, “A Praefatory Discourse concerning the TrueWay or Method of
Attaining to Divine Knowledge,” in E. T. Campagnac, The Cambridge
Platonists, Oxford, 1961, p. 80.

It is interesting to note that despite his insistence on the primacy of
Divine Knowledge, John Smith accepted Cartesian mechanism-distinguishing
“science” from “wisdom”-and opposed Cudworth and More on this central
issue  demonstrating not only differences of view which existed among
the Cambridge Platonists but also the partial character of the
traditional knowledge which this school possessed and expounded. On the
differences among the Cambridge Platonists, esp. concerning Descartes
who had been read by all of them, see J. E. Saveson, “Differing
Reactions to Descartes Among the Cambridge Platonists,” journal of the
History of Ideas 21/4 (Oct.-Dec. 1960): 560-[^67]:

[^89]: “Divinity indeed is a true Efflux from the Eternal light, which,
like the Sunbeams, does not only enlighten, but heat and enliven; and
therefore our Saviour hath in his Beatitudes connext Purity of heart
with the Beatifical Vision.” Campagnac, op. cit., p. 80.

[^90]: Campagnac, op. cit., p. 96.

[^91]: On Angelus Silesius (Johannes Scheffler) see J. Baruzi, Création
reiigieuse et pensée contemplative, 2e part.: Angelus Silesius, Paris,
1951; E. Suzini, Le Pélerin Chérubique, 2 vols., Paris, 1964; G.
Ellinger, Angelus Silesius. Ein Lebensbild, Munich, 1927; H. Plard, La
Mystique d’Angelus Silesius, Paris, 1943; Von Willibald Köhler, Angelus
Silesius (Johannes Scheffler), Munich, 1929; J. Trautmann, Von
wesentlichem Leben: Eine Auswahl aus dem CherubinischenWandersmann des
Angelus Silesius,

Hamburg, 1946; J. L. Sammons, Angelus Silesius, New York, 1967; and G.
Rossmann, Das königliche Leben: Besinnung auf Angelus Silesius, Zurich,
1956.

[^92]: “Il s’agit, dans son livre, d’un retour à Dieu, et d’abord par la
connaissance. C’est le sens du titre, devenu le sien à partir de la
seconde édition (1675); Der Cherubische Wandermann, où sont réunies
l’idée d’une marche vers Dieu, et la connaissance, ou plus exactement,
la sagesse comme principe de cette marche.” H. Plard, La Mystique
d’Angelus Silesius, Paris’, 1943.

[^93]: How remarkably close is the verse of Silesius,

Stirb, ehe du noch stirbst, damit du mchte darfst sterben

Wenn du nun sterben sollst; sonst möchtest du verderben.

Die now before thou diest; that thou mayst not die

When thou shalt die, else shalt thou die eternally.

to the verses of Jalal al-Dın Rumı

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E004%5D:jpg)

O man go die before thou diest

So that thou shalt not have to suffer death when thou shalt die.

Such a death that thou wilst enter unto light

Not a death through which thou wilst enter unto the grave.

These and other amazingly similar utterances of Silesius and Sufi poets
point not to historical borrowings but common archetypes. They indicate
similar types of spirituality within the members of the Abrahamic family
of religions.

[^94]: J. Bilger, Alexandrines, Translated from the Cherubischer
Wandermann of Angelus Silesius 1657, North Montpelier, N.Y., 1944, p.
33.

[^95]: Angelus Silesius, The Cherubic Wanderer, selections trans. W.
Trask, New York, 1953, p. 27.

[^96]: Angelus Silesius, A Selection from the Rhymes of a German Mystic,
trans. P. Carus, Chicago, 1909, p. 163.

[^97]: Silesius, The Cherubic Wanderer, p. 60.

[^98]: Silesius, A Selection, p. 152. This rather jarring
anthropomorphic imagery must of course be understood in its esoteric and
symbolic sense, signifying both union and ecstasy which characterize the
state of the intellect when it attains knowledge of the sacred at its
highest level.

[^99]: It is certainly paradoxical that the eighteenth century which,
along with the period that was to follow, must be characterized as the
age of darkness from the sapiential point of view should be identified
with “light,” this age being known as the Enlightenment, l’âge des
lumières, illuminismo, or Aufklärung in various European languages. If
in a hypothetical situation an Oriental sage such as ´Sankara or Ibn
‘Arabı were to review the later history of Western thought, perhaps few
facts would amaze him more than seeing men like Diderot and Condorcet
called “enlightened.” He would also be surprised that some (but of
course not all) of those figures who were called les frères illuminés
and who belonged to various “esoteric” and “occultist” groups were
opposed to theism not from the point of view of the Advaita or the
“transcendent unity of being” (wah. dat al-wujud), which “comprehends”
the theistic position, but from the perspective of a deism which was
practically agnostic if not outright atheistic. See E. Zolla, “Che Cosa
Potrebbe Essere un Nuova Illuminismo” in his Che Cos’è la Tradizione,
Milan, 1971.

It is, however, important to note also that careful studies carried out
only recently have shown that there were a large number of figures in
the eighteenth century who, although belonging to this period in time,
stood opposed to the rationalism of the age. This group embraced many
figures ranging all the way from real gnostics and theosophers who
possessed authentic esoteric knowledge to different kinds of occultists
who were to be the forerunners of the better known occultist groups of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. No one in recent
years has done as much as A. Faivre to make better known the teachings
of these marginal but important figures of the eighteenth and early
nineteenth century. See his L’Esotérisme au XVIIIe stiècle en France et
en Allemagne, Paris, 1973; Kirchberger et l’illuminisme du XVIIIe
siècle, The Hague, 1966; Epochen der Naturmystik:

Hermetische Tradition im wissenschaftlichen Forschritt, Berlin, 1977;
and “De Saint-Martin à Baader, le ‘Magikon’ de Kleuker,” in Revue
d’Etudes Germaniques, April-June 1968, pp. 161-90. See also R. Le
Forestier, La Franc-Maçonnerie occultiste au XVIIIe siècle et l’Ordre
des Elus-Coens, Paris, 1928; idem, La Franc-Maçonnerie occultiste et
templière aux XVIIIe et XIXe siècles, Paris, 1970; E. Benz, Adam, der
Mythus von Urmenschen, Munich, 1955; “L’illuminisme au XVIIIe siècle,”
ed. R. Amadou, in Les Cahiers de la Tour Saint-Jacques, Paris, 1960; and
H. Schneider, Quest for Mysteries, Ithaca, N.Y., 1947.

[^100]: SeeA. Faivre, Eckartshausen et la théosophie chrétienne, Paris,
1969. Eckartshausen was not only influential in Russia but even left his
effect upon such more recent occultists as Eliphas Lévi and Papus.

[^101]: There is a vast literature on Swedenborg. See, for example, E.
Benz, Swedenborg, Naturforscher und Seher, Munich, 1948; and H. Corbin,
“Herméneutique spirituelle comparée (I. Swedenborg-II.) Gnose
ismaëlienne,” in Eranos- Jahrbuch 33 (1964): 71-176, where an
interesting morphological study is made of Swedenborg’s hermeneutics and
that of certain Isma’ılı exegetes who sought to reveal the inner
significance of the Quran.

[^102]: On Newton and alchemy see B. Dobbs, The Foundations of Newton’s
Alchemy; or, “The Hunting of the Greene Lyon,” Cambridge, 1976. Although
the interest of the author is more scholarly and historical than
philosophical and metaphysical, she has provided in this study much
material on Newton’s alchemy not available before including a list of
Newton’s considerable alchemical writings in Appendix A, pp. 235-48. On
Newton’s alchemy see also P. M. Rattansi, “Newton’s Alchemical Studies,”
in A. Debus (ed.), Science, Medicine and Society in the Renaissance.
Essays to Honor Walter Pagel, 2 vols., New York, 1972, II, pp. 167-82.

[^103]: Concerning Newton’s profound interest in Boehme see S. Hutin,
Les Disciples anglais de Jacob Böhme, Paris, 1960; also K. R. Popp,
Jakob Böhme und Isaac Newton, Leipzig, 1935. The thesis that Boehme has
influenced Newton has been refuted by H. McLachlan, Sir Isaac Newton:
Theological Manuscripts, Liverpool, 1950, pp. 20-21, on the basis of
lack of any substantial extracts from Boehme’s writings in Newton’s
theological works. His view has also been espoused by Dobbs in op. cit.,
pp. 9-10. On the general philosophical level of the meaning of alchemy,
however, one can see a relation between them and the thesis of S. Hutin
and others who claim a link between Boehme and Newton cannot be totally
refuted through the lack of either citations of names or quotations of
texts or even the fact that Newton had another side very different from
Boehme.

[^104]: It is remarkable how little of the writings of this important
figure is available in the English language. On von Baader see H.
Fischer-Barnicol (ed.), Franz von Baader vom Sinn der Gesellschaft,
Köln, 1966; M. Pulver, Schriften Franz von Baaders, Leipzig, 1921; E.
Susini, Franz von Baader et le romantisme mystique, 3 vols., Paris,
1942; J. Glaassen, Franz von Baaders Leben und theosophische Ideen, 2
vols., Stuttgart, 1886.

[^105]: See E. Klamroth, DieWeltanschauung Franz von Baaders in ihrem
Gegensatz zu Kant, Berlin, 1965. To Descartes’s cogito ergo sum, von
Baader was to answer cogitor, ergo cogito et sum (“I am thought [by
God], therefore I think and I am”), placing God’s knowledge of man as
the source of both his being and intelligence. See F. Schuon, Logic and
Transcendence, p. 44. For von Baader knowledge does not begin with
cogito but with God’s knowledge of us.

[^106]: This doctrine is found especially in his two major works
Fermenta cognitionis and Spekulative Dogmatik.

Von Baader also considered religion as a sacred science and sacred
science as religion. For him religion should be based on knowledge of a
sacred character and not only sentiments. Likewise, science should be
ultimately rooted in the Divine Intellect which would make of it
religion in the vastest sense of this term. “Baader affirme que la
religion doit devenir une science, et la science une religion; qu’il
faut savoir pour croire, croire pour savoir.” A. Faivre, L’Esotérisme au
XVIIIe siècle, p. [^113]:

[^107]: See Susini, op. cit, esp. vols. 2-3, pp. 225ff.

[^108]: The influence of Rossmini was to continue in Italy until recent
times among such Catholic thinkers as F. Sciacca, but he is hardly known
in the Englishspeaking world and remains like von Baader and similar
philosophers a peripheral figure in a world where philosophy became
reduced to rationalism and finally irrationalism.

[^109]: The root of knowledge is of course the same as the Sanskrit
jnîana as well as the Greek gnosis which mean both knowledge and
sapiential wisdom. The distinction made in later Greek thought and also
by the church fathers between gnosis and episteme already marks the
separation of knowledge from its sacred source. Otherwise knowledge in
English or Erkenntnis in German containing the root kn should also
reflect the meaning of gnosis as jnîana does in Sanskrit, a root which
implies at once knowledge and coming into being as the word genesis
implies.

[^110]: “Le ‘miracle grec’, c’est en fait la substitution de la raison a
l’Intellect, du fait au Principe, du phénoméne à l’Idée, de l’accident à
la Substance, de la forme à l’Essence, de l’homme à Dieu, et cela dans
l’art aussi bien que dans la pensée.” F. Schuon, Le Soufisme voile et
quintessence, Paris, 1980, p. 106.

[^111]: “Le véritable miracle grec, si miracle il y a,-et dans ce cas il
serait apparenté au ‘miracle hindou’,-c’est la métaphysique doctrinale
et la logique méthodique, providentiellement utilisées par les Sémites
monothéistes.” Ibid., p. 106.

[^112]: See S. H. Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, Albany, N.Y., 1975, chaps. 1
and 2.

[^113]: On the issues involved in this “dialogue” see F. Schuon,
“Dialogue between Hellenists and Christians,” in Light on the Ancient
Worlds, trans. Lord Northbourne, London, 1965, pp. 58-71.

[^114]: Of course Hellenism triumphed in another dimension by surviving
as a doctrinal language and way of thinking and looking upon the world
at the heart of Christianity itself.

“Like most inter-traditional polemics, the dialogue in which Hellenism
and Christianity were in opposition was to a great extent unreal. The
fact that each was right on a certain plane-or in a particular
‘spiritual dimension’-resulted in each emerging as victor in its own
way: Christianity by imposing itself on the whole Western world, and
Hellenism by surviving in the heart of Christianity and conferring on
Christian intellectuality an indelible imprint.” Ibid., p. [^58]:

It would be worthwhile to note that, while Western Christianity opposed
so strongly what it considered as Greek “paganism,” in Western Asia in
certain Christian circles during early centuries of Christian history
such figures as Socrates were considered as pre-Christian saints.

[^115]: We owe this termto Th. Roszak. See his Where theWasteland
Ends,New York, 1972.

[^116]: See J. Robinson (ed.), The Nag Hammadi Library,New York, 1977,
“Acts of Peter and the Twelve Apostles,” pp. 265ff.; also H. Corbin,
“L’Orient des pélerins abrahamiques,” in Les Pelerins de l’orient et les
vagabonds de l’occident, Cahiers de l’Université Saint-Jean de
Jérusalem, no. 4, Paris, 1978, p. 76; and Corbin, “La necessité de
l’angélologie,” in Cahiers de l’hermétisme, Paris, 1978, chap. 4, II.

[^117]: For his views on this crucial question see E. Gilson, Reason and
Revelation in the Middle Ages, New York, 1938.

[^118]: S. H. Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines,
pp. 185ff. It is interesting that neo-Thomist European scholars of
Islamic thought such as L. Gardet have posed the question as to whether
Ibn Sına’s thought is Islamic philosophy or just Greek philosophy in an
Islamic dress, while a scholar such as Corbin, who was so devoted to the
sapiential school of the West including the Renaissance Protestant
mystics, insists upon not only the importance of Ibn Sına as an Islamic
philosopher for Islamic thought itself but the sapiential and gnostic
teachings of Suhrawardı and Mulla S. adra. Despite our deep respect for
such scholars as Gardet, who precisely because of their Thomism are able
to understand many important aspects of Islam which simply secularist or
agnostic scholars have neglected and ignored, on this particular issue
we agree totally with the views of Corbin. Anyone who, in fact, knows
later Islamic thought well and who also comprehends the purely
metaphysical perspective cannot but be led to a similar if not identical
conclusion as we see in the writings of T.Izutsu who has also made many
important studies of later Islamic philosophy and gnosis. See Corbin in
collaboration with S. H.Nasr and O. Yahya, Histoire de la philosophic
islamique, vol. 1, Paris, 1964; the prologomena of Corbin to S.adr al-D
ın Shırazı, Le Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques, Paris-Tehran,
1964;and T. Izutsu, The Concept and Reality of Existence, Tokyo, 1971.

[^119]: See H. Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital, trans. W.
Trask, Dallas,1980.

[^120]: On Latin Avicennism and Latin Averroism see R. de Vaux, “La
première entrée d’Averroës chez les Latins,” Revue des Sciences
Philosophiaues et Théologiques 22 (1933): 193-245; de Vaux, Notes et
textes sur l’Avicennisme latin aux confins des XIIe -XIIIe siècles,
Paris, 1934; M. T. d’Alverny, Avicenna nella storia della cultura
medioevale, Rome, 1957; d’Alverny, “Les traductions latines d’Ibn Sına
et leur diffusion au Moyen Âge,” Millénaire d’Avicenne. Congrès de
Bagdad, Baghdad, 1952, pp. 59-79; d’Alverny, “Avicenna Latinus,”
Archives d’Histoire, Doctrinale du Moyen-Age 28 (1961): 281-316; 29
(1962): 271-33; 30 (1963): 221-72, 31 (1964): 271-86; 32 (1965):
257-302; M. Bouyges, “Attention à Averroista’,” Revue du Moyen Âge Latin
4 (1948): 173-76; E. Gilson, History of Christian Philosophy in the
Middle Ages, New York, 1935; and F. Van Steenberghen, Siger de Brabant
d’aprè’s ses oeuvres inédites, 2 vols., Louvain, 1931-42.

[^121]: See Nasr, Three Muslim Sages.

[^122]: This process has been admirably treated by E. Gilson in his
Unity of Philosophical Experience, although Gilson in conformity with
his Thomistic perspective does not point to the significance of the loss
of the sapiential or gnostic dimension in the destruction of Thomism
itself. For in the absence of the availability of that type of knowledge
which is immediate and sanctifying, even the imposing edifice of
Thomism, which leads to the courtyard of the Divine Presence but not the
beatific union itself, was finally criticized and rejected. Also had the
intellectual intuition of men not become dimmed, the realist-nominalist
debate would not have even taken place and a situation would perhaps
have developed not dissimilar to what is found in India and also the
Islamic world where positions similar to nominalism have existed but
only at the margin of the traditional spectrum whose center has always
been occupied by doctrines of a jnîani or ‘irfanı nature.

[^123]: See D. P.Walker, The Ancient Theology, Studies in Christian
Platonism from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century, London, 1972.

[^124]: On the integration of various figures of Greek wisdom such as
Apollo and Orpheus which marks the integration of ancient wisdom into
the Christian tradition and its literature see E. R. Curtius, European
Literature and the Latin Middle Ages, trans. W. R. Trask, New York,
1953. Perhaps the last European literary figure for whom the
Orpheus-Christ figure was still a reality was the seventeenth-century
Spanish playwright Calderón, the author of El Divino Orfeo, for whom
“Christ is the divine Orpheus. His lyre is the wood of the Cross.”
Curtius, op. cit., p. 244. Calderön viewed Greek wisdom as a second Old
Testament and wrote in his Autos sacramentales:

[^125]: As Suhrawardı, Qut.bal-Dın Shırazı, and later MullaS.adra were
to do for Peripatetic philosophy in Islam.

[^126]: The celebrated Sufi of the fourth/eleventh century who was put
to death in Baghdad for uttering esoteric sayings (theophonic utterances
called snath.in Arabic) and who is considered as one of the great
masters of Islamic gnosis. His life and teachings have been treated
amply by L. Massignon in his classical work, La Passion d’al-Hallaj, 2nd
ed., 4 vols., Paris, 1975; this work has been translated in its entirety
into English by H. Mason and is to appear shortly.

[^127]: “Metaphysics prescinds from the animistic proposition of
Descartes, Cogito ergo sum, to say, Cogito ergo Est; and to the
question, Quid est? answers that this is an improper question, because
its subject is not a what amongst others but the whatness of them all
and of all that they are not.” A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Bugbear of
Literacy, London, 1947, p. 124; enlarged edition, London, 1980.

[^128]: Certain forms of analytical philosophy have rendered, relatively
speaking, a positive service in clarifying the language of philosophical
discourse which had in fact become ambiguous in modern times but not in
traditional schools where philosophical language, let us say in Arabic,
Hebrew, or Latin, is as precise as that of modern science and not like
modern philosophy. But this clarification of language is not the only
task achieved by analytical philosophy and positivism in general whose
much more devastating effect has been the trivialization of philosophy
and its goals, causing many an intelligent seeker after philo-sophy to
search for it in disciplines which do not bear such a name in
contemporary academic circles.

[^129]: “Academic philosophy as such, including Anglo-Saxon philosophy,
is today almost entirely anti-philosophy.” F.A. Schaeffer, The God Who
is There, Downers Grove, III., 1977, p. 28.

[^130]: See F. Yates, The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age,
London and Boston, 1979.

[^131]: We have dealt extensively with this issue in our Man and Nature,
London, 1976; see also Roszak, Where the Wasteland Ends and his
Unfinished Animal, New York, 1975.

[^132]: Referring to critics of modern science E. J. Dijkterhuis, who
has done extensive research and provides a detailed account of how the
process of mechanization of the world took place, writes, “They are
inclined to look upon the domination of the mind by the mechanistic
conception as one of the main causes of the spiritual chaos into which
the twentieth-century world has, in spite of all its technological
progress, fallen.” Dijkterhuis, The Mechanization of theWorld, trans. C.
Dikshoorn, Oxford, 1961, pp. 1-2. This process has also been dealt with
by many historians of science of the Renaissance and seventeenth century
such as A. Koyré, G. Di Santillana, and I. B. Cohen.

[^133]: For an example of reactions against the new astronomy which
served as a basis for the mechanistic world view among such figures as
Oetinger and Swedenborg see E. Benz, “Der kopernikanische Schock und
seine theologische Auswirkung,” in Eranos Jahrbuch 44 (1975): 15-60;
also Cahiers de l’Université de St. Jean de Jérusalem, vol. 5, Paris,
1979.

[^134]: Goethe and Herder who championed the cause of both integral
knowledge and Naturphilosophie were among those who opposed the
mechanized conception of the world and who reasserted the idea of the
interrelatedness of the parts of nature into a living whole which
accords with traditional teachings. Goethe writes, “Die Natur, so
mannigfaltig sie erscheint, ist doch immer ein Eins, eine Einheit, und
so muss, wenn sie teilweise manifestiert, alles übrige Grundlage dienen,
dieses in dem übrigen Zusammenhang haben.” Quoted in R. D. Gray, Goethe,
The Alchemist, Cambridge, 1952, p. 6. See also H. B. Nisbet, Goethe and
the Scientific Tradition, London, 1972, p. 20.

[^135]: The popular work of K. Popper, The Poverty of Historicism,
Boston, 1957, is one of the best known of these criticisms by a famous
contemporary philosopher of science. Modern phenomenology has also
reacted against historicism and produced alternative ways and methods of
studying religion, philosophy, art, etc., and has produced notable
results when wed to the traditional perspective. Otherwise, it has led
to a kind of sterile study of structures divorced from both the sense of
the sacred and the history of various traditions as sacred history.
Nevertheless, there lies at the heart of the intuition which led to
phenomenology an awareness of the “poverty of historicism” and the
recollection of the richness of the permanent structures and modes which
one observes even in the phenomenal world and which reflect aspects of
the permanent as such.

[^136]: He refers to the idea of nature as a great book at the beginning
of his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems-Ptolemaic and
Copernican.

[^137]: “Philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe, which
stands continually open to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood
unless one first learns to comprehend the language and read the letters
in which it is composed. It is written in the language of mathematics
and its characters are triangles, circles, and other geometric figures
without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of
it.” From the Assayer in Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo, trans.
Stillman Drake, New York, 1957, pp. 237-38. Quoted in M. De Grazia,
“Secularization of Language in the 17th century,” Journal of the History
of Ideas 41/2 (April-June 1980).

There is little evidence of Galileo showing direct interest in
Pythagoreanism although his father was keenly interested in Pythagorean
teachings.

[^138]: Kepler develops this idea in several of his works including the
Mysterium Cosmographicum.

[^139]: De Grazia, op. cit., p. 326.

[^140]: “In the seventeenth century, the traditional connection between
human and divine language broke down. God’s language was no longer
considered primarily verbal; human words ceased to be related both in
kind and quality to the divine Word.” Ibid., p. 319. This process was
without doubt facilitated in the West because Christianity, in contrast
to Judaism and Islam, did not possess a sacred language, Latin being,
properly speaking, a liturgical language and not sacred as are Arabic
and Hebrew for Islam and Judaism.

[^141]: The same process has had to take place in the revival of
traditional doctrines today to which we shall refer in the following
chapters.

The whole question of the relationship between the process of the
desacralization of knowledge and language in the modern world deserves a
separate, detailed study to which we can allude here only in passing.
The process of the desacralization of the traditional languages of the
Orient in the face of the secularization of thought in the East today
affords a living example of what occurred in theWest over a period of
some five centuries.

[^142]: One might of course say that this radical departure from the
realm of reason and taking refuge in faith alone are because “modern
rationalism does its work against faith with silent violence, like an
odorless gas.” K. Stern, The Flight from Woman, New York, 1965, p. 300.
But the question is why should a Christian theologian accept the
limitation of reason imposed by rationalism if not because of the loss
of the sapiential perspective which has always seen in reason not the
poison gas to kill religion but a complement to faith since both are
related to the Divine Intellect. The fact that such types of theology
appear indicates that the depleting of the faculty of knowing of the
sacred by modern Western philosophy and science has been finally
accepted by the theologians themselves, some of whom then carry it out
to a much more radical stage than do many contemporary scientists in
quest of the rediscovery of the sacred.

[^143]: Speaking of Barth, Schaeffer writes, “He has been followed by
many more, men like Reinhold Niebuhr, Paul Tillich, Bishop John
Robinson, Alan Richardson, and all the new theologians. They may differ
in details, but their struggle is the same-it is the struggle of modern
man who has given up a unified field of knowledge. As far as the
theologians are concerned, they have separated religious truth from
contact with science on the one hand and history on the other. Their new
system is not open to verification, it must simply be believed.”
Schaeffer, op. cit., p. 54.

The case of Teilhard de Chardin presents, from the traditional point of
view, a new dimension of theological subversion with which we shall deal
later.
