Chapter Two: What Is Tradition?
===============================

*By adhering to the Tao of the past You will master the existence of the
present.*

**Tao Te-Ching**

*I do not create; I only tell of the past.*

**Confucius**

The term tradition has been used profusely in the previous chapter. It
is now necessary to define it as completely as possible in order to
avoid misunderstanding about a concept which lies at the heart of our
concern for the meaning of the sacred in its relation to knowledge. The
usage of the term tradition in the sense understood in the present study
came to the fore in Western civilization at the moment of the final
phase of the desacralization of both knowledge and the world which
surrounded modern man. The rediscovery of tradition constituted a kind
of cosmic compensation, a gift from the Divine Empyrean whose mercy made
possible, at the moment when all seemed to be lost, the reassertion of
the Truth which constitutes the very heart and essence of tradition. The
formulation of the traditional point of view was a response of the
Sacred, which is both the alpha and the omega of human existence, to the
elegy of doom of modern man lost in a world depleted of the sacred and
therefore, of meaning.

*For though all seem lost, yet All is found*

*In the Last who is the First. Faithful pageant,*

*Not amiss is thy mime, for manifest in thee*

*Omega is an archway where Alpha stands framed,*

*The First who comes Last, for likewise art thou*

*The season of seeds, O season of fruits.1*

“The First who comes Last,” the reassertion at this late hour of human
history of tradition which itself is both of a primordial character and
possesses continuity over the ages, made possible once again access to
that Truth by which human beings have lived during most-or rather nearly
all-of their terrestrial history. This Truth had to be stated anew and
reformulated in the name of tradition precisely because of the nearly
total eclipse and loss of that reality which has constituted the matrix
of life of normal humanity over the ages. The usage of the term and
recourse to the concept of tradition as found in the contemporary world
are themselves, in a sense, an anomaly made necessary by the anomaly
which constitutes the modern world as such.2

Various languages before modern times did not use a term corresponding
exactly to tradition, by which this premodern humanity itself is
characterized by those who accept the traditional point of view.
Premodern man was too deeply immersed in the world created by tradition
to have the need of having this concept defined in an exclusive manner.
He was like the baby fish who, according to a Sufi parable, went one day
to their mother and asked to have explained to them the nature of water
about which they had heard so much, but which they had never seen nor
had had defined and described for them. The mother answered that she
would be glad to reveal the nature of water for them provided they would
first find something other than water. In the same way, normal
humanities lived in worlds so

impregnated with what we now call tradition that they had no sense of a
separate concept called tradition as it has been necessary to define and
formulate in the modern world. They had an awareness of revelation, of
wisdom, of the sacred and also knew of periods of decadence of their
civilization and culture, but they had had no experience of a totally
secularized and antitraditional world which would necessitate the
definition and formulation of tradition as has been the case today. In a
sense the formulation of the traditional point of view and the
reassertion of the total traditional perspective, which is like the
recapitulation of all the truths manifested in the present cycle of
human history, could not have come but at the twilight of the Dark Age
which marks at once an end and the eve preceding a new morning of
splendor. Only the end of a cycle of manifestation makes possible the
recapitulation of the whole of the cycle and the creation of a synthesis
which then serves as the seed for a new cycle.3

The concept of tradition had to be brought forth and traditional
teachings expressed in their totality; and this is exactly what has
taken place during this late stage of human history. But the traditional
writings are far from being widely known in the modern world. In fact
had the writings of those who belong to the traditional point of view
become well-known, it would hardly have been necessary to redefine here
and now the meaning of tradition to which so many pages, articles, and
even books have been devoted.4 One of the remarkable aspects of the
intellectual life of this century, however, is precisely the neglect of
this point of view in circles whose official function it is to be
concerned with questions of an intellectual order. Whether this neglect
is deliberate or accidental is not our concern here. Whatever the cause
might be, the result is that some sixty or seventy years after the
appearance of works of a traditional character in the West, tradition is
still misunderstood in most circles and confused with custom, habit,
inherited patterns of thought, and the like. Hence, the necessity of
delving once again into its meaning despite all that has been written on
the subject.

As far as traditional languages are concerned, they do not possess, for
reasons already mentioned, a term corresponding exactly to tradition.
There are such fundamental terms as the Hindu and Buddhist dharma, the
Islamic al-dīn, the Taoist Tao, and the like which are inextricably
related to the meaning of the term tradition, but not identical with it,
although of course the worlds or civilizations created by Hinduism,
Buddhism, Taoism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, or for that matter any
other authentic religion, is a traditional world. Each of these
religions is also the heart or origin of the tradition which extends the
priciples of the religion to different domains. Nor does tradition mean
exactly traditio as this term is used in Catholicism, although it does
embrace the idea of transmission of a doctrine and practices of an
inspired and ultimately revealed nature implied by traditio. In fact,
the word tradition is related etymologically to transmission and
contains within the scope of its meaning the idea of the transmission of
knowledge, practice, techniques, laws, forms, and many other elements of
both an oral and written nature. Tradition is like a living presence
which leaves its imprint

but is not reducible to that imprint. What it transmits might appear as
words written upon parchment but it may also be truths engraved upon the
souls of men, and as subtle as the breath or even the glance of the eye
through which certain teachings are transmitted.

Tradition as used in its technical sense in this work, as in all our
other writings, means truths or principles of a divine origin revealed
or unveiled to mankind and, in fact, a whole cosmic sector through
various figures envisaged as messengers, prophets, avatāras, the Logos
or other transmitting agencies, along with all the ramifications and
applications of these principles in different realms including law and
social structure, art, symbolism, the sciences, and embracing of course
Supreme Knowledge along with the means for its attainment.

In its more universal sense tradition can be considered to include the
principles which bind man to Heaven, and therefore religion, while from
another point of view religion can be considered in its essential sense
as those principles which are revealed by Heaven and which bind man to
his Origin. In this case, tradition can be considered in a more
restricted sense as the application of these principles. Tradition
implies truths of a supraindividual character rooted in the nature of
reality as such for as it has been said, “Tradition is not a childish
and outmoded mythology but a science that is terribly real.”5 Tradition,
like religion, is at once truth and presence. It concerns the subject
which knows and the object which is known. It comes from the Source from
which everything originates and to which everything returns. It thus
embraces all things like the “Breath of the Compassionate” which,
according to the Sufis, is the very root of existence itself. Tradition
is inextricably related to revelation and religion, to the sacred, to
the notion of orthodoxy, to authority, to the continuity and regularity
of transmission of the truth, to the exoteric and the esoteric as well
as to the spiritual life, science and the arts. The colors and nuances
of its meaning become in fact clearer once its relation to each of these
and other pertinent concepts and categories is elucidated.

During the past few decades for many attracted to the call of tradition,
the meaning of tradition has become related more than anything else to
that perennial wisdom which lies at the heart of every religion and
which is none other than the Sophia whose possession the sapiential
perspective in the West as well as the Orient has considered as the
crowning achievement of human life. This eternal wisdom from which the
idea of tradition cannot be divorced and which constitutes one of the
main components of the concept of tradition is none other than the
sophia perennis of the Western tradition, which the Hindus call the
sanatāna dharma6 and the Muslims al-ḥikmat al-khālidah (or jāvīdān
khirad in Persian).7

In one sense, sanatāna dharma or sophia perennis is related to the
Primordial Tradition8 and therefore to the Origin of human existence.
But this view should not in any way detract from or destroy the
authenticity of the later messages from Heaven in the form of various
revelations, each of which begins with an origin which is the Origin and
which marks the beginning of a tradition that is at once the Primordial
Tradition and its adaptation to a particular humanity, the adaptation
being a Divine

Possibility manifested on the human plane. The attraction of Renaissance
man for the quest of origins and the “Primordial Tradition” that caused
Ficino to put aside the translation of Plato for the Corpus Hermeticum,
which was then considered as more ancient and primordial, an attraction
which also became part of the world view and Zeitgeist of the nineteenth
century,9 has caused much confusion in the question of the meaning of
“Primordial Tradition” in its relation to various religions. Each
tradition and Tradition as such are related in depth to the perennial
wisdom or Sophia, provided this link is not considered only temporally
and not as a cause for the rejection of those other messages from Heaven
which constitute the different religions and which are, of course,
inwardly related to the Primordial Tradition without being simply its
historical and temporal continuity. The spiritual genius and
particularity of each tradition cannot be neglected in the name of the
ever present wisdom which lies at the heart of each and every celestial
descent.

A. K. Coomaraswamy, one of the foremost expositors of traditional
doctrines in the contemporary period, translated sanatāna dharma as
philosophia perennis to which he added the adjective universalis. Under
his influence many have identified tradition with the perennial
philosophy to which it is profoundly related.10 But the term philosophia
perennis or its English translation is somewhat problematic in itself
and needs to be defined before tradition can be better understood with
reference to it. Contrary to Huxley's assertion, the term philosophia
perennis was not employed first by Leibniz who did quote it in a
well-known letter to Remond written in 1714.11 Rather, the term was
probably employed for the first time by Agostino Steuco (1497-1548), the
Renaissance philosopher and theologian who was an Augustinian. Although
the term has been identified with many different schools including
Scholasticism, especially of the Thomistic school,12 and Platonism in
general, these are more recent associations, whereas for Steuco it was
identified with a perennial wisdom embracing both philosophy and
theology and not related to just one school of wisdom or thought.

The work of Steuco De perenni philosophia was influenced by Ficino,
Pico, and even Nicolas of Cusa, especially the De pace fidei which
speaks of harmony between various religions. Steuco, who knew Arabic and
other Semitic languages and was librarian of the Vatican Library where
he had access to the “wisdom of the ages” as far as this was possible in
the Occident at that time, followed the ideas of these earlier figures
concerning the presence of an ancient wisdom which had existed from the
dawn of history. Ficino did not speak of philosophia perennis but he did
allude often to the philosophia priscorium or prisca theologia, which
can be translated as ancient or venerable philosophy and theology.
Following Gemisthus Plethon, the Byzantine philosopher, who wrote of
this ancient wisdom and emphasized the role of Zoroaster as the master
of this ancient knowledge of a sacred order, Ficino emphasized the
significance of the Hermetic Corpus and the Chaldaean Oracles which he
considered to have been composed by Zoroaster as the origins of this
primordial wisdom. He believed that true philosophy originated with
Plato who was heir to this wisdom,13 and true

theology with Christianity. This true philosophy, vera philosophia, was
for him the same as religion and true religion the same as this
philosophy. For Ficino, as for so many Christian Platonists, Plato had
known the Pentateuch and was a “Greek-speaking Moses,” the Plato whom
Steuco called divinus Plato in the same way that many Muslim sages had
given him the title Aflāṭūn al-ilāhī, the “Divine Plato.”14 Ficino, in a
way, reformulated the views of Gemisthus Plethon concerning the
perennity of true wisdom.15 Ficino's compatriot Pico della Mirandola was
to add to the sources of the philosophia priscorium, the Quran, Islamic
philosophy, and the Kabbala along with the non-Christian and especially
Graeco-Egyptian sources considered by Ficino, although he followed the
perspective of Ficino and emphasized the idea of the continuity of a
wisdom which is essentially one throughout various civilizations and
periods of history.

Steuco's philosophia perennis was none other than this philosophia
priscorium but under a new appellation.16 Steuco asserted that wisdom
was originally of divine origin, a sacred knowledge handed by God to
Adam which, for most human beings, was gradually forgotten and turned
into a dream surviving only and most fully in the prisca theologia. This
true religion or philosophy, whose goal is theosis and attainment of
sacred knowledge, has existed from the beginning of human history and is
attainable through either the historical expressions of this truth in
various traditions or by intellectual intuition and “philosophical”
contemplation.

Although severely attacked from many quarters for expressing such ideas
so opposed to both the prevalent humanism of the Renaissance and the
rather exoteric and sectarian interpretations of Christianity prevalent
at that time, the term used by Steuco continued to survive and became
celebrated through its use by Leibniz who did have a certain degree of
sympathy with traditional ideas. But interestingly enough, it is only in
the twentieth century that the term has gained wide popularity. If
perennial or ancient wisdom is in fact understood as Plethon, Ficino,
and Steuco understood it, then it is related to the idea of tradition
and can even be employed as a translation for sanatāna dharma, provided
the term philosophia is not understood only in a theoretical manner but
embraces realization as well.17 Tradition contains the sense of a truth
which is both of divine origin and perpetuated throughout a major cycle
of human history through both transmission and renewal of the message by
means of revelation. It also implies an inner truth which lies at the
heart of different sacred forms and which is unique since Truth is one.
In both senses, tradition is closely related to the philosophia perennis
if this term is understood as the Sophia which has always been and will
always be and which is perpetuated by means of both transmission
horizontally and renewal vertically through contact with that reality
that was “at the beginning” and is here and now.18

Before leaving the subject of philosophia perennis, it seems appropriate
to turn for a moment to the destiny of this idea in the Islamic
tradition where its relation to sacred knowledge and its meaning as a
perennial truth revived within each revelation is quite evident and more
emphasized than in the Christian tradition. Islam sees the doctrine of
unity (al-tawḥīd) not only as the essence of its own message but as the
heart of every religion. Revelation

for Islam means the assertion of al-tawḥīd and all religions are seen as
so many repetitions in different climes and languages of the doctrine of
unity. Moreover, wherever the doctrine of unity is to be found, it is
considered to be of divine origin. Therefore, Muslims did not
distinguish between religion and paganism but between those who accepted
unity and those who denied or ignored it. For them the sages of
antiquity such as Pythagoras and Plato were “unitarians” (muwaḥḥidūn)
who expressed the truth which lies at the heart of all religions.19
They, therefore, belonged to the Islamic universe and were not
considered as alien to it.

The Islamic intellectual tradition in both its gnostic (ma‘rifah or
‘irfān) and philosophical and theosophical (falsafah-ḥikmah)20 aspects
saw the source of this unique truth which is the “Religion of the Truth”
(dīn al-ḥaqq) in the teachings of the ancient prophets going back to
Adam and considered the prophet Idrīs, whom it identified with Hermes,
as the “father of philosophers” (Abu‘l-ḥukamā‘).21 Many Sufis called not
only Plato “divine” but also associated Pythagoras, Empedocles, with
whom an important corpus which influenced certain schools of Sufism is
associated, and others with the primordial wisdom associated with
prophecy. Even early Peripatetic (mashshā‘ī) philosophers such as
al-Fārābī saw a relation between philosophy and prophecy and revelation.
Later figures such as Suhrawardī expanded this perspective to include
the tradition of pre-Islamic Persia.22 Suhrawardī spoke often of
al-ḥikmat al-laduniyyah or Divine Wisdom (literally the wisdom which is
near God) in terms almost identical with what Sophia and also
philosophia perennis mean traditionally, including its aspect of
realization.23 A later Islamic figure, the eighth/fourteenth
(Islamic/Christian) century gnostic and theologian Sayyid Ḥaydar Āmulī,
made no reservations in pointing to the correspondence existing between
the “Muḥammadan” pleroma of seventy-two stars of the Islamic universe
and the seventy-two stars of the pleroma comprised of those sages who
had preserved their primordial nature but belong to a world outside of
the specifically Islamic one.

Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī identified true knowledge with a perennial wisdom
which has existed since the beginning of human history.25 The Islamic
conception of the universality of revelation went hand in hand with the
idea of a primordial truth which has always existed and will always
exist, a truth without history. The Arabic al-dīn, which is perhaps the
most suitable word to translate the term tradition, is inseparable from
the idea of permanent and perpetual wisdom, the sophia perennis which
can also be identified with the philosophia perennis as understood by
such a figure as Coomaraswamy.

To understand better the meaning of tradition, it is also necessary to
discuss somewhat more fully its relation to religion. If tradition is
related etymologically and conceptually to transmission, religion in
turn implies in its root meaning, “binding” (from the Latin religare).26
As already mentioned, it is what binds man to God and at the same time
men to each other as members of a sacred community or people, or what
Islam calls an ummah. Understood in this sense, religion can be
considered as the origin of tradition, as the heavenly beginning which
through revelation manifests certain principles and truths whose
applications then comprise tradition.

But, as indicated before, the plenary meaning of tradition includes this
origin as well as its ramifications and deployment. In this sense,
tradition is a more general concept embracing religion, as the Arabic
term al-dīn means at once tradition and religion in its most universal
sense, while religion as used in its widest sense is understood by some
to include the application of its revealed principles and its later
historical unfolding, so that it would in turn embrace what we mean by
tradition although the traditional point of view is not identical with
the religious as a result of the intrusion of modernism and
antitraditional forces into the realm of religion itself.

Moreover, the limited meaning that the term religion has gained in
European languages has caused certain of the traditional authors such as
Guénon to limit this term only to the Western religions especially in
their exoteric expressions distinguishing them from Hinduism, Taoism,
and the like which they call tradition rather than religion. But there
is no limitation in principle in the term religion and no reason to
exclude Hinduism from the category of religion if this latter term is
understood as that which binds man to the Origin through a message,
revelation, or manifestation which comes from the Ultimate Reality.

The limitation of religion to its most outward aspects in the recent
history of the West has also caused such terms as religious art or
religious literature to become so depleted of the sense of the sacred
and removed from tradition considered as the application of principles
of a transcendent order, that what is currently called religious art,
literature, etc., in many cases is nontraditional or even
antitraditional in character. It has, therefore, become necessary to
distinguish traditional from religious in such contexts. But once the
term religion is resuscitated to mean that which descends from the
Source in those objective manifestations of the Logos called revelation
in the Abrahamic religions or avatāric descent in Hinduism, then it can
be seen as the heart of that total and all-embracing order which is
tradition. Of course, this understanding of religion in all its
amplitude and universality is possible only when the traditional point
of view is revived and reality is viewed from the perspective of the
traditional and the sacred, and not the profane.

To discuss the relation of tradition to religion requires of necessity
delving into the problem of the plurality of religions. The multiplicity
of religious forms implies the multiplicity of traditions, while one
also speaks of the Primordial Tradition or Tradition as such in the same
way that there is one sophia perennis but many religions in which it is
to be found in different forms. One is thus confronted of necessity with
the basic question of Tradition and traditions, a question about which
much has been written and which has been the cause of so much
misunderstanding. From a certain point of view there is but one
Tradition, the Primordial Tradition, which always is. It is the single
truth which is at once the heart and origin of all truths. All
traditions are earthly manifestations of celestial archetypes related
ultimately to the immutable archetype of the Primordial Tradition in the
same way that all revelations are related to the Logos or the Word which
was at the beginning and which is at once an aspect of the Universal
Logos and the Universal Logos as such.27

Yet, each tradition is based on a direct message from Heaven and is not
just the result of the historical continuity of the Primordial
Tradition. A prophet or avatār owes nothing to anyone save what he
receives from the Origin. In the modern world certain occultist and
pseudo-“esoteric” circles claiming to be traditional have spoken of an
actual depository of the Primordial Tradition on the earth, often
identifying the locus with some region of Middle Asia and even claiming
contact with representatives of the center.28 Streams of aspirants have
wandered into the mountains of the Hindu Kush or the Himalayas in quest
of such a center and a whole science fiction has been created around a
sacred geography which has been interpreted in a literal rather than a
symbolic fashion. \>From the traditional point of view the reality of
the Primordial Tradition and the “Supreme Center” is strongly confirmed,
but this affirmation does not in any way decrease or destroy the
authenticity or complete originality of each religion and tradition
which conforms to a particular archetype and represents a direct
manifestation from the Origin, marking a rupture of the horizontal and
temporal dimension by the vertical and the transcendent. There is both
Tradition and the traditions without one contradicting the other. To
speak of Tradition does not mean to reject the celestial origin of any
of the authentic religions and traditions but to confirm the sacred in
each “original” message from Heaven,29 while remaining aware of that
Primordial Tradition which is confirmed by each tradition in not only
its doctrines and symbols but also through the preservation of a
“presence” which is inseparable from the sacred.

The traditional perspective is in fact so closely wed to the sense of
the sacred that it is necessary to say something about the sacred itself
and to try to “define” its meaning. In a sense, the sacred, like truth,
reality, or being, is too principial and elemental to delimit in the
logical manner of defining a universal by means of genus and specific
difference. The sacred resides in the nature of reality itself, and
normal humanity has a sense for the sacred just as it has for reality
which one distinguishes naturally from the unreal.30 But the condition
of modern man is such that even this natural sense has become nearly
forgotten, causing the need to provide a “definition” of the sacred. It
is of much interest to note that attempts such as those of R. Otto to
relate the sacred to the irrational have attracted the greatest deal of
interest during this century. This fact implies that the relation of
intellectual truth or knowledge to the sacred has been ignored precisely
because of the depleting of knowledge of its sacred content. Moreover,
in a secularized world the sacred has come to be viewed from the
perspective of the profane world for which the sacred is then the
totally other.31 This point of view is perfectly understandable for most
men do live in a world of forgetfulness in which the remembrance of God
is wholly “other”; they live in a world of indifference and pettiness in
which the grandeur of the sacred represents a radical “otherness.” But
what is exceptional in the modern world is that the sapiential
perspective, which lives in the sacred and sees the profane in terms of
the sacred and which had always been a living presence within normal
civilizations, has become so forgotten that the view of the sacred as
completely alien to what appears as “normal” human life has become the

only view, if the sacred is accepted as a possibility at all. To the
extent that the reality of the sacred is accepted at least in religious
circles, it is connected with the power of God rather than His wisdom.

Perhaps the most direct way of approaching the meaning of the sacred is
to relate it to the Immutable, to that Reality which is both the Unmoved
Mover and the Eternal. That Reality which is immutable and eternal is
the Sacred as such, and the manifestation of this Reality in the stream
of becoming and the matrix of time is that which possesses the quality
of sacredness. A sacred object or sacred sound is an object or a sound
which bears the imprint of the Eternal and the Immutable in that
physical reality which comprises outwardly the object or the sound.
Man's sense of the sacred is none other than his sense for the Immutable
and the Eternal, his nostalgia for what he really is, for he carries the
sacred within the substance of his own being and most of all within his
intelligence which was created to know the Immutable and contemplate the
Eternal.

The Sacred as such is the source of Tradition and what is traditional is
inseparable from the sacred. He who has no sense of the sacred cannot
perceive the traditional perspective, and traditional man is never
separated from the sense of the sacred. Nevertheless, the sacred is more
like the blood which flows in the arteries and veins of tradition, an
aroma which pervades the whole of a traditional civilization.32
Tradition extends the presence of the sacred into a whole world,
creating a civilization in which the sense of the sacred is ubiquitous.
The function of a traditional civilization may be said to be nothing
other than creating a world dominated by the sacred in which man is
saved from the terror of the nihilism and skepticism which accompanies
the loss of the sacred dimension of existence and the destruction of the
sacred character of knowledge.

The all-embracing nature of tradition is made possible by the presence
within each integral tradition, and going back to the religion which
lies at the origin of the tradition, of not one but several dimensions,
levels of meaning or types of teaching corresponding to the different
types of spiritual and intellectual capabilities and needs of the
humanity chosen as the earthly vehicle of the tradition in question.
Although these dimensions or levels are multiple in number and many
traditions speak of seven or forty or some other symbolic number of
levels, they can be reduced at the first stage to the two basic
dimensions of the exoteric and the esoteric: the first, concerning that
aspect of the message from Heaven which governs the whole of the life of
a traditional humanity; the other, the spiritual and intellectual needs
of those who seek God or the Ultimate Reality here and now. In Judaism
and Islam the two dimensions of the tradition as the Talmudic and
Kabbalistic or the Sharī'ah and the Ṭarīqah are clearly delineated,
although even in those cases there are intermediary regions and a
spectrum which is far from being abruptly separated.33 As for
Christianity, although it is essentially an eso-exoterism with a less
well-defined esoteric dimension than the other two Abrahamic traditions,
it too did possess at the beginning a distinctly esoteric message which
has manifested itself in various ways during the later history of
Christianity.34

Although the Indian and Far Eastern worlds have different traditional
structures from the Abrahamic ones, there are nevertheless such
realities as the Law of Manu complementing Advaita Vedanta, Confucianism
complementing Taoism, and the Theravada and Mahayana schools of Buddhism
which correspond in their own context to the exoteric-esoteric
dimensions of tradition. Although our concern in this study is with
sacred knowledge and therefore more with the esoteric dimension which is
related more directly to sacred knowledge, it is important to emphasize
the significance of the exoteric dimension and its necessity for an
integral, living tradition. This point is particularly important to
mention in the light of the pretensions of so many pseudoesoteric groups
today which claim themselves to be beyond the need of the exoteric in
contrast to the greatest sages of days gone by who amidst the most
exalted utterances concerning spiritual realization remained faithful to
the forms and exoteric teachings of their religions, the rare exceptions
being only those which prove the rule.35

Esoterism is that inward dimension of tradition which addresses the
inner man, ho esō anthrōpos of Saint Paul. It is hidden because of its
very nature and accessible to only the few because in this stage of
human history only the few remain aware of the inner dimensions of their
nature; the rest live on the periphery of the circle of their own
existence, oblivious to the Center which is connected by the esoteric
dimension of tradition to the circumference or periphery.36 The esoteric
is the radius which provides the means of going from the circumference
to the Center, but it is not available to all because not everyone is
willing or qualified to undertake the journey to the Center in this
life. To follow the exoteric dimension of religion, however, is to
remain on the circumference and hence in a world which has a center, and
to remain qualified to carry out the journey to the Center in the
afterlife, the beatific vision being only a posthumous possibility from
the exoteric point of view.

The authentically esoteric is always contained within a total and
integral tradition. It is only in the modern West, and possibly during
the decadence of the late antiquity, that esoteric teachings have become
divorced from the tradition within whose matrix the esoteric is
veritably the esoteric. As a result of this phenomenon, which as far as
the modern world is concerned goes back to the eighteenth century, the
esoteric has been made to appear, for the most part, as being opposed to
the Christian tradition, while what has survived of the Christian
tradition has in most instances disdained the very idea of the esoteric
in the same way that gnosis or sacred knowledge has been left out of
consideration in the exposition of the message of most Christian
churches in recent times. Because of its detachment from a living
tradition, this so-called esoterism has usually degenerated into an
inoperative or even harmful occultism and the shell of sacred knowledge
has remained but become depleted of the sacred. What has paraded for the
most part as esoterism in the modern world has become divorced from the
sense of the sacred in complete contrast to genuine esoterism as
understood traditionally, which is by nature concerned with the sacred
and is the means par excellence of gaining access to the sacred in that
here and now which is the reflection of the Immutable and the Eternal.37

Whether considered in its exoteric or esoteric aspect, tradition implies
orthodoxy and is inseparable from it. If there is such a thing as truth,
then there is also error and norms which allow man to distinguish
between them. Orthodoxy in its most universal sense is none other than
the truth in itself and as related to the formal homogeneity of a
particular traditional universe. The loss of the multidimensional
character of religion and its reduction to a single level have also
caused the narrowing of the sense of orthodoxy in such a manner that the
esoteric and the mystical have often been castigated as unorthodox.
Orthodoxy has become identified with simple conformity and has gained an
almost pejorative sense among those concerned with intellectuality, and
many who unknowingly thirst for orthodoxy in its most universal sense
have claimed themselves as heterodox vis-a-vis a narrowly formulated and
conceived orthodoxy which has left no living space for the liberating
flight of the sanctified intellect. The narrowing of the meaning of the
term orthodoxy is, in fact, not unconnected with the loss of the
original meaning of intellectuality and its reduction to rationalism.
Otherwise intellectuality in its authentic sense cannot but be related
to orthodoxy.38

If orthodoxy is understood in its universal sense as the quality of the
truth in the context of a particular spiritual and religious universe as
well as the truth as such, then it must be interpreted on different
levels like tradition itself. There are certain doctrines which are
extrinsically heterodox vis-a-vis a particular traditional universe but
intrinsically orthodox. An example would be Christianity as viewed from
Judaism and Buddhism from the point of view of Hinduism. Even within a
single tradition, a particular esoteric school may appear as unorthodox
from the point of view of the exoteric dimension or even from the
perspective of another esoteric school of that same tradition, as seen
in certain schools of Japanese Buddhism. In all these cases the concept
of orthodoxy is of capital importance in judging the character of the
teachings involved from the traditional point of view and is almost
synonymous with the traditional as far as conformity to the truth is
concerned. There is no possibility of tradition without orthodoxy nor of
orthodoxy outside of tradition. Moreover, both are exclusive of all
those imitations, aberrations, and deviations of a purely human or
sometimes subhuman origin, which either claim openly to stand outside of
the traditions or imply such departures from the traditional universe as
to make impossible the gaining of access to the doctrines, practices,
and spiritual presence which alone enable man to go beyond his limited
self and to reach the entelechy which is his raison d'être. In any case,
a tree is judged by the fruit it bears and this principle is nowhere
more applicable than in the judgment of what is orthodox and what
departs or deviates from orthodoxy at all levels of man's religious
life, including not only law and morality but also and especially the
domain of knowledge and intellectuality. The full attainment of sacred
knowledge, including its realized aspect, is as much related to the key
concept of tradition as to orthodoxy; and it is not possible to
understand the significance of tradition without an appreciation of its
relation to orthodoxy understood in its most universal sense.39

To speak of the truth and of orthodoxy in the traditional context is
also to speak of authority and the transmission of truth. Who or what
determines

religious truth and guarantees the purity, regularity, and perpetuity of
a tradition? This is a key question to which all traditions have
addressed themselves in different ways. Moreover, they have provided
answers which guarantee the authenticity of the tradition without their
having recourse to simply one solution. There are traditions which have
a magisterium and others a sacred community which itself guarantees the
purity and continuity of the message.40 Some have emphasized the
continuity of a sacerdotal function and others of a chain of
transmission through teachers whose qualifications have been determined
and defined by the tradition in question. Sometimes even within a single
tradition several means have been used, but in all cases traditional
authority remains inseparable from the meaning of tradition itself.
There are those who are authorities in traditional matters and there are
those who are not; there are those who know and those who do not.
Individualism in any case does not and cannot play a role in the
transmission and interpretation of that which is by definition
suprahuman, even if an extensive field is left for human elaboration and
interpretation. Intellectual and spiritual authority is inseparable from
that reality which is tradition and authentic traditional writings
always possess an innate quality of authority.

Likewise, tradition implies the regularity of transmission of all of its
aspects ranging from legal and ethical rulings and precepts to esoteric
knowledge. Different means of transmission including oral transmission,
initiation, transfer of power, techniques, and knowledge from master to
disciple, and the perpetuation of a particular spiritual perfume and
sacred presence are all related to and inseparable from that reality
which is tradition. To live in the traditional world is to breathe in a
universe in which man is related to a reality beyond himself from which
he receives those principles, truths, forms, attitudes, and other
elements which determine the very texture of human existence. And this
reception is made possible through that transmission which brings the
reality of tradition to the lives of the members of each generation
according to their capacities and destiny and guarantees the
perpetuation of this reality without the corruption which characterizes
all that is affected by the withering influence of time and becoming.

The all-embracing nature of tradition is also a trait which needs to be
emphasized. In a civilization characterized as traditional, nothing lies
outside the realm of tradition. There is no domain of reality which has
a right to existence outside the traditional principles and their
applications. Tradition therefore concerns not only knowledge but also
love and works. It is the source of the law which governs society even
in cases where the law is not derived directly from the revelation.41 It
is the foundation of ethics. In fact, ethics has no meaning outside the
cadre established by the tradition. It also sets the principles and
norms for the political aspect of the life of society, and political
authority is related to that of the spiritual although the relation
between the two is far from being uniform in different traditions.42
Likewise, tradition determines the structure of society applying
immutable principles to the social order, resulting in structures
outwardly as different as the Hindu caste system and the Islamic
“democracy of married monks,”

as some have characterized theocratic Islamic society, in which there is
nevertheless an equality before God and the Divine Law, but of course
not in the quantitative modern sense.43

Tradition also governs the domains of art and science, with which we
shall deal in later chapters, and is especially concerned with
principial knowledge or that supreme science which is metaphysics and
which has been often confounded in the West with philosophy. Our concern
being knowledge in its relation to the sacred rather than all aspects of
tradition, it is necessary to pause here to distinguish between the
kinds of knowledge which exist in a traditional civilization. Besides
the various cosmological sciences, there are, as already noted, three
modes of knowing dealing with principles which one can distinguish in a
traditional world, especially those governed by one of the Abrahamic
religions: these three being philosophy, theology, and gnosis, or in a
certain context theosophy. The modern world distinguishes only two modes
or disciplines: philosophy and theology rather than the three existing
in the traditional world of not only Christianity but also Islam and
Judaism.

In the Islamic tradition after several centuries during which the
various perspectives were formed, a situation developed which
demonstrates fully the role and function of philosophy, theology, and
metaphysics or gnosis in a traditional context. There were schools such
as that of the Peripatetics (mashshā‘ī) which could be called
philosophical in the traditional sense. There were schools of theology
(kalām) such as that of the Mu‘tazilites, the Ash‘arites, the
Maturidites, the Ismāīlīs, and the Twelve-Imam Shī‘tes. Then there was
gnosis or metaphysics associated with various schools of Sufism. As far
as the eastern Islamic world was concerned, there also gradually
developed a school associated with Suhrawardī and his school of
illumination (al-ishrāq) which was both philosophical and gnostic and
which should be called, properly speaking, theosophical,44 while in the
western lands of Islam, contemporary with this development, philosophy
ceased to exist as a distinct discipline becoming wed to theology on the
one hand and gnosis on the other. Likewise, medieval Judaism could
distinguish between the same three kinds of intellectual perspectives
represented by such figures as Judas Halévy, Maimonides, Ibn Gabirol,
and Luria. Needless to say, in medieval Christianity one could also
distinguish between the theology of a Saint Bernard, the philosophy of
an Alberrus Magnus, and the gnosis of a Meister Eckhart, not to speak of
a Roger Bacon or Raymond Lull, who correspond more to the school of
ishrāq of Suhrawardī than anything else if a comparison is to be made
with the Islamic tradition.45

All three disciplines have a role and function to play in the
intellectual life of a traditional world. There is an aspect of
“philosophy” which is necessary for the exposition of certain
theological and gnostic ideas as there are elements of theology and
gnosis which are present in every authentic expression of philosophy
worthy of the name. One can, in fact, say that every great philosopher
is also to some extent theologian and metaphysician, in the sense of
gnostic, as every great theologian is to some extent philosopher and
gnostic and every gnostic to some degree

philosopher and theologian as found in the case of an Ibn ‘Arabī or
Meister Eckhart.46

Although, due to the complete depletion of what passes, in the modern
world, as philosophy of traditional truth and the sacred, traditional
authors such as A. K. Coomaraswamy and F. Schuon and especially R.
Guénon have attacked philosophy severely in order to clear the ground
for the presentation of metaphysics and to prevent any distortions or
deviations which might be caused by the confusion between profane
philosophy and sacred knowledge,47 there is no doubt that there is such
a thing as traditional philosophy or philosophy in the traditional
context.48 Despite all the depreciation that the term philosophy has
suffered in the modern world, still something of the Pythagorean and
Platonic conception of philosophy resonates through it. It is possible
to resuscitate the meaning of this discipline and its function provided
the sacred character of knowledge is established once again. In any
case, the traditional intellectual world implies the presence of
different dimensions and perspectives, including what in the Western
tradition would be called not only theology and philosophy but also
gnosis and theosophy.49 The disappearance of gnosis from the mainstream
of modern Western thought could not but result in the trivialization of
the meaning of philosophy, the diluting of the substance of theology and
finally the appearance of that type of inversion of traditional
knowledge which has paraded as “theosophy” during the past century.

Although the essence of tradition is present eternally in divinis, its
historical manifestation can either disappear completely from the
earthly plane or become partly inaccessible or “lost.” Not every
tradition is a living one. The Egyptian tradition, for example, which is
one of the most remarkable known to man, cannot be practiced or lived
although its art forms, symbols, and even a certain presence of a
psychological rather than spiritual kind belonging to it survive. That
spiritual life, which invigorated and animated the earthly body of the
tradition, left for the abode of the origin of all religions and the
tradition cannot be said to be alive as can, let us say, Hinduism or
Islam. There are also certain traditions which are only partially
accessible or “alive” in the sense that only certain of their dimensions
or teachings are available. In this case there is always the possibility
of a rejuvenation and regeneration of what has been lost or forgotten,
provided the roots and channels of transmission of the tradition remain
intact. Likewise the civilizations created by various traditions can
become weakened, decay, or die without the religion and certain aspects
of the tradition which gave birth to the civilization in question
decaying or dying. Such is in fact the case of the traditional
civilizations of Asia today which have decayed in different degrees
while the traditions which gave birth to them remain alive.

As for traditional symbols, since they have their root in the archetypal
world of the Spirit, it is possible to have them resuscitated provided
there is a living tradition which can absorb symbols, images, and even
doctrines of another traditional world, this absorption implying much
more than mere historical borrowing.50 In any case, symbols and ideas of
nonliving or alien traditions cannot be legitimately adopted or absorbed
into another world

which is not itself traditional, as so many attempt to do in the modern
world. He who attempts to carry out such a process independent of
tradition is doing nothing less than usurping the function of a prophet
or the figure whom the Muslims call the Mahdī and the Hindus the
Chakravartin. The adoption of any element from another tradition must
follow the laws and principles which determine the mode of existence of
the tradition which is adopting the elements in question. Otherwise, the
adoption of elements of an even originally traditional character can
result in the diffusion of forces of dissolution which can cause great
harm or even destruction to an already living tradition not to speak of
organizations of purely human origin playing with forces far beyond
their ken of understanding or power of control.51

This and numerous other dangers, obstacles, and precipices which face
modern man who has decided to live by bread alone have forced those who
have sought to resuscitate the traditional point of view in the modern
world to express their categorical opposition to modernism, which they
do not at all identify with the contemporary world as such but with that
revolt against Heaven which began in the Renaissance in the West and
which has now invaded nearly the whole globe. At other times, it would
have been possible to speak of what constitutes tradition without
discussing forces of secularism but such a possibility does not exist in
a world already influenced and, from the traditional point of view,
contaminated by modernism. To speak of tradition is to be concerned with
the truth and therefore error, and to be faced with the necessity of
evaluating the modern world in the light of those truths which comprise
the very principles of tradition. The unrelenting opposition of
traditional authors to modernism issues first and foremost from their
dedication to traditional truth and then from compassion and charity
toward a humanity entangled in a world woven of the threads of
half-truths and errors.

Today the criticism against the modern world and modernism has become
commonplace, ranging from works of poets to analyses of even
sociologists.52 But the opposition of tradition to modernism, which is
total and complete as far as principles are concerned, does not derive
from the observation of facts and phenomena or the diagnosis of the
symptoms of the malady. It is based upon a study of the causes which
have brought about the illness. Tradition is opposed to modernism
because it considers the premises upon which modernism is based to be
wrong and false in principle.53 It does not neglect the fact that some
element of a particular modern philosophical system may be true or some
modern institution may possess a positive feature or be good. In fact,
complete falsehood or evil could not exist since every mode of existence
implies some element of that truth and goodness which in their purity
belong to the Source of all existence.

What tradition criticizes in the modern world is the total world view,
the premises, the foundations which, from its point of view, are false
so that any good which appears in this world is accidental rather than
essential. One could say that the traditional worlds were essentially
good and accidentally evil, and the modern world essentially evil and
accidentally good. Tradition is therefore opposed in principle to
modernism. It wishes to slay the modern world54 in order to create a
normal one. Its goal is not to destroy what is

positive but to remove that veil of ignorance which allows the illusory
to appear as real, the negative as positive and the false as true.
Tradition is not opposed to all that exists in the world today and, in
fact, refuses to equate all that exists today with modernism. After all,
although this age is given such epithets as the space age or the atomic
age because man has traveled to the moon or split the atom, through the
same logic it could just as well have been called the age of monks,
because monks do still exist along with astronauts. The fact that this
age is not called the age of monasticism but of space is itself the
fruit of the modernistic point of view which equates modernism with the
contemporary world, whereas tradition distinguishes sharply between the
two, seeking to destroy modernism not in order to destroy contemporary
man but to save him from continuing upon a path whose end could not but
be perdition and destruction. From this point of view the history of
Western man during the past five centuries is an anomaly in the long
history of the human race in both East and West. In opposing modernism
in principle and in a categorical manner, those who follow the
traditional point of view wish only to enable Western man to join the
rest of the human race.55

The emphasis upon the East or the Orient by contemporary traditional
authors is in fact due to the historic situation in which modernism and
rebellion against tradition arose in the West. Otherwise tradition
embraces both East and West for it is derived from none other than that
“Blessed Olive Tree” or central axis of cosmic existence to which the
Quran refers stating that it is neither of the East nor of the West.56
It is true that during this century those who have spoken of tradition
have emphasized the three major spiritual universes of the East
comprising the Far East, India, and the Islamic world with their own
distinct features as well as their points of interpenetration. It is
also true that some have even thought that traditional civilization
simply means Oriental civilization. But even during this century since a
work such as East and West of R. Guénon was written, a great deal has
changed in Asia itself giving further reason for not identifying
tradition with a geographic Orient alone, although more of what is
traditional still survives in the geographic East than in the West and
these terms have not lost their geographic sense completely.57

As the tragic history of these decades unfolds, however, it becomes more
and more necessary to identify tradition with that East or Orient which
belongs to sacred geography and which is symbolic rather than literal.
The Orient is the source of light, the point where dawn breaks and where
the sun rises casting its light upon the horizons, removing darkness and
bringing forth the warmth which vivifies. The Orient is the Origin as
well as the point toward which we turn in our journey in life, the point
without which there would be no orientation, without which life would
become disarray and chaos and our journey a meandering in the labyrinth
of what the Buddhists call samsāric existence. Tradition is identified
with this Orient. It, too, issues from the Origin and provides
orientation for human life. It provides a knowledge which is at once
Oriental and illuminating, a knowledge which is combined with love as
the light of the sun is combined with heat, a

knowledge which issues from the Precinct of the Sacred and which leads
to the Sacred.

To the extent that the shadows of the land of the setting sun cover the
living space of the human species and the geographical Orient becomes
ravaged by various forms of modernism, to that extent the Orient becomes
a pole carried within the heart and soul of human beings wherever they
might be. To the extent that the physical Orient ceases to be, at least
outwardly, the land of tradition as it has been over the millennia,58 to
that extent tradition spreads once again into the Occident and even into
the “Far West” preparing the ground symbolically for that day when “the
Sun shall rise in the West.” To identify tradition with the Orient today
is to identify it with that Orient which is the place of the rising Sun
of our own being, the point which is at once the center and origin of
man, the center which both illuminates and sanctifies and without which
human existence on both the individual and collective levels becomes
like a circle without center, a world deprived of the enlightening and
vivifying luminosity of the rising Sun.

Notes
-----

[^1]: From the poem “Autumn” of M. Lings, one of the leading
contemporary traditional writers who is also a poet, in his The Heralds
and Other Poems, London, 1970, p. 26.

[^2]: As one of the foremost of the contemporary traditional masters has
asserted, the exposition of traditional doctrines in their totality is
necessary today because “one irregularity deserves another.”

[^3]: On the microcosmic level traditional eschatologies teach that at
the moment of death the whole life of a human being is recapitulated in
a nutshell before him. He is then judged accordingly and enters a
posthumous state in accordance with his state of being and of course the
Divine Mercy whose dimensions are imponderable. The same principle
exists on the macrocosmic level and as it involves the life of humanity
as such with of course all the differences which the shift from the
individual to the collective level implies.

[^4]: The earliest works of R. Guénon, one of the foremost expositors of
the traditional perspective in the modern West, contain many passages on
the meaning of tradition. See “What is Meant by Tradition,” in his
Introduction to the Study of Hindu Doctrines, trans. M. Pallis, London,
1945, pp. 87-89; and “De l’infaillibilité traditionnelle,” in id.,
Aperçus sur l’initiation, Paris, 1946, pp. 282-88. Likewise, A. K.
Coomaraswamy and F. Schuon have written numerous pages and passages on
the concept of tradition itself. See, for example, Coomaraswamy, The
Bugbear of Literacy, esp. chaps. 4 and 5; and F.Schuon, Spiritual
Perspectives and Human Farts, pt. 1; idem, Light on the Ancient Worlds,
chaps. 1 and 2; idem, “Fatalité et progrès,” Etudes Traditionnelles, no.
261 (July-August 1947): 183-89; and idem, “L’Impossible convergence,”
Etudes Traditionnelles, no. 402-3(September-October 1967): 145-49. See
also E. Zolla, Ché cos’ è la tradizione?, esp. pt. 2, “La Tradizione
Eterna,” which deals with tradition from a more literary point of view;
and idem, “What is Tradition?,” in the volume dedicated to A. K.
Coomaraswamy and edited by R.Fernando (in press). Tradition has also
been used with a similar but more limited meaning than intended in this
work by certain Catholic authors such as J.Pieper, Überlieferung-Begriff
und Anspruch, Munich, 1970, while other Catholic figures to whom we
shall turn later have embraced the traditional idea fully.

[^5]: F. Schuon, Understanding Islam.

[^6]: Sanatana dharmu cannot be translated exactly, although sophia
perennis is perhaps the closest to it since sanatana means perennity
(that is, perpetuity throughout a cycle of human existence and not
eternity) and dharma, the principle of conservation of beings, each
being having its own dharma to which it must conform and which is its
law. But dharma also concerns a whole humanity in the sense of
Manava-dharma and in that case is related to the sacred knowledge or
Sophia which is at the heart of the law governing over a human cycle. In
that sense sanatana dharma corresponds to sophia perennis esp. if the
realized and not only the theoretical dimension of Sophia is taken into
consideration. In its plenary meaning sanatana dharma is primordial
tradition itself as it has subsisted and will continue to subsist
throughout the present cycle of humanity. See R. Guénon, “Sanatana
Dharma,” in his Études sur l’Hindouisme, Paris, 1968, pp. 105-6.

[^7]: This is in fact the title of a well-known work by Ibn Miskawayh
(Muskuyah) which contains metaphysical and ethical aphorisms and sayings
by Islamic and pre-Islamic sages. See the A. Badawi edition al-Hikmat
al-khalidah: Jawıdan khirad, Cairo, 1952. This work discusses the
thought and writings of many sages and philosophers, including those
from ancient Persia, India, and the Mediterranean world (Rum). On this
work see the Introduction of M. Arkoun to T. M. Shushtarı’s Persian
translation of Ibn Miskawayh, Javıdan khirad, Tehran, 1976, pp. 1-24.

[^8]: The primordial tradition is none other than what Islam refers to
as al-dın alh.anıf to which the Quran refers in many different contexts
but usually in relation to the Prophet Abraham who is usually referred
to as hanıf ; for example, “Nay but, (we follow) the religion of
Abraham, the upright (h.anıfan), and he was not of the idolators” (II;
135-Pickthall translation). See also verses 111; 67 and 95-VI; 79 and
161-XVI; 120-and XVII; 31.

[^9]: See M. Eliade, “The Quest for the ‘Origins of Religion’,” History
of Religions 4/1 (Summer 1964): 154-69.

[^10]: The well-known work of A. Huxley, Perennial Philosophy, New York,
1945, is one of the works which has sought to demonstrate the existence
and to present the content of this enduring and perennial wisdom through
selections of sayings drawn from various traditions, but the work
remains incomplete in many ways and its perspective is not traditional.
The first work which carried out in full the suggestion of Coomaraswamy
in assembling a vast compendium of traditional knowledge in order to
show the remarkable perennity and universality of wisdom is the sadly
neglected work of W. N. Perry, A Treasury of TraditionalWisdom, London
and New York, 1971, which is a key work for the understanding of what
traditional authors mean by perennial philosophy.

[^11]: After stating in this letter that truth is more extensive than
has been thought before and that its trace is found among the ancients
he says, “et ce serait en effect perennis quaedam Philosophia.” C. J.
Gerhardt (ed.), Die philosophischen Schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibnitz, Berlin, 1875-90, vol. 3, p. 625. Quoted also in C. Schmitt,
“Perennial Philosophy: Steuco to Leibniz,” Journal of the History of
Ideas 27 (1966): 506. This article (pp. 505-32 of the cited volume)
traces the history of the usage of the term philosophia perennis with
special attention paid to its Renaissance background in Ficino and other
early Renaissance figures. See also J. Collins, “The Problem of a
Perennial Philosophy,” in his Three Paths in Philosophy, Chicago, 1962,
pp. 255-79.

[^12]: The identification of the “perennial philosophy” with Thomism or
Scholasticism in general is a twentieth-century phenomenon, while in the
Renaissance the Scholastics in general opposed the theses of Steuco.

[^13]: Specifically heir to Zoroaster, Hermes, Orpheus, Aglaophemus (the
teacher of Pythagoras), and Pythagoras.

[^14]: This term is found among both Islamic philosophers like al-Farabı
and certain Sufis.

[^15]: On the views of Ficino see the various works of R. Klibansky, E.
Cassirer, and P. O. Kristeller on the Renaissance, esp. Kristeller’s
Studies in Renaissance Thought and Letters, Rome, 1956; and idem, Il
pensiero filosofico di Marsilio Ficino, Florence, 1953.

[^16]: This fact is shown dearly by Schmitt in his already cited article
which demonstrates that although the term philosophia perennis is of
Renaissance origin, the idea even in Western intellectual life is of a
medieval and ultimately ancient Greek origin.

[^17]: Referring to religio perennis Schuon writes, “These words recall
the philosophia perennis of Steuchus Eugubin (sixteenth century) and of
the neo-scholastics; but the word ‘philosophia’ suggests rightly or
wrongly a mental elaboration rather than wisdom, and therefore does not
convey exactly the intended sense.” Light on the Ancient Worlds, p. 143.

[^18]: “‘Philosophia perennis’ is generally understood as referring to
that metaphysical truth which has no beginning, and which remains the
same in all expressions of wisdom. Perhaps it would here be better or
more prudent to speak of a ‘Sophia perennis’.. .

“With Sophia perennis, it is a question of the following: there are
truths innate in the human Spirit, which nevertheless in a sense lie
buried in the depth of the ‘Heart’-in the pure Intellect-and are
accessible only to the one who is spiritually contemplative; and these
are the fundamental metaphysical truths. Access to them is possessed by
the ‘gnostic’, ‘pneumatic’ or ‘theosopher’,-in the original and not the
sectarian meaning of these terms,-and access to them was also possessed
by the ‘philosophers’ in the real and still innocent sense of the word:
for example, Pythagoras, Plato and to a large extent also Aristotle.”
Schuon, “Sophia perennis”: Studies in Comparative Religion, trans. W.
Stoddart, (in press). See also Schuon, Wissende, Verschwiegene. Ein
geweihte Hinführung zur Esoterik, Herderbücherei Initiative 42, Munich,
1981, pp. 23-28; and idem, the introduction and first chapter,
“Prémisses epistémologiques,” in his Sur les traces de la religion
pérenne (in press).

[^19]: We have dealt with this theme in many of our writings. See, for
example, our An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, pp.
37ff.

[^20]: Falsafah and hikmah can be translated as both philosophy and
theosophy depending on how these terms are understood in English and in
what context the Arabic terms are employed.

[^21]: On the figure of Hermes in Islamic thought see L. Massignon,
“Inventaire de la littérature hermétique arabe,” in A. Nock and A. J.
Festugière, La Révélation d’Hermès Trismégiste, 1, Paris, 1949, app. 3;
S. H. Nasr, “Hermes and Hermetic Writings in the IslamicWorld,” in
Islamic Life and Thought, London, 1981, pp.102ff; F. Sezgin,

Geschichte der Arabischen Schrifttums, Leiden, 1970 on, with references
to Hermes on many different pages, for example, vol. 3, 1970, pp.170-71,
vol. 4, 1971, pp. 139-269; and the article “Hirmis“by M. Plesser in the
New Encyclopaedia of Islam.

[^22]: The emphasis upon pre-Islamic Persia as well as Greece as the
home of the “perennial philosophy” is also found in Ibn Miskawayh and
Abu’l Hasan al-‘ Amirı although not to the same extent as Suhrawardı who
considered himself the resurrector of the wisdom of the ancient
Persians. See Nasr, Three Muslim Sages, chap. 2; and H. Corbin, En Islam
iranien, vol. 2.

[^23]: Suhrawardı also refers to this wisdom as al-h. ikmat al-‘atıqah
(the ancient wisdom) which is exactly the same as the Latin philosophia
priscorum. Whether there is a historical link or simply the repetition
of the same truth and even terminology in twelfth-century Persia and
Renaissance Italy cannot be answered until more study is made of the
dissemination of the teachings of Suhrawardı CHAPTER 2. WHAT IS
TRADITION? 81 in the West. See S. H. Nasr, “The Spread of the
Illuminationist School of Suhrawardı,” in La Persia nel Medioevo, Rome,
1971, pp. 255-65.

[^24]: Sayyid Haydar Âmolî, Le texte des textes (Nas.s. al-Nos.ûs.),
commentaire des “Fos.ûs.al-h. ikam” d’Ibn Arabî. Les prolégomènes, ed.
by H. Corbin and O. Yahya, Tehran-Paris, 1975, §865. The author has
provided elaborate diagrams which are like man.d.alas based on the
vision of the intelligible world containing the names of various
spiritual and intellectual figures, both Islamic and pre-Islamic. These
diagrams have been analyzed by Corbin in his, “La paradoxe du
monothéisme,” Eranos-Jahrbuch, 1976, pp. 77ff. Concerning the
“extraordinary interest” of these diagrams depicting the sages in the
spiritual firmament Corbin writes, “[Cet intérêt] est dans la
correspondance instituée pour les deux diagrammes 21 et 22 entre la
totalité mohammadienne groupé autour de la famille ou du temple des
Imams immaculés (Ahl al-bayt) et la totalité des religions groupés
autour des hommes dont la nature foncière originelle a été preservée
(fit.ra salîma). La fitra salîma, c’est la nature humaine, l’Imago Dei,
telle qu’elle est ‘sortie des mains’ du Créateur, sans avoir jamais été
détruite.” Ibid., pp. 98-99.

[^25]: The masterpiece of Sadr al-Dın Shırazı, al-H. ikmat
al-muta‘aliyah fi‘l-asfar alarba‘ ah, is not only a summa of Islamic
philosophy and theosophy but also a major source for the history of
Islamic thought as well as the pre-Islamic ideas which Muslim
philosophers and theologians encountered. In almost every discussion
Mulla S.adra turns to ancient philosophies as well as Islamic ones and
takes the point of view of the philosophia perennis for granted. The
same point of view is to be seen in his other works such as H.uduth
al-‘alam. See S. H.Nasr, S.adr al-Dın Shırazı and His Transcendent
Theosophy, London, 1978; and idem, “Mulla Sadra as a Source for the
History of Muslim Philosophy,” Islamic Studies 3/3 (Sept. 1964): 309-14.

[^26]: “Religio is that which ‘binds’ (religat) man to Heaven and
engages his whole being; as for the word ‘traditio’, it is related to a
more outward and sometimes fragmentary reality, besides suggesting a
retrospective outlook. At its birth a religion ‘binds’ men to Heaven
from the moment of its first revelation, but it does not become a
‘tradition’, or admit more than one ‘tradition’, till two or three
generations later.” Schuon, Light on the Ancient Worlds, p. 144.

[^27]: The multiplicity of religious forms in the light of unitary and
sacred knowledge shall be dealt with in chap. 9 of this work.

[^28]: The book of R. Guénon, Le Roi du monde, Paris, 1927, has itself
given rise to many such speculations by people of such tendencies.

[^29]: Strictly speaking, only that which comes from the Origin can be
original. That is precisely how the traditional perspective views
originality in contrast to the antitraditional view for which
originality is divorced from both the truth and sacred presence and
therefore from all that comprises religion or tradition as such.

[^30]: This distinction is so fundamental that even those sophists who
try to disprove the reality of the real nevertheless live and act upon
the basis of the intuition of the distinction between the real and the
unreal.

[^31]: It is this idea of the sacred as wholly other that was developed
by R. Otto in his well-known work The Idea of the Holy, trans. J.
Harvey, New York, 1958, pp. 12ff., and which has attracted so much
attention among scholars of religion during recent decades.

[^32]: For example, all sacred art is traditional art but not all
traditional art is sacred art. The latter comprises that aspect of
traditional art which deals directly with the symbols, images, rites,
and objects dealing with the religion which lies at the heart of the
tradition in question. We shall treat this question more fully in chap.
8 dealing with sacred art.

[^33]: On these dimensions in Islam see S. H. Nasr, Ideals and Realities
of Islam; as for exoterism and esoterism in general see F. Schuon, The
Transcendent Unity of Religions, trans. P. Townsend, New York, 1975,
chaps. 2 and 3.

[^34]: “We have put forward the view that the process of dogmatic
enunciation during the first centuries was one of successive Initiation,
or in a word, that there existed an exoterism and an esoterism in the
Christian religion. Historians may not like it, but one finds
incontestable traces of the lex arcani at the origin of our religion.”
P. Vuillaud, Études d’ésotérisme catholiaue, quoted in Schuon,
Transcendent Unity, p. 142.

[^35]: It is often forgotten that a ´Sankara who was the supreme jnîani
in Hinduism composed hymns to ´Siva and that a Hafiz. or Rumı who spoke
constantly of casting aside forms (s.urah) in favor of the essence
(ma‘na-literally “meaning”) never missed their daily prayers. They
transcended formfrom above not below and were therefore the first to
recognize the necessity of exoteric forms for the preservation of the
equilibrium of a human collectivity.

[^36]: See S. H. Nasr, “Between the Rim and the Axis,” in Islam and the
Plight of Modern Man, London, 1976, chap. 1.

[^37]: On the meaning of esoterism see F. Schuon, Esoterism as Principle
and as Way, trans. byWilliam Stoddart, London, 1981, Introduction; and
L. Benoist, L’Esotérisme, Paris, 1963.

[^38]: “. . Orthodoxy is the principle of formal homogeneity proper to
any authentically spiritual perspective; it is therefore an
indispensible aspect of all genuine intellectuality.” Schuon, Stations
of Wisdom, trans. G. E. H. Palmer, London, 1961.

[^39]: It is of much interest that the term orthodoxy is not found in
Oriental languages and even in Arabic dominated by Islam which bears so
many resemblances to Christianity. When one studies the Christian
tradition, however, one realizes how essential this term is to describe
various aspects of Islam itself and how misleading it is when
orientalists call, let us say, Shı‘ism and Sufism unorthodox whereas
they both belong to the totality of Islamic orthodoxy, and also
orthopraxy. See Nasr, Ideals and Realities of Islam, chaps. 5 and 6.

[^40]: In Sunni Islam the ummah itself is the protector of the purity
and continuity of the tradition; hence the principle of ijma‘ or
consensus which has been interpreted as the consensus of the religious
scholars (‘ulama’) as well as the community as a whole. In Shı‘ite Islam
the function of preserving the tradition is performed by the Imam
himself. See ‘Allamah Tabat.aba’ı, Shı’ite Islam, trans. S. H. Nasr,
London and Albany (N. Y.), 1975, pp. 173ff.

[^41]: In Judaism and Islam the law is an integral part of the religion
and derives directly from the revelation. It is therefore traditional by
definition. But even in Christianity which did not reveal a law, the law
which was adopted by the Christian civilization of the Middle Ages from
Roman and common law was still traditional, although because of the less
direct relation of this law to the source of the Christian revelation,
it became easier to reject the social aspects of Christian civilization
at the time of the revolt against the Christian tradition than would
have been possible in Islam or Judaism.

[^42]: See R. Guénon, Autorité spirituelk et pouvoir temporel, Paris,
1929; A. K. Coomaraswamy, Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power in the
Indian Theory of Government, New Haven, 1942; S. H. Nasr, “Spiritual and
Temporal Authority in Islam,” in Islamic Studies, Beirut, 1967, pp.
6-13.

[^43]: There are several notable works on tradition in its social aspect
in European languages such as G. Eaton, The King of the Castle: Choke
and Responsibility in the Modern World, London, 1977; M. Pallis, “The
Active Life,” in his The Way and the Mountain, London, 1960, pp. 36-61;
A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Religious Basis of the Forms of Indian Society,
New York, 1946; R. Guénon, Introduction to the Study of the Hindu
Doctrines, Pt. 3, chaps. 5 and 6; and F. Schuon, Castes and Race, trans.
Marco Pallis and Macleod Matheson, London, 1981.

[^44]: For a discussion of these intellectual perspectives in Islam see
Nasr, Islamic Life and Thought.

[^45]: In later centuries “theosophy” associated with Boehme and his
school in a sense replaced the earlier metaphysics of the Christian
sages. The term “theosophy,” although of Greek origin, did not become
common in Christian intellectual life until the Renaissance.

[^46]: “Il est impossible de nier que les plus illustres soufis, tout en
étant ‘gnostiques’ par définition, furent en même temps un peu
théologiens et un peu philosophes, ou que les grands theologiens furent
à la fois un peu philosophes et un peu gnostiques, ce dernier mot
devenant s’entendu dans son sense propre et non sectaire.” Schuon, Le
Soufisme, voile et quintessence, Paris, 1980, p. 105.

[^47]: There is some difference in the way philosophy has been
criticized by the traditional authors, the criticism of Schuon being
more graded and shaded than that of Guénon who in order to clear the
ground for the presentation of traditional doctrines opposed philosophy
categorically (except for Hermeticism) identifying all philosophy with
profane thought. See Guénon, Introduction, pt. 2, chap. 8. Schuon’s more
positive appreciation of philosophy in which he distinguishes between
traditional philosophy and modern rationalism is found in many of his
later writings esp. “Sur les traces de la notion de la philosophic,” in
his Le Soufisme, pp. 97-107.

[^48]: See A. K. Coomaraswamy, “On the Pertinence of Philosophy,” in
Contemporary Indian Philosophy, ed. S. Radhakrishnan, London, 1936, pp.
113-44; as far as the Islamic tradition is concerned see S. H. Nasr,
“The Meaning and Role of ‘Philosophy’ in Islam,” Studia Islamica 36
(1973): 57-80.

[^49]: On the meaning of theosophy see “Theosophie” by A. Faivre, in
Encyclopedia universalis.

[^50]: “When we sound the archetype, the ultimate origin of the form,
then we find that it is anchored in the highest, not the lowest.. . He
who marvels that a formal symbol can remain alive not only for
millennia, but that, as we shall yet learn, can spring to life again
after an interval of thousands of years, should remind himself that the
power from the spiritual world, which forms one part of the symbol, is
everlasting.” From W. Andrae, Die Ionische Säule; Bauform oder Symbol?,
Berlin, 1933, pp. 65-66, quoted in A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Vedas: Essays
in Translation and Exegesis, London, 1976, p. 146.

[^51]: On this question see Guénon, The Reign of Quantity and the Signs
of Times, trans. Lord Northbourne, Baltimore, 1973.

[^52]: If half a century ago one had to read T. S. Eliot to become aware
of the pathetic character of the spiritual condition of modern man,
today there are numerous students of human society who have become aware
that there is something deeply wrong with the premises upon which
modernism is based and who have sought to study modern society from this
point of view. See, for example, the well-known works of P. Berger such
as The Homeless Mind: Modernization and Consciousness, New York, 1973;
and those of I. Illich, Celebration of Awareness, New York, 1970; idem,
Energy and Equity, London, 1974; idem, Tools for Conviviality, New York,
1973; and idem, Tradition and Revolution, New York, 1971.

There are numerous other criticisms of technology, science, the social
order, etc., by other well-known figures such as L. Mumford, J. Ellul,
and Th. Roszak. Roszak has in fact recorded many of these criticisms of
various aspects of the modern world in his Where the Wasteland Ends, The
Unfinished Animal, and Person/Planet, New York, [^1980]:

Despite the appearance of such works, however, it is amazing that those
proponents of modernism who dominate a world which prides itself on
being critical are so much lacking in a critical spirit when it comes to
the examination of those premises and suppositions upon which the
modernistic world view is based. “The past, out of which the tradition
comes, is relativized [by the modernist relativizers] in terms of this
or that socio-historical analysis. The present, however, remains
strangely immune from relativization. In other words, the New Testament
writers are seen as afflicted with a false consciousness rooted in their
times, but the contemporary analyst takes the consciousness of his time
as an unmixed intellectual blessing. The electricity-and radio-users are
placed intellectually above the Apostle Paul.” P. Berger, A Rumor of
Angels: Modern Society and the Rediscovery of the Supernatural, New
York, 1969, p. [^51]:

[^53]: On traditional criticisms of the modern world see R. Guénon, The
Crisis of the Modern World, trans. M. Pallis and R. Nicholson, London,
1975; and A. K. Coomaraswamy, “Am I My Brother’s Keeper?” in his The
Bugbear of Literacy.

[^54]: Referring to his encounter with traditional authors, J.Needleman
writes, “These were out for the kill. For them, the study of spiritual
traditions was a sword with which to destroy the illusions of
contemporary man.” Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, Baltimore,
1974, p. 9.

[^55]: “When we look at human bodies, what we normally notice is their
surface features, which of course differ markedly. Meanwhile on the
inside the spines that support these motley physiognomies are
structurally very much alike. It is the same with human outlooks.
Outwardly they differ, but inwardly it is as if an ‘invisible geometry’
has everywhere been working to shape them to a single Truth. “The sole
notable exception is ourselves: our contemporary Western outlook differs
in its very soul from what might otherwise be called ‘the human
unanimity’. . If we succeed in correcting it [the misreading of modern
science] we can rejoin the human race.” H. Smith, Forgotten Truth, New
York, 1976, pp. ix-x.

[^56]: The well-known “Light Verse” is as follows: “Allah is the Light
of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of His light is as a niche
wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a
shining star. (This lamp is) kindled from a blessed tree, an olive
neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would almost glow forth
(of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon light, Allah guideth
unto His light whom He will. And Allah speaketh to mankind in
allegories, for Allah is Knower of all things.” Quran XXIV; 35-Pickthall
translation.

Goethe who read the Quran when he was twenty-three years old wrote (in
his Aus dem Nachlass):

So der Westen wie der Osten

Gehen Reines die zu kosten

Lass die Grillen, lass die Schale

Seize dich zum grossen Mahle.

[^57]: You’ve managed to get to a note that doesn’t exist.

[^58]: As pointed out already the spread of modernism into the
geographical Orient has destroyed to some extent the traditional
civilizations of various parts of that world, but this does not mean
that the sapiential dimension of the Oriental traditions in both their
doctrinal and operative aspects which are of special concern to this
study have been destroyed.
