Chapter Three: The Rediscovery of the Sacred: The Revival of Tradition
======================================================================

*The words of wisdom are the lost objects of the faithful; he must claim
them wherever he finds them.*

**Ḥadīth of the Prophet of Islam**

*Remembering is for those who have forgotten.*

**Plotinus**

The overall harmony and equilibrium of the cosmos required a movement
within the heart and soul of at least a number of contemporary men to
rediscover the sacred at the very moment when the process of
secularization seemed to be reaching its logical conclusion in removing
the presence of the sacred altogether from all aspects of human life and
thought. The principle of cosmic compensation has brought to the fore
the quest for the rediscovery of the sacred during the very period which
the heralds of modernism had predicted to be the final phase of the
depletion of human culture of its sacred content, the period whose dawn
Nietzsche had declared a century ago when he spoke of the “death of
God.”1 But many a contemporary man, having faced the terror of nihilism
and the death of that which is human as a result of the effacing of the
imprint of the Divinity upon the human face, has been confronted with
the impelling attraction of the sacred which is both beyond and other
than the secularized world that he calls “normal life.” Such a person
has felt the inner pull of the sacred at the center of his own being,
the center which he carries with him wherever he may be. The quest for
the rediscovery of the sacred, whether carried out consciously or in the
form of groping in the dark, has become an element of the life of that
humanity which has already experienced the loneliness of a world from
which the Spirit has been banished. Needless to say, this quest has not
always been successful but it has not always failed either, having
reached its goal in a full and complete sense in those circles which
have carried out the revival of tradition. The rediscovery of the sacred
is ultimately and inextricably related to the revival of tradition, and
the resuscitation of tradition and the possibility of living according
to its tenets in the West during this century is the complete and final
fulfillment of the quest of contemporary man for the rediscovery of the
sacred.

The sapiential dimension which lies at the heart of tradition had become
too weakened in the West to enable tradition to become revived during
this century without authentic contact with the Oriental traditions
which had preserved their inner teachings intact in both their doctrinal
and operative aspects. Truncated and fragmented teachings of an
originally esoteric nature issuing from the salons of Paris and other
European cities were themselves too depleted of the presence of the
sacred to enable modern Western man to rekindle the fire of the
metaphysically penetrating intelligence and to enable the phoenix of
sapience to arise from the ashes of a debilitating rationalism through
recourse to what these circles offered. Already in the nineteenth
century, what remained of knowledge of an originally sacred character
had become more or less reduced to either occultism or a purely
theoretical philosophy divorced from the possibility of realization,
while even as theory it remained incomplete. That is why those who
sought to rediscover sacred

knowledge were attracted to the Orient despite the impossibility in most
cases of gaining authentic knowledge of the Oriental traditions,
especially as far as their inner dimensions were concerned.

The “lure” of the Orient is to be seen already in the eighteenth-century
fascination in many European circles with China and also Egypt which, as
far as the sources of traditional teachings are concerned, must be
considered as an integral part of the Orient and the home of one of the
most remarkable of traditional civilizations. Supposedly esoteric
knowledge derived from Egypt, China, and other Eastern sources became a
subject of discussion of occultist circles especially in France and such
“restitutions” as the Egyptian Rite of Cagliostro were carried out
within Freemasonary.2 Egyptology, as well as Orientalism in general,
were closely associated at this time with the quest for a kind of
knowledge which seemed to have been already lost in the mainstream of
European thought. These disciplines, which in the nineteenth century
became nearly completely “scientific” and rationalistic, were more in
search of tradition and esoteric knowledge in the eighteenth century
than is usually believed, although this search was rarely satisfied in a
complete manner and certainly did not succeed in resuscitating the
traditional point of view in such a way as to affect in any perceptible
way the process of the desacralization of knowledge which was taking
place at that time. Nor was this extensive transformation which was
expected to happen in the West as a result of the dissemination of
Oriental teachings and which was called a “second Renaissance” by
Schopenhauer ever to take place during the nineteenth century when so
many important works of Oriental wisdom were translated into European
languages.3

Paradoxically enough, the nineteenth century, which from the
metaphysical point of view marks the peak of the eclipse of tradition in
the West, was also witness to the widespread interest in the study of
the Orient and the translation of the sacred scriptures and works of a
sapiential nature into various European languages by such master
linguists as A. H. Anquetil Duperron, J. Hammer-Purgstall, and Sir
William Jones. This was the period of intense activity in Orientalism
which, despite its horrendous misdeeds, misinterpretations-both
intentional and otherwise-condescending attitude toward natives, and
servility to various political causes of European colonial powers, made
available those hymns of gnosis and theophanies of pure metaphysics as
the Upanishads,4 the Tao-Te-Ching, and much of Sufi poetry. The history
of Orientalism during this period is not our concern here for most of
this activity was not related to either the rediscovery of the sacred or
the revival of tradition but, in fact, served in many instances to
destroy both the traditions it was studying and what remained of the
Christian tradition which was often relativized by those who tried to
make use of the presence of other religions to destroy the claim of
Christians to the possession of truth in an absolute sense.5 What
concerns us here, therefore, is the case of the few philosophers and
poets in the West who, being in quest of the sacred, sought to
rediscover tradition in Oriental sources in an age which stood totally
opposed to the traditional ideal.

Of all European countries, it was perhaps Germany where the influence of
Oriental teachings was greatest partly because the Romantic movement

possessed a greater intellectual content there than elsewhere and also
because, as already mentioned, something of the Boehmian heritage still
survived in his native land. To take one example, the translation into
German of such masterpieces of Sufi poetry as the Rose-Garden of Divine
Mysteries (Gulshan-i rāz) by Hammer-Purgstall had a profound effect upon
notable German poets and created an avid interest in Oriental poetry and
wisdom in a wide circle. Rückert was himself a translator of Persian and
Arabic poetry as well as a poet of great quality who was influenced in
his own works by Persian poetic symbols and images.6

The most notable figure of this period in Germany who was touched
seriously on both the artistic and the intellectual planes by Oriental
traditions, particularly Islam, was Goethe. He was intimately familiar
with both the Quran and Islamic poetry, especially the works of Ḥāfiẓ,
and even wrote a tragedy whose hero was the Prophet of Islam.7 Goethe's
grand response to that perfect wedding between metaphysical truth and
poetic beauty which is the Divan of Ḥāfiẓ is the West-östlicher Divan
which is unique in the annals of nineteenth-century European
literature.8 The opening verses,

North and South and West are crumbling,

Thrones are falling, kingdoms trembling:

Come, flee away to purer East,

There on patriarch's air to feast,

There with love and drink and song

Khiser's spring shall make thee young.

There, pure and right where still they find,

Will I drive all mortal kind

To the great depths whence all things rise,

There still to gain, in godly wise,

Heaven's lore in earthly speech,

Heads might break ere they could reach.9

have been often interpreted as Goethe's reaction to Napoleon's conquest
of Europe. But his call is more fundamental than the response to a
passing phenomenon of European history. It is a nostalgia for that
immemorial tranquility of an Orient which is also the Origin and from
which flows the fountain of eternal life guarded by Khiḍr,10 an Orient
still embedded in the peace and harmony of the traditional universe,
before the shocking earthquakes of a world rebellious against Heaven and
its imprint upon the human plane also reached the mountains and valleys
of the East.

In England the quest for the Orient and the rediscovery of the sacred in
various forms of archaic traditions included the revival of Platonism
through the extensive translations of Floyer Sydenham and especially the
remarkable scholar and Platonic philosopher Thomas Taylor. With the
advent of Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding, the view of
those who considered reason as a faculty which was developed in man
“through the rationality displayed in the creation” triumphed over the
older view that reason was “imparted from God directly to the mind of
man” and therefore was wed to the Intellect and possessed a divine
creative power.11 The result was either the skepticism of a Hume
concerning the power of reason or the

religious activism of a John Wesley. The eighteenth century in England
and Scotland was therefore one in which the Platonic concept of
knowledge and of the process of knowing was nearly completely eclipsed.
But a reaction soon set in against the prevalent philosophical
tendencies, the reaction taking several different forms, of which the
most important was the revival of Platonism.12

Thomas Taylor, who was the major factor in the revival of Platonism and
in making the writings of Plato, the Neoplatonists, and Aristotle
accessible in the English language, was not just a scholar of Greek.
Rather, he belonged philosophically to the Platonic school and saw
knowledge as the primary means of reaching the sacred. The premises of
his world view stood opposed to the secularizing and rationalistic
tendencies of his day. He still conceived of knowledge in a principial
manner, as a way of attaining deliverance. The problem was that he stood
outside the Christianity of his day and sought consciously to revive
Greek paganism as if it were possible to resuscitate through a purely
human agency a tradition whose animating spirit had already departed
from the earthly plane.13 Be that as it may, his edition of the complete
works of Plato in 1804, along with so many other basic texts of
Neoplatonism, played an important role in making accessible a
traditional metaphysics, one of the most complete in the West, for those
seeking an alternative to the secularizing philosophies and sciences of
the time.14 His work, in a sense, complemented the translation and
introduction of Oriental doctrines into the English-speaking world, and
many who were drawn to Taylor's works were likewise attracted to
Oriental teachings. Taylor also influenced greatly such Romantic figures
as Carlyle and Coleridge, but the most important personality whom he
influenced was William Blake who was at the forefront of the movement
seeking to reestablish the primacy of the sacred against all the
prevalent tendencies of that day.

In recent years, Blake has appeared as a hero of those who seek to
return to a more wholistic view of man and nature against the
mechanistic and rationalistic conceptions of the world and of man
represented by Bacon, Newton, and Locke, whom Blake opposed so strongly.
The avid interest in Blake today is related closely to the intense
search of those in the modern world who, tired and wary of the
suffocating landscape of their secularized ambience, are seeking
alternative philosophies and views of the cosmos. Moreover, rather than
an eccentric poet of genius, as his contemporaries saw him, Blake
appears today to many who are attracted to the traditional point of view
as being more of a harbinger of certain aspects of tradition than just
an individualistic rebel, and as a poet who was essentially traditional
but who appeared as a rebel at a time when the established order and
world view were themselves so antitraditional. The celebrated
contemporary British poetess, Kathleen Raine, in fact believes that
Blake possessed a secret and esoteric knowledge of an authentic
traditional character.15

There is no doubt that he had knowledge of Western traditional sources
and possibly some Oriental ones through translation. Also it is certain
that he possessed visionary powers and combined a sense for the
rediscovery of the sacred with poetic genius. Although his traditional
knowledge was not

complete and there are elements of an excessively individualistic nature
in his artistic work which prevent his art from being characterized as
traditional, there is no doubt that Blake represents one of the most
powerful and effective attempts of the last century to convey the sense
of the quest for the sacred and to criticize a world from which the gods
and the angels seemed to have been banished. In his works, there is a
strong sense, unique in its intensity in nineteenth-century English
literature, of the struggle of the soul in its mortal combat against
forces which would deprive it of the nourishment of the world of the
Spirit and a revolt against limiting the scope of knowledge to that
externalized reason which is the parody of the sanctifying intellect.16
Blake is also the gate to the positive reappraisal of myth which was to
be followed by his most important commentator, Yeats, and others during
this century, and which is so closely allied to the quest for the
rediscovery of the sacred. In America also, amidst a strongly active and
in many ways anti-traditional climate, the influence of the Orient was
to be seen among those philosophers and poets most in quest of a sacred
vision of life, such figures as Walt Whitman, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and
the New England Transcendentalists in general. But it is especially in
the works of Emerson that the attraction toward the Orient is to be seen
most clearly, in the poet-philosopher for whom Asia was “a wonderland of
literature and philosophy.”17 Emerson was especially inebriated by the
message of the Upanishads, whose nondualistic doctrine contained so
lucidly in the Kaṭha-Upanishad, is reflected in his well-known poem
“Brahma”:

If the red slayer think he slays,

Or if the slain think he is slain,

They know not well the subtle ways

I keep, and pass, and turn again.

Emerson also concluded his essay on immortality with the story of
Nachiketas drawn again from the Kaṭha-Upanishad.18

In addition to Hindu sources, Emerson was greatly attracted to Persian
poets, especially Sa‘dī, and wrote an introduction for the first
American edition of the translation of his Gulistān which appeared in
1865.19 Moreover, he read other Oriental sources extensively and quotes
Zoroaster often, although most of what he considered to be by Zoroaster
were works of Oriental inspiration of the Hellenistic period attributed
to the Persian prophet. The love of Emerson for these works of Oriental
origin marks an important phase in America, paralleling what was
occurring in Europe, a phase in which aid was sought from the surviving
traditions of the East to resuscitate that sapientia which had become
nearly completely lost in the West.

But neither such great poets as Goethe, Blake, or Emerson, nor for
stronger reasons the prevalent occultism of nineteenth-century France
associated with such names as Eliphas Lévi and Papus, could bring
tradition back to the soil of the West in a total and complete way nor
revive that scientia sacra which lies at the heart of all tradition. It
remained for the Orient itself to bring about the revival of tradition
in the West through the pen and words of those who lived in Europe or
wrote in Western languages but who had been transformed intellectually
and existentially by the

traditional world view. The study of the quest of nineteenth-century
figures, some of whom have been mentioned, for the rediscovery of the
sacred in Oriental teachings and the attempt to regain knowledge of a
traditional character in occultist and pseudoesoteric circles at that
time, as well as the combination of these endeavours in such movements
as the Theosophical Society and “spiritualism” with an Eastern coloring,
provides a valuable background for the understanding of the significance
of the appearance of authentic traditional teachings in the West during
the early decades of this century. Such a study reveals in fact why a
fresh restatement from the Orient was necessary at that time.

The dissemination of traditional teachings commenced in the West during
the first two decades of this century when a small number of Europeans
were given direct instruction and initiation into the esoteric schools
of various Oriental traditions by authentic representatives of these
traditions.20 To be sure, such contacts had also existed occasionally
during the nineteenth century, as for example in the case of H.
Wilberforce Clarke who was received into Sufism and whose translations
of Ḥāfiẓ and ‘Umar Suhrawardī are based on oral tradition as well as
written sources. But what distinguished what occurred in the early part
of this century from these already mentioned isolated cases was that, in
contrast to the nineteenth century, the twentieth-century
representatives of the traditional perspective possessed full knowledge
of traditional teachings and were intellectually prepared to implant the
tree of tradition upon the soil of the Western world with effects far
beyond the rare contact with various Oriental traditions during the
preceding decades.

The central figure who was most responsible for the presentation of the
traditional doctrines of the Orient in their fullness in the modern West
was René Guénon, a man who was chosen for this task by Tradition itself
and who fulfilled an intellectual function of a supra-individual
nature.21 Guénon (1886-1951) was born and educated in France where he
studied philosophy and mathematics before turning to various occult
circles which were active in his youth when he was in quest of authentic
knowledge which he could not discover in either the official university
circles or in religious sources available to him at that time. But he
could not discover what he was seeking in these occult groups any more
than he could in the then accessible academic or religious
organizations. In fact, he discovered within the so-called “esoteric”
groups which he frequented all kinds of aberrations and outlandish
pretensions which he was to study and to expose with such detail in
later life. Sometime during the first few years of this century, when he
was still a young man, he was initiated into Sufism and also received
esoteric knowledge from authentic Hindu sources. Henceforth, he began to
write on various traditional themes for the journal Le Voile d'Isis
which under its later title Études Traditionnelles was to become the
main vehicle for the exposition of the traditional perspective in
Europe, containing articles not only by him and his students and
associates but also by other outstanding masters of traditional
doctrines such as Coomaraswamy and Schuon. The first book of Guénon,
Introduction générale à l'étude des doctrines hindoues, published in
Paris in 1921, was also the first full

exposition of the main aspects of traditional doctrines. It was like a
sudden burst of lightning, an abrupt intrusion into the modern world of
a body of knowledge and a perspective utterly alien to the prevalent
climate and world view and completely opposed to all that characterizes
the modern mentality. During the next thirty years, Guénon was to
produce a vast number of books, articles, and reviews which form an
integral whole as if he had written them all at one sitting and then
published them over the next few decades. This lack of a historical
development, due also in part to the fact that his function was to
express metaphysical and cosmological doctrines and not the operative
and existential aspects of tradition nor scholarly research, appears all
the more remarkable in that his personal life was transformed completely
during this period. He openly embraced Islam, migrated to Cairo, married
an Egyptian, lived in a traditional house near the Pyramids both
physically and architecturally far away from his Paris residence, and
was buried in a cemetery near Cairo which, even in the present
semimodernized crowded climate of that city, is as far removed from the
cultural ambience of his native France as one can imagine. Guénon, as he
is reflected in his writings, seemed to be more of an intellectual
function than a “man.” His lucid mind and style and great metaphysical
acumen seemed to have been chosen by traditional Sophia itself to
formulate and express once again that truth from whose loss the modern
world was suffering so grieviously.

To accomplish such a task, Guénon had to be in a sense an extremist; he
had to clear the ground completely in order to remove all possibility of
error. He therefore adopted a polemical and uncompromising tone which
has hindered many people from appreciating his exposition of traditional
wisdom. To build the edifice of traditional knowledge he had to break
down and remove the rubble of all that pretended to provide ultimate
knowledge for modern man. He thereby began a systematic criticism of all
that stood in the way of the understanding of tradition; playing a
thankless iconoclastic role, Guénon devoted several studies to a
detailed study and rejection of the various occultist, pseudoesoteric,
and modernistic groups which pretended to possess sacred knowledge of
either the Oriental or Western traditions. He was particularly critical
of theosophy in the sense of the Theosophical Society of Mme. Blavatsky
and Annie Besant, spiritualism of various kinds, and the modernistic
movements in India affected by the West such as the Arya Samaj and
Brahma Samaj, and discussed in detail the dangers of “initiation” into
such pseudotraditional bodies from which he had suffered himself and
which he knew well through personal experience.22

Guénon then set about to criticize the modern world itself, attacking
not its accidental faults and shortcomings but the very premises upon
which it stands. His Crisis of the Modern World, written in 1927,
contains pages which seem “prophetic” today in retrospect, while his The
Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times records in a masterly
fashion the unfolding of the human cycle according to traditional
principles relating much that has occurred and is occurring in the world
today to perfectly intelligible principles.23

We are not concerned here with Guénon's criticism of the modern world as
far as the social and political aspects of life are concerned. What is
of particular interest for our study of the quest for the sacred in its
sapiential aspect is his severe criticism of various modes of knowing
prevalent in the modern world. As mentioned already, Guénon, who had
studied European philosophy, was severely critical of all that is called
modern philosophy, and in fact of “philosophy” as such, which he tried
to refute completely as a legitimate manner of knowing principles. His
criticism was extreme and uncompromising because he wanted to prevent
any confusion between what modern man understands as philosophy and
traditional metaphysics. His excess in this domain was due to the fact
that he wanted at all costs to prevent metaphysics from being reduced to
the category of profane thought. In his exaggeration, he overlooked the
positive aspects of traditional philosophy, and even the term
philosophy, to which Schuon was to point later.

Guénon was also thoroughly critical of modern science not because of
what it has accomplished but because of the reductionism and also
pretensions which have been associated with science in the modern world.
His greatest criticism of modern science was its lack of metaphysical
principles and its pretension, or rather the pretension of those who
claim to speak from the “scientific point of view,” to be thescience or
the way of knowing, whereas it is a science or a way of knowing
concerned with a very limited domain of reality. This theme runs
throughout Guénon's writings and he never tired of pointing out that the
science of any domain would be legitimate provided it were not cut off
from principles of a higher order and the traditional world view.24 His
criticism of modern science was a logical and intellectual one, based on
neither sentiments nor even theological concerns derived from a
particular form of revealed truth. Guénon in fact sought to demonstrate
how it was possible to develop a science which was exact and
“scientific” even in the contemporary sense but not divorced from
metaphysical principles, choosing for this purpose the field of
mathematics which he knew well.25 Moreover, Guénon sought to expound the
principles of some of the traditional sciences such as geometry and
alchemy,26 demonstrating that these sciences, far from being early
stages of development of modern sciences which had now been outgrown,
were sciences of another order providing a veritable knowledge of
various aspects of cosmic reality, sciences which remained as valid
today as in the days gone by if only one were to understand their
symbolic language, sciences which were not in any way invalidated by
other sciences developed later and dealing with the same subject
matters.

Since Guénon was seeking to revive tradition through the presentation of
Oriental doctrines, he also had to clear the ground of other misleading
sources which also dealt with Oriental teachings, namely, works of
orientalism. Here also, his criticism was massive and total and not
based on discrimination between works of various degrees of value. To be
sure, as already mentioned, most works of orientalism, although
providing material for the study of the Orient, have been written from a
point of view which is, to put it mildly, a hindrance to the
understanding of the very subject the

orientalists were, and in fact are still, trying in many cases to study.
But there have also been works of both a scholarly and intellectual
value produced by those who have been officially called orientalists.27
Guénon rejected the whole enterprise of orientalism, neglecting
worthwhile works, in order to avoid once again any error which might
creep into the mind of the reader and prevent him from understanding
traditional doctrines from their own point of view.

Parallel with this clearing of the ground, Guénon set about to expound
metaphysics and cosmology from the traditional point of view and in
relation to and as contained in the sapiential teachings of various
traditions. His point of departure was Hinduism and his first purely
metaphysical exposition was the Man and His Becoming According to the
Vedanta. But he also dealt extensively with Islam and Taoism, the
Kabbala, certain medieval esoteric currents in Christianity, and
Hermetirism.28 Moreover, Guénon wrote a number of works on general
metaphysical and cosmological subjects such as Oriental Metaphysics, Les
États multiples de l'être, Symboles fondamentaux de la science sacré,
and La Grande triade. All in all, he was able to produce a vast corpus
based on the primacy of knowledge and intelligence as their powers and
possibilities are actualized by various objective modes of revelation
which lie at the heart of the traditions that have governed the life of
humanity over the ages. In his works is to be found one of the most
important restatements of the doctrinal aspect of the knowledge of the
sacred in modern times and they mark a major step in the rediscovery of
sacred knowledge and the revival of tradition. Guénon did not establish
another ism or one school of thought among others. There is no such
thing as Guénonianism despite the misunderstanding of certain groups in
Europe who call themselves Guénonians. What Guénon did emphasize is the
necessity of following fully a living tradition and accepting the
traditional perspective. But precisely because the modern world is what
it is, one can refer to the reestablishment of the traditional
perspective by him and others amidst a world alien to such a world view
as the founding of a “school” or perspective, one which is both very
much alive and pertinent to the contemporary world and distinct from
different forms of modernism which, despite differences among
themselves, stand opposed to it.

The work of Guénon in reviving the traditional point of view was
complemented by another metaphysician of remarkable acumen and
amplitude, Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (1877-1947), who was born of a
Singalese father and an English mother. Like Guénon, Coomaraswamy began
with the study of science but while the “abstract” bent of mind of
Guénon had attracted him to mathematics, Coomaraswamy, who was always
sensitive to the meaning of forms, was drawn to geology, a descriptive
science in which he became an established authority. His temperament
complemented that of Guénon in more than one way. While Guénon was a
metaphysician not drawn greatly to artistic forms, Coomaraswamy was
profoundly moved by forms of art and was in fact drawn to tradition when
working as a geologist in the hills and mountains of Ceylon (Sri Lanka)
and India he became witness to the rapid destruction of

the traditional art and civilization of his homeland. Also Coomaraswamy
was a meticulous scholar concerned with details while Guénon was
essentially a metaphysician and mathematician concerned with
principles.29 Even in personal traits and styles of writing, the two men
complemented each other, yet they were in perfect agreement about the
validity of the traditional perspective and the metaphysical principles
which lie at the heart of all traditional teachings.

Coomaraswamy was a man of immense energy who left a vast body of
writings behind.30 With the many works which introduced Oriental art,
especially that of India, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia, to the West we are
not concerned here. Suffice it to say that his years of maturity in
England and especially the last thirty years of his life in America,
where he was curator of Oriental art at the Boston Museum of Fine Arts,
played a major role in bringing a vital aspect of Oriental
civilizations, namely, their art, to the attention of the Western
public. But Coomaraswamy was not a historian of art; his interest in the
study of traditional art was in the truth which it conveyed. His studies
were of an intellectual order, and in such works as the Transformation
of Nature in Art and The Christian and Oriental Philosophy of Art he
expounded a metaphysics of art which presents traditional art as a
vehicle for the exposition of knowledge of a sacred order.

Like Guénon, Coomaraswamy also wrote in an unrelenting manner against
modernism, emphasizing more than Guénon the devastations brought about
by industrialization upon the traditional crafts and patterns of life in
the West as well as in the Orient itself. But Coomaraswamy also
addressed himself to the intellectual issues involved; in fact, he
undertook a series of works called the “Bugbear Series” at the end of
his life, of which only the Bugbear of Literacy was published before his
death and which sought to destroy the various false gods of modernism
through recourse to intellectual principles.

As for metaphysics and cosmology, Coomaraswamy produced numerous
articles and books in which he drew freely from Hindu, Buddhist, and
Islamic sources as well as from Plato, Plotinus, Dionysius, Dante,
Erigena, Eckhart, Boehme, Blake, and other representatives of the
Western sapiential tradition. Like Guénon, he emphasized the unity of
the truth which lies at the heart of all traditions, the unity to which
Coomaraswamy devoted his well-known essay “Paths That Lead to the Same
Summit.”31 Besides his several works on the Hindu and Buddhist
traditions of which Hinduism and Buddhism is an intellectual synthesis,
Coomaraswamy also wrote such purely metaphysical works as Recollection,
Indian and Platonic, On the One and Only Transmigrant, and Time and
Eternity.

Coomaraswamy was deeply concerned with myth and symbol, with the
so-called primitive mentality and traditional anthropology. His studies
of religious symbolism and the traditional significance of myth played a
major role in the resuscitation of interest in myth and symbol among
many scholars of religion despite the so-called demythologizing tendency
so evident in certain schools of Protestant and even Catholic theology.
Coomaraswamy also devoted many studies to the traditional sciences
ranging from his essay on the symbolism of zero in Indian mathematics to

his treatise on the distinction between the traditional doctrine of
graduation and modern evolution. Altogether, his works presented
traditional teachings in the language of contemporary scholarship and
with such immense learning and clarity of expression that, despite the
nearly total opposition of modern milieus against his ideas when he
first began to expound them, he wielded a great deal of influence among
a vast spectrum of scholars and thinkers ranging from art historians to
physicists, an influence which continues to this day. At the heart of
this remarkable intellectual edifice lay the concept of knowledge of the
sacred and sacred knowledge; in fact his works, as those of Guénon, were
themselves the product of an intellect which breathed and functioned in
a world of sacred character, a world which reflects the very substance
of intelligence itself.

The task of the completion of the revival and exposition of traditional
teachings in the contemporary world was to be carried out by Frithjof
Schuon (b. 1907) whose works crown the body of contemporary traditional
writings. If Guénon was the master expositor of metaphysical doctrines
and Coomaraswamy the peerless scholar and connoisseur of Oriental art
who began his exposition of metaphysics through recourse to the language
of artistic forms, Schuon seems like the cosmic intellect itself
impregnated by the energy of divine grace surveying the whole of the
reality surrounding man and elucidating all the concerns of human
existence in the light of sacred knowledge. He seems to be endowed with
the intellectual power to penetrate into the heart and essence of all
things, and especially religious universes of form and meaning, which he
has clarified in an unparalleled fashion as if he were bestowed with
that divine gift to which the Quranic revelation refers as the “language
of the birds.” No wonder that one of the leading American historians of
religion, Huston Smith, says concerning him, “The man is a living
wonder; intellectually à propos religion, equally in depth and breadth,
the paragon of our time. I know of no living thinker who begins to rival
him.”32

Schuon has written of not only traditional doctrines but also the
practical and operative aspects of the spiritual life. He has written of
rites, prayer, love, faith, the spiritual virtues, and the moral life
from the sapiential point of view. Moreover, he has expanded the horizon
of traditional expositions to include certain aspects of the Christian
tradition, especially Orthodoxy which was passed over by Guénon, as well
as the American Indian tradition and Shintoism, He has expounded in all
its grandeur the metaphysics of virgin nature and, being himself an
outstanding poet and painter in addition to a metaphysician, has written
some of the most remarkable pages on the metaphysics of traditional art
and the spiritual significance of beauty.

Most of Schuon's numerous works have been translated into English
although some are available still only in their original French and
German.33 These works include a series on comparative religion from the
point of view of the sophia perennis, including his first work to be
translated into English The Transcendent Unity of Religions,34 and books
devoted somewhat more particularly, although not exclusively, to
specific traditions, such works as Language of the Self, concemed mostly
with Hinduism; In the Tracks of Buddhism, which also includes a section
on Shintoism; Understanding

Islam, Dimensions of Islam, and Islam and the Perennial Philosophy,
dealing with different facets of Islam including both Shī‘ism and
Sufism; Le Soufisme, voile et quintessence, devoted nearly completely to
Sufism, as well as Gnosis: Divine Wisdom which contains sections on the
Christian tradition. In Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts and Light
on the Ancient World he has dealt with the crisis of modern civilization
and surveyed many facets of human history from the traditional point of
view, while in such works as L'Oeil du coeur and Stations of Wisdom he
has elucidated some of the most complex metaphysical and cosmological
questions as well as elements of the practical aspect of the realization
of knowledge. As for most of his recent works such as Logic and
Transcendence, Formes et substance dans les religions, Esoterism as
Principle and as Way, and Du Divin à l'humain (which is the synopsis of
all his metaphysical teachings), they deal more than anything else with
sacred knowledge and the ultimately sacred character of the faculty
which knows. They are the final testament of pure gnosis reflecting both
upon the object of knowledge and the subject or consciousness whose root
is the Sacred as such.

The concern of Schuon in these works has been to elaborate the meaning
of all that is human in the light of the Divine and with the aim of
making possible the return to the Divine through a mode which is
primarily sapiential but which is always wed to love and faith. Schuon
speaks from the point of view of realized knowledge not theory, and his
writings bear an “existential” impact that can only come from
realization. No one can understand the message of these words and remain
“existentially” the same. No wonder that upon the appearance of his
first three books, an English Catholic could write,

The Transcendent Unity of Religions, L'Oeil du coeur and Spiritual
Perspectives and Human Facts not only show an understanding of Christian
truth, precisely as truth,… but also exhibit an interior dimension in
that understanding which no mere scholarship could produce. If in the
Transcendent Unity he speaks of the way of Grace as one who understands
that Divine economy in relation to the esoteric and exoteric paths of
Islam, and in principle, in relation to exotericism and esotericism as
such, in Spiritual Perspectives he speaks of Grace as one in whom it is
operative and as it were in virtue of that operation. The book has a
fulness of light which we have no right to find in the twentieth
century, or perhaps in any other century.35

With Schuon's writings the full-fledged revival of tradition as related
to the rediscovery of the sacred in the heart of all traditions and by
virtue and through the aid of tradition in the heart of virgin nature,
sacred art, and the very substance of the human being has taken place,
making it possible amidst a world suffocating from the poisonous
atmosphere of nihilism and doubt for those who “are called” to gain
access to knowledge of the highest order rooted in the sacred and
therefore inseparable from the joy and light of certitude.

The traditional point of view expanded with such rigor, depth, and
grandeur by Guénon, Commaraswamy, and Schuon has been singularly

neglected in academic circles and limited in diffusion as far as its
“horizontal” and quantitative dissemination is concerned. But its appeal
in depth and quality has been immeasurable. Being the total truth, it
has penetrated into the hearts, minds, and souls of certain individuals
in such a way as to transform their total existence. Moreover, ideas
emanating from this quarter have had an appeal to an even larger circle
than that of those who have adopted totally and completely the
traditional point of view, and many scholars and thinkers of note have
espoused certain basic traditional theses. As far as those who must be
considered as belonging to the small circle of traditional authors are
concerned, one should mention first of all Titus Burckhardt, residing in
Switzerland, who has presented several basic works of Islamic esoterism
in European languages with a lucidity and transparency of mind that is
incredible and has also enriched the field of art with numerous studies
of sacred art, accomplishing especially for Islamic art what
Coomaraswamy had done for Hindu and Buddhist art.36 In France Leo Schaya
has applied traditional principles to produce one of the most
penetrating studies on the Kabbala to appear in this century.37 In Italy
G. Evola, who collaborated with Guénon, wrote several major studies on
Hinduism, Hermeticism, and other traditions in a spirit akin to that of
Guénon, while in recent years such figures as E. Zolla have continued to
present a series of works of a traditional character especially on
traditional literature and certain of the traditional sciences.

Outside of continental Europe it has been primarily England which has
been the site of activity of traditional authors of significance. Here
Marco Pallis, of Greek origin but living in Great Britain, who had
traveled to the Himalayas in search of botanical specimens but returned
with flowers of Buddhist wisdom, was the first person to present Tibetan
Buddhism in an authentic manner to the West and is the author of the
famous Peaks and Lamas, which was one of the very few serious works on
the Oriental traditions available in European languages before the
Second World War.38 Also in this same land, for years Martin Lings has
been making available treasures of Islamic esoterism from the
traditional point of view and applying his intimate knowledge of
spirituality combined with a gift for poetry to shed new light upon such
figures of English literature as Shakespeare.39 Here also such Catholic
scholars and artists as Eric Gill and Bernard Kelly fell under the sway
of the teachings of Guénon, Coomaraswamy, and Schuon, as have a number
of orthodox figures. The activity of traditional authors has gradually
gravitated around the journal Studies in Comparative Religion, which has
now become perhaps the leading traditional journal in the Western
world,40 but the circle of those concerned with tradition has also
widened steadily over the past few decades.41

As for America, the number of those who belonged fully to the
traditional perspective had been very limited until recent years,
despite the long presence in that land of Coomaraswamy whose writings
influenced numerous scholars of whom few embraced the traditional point
of view fully. But in America such scholars as J. E. Brown have sought
to study the American Indian tradition from the traditional point of
view,42 while a

number of scholars of religion such as H. Smith and V. Danner have
produced important works of traditional character in recent years43 and
an ever greater number of figures covering a wide spectrum continue to
be drawn to different elements of tradition, without their adopting the
traditional point of view as such.44

The presence of the works and the emanation of ideas of those who
revived tradition in the West have had an influence in one way or
another upon many well-known figures in different fields of intellectual
endeavor and scholarship, including the eminent historian of religion M.
Eliade (at least in his earlier works), the foremost French authority of
Islamic philosophy H. Corbin, the German scholar and critic L. Ziegler,
the Indologist H. Zimmer, the mythologist J. Campbell, the art historian
M. Schneider, the French philosopher G. Durand, the celebrated English
poetess and scholar Kathleen Raine, and the remarkable economist turned
traditional philosopher and theologian E. C. Schumacher.45

The revival of tradition in the West based upon the exposition of
authentic Oriental doctrines and teachings has also had an echo in the
Orient, itself faced with the destruction of its own millennial
traditions as a result of the onslaught of modernism.46 Some of the
works of traditional authors have been translated into Oriental
languages ranging from Tibetan to Arabic and have provided intellectual
arguments against certain tenets of modernism, arguments whose
formulation had been for the most part impossible for most Orientals
themselves, usually unaware of the deeper forces which have brought
about modernism and often suffering from an inferiority complex
vis-a-vis the modern West.47 Needless to say, however, those among the
modernized Orientals who have grasped the meaning of these traditional
works have been limited in number, as can be seen by the intellectual
quality of the response to the modern world which usually issues from
those in the East who have become affected by modernism to any
appreciable degree or from those still traditional but addressing the
modern world of whose nature they are ignorant.

The quest for the sacred and the revival of tradition have also taken
place in a more partial and limited but sometimes profound manner
outside the major movement for the revival of tradition already
outlined, although it was without doubt the sinking of the roots of
authentic traditional teachings on the soil of Europe that transformed
the cosmic ambience and created an opening in this cosmic sector which
is the West to enable traditional teachings to spread to the West from
other sources. The craving for the Orient has drawn many people in
quest, not of wealth or worldly glory, but of the Land of Light to
various countries of the East ranging from Japan to Morocco, which from
the traditional point of view is part of the Orient. Not all these
quests have resulted in serious contacts or the transmission of
traditional knowledge, even when the possibility has arisen to encounter
authentic representatives of the Oriental traditions.

There were, however, exceptions. Such Japanese masters as Roshi
Tachibana and Hindus as Śri Ramana Maharshi and Anandamoyi Ma have
emanated a presence, as well as spiritual instruction, which has crossed
the ocean and the land to reach certain circles in the West. Likewise,
the

emanation of the teachings of certain Sufi masters from many different
parts of the Islamic world has reached the West during the last few
decades. Moreover, many representatives of these traditions, some
authentic and others modernized, have traveled in ever greater numbers
to Europe and America, ranging from a Vivekananda, who had a missionary
zeal to present a modernized version of the Vedanta to the West but who
nevertheless remained related to the teachings of the great Indian saint
Ramakrishna,48 to the prolific Japanese expositor of Zen, D. T. Suzuki,
to the remarkable lamas forced out of Tibet after the Chinese invasion
and the Sufi masters who have visited the West with increasing frequency
during the past few years. This fresh, direct contact with the Orient
has of course been of significance in the revival of tradition in the
West, despite the role played by the army of pseudogurus and yogis in
creating the confusion which characterizes the modern world. It also
remains a fact that for many people it is difficult, without access to
the traditional teachings connected with those who revived tradition in
the West, to grasp the significance of what they do encounter in
Oriental teachings, although there are exceptions and there is of course
the question of different temperaments which require different types of
instruction. The traditional circle, as described above, is like the
Intellect or Buddhi of the domain of tradition in the modern world,
casting its light and presence as the faculty which discriminates the
true from the false, and elucidates, clarifies, and integrates the world
in which different spiritual modes and ways, including those of work or
service and love, function along with the way of knowledge which is the
concern par excellence of the Intellect.

The revival of tradition has also involved to some degree, besides
Oriental doctrines, the reappraisal of the classical Greek tradition,
although the need still remains in the present day for the full
reevaluation of the Greek intellectual heritage in the light of
tradition. Already, however, there have been several studies of the
Pythagorean-Platonic tradition based not upon the Renaissance and
post-Renaissance humanism which has colored the study of Greek
philosophy in the West ever since, but upon the perspective which sees
the Pythagorean-Platonic school as being related to the universal
Tradition. The discovery of the Pythagorean scale by von Thimus during
the last century, followed by the studies on harmonics of H. Keyser and
in recent years the appreciation of Plato as a Pythagorean philosopher49
by E. McClain and others, represents the rediscovery of an important
element of the Greek tradition. Also the extensive works of R. A.
Schwaller de Lubicz on Egypt, as well as on Hermeticism, based on
traditional principles and sources, seem astounding, especially when one
speaks to those who knew him personally.50

These and other studies in different arts and sciences represent another
facet of the rediscovery of the sacred and the revival of tradition with
which we are concerned here. There have existed amidst this most
antitraditional period of art attempts to practice once again the
traditional art of both Eastern and Western origin, ranging from the
revival of calligraphy to architecture, and to rediscover the
intellectual principles of the arts in both East and West.51 Important
elements of traditional mathematics, especially

geometry, have been reconstituted.52 Much interest is to be seen in many
circles in the meaning of traditional science itself and the
significance of these sciences as at least alternative modes of
knowledge of cosmic reality.

Another contemporary phenomenon related to the quest for the rediscovery
of the sacred is the increase of interest in the study of myth and
symbols. One can detect much change from the days when men like Frazer,
whom Coomaraswamy called “hewers of wood,” were collecting myths without
the least interest in their inner significance to the contemporary
interest shown by a significant number of scholars of religion and art,
as well as philosophers and psychologists, in myths and symbols as keys
for the understanding of both traditional man and the way he envisaged
the cosmic environment. The identification of myth with the unreal is
hardly as automatic in disciplined intellectual discourse today as a
century ago. Yet, although some have now realized the significance of
myth and symbol as distinct from facts, in the same way that a geologist
would distinguish a crystal from opaque rock, in most cases there is
still no light in which the crystal of myth could display its real
qualities. That light can only come from a living tradition without
which the study of myths and symbols, even if appreciated, usually
dwindles to psychological interpretations or, at best, a science emptied
of spiritual significance. The revival of the study of myths and symbols
in modern times certainly signifies the quest of contemporary man for a
universe of meaning and the sacred, but this quest cannot achieve its
goal without the help of and through recourse to tradition itself. The
study of myth and symbol cannot result in the knowledge of the sacred
but is the means to this knowledge, provided the mind which studies
myths and symbols is already transformed by the light and grace of
tradition.

Strangely enough, the quest for the sacred is to be seen even in certain
sectors of modern science which epitomizes secular knowledge and has
been the primary force for the secularization of the world since the
seventeenth century. Needless to say, that type of reason which has
surrendered itself to the results of an empirical science refuses to see
the metaphysical implications of modern science. In fact, scientistic
philosophers are much more dogmatic than many scientists in denying any
metaphysical significance to the discoveries of science. But the
physicists themselves, or at least many of the outstanding figures among
them, have often been the first to deny scientism and even the so-called
scientific method. Much of the most serious theological discussions of
the past decades have issued from the quarter of scientists rather than
philosophers, and especially theologians, who seem, paradoxically
enough, just about the last group to grasp the significance of the work
of many scientists seeking to go beyond the scientific reductionism
which has played such a role in the desacralization of nature and of
knowledge itself.53

Let us take a look at contemporary physics with an independent mind and
without becoming either mesmerized by the unscientific extrapolations of
science into fantastic views of the cosmos, which seem to change with
about the same rapidity as dress fashions, or hypnotized by the lure of
the microscope.54 Most of the major discoveries of physics since
Einstein's 1905 theory of special relativity was announced have been the
result not of

induction or empirical observation but the consideration of aesthetic
factors, search for unity, symmetry, and harmony. How often have
well-known physicists proposed a theory which they have supported
because it was mathematically speaking more “elegant”? Why is there this
search for unity in the study of the laws of nature and, in fact, the
attainment of ever greater or higher stages of unity? What about the
appeal of Einstein in 1905 and Dirac in 1929 to symmetry, leading
respectively to the special theory of relativity and antimatter, long
before experimental evidence could be provided? Finally, how can one
evaluate the so-called Pythagorean period of modern physics covering the
era from Bohr to de Broglie, when very important contributions based on
Pythagorean harmony and with full knowledge of musical harmony were made
to modern physics? One could interpret these episodes as confirmations
within the domain of modern physics of principles of a metaphysical and
cosmological order not belonging to the physical sciences themselves.
Such an interpretation would do no injustice to physics. It is, in fact,
today of greater attraction to many physicists than the type of
so-called philosophical interpretation which would claim that all is
relative because of the theory of relativity or that free will is proven
because of Heisenberg's indeterminacy principle. To be sure, traditional
principles cannot be proven through modern physics but this physics, to
the extent that it corresponds to an aspect of reality, can be a
legitimate science whose ultimate significance can be grasped only
through traditional metaphysics. In fact, this science could in
principle be integrated into a higher form of knowledge if only this
knowledge were available in such a manner as to transform the
intellectual climate of the contemporary world and if modern science
were to accept the limitations inherent in its premises and
assumptions.55

Another aspect of modern physics brings us back to the meaning of
intelligence and consciousness themselves. To study a particle like the
electron means to relate, in a much more direct manner than in classical
physics, the intelligence of the agent which knows to that which is
known. In fact, by its behavior the electron seems to possess a kind of
intelligence itself. No matter how deeply the heart of matter is pierced
there is seen order and intelligibility which demonstrate the
penetration of intelligence into the very heart of what is called
material manifestation, until the stage bordering on chaos is reached
where that which is called material simply ceases to exist.56 Man's
consciousness must be seen even in physics as an integral part of that
reality which the physicist seeks to study, to the extent that Eugene
Wigner, one of the founders of quantum mechanics, calls consciousness
the first absolute reality and outward reality secondary reality.57 The
consciousness which is the direct reflection and ray of the Intellect
and the substance of sacred knowledge is seen as an element with which
the physicist has no choice but to be concerned, whether the mystery of
human subjectivity and the divine origin of consciousness is understood
and accepted by him or not.

Likewise, the idea of the world standing out there comprised of mutually
exclusive objects whose motions and relations are studied by the
physicist in an order which is ultimately mechanical has been questioned
by such

physicists as David Bohm, who now speaks of an “implicate order”
resembling certain Oriental cosmological doctrines.58 The birth and
death of symmetrical particles from “nothing” and to “nothing” have also
challenged the idea of the presence of the vacuum in modern science.
What appears physically as emptiness is actually an ocean of virtual
objects even from the physical point of view. What appears as empty in
the cosmos is much more akin to the Far Eastern void and also the ether
of traditional Western cosmologies than the vacuum of Newtonian physics.
No wonder that during recent years there have appeared a score of works
seeking to relate modern physics to Oriental esoteric doctrines, some
comparing the no-thingness of modern physics to the Buddhist doctrine of
the impermanence of things,59 others the constant motion of particles to
the cosmic dance of Siva, and yet others the idea of emptiness and the
vacuum of modern physics to the Taoist void and similar conceptions.60
Not all of these studies have displayed a full grasp of the Oriental
doctrines involved and many deal with traditional teachings from a
profane point of view. But the fact that there is and has been much
interest even among such leading physicists as Erwin Schrödinger, Carl
Friedrich von Weizäcker, Wigner, and Bohm, as well as many others, in
Oriental cosmological and metaphysical teachings points to a groping,
even within physics, which is the heart of modern science, for the
sacred and a world view not bound by the reductionism of a quantitative
science imposed upon the nature of reality as such.61 For there is no
doubt that since nature is not man-made but comes from the source of the
sacred or the Sacred as such, if limitations placed upon it by a
desacralized mode of knowing were to be removed, the sacred would
manifest itself of its own accord. The light has not ceased to exist in
itself. The cosmos seems to have become dark, spiritually speaking, only
because of the veil of opacity surrounding that particular humanity
called modern. Actually, any attempt to go beyond reductionist science
and to introduce a nonmaterialistic world view is a quest, albeit
unconsciously, for the rediscovery of the sacred even if the quest does
not succeed as a result of its being cut off from tradition, that
veritable source of the sacred that resides at the heart of each
religion by virtue of which the message of that other grand revelation
that is the cosmos becomes comprehensible and meaningful in an operative
manner.

The concern for the sacred is observed in an even more open manner in
the contemporary interest in ecology and the conservation of nature.
Although because of the neglect of the spiritual element, which is an
essential factor in the economy of the cosmos, many ecological concerns
have failed to bear fruit, still the recent awareness of the
interrelation among all living beings now emphasized even by agnostic
scientists carries within it once again the urge for the rediscovery of
the sacred, even if the necessary metaphysics of nature is not usually
available or is neglected.62 For example, the Gaia hypothesis, which
sees the earth not as a complex of dead, material components
accidentally supporting life and somehow keeping the right temperature
to make life possible for “hundreds of millions” of years but as a
living being which itself controls the condition of various elements
such as air, associated with life, is impregnated with metaphysical
significance.63 It is not only the name of the Greek goddess for

earth which this theory resuscitates but the traditional doctrine that
the earth is a great animal already stated by Plato in the Timaeus and
repeated by numerous medieval philosophers and scientists in the Islamic
world as well as among Jews and Christians. It is also an echo of the
traditional doctrine of the sacrifice of the primordial man at the
beginning of the cosmogonic process whether those who devised the Gaia
hypothesis on purely scientific grounds were aware of it or not.

There are numerous serious scientists working with ecological questions
who realize that the whole is greater than its parts and that the quest
for wholeness is inseparable from the quest for holiness. The founder of
the New Alchemy Institute at Cape Cod, one of the most important
institutions of this kind in America, who is himself a reputable
scientist once told us that somehow through the study of ecology the
sacred has reentered into the world view of contemporary science.64
There are many scientists engaged in various kinds of ecological studies
who would confirm his point of view65 while others accept the reality of
this thesis even if they shun the usage of the word sacred.

In quite another realm of science, namely neurology and the study of the
brain, there are again those among leading scientists who refuse to
reduce man to a complicated machine or a behaviorally determined
mechanism as do certain psychologists and who confirm the reality of the
mind against the view of certain positivist philosophers like Ryle and
Ayer who question even the meaning of the term mind.66 The confirmation
of the mind or consciousness independent of its material instrument
which is the brain is yet another aspect of this search for the sacred
and the evasion of that reductionism which closes the door to the
perfume of the sacred within the breathing space of contemporary man.
That is why all kinds of research carried out in the fields of
parapsychology to show the independence of the mind from matter or even
Kirlian photography developed particularly in Russia where direct study
of spiritual questions is, to put it mildly, problematic, all indicate a
religious urge toward the rediscovery of the sacred in a world dominated
by the emphasis upon phenomena and despite the common error of failing
to distinguish between the Spirit and the psyche.

The search for wholeness has manifested itself also in medicine and all
the other sciences which are concerned with the human body including the
rediscovery of the spiritual significance of the body.67 Concern with
wholistic medicine, natural foods, natural bodily rhythms, and the like,
despite all the fads and commercial exploitations, represent a desire to
return to that primordial harmony of man with the natural environment,
which being created by God is the theater of His Wisdom and Power and
contains a sacred presence. That is why for so many people this type of
concern has become practically a “religion” engaging their whole being
as if it could satisfy even their need for the Sacred as such.68

Although modern psychoanalysis is a veritable parody of traditional
psychology and psychotherapy connected with the spiritual transformation
of the soul, one observes increasingly in recent years attempts to break
away from the mold Freud and also Jung have cast upon this discipline
and to

rediscover traditional techniques of curing the ills of the soul.69 This
is of course a very dangerous ground for ultimately only God has the
right to treat the soul of man which belongs to Him alone. Without the
protection of tradition the application of traditional techniques is a
most dangerous one. Nevertheless, the attempt is now being made to break
at least the tyranny of this agnostic and atheistic type of
psychoanalysis that has been prevalent in the West during this century
and to study those traditional sciences of the soul which are anchored
in sacred knowledge and see the well-being of the soul in its wedding to
the Spirit.70 Again in these attempts one can detect the quest for the
rediscovery of the Sacred even if here as in so many other domains the
quest has not always been successful and has not been able to discover a
science which could safely treat the deeper problems of the soul in such
a way that the soul would be protected from the darkening influences of
the lower psyche.

As far as philosophy is concerned, the mainstream of European and
American thought has been completely dominated by that desacralization
of knowledge discussed earlier and become reduced to either logic or an
irrationalism based on anxiety, despair, and the like. Yet, besides the
main schools of Anglo-Saxon and American positivism and continental
existentialism and Existenz philosophy, there have appeared in recent
years a number of Western philosophers whose concern has been
essentially the revival of traditional philosophy and even metaphysics.
Such figures as G. Durand in France and F. Brunner in Switzerland
represent such a tendency as do many of the younger French philosophers
now called “les nouveaux philosophes.” After years of opposition to
classical proofs for the existence of God as being meaningless, there
have appeared once again, during the past decade or two, certain
thinkers who are reexamining these classical proofs and seeking to
revive what would amount to natural theology.71 In as much as the
destruction of natural theology was the final phase and end result of
the destruction of the sacred character of knowledge and the divorce
between Intellect and reason, such a resuscitation of the, properly
speaking, intellectual faculties of the mind, even if it be in a partial
manner, is in its own way another indication of the current movement in
certain quarters towards the rediscovery of the sacred.

Parallel with these and many other contemporary movements in the arts,
the sciences, and philosophy, which are too extensive to enumerate here,
there has also taken place, in many parts of the Western world and
particularly in America, the spread of Oriental religions and especially
their mysticisms ranging from authentic transmission of a tradition to
demonic counterfeits which only remind one of Christ's prophecy about
many false prophets arising at the end of time. There have also appeared
such phenomena as drug-induced mysticism, natural and even black magic,
appropriation of techniques of meditation outside of their traditional
context, and all kinds of bewildering experiments and experiences
offered to a world hungering for anything which would enable it to break
the confines of a stifling materialistic ambience and searching for an
experience of the not-ordinary.72

Finally, a word must be said about the quest to revive certain lost or
forgotten dimensions of the Christian tradition itself and to rediscover
the presence of the sacred within the life and thought of those who,
although nominally Christian, have relegated religion to a peripheral
role in their lives. Christianity, being a living tradition, has
certainly the possibility for such a restitution, although during the
past few decades what in fact has taken place in the main body of the
Church in the West is the intrusion of modernism into the heart of the
religion itself. Nevertheless, despite all the antitraditional ideas
which have gained acceptance even within religious circles that were
orthodox until yesterday, there have been attempts to make use of
techniques of meditation and metaphysical doctrines drawn from Oriental
traditions and to resuscitate certain dimensions of the Christian
tradition in conformity with universes of religious meaning discovered
elsewhere. There are those who consider themselves “American Indian or
Buddhist Christians” without at all meaning a crass eclecticism.73 There
are also those who have sought recourse to Orthodox spirituality whose
sapiential doctrines and methods of realization have been kept more
intact while, at the very moment when many Western theologians are
introducing secularism into the citadel of religion itself, there is an
amazing rise of interest in the sapiential and mystical dimension of the
Christian tradition. In America, at least, the quest for the sacred in
the Oriental traditions which marked the postwar decades, especially the
1960s, has now turned to a large extent to the attempt to rediscover the
Christian tradition itself, especially those aspects of it which were
lost or eclipsed after the Middle Ages.74 To a certain extent also the
same tendency can be observed among many secularized Jews. Of course, in
these instances, as in the case of the new cults and sects, there have
also been, from the traditional point of view, all kinds of
exaggerations, false pretensions, and attempts at synthesis which are no
more than amalgamations which cannot but harm the integrity of the
tradition in question.

When one gazes over this complex pattern which constitutes the religious
life of contemporary man in quest of the rediscovery of the saaed, the
revival of tradition in the West becomes even more of paramount
significance, for this resuscitated knowledge of a principial order
provides the criterion for distinguishing the wheat from the chaff, the
true from the false, and especially the counterfeit. Not everything that
is nontraditional is antitraditional. There is the third category of the
counterfeit of tradition or countertradition which begins to play an
ever greater role in the modern world.75 The revival of interest in the
rediscovery of the sacred can become meaningful and operative only in
the bosom of tradition which is “what attaches all things human to the
Divine Truth.”76 Otherwise, this fragmented delving into the residues of
traditional teachings, the search for the sacred and even the playing
with symbols and doctrines of a sacred origin without full dedication to
the sacred can become an aberration rather than a means of integration,
leading even to chaos and dissolution. But, if carried out in the matrix
of tradition, the quest for the sacred observable in so many domains of
contemporary life and thought can lead to the reestablishment of the
Truth and the rehabilitation of man in the light of that Truth which
also

resides at the center of his being. Such a rehabilitation which is a
veritable resurrection can take place at least for that type of man
whose inner being still resonates to the call of the sacred. And at the
heart of this call is to be found that scientia sacra which is
inseparable from the very substance and root of intelligence and which
constitutes the foundation of tradition, the “sacred science” whose
attainment is the raison d'être of human existence.

Notes
-----

[^1]: It is remarkable how so many so-called radical theologians have
sided with Nietzsche in talking about the “death of God” in order not to
remain behind current fashions, whereas what one would expect from a
theologian’s interpretation of current nihilism is the reassertion of
the saying of Meister Eckhart, “the more you blaspheme the more you
praise God,” and the Gospel saying, “Slander must needs come but woe
unto him who bringeth it about.” As could be expected, many sociologists
have predicted the continuation of the secularizing movement in the
modern world as a natural confirmation of their own secular point of
view. This tendency is to be expected more in sociology than in theology
seeing the nature of the origins of the discipline called sociology. But
even among sociologists there are those, like P. Berger, who assert that
from a sociological point of view there is reason to believe that faith
in the supernatural and quest for the sacred will continue to survive
even in modern society. Berger adds, however, that “those to whom the
supernatural is still, or again, a meaningful reality find themselves in
the status of a minority, more precisely, a cognitive minority-a very
important consequence with far-reaching implications.” P. Berger, A
Rumor of Angels, p. 7.

[^2]: See Faivre, L’Ésotérisme au XVIIIe siècle, p. 171.

[^3]: Eliade explains the reason why this so-called “second Renaissance”
did not take place: “But the ‘Renaissance’ did not come about for the
simple reason that the study of Sanskrit and other oriental languages
did not succeed in passing beyond the circle of philologians and
historians, while, during the Italian Renaissance, Greek and classical
Latin were studied not only by the grammarians and humanists but also by
the poets, artists, philosophers, theologians, and men of science.”
“Crisis and Renewal in History of Religions,” History of Religions 5/1
(Summer 1965): 3.

We would add that, first of all, Oriental traditions could not possibly
have brought about a renaissance if by renaissance is meant that
antitraditional revolt against the Christian tradition which is the
source of most of what characterizes the modern world and which marks
the point of departure of Western civilization from the rest of the
world; and second, the European Renaissance was a fall, a discovery of a
new earth at the expense of the loss of a heaven and therefore in
conformity with the downward flow of the cosmic cycle, while a
traditional “renaissance” would imply a restoration from on high against
the downward pull of the stream of historic time. In any case, a
traditional restoration, which would in fact have been a veritable
renaissance, could not possibly take place through the translation of
texts alone and in the absence of that authentic knowledge which would
make the appropriate understanding of these texts possible.

[^4]: The translation of the Upanishads by Anquetil Duperron into Latin
from the Persian Sirr-i akbar was particularly important in introducing
nineteenthcentury Europe to a sacred text of a purely metaphysical
character. It is interesting to note that this basic work, presented by
the translator to Napoleon in 1804, was from the Persian translation of
the Mogul prince Dara Shukuh, the translation having been carried out in
Benares in the eleventh/seventeenth century and being itself the result
of one of the most remarkable encounters between the esoteric dimensions
of Islam and Hinduism. See D. Shayegan, Hindouisme et Soufisme, les
relations de l’Hindouisme et du Soufisme d’après le “Majma‘al-bahrayn”
de Dârâ Shokûh, Paris, 1979.

[^5]: The history of Orientalism and Western views toward various
Oriental traditions has been dealt with in many works. See, as far as
the Islamic world is concerned, for example, N. Daniel, Islam, Europe
and Empire, London, 1968; Y. Moubarac, Recherches sur la pensée
chrétienne et l’Islam dans les temps modernes et à l’époque
contemporaine, Beirut, 1977; and J. Fück, Die arabischen Studien in
Europa bis in den Anfang des 20. Jahrhunderts, Leipzig, 1955.

[^6]: See A. M. Schimmel (ed.), Orientalische Dichtung in den
Übersetzung Friedrich Rückerts, Bremen, 1963. In her introduction the
editor discusses the influence of the Orient onWestern and esp. German
literature.

[^7]: On Goethe and the East see Taha Hussein Bey, “Goethe and the
East,” in Goethe: UNESCO’s Hommage on the Occasion of the Two Hundredth
Anniversary of His Birth, Paris, 1949, pp. 167-79; F. Strich, Goethe und
die Weltliteratur, Bern, 1957, esp. “Die Öffnende Macht des Orients,”
pp. 154-70; H. H. Schaeder, “Goethes Erlebnis des Ostens,”

in Vierieljahrschrift des Goetheges. 2 (1937): 125-39; and H.
Krüger,Weltend, Goethe und der Orient,Weimar, 1903.

[^8]: On the significance of this work see K. Viëtor, Goethe the Poet,
“West-Eastern Divan,” pp. 219-30.

[^9]: Goethe’s Reineke Fox, West-Eastern Divan, and Achilleid, trans. in
the original meters by A. Rogers, London, 1890, pp. 199-200.

[^10]: Khid. r or the “Green prophet” represents an ever present
initiatic function in the Islamic tradition similar to that of Elias in
Judaism. Khid. r (or Khad. ir) is considered as the guardian of the
fountain of life which from the sapiential point of view symbolizes the
water of sacred knowledge. On Khid. r and his iconography in Islamic art
see A. K. Coomaraswamy, “Khwaja Khad. ir and the Fountain of Life, in
the Tradition of Persian and Mughal Art,” Ars Islamica I (1934): 173-82.

[^11]: See G. M. Harper, The Neoplatonism ofWilliam Blake, Chapel
Hill,N.C., 1961, p. 3.

[^12]: On Platonism in England see E. Cassirer, The Platonic Renaissance
in England, trans. J. P. Pettegrove, London, 1953, dealing with the
earlier Cambridge Platonists up to the Age of Reason; and J. H.
Muirhead, The Platonic Tradition in Anglo-Saxon Philosophy, London,
1931, which however neglects certain important figures including Taylor.

[^13]: On Thomas Taylor and his writings see K. Raine and G. M. Harper
(eds.), Thomas Taylor the Platonist: Selected Writings, Princteon, 1969.

[^14]: On the bibliography of Taylor see W. E. Axon and J. J. Welsh, A
Bibliography of the Works of Thomas Taylor, the Platonist,Westwood, N.
J., 1975.

[^15]: Kathleen Raine has composed several works on Blake but the most
important as far as traditional teachings are concerned is Blake and
Tradition, 2 vols., Princeton, 1968.

“. . for Blake himself, no less than Ellis and Yeats, seemed to have a
knowledge whose sources were not divulged, as knowledge of the ancient
Mysteries was kept secret among initiates. I began to understand that in
those Mysteries was to be found the ordering principle-I know now that
the key for which many have sought is traditional metaphysics with its
accompanying language of symbolic discourse.” Ibid., pp. xxv-xxvi.

[^16]: It is interesting that Blake has attracted Oriental scholars,
esp. Muslims who have devoted several scholarly works to him. See, for
example, A. A. Ansari, Arrows of Intellect; A Study in William Blake’s
Gospel of the Imagination, Aligarh, 1965; and Gh. Sabri-Tabrizi, The
“Heaven” and “Hell” of William Blake, London, 1973. A. K. Coomaraswamy
also admired Blake whom he called “the most Indian of modern Western
minds,” and some of his early essays such as “The Religious Foundations
of Life and Art,” in Coomaraswamy and A. J. Penry (eds.), Essays in
Post-Industrialism: A Symposium in Prophecy, London, 1914, pp. 33ff. are
deeply “Blakean.” Coomaraswamy also continued to quote Blake profusely
throughout his later works. See R. Lipsey, Coomaraswamy 3: His Life and
Work, Princeton, 1977, pp. 105ff.

On Blake and the traditional doctrine of art as expounded by
Coomaraswamy, Schuon, and Burckhardt see B. Keeble, “Conversing with
Paradise: William Blake and the Traditional Doctrine of Art,” Sophia
Perennis l/l(Spring 1975): 72-[^96]:

[^17]: F. I. Carpenter, Emerson and Asia, Cambridge, Mass., 1930, p. 27;
see also A. Christy, The Orient in American Transcendentalism; a Study
of Emerson, Thoreau and Alcott, New York, 1932; and W. Staebler, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, New York, 1973. See also E. Zolla, “Naturphilosophie and
Transcendentalism Revisited,” Sophia Perennis 3/2(Autumn 1977): 65-94.

[^18]: See Swami Paramananda, Emerson and Vedanta, Boston, 1918; and
Carpenter, op. cit.

[^19]: On Emerson and Persian poetry see J. D. Yohannan, “Emerson’s
Translations of Persian Poetry from German Sources,” American Literature
14 (Jan. 1943): 407-20. See also M. A. Ekhtiar, From Linguistics to
Literature, Tehran, 1962, pt. 2.

[^20]: Some had received knowledge from Taoist and other Far Eastern
sources, such as A. de Pourvourville, known as Matgioi, the author of
the well-known La Voie rationnelle, Paris, 1941, and La Voie
métaphysique, Paris, 1936; and others from Islamic esoteric circles,
such as ‘Abd al-Hadı, who was to translate into French the celebrated
Risalat al-ahadiyyah (Treatise on Unity) attributed to Ibn ‘Arabı. See
Le Traité de l’Unité dit d’Ibn Arabî, Paris, 1977, pp. 19-48.

[^21]: Numerous works and studies have appeared on Guénon, mostly in his
mother tongue, French. See, for example, J. Marcireau, René Guénon et
son oeuvre, Paris, 1946; P. Chacornac, La Vie simple de René Guénon,
Paris, 1958; P. Serant, René Guénon, Paris, 1953; L. Meroz, René Guénon
ou la sagesse initiatique, Paris, 1962; and J. Tourniac, Propos sur René
Guénon, Paris, 1973, and Planète plus (L’homme et son message-René
Guénon), Paris, 1970. Some of these works, like that of P. Chacornac,
for example, are reliable and of a traditional character, and others of
a problematic nature.

[^22]: His two major works in this domain are Le Théosophisme-histoire
d’une pseudoreligion, Paris, 1921; and L’Erreur spirite, Paris, 1923.
There are also studies devoted to these subjects in his Aperçus sur
l’initiation, Paris, 1980; and Initiation et réalisation spirituelle,
Paris, 1952.

[^23]: Many of the works of Guénon were translated into English but a
large number remain available only in the original French. Those
translated into English include: Introduction to the Study of the Hindu
Doctrines, Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, trans. R.
Nicholson, London, 1945; Crisis of the Modern World, trans. M. Pallis
and R. Nicholson, London, 1962; Symbolism of the Cross, trans. A.
Macnab, London, 1958; East and West, trans. W. Massey, London, 1941; The
Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times, trans. Lord Northboume,
London, 1953; and Oriental Metaphysics inNeedleman (ed.), The Sword of
Gnosis. A number of his articles have also been translated and published
mostly in Studies in Comparative Religion.

[^24]: See, for example, “Sacred and Profane Science,” in his Crisis of
the Modern World, pp. 37-50 (also trans. A. K. Coomaraswamy,
Vi´sva-Bharati Quarterly 1 [^1935] : 11-24).

[^25]: He achieved this task in the field of infinitesimal calculus
whose principles he related to more universal principles of a
metaphysical order. See his Les Principes du calcul infinitésimal,
Paris, 1946.

[^26]: See, for example, The Symbolism of the Cross, dealing with the
metaphysical symbolism of space and geometric patterns and La Grande
triade, Paris, 1980, much of which deals with alchemical symbolism along
with metaphysics.

[^27]: An example of this type of orientalism is the works of L.
Massignon, the great French Islamicist, whose works are not only
important from a purely scholarly point of view but also expound in an
authentic fashion certain important aspects of the Islamic tradition.

[^28]: He paid much less attention to certain aspects of Christianity
and also Buddhism and in fact corrected his earlier appraisal of
Buddhism, which was from the exclusively Brahmanic point of view, as a
result of his contacts with Coomaraswamy and Marco Pallis. This is one
of the rare instances of change of view in the writings of Guénon where
one can detect a revision concerning a particular subject.

[^29]: Marco Pallis, himself a distinguished traditional author, writes
concerning Coomaraswamy:

“An intellectual genius well describes this man in whose person East
andWest came together, since his father belonged to an ancient Tamil
family established in Sri Lanka while his mother came of an English
aristocratic stock. An immensely retentive memory coupled with command
of many languages both classical and current constituted the equipment
of this prince among scholars. In the matter of checking his references
Coomaraswamy was meticulously scrupulous where Guénon was the reverse.”
M. Pallis, “A Fateful Meeting of Minds; A. K. Coomaraswamy and R.
Guénon,” p. [^179]:

[^30]: On his writings see R. Ettinghausen, “TheWritings of Ananda K.
Coomaraswamy,”

Ars Islamica 9 (1942): 125-42; and R. Lipsey, Coomaraswamy, pp.
293-[^304]: A working bibliography of Coomaraswamy is being prepared by
R. P. Coomaraswamy, while J. Crouch has completed an exhaustive
bibliography to be published soon.

As for works on Coomaraswamy himself there are the full-fledged
biographies by R. Lipsey, Coomaraswamy, and P. S. Sastri, Ananda K.
Coomaraswamy,New Delhi, 1974, and several works dedicated to him and
containing sketches, testimonials, etc. Among these the several works of
S. Durai Raja Singham contain a wealth of biographical information as
well as testimonials. For example, his A New Planet in Thy Ken:
Introduction to Kala-Yogi Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Kuantan, Malaya, 1951;
also Hommage to Ananda K. Coomaraswamy: A Garland of Tributes, Kuala
Lumpur, 1948; Hommage to Ananda K. Coomaraswamy (A Memorial Volume),
Kuala Lumpur, 1952; and Remembering and

Remembering Again and Again, Kuala Lumpur, 1974. See also K. Bharata
Iyer (ed.), Life and Thought, London, 1947; and R. Livingston, The
Traditional Theory of Literature, Minneapolis, 1962. See also Sophia
Perennis 3/2 (1977), dedicated to Coomaraswamy and devoted to “Tradition
and the Arts” including the article of W. N. Perry on Coomaraswamy and
Guénon and a section of poems by contemporary poets inspired by
traditional doctrines, poets such as Kathleen Raine, Peter Wilson, Peter
Russell, Cristina Campo, and Philip Sherard. Finally, see the more
recent work of M. Bagchee, Ananda Coomaraswamy, A Study, Varanasi, 1977.

[^31]: Originally published in Motive, May 1944, and which appeared
later as chap. 3 of his Bugbear of Literacy.

[^32]: H. Smith, statement made on the occasion of the publication of
the English translation of Schuon’s Logic and Transcendence and printed
on the back of the 1975 paperback edition of the work.

[^33]: The books of Schuon include De l’unité transcendante des
religions, Paris, 1979; L’Oeil du coeur, Paris, 1974; Perspectives
spirituelles et faits humains, Paris, 1953; Sentiers de gnose, Paris,
1957; Castes et races, Paris, 1979; Les Stations de la sagesse, Paris,
1958; Images de l’esprit, Paris, 1961; Comprendre l’Islam, Paris, 1961;
Regards sur les mondes anciens, Paris, 1965; Logique et transcendance,
Paris, 1970; Forme et substance dans les religions, Paris, 1975;
L’Esotérisme comme principe et comme voie, Paris, 1978; Le Soufisme,
voile et quintessence; Du Divin à l’humain; Christianisme/Islam-Visions
d’oecuménisme ésotérique; and Sur les traces de la Religion pérenne;
Leitgedanken zur Urbesinnung, Zurich and Leipzig, 1935; and the two
volumes of poetry, Tage-und Nachtebuch, Bern, 1947, and Sulamith, Bern,
1947.

Schuon’s books translated into English are: The Transcendent Unity of
Religions; Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts; Language of the Self,
trans. M. Pallis and D. M. Matheson, Madras, 1959; Gnosis: DivineWisdom,
trans. G. E. H. Palmer, London, 1977; Stations of Wisdom, trans. G. E.
H. Palmer, London, 1978; Understanding Islam; Light on the Ancient
Worlds; In the Tracks of Buddhism, trans. M. Pallis, London, 1968;
Dimensions of Islam, trans. P. Townsend, London, 1970; Logic and
Transcendence; Islam and the Perennial Philosophy, trans. P. Hobson,
London, 1976; and Esoterism as Principle and as Way, trans. W. Stoddart,
London, [^1981]:

For an evaluation of the writings of Schuon see L. Benoist, “L’Oeuvre de
Frithjof Schuon,” Etudes Traditionelles 79/459 (1978): 97-[^101]:

We are now preparing an anthology of his writings to appear soon care of
the Crossroad Publishing Company in New York.

[^34]: R. C. Zaehner, who changed his perspective several times during
his writing career, at one point opposed the theses of Schuon completely
and wrote, “Mr. Frithjof Schuon, in his Transcendent Unity of Religions,
has tried to show that there is a fundamental unity underlying all the
great religions. The attempt was worth making if only to show that no
such unity can, in fact, be discovered.” The Comparison of Religions,
Boston, 1958, p. 169. To this assertion of Zaehner we would only add the
phrase “by those who have no intellectual intuition of the supra-formal
essence and who therefore should not be legitimately concerned with
trying to understand or discern the supra-formal unity of which Schuon
speaks.” In his preface to the American edition of the Transcendent
Unity of Religions another eminent scholar of religion, H. Smith, has
presented extensive arguments to show why the method of Schuon and other
traditional authors is in fact the only possible way of realizing the
inner truth of religions and bringing about harmony among them without
sacrificing a single form, doctrine, or rite of a divine origin.

[^35]: B. Kelly, “Notes on the Light of the Eastern Religions with
Special Reference to theWorks of Ananda Coomaraswamy, René Guénon and
Frithjof Schuon,” Dominican Studies 7 (1954): 265.

[^36]: Burckhardt has also written several basic works on the
traditional sciences. His major writings include: An Introduction to
Sufi Doctrine, trans. D. M. Matheson, London, 1976; Sacred Art East
andWest, trans. Lord Northbourne, London, 1967; The Wisdom of the
Prophets of Ibn ‘Arabi, trans. A. Culme- Seymour, Gloucestershire, 1975;
Alchemy: Science of the Cosmos, Science of the Soul, trans. W. Stoddart,
Baltimore, 1971; The Art of Islam, trans. J. P. Hobson, London, 1976;
and Moorish Culture in Spain, trans. A. Jaffa, London, 1972.

[^37]: See Schaya, TheUniversal Meaning of the Kabbala, trans. N.
Pearson, London, 1971. He has also published many articles in the Etudes
Traditionnelles of which he is now editor.

[^38]: Pallis who is both an accomplished musician and mountain climber
has also written on both nature and music from the traditional point of
view and been instrumental, along with M. Lings, P. Townsend, R. C.
Nicholson, W. Stoddart, G. Palmer, the late D. M. Matheson, P. Hobson,
LordNorthbourne-himself the author of works on tradition-and several
other selfless scholars, in making much of the work of Guénon and Schuon
available in English. See Pallis, The Way and the Mountain, London,
1960; Peaks and Lamas, London, 1974; and A Buddhist Spectrum, London,
1980.

[^39]: See his Shakespeare in the Light of Sacred Art, London, 1966;
also his A Sufi Saint of the Twentieth Century, London and Berkeley,
1971; What is Sufism?, London, 1981; and Ancient Beliefs and Modern
Superstitions, London, 1979.

[^40]: This journal in a sense complements the older Etudes
Traditionnelles but has a larger audience and also a more extended field
of concern. For a collection of some of the articles in the journal see
Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis. During recent years other journals
with a traditional point of view have seen the light of day of which the
most notable perhaps was the Sophia Perennis that was published by the
Iranian Academy of Philosophy from 1975 through 1978. Other journals
such as Conoscenza religiosa (Italy), Religious Studies (Australia), and
Temenos (England) also possess a traditional perspective with different
kinds of emphasis. As for the Studi tradizionali published also in
Italy, it is more than anything else of a “Guénonian” character.

[^41]: There are many other notable traditional authors whose names
cannot all be mentioned here. Some like Gai Eaton have gained fairly
wide recognition as writers while others like Lord Northbourne have
remained known to a more exclusive audience. W. Stoddart is preparing a
full bibliography of traditional works written during this century.

[^42]: See esp. his well-known work The Sacred Pipe, Baltimore, 1972.

[^43]: There are a number of scholars mostly in the field of comparative
religion and Islamic studies who have carried out important scholarly
studies and translations from Oriental languages from the traditional
point of view. This group includes H. Smith, W. N. Perry, V. Danner, R.
W. J. Austin, J. L. Michon and W. Chittick whose works in Islamic
studies and comparative religion are well known in scholarly circles.

[^44]: Such figures include not only scholars like J. Needleman but also
important religious thinkers like Thomas Merton.

[^45]: His posthumous work Guide for the Perplexed is one of the most
easily approachable introductions to traditional doctrines available
today.

[^46]: Such Oriental scholars and thinkers as the late Shaykh ‘Abd al-H.
alım Mah.mud, the former rector of al-Azhar University, H. Askari, M.
Ajmal, A. K. Brohi, and Y. Ibish in the Islamic world; A. K. Saran and
Keshavram Iyengar in India; R. Fernando in Sri Lanka; and Sh. Bando in
Japan may be mentioned among figures directly influenced in a major way
by those who have revived tradition in theWest.

[^47]: This is a theme which cannot be dealt with here but which we have
treated extensively in many of our Persian writings including our
introduction to the Persian translation of Guénon’s Crisis of the Modern
World (Buhran-i dunya-yi mutajaddid), trans. D. Dihshırı, Tehran, 1971;
see also our Islam and the Plight of Modern Man.

[^48]: On the enigma of Vivekananda in relation to Ramakrishna see F.
Schuon, Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts, pp. 113-22.

[^49]: The nowextensive amount of literature on traditional harmonics
and Pythagorean musical theory are based on the pioneering work of A.
von Thimus, Die harmonikale Symbolik des Altertums, Berlin, 1868-76, as
resuscitated and extended by H. Kayser in such works as Der hörende
Mensch, Berlin, 1932; Akrösis: The Theory of World Harmonics, Boston,
1970; Orphikon. Eine harmonikale Symbolik, Basel-Stuttgart, 1973; and
numerous other studies. On his life and works see R. Haase, Ein Leben
für die Harmonik der Welt, Basel-Stuttgart, 1968.

These teachings were brought to America mostly by the Swiss pianist and
musicologist E. Levy who also wrote about them and taught them to many
students. See his “The Pythagorean Table,” with S. Levarie, Main
Currents in Modern Thought, March-April 1974, pp. 117-29; and their
Tone: A Study in Musical Acoustics, Kent, Kans., [^1968]: In

recent years a number of more accessible works have spread the knowledge
of traditional musical theories as they apply to various disciplines
further afield. See E. McClain, The Pythagorean Plato: Prelude to the
Song Itself, Stony Brook, N. Y., 1978; idem, The Myth of Invariance,
Boulder, Colo., and London, 1978; idem, “The Ka‘ba as Archetypal Ark,”
Sophia Perennis 4/1 (Spring 1978): 59-74; R. Brumbugh, Plato’s
Mathematical Imagination, New York, 1968; and A. T. de Nicolàs,
Meditation through theR. g Veda: Four Dimensional Man, New York, 1976.

[^50]: Once when we were in Cairo discussing Schwaller de Lubicz’s study
of things Egyptian with the celebrated Egyptian architect Hasan Fathy
who knew him well, the aged architect, who is far from being a gullible
person, told us that the French scholar seemed to have known the
principles of Egyptian art and archaelogy a priori, before even arriving
in Egypt, and terminated his studies, finished the cycle of his work,
and left Egypt before the revolution with a clear premonition of what
was to occur. Fathy is convinced that Schwaller de Lubicz’s knowledge of
the Egyptian tradition had come from an esoteric source which his
archaeological studies only confirmed and that his knowledge was not the
fruit of ordinary archaeological and art historical studies.

[^51]: See, for example, S. Kramrish, The Hindu Temple, 2 vols., New
York, 1980; B. Rowland, Art in East and West, Boston, 1966; idem, The
Art and Architecture of India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain, Baltimore, 1971;
and H. Zimmer, The Art of Indian Asia; Its Mythology and
Transformations, ed. J. Campbell, 2 vols., New York, 1955.

[^52]: See, for example, K. Critchlow, Islamic Patterns, London, 1975;
idem, Time Stands Still, London, 1980; R. Alleau, Aspects de l’alchimie
traditionnelle, Paris, 1970; M. Ghyka, Philosophie et mystique du
nombre, Paris, 1952; and E. Zolla, Meraviglie della natura: l’alchimia,
Milan, 1975.

[^53]: On different types of movement against reductionism such as
consciousness research, frontier physics, morphic science, and the like
see Roszak, Person/Planet, pp. 50-54 and pp. 327-28 for references to
works in such fields.

[^54]: We have in mind such completely unscientific extrapolations
carried out in popularized descriptions of the scientific universe by
men like C. Sagan and the evolutionist theology of Teilhard de Chardin
with whichwe shall deal more extensively later.

[^55]: We shall deal with this issue and the traditional criticism of
modern science in chap. 6.

[^56]: This would correspond to the materia prima of traditional
cosmology. See his “Cosmology and Modern Science.”

[^57]: “Our inability to describe our consciousness adequately, to give
a satisfactory picture of it, is the greatest obstacle to our acquiring
a rounded picture of the world.” E. Wigner, quoted by Sir J. Eccles, The
Brain and the Person, Sydney, 1965, p. 3; see also E. Wigner, Symmetries
and Reflections, Cambridge, Mass., 1970.

[^58]: See D. Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order, London, 1980,
esp. chap. 7, “The Enfolding-Unfolding Universe and Consciousness,” pp.
172ff., where he summarizes his views speaking of the life of the
universe as an unfolding rather than evolution. Of course from the
traditional point of view as far as consciousness is concerned the
unfolded reality was already at the beginning and nothing can be added
to its pure unconditional state by any process whatsoever of change and
becoming.

[^59]: One author calls the discovery of the fundamental impermanence of
things, the discontinuity of matter and the absence of substance in
modern physics as “une confirmation éclatante des principes essentiels
du Bouddhisme.” R. Linssen, “Le Bouddhisme et la science moderne,”
Prance-Ask, no. 46-47 (Jan.-Feb. 1950), p. 658.

[^60]: See the well-known works of F. Capra, The Tao of Physics, New
York, 1977; R. G. Siu, The Tao of Science: An Essay onWestern Knowledge
and EasternWisdom, Cambridge, Mass., 1958. Such types of writing have
proliferated during the past few years. C. F. vonWeizsäcker has even
established a research foundation for the study of Eastern wisdom and
Western science. See W. I. Thompson, Passage About Earth, New York,
1974, chap. 5, where the activities of this foundation are described.

[^61]: It is amazing to note that even with the help of computers it is
not possible to solve all the different aspects of a three body problem.
How strange it is that people still think

about reducing the whole of the visible universe to the activity of
physical particles whose reality is exhausted by a mathematical
treatment of their physical properties!

[^62]: We have dealt with the question of the encounter of man and
nature, its historical background in the Occident, and metaphysical
principle pertaining to nature, in Man and Nature, London, 1976.

[^63]: After carrying out scientific research on the interdependence of
various elements and forces on the surface of the earth, Lovelock and
Epton, who first proposed the Gaia hypothesis, write, “This led us to
the formulation of the proposition that living matter, the air, the
oceans, the land surface were parts of a giant system which was able to
control temperature, the composition of the air and sea, the pH of the
soil and so on so as to be optimum for survival of the biosphere. The
system seemed to exhibit the behaviour of a single organism, even a
living creature. One having such formidable powers deserved a name to
match it; William Golding, the novelist, suggested Gaia, the name given
by the ancient Greeks to their Earth goddess.” J. Lovelock and S. Epton,
“The Quest for Gaia,” New Scientist, Feb. 6, 1975, p. 304.

[^64]: This statement was made to us by John Todd during the ceremony of
his receiving the Threshold Award at the New Alchemy Institute in 1980.
On his ecological ideas see Nancy Todd (ed.), Book of the New
Alchemists, New York, 1980; John Todd and Nancy Todd, Tomorrow is Our
Permanent Address, New York, 1980.

[^65]: For example, the Lindesfarne experiment conveys the same concern
with the rediscovery of the sacred through the study of both ecological
and traditional sciences. See W. J. Thompson, Passages About Earth, and
his other later works which are all concerned in one way or another with
the Lindesfarne experiment. See also the Lindesfarne Letters which
appears periodically.

[^66]: “I want to discredit such dogmatic statements [about man being
simply a complicated machine] and bring you to realize how tremendous is
the mystery of each one of us.” Eccles, op. cit., p. 1. Also, “Contrary
to this physicalist creed, I believe that the prime reality of my
experiencing self cannot with propriety be identified with some aspects
of  its experiences and its imaginings-such as brains and nervous and
nerve impulses and even complex spatio-temporal patterns of impulses.
The evidence presented in these talks show that these events, in the
material world are necessary but not sufficient causes for conscious
experiences and formy consciouslyexperiencing self.” Ibid., p. 43.

[^67]: This does not mean that this concern with the human body has
succeeded in actually discovering the sacred significance of the body.
On the contrary, it has often led to the worst kinds of perversions from
both the moral and spiritual points of view.

[^68]: In this as in other cases the lack of a traditional world view
and the actual practice of a traditional way prevents such concerns from
being anything more than partial and fragmentary, never able to
transform the being of the person who has become attracted to the
“natural” way of eating or natural methods of being treated medically
usually for deeper spiritual reasons of which he is often not totally
aware.

[^69]: It might appear on the surface that Jung is dealing with
traditional psychology whereas his treatment of traditional doctrines
and symbols is a perversion of them so that he is, in a sense, more
misleading than Freud who is openly against all that tradition stands
for. See T. Burckhardt, “Cosmology in Modern Science,” in Needleman
(ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, pp. 153-78; idem, Alchemy, esp. chaps. 9-11;
W. N. Perry, “The Revolt against Moses,” Studies in Comparative
Religion, Spring 1961, pp. 103-19; and F. Schuon, “The Psychological
Imposture,” Studies in Comparative Religion, Spring 1961, pp. 98-102. On
traditional psychology see H. Jacobs, Western Psychoth erapy and Hindu
Sadhana: A Contribution to Comparative Studies in Psychology and
Metaphysics, London, 1961; and A. K. Coomaraswamy, “On the Indian and
Traditional Psychology, or Rather Pneumatology,” in Lipsey (ed.),
Coomaraswamy 2: Selected Papers-Metaphysics, Princeton, 1977, pp.
333-78. The two volumes of Coomaraswamy edited by R. Lipsey include both
essays not published previously, such as the one on psychology, and some
which had appeared in earlier collections, such as Figures of Speech and
Figures of Thought and Why Exhibit Works of Art?, as well as articles
from various learned journals.

J. Sinha in his classical work Indian Psychology: Perception, London,
1934, states, “There is no empirical psychology in India. Indian
psychology is based on metaphysics” (p.

16). This statement holds true for all traditional psychology, which is
a science of the soul in the light of the scientia sacra.

[^70]: “There is no science of the soul without a metaphysical basis to
it and without spiritual remedies at its disposal.” Schuon, Logic and
Transcendence, p. 14.

On the current search for the discovery of traditional science of the
soul see J. Needleman (ed.), On the Way to Self Knowledge, New York,
1976; also E. Fromm, D. T. Suzuki, and R. DeMartino, Zen Buddhism and
Psychoanalysis, New York, 1960, one of numerous works seeking to draw
from Buddhist sources for the recreation of a viable science of the
soul.

[^71]: The classical proofs such as the moral, experiential,
teleological, cosmological, and ontological have been resuscitated of
late in one form or another by such contemporary philosophers and
theologians as R. Green, A. Plantinga, H. Malcolm, M. Adler, B. J. F.
Lonergan, and R. Swinburne. This does not mean that the nexus between
reason and the Intellect has been reestablished among such thinkers. But
it does mean that a step has been taken in the other direction and away
from the debasing of reason and its severance from the certitude of
intellection, a step which was to lead with Hume and esp. the
post-Hegelian critics of reason to an irrationalism which did not go
beyond reason but fell below it.

Islamic theological and philosophical proofs for the existence of God
which are in fact similar to those of St. Thomas and other Christian
theologians have been discussed and analyzed in terms of modern
philosophical ideas by W. L. Craig in his The Kalam Cosmological
Argument, London, 1979; the author considers the kalam argument based on
the impossibility of an infinite temporal regress as being defendable in
contemporary philosophical terms. This is just one example of the
renewal of interest in traditional philosophical proofs for the
existence of God. Of course the proofs are not themselves affected by
whether a particular generation of Western philosophers appreciates them
or not.

[^72]: The discernment of the true from the false in this
bewilderingworld, and even a study of the present day scene, is beyond
the confines of this study but certainly there is a need to survey the
whole situation once again from the traditional point of view. For a
description of the so-called “new religions” in America see J.
Needleman, The New Religions, New York, 1977; and Needleman and G. Baker
(eds.), Understanding the New Religions, New York, 1978.

[^73]: Such authors as A. Graham, B. Griffiths, and T. Merton have
written extensively on the positive role that living spirituality can
play on the revival of the contemplative disciplines within Christianity
and have even put certain Oriental forms of meditation into practice.
There are, however, others whose approach is, to put it mildly, much
less serious.

[^74]: See J. Needleman, Lost Christianity, New York, 1980, which deals
with the significance of this question in the religious life of many
seekers today without exhausting the different facets of the problem.

[^75]: On the countertradition see R. Guénon, The Reign of Quantity.

[^76]: “La tradition est ce qui rattache toute chose humaine à la Verité
Divine.” F. Schuon, “L’esprit d’une oeuvre,” Planète plus (L’homme et
son message-René Guénon), April 1970, p. 36.
