Chapter Four: Scientia Sacra
============================

*The Good Religion is Innate Wisdom: and the forms and virtues of Innate
Wisdom are of the same stock as Innate Wisdom itself.*

**Dēnkard**

*A fund of omniscience exists eternally in our heart.*

**Tipiṭaka**

Sientia sacra is none other than that sacred knowledge which lies at the
heart of every revelation and is the center of that circle which
encompasses and defines tradition. The first question which presents
itself is, how is the attainment of such a knowledge possible? The
answer of tradition is that the twin source of this knowledge is
revelation and intellection or intellectual intuition which involves the
illumination of the heart and the mind of man and the presence in him of
knowledge of an immediate and direct nature which is tasted and
experienced, the sapience which the Islamic tradition refers to as
“presential knowledge” (al-‘ilm al-ḥuḍūrī).1 Man is able to know and
this knowledge corresponds to some aspect of reality. Ultimately in
fact, knowledge is knowledge of Absolute Reality and intelligence
possesses this miraculous gift of being able to know that which is and
all that partakes of being.2

Scientia sacra is not the fruit of human intelligence speculating upon
or reasoning about the content of an inspiration or a spiritual
experience which itself is not of an intellectual character. Rather,
what is received through inspiration is itself of an intellectual
nature; it is sacred knowledge. The human intelligence which perceives
this message and receives this truth does not impose upon it the
intellectual nature or content of a spiritual experience of a sapiential
character. The knowledge contained in such an experience issues from the
source of this experience which is the Intellect, the source of all
sapience and the bestower of all principial knowledge, the Intellect
which also modifies the human recipient that the Scholastics called the
potential intellect. Here the medieval distinction between the active
and passive or potential intellect3 can serve to elucidate the nature of
this process of the illumination of the mind and to remove the error of
seeing the sapiential and intellectual content of spiritual experience
as being the result of the human mind meditating upon or reasoning about
the content of such an experience, whereas spiritual experience on the
highest level is itself of an intellectual and sapiential nature.

From another point of view, that of the Self which resides at the center
of every self, the source of the scientia sacra revealed to man is the
center and root of human intelligence itself since ultimately “knowledge
of the Substance is the substance of knowledge,” or knowledge of the
Origin and the Source is the Origin and Source of knowledge. The truth
descends upon the mind like an eagle landing upon a mountain top or it
gushes forth and inundates the mind like a deep well which has suddenly
burst forth into a spring. In either case, the sapiential nature of what
the human being receives through spiritual experience is not the result
of man's mental faculty but issues from the nature of that experience
itself. Man can know through intuition and revelation not because he is
a thinking being who imposes the categories of his thought upon what he
perceives but because knowledge is

being. The nature of reality is none other than consciousness, which,
needless to say, cannot be limited to only its individual human mode.

Of course not everyone is capable of intellection or of having
intellectual intuition no more than everyone is capable of having faith
in a particular religion. But the lack of possibility of intellection
for everyone does not invalidate the reality of such a possibility any
more than does the fact that many people are not able to have faith
invalidate the reality of a religion. In any case for those who have the
possibility of intellectual intuition there is the means to attain a
knowledge of a sacred character that lies at the heart of that objective
revelation which constitutes religion and also at the center of man's
being. This microcosmic revelation makes possible access to that
scientist sacra which contains the knowledge of the Real and the means
of distinguishing between the Real and the illusory.

What we have designated as scientia sacra is none other than metaphysics
if this term is understood correctly as the ultimate science of the
Real. This term possesses certain unfortunate connotations because,
first of all, the prefix meta does imply transcendence but not immanence
and also it connotes a form of knowledge or science that comes after
physics whereas metaphysics is the primary and fundamental science or
wisdom which comes before and contains the principles of all the
sciences.4 Second, the habit of considering metaphysics in the West as a
branch of philosophy, even in those philosophical schools which have a
metaphysical dimension, has been instrumental in reducing the
significance of metaphysics to just mental activity rather than seeing
it as a sacred science concerned with the nature of Reality and wed to
methods for the realization of this knowledge, a science which embraces
the whole of man's being.5 In Oriental languages such terms as prajnîa,
jnîāna, ma‘rifah, or ḥiktnah connote the ultimate science of the Real
without their being reduced to a branch of another form of knowledge
known as philosophy or its equivalent. And it is in this traditional
sense of jnîāna or ma‘rifah that metaphysics, or the “science of the
Real,” can be considered as identical with scientia sacra.

If scientia sacra lies at the heart of each tradition and is not a
purely human knowledge lying outside of the sacred precinct of the
various traditions, then how can one speak of it without remaining bound
within a single religious universe? The response to this question has
led certain scholars and philosophers engaged in “comparative
philosophy” in the context of East and West to speak of
“meta-philosophy” and a meta-language which stands above and beyond the
language of a particular tradition.6 From the traditional point of view,
however, the language of metaphysics is inseparable from the content and
meaning it expresses and bears the imprint of the message, this language
having been developed by the metaphysicians and sages of various
traditions over the ages. Each tradition possesses one or several
“languages of discourse” suitable for metaphysical doctrines and there
is no need whatsoever to create a meta-language or invent a new
vocabulary today to deal with such matters, since the English language
is heir to the Western tradition and the several perfectly suitable
metaphysical languages of the West such as those of Platonism, Thomism,
and the school of Palamite theology. Moreover,

contemporary traditional authors have already resuscitated the symbolic
and intellectual aspects of modern languages which have decayed in their
symbolic and hierarchic aspects but which nevertheless contain
metaphysical possibilities because of the very nature of human
language.7 These authors have created a perfectly suitable language for
the expression of scientia sacra drawing occasionally from such sacred
languages as Sanskrit and Arabic for certain key concepts. In any case a
meta-language to express a meta-philosophy in order to expound
traditional metaphysics is totally unnecessary. The language needed has
been already forged from existing European languages which, although
reflecting the gradual degradation of thought from an intellectual point
of view, have also preserved the possibility of revival precisely
because of their inalienable link with the classical languages of the
West and the traditional metaphysics expressed in them, and even in the
earlier phases of the life of modern European languages.

If one were to ask what is metaphysics, the primary answer would be the
science of the Real or, more specifically, the knowledge by means of
which man is able to distinguish between the Real and the illusory and
to know things in their essence or as they are, which means ultimately
to know them in divinis.8 The knowledge of the Principle which is at
once the absolute and infinite Reality is the heart of metaphysics while
the distinction between levels of universal and cosmic existence,
including both the macrocosm and the microcosm, are like its limbs.
Metaphysics concerns not only the Principle in Itself and in its
manifestations but also the principles of the various sciences of a
cosmological order. At the heart of the traditional sciences of the
cosmos, as well as traditional anthropology, psychology, and aesthetics
stands the scientia sacra which contains the principles of these
sciences while being primarily concerned with the knowledge of the
Principle which is both sacred knowledge and knowledge of the sacred par
excellence, since the Sacred as such is none other than the Principle.

The Principle is Reality in contrast to all that appears as real but
which is not reality in the ultimate sense. The Principle is the
Absolute compared to which all is relative. It is Infinite while all
else is finite. The Principle is One and Unique while manifestation is
multiplicity. It is the Supreme Substance compared to which all else is
accident. It is the Essence to which all things are juxtaposed as form.
It is at once Beyond Being and Being while the order of multiplicity is
comprised of existents. It alone is while all else becomes, for It alone
is eternal in the ultimate sense while all that is externalized partakes
of change. It is the Origin but also the End, the alpha and the omega.
It is Emptiness if the world is envisaged as fullness and Fullness if
the relative is perceived in the light of its ontological poverty and
essential nothingness.9 These are all manners of speaking of the
Ultimate Reality which can be known but not by man as such. It can only
be known through the sun of the Divine Self residing at the center of
the human soul. But all these ways of describing or referring to the
Principle possess meaning and are efficacious as points of reference and
support for that knowledge of the Real that in its realized aspect
always terminates in the Ineffable and in that silence which is the
“reflection” or “shadow” of the

nonmanifested aspect of the Principle upon the plane of manifestation.
From that unitary point of view, the Principle or the Source is seen as
not only the Inward but also the Outward10 , not only the One but also
the essential reality of the many which is but the reflection of the
One. At the top of that mountain of unitive knowledge there resides but
the One; discrimination between the Real and the unreal terminates in
the awareness of the nondual nature of the Real, the awareness which is
the heart of gnosis and which represents not human knowledge but God's
knowledge of Himself, the consciousness which is the goal of the path of
knowledge and the essence of scientia sacra.11

The Ultimate Reality is at once Absolute and Infinite since no finite
reality can be absolute due to its exclusion of some domain of reality.
This reality is also the Supreme Good or the Perfection which is
inseparable from the Absolute. Reality, being at once Absolute,
Infinite, and Supreme Goodness or Perfection, cannot but give rise to
the world or multiplicity which must be realized for otherwise that
Reality would exclude certain possibilities and not be infinite. The
world flows from the infinitude and goodness of the Real for to speak of
goodness is to speak of manifestation, effusion, or creation and to
speak of infinity is to speak of all possibilities including that of the
negation of the Principle in whose direction the cosmogonic process
moves without ever realizing that negation completely, for that total
negation would be nothingness pure and simple.

Goodness is also from another point of view the image of the Absolute in
the direction of that effusion and manifestation which marks the descent
from the Principle and constitutes the world. Herein lies the root of
relativity but it is still on the plane of Divinity. It is relatively in
divinis or what could be called, using the well-known Hindu concept, the
Divine māyā.12 Relativity is a possibility of that Reality which is at
once Absolute and Infinite; hence that reality or the Absolute gives
rise to that manifestation of the good which in descending hierarchy
leads to the world. The world is ultimately good, as asserted by various
orthodox traditions,13 because it descends from the Divine Goodness. The
instrument of this descent is the reflection of the Absolute upon the
plane of that Divine Relativity, the reflection which is none other than
the Supreme Logos, the source of all cosmic perfections, the “place” of
the archetypes, the “Word” by which all things were made.14

Since the world or manifestation or creation issues from that Reality
which is at once Absolute, Infinite, and Perfection or Goodness, these
Hypostases of the Real or the Divine must be also reflected in the
manifested order. The quality of absoluteness is reflected in the very
existence of things, that mysterious presence of each thing which
distinguishes it from all other things and from nothingness. Infinitude
is reflected in the world in diverse modes in space which is indefinite
extension, in time which is potentially endless duration, in form which
displays unending diversity, in number which is marked by endless
multiplicity, and in matter, a substance which partakes potentially of
endless forms and divisions. As for Goodness, it is reflected in the
cosmos through quality itself which is indispensable to existence
however eclipsed it might

become in certain forms in the world of multiplicity which are removed
as far as possible from the luminous and essential pole of
manifestation. Space which preserves, time which changes and transforms,
form which reflects quality, number which signifies indefinite quantity
and matter which is characterized by limitless substantiality are the
conditions of existence of not only the physical world but the worlds
above reaching ultimately the Divine Empyrean and the Divine Hypostases
of Absoluteness, Infinity, and Perfection themselves.

Moreover, each of the Divine Hypostases is reflected in a particular
manner in the five conditions of existence. Absoluteness is reflected in
space as center, in time as the present moment, in matter as the ether
which is the principle of both matter and energy, in form as the sphere
which is the most perfect of forms and generator of all other regular
geometric forms that are potentially contained in it, and in number as
unity which is the source and principle of all numbers. Infinitude is
reflected in space as extension which theoretically knows no bound, in
time as duration which has logically no end, in matter as the
indefiniteness of material substantiality, in form as the unlimited
possibility of diversity, and in number as the limitlessness of
quantity. As for Perfection, it is reflected in space as the contents or
objects in space reflecting Divine Qualities and also as pure existence
which as the Sufis say is the “Breath of the Compassionate” (nafas
al-raḥmān), in space and time likewise as shapes and events possessing
quality, in form as beauty and in number as that qualitative aspect of
number always related to geometric forms which is usually associated
with the idea of Pythagorean number. Scientia sacra sees these aspects
of cosmic existence as reflections upon the plane or the multiple planes
of manifestation of the Supreme Hypostases of Absoluteness, Infinitude,
and Goodness which characterize the Real as such. It also sees each of
these conditions of existence as reflecting directly an aspect of the
Divinity: matter and energy the Divine Substance, form the Logos, number
the Divine Unity which is inexhaustible, space the infinite extension of
Divine Manifestation, and time the rhythms of the universal cycles of
existence which the Abrahamic traditions allude to in passing as far as
their official, formal theologies are concerned and which Hinduism
highlights, referring to them as days and nights in the life of Brahma.

Since metaphysics as developed in the Occident has almost always been
related to ontology, it is important to pause a moment and discuss the
relation of Being to the Principle or Ultimate Reality. If Being is
envisaged as the principle of existence or of all that exists, then It
cannot be identified with the Principle as such because the Principle is
not exhausted by its creating aspect. Being is the first determination
of the Supreme Principle in the direction of manifestation, and ontology
remains only a part of metaphysics and is incomplete as long as it
envisages the Principle only as Being in the sense defined. But if Being
is used to embrace and include the sense of Absoluteness and Infinity,
then it can mean both the Supra-Being or Reality beyond Being and Being
as its first determination, even if only the term Being is used. Such
seems to be the case with esse as employed by

certain of the Scholastics and also wujūd in some of the schools of
Islamic philosophy and theosophy.15

The distinction between Being and being, Being and existence, existence
and essence or quiddity and the relation between quiddity or essence and
existence in existents lies at heart of medieval Islamic, Jewish, and
Christian philosophy and has been discussed in numerous works of
medieval thought. From the point of view of scientia sacra what caused
this profound way of envisaging reality to become unintelligible and
finally rejected in the West was the loss of that intellectual intuition
which destroyed the sense of the mystery of existence and reduced the
subject of philosophy from the study of the act of existence (esto) to
the existent (ens), thereby gradually reducing reality to pure “it”
divorced from the world of the Spirit and the majesty of Being whose
constant effusions uphold the world which appears to the senses as
possessing a continuous “horizontal” existence divorced from the
“vertical” Cause or Being per se. That Islamic philosophy did not end
with that impasse which marks the study of ontology in Western
philosophy is due to its insistence upon the study of Being and its act
rather than existents and to the wedding of this philosophy, by
Suhrawardī and those who were to follow him, to spiritual experience
which made the experience of Being not only a possibility but the source
for all philosophical speculation concerning the concept and reality of
being.16

The Ultimate Reality which is both Supra-Being and Being is at once
transcendent and immanent. It is beyond everything and at the very heart
and center of man's soul. Scientia sacra can be expounded in the
language of one as well as the other perspective. It can speak of God or
the Godhead, Allah, the Tao, or even nirvāna as being beyond the world,
or forms or samsāra, while asserting ultimately that nirvāna is samsāra,
and samsāra, nirvāna. But it can also speak of the Supreme Self, of
Ātman, compared to which all objectivization is māyā. The Ultimate
Reality can be seen as both the Supreme Object and the Innermost
Subject, for God is both transcendent and immanent, but He can be
experienced as immanent only after He has been experienced as
transcendent. Only God as Being can allow man to experience the Godhead
as Supra-Being. The unitive knowledge which sees the world not as
separative creation but as manifestation that is united through symbols
and the very ray of existence to the Source does not at all negate the
majesty of transcendence. Without that majesty, the beauty of Divine
Proximity cannot be beheld and integral metaphysics is fully aware of
the necessity, on its own level, of the theological formulations which
insist upon the hiatus between God and man or the Creator and the world.
The metaphysical knowledge of unity comprehends the theological one in
both a figurative and literal sense, while the reverse is not true. That
is why the attainment of that unitive knowledge is impregnated with the
perfume of sanctity which always strengthens the very foundations of the
religion with which the formal theology in question is concerned, while
the study of formal theology can never result in that scientia sacra
which simply belongs to another dimension and which relies upon another
aspect of the functioning of the Intellect upon the human plane.

Metaphysics does not only distinguish between the Real and the apparent
and Being and becoming but also between grades of existence. The
hierarchic nature of reality is a universal assertion of all traditions
and is part and parcel of their religious practices as well as their
doctrines, whether conceived in terms of various hosts and orders of
angels as described in the famous Celestial Hierarchies of Dionysius, or
levels of light and darkness as in certain schools of Islamic esoterism,
or as various orders of gods and titans as in religions with a
mythological structure such as Hinduism. Even in Buddhism for which the
Supreme Principle is seen as the Void or Emptiness rather than Fullness,
the vast intermediate worlds are depicted with remarkable power and
beauty in both Buddhist cosmological texts and Buddhist art. The
emphasis upon the hierarchic structure of reality in traditional
doctrines is so great that a famous Persian poem states that he who does
not accept the hierarchy of existence is an infidel (zindīq). Here again
scientia sacra which is concerned with the nature of reality is
distinguished from theology as usually understood, which can remain
satisfied with what concerns man directly and a simpler view of reality
based on God and man without emphasis upon the hierarchy of existence,
although even in theology many schools have not failed to take into
consideration the existence if not always the full significance of the
intermediate planes of reality.17

The relation between the various levels of reality or hierarchy of
existence cannot be fully understood without taking into consideration
another important notion found in one way or another in all the complete
expressions of the scientia sacra, this notion being that of necessity
to which is contrasted the notion of possibility. The distinction
between necessity and possibility is the cornerstone of the philosophy
of Ibn Sīnā (Avicenna) who has been called the “philosopher of being”
and father of medieval ontology.18 But the significance of both of these
terms is of a purely metaphysical order and cannot be limited to the
philosophical realm, even if this be traditional philosophy. It is the
fruit of intellection rather than ratiocination as are in fact many of
the tenets of traditional philosophy which veil in a syllogistic garb
intuitions of a purely metaphysical nature. The presence of the notions
of necessity and possibility in both Hindu and Far Eastern doctrines
point in fact to realities of a universal order not at all limited to
one particular mode of exposition or school of metaphysics.

Necessity is opposed to possibility conceptually but, if the meaning of
possibility is understood fully, it will be seen that in one sense it
complements necessity and is opposed to necessity only in one of its
meanings. The root of possibility is related to potentiality and also
“puissance,” all three words being derived from posse, which means “to
be able to.” Possibility has in fact two meanings: one, the quality or
character of something that can exist or not exist; and two, the quality
or character of something which has the power and capability to perform
or carry out an act. In the first sense the quiddities of things are
possible, or contingent; an object can exist or not exist and there is
no logical or metaphysical contradiction whether, let us say, a horse
exists or not. In this sense but on a higher level, the archetypes or
what Islamic metaphysics call al-a‘yān al

thābitah or “immutable essences”19 are also possible beings, only God
being necessary. Taken in this meaning of the term, possibility is
opposed to necessity while things which do exist and therefore must
exist have become necessary not through their own essence but through
the Necessary Being which alone is necessary in Itself. That is why, to
use the language of Islamic philosophy again, they are called al-wājib
bi'l-ghayr, literally “that which is made necessary by other than
itself,” the “other” being ultimately the Necessary Being.

In the second sense of the meaning of possibility as power, it is not
opposed to necessity but complements it as far as the Principle is
concerned. God is Absolute Necessity and Infinite Possibility, the
omnipotence of God reflected in the Divine Attribute al-Qādir in the
Quran, meaning exactly possibility in this second sense. Whatever
happens in this world is according to the Will of God but also in
conformity with a Divine Possibility. God could not will what is not
possibility in this sense for He would then negate His own Nature.
Whatever claims a blind type of religious voluntarism might make, God's
omnipotence cannot contradict His Nature and when the Gospel claims,
“With God all things are possible,” it is referring precisely to this
Infinite Possibility of God.

Each world brought into being corresponds to a Divine Possibility and
gains existence through the Divine Will which operates on different
levels, sometimes appearing as contradictory to the eyes of the earthly
creature. But there is never anything arbitrary about what God wills;
His wisdom complements His Will and His Nature remains inviolable.

As far as necessity is concerned, it can be said that although the
medieval philosophers called pure Being the Necessary Being, strictly
speaking only the Beyond Being or Ultimate Reality is necessity in
Itself and necessary with respect to Itself. Being is necessary
vis-a-vis the world so that from the point of view of the world or of
multiplicity, it can be legitimately considered as the Necessary Being.
But Being can also be considered as Possibility as such which must be
distinguished from the possibilities which are qualities of Being. These
qualities possess two aspects: they are contingent or possible in
relation to the Principle or Essence, that is, they can exist or not
exist, and they are necessary in their content and so participate in the
necessity of the Essence. From the consideration of these two aspects
one can see that there are two kinds of possibilities: those which
reflect necessity and those which reflect contingency. The first kind
engenders objects which definitely exist and the second those which can
possibly not exist.

God gives existence to possibilities which are so many reflections and
reverberations of Being and from this breathing of existence upon the
quiddities of possibilities the world and, in fact, the myriad of worlds
are born. That Divine Relativity or māyā, as it is projected toward
nothingness and away from the Source, produces privative modalities and
inversions of these possibilities whose origin is positive reflection
and inversion, polarization of light and casting of shadows, luminous
Logos and dark Demiurge. Being as Possibility is Itself the supreme veil
of the Reality

which in Itself is not only Infinite but also Absolute, that Essence
which is beyond all determination.20

To speak of the veil is to be concerned with one of the key concepts
with which scientia sacra is concerned, one which, however, has not been
as much emphasized in Western metaphysical doctrines as it has in the
East, although it is certainly mentioned by such figures as Eckhart and
Silesius who allude to the Divine Relativity and are aware of its
significance for the understanding of how the roots and principles of
manifestation are to be found in the Principle Itself. The veil is none
other than what the Hindus call māyā and the Sufis ḥijāb. The fact that
māyā has now become practically an English word points to the necessity
of dealing with such a concept in the exposition of traditional
doctrines and the lack of an appropriate term in the English language to
convey all that māyā signifies.

Māyā is usually translated as illusion and from the nondualistic or
Advaitist point of view māyā is illusion, only Ātman, the Supreme Self,
being real. But māyā is also creativity and “Divine Play” (līlā). On the
principial level she is relativity which is the source of separateness,
exteriorization, and objectivization. She is that tendency toward
nothingness which brings manifestation into being, the nothingness which
is never reached but which is implied by the cosmogonic movement away
from the Principle. Infinitude could not but include the possibility of
separation, division, and externalization which characterize all that is
other than the Principle.21 Māyā is the supreme veil and also the
supreme theophany which at once veils and reveals.22 God being good
cannot but radiate His goodness and this tendency toward radiation or
manifestation implies that movement away from the Source which
characterizes cosmic and even metacosmic levels of reality away from the
Origin which alone is absolutely real. Māyā is almost the same as the
Islamic raḥmah, the Divine Mercy, whose “breath” existentiates the
world, the very substance of the world being nafas al-raḥmān, the Breath
of the Compassionate23 in the same way that one can call māyā the breath
of Ātman. For Hinduism, however, the creation of the world or the
casting of the veil of māyā upon the Absolute Self or Ātman is expressed
as “Divine Play,” while for Islam this externalization which is none
other than the activity of māyā is envisaged as the love of God to be
“known,” the origin of the world being the revelation of God to Himself
according to the famous tradition of the Prophet (ḥadīth), “I was a
hidden treasure, I desired to be known, hence I created the world in
order to be known.”24

Formal theology envisages God and the world or the Creator and the
created in a completely distinct and “absolute” manner and is therefore
unable to provide answers for certain fundamental questions
intellectually, questions which can be dealt with only from the
perspective of the scientia sacra and the doctrine of māyā or veil
which, on the highest level, implies introduction of relativity into the
principial plane without, however, reaching the level of the Absolute
which remains beyond all duality and relativity. Since there is a world
which is relative, the roots of this world must exist in the principial
order itself and this root is none other than the Divine māyā which
veils and manifests the One upon all planes of reality.

She is the Feminine, at once Mary and Eve. Evil issues from the
exteriorizing activity of māyā but Existence which remains pure and good
finally prevails over evil as Eve was forgiven for her sins by the
spiritual inviolability and victory of Mary.

Māyā acts through both radiation and reverberation or reflection, first
preparing the ground or plane of manifestation and then manifesting both
the radiation and reverberation which take place on this plane. To use
an image of Schuon,25 if we envisage a point which symbolizes the
Absolute or the Supreme Substance, the radii symbolize the radiation,
the circumference the reflection or reverberation of the center and the
area of the whole circle, Existence itself,26 or a particular level of
existence in which māyā repeats her act. Māyā is the source of all
duality even on the principial level causing the distinction between the
Essence and the Qualities. It is also the source of the dualism between
subject and object even on the highest level beyond which there is but
the One, in which knower and known, or subject and object are one. But
māyā does not remain bound to the principial level alone. She is
self-projected through various levels of cosmic existence which a ḥadīth
calls the seventy thousand veils of light and darkness and which can be
summarized as the three fundamental levels of angelic, animic, and
physical existence.

On each level there is a manifestation or reflection of the Supreme
Substance and the action of māyā. For example, on the physical or
material plane, the reflection of Substance is the ether which is the
invisible support and origin of the physical elements. The reverberation
of māyā is matter and its radiation energy. Moreover, the two main
tendencies of māyā, which are conservation and transformation, translate
themselves into space and time in this world and the many worlds and
cycles which transform these worlds on the cosmic level. There is, to be
sure, an immense gulf which separates various worlds and an almost
complete incommensurability between the animic and the material worlds
and also between the angelic or spiritual world and the animic. But
through all these levels māyā remains māyā, being at once the revealer
of the Real and Its veil, in herself the intermediary and isthmus
between the Infinite and the finite.

Māyā in its aspect of illusion is also the cause for this impossibility
of encompassing Reality in a closed system of thought so characteristic
of profane philosophy. The Absolute is blinding evidence or something
incomprehensible to those who do not possess the eye or intuition to
grasp it conceptually. In any case, ratiocination, belonging to the
realm of relativity, cannot be used to prove or perceive the Absolute
which remains beyond the reach of all attempts of the relative to
comprehend It. But intelligence can know the Absolute and in fact only
the Absolute is completely intelligible. Below that level, the activity
of māyā enters into play and brings about an element of ambiguity and
uncertainty. If there were to be such a thing as pure relativity, it
would be completely unintelligible. But even in the relative world which
still bears the imprint of the Absolute, the element of ambiguity and
unintelligibility of māyā enters into all mental activity which would
seek to transgress beyond its legitimate function and try to enmesh the
Absolute in a finite system of thought based upon ratiocination.27

Human thought as mental activity cannot become absolutely conformable to
the Real as a result of māyā, whereas direct knowledge or intellection
has such a power. The plight of innumerable schools of modern philosophy
and their failure to achieve the task of encompassing the Real through
the process of purely human thought is caused by the power of māyā which
exercises its illusory spell most upon those who would deny her reality.

Closely related to the doctrine of māyā is the question of evil and its
meaning in the light of the absolute goodness of the Origin and Source,
a question which lies at the heart of the problems of theodicy,
especially as they have been discussed in the Abrahamic world over the
ages. This problem, namely, how can a God who is both omnipotent and
good create a world which contains evil, is insoluble on the level of
both formal theology and rationalistic philosophy. Its answer can be
found only in metaphysics or scientia sacra, the eclipse of which has
caused many men to lose their faith in religion and the religious world
view precisely because of their inability to gain access to a doctrine
which would solve this apparent contradiction. From the metaphysical
point of view there is not just the question of the omnipotence of God,
there is also the Divine Nature which the Divine Will cannot contradict.
God cannot will to cease to be God. Now, this Divine Nature is not
limited to Being; as already mentioned, it is the Absolute and Infinite
Reality which is the Beyond Being or Supra-Being of which Being is the
first determination in the direction of manifestation or creation. The
Divine Nature or Ultimate Reality is both infinite and good and
therefore wills to radiate and manifest Itself. From this radiation
issue the states of existence, the multiple worlds, hence separation,
elongation from the Source from which results what manifests itself as
evil on a particular plane of reality. To speak of Infinity is to speak
of the possibility of the negation of the Source in the direction of
nothingness, hence of evil which one might call the “crystallization or
existentiation of nothingness.” Since only God-who is both the Beyond
Being and Being-is Good, as the Gospels assert, all that is other than
God partakes of that element of privation which is the source of evil.
The will of God as the Godhead or the Beyond Being is the realization of
the possibilities inherent in Its Infinitude and hence that separation
from the Source which implies evil. But precisely because manifestation
is a possibility of Infinite Reality, the existence of the world in
itself is not evil nor does the element of evil appear in any of the
worlds still close to the Divine Proximity.28 Now, the Will of God as
Being operates within the radiation and reverberation caused by māyā and
the very Nature of that Infinite Reality which is the Supra-Being. The
Will of God on this level opposes concrete forms of evil according to
the criteria established by various revelations and always in the light
of the total good and in accordance with the economy of a particular
traditional mode of life. On this level the Will of God is opposed to
various types of evil without being able to eradicate existence as such,
which would amount to negating the Divine Nature Itself. There are in
reality two levels of operation of the Divine Will or even two Divine
Wills, one related to the Absolute and Infinite Reality which cannot but
manifest and create, hence, separation, elongation, and privation which
appear as evil; and the second related to the Will of Being

which opposes the presence of evil in accordance with the divine laws
and norms which constitute the ethical structures of various traditional
worlds.

To relate evil to the infinity of that Reality which is also the
All-Possibility, does not mean to deny the reality of evil on a
particular level of reality. The existence of evil is inseparable from
the relative level in which it manifests itself. One cannot simply say
that evil does not exist as do even certain traditional masters of
gnosis who, gazing with constancy upon the overwhelming goodness of the
Divine Principle, in a sense circumvent evil and pass it by.29 But this
is of course not the case of all the traditional sages, many of whom
have provided the metaphysical key for the understanding of evil. From
the point of view of scientia sacra, although real on the relative plane
of reality, evil has no reality as a substance and in itself as a thing
or object. Evil is always partial and fragmented. It must exist because
of the ontological hiatus between the Principle and manifestation but it
remains always limited and bound while goodness is unlimited and opens
unto the Infinite. Also as far as the Will of God is concerned, God
wills evil not as evil but as part of a greater good to which this
segmented reality called evil contributes. That is why evil is never
evil in its existential substance but through that privation of a good
which plays a role in the total economy of the cosmos and contributes to
a greater good. Every disequilibrium and disorder is of a partial and
transient nature contributing to that total equilibrium, harmony, and
order which is the cosmos.30

The doctrine of māyā or ḥijāb enables us to understand the metaphysical
roots of that which appears as evil. This doctrine explains evil as
privation and separation from the Good and also as an element
contributing to a greater good, although within a particular ambience or
plane of existence, evil remains evil as a result of either privation or
excess. If this doctrine is fully understood then it is possible to
comprehend the meaning of evil as such. But even in this case it is not
possible for man to understand such or such an evil, only God being
totally and completely intelligible. In any case, although the Divine
Will wills everything that exists including what appears as evil, as far
as man, who is both intelligent and has a free will, is concerned, God
wills for him only the good. The best way of solving the question of
evil and theodicy is in fact to live a life which would make possible
the actualization of the scienta sacra in one's being. This realization
or actualization is the best possible way of understanding the nature of
the Good and the why of terrestrial human existence which, being removed
from God, cannot but be marred by the fragmentation, dissipation, and
privation that appears as evil and that is as real as that plane of
reality upon which it manifests itself. Evil ceases to exist, however,
on a higher plane, where transient and partial disorders contribute to a
greater order and privation to a greater good.

Closely allied to the question of good and evil is that of free will and
determinism which has also occupied philosophers and theologians in the
Abrahamic world over the ages but which also is of central concern in
other traditional climates such as that of India as evidenced by the
discussion of correct action in the Bhagavad-Gīta. In this question also
there is no possibility of going beyond the either-or dichotomy as long
as one remains

on the level of formal theology or rationalistic philosophy as witnessed
by centuries of debates among theologians and philosophers in Judaism,
Christianity, and Islam. From the metaphysical point of view, however,
the whole debate appears as sterile and fragmented through the fact that
both sides attribute a quality of absoluteness to that which is
relative, namely the human plane. Metaphysically speaking, only the
Ultimate Reality is absolute and at once pure necessity and pure
freedom. Only God is completely necessary and free, being both
Absoluteness and Infinitude. Now, on the human plane, we are already on
the level of relativity, therefore there cannot be either absolute
determination or absolute free will. Something of both must manifest
itself on the level of human relativity. If only one of these two
conditions were to be present, the plane of relativity would no longer
be relative but absolute. Man's freedom is as real as himself. He ceases
to be free in the sense of independent of the Divine Will to the extent
that he ceases to be separated ontologically from God. At the same time,
man is determined and not free to the extent that an ontological hiatus
separates him from his Source and Origin, for only God is freedom.
Journeying from the relative toward the Absolute means at once losing
the freedom of living in error and gaining freedom from the tyranny of
all the psycho-material determinations which imprison and stifle the
soul. In God there is pure freedom and pure necessity and only in Him is
man completely free and also completely determined but with a
determination which, being nothing but man's own most profound nature
and the root of his being, is none other than the other face of freedom,
total and unconditional.

Intelligence is a divine gift which pierces through the veil of māyā and
is able to know reality as such. It is a ray of light which pierces
through the veils of cosmic existence to the Origin and connects the
periphery of existence, upon which fallen man lives, to the Center
wherein resides the Self. The Intellect is itself divine and only human
to the extent that man participates in it. It is a substance as well as
a function; it is light as well as vision. The Intellect is not the mind
nor is it reason which is the reflection of the Intellect upon the human
plane, but it is the root and center of consciousness and what has been
traditionally called the soul. In the technical sense, however, the soul
must be considered as the equivalent of the anima or psyche in which
case the Intellect is spiritus or nous from whose marriage with the
passive and feminine psyche is born that gold which symbolizes the
perfection of the sanctified soul.

The metacosmic principle which is the Intellect is the source of both
knowledge and being, of the subjective conscience which knows and the
objective order which is known. It is also the source of revelation
which creates a nexus between man and the cosmos and of course the
metacosmic Reality. The Logos or Buddhi or ‘aql, as the Intellect is
called in various traditions, is the luminous center which is the
generating agent of the world-for “it was by the Word that all things
were made”-of man, and of religion. It is God's knowledge of Himself and
the first in His creation. Moreover, as there is a hierarchy of cosmic
existence, so are there levels of consciousness and degrees of descent
of the Intellect through various levels of existence until man is
reached, in whose heart the ray of Intellect still shines, although

it is usually dimmed by the passions and the series of “falls” that have
separated man from what he really is.

Yet, even the consciousness of fallen man and the intelligence which
shines within him, although a distant reflection of the Intellect,
nevertheless display something of the miracle of the Intellect which is
at once supernatural and natural. Perhaps the most immediate experience
of man is his subjectivity, the mystery of inwardness and a
consciousness which can reflect upon itself, opening inwardly unto the
Infinite which is also bliss. No less of a miracle is the power of
objectivity, the power of human intelligence to know the world in an
objective manner and with a categorical certitude which no amount of
sophism can destroy. Finally, there is the mystery of the adequation of
knowledge, of the fact that our intelligence corresponds to the nature
of reality and that what man knows corresponds to aspects of the Real.31
But these are all mysteries as long as man is cut off from the light of
intellectual intuition or intellection. Otherwise, in the light of the
Intellect itself both the subjective and objective powers of
intelligence are perfectly intelligible.

As already stated, scientia sacra cannot be attained without
intellection and the correct functioning of intelligence within man.
That is why those who are cut off from this inner sacrament32 not only
repudiate the teachings of this sacred knowledge but also offer
rationalistic arguments against them based usually on incomplete or
false premises, expecting the heavens to collapse as a result of this
sound and fury which metaphysically signifies nothing. Intellection does
not reach the truth as a result of profane thought or reasoning but
through an a priori direct intuition of the truth. Reasoning may act as
an occasion for intellection but it cannot be the cause of intellection.
For that very reason the fruit of intellection cannot be nullified or
negated by any form of reasoning which, based on the limitations of the
person who uses reasoning, often results in error pure and simple. This
assertion does not mean of course that intellection is against logic or
that it is irrational. On the contrary, there is no truth which can be
considered illogical, logic itself being an ontological reality of the
human state. But the role and function of reasoning and the use of logic
in metaphysics and profane philosophy are completely different, as
different as the use of mathematics in the rosette of the Chartres
Cathedral or a cupola of one of the mosques of Isfahan and in a modern
skyscraper.

Although the Intellect shines within the being of man, man is too far
removed from his primordial nature to be able to make full use of this
divine gift by himself. He needs revelation which alone can actualize
the intellect in man and allow it to function properly. The day when
each man was also a prophet and when the intellect functioned in man
“naturally” so that he saw all things in divinis and possessed a direct
knowledge of a sacred character is long past. The traditional doctrines
themselves emphasize that in the later unfolding of the cosmic cycle it
is only revelation or avatāric descent that enables man to see once
again with the “eye of the heart” which is the “eye of the intellect.”
If there are exceptions, these are exceptions which only prove the rule
and in any case “the wind bloweth where it listeth.”

Revelation in its esoteric dimension makes possible, through initiation,
access to higher levels of man's being as well as consciousness. The
appropriate rites, the traditional cadre, forms and symbols, and the
grace issuing from revelation provide keys with which man is able to
open the doors of the inner chambers of his being and with the help of
the spiritual master to journey through the cosmic labyrinth with the
result of finally attaining that treasure which is none other than the
pearl of gnosis. Revelation actualizes the possibilities of the
intellect, removes impediments of the carnal soul which prevent the
intellect from functioning, and makes possible the transmission of an
initiatic knowledge which at the same time resides within the very
substance of the intellect. There is an unbridgeable hiatus between
intelligence sanctified by revelation and the intelligence which, cut
off from this source and also from its own root, is reduced to its
reflection upon the human mind and atrophied into that truncated and
fragmented faculty which is considered scientifically as intelligence.33

As far as the relation between the intellect and revelation is
concerned, it is fundamental to say a few words on the rapport between
intellectuality and sacred scripture which has been so forgotten in the
modern world. Without reviving spiritual exegesis, it is not possible to
rediscover scientia sacra in the bosom of a tradition dominated by the
presence of sacred scripture. Scripture possesses an inner dimension
which is attainable only through intellection operating within a
traditional framework and which alone is able to solve certain apparent
contradictions and riddles in sacred texts. Once intellectual intuition
becomes inoperative and the mind a frozen lake over which ideas glide
but into which nothing penetrates, then the revealed text also veils its
inner dimension and spiritual exegesis becomes reduced to archaeology
and philology, not to speak of the extrapolation of the subjective
errors of the present era back into the age of the revelation in
question. Clement and Origen become thus transformed into modern
exegetes for whom the New Testament is little more than an ethical
commentary upon the social conditions of first-century Palestine.

In the Oriental world, including the Judeo-Christian tradition, the
spiritual science of exegesis has never died out completely. The sacred
text serves as the source for the formal world of the tradition in
question, including its ritual and liturgical practices and its sacred
art, as well as the intellectual aspect of the tradition extending from
formal theology, philosophy, and the science of symbols to scientia
sacra itself which crowns the inner message conveyed by the sacred text
and which is attained through the intelligence that is sanctified by
that very sacred scripture.34 In Islam, dominated by the blinding
presence of the Quran, every aspect of the tradition has been related to
the Holy Book and the category of exegetes35 has ranged from those
concerned with the Divine Law to the gnostics who have penetrated
through that spiritual hermeneutics or ta'wīl36 to the pearl of wisdom
residing behind the veil of the external forms of the Holy Book. Such
masterpieces of Sufism as the Mathnawī of Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī are in
reality commentaries upon the Quran, not to speak of the numerous
esoteric commentaries of such masters as Ibn ‘Arabī,37 Ṣadr al-Dīn
al-Qūnyawī,38 ‘Abd al-Razzāq al-Kāshānī, Rashīd al-Dīn Aḥmad Mībudī, and
others. Both

scientia sacra and all the ancillary traditional sciences in Islam may
be said to issue forth from the fountainhead of the inner wisdom
contained in the Quran in the same way that Hinduism considers the
traditional sciences to be the limbs of the Vedas. Spiritual
hermeneutics is the means whereby the intelligence, sanctified by
revelation, is able to penetrate into the heart of revelation to
discover that principial truth which is the very root and substance of
intelligence itself. In this process the microcosmic manifestation of
the Intellect, which is the source of inner illumination and
intellection, unveils the inner meaning of that macrocosmic
manifestation of the Intellect which is revelation or more specifically,
sacred scripture. Moreover, the same truth pertains mutatis mutandis to
the interpretation of the inner meaning of that other revealed book
which is the cosmos itself.

Scientia sacra envisages intelligence in its rapport not only with
revelation in an external sense but also with the source of inner
revelation which is the center of man, namely the heart. The seat of
intelligence is the heart and not the head, as affirmed by all
traditional teachings. The word heart, hṛdaya in Sanskrit, Herz in
German, kardia in Greek, and cor/cordis in Latin, have the root hrd or
krd which, like the Egyptian Horus, imply the center of the world or a
world.39 The heart is also the center of the human microcosm and
therefore the “locus” of the Intellect by which all things were made.
The heart is also the seat of sentiments and the will, the other
elements of which the human being is constituted. Profound emotions as
well as will have their origin in the heart as does intelligence which
constitutes the apex of the microcosmic ternary of powers or faculties.
It is also in the heart that intelligence and faith meet and where faith
itself becomes saturated with the light of sapience. In the Quran both
faith (īmān) and intelligence (‘aql) are explicitly identified with the
heart (al-qalb),40 while in Hinduism the Sanskrit term śraddhā, which is
usually translated as faith, means literally knowledge of the heart.41
In Latin also the fact that credo and cor/cordis are derived from the
same root points to the same metaphysical truth. This traditional
exegesis of language reveals not only the relation of principial
knowledge to the heart but also the important metaphysical principle
that integral intelligence is never divorced from faith but that, on the
contrary, faith is necessary in the actualization of the possibilities
of intellection within the cadre of a revelation. That intelligence
which is able to attain to the knowledge of the sacred is already
sanctified and rooted in the center of the human state where it is never
divorced from either faith or love. In the heart, knowledge in fact
always coincides with love. Only when externalized does knowledge become
related to the mind and the activity of the brain, and love to that
substance which is usually called the soul.

This externalization of the intelligence and its projection upon the
plane of the mind is, however, a necessary condition of human existence
without which man would not be man, the creature who is created as a
thinking being. Dialectical intelligence identified with the mind is not
in itself negative; in fact, human intelligence in its fullness implies
the correct functioning of both the intelligence of the heart and that
of the mind, the first being intuitive and the second analytical and
discursive. The two

functions together make possible the reception, crystallization,
formulation, and finally communication of the truth. Mental formulation
of the intuition received by the intelligence in the heart becomes
completely assimilated by man and actualized through the activity of the
mind. This in fact is one of the main roles of meditation in spiritual
exercises, meditation being related to the activity of the mind. Through
this process also the light received by the heart is communicated and
transmitted, such an activity being necessary because of the very nature
of the content of the intuition received by the intelligence residing in
the heart, the content which, being good, has to give of itself and,
like all goodness, shine forth.42 The human being needs to exteriorize
certain inner truths in order to be able to interiorize, to analyze in
order to synthesize, synthesis needing a phase of analysis. Hence, the
need of man for language which proceeds from holy silence and returns
again to it, but which plays a vital role in the formulation of the
truth issuing from the first silence and in preparing man for return to
the second silence which is synthesis after analysis, return to unity
after separation.43

Symbolically, the mind can be considered as the moon which reflects the
light of the sun which is the heart. The intelligence in the heart
shines upon the plane of the mind which then reflects this light upon
the dark night of the terrestrial existence of fallen man. Scientia
sacra which issues from the total intelligence of the heart,44
therefore, also includes the dialectic of the mind. In fact, some of the
greatest dialecticians in both East and West have been metaphysicians
who have realized the supreme station of knowledge. What tradition
opposes is not the activity of the mind but its divorce from the heart,
the seat of intelligence and the location of the “eye of knowledge,”
which the Sufis call the eye of the heart (‘ayn al-qalb or chishm-i dil)
and which is none other than the “third eye” of the Hindu tradition. It
is this eye which transcends duality and the rational functioning of the
mind based upon analysis and which perceives the unity that is at once
the origin and end of the multiplicity perceived by the mind and the
mind's own power to analyze and know discursively. That is why the Sufis
chant:

Open the eye of thy heart so that thou wilst see the Spirit

So that thou wilst see that which cannot be seen.45

The attempt of the rational mind to discover the Intellect through its
own light is seen by tradition to be futile because the object which the
rational faculty is trying to perceive is actually the subject which
makes the very act of perception by the rational faculty possible. A
mind which is cut off from the light of the intelligence of the heart
and which seeks to find God is unaware that the light with which it is
seeking to discover God is itself a ray of the Light of God. Such a mind
cannot but be like a person wandering in the desert in the brightness of
day with a lamp in his hand looking for the sun.46 Blindness does not
issue from reason but from reason being cut off from the intellect and
then trying to play the role of the intellect in the attainment of
knowledge. Such an attempt cannot but result in that desacralization of
knowledge and of life that one already observes in members of that
segment of humanity which has chosen to take its destiny into its own
hands and live on the earth as if it were only of this earth.

Since scientia sacra is expressed outwardly and does not remain only on
the level of the inner illumination of the heart, it is necessary to
understand something of the kind of language it employs. The formal
language used for the expression of scientia sacra, and in fact nearly
the whole spectrum of traditional teachings, is that of symbolism.
Scientia sacra can be expressed in human words as well as in landscape
paintings, beating of drums, or other formal means which convey meaning.
But in all cases symbolism remains the key for the understanding of its
language. Fortunately, during this century much has been written on the
veritable significance of symbols, and it has been shown, especially in
works identified with the circle of traditional writers, that symbols
are not man-made signs, but reflections on a lower level of the
existence of a reality belonging to the higher order.47 Symbols are
ontological aspects of a thing, to say the least as real as the thing
itself, and in fact that which bestows significance upon a thing within
the universal order of existence. In the hierarchic universe of
traditional metaphysics, it can be said that every level of reality and
everything on every level of reality is ultimately a symbol, only the
Real being Itself as such. But on a more limited scale, one can say that
symbols reflect in the formal order archetypes belonging to the
principial realm and that through symbols the symbolized is unified with
its archetypal reality.48

There are, moreover, symbols which are “natural” in the sense of being
inherent in the nature of certain objects and forms through the very
cosmogonic process which has brought forth these forms upon the
terrestrial plane. There are other symbols which are sanctified by a
particular revelation that is like a second creation. The sun is
“naturally” the symbol of the Divine Intellect for anyone who still
possesses the faculty of symbolic perception and in whom the “symbolist
spirit” is operative. But the same sun is sanctified in a special manner
in solar cults such as Mithraism and gains a special significance in a
particular traditional universe as has wine in Christianity or water in
Islam. The Sufi poets may use the symbolism of wine in the first sense
of symbol but it is the Christic descent which has given that special
significance to wine in the Eucharist as a sanctified symbol that
remains bound to the particular world which is Christian.49

Scientia sacra makes use of both types of symbolism in the exposition of
its teachings but is always rooted in its formal aspect in the tradition
in which it flowers and functions and by virtue of which the very
attainment of this sacred knowledge is possible in an operative manner.
Sufism may draw occasionally from Hindu or Neoplatonic formulations and
symbols, but its formal world is that of the Quran and it is the grace
issuing from the Quranic revelation which has made the attainment of
gnosis in Sufism possible. It is in fact the living tradition that molds
the language of discourse of metaphysics and that chooses among the
symbols available to it those which best serve its purpose of
communicating a doctrine of a sapiential and sacred nature. On the one
hand, symbolism can be fully understood only in the light of a living
spirituality without which it can become a maze of riddles; on the other
hand, symbols serve as the means whereby man is able to understand the
language of scientia sacra.

Finally, it must be emphasized that traditional metaphysics or scientia
sacra is not only a theoretical exposition of the knowledge of reality.
Its aim is to guide man, to illuminate him, and allow him to attain the
sacred. Therefore, its expositions are also points of reference, keys
with which to open certain doors and means of opening the mind to
certain realities. In their theoretical aspect they have a provisional
aspect in the sense of the Buddhist upāya, of accommodating means of
teaching the truth. In a sense, scientia sacra contains both the seed
and the fruit of the tree of knowledge. As theory it is planted as a
seed in the heart and mind of man, a seed that if nurtured through
spiritual practice and virtue becomes a plant which finally blossoms
forth and bears fruit in which, once again, that seed is contained. But
if the first seed is theoretical knowledge, in the sense of theoria or
vision, the second seed is realized gnosis, the realization of a
knowledge which being itself sacred, consumes the whole being of the
knower and, as the sacred, demands of man all that he is. That is why it
is not possible to attain this knowledge in any way except by being
consumed by it.

The result of my life can be summarized in three words;

I was immature, I matured and I was consumed.50

RŪMĪ

Notes
-----

[^1]: On the meaning of this term see Nasr, Islamic Science-An
Illustrated Study, London, 1976, p. 14.

[^2]: “Toute connaissance est, par définition, celle de la Réalité
absolue; c’est à dire que la Réalité est l’objet nécessaire, unique,
essentiel de toute connaissance possible.” Schuon, L’Oeil du coeur, p.
20.

[^3]: Islamic as well as Jewish and Christian philosophers of the
medieval period distinguished between the Active Intellect (al-‘aql
al-fa“al, intellectus agens, hasekhel hapo’et) which is the origin of
knowledge and the potential or “material” intellect (al-‘aql
al-hayulanı, intellectus materialis, ha-sekhel ha-hyula’ni) which
receives knowledge, and emphasized the intellectual nature of what is
received by the human mind from the Divine Intellect. On the doctrine of
the intellect in Islam see Ibn Sına, Le Livre des directives et
remarques, trans. A. M. Goichon, Paris-Beirut, 1951, pp. 324ff;
al-Farabı, Epistola sull’intelletto, trans. F. Lucchetta, Padua, 1974;
F. Rahman, Prophecy in Islam, Philosophy and Orthodoxy, Chicago, 1979;
and J. Jolivet, L’Intellect selon Kindı, Leiden, 1971. As for the
medieval Western world in general see E. Gilson, History of Christian
Philosophy in the Middle Ages, New York, 1955; also M. Shallo, Lessons
in Scholastic Philosophy, Philadelphia, 1916, pp. 264ff; and R. P. de
Angelis, Conoscenza dell’individuate e conoscenza dell’universale nel
XIII e XIV secolo, Rome, 1922. H. A. Wolfson has also dealt with this
issue in many of his writings including The Problem of the Soul of the
Spheres, Washington, 1962; Essays in the History CHAPTER 4. SCIENTIA
SACRA 137 of Philosophy and Religion, ed. I. Twersky and G. H. Williams,
Cambridge, Mass., 1979; Philo: Foundations of Religious Philosophy in
Judaism, Cambridge, Mass., 1968; Christianity and Islam, Cambridge,
1948; and “Extradeical and Intradeical Interpretations of Platonic
Ideas,” Journal of the History of Ideas 22/1 (Jan.-March 1961): 3-32.

[^4]: The Platonic view which sees knowledge descending from the realm
of the “ideas” to the world, or from the Principle to manifestation, is
more akin to the sapiential perspective than the Aristotelian one which
moves from manifestation to the Principle or from physics to
metaphysics.

[^5]: On the distinction between metaphysics and profane philosophy see
Guénon, Introduction to the Study of Hindu Doctrines, pp. 108ff; and
idem, “Oriental Metaphysics,” in Needleman (ed.), Sword of Gnosis, pp.
40-56.

[^6]: This issue has been discussed by T. Izutsu, among others, in his
The Concept and Reality of Existence, Tokyo, 1971; also his Unicité de
l’existence et création perpétuelle en mystique islamique, Paris, 1980.

[^7]: The service rendered by traditional authors to French, English,
and German, the primary languages employed by them, in reviving them as
languages for metaphysical discourse and in resuscitating their symbolic
quality is the very reverse of the process being carried out by many
modern analytical philosophers and positivists to cleanse European
languages of their metaphysical content, reducing them to unidimensional
languages reflecting the unidimensional minds which use such forms of
language.

The concern of certain traditional authors with etymology and the
revival of the significance of the root meaning of words is closely
linked with this need to bring to the fore once again the symbolic
possibilities hidden in the very structure of words which were once used
by human beings who lived in the world of the sacred and who possessed
the “symbolist spirit” which was directly reflected in their language.
The still extant sacred and archaic languages are a witness to the
remarkable treasury of metaphysics embedded in the very structure of
language itself. In fact, in certain societies to this day metaphysics
is taught as a commentary upon a sacred or archaic language, for
example, in certain schools of Sufism. As far as Sufism is concerned see
J. L. Michon, Le Soufi marocain Ah. mad ibn ‘Ajıba et son mi‘aj.
Glossaire de la mystique musulman, Paris, 1973, especially pp. 177ff.

See also E. Zolla, Language and Cosmogony, Ipswich, U.K., 1976; and J.
Canteins, Phonèmes et archetypes, Paris, [^1972]:

[^8]: This element comprises the heart of all traditional doctrine while
the method concerns means of attaching oneself to the Real. On the
relation between doctrine and method see M. Pallis, “The Marriage
ofWisdom and Method,” Studies in Comparative Religion 6/2 (1972):
78-104.

[^9]: Some contemporary scholars such as R. Panikkar (in his
Inter-religious Dialogue, New York, 1978) have contrasted the Buddhist
Shunyata and the Christian Pleroma but, metaphysically speaking, the
concept of Ultimate Reality as emptiness and as fullness complement each
other like the yin-yang symbol and both manifest themselves in every
integral tradition. Even in Christianity where the symbolism of Divine
Fullness is emphasized and developed with remarkable elaboration in
Franciscan theology, esp. that of St. Bonaventure, the complementary
vision of emptiness appears in the teachings of the Dominican Meister
Eckhart who speaks of the “desert of the Godhead.”

[^10]: In one of the most difficult verses to comprehend from the
exoteric point of view the Quran states, “He is the First and the Last;
the Outward and the Inward” (LVII; 3).

[^11]: This is the view of the Advaita Vedanta in Hinduism and of the
transcendent Unity of Being (wah. dat al-wujud) in Sufism which, because
of the myopia of a reason divorced from the sanctifying rays of the
Intellect, have been often mistaken for pantheism. SeeNasr, Three Muslim
Sages, Cambridge, Mass., 1964, pp. 104-8; also T. Burckhardt,
Introduction to Sufi Doctrine, pp. 28-30.

[^12]: See Schuon, Du Divin à l’humain, pt. 2, “Ordre divin et
universel.”

[^13]: The point of view of Manichaeism which sees the world as evil
rather than good is primarily initiatic and not metaphysical, that is,
it begins not with the aim of understanding the nature of things but of
providing a way for escaping from the prison of material existence.
Buddhism possesses a similar practical perspective but, of course, with
a different metaphysical background since it belongs to a different
spiritual universe.

[^14]: Islam and Hinduism join the Judeo-Christian tradition in
confirming that it was by the Word that all things were made. The Quran
asserts, “Verily, when He [Allah] intends a thing, His Command is, “Be”
[kun] , and it is!” (XXXVI; 82-Yusuf Ali translation). Here the
imperative form of the verb “to be,” namely kun, being identified with
theWord or Logos.

[^15]: One can interpret Thomistic metaphysics which begins and ends
with esse as including the notion of the Real in its completely
unconditioned and undetermined sense although this term could be
complemented by the term posse to denote the All-Possibility of the
Divine Principle. From this point of view one can assert that despite
the sensualist epistemology of St. Thomas, criticized earlier because of
its denial of the possibility of intellectual intuition, Thomism
contains in its dogmatic content truths of a truly metaphysical nature
which reflect knowledge of a principial order and which can serve as
support for metaphysical contemplation.

In Islamic philosophy such a figure as Sadr al-Dın Shırazı speaks about
wujud (which means literally “being”) in such a manner that it is
definitely to be identified with the Supreme Principle rather than its
first self-determination. The Supreme Name of God in Islam, namely,
Allah, implies also both Being and Beyond Being, both the personal Deity
and the Absolute and Infinite Reality, both God and the Godhead of
Meister Eckhart.

[^16]: See the introduction of Corbin to Sadr al-Dın Shırazı, Le Livre
des pénétrations métaphysiques, Tehran-Paris, 1964, where he contrasts
the destiny of ontology in the Islamic world ending with Sabziwari and
his like and in theWest terminating with Heidegger, showing the chasm
which distinguishes the Islamic theosophical and philosophical schools
from Existenz philosophy. See also Izutsu, The Concept and Reality of
Existence; and Nasr, “Mulla Sadra and the Doctrine of the Unity of
Being,” Philosophical Forum, December 1973, pp. 153-61.

[^17]: In Islam such a widespread theological school as Ash‘arism is
characterized by its rejection of the hierarchy of existence in
conformity with its atomistic and voluntatistic point of view.

[^18]: On this question see Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines, chap. 12, “The Anatomy of Being.” In Arabic
“necessity” is wujub and “possibility” imkan, which in the context of
Avicennan ontology we translate as “contingency.”

[^19]: On the immutable essences see T. Burckhardt, Introduction to Sufi
Doctrine, pp. 62-64.

[^20]: “Nous pouvons discerner [dans l’absolument Réel] une
tridirnensionalité, elle aussi intrinsèquement indifférenciée mais
annonciatrice d’un déploiement possible; ces dimensions sont l’‘Être’,
la ‘Conscience’, la ‘Félicité’. C’est en vertu du troisième
élément-immuable en soi-que la Possibilité divine déborde et donne bien,
‘par amour’, à ce mystère

d’extériorisation qu’est le Voile universel, dont la chaine est faite
des mondes, et la traine, des êtres.” Schuon, “Le problème de la
possibilité,” in Du Divin à l’humain.

[^21]: To which Islamic metaphysics refer as ma siwa’Llah, literally,
“all that is other than Allah.”

[^22]: “Maya is likened to a magic fabric woven from a warp that veils
and a weft that unveils.” Schuon, “Atma-Maya,” p. 89. On the
metaphysical significance of maya as both veil and principle of
relativization and manifestation of the Absolute see, besides this
article, the chap. “Maya” in Schuon’s Light on the Ancient Worlds, pp.
89-98.

[^23]: On the Breath of the Compassionate see Ibn al-‘Arabı, The Bezels
of Wisdom, trans. R. W. J. Austin, New York, 1980, “The Wisdom of
Leadership in the Word of Aaron,” pp. 241ff. Also Nasr, Science and
Civilization in Islam, chap.13.

[^24]: Called the hadıth of kanz al-makhfı (The Hidden Treasure).

[^25]: See his “Atma-Maya.”

[^26]: As far as the highest level is concerned, Islamic metaphysics
calls the reverberation “the most sacred effusion” (al-fayd. al-aqdas)
and the radii “the sacred effusion” (al-fayd. al-muqaddas), the first
being the archetype of all things (al-a‘yan al-thabitah) and the second
the Breath of the Compassionate which externalizes and existentiates
them on various planes of reality.

[^27]: “The desire to enclose universal Reality in an exclusive and
exhaustive ‘explanation’ brings with it a permanent disequilibrium due
to the interference of Maya.” Schuon, Light on the Ancient Worlds, p.
91.

[^28]: The Quranic doctrine that Iblıs was a jinn and made of fire
signifies that the presence of evil does not make itself felt on the
cosmic plane until the descent reaches into the animic realm.

[^29]: The Intellect as it operates in man does not begin with a
knowledge of the world but with an a priori knowledge of the Divine Good
which it perceives before it even comes to understand evil. That is why
some metaphysicians, led through intellection to a direct understanding
of the Good in itself, do not even have a desire to understand evil and
pass it by as if it did not exist. There is, of course, also the
experiential aspect to consider. A saint who has destroyed evil not in
the whole world but around himself might be said to breathe already in
the atmosphere of paradise and therefore be oblivious to the evils of
terrestrial existence which do not exist as such for him. This attitude
is to be found among certain of the great Sufis who assert that evil
simply does not exist without bothering to provide the metaphysical
evidence as to what one means by such a statement and from what point of
view can one say that evil does not exist.

[^30]: Cosmos literally means “order” in Greek. The opposite of cosmos
is nothing but chaos.

[^31]: The principle of adequation does not negate our earlier assertion
that maya prevents containing and comprehending reality in a system
derived from ratiocination, for we are speaking here of intellection and
intelligence not ratiocination and thought of a purely human character.

[^32]: Not only in the Islamic tradition whose spirituality is
essentially sapiential is intelligence considered as God’s greatest gift
to man (according to the wellknown saying attributed to ‘Alı ibn Abı
Talib, “God did not bestow upon His servants anything more precious than
intelligence”), but even in Christianity which is primarily a way of
love the Hesychasts consider the essence of the prayer of Jesus itself
to be the actualization and descent of intelligence into the human
heart.

[^33]: See Schuon, In the Tracks of Buddhism, p. 83.

[^34]: “A point de vue doctrinal, ce qui importerait le plus, ce serait
de retrouver la science spirituelle de l’exégèse, c’est-à-dire de
l’interpretation métaphysique et mystique des Écritures; les principes
de cette science, dont le maniement présuppose de toute evidence une
haute intelligence intuitive et non une simple acuité mentale, ont été
exposés par Origène et d’autres, et mis en pratique par les Pères et par
les plus grands saints. En d’autres termes, ce qui manque en Occident,
c’est une intellectualité fondé, non sur l’érudition et le scepticisme
philosophique, mais sur l’intuition intellectuelle actualisée par le
Saint-Esprit sur la base d’une exégèse tenant compte de tous les plans
et de tous les niveaux de l’entendement; cette exégèse implique aussi la
science du symbolisme, et celle-ci s’étend à tous les domaines de
l’expression formelle, notamment à l’art sacré, qui, lui

englobe la liturgie, au sense le plus large, aussi bien que l’art
proprement dit. L’Orient traditionel ne s’étant jamais éloigné de cette
manière d’envisager des choses, la compréhension de ses métaphysiques,
ses exégèses, ses symbolismes, et ses arts seraient pour l’Occident,
d’un intérêt vital.” Schuon, “Que peut donner l’Orient à l’Occident?”
France-Asie, no. 103 (Dec. 1954): 151.

[^35]: There are in fact numerous works in Islamic languages on the
“categories” of commentators usually called Tabaqat al-mufassirın, while
a clear distinction is made between exoteric commentary (tafsır) and
inner or esoteric commentary (ta’wıl).

[^36]: Ta’wıl, which in Islamic esoterism means to reach the inner
meaning of the sacred text and which should not be confused with the
pejorative sense in which it is occasionally used as meaning
individualistic interpretation of the sacred text, contains a profound
metaphysical significance in its very etymology for it means, literally,
“to take back to the beginning,” implying that to reach the inner
meaning (batin) from the outward sense (zahir) is also to return to the
origin or beginning of that truth whose very descent implies also
externalization. On the question of ta’wıl see Corbin, En Islam iranien,
vol. 3, pp. 222ff. and pp. 256ff., where it is discussed with reference
to the Quran; and Nasr, Ideals and Realities of Islam, chap. 2.

[^37]: The well-known Ta’wıl al-qur’an (The Spiritual or Hermeneutic
Commentary upon the Quran) attributed to Ibn ‘Arabı is actually by a
later member of his school, ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Kashanı, while Ibn ‘Arabı
himself wrote a monumental commentary, discovered by O. Yahya, which,
however, has not as yet been printed.

[^38]: The major commentary of Qunyawı on the Surat al-fatihah, the
opening chapter of the Quran, is being edited and translated byW.
Chittick and is to appear soon.

[^39]: See R. Guénon, “The Heart and the Cave,” in Studies in
Comparative Religion 4 (Spring 1971): 69-72.

[^40]: Hence ıman is often identified with knowledge and when God is
referred to as al-mu’ mın, traditional commentators do not translate
that Name as “He who has faith” as one would expect from the literal
meaning but as “He who has knowledge which illuminates the creature and
transforms him.”

[^41]: See H. Köhler, ´Sraddha-In der Vedischen und Altbuddistischen
Literatur, Wiesbaden, 1973. This issue has been dealt with in detail
byW. C. Smith in his Faith and Belief. Smith draws attention quite
rightly to the fact that, before modern times, belief as opinion was not
a religious category and faith was related to knowledge not to belief in
the tentative sense in which this term is used today. This does not mean
that the more traditional sense of the term belief which is still alive
cannot be fully resuscitated.

[^42]: In traditional Islamic educational circles the ability to teach
metaphysics is considered as the sign of the teacher’s complete
assimilation of the subject in such a manner that his intellect has
reached the level of al-‘aql bi’l-malakah (intellectus habitus) and the
knowledge in question has become for him bi’l-malakah, that is,
completely digested and assimilated.

[^43]: What Islamic metaphysics calls al-jam‘ba‘d al-farq, 44. Some of
the most profound metaphysical doctrines expounded in works of Islamic
philosophy and theosophy are described under the title of al-waridat
al-qalbiy-yah, literally, “that which has entered the heart.” In fact,
one of the books of Sadr al-Dın Shırazı, one of the greatest of Islamic
metaphysicians, bears such a title. See Nasr, The Transcendent Theosophy
of Sadr al-Dın Shırazı, London, 1978, p. 49.

[^45]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image005.jpg)

[^46]: This is the imagery of the famous poem of Shabistarı from the
Gulshan-iraz;

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E006%5D:jpg)

There is many a fool who seeks the luminous sun

In the desert with a lamp in his hand.

[^47]: On the meaning and science of symbols see L. Benoist, Signes,
symboles et mythes, Paris, 1977; H. Sedlmayr, Verlust der Mitte,
Salzburg, 1976; R.A. Schwaller de Lubicz, Symbol and the Symbolic,
trans. R. and D. Lawlor, Brookline, Mass., 1978; G. Dumézil,

Mythe et épopée, 2 vols., Paris 1968-71 (dealing mostly with myths but
of course also symbolism); H. Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art
and Civilization, ed. J. Campbell, New York, 1963; M. Eliade, Images and
Symbols, trans. Ph. Mairet, New York, 1961; R. Alleau, La Science des
symboles, Paris, 1976; and J. C. Cooper, An Illustrated Encyclopaedia of
Traditional Symbols, London, 1978.

[^48]: For primordial man the symbolized was in fact the symbol since he
still lived in the unfragmented reality of the paradisal state.
Something of this primordial point of view has survived among some of
the so-called primitive peoples among whom the “symbolist spirit” is
still alive and who identify in their perception of things the object
symbolized and the symbol. This is the reverse of idolatry which reduces
the symbol to the physical object which is supposed to symbolize it,
while in the perspective in question the object symbolizing an
archetypal reality is “elevated” to the level of that reality and
becomes a transparent form through which that reality is reflected and
manifested.

[^49]: “Natural symbolism, which assimilates, for example, the sun to
the divine Principle, derives from a ‘horizontal’ correspondence;
revealed symbolism, which makes this assimilation spiritually
effective-in ancient solar cults and before their ‘petrifaction’-derives
from a ‘vertical’ correspondence; the same holds good for gnosis, which
reduces phenomena to ‘ideas’ or archetypes. Much might be said here on
the natural symbolism of bread and body-or of body and blood-and their
‘sacramentalisation’ by Christ; likewise the sign of the Cross, which
expresses with its two dimensions the respective mysteries of the Body
and Bread and the Blood and Wine, has, of course, always had its
metaphysical sense but received its quasi-sacramental virtue-at least in
its specifically Christian form-through the incarnatedWord, in other
terms, it is necessary for the Avatara to ‘live’ a form in order to make
it ‘effective’, and that is why sacred formulae or divine Names must
come from Revelation in order to be capable of being ‘realised’.”
Schuon, Stations of Wisdom, p. 97.

[^50]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image007.jpg)
