Chapter Five: Man, Pontifical and Promethean
============================================

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image008.jpg)

*Look within yourself a moment and ask who art thou?*

*From where doest thou comest, from which place,*

*What art thou?*

**Rūmī**

*Was ist der Menschen Leben, ein Bild der Gottheit.*

*What is the life of man, an image of the Godhead.*

**Hölderlin**

The concept of man as the pontiff, pontifex, or bridge between Heaven
and earth, which is the traditional view of the anthrōpos, lies at the
antipode of the modern conception of man1 which envisages him as the
Promethean earthly creature who has rebelled against Heaven and tried to
misappropriate the role of the Divinity for himself. Pontifical man,
who, in the sense used here, is none other than traditional man, lives
in a world which has both an Origin and a Center. He lives in full
awareness of the Origin which contains his own perfection and whose
primordial purity and wholeness he seeks to emulate, recapture, and
transmit. He also lives on a circle of whose Center he is always aware
and which he seeks to reach in his life, thought, and actions.
Pontifical man is the reflection of the Center on the periphery and the
echo of the Origin in later cycles of time and generations of history.
He is the vicegerent of God (khalīfatallāh) on earth, to use the Islamic
term,2 responsible to God for his actions, and the custodian and
protector of the earth of which he is given dominion on the condition
that he remain faithful to himself as the central terrestrial figure
created in the “form of God,” a theomorphic being living in this world
but created for eternity. Pontifical man3 is aware of his role as
intermediary between Heaven and earth and his entelechy as lying beyond
the terrestrial domain over which he is allowed to rule provided he
remains aware of the transient nature of his own journey on earth. Such
a man lives in awareness of a spiritual reality which transcends him and
which yet is none other than his own inner nature and against which he
cannot rebel, save by paying the price of separation from all that he is
and all that he should wish to be. For such a man, life is impregnated
with meaning and the universe peopled with creatures whom he can address
as thou. He is aware that precisely because he is human there is both
grandeur and danger connected with all that he does and thinks. His
actions have an effect upon his own being beyond the limited
spatio-temporal conditions in which such actions take place. He knows
that somehow the bark which is to take him to the shore beyond after
that fleeting journey which comprises his earthly life is constructed by
what he does and how he lives while he is in the human state.

To be sure, the image of man as depicted in various traditions has not
been identical. Some have emphasized the human state more than others
and they have envisaged eschatological realities differently. But there
is no doubt that all traditions are based on the central and dominant
images of the Origin and the Center and see the final end of man in the
state or reality

which is other than this terrestrial life with which forgetful or fallen
man identifies himself once he is cut off from revelation or religion
that constantly hearken man back to the Origin and the Center.

Promethean man, on the contrary, is a creature of this world. He feels
at home on earth, earth not considered as the virgin nature which is
itself an echo of paradise, but as the artificial world created by
Promethean man himself in order to make it possible for him to forget
God and his own inner reality. Such a man envisages life as a big
marketplace in which he is free to roam around and choose objects at
will. Having lost the sense of the sacred, he is drowned in transience
and impermanence and becomes a slave of his own lower nature, surrender
to which he considers to be freedom. He follows passively the downward
flow of the cycle of human history in which he takes pride by claiming
that in doing so he has created his own destiny. But still being man, he
has a nostalgia for the Sacred and the Eternal and thus turns to a
thousand and one ways to satisfy this need, ways ranging from
psychological novels to drug-induced mysticism.

He also becomes stifled by the prison of his own creation, wary of the
destruction he has wrought upon the natural environment and the
vilification of the urban setting in which he is forced to live. He
seeks for solutions everywhere, even in teachings by which pontifical
man, or traditional man, has lived over the ages. But these sources are
not able to help him for he approaches even these truths as Promethean
man. This recently born creature, who has succeeded in wreaking havoc
upon the earth and practically upsetting the ecological balance of the
natural order itself in only some five centuries,4 is little aware that
to overcome the impasse into which modern man has thrown himself as a
result of attempting to forget what it really means to be man he must
rediscover himself. He must come to understand the nature of man as that
pontifical and central creature on this earth who stands as witness to
an origin from which he descends and a center to which he ultimately
returns. The traditional doctrine of man and not the measurement of
skulls and footprints is the key for the understanding of that anthrōpos
who, despite the rebellion of Promethean man against Heaven from the
period of the Renaissance and its aftermath, is still the inner man of
every man, the reality which no human being can deny wherever and
whenever he lives, the imprint of a theomorphic nature which no
historical change and transformation can erase completely from the face
of that creature called man.

In recent decades many attempts have been made to trace the stages of
the “disfiguration of the image of man in the West”5 beginning with the
first stages of the Promethean revolt in the Renaissance, some of whose
causes are to be seen already in the late Middle Ages, and terminating
with the infrahuman condition into which modern man is being forced
through a supposedly humanistic civilization. The tracing of this
disfiguration could not in fact be anything other than the tracing of
one facet of that process of the desacralization of knowledge and of
life already outlined in the first part of this book. The decomposition
and disfiguration, in the history of the West, of the image of man as
being himself imago Dei, came into the open with that worldly humanism
which characterizes the Renaissance and which

is most directly reflected in its worldly art.6 But there are certain
elements of earlier origin which also contributed to this sudden fall,
usually interpreted as the age of the discovery of man at the moment
when the hold of the Christian tradition upon Western man was beginning
to weaken. One of the elements is the excessive separation between man
as the seat of consciousness or the I and the cosmos as the “not-I” or a
domain of reality from which man is alienated. This attitude was not
unrelated to the excessive separation of the spirit from the flesh in
official Christian theology even if this chasm was filled by the
Hermetic tradition, especially its alchemical aspect, and affected even
the daily life of the medieval community through the craft guilds. The
“angelism” of medieval theology, although containing a profound truth,
considered only one aspect of the traditional anthrōpos, allowing the
rebellion against such a view by those who thought that in order to
discover the spiritual significance of nature and the positive
significance of the body, they had to deny the medieval concept of man.
The Renaissance cult of the body, even if by some freak of history it
had manifested itself in India, could not have been opposed to Hinduism
in the same way that it was opposed to Christianity in the West.

The other elements which brought about the destruction of the image of
pontifical man and helped the birth of that Promethean rebel with whom
modern man usually identifies himself were mostly associated with the
phenomena of the Renaissance itself and its aftermath or had their root
in the late medieval period. These factors include the destruction of
the unity and hierarchy of knowledge which resulted from the eclipse of
the sapiential dimension of tradition in the West. From this event there
resulted in turn the emptying of the sciences of nature of their
esoteric content and their quantification, the rise of skepticism and
agnosticism combined with a hatred of wisdom in its Christian form, and
the loss of knowledge based upon certitude,7 which was itself the result
of reducing Being to a mental concept and a denial of its unifying and
sanctifying rays.

From an intellectual point of view the main stages in the process of the
disfiguration of pontifical man into the Promethean can be traced to the
late Middle Ages because they include the excessively rigid
Aristotelianization of Western thought in the thirteenth century
identified by some with Averroes. This “exteriorization” of Christian
thought was followed by the secularization of the science of the cosmos
in the seventeenth century, itself a result of the “naturalization” of
Christian man as a well-contented citizen of this world. This period was
in turn succeeded by the divinization of time and historical process
associated in the nineteenth century with the name of Hegel and others
who made of change and becoming the foundation of reality and the
criterion of the truth itself. The development of Aristotelian
philosophy and theology in a Christian mold was itself of course not
antitraditional. It even provided a metaphysical language of great power
and dogmatic assertions of remarkable depth. But, as already mentioned,
it did exteriorize the process of knowledge. Furthermore, Averroism in
the Western world, and in contrast to the Islamic world itself from
which Averroes (Ibn Rushd) himself hailed, depleted the cosmos of its
“soul,”

helping the secularization of the cosmos which was also to affect deeply
the destiny of Western man himself.8

The seventeenth-century scientific revolution not only mechanized the
conception of the world but also of man, creating a world in which man
found himself as an alien. Furthermore, the scientism which issued from
this century and the apparent success of Newtonian physics led to the
establishment of a whole series of so-called sciences of man which to
this day emulate an already outmoded physics. The modern sciences of man
were born in an atmosphere of positivism associated with a figure like
Auguste Comte who simply reversed the traditional rapport between the
study of Deus, homo, and natura in creating his famous three stage
theory of human progress, which is based on the total misunderstanding
of the nature of man and is a parody of traditional doctrines concerning
human existence on earth.9 The Comptean science of man and his society
can be only characterized as ignorance, or avidyā, characteristic of the
Dark Age, parading as science. Despite the refutation of the mechanistic
physics upon which most sciences of man are based today and strong
criticism of the type of anthropology which sees in man no more than a
mammal walking upright, most of those disciplines usually identified as
the social sciences and even humanities still suffer from an inferiority
complex vis-à-vis the natural sciences and mathematics which forces them
to adopt a world view alien to the very nature of man.

As for the Hegelian turning of permanence into change and dialectical
process, it not only deprived man of the image of immutability which
constitutes a basic feature of the traditional concept of man but it
also played a major role in the humanization of the Divinity which was
to lead to the final phase of the secularization of the life of modern
man. Hegel “equated” man's finite consciousness with the Divine Infinite
Consciousness. From his position there was but one step to Feurbach's
assertion that man's awareness of Infinite Consciousness is nothing more
than the consciousness of the Infinite within human consciousness
itself. Instead of man being seen as the image of God, the relation was
now reversed and God came to be regarded as the image of man and the
projection of his own consciousness. Promethean man not only sought to
steal fire from Heaven but even to kill the gods, little aware that man
cannot destroy the image of the Divinity without destroying himself.10?

As far as the traditional doctrine of man is concerned, it is based in
one way or another on the concept of primordial man as the source of
perfection, the total and complete reflection of the Divinity and the
archetypal reality containing the possibilities of cosmic existence
itself. Man is the model of the universe because he is himself the
reflection of those possibilities in the principial domain which
manifest themselves as the world. Man is more than merely man so that
this way of envisaging his rapport with respect to the cosmos is far
from being anthropomorphic in the usual sense of this term. The world is
not seen as the reflection of man qua man but of man as being himself
the total and plenary reflection of all those Divine Qualities whose
reflections, in scattered and segmented fashion, comprise the manifested
order.

In traditions with a strongly mythical character this inward
relationship between man and the cosmos is depicted in the myth of the
sacrifice of the primordial man. For example, in the Iranian religions
the sacrifice of the primordial man is associated with the creation of
the world and its various orders and realms, different parts of the
“body” of the primordial man being associated with different orders of
creatures such as animals, plants, and minerals. Sometimes, however, a
more particular relationship is emphasized as in those Zoroastrian
sources where Gāyomart, who is the first man, is associated with the
generation of the minerals, for as the Greater Bundahisën says, “When
Gāyomart was assailed with sickness, he fell on his left side. From his
head lead came forth, from his blood zinc, from his marrow silver, from
his feet iron, from his bones brass, from his fat crystal, from his arms
steel, and from his soul as it departed, gold.”11 In Hinduism there is
the famous passage in the Ṛg-Veda (X, 90) according to which, from the
sacrifice of Puruṣa or primordial man, the world and the human race
consisting of the four castes are brought into being, the brahmins from
his mouth, the rājanyas or kṣatriyas from his arms, the vaiśyas from his
belly, and the śūdras from his feet, his sacrifice, or yājnîas, being
the model of all sacrifice.12 Primordial man is the archetype of
creation as he is its purpose and entelechy. That is why according to a
ḥadīth, God addresses the Prophet of Islam, whose inner reality is the
primordial man par excellence in the Islamic tradition, in these terms,
“If thou wert not, I would not have created the world.”13 This
perspective envisages the human reality in its divine and cosmic
dimensions in exact opposition to philosophical anthropomorphism. Man
does not see God and the world in his image but realizes that he is
himself in his inner reality that image which reflects the Divine
Qualities and by which cosmic reality is created, the possibilities
being contained in the Logos “by which all things were made.”

The metaphysical doctrine of man in the fullness of his being, in what
he is, but not necessarily what he appears to be, is expounded in
various languages in the different traditions with diverse degrees of
emphasis which are far from being negligible. Some traditions are based
more upon the divinized human receptacle while others reject this
perspective in favor of the Divinity in Itself. Some depict man in his
state of fall from his primordial perfection and address their message
to this fallen creature, whereas others, while being fully aware that
the humanity they are addressing is not the society of perfect men
living in paradise, address that primordial nature which still survives
in man despite the layers of “forgetfulness”14 and imperfection which
separate man from himself.

That primordial and plenary nature of man which Islam calls the
“Universal or Perfect Man” (al-insājn al-kājmil)15 and to which the
sapiential doctrines of Graeco-Alexandrian antiquity also allude in
nearly the same terms, except for the Abrahamic and specifically Islamic
aspects of the doctrines absent from the Neoplatonic and Hermetic
sources, reveals human reality to possess three fundamental aspects. The
Universal Man, whose reality is realized only by the prophets and great
seers since only they are human in the full sense of the word, is first
of all the archetypal reality of the universe; second, the instrument or
means whereby revelation

descends into the world; and third, the perfect model for the spiritual
life and the ultimate dispenser of esoteric knowledge. By virtue of the
reality of the Universal Man, terrestrial man is able to gain access to
revelation and tradition, hence to the sacred. Finally, through this
reality which is none other than man's own reality actualized, man is
able to follow that path of perfection which will finally allow him to
gain knowledge of the sacred and to become fully himself. The saying of
the Delphic oracle, “Know thyself,” or that of the Prophet of Islam, “He
who knoweth himself knoweth his lord,” is true not because man as an
earthly creature is the measure of all things but because man is himself
the reflection of that archetypal reality which is the measure of all
things. That is why in traditional sciences of man the knowledge of the
cosmos and the metacosmic reality are usually not expounded in terms of
the reality of terrestrial man. Rather, the knowledge of man is
expounded through and in reference to the macrocosm and metacosm, since
they reflect in a blinding fashion and in an objective mode what man is
if only he were to become what he really is. The traditional doctrine of
Primordial or Universal Man with all its variations-Adam Kadmon, Jen,
Puruṣa, al-insān al-kāmil, and the like-embraces at once the
metaphysical, cosmogonic, revelatory, and initiatic functions of that
reality which constitutes the totality of the human state and which
places before man both the grandeur of what he can be and the pettiness
and wretchedness of what he is in most cases, in comparison with the
ideal which he carries always within himself. Terrestrial man is nothing
more than the externalization, coagulation, and often inversion and
perversion of this idea and ideal of the Universal Man cast in the
direction of the periphery. He is a being caught in the field of the
centrifugal forces which characterize terrestrial existence as such, but
is also constantly attracted by the Center where the inner man is always
present.

It is also by virtue of carrying this reality within himself and bearing
the characteristics of a theomorphic being, because he is such a being
in his essential reality, that man remains an axial creature in this
world. Even his denial of the sacred has a cosmic significance, his
purely empirical and earthly science going to the extent of imposing the
danger of destroying the harmony of the terrestrial environment
itself.17 Man cannot live as a purely earthly creature totally at home
in this world without destroying the natural environment precisely
because he is not such a creature. The pontifical function of man
remains inseparable from his reality, from what he is. That is why
traditional teachings envisage the happiness of man in his remaining
aware and living according to his pontifical nature as the bridge
between Heaven and earth. His religious laws and rites have a cosmic
function18 and he is made aware that it is impossible for him to evade
his responsibility as a creature who lives on the earth but is not only
earthly, as a being strung between Heaven and earth, of both a spiritual
and material mold, created to reflect the light of the Divine Empyrean
within the world and to preserve harmony in the world through the
dispensation of that light and the practice of that form of life which
is in accordance with his inner reality as revealed by tradition.19
Man's responsibility to society, the cosmos, and God issues ultimately
from himself, not his self as ego but the inner man who is the

mirror and reflection of the Supreme Self, the Ultimate Reality which
can be envisaged as either pure Subject or pure Object since It
transcends in Itself all dualities, being neither subject nor object.

The situation of man as bridge between Heaven and earth is reflected in
all of his being and his faculties. Man is himself a supernaturally
natural being. When he walks on the earth, on the one hand he appears as
a creature of the earth; on the other, it is as if he were a celestial
being who has descended upon the earthly realm.20 Likewise, his memory,
speech, and imagination partake at once of several orders of reality.
Most of all his intelligence is a supernaturally natural faculty, a
sacrament partaking of all that the term supernatural signifies in
Christianity, yet functioning quasi-naturally within him with the help
of revelation and its unifying grace. That is why, while even in this
world, man is able to move to the other shore of existence, to take his
stance in the world of the sacred and to see nature herself as
impregnated with grace. He is able to remove that sharp boundary which
has been drawn between the natural and the supernatural in most schools
of official Christian theology but which is not emphasized in the same
manner in other traditions and is also overcome in the sapiential
aspects of the Christian tradition itself.

Metaphysically speaking then, man has his archetype in that primordial,
perfect, and universal being or man who is the mirror of the Divine
Qualities and Names and the prototype of creation. But each human being
also possesses his own archetype and has a reality in divinis as a
possibility unto himself, one which is unique since that person reflects
the archetype of the human species as such in the same way that every
point on the circumference of a circle reflects the center and is yet
distinct from other points. The reality of man as a species as well as
of each human being has its root in the principial domain. Therefore man
as such, as well as each human being, comes into the world through an
“elaboration” and process which separates him from the Divine and
departs from the world through paths, which in joy or sorrow depending
on his life on earth, finally lead him back to the Divine.

This “elaboration” concerning the genesis of man is expounded in one
form or another in all sapiential teachings but not in exoteric
religious formulations whose point of view is the immediate concern of
man for his salvation, so that they leave aside certain doctrines or
only allude to them in passing, while esoterism, being concerned with
the truth as such, takes such questions into consideration as we see in
the case of exoteric Judaism on the one hand and the Kabbala on the
other. In the Christian West, especially in modern times when the
esoteric and sapiential teachings had become much less accessible than
before, the religious point of view seemed to assert only the doctrine
of creation ex nihilo without further explanation of what ex nihilo
might mean metaphysically as Ibn ‘Arabī, for example, had done for the
term al-‘adam which is the Quranic term used for creation “from
nothing.”21

As a result, many nineteenth-century thinkers felt that they had to
choose between either the creationist view or the Darwinian theory of
evolution and naturally chose the latter as appearing more “plausible”
in a world which

had forfeited the view of permanence and immutability to that of
constant change, process, and becoming and where the higher states of
existence had lost their reality for those affected by the leveling
process of modern thought. Even today, certain scientists who realize
the logical and even biological absurdity of the theory of evolution and
some of its implications and presuppositions believe that the only other
alternative is the ex nihilo doctrine, unaware that the traditional
metaphysical doctrine interprets the ex nihilo statement as implying an
elaboration of man's being in divinis and through stages of being
preceding his appearance on earth. This doctrine of man, based on his
descent through various levels of existence above the corporeal, in fact
presents a view of the appearance of man which is neither illogical nor
at all in disagreement with any scientific facts-and of course not
necessarily hypotheses and extrapolations-provided one accepts the
hierarchy of existence, or the multiple levels of reality which surround
the corporeal state. As we shall see in our later discussion of the
theory of evolution, the whole modern evolutionary theory is a desperate
attempt to substitute a set of horizontal, material causes in a
unidimensional world to explain effects whose causes belong to other
levels of reality, to the vertical dimensions of existence.

The genesis of man, according to all traditions, occurred in many
stages: first, in the Divinity Itself so that there is an uncreated
“aspect” to man. That is why man can experience annihilation in God and
subsistence in Him (the al-fanā' and al-baqā' of Sufism) and achieve
supreme union. Then man is born in the Logos which is in fact the
prototype of man and another face of that same reality which the Muslims
call the Universal Man and which each tradition identifies with its
founder. Next, man is created on the cosmic level and what the Bible
refers to as the celestial paradise, where he is dressed with a luminous
body in conformity with the paradisal state. He then descends to the
level of the terrestrial paradise and is given yet another body of an
ethereal and incorruptible nature. Finally, he is born into the physical
world with a body which perishes but which has its principle in the
subtle and luminous bodies belonging to the earlier stages of the
elaboration of man and his genesis before his appearance on earth.22

Likewise, the Quran speaks of man's pre-eternal (azalī) covenant with
God when he answered God's call, “Am I not your Lord?” with the
affirmative, “Yea,”23 the “Am I not your Lord?” (alastu birabbikum)
symbolizing the relation between God and man before creation and so
becoming a constantly repeated refrain for all those sages in Islam who
have hearkened man to his eternal reality in divinis by reminding him of
the asrār-i alast or the mysteries of this preeternal covenant. This
reminding or unveiling, moreover, has always involved the doctrine of
the elaboration of man through various states of being. When Ḥāfiẓ, in
his famous poem,

Last night [dūsh] I saw that the angels beat at the door

of the Tavern

The clay of Adam, they shaved and with the mold of love

they cast24

speaks of dūsh or “dark night” preceding the morning light, he is
alluding symbolically to that unmanifested state where the primordial
substance of

man was being molded in the Divine Presence preceding the day of
manifestation and his descent on earth; but even this substance molded
by the angels was itself an elaboration and descent of man from his
uncreated reality in divinis.

It is remarkable that, while traditional teachings are aware that other
creatures preceded man on earth, they believe that man precedes them in
the principial order and that his appearance on earth is the result of a
descent not an ascent, Man precipitates on earth from the subtle state
appearing out of the cloud or on a chariot as described in various
traditional accounts, this “cloud” symbolizing the intermediary
condition between the subtle and the physical. He appears on earth
already as a central and total being, reflecting the Absolute not only
in his spiritual and mental faculties but even in his body. If
Promethean man finally lost sight completely of the higher levels of
existence and was forced to take recourse in some kind of mysterious
temporal process called evolution which would bring him out of the
primordial soup of molecules envisaged by modern science, pontifical man
has always seen himself as the descent of a reality which has been
elaborated through many worlds to arrive on earth in a completed form as
the central and theomorphic being that he is. From his point of view as
a being conscious of not only earthly, horizontal causes but also Heaven
and the vertical dimension of existence and chains of causes, the monkey
is not what man had once been and is no longer, but what he could never
be precisely because of what he always is and has been. Pontifical man
has always been man, and the traditional perspective which is his views
the presence of the monkey as a cosmic sign, a creature whose
significance is to display what the central human state excludes by its
very centrality. To study the state of the monkey metaphysically and not
just biologically is to grasp what man is not and could have never been.

Traditional sciences of man have spoken at length about the inner
structure and faculties of man as well as the significance of his body
and its powers. One discovers in such sources the repeated assertion
that man has access to multiple levels of existence and consciousness
within himself and a hierarchy of faculties and even “substances” which
in any case cannot be reduced to the two entities of body and soul or
mind and body, reflecting the dualism so prevalent in post-Cartesian
Western thought. This dualism neglects the essential unity of the human
microcosm precisely because duality implies opposition and, in contrast
to trinity, is not a reflection of Unity. On the first level of
understanding the human microcosm, therefore, one must take into
consideration the tripartite nature of the human being consisting of
spirit, soul, and body-the classical pneuma, psychē, and hylē or
spiritus, anima, and corpus of Western traditions both
Graeco-Alexandrian and Christian-at least as far as Christian
Hermeticism is concerned. The soul is the principle of the body, but in
the “normal” human being is itself subservient to the spirit and reaches
its salvation and beatitude through its wedding to the spirit of which
so many alchemical texts speak.25

This tripartite division, however, is a simplification of a more complex
situation. Actually man contains within himself many levels of existence
and layers. Such traditions as Tantrism and certain schools of Sufism as
well

as Western Hermeticism speak not of body as opposed to soul and spirit
but of several bodies of man of which the physical body is only the most
outward and externalized envelope. Man possesses subtle as well as
spiritual bodies in conformity with the different worlds through which
he journeys. There is, moreover, an inversion between various levels of
existence so that man's soul (used here in the general sense of all that
is immaterial in his being), molded in this world by his actions,
becomes externalized in the intermediate world as his “body.” It is in
reference to this principle that the Imams of Shfism, referring to the
posthumous states of man and especially the “perfect man” represented by
the Imams, have declared, “Arwāḥunā ajsādunā wa ajsādunā arwāḥunā” (Our
spirits are our bodies and our bodies are our spirits).26 The sojourn of
man through the levels of existence and forms, which the popular
interpretation of Indian religions identifies with a return to the same
level of reality and the esoteric dimension of the Abrahamic traditions
with multiple levels of reality,27 corresponds to his journey within
himself and through all the layers of his own being.

Man possesses an incorruptible ethereal body as well as a radiant
spiritual body corresponding to the other “earths” of the higher states
of being. In the same way that to speak of body and soul corresponds to
the perspective of heaven or several heavens and earth, to envisage the
several bodies of man corresponds to seeing the higher levels of reality
as each possessing its own heaven and earth. After all, through the
grace of the Amidha Buddha man is born in the “Pure Land” and not “pure
heaven,” but here the symbolism of land includes the paradisal and
heavenly.28 It is the celestial earth to which also Islamic esoterism
refers often, and which played such an important role in Zoroastrianism,
where the earth itself was conceived as having been originally an
angel.29

The various “bodies” of the inner man have been envisaged in very
different terms in different traditions but everywhere they are related
to the realization of sacred knowledge and the attainment of virtue. The
beauty of man's physical body is God-given and not for him to determine.
But the type of “body” attained either in the posthumous state or
through initiatic practices and ways of realization depends upon how man
spends that precious gift which is human life, for once this life comes
to an end the door, which is open toward the Infinite, closes. Only man
can pass through the door while enjoying possibilities of the human
state. It makes literally all the difference in the world whether man
does pass through that door while he has the possibility or not.30

In any case, as far as the positive and not negative and infernal
possibilities are concerned, the various bodies of the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas mentioned in northern schools of Buddhism and so central to
Buddhist eschatology and techniques of meditation, the Hindu chakras as
centers of the subtle bodies and energies, the ōkhēma symphyēs (“psychic
vehicle”) of Proclus or the laṭā'if or subtle bodies of Sufism, all
refer to the immense reality unto which the human microcosm opens if
only man were to cease to live on the surface of his being. Certain
schools also speak of the man of light and the whole anatomy and
physiology of the inner man, which is not the subject of study of modern
biology but which, nevertheless,

affects the human body, the physical body itself reflecting the Absolute
on its own level and possessing a positive nature of great import for
the understanding of the total nature of man.31

The human body is not the seat of concupiscence but only its instrument.
Although asceticism is a necessary element of every authentic spiritual
path, for there is something in the soul that must die before it can
reach perfection, the body itself is the temple of God. It is the sacred
precinct in which the Divine Presence or the Divine Light32 manifests
itself as asserted not only in the Oriental religions but also in
Hesychasm within Orthodox Christianity where the keeping of the mind
within the body and the Divine Name within the center of the body, which
is the heart, plays a crucial role. This perspective is also to be found
in Christian Hermeticism but has not been greatly emphasized in Western
Christian theology.33

The human body consists of three basic elements: the head, the body, and
the heart. The heart, which is the invisible center of both the subtle
and the physical body, is the seat of intelligence and the point which
relates the terrestrial human state to the higher states of being. In
the heart, knowledge and being meet and are one. The head and the body
are like projections of the heart: the head, whose activity is
associated with the mind, is the projection of the intelligence of the
heart and the body the projection of being. This separation already
marks the segmentation and externalization of man. But the
compartmentalization is not complete. There is an element of being in
the mind and of intelligence in the body which become forgotten to the
extent that man becomes engrossed in the illusion of the Promethean mode
of existence and forgets his theomorphic nature. That is why modern man,
who is Promethean man to the extent that such a perversion of his own
reality is possible, is the type of man most forgetful of the
tranquility and peace of mind which reflects being and of the
intelligence of the body. That is also why those contemporary men, in
quest of the sacred and the rediscovery of pontifical man, seek, on the
one hand, techniques of meditation which would allow the agitated mind
to simply be and to overcome that excessive cerebral activity which
characterizes modern man and, on the other hand, to rediscover the
wisdom and intelligence of the body through yoga, Oriental forms of
medicine, natural foods, and the like. Both attempts are in reality the
quest for the heart which in the spiritual person, aware of his vocation
as man, “penetrates” into both the head and the body, integrating them
into the center, bestowing a contemplative perfume to mental activity
and an intellectual and spiritual presence to the body which is
reflected in its gestures and motions.34

In the prophet, the avatār, and the great saint both the face and the
body directly manifest and display the presence of the heart through an
inwardness which attracts toward the center and a radiance and emanation
of grace which inebriates and unifies. For those not blessed by the
vision of such beings, the sacred art of those traditions based on the
iconography of the human form of the founder or outstanding spiritual
figures of the tradition is at least a substitute and reminder of what a
work of art man himself is. To behold a Japanese or Tibetan Buddha
image, with eyes drawn inward toward the heart and the body radiating
the presence of the Spirit

which resides in the heart, is to grasp in a concrete fashion what the
principial and ideal relation of the heart is to both the head and the
body which preserve their own intelligible symbolism and even their own
wisdom, whether a particular “mind” cut off from its own roots is aware
of it or not.

The central and “absolute” nature of the human body is also to be seen
in man's vertical position which directly reflects his role as the axis
connecting heaven and earth. The clear distinction of his head
protruding toward heaven reflects his quest for transcendence. The chest
reflects glory and nobility, of a more rigorous nature in the male and
generous in the female, and the sexual parts hierogenesis, divine
activity whose terrestrial result is the procreation of another man or
woman who miraculously enough is again not merely a biological being
although outwardly brought into the world through biological means.35
From the perspective of scientia sacra the human body itself is proof
that man has sprung from a celestial origin and that he was born for a
goal beyond the confines of his animality. The definition of man as a
central being is reflected not only in his mind, speech, and other
internal faculties but also in his body which stands at the center of
the circle of terrestrial existence and possesses a beauty and
significance which is of a purely spiritual nature. The very body of man
and woman reveals the destiny of the human being as a creature born for
immortality, as a being whose perfection resides in ascending the
vertical dimension of existence, having already reached the center of
the horizontal dimension. Having reached the point of intersection of
the cross,36 it is for man to ascend its vertical axis which is the only
way for him to transcend himself and to remain fully human, for to be
human is to go beyond oneself. As Saint Augustine has said, to remain
human, man must become superhuman.

Man also possesses numerous internal faculties, a memory much more
prestigious than those who are the product of modern education can
envisage37 and one which plays a very positive role in both intellectual
and artistic activity of traditional man. He possesses an imagination
which, far from being mere fantasy, has the power to create forms
corresponding to cosmic realities and to play a central role in
religious and even intellectual life, far more than can be conceived by
the modern world whose impoverished view of reality excludes the whole
domain of what might be called the imaginal, to distinguish it from the
imaginary.38 Man also possesses that miraculous gift of speech through
which he is able to exteriorize the knowledge of both the heart and the
mind. His speech is the direct reflection and consequence of his
theomorphic nature and the Logos which shines at the center of his
being. It is through his speech that he is able to formulate the Word of
God and it is also through his speech in the form of prayer and finally
the quintessential prayer of the heart which is inner speech and silent
invocation that he himself becomes prayer. Man realizes his full
pontifical nature in that theophanic prayer of Universal Man in which
the whole creation, both Heaven and earth, participate.

From the point of view of his powers and faculty man can be said to
possess essentially three powers or poles which determine his life,
these being intelligence, sentiment, and will. As a theomorphic being he
possesses

or can possess that absolute and unconditioned intelligence which can
know the truth as such; sentiments which are capable of going beyond the
limited conditions of man and of reaching out for the ultimate through
love, suffering, sacrifice, and also fear;39 and a will which is free to
choose and which reflects the Divine Freedom.

Because of man's separation from his original perfection and all the
ambivalence that the human condition involves as a result of what
Christianity calls the fall, none of these powers function necessarily
and automatically according to man's theomorphic nature. The fall of man
upon the earth, like the descent of a symbol from a higher plane of
reality, means both reflection and inversion which in the case of man
leads to perversion. Intelligence can become reduced to mental play;
sentiments can deteriorate to little more than gravitation around that
illusory coagulation which we usually call ourselves but which is only
the ego in its negative sense as comprising the knots of the soul; and
the will can be debased to nothing other than the urge to do that which
removes man from the source of his own being, from his own real self.
But these powers, when governed by tradition and imbued with the power
of the light and grace which emanates from revelation, begin to reveal,
like man's body, dimensions of his theomorphic nature. The body,
however, remains more innocent and true to the form in which God created
it, whereas the perversion of man and his deviation from his Divine
Prototype is manifested directly in this intermediate realm with which
man identifies himself, namely, the realm of the will and the sentiments
and even the mental reflection of the intelligence, if not the
intelligence itself. In the normal situation which is that of pontifical
man, the goal of all three human powers or faculties, that is,
intelligence, the sentiments, and will, is God. Moreover, in the
sapiential perspective both the sentiments and the will are related to
intelligence and impregnated by it, for how can one love without knowing
what one loves and how can one will something without some knowledge at
least of what one wills?

The understanding of the reality of man as anthrōpos can be achieved
more fully by also casting an eye upon the segmentations and divisions
of various kinds which characterize mankind as such. The original
anthrōpos was, according to traditional teachings, an androgynic figure
although some traditions speak of both a male and a female being whose
union is then seen as the perfection identified with the androgynic
state.40 In either case, the wholeness and perfection inherent in the
human state and the bliss which is associated with sexual union belong
in reality to the androgynic state before the sexes were separated. But
the dualities which characterize the created order and which manifest
themselves on all levels of existence below the principial, such as
yin-yang, puruṣa-prakṛti, activity and passivity, form and matter, could
not but appear upon the plane of that androgynic reality and give birth
to the male and the female which do not, however, correspond to pure yin
and pure yang. Since they are creatures they must contain both
principles within themselves with one of the elements of the duality
predominating in each case. The male and the female in their
complementarity recreate the unity of the androgynic being and in fact

sexual union is an earthly reflection of that paradisal ecstasy which
belonged to the androgynic anthrōpos. But that androgynic reality is
also reflected in both man and woman in themselves, hence both the sense
of complementarity and rivalry which characterizes the relation between
the sexes. In any case the distinction between the male and female is
not only biological. It is not even only psychological or spiritual. It
has its roots in the Divine Nature Itself, man reflecting more the
Absoluteness of the Divine and the woman Its Infinitude. If the face of
God towards the world is envisaged in masculine terms, His inner
Infinitude is symbolized by the feminine as are His Mercy and Wisdom.41
Human sexuality, far from being a terrestrial accident, reflects
principles which are ultimately of a metacosmic significance. It is not
without reason that sexuality is the only means open for human beings,
not endowed with the gift of spiritual vision, to experience “the
Infinite” through the senses, albeit for a few fleeting moments, and
that sexuality leaves such a profound mark upon the soul of men and
women and affects them in a manner far more enduring than other physical
acts. To understand the nature of the male-female distinction in the
human race and to appreciate the positive qualities which each sex
displays is to gain greater insight into the nature of that androgynic
being whose reality both the male and female carry at the center of
their being.42

Man is not only divided according to sex but also temperament of which
both sexes partake. The four temperaments of traditional Galenic
medicine which have their counterparts in other schools of traditional
medicine concern not only the physical body but also the psychic
substance and in fact all the faculties which comprise what we call the
soul. They affect not only the sentiments but also the will and even the
modes of operation of intelligence which in themselves remain above the
temperamental modifications. The same could be said of the three guṇas
of Hindu cosmology, those fundamental tendencies in the primary
substance of the universe, or prakṛti, which concern not only the
physical realm but also human types.43 One can say that human beings are
differentiated through the dual principles of yin-yang; the three guṇas,
which are sattva, the ascending, raja, the expansive, and tamas, the
descending tendencies; and the temperaments which have a close
correlation with the four natures, elements, and humors as expounded in
various cosmological schemes.44

Human types can also be divided astrologically, here astrology being
understood in its cosmological and symbolic rather than its predictive
sense.45 Astrological classifications, which are in fact related to
traditional medical and physical typologies, concern the cosmic
correspondences of the various aspects of the human soul and unveil the
refraction of the archetype of man in the cosmic mirror in such a way as
to bring out the diversity of this refraction with reference to the
qualities associated with the zodiacal signs and the planets.
Traditional astrology, in a sense, concerns man on the angelic level of
his being but also unveils, if understood in its symbolic significance,
a typology of man which reveals yet another facet of the differentiation
of the human species. The correspondence between various parts of the
body as well as man's mental powers to astrological signs and the
intricate rapport created between the motion of the heavens, various

“aspects” and relations between planets and human activity are also a
means of portraying the inward link that binds man as the microcosm to
the cosmos.

Mankind is also divided into castes and races, both of which must be
understood in their essential reality and without the pejorative
connotations which have become associated with them in the modern world.
The division of humanity into castes does not necessarily mean immutable
social stratification for there have been strictly traditional
societies, such as the Islamic, where caste has not existed as a social
institution in the same way it was found in ancient Persia or in India.
The traditional science of man sees the concept of caste as a key for
the understanding of human types. There are those who are contemplative
by nature and drawn to the quest of knowledge, who have a sacerdotal
nature and in normal times usually fulfill the priestly and intellectual
functions in their society. There are those who are warriors and leaders
of men, who possess the courage to fight for the truth and to protect
the world in which they live, who are ready to sacrifice themselves in
battle as the person with a sacerdotal nature sacrifices himself in
prayer to the Divinity. Members of this second caste have a knightly
function and in normal times would be the political leaders and
warriors. Then there are those given to trade, to making an honest
living and working hard to sustain and support themselves and those
around them. They have a mercantile nature and in traditional societies
comprise those who carry out the business and economic functions of
normal society. Finally, there are those whose virtue is to follow and
to be led, to work according to the dictates of those who lead them.
These castes which Hinduism identifies as the brahman, kṣatriya, vaiśya,
and śūdra are not necessarily identified with birth in all societies.46
In any case, as far as the study of human types is concerned, they are
to be found everywhere in all times and climes wherever men and women
live and die. They represent fundamental human types complementing the
tripartite Neoplatonic division of human beings into the pneumatics,
psychics, and “hylics” (the hylikoi of the Neoplatonists). To understand
the deeper significance of caste is to gain an insight into a profound
aspect of human nature in whatever environment man might function and
live.47

Finally, it is obvious that human beings are divided into racial and
ethnic types. There are four races, the yellow, the red, the black, and
the white, which like the four castes act as the pillars of the human
collectivity, four symbolizing stability and being associated with the
earth itself with its four cardinal directions and the four elements of
which the physical world is composed. Each race is an aspect of that
androgynic reality and possesses its own positive features. In fact, no
one race can exhaust the reality of the human state, including human
beauty which each race, both its male and female members, reflect in a
different fashion. The very plenitude of the Divine Principle and
richness of the reality of the Universal Man, who is the theater for the
theophany of all the Divine Names and Qualities, requires this
multiplicity of races and ethnic groups which in their unbelievable
variety manifest the different aspects of their prototype and which
together give some idea of the grandeur and beauty of that first
creation of God

which was the human reality as such, that primordial reflection of the
face of the Beloved in the mirror of nothingness.

The division of mankind into male and female, the various temperamental
types, astrological divisions of human beings, different natures
according to caste, various racial types, and many other factors along
with the interpenetration of these modes of perceiving the human state,
reveal something of the immense complexity of that creature called man.
But as analysis leads in turn to synthesis, this bewildering array of
types all return to that primordial reality of the anthrōpos which each
human being reflects in himself or herself. To be human is to be human
wherever and whenever one may live. There is therefore a profound unity
of traditional mankind which only the traditional science of man can
comprehend without reducing this unity to a uniformity and a gross
quantitative equality that characterizes so much of the modern concern
for man and the study of the human state.

Through all these differences of types, tradition detects the presence
of that pontifical man born to know the Absolute and to live according
to the will of Heaven. But tradition is also fully aware of the
ambivalence of the human state, of the fact that men do not live on the
level of what they are in principle, but below themselves, and of the
imperfection of all that participates in what is characteristically
human. This trait includes even those direct manifestations of the
Absolute in the relative which comprise religion with revelation at its
heart. Man is such a being that he can become prophet and spokesman for
the Word of God, not to speak of the possibility of the divinized man
which certain traditions like Islam, based on the Absolute itself,
reject. But even in these cases there is a human margin and within each
religion there exists an element of pure, unqualified Truth and a margin
which already belongs to the region where the Truth penetrates into the
human substance.48 Moreover, revelation is always given in the language
of the people to whom God addresses Himself. As the Quran says, “And We
never sent a messenger save with the language of his folk that he might
make [the message] clear for them.”49 Hence the multiplicity of
religions in a world with multiple “humanities.” The human state
therefore gives a certain particularity to various revelations of the
Truth while the heart of these revelations remains above all form. In
fact, man himself is able to penetrate into that formless Essence
through his intelligence sanctified by that revelation and even come to
know that the formless Truth is modified by the form of the recipient
according to the Divine Wisdom and Will, God having Himself created that
recipient which receives His revelation in different climes and
settings.50

How strange it appears that agnostic humanism, which remains content
with the vessel without realizing the origin of the divine elixir that
the human vessel contains, should be only a half-way house to that which
is inhuman! Pontifical man has lived on the earth for millennia and
continues to survive here and there despite the onslaught of modernism.
But the life of Promethean man has been indeed short-lived. The kind of
humanism associated with the Promethean revolt of the Renaissance has
led in only a few centuries to the veritably infrahuman which threatens
not only the

human quality of life but the very existence of man on earth. The reason
for such a phenomenon, which seems so unexpected from the perspective of
Promethean man, is quite obvious from the traditional point of view. It
lies in the fact that to speak of the human is to speak, at the same
time, of the Divine. Although scholars occasionally discuss what they
call Chinese or Islamic humanism, there has in fact never been a
humanism in any traditional civilization similar to the one associated
with the European Renaissance and what followed upon its wake.
Traditional civilizations have spoken of man and of course created
cultures and disciplines called the humanities of the highest order but
the man they have spoken of has never ceased to be that pontifical man
who stands on the axis joining Heaven and earth and who bears the
imprint of the Divine upon his very being.

It is this basic nature of man which makes a secular and agnostic
humanism impossible. It is not metaphysically possible to kill the gods
and seek to efface the imprint of the Divinity upon man without
destroying man himself; the bitter experience of the modern world stands
as overwhelming evidence to this truth. The face which God has turned
toward the cosmos and man (the wajhallāh of the Quran)51 is none other
than the face of man toward the Divinity and in fact the human face
itself. One cannot “efface” the “face of God” without “effacing” man
himself and reducing him to a faceless entity lost in an anthill. The
cry of Nietzsche that “God is dead” could not but mean that “man is
dead” as the history of the twentieth century has succeeded in
demonstrating in so many ways. But in reality the response to Nietzsche
was not the death of man as such but of the Promethean man who had
thought he could live on a circle without a center. The other man, the
pontifical man, although forgotten in the modern world, continues to
live even within those human beings who pride themselves in having
outgrown the models and modes of thought of their ancestors; he
continues to live and will never die.

That man who remains man and continues to survive here and there even
during this period of eclipse of spirituality and the desacralization of
life is the being who remains aware of his destiny which is
transcendence and the function of his intelligence which is knowledge of
the Absolute. He is fully aware of the preciousness of human life, which
alone permits a creature living in this world to journey beyond the
cosmos, and is always conscious of the great responsibility which such
an opportunity entails. He knows that the grandeur of man does not lie
in his cunning cleverness or titanic creations but resides most of all
in the incredible power to empty himself of himself, to cease to exist
in the initiatic sense, to participate in that state of spiritual
poverty and emptiness which permits him to experience Ultimate Reality.
As the Persian poet Sa‘di says,

Man reaches a stage where he sees nothing but God;

See how exalted is the station of manhood.52

Pontifical man stands at the perigee of an arc half of which represents
the trajectory through which he has descended from the Source and his
own archetype in divinis and the other half the arc of ascent which he
must follow to return to that Source. The whole constitution of man
reveals this role of the traveler who becomes what he “is” and is what
he becomes. Man

is fully man only when he realizes who he is and in doing so fulfills
not only his own destiny and reaches his entelechy but also illuminates
the world about him. Journeying from the earth to his celestial abode,
which he has left inwardly, man becomes the channel of grace for the
earth, and the bridge which joins it to Heaven. Realization of the truth
by pontifical man is not only the goal and end of the human state but
also the means whereby Heaven and earth are reunited in marriage, and
the Unity, which is the Source of the cosmos and the harmony which
pervades it, is reestablished. To be fully man is to rediscover that
primordial Unity from which all the heavens and earths originate and yet
from which nothing ever really departs.

Notes
-----

[^1]: By man is meant not the male alone but the human state whose
archetypal reality is the androgyne reflected in both the male and
female. Man in English signifies at once the male and the human being as
such like the Greek anthropos, the German mensch or the Arabic insan.
There is no need to torture the natural structure of the English
language to satisfy current movements which consider the use of the term
“man” as a sexist bias, forgetting the second meaning of the term as
anthropos.

[^2]: On the Islamic conception of man and the meaning of this term see
G. Eaton, King of the Castle, chap. 5; G. Durand, Science de l’homme et
tradition, Paris, 1979, esp. chap. 3, entitled “Homo proximi orientis:
science de l’homme et Islam spirituel”; and Nasr, “Who is Man? The
Perennial Answer of Islam,” in Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, pp.
203-17.

See also “Man as Microcosm,” in T. Izutsu, A Comparative Study of the
Key Philosophical Concepts in Sufism and Taoism-Ibn ‘Arabı and Lao-Tzu,
Chuang- , Tzu, Pt. 1, Tokyo, 1966, pp. 208ff., where the whole doctrine
of the universal man (or khalıfah) as expounded in Ibn ‘Arabı’s Fusus
al-hikam is elaborated with great clarity. In pts. 2 and 3 of this work
the Taoist concept of man is likewise elucidated and finally compared in
a masterly fashion with the Islamic.

[^3]: Needless to say, the title of pontiff given to the Catholic pope
symbolizes directly the central function of this office as the “bridge”
between God and His church as well as between the church and the
community of the faithful, but this more particular usage of the term
does not invalidate the universal significance of the “pontifical”
function of man as such.

[^4]: Certain modern observers of the environmental crisis, who want at
the same time to defend the misdeeds of modern man, seek to extrapolate
the devastation of the planet to earlier periods of human history in
order to decrease the burden of responsibility of modern man by
including even goats to explain why the ecological balance is being
destroyed. While one cannot deny the deforestation of certain areas or
erosion of the soil during the Middle Ages or even earlier, there is no
doubt that there is no comparison between the intensity, rapidity, or
extent of destruction of the natural environment during the past few
centuries and what occurred during the previous long periods of history
when traditional man lived on the surface of the earth.

[^5]: This is the title of a well-known essay of G. Durand. See his On
the Disfiguration of the Image of Man in the West, Ipswich, U.K., 1976.

[^6]: There is no doubt that there were many attempts to rediscover
traditional teachings in the Renaissance esp. in the field of the
traditional sciences. See J. F. Maillard, “Science sacrée et science
profane dans la tradition ésotérique de la renaissance,” Cahiers de
l’Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem, vol. I, Paris, 1974, pp. 111-26.
But this fact cannot at all obliterate the truth that secularizing
humanism and the rationalism connected with the notion of virtù,
according to which man was able to command any situation rationally,
characterize and dominate the Renaissance world view, especially as it
concerns man. This conception of man based on an aggressive rationalism
combined with skepticism was to enter the mainstream of European
thought, both literary and scientific, through such figures as Montaigne
and Galileo. On virtù and the concept of Renaissance man as “the
rational artist in all things,” see A. C. Crombie, “Science and the Arts
in the Renaissance: The Search for Truth and Certainty, Old and New,”
History of Science, 18/42 (Dec. 1980): 233.

[^7]: This hatred of wisdom has been combined, in what is
characteristically modern philosophy, with a fear that God may somehow
threaten the petty mental constructions which modern man has substituted
for wisdom. “God, for the philosophic spirit, is an external menace to
the human wisdom that man, deprived of Divine Intellect, contrives for
himself.” Durand, op. cit., pp. 20-21.

[^8]: On this process see S. H. Nasr, Man and Nature, chap. 2.

[^9]: On the traditional criticism of Comte see R. Guénon, La Grande
triade, Paris, 1980, chap. 20.

[^10]: For a criticism of the positivism inherent in modern anthropology
see Durand, “Hermetica ratio et science de l’homme,” in his Science de
l’homme et tradition, pp. 174ff. See also the capital work of J.
Servier, L’Homme et l’invisible, which, using scientific data, refutes
nearly all the presumptions of modern anthropology.

[^11]: Quoted in R. C. Zaehner, The Teachings of the Magi, London, 1956,
p. 75; see also M. Molé, Le Problème zoroastrien et la tradition
mazdéenne, Paris, 1963.

The alchemical significance of this passage which relates the alchemical
symbolism of metals to the inner or physiological aspect of the
microcosm is evident. It is also of great significance to note that
according to the Bundahisën, the form of Gayomart was spherical as also
asserted in Plato’s Symposium concerning the form of the primordial man.
This geometric symbolism indicated that just as all geometric figures
and solids are generated by and contained in the circle and the sphere
which are the primordial form in two and three dimensions, primordial
man is the origin of all humanity and, in fact, cosmic existence and
“comprehends,” in a metaphysical sense, all cosmic existence.

See also the various works of M. Eliade dealing with sacrifice and
religious rites including Patterns in Comparative Religion, trans. R.
Sheed, New York, 1958; Traité d’histoire des religion, Paris, 1964; and
Gods, Goddesses, and the Myths of Creation, New York, [^1967]:

[^12]: The Person (Purus.a) has a thousand eyes, a thousand heads, a
thousand feet:

Encompassing Earth on every side, he rules firmlye-stablished in the
heart.

The Person, too, is all This, both what has been and what is to come. .

With three parts the Person is above, but one part came-into-existence
here:

Thence, he proceeded everywhere, regarding Earth and Heaven.

Of him was Nature born, from Nature Person born:

When born, he ranges Earth from East toWest.

Whereas the Angels laid-out the sacrifice with the Person of their
offering,. .

From that sacrifice, when the offering was all accomplished, the Verses
and Liturgies were born, The Metres, and the Formulary born of it.

Therefrom were born horses, and whatso beasts have cutting teeth in both
jaws.

Therefrom were born cows, and therefrom goats and sheep.

When they divided the Person, how-many-fold did they arrange him?

What was his mouth? What were his arms? How were his thighs and feet
named?

The Priest was his mouth; of his arms was made the Ruler;His thighs were
the Merchant-folk; from his feet was born the Servant.

The Moon was born from his Intellect; the Sun from his eye.

R.g Veda, X, 90, trans. A. K. Coomaraswamy on the basis of the
translation of N. Brown. See Coomaraswamy, The Vedas, Essays in
Translation and Exegesis, London, 1976, pp. 69-[^71]:

[^13]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image010.jpg)

[^14]: This is a specifically Islamic image, since Islam sees the
cardinal sin of man in his forgetfulness (ghaflah) of who he is although
he still carries his primordial nature (al-fit.rah) within himself, the
man as such to which in fact the Islamic message addresses itself. See
Schuon, Understanding Islam, pp. 13-15.

[^15]: The term al-insan al-kamil was first used as a technical term by
Ibn ‘Arabı although its reality constitutes the second Shahadah, Muh.
ammadun rasulallah, and of course was present from the beginning of the
Quranic revelation. After Ibn ‘Arabı the doctrine was presented in a
more systematic fashion by ‘Abd al-Karım al-Jılı in his al-Insan
al-kamil and also by ‘Azız al-Dın Nasafı in the work bearing the same
name. See. T. Burckhardt, De l’homme universel; and M. Molé (ed.),
‘Azizoddin Nasafi, Le Livre de l’homme parfait (Kitab al-insan
al-kamil), Tehran-Paris, 1962. A complete translation of the Jılı work
is being prepared in English by V. Danner for the Classics ofWestern
Spirituality Series being published by the Paulist Press.

[^16]: All traditions teach of the presence of more than one self within
us, and we still speak of self-discipline which means that there must be
a self which disciplines and another which is disciplined. Coomaraswamy
has dealt with this theme in many of his writings, for example, ¸SOn the
Indian Traditional Psychology, or Rather Pneumatology,ˇT in Lipsey
(ed.), Coomaraswamy 2: Selected Papers, Metaphysics, pp. 333ff.

On the traditional doctrine of the inner man see also V. Danner, ¸SThe
Inner and Outer Man,ˇT in Y. Ibish and P. Wilson (eds.), Traditional
Modes of Contemplation and Action, Tehran, 1977, pp. 407 ˝ U[^12]:

[^17]: The very fact that one of the species living on earth called man
can destroy the natural environment is itself an indication that he is
not simply an earthly creature and that his actions possess a cosmic
dimension. This only proves, for those whose vision has not become
atrophied by the limitations of modern thought, that man is more than a
purely biological specimen with a somewhat larger brain than the other
primates.

[^18]: Both Jews and Muslims within the Abrahamic family of traditions
and Hindus in quite another world believe that the practice of their
rites and various aspects of their sacred law uphold the cosmos. In
Hinduism the gradual decline of man and his natural environment through
a cosmic cycle are explicitly associated with degrees of practice of the
Law of Manu. The same correspondence between the practice of rites and
the sustenance of the cosmic order is also emphasized in nearly every
other tradition ranging from the Egyptian to the American Indian.

[^19]: “Man is either Viceroy or else he is an animal that claims
special rights by virtue of its cunning and the devouring efficiency of
teeth sharpened by technological instruments, an animal whose time is
up. If he is such an animal, then he has no rights-he is no more nor
less than meat-and elephants and lions, rabbits and mice must in some
dim recess of their being rejoice to see the usurper develop the means
of his own total destruction. But if he is Viceroy, then all decay and
all trouble in the created world that surrounds him is in some measure
to be laid to his count.” Eaton, King of the Castle, p. 123.

[^20]: By this assertion we do not mean that traditional man is only
that half-angelic creature of a certain type of Christian piety who is
alienated from nature. Traditional man who saw himself as custodian of
nature nevertheless buried his dead and did not consider himself a
purely natural being, although he lived in complete harmony with nature.

[^21]: See Ibn ‘Arabı, TheWisdom of the Prophets (Fusus al-hikam),
trans. from Arabic to French with notes by T. Burckhardt and trans. from
French to English by A. Culme-Seymour, pp. 23 and 35; also Ibn
al-‘Arabı, Bezels of Wisdom, chap.2.

[^22]: The genesis of man and his prenatal existence in various higher
states of existence is expounded in great detail in Jewish esoterism.
See L. Schaya, “La genèse de l’homme,” Études Traditionnelles, no.
456-57 (Avril-Septembre 1977): 94-131, where he discusses the birth,
descent, loss of original purity, and the regaining of man’s original
state according to Jewish sources concluding that, “Né de Dieu, l’être
humain est destiné, après ses multiples naissances et morts, à renaiître
en Lui, en tant que Lui” (p. 131); and idem, The Universal Meaning of
the Kabbalah, pp. 116ff. See also F. Warrain, La Théodicée de la
Kabbale, Paris, 1949, pp. 73ff.; and G. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish
Mysticism, Jerusalem, 1941, lectures 6 and 7.

[^23]: Quran VII; 172. On the significance of this verse see Nasr,
Ideals and Realitites of Islam, pp. 41ff.

[^24]: The Divan, trans. H.Wilberforce Clarke, vol. 1, Calcutta, 1891,
p. 406.

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E011%5D:jpg)

[^25]: Hermeticism as reflected in alchemical texts contains a most
profound anthropology which is now attracting the attention of
thoseWestern anthropologists who have realized the inadequacies of the
modern science bearing this name and are in search of a science which
would deal with the anthropos, not the twolegged animal that modern,
secularized man envisages him to be. On the wedding between the soul and
the Spirit in alchemy see T. Burckhardt, Alchemy, chap. 17.

[^26]: Sadr al-Dın Shırazı and later Islamic metaphysicians have dealt
extensively with eschatological questions centered around the doctrine
of the subtle body and its relation with the soul as it is molded by
human action to which this hadıth refers. See especially the commentary
of Sadr al-Dın Shırazı upon the Us.ul al-kafı of Kulayrı containing the
sayings of the Imams and also his commentary upon Suhrawardı’s Hikmat
al-ishraq. See Corbin, “Le Thème de la résurrection chez Mollâ Sadrâ
Shîrâzî (1050/1640) commentateur de Sohrawardî (587/1191),” in Studies
in Mysticism and Religion presented to Gershom G. Scholem, Jerusalem,
1968, pp. 71-115.

[^27]: On the metaphysical interpretation of the popular Indian notion
of transmigration see Coomaraswamy, “On the One and Only Transmigrant,”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 44, supplement no. 3, and in
Lipsey, Coomaraswamy, vol. 2.

[^28]: One must also remember the meaning of “land” in the ancient
Icelandic Land-Nama-Bok, which has been compared by Coomaraswamy in
certain respects to the Rg-Veda. See his The Rg Veda as Land-Nama-Bok,
in his The Vedas-Essays in Translation and Exegesis, pp. 117-59.

The Rg Veda itself (I, 108, 9 and X, 59, 4) refers to the three worlds
as “earths.”

Likewise, the Kabbalah speaks of not only the earthly paradise or “upper
earth” (Tebel) but also of six other earths of a more fragmentary nature
so that there are altogether seven earths as stated by the Zohar and the
Sefer Yetsirah. See Schaya, The Universal Meaning of the Kabbalah, pp.
108-[^9]:

[^29]: See Corbin, Spiritual Body and Celestial Earth, trans. N.
Pearson, Princeton, 1977, where these doctrines are fully expounded.
Corbin even speaks of “geosophy” as a wisdom about the earth and a
sacred knowledge of the earth, including the celestial earth totally
distinct from what geography or geology is concerned with.

[^30]: Traditional eschatologies, whose complex doctrines cannot be
treated here, all assert that only in this life as a human being can one
take advantage of the central state into which one is born and pass to
the spiritual abode and that there is no guarantee that one will be born
into a central state after death unless one has lived according to
tradition and in conformity with the DivineWill.

[^31]: The physiology of the “man of light” is developed within Islamic
esoterism particularly in the Central Asiatic school associated with the
name of Najmal-Dın Kubra. See Corbin, The Man of Light in Iranian
Sufism, trans. N. Pearson, Boulder, Colo., and London, 1978; and idem,
En Islam iranien, vol. 3. It is also developed fully in the Kabbala (for
example, in the Zohar) as well as in the ancient Iranian religions which
speak often of the cosmic dimensions of man in terms of light symbolism.
See B. T. Anklesaria, Zand- Akasıh, Iranian or Greater Bundahisën,
Bombay, 1956; and J. C. Coyajee, Cults and Legends of Ancient Iran and
China, Bombay, 1963.

[^32]: The title of one of Suhrawardı’s most famous works is Hayakil
al-nur (The Temples of Light). The Arabic work haykal (pl. hayakil) here
rendered as temple means also body; the title refers to the symbolism of
the body as the temple in which is present the light of God.

[^33]: There are of course exceptions not only in the medieval period in
such figures as Dante but also in the later period in the writings of
Paracelsus and even during the last century in the poetry ofWilliam
Blake.

On the doctrine of the spiritual significance of the body in connection
with the “subtle body” see G. R. S. Mead, The Doctrine of the Subtle
Body in Western Tradition, London, 1919; and of more recent origin, C.
W. Leadbeater, Man Visible and Invisible, Wheaton, Ill., 1969; and on a
more popular level D. Tanseley, Subtle Body, Essence and Shadow, London,
[^1977]:

[^34]: One hardly need mention how important gesture is in traditional
societies and how it is related to sacred symbols which manifest
themselves in all facets of traditional civilizations including their
art. The mudras in both Hinduism and Buddhism are a perfect example of
the central role played by gesture.

On the heart, head, and body of man and their spiritual significance see
Schuon, “The Ternary Aspect of the Human Microcosm,” Gnosis,
DivineWisdom, pp.93-[^99]:

[^35]: See Schuon, Du Divin à l’humain, pt. 3.

[^36]: The horizontal and vertical dimensions of the cross symbolize the
Universal Man who contains all the possibilities of existence, both
horizontal and vertical, within himself. See R. Guénon, Symbolism of the
Cross.

[^37]: Some interest has been taken in recent years on reviving the
traditional doctrines concerning memory. See F. Yates, The Art of
Memory, Chicago, 1966.

[^38]: This is a term used first by Corbin in French to distinguish the
positive role of the imagination from all the pejorative connotations
connected with the word “imaginary.”

In recent years after three centuries of neglect, certain European
philosophers and scholars have turned their attention to a serious
reappraisal of the traditional teaching concerning the imagination.
Among this group one must mention especially G. Durand who

has established a center in Chambéry, France, named “Centre de recherche
sur l’Imaginaire” for the study of the world of imagination. See his Les
Structures anthropologiques de l’Imaginaire, Paris, 1979;also Corbin,
Creative Imagination in the Sufism of Ibn ‘Arabı, trans. R. Manheim,
Princeton, 1969. See also R. L. Hart, Unfinished Man and the
Imagination, New York, 1968.

[^39]: For modern man the sentiment of fear has come to have only a
negative significance as result of the loss of the sense of majesty and
grandeur associated with the Divinity. In the traditional context,
however, the Biblical saying, repeated by St. Paul and the Prophet of
Islam, “the beginning of wisdom is the fear of God” (rd’s al-h. ikmah
makhafatallah), remains of permanent significance since it corresponds
to the nature of things and the most urgent and real needs of man as a
being created for immortality.

[^40]: For example, in India while in Tantrism there is reference to the
androgynic figure Ardhanarı; in the ´Sivite school the androgynic state
is usually represented iconographically by the union of ´Siva and
Parvatı who are sometimes fused as one figure half male and half female,
in which case ´Siva is known as Ardhan arı´svara.

On the significance of the androgyne and some of the contemporary
applications of the meaning of its symbol see E. Zolla, The Androgyne,
Fusion of the Sexes, London, 1981; also K. Critchlow, The Soul as Sphere
and Androgyne, Ipswich, U.K., [^1980]:

[^41]: It is not accidental that in so many sacred languages these
qualities possess a feminine form such as the Arabic rahmah (“mercy”)
and hikmah (“wisdom”).

[^42]: The attempt by modern man to destroy the qualitative differences
between the sexes in the name of some kind of egalitarianism is only a
consequence of the further elongation of Promethean man from the
archetypal reality of the human state and therefore an insensitivity to
this precious qualitative difference between the sexes.

[^43]: On the gun. as see Guénon, Man and His Becoming According to the
Vedanta, chap. 4.

[^44]: On their relation see Nasr, Islamic Science-An Illustrated Study,
pp. 159ff.

[^45]: For the traditional treatment of astrological human types see
al-Bırunı Elements of Astrology, trans. W. RamseyWright, London, 1934;
Burckhardt, The Mystical Astrology of Ibn ‘Arabı, London, 1977; R. Z.
Zoller, The Lost Key to Prediction, New York, 1980; M. Gauguelin, The
Cosmic Clocks, London, 1969; and J. A.West and J. G. Toonder, The Case
for Astrology, London, 1970.

[^46]: On the metaphysical significance of caste see Schuon, “Principle
of Distinction in the Social Order,” in his Language of the Self, pp.
136ff.

[^47]: It is possible for a human being to possess more than one caste
characteristic, the most eminent example being of course the
prophet-kings of the Abrahamic traditions who possessed both the
sacerdotal and knightly natures in the most eminent degree, Melchizedik
being the primal example of the union of these natures as well as
spiritual and temporal authority.

[^48]: See Schuon, “Understanding and Believing” and “The Human Margin,”
in Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, pp. 401ff.

[^49]: Quran (XIV; 4-Pickthall translation).

[^50]: We shall deal more extensively with this question in chap. 9.

[^51]: In all traditions the significance of the “face” is emphasized
since it bears the direct imprint of the Divine upon the human. In the
Quran there are several references to the “face of God” which have
become sources of meditation for many Muslim sages. See, for example, H.
Corbin, “Face de Dieu et face de l’homme,” Eranos-Jahrbuch 36 (1968):
165-228, which deals mostly with the teachings of Qadı Sa‘ıd Qummı, on
the significance of the face of God in relation to the human face and
all that determines the humanity of man.

[^52]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image012.jpg)
