Chapter Six: The Cosmos as Theophany
====================================

*Nel suo profondo vidi che s'interna,*

*legato con amore in un volume,*

*ciò che per l'universo si squaderna:*

*sustanze e accidenti e lor costume*

*quasi conflati insieme, par tal modo*

*che cio ch'i' dico è un semplice lume.*

*In the depth I saw ingathered, bound by love in one single volume, that
which is dispersed in leaves throughout the universe: substances and
accidents and their relations, as though fused together in such a way
that what I tell is but a simple light.1*

**Dante**

Although the goal of sacred knowledge is the knowledge of the Sacred as
such, that is, of that Reality which lies beyond all cosmic
manifestation, there is always that stage of the gathering of the
scattered leaves of the book of the universe, to paraphrase Dante,
before journeying beyond it. The cosmos plays a positive role in certain
types of spirituality that any integral tradition must account for and
include in its total perspective, which is not to say that the adept of
every kind of spiritual path need study the pages of the cosmic book.
But precisely because the cosmos is a book containing a primordial
revelation of utmost significance and man a being whose essential,
constitutive elements are reflected upon the cosmic mirror and who
possesses a profound inner nexus with the cosmic ambience around him,
sacred knowledge must also include a knowledge of the cosmos which is
not simply an empirical knowledge of nature nor even just a sensibility
toward the beauties of nature, no matter how noble this sensibility of
the kind expressed by so many English Romantic poets might be.

In the traditional world there is a science of the cosmos-in fact many
sciences of the cosmos or cosmological sciences which study various
natural and cosmic domains ranging from the stars to minerals, but from
the point of view of metaphysical principles. All traditional cosmology
is in fact the fruit of the applications of metaphysical principles to
different domains of cosmic reality by an intelligence which is itself
still wed to the Intellect and has not completely surrendered to
sensorial impressions. Such sciences also do deal with the natural world
and have produced knowledge of that world which is “scientific”
according to the current understanding of this term, but not only
scientific.2 Even in these instances, however, the aim of such
traditional sciences has been not to produce knowledge of a particular
order of reality in a closed system, and cut off from other orders of
reality and domains of knowledge, but a knowledge which relates the
domain in question to higher orders of reality as that knowledge itself
is related to higher orders of knowledge.3 There is such a thing as
traditional science distinct from modern science dealing with the same
realms and domains of nature which are treated in the sciences today.
Yet these traditional sciences, although of much importance in
understanding the rise of modern science, which in many cases employed
their outward content without comprehending or accepting their world
view, have a significance wholly other than the modern sciences of
nature.4

The traditional sciences of the cosmos make use of the language of
symbolism. They claim to expound a science and not a sentiment or poetic
image of the domain which is their concern, but a science which is
expounded in the language of symbolism based on the analogy between
various levels of existence. In fact, although there are numerous
cosmological sciences, sometimes even several dealing with the same
realm and within a single tradition, one can speak of a cosmologia
perennis which they reflect in various languages of form and symbol, a
cosmologia perennis which, in one sense, is the application and, in
another, the complement of the sophia perennis which is concerned
essentially with metaphysics.

There is also another type of the “study” of the cosmos in the
traditional context which complements the first. That is the
contemplation of certain natural forms as reflecting Divine Qualities
and the vision of the cosmos in divinis. This perspective is based on
the power of forms to be occasions for recollection in the Platonic
sense and the essential and of course not substantial identity of
natural forms with their paradisal origin. Spiritual realization based
on the sapiential perspective implies also this “metaphysical
transparency of natural forms and objects” as a necessary dimension and
aspect of “seeing God everywhere.”5 In reality the traditional
cosmological sciences lend themselves to being such a support for
contemplation besides making available a veritable science of various
realms of the cosmos. What is in fact traditional cosmology but a way of
allowing man to contemplate the cosmos itself as an icon! Therefore,
both types of knowledge of the cosmos, as viewed from the perspective of
sacred knowledge and through eyes which are not cut off from the
sanctifying rays of the “eye of the heart,” reveal the cosmos as
theophany.6 To behold the cosmos with the eye of the intellect is to see
it not as a pattern of externalized and brute facts, but as a theater
wherein are reflected aspects of the Divine Qualities, as a myriad of
mirrors reflecting the face of the Beloved, as the theophany of that
Reality which resides at the Center of the being of man himself. To see
the cosmos as theophany is to see the reflection of one-Self in the
cosmos and its forms.

In traditions based upon a sacred scripture the cosmos also reveals its
meaning as a vast book whose pages are replete with the words of the
Author and possess multiple levels of meaning like the revealed book of
the religion in question. This perspective is to be found in Judaism and
Islam where the eternal Torah and the Quran as the Umm al-kitāb are seen
as prototypes of both the revealed book and that other grand book or
virgin nature which reflects God's primordial revelation. In
Christianity also, where there is greater emphasis upon the Son as Logos
than on the book, the vision of the universe as the book of God is not
only present but has been repeated through the ages especially in the
utterance of those who have belonged to the sapiential perspective. In
fact, this view, so majestically depicted by Dante, did not disappear
until the inner meaning of revelation itself became inaccessible.
Exegesis turned to the interpretation of the outward, literal meaning of
the sacred text while cosmic symbols were becoming facts and, instead of
revealing the cosmos as theophany, were limiting the reality of the
world to the categories of mass and motion. The

veiling of pontifical man and his transformation to the Promethean could
not but result in the cosmic book becoming illegible and sacred
Scripture reduced to only its outward meaning.

In Islam the correspondence between man, the cosmos, and the sacred book
is central to the whole religion. The sacred book of Islam is the
written or composed Quran (al-Qur'ān al-tadwīnī) as well as the cosmic
Quran (al-Qur'ān al-tadwīnī). Its verses are called āyāt which means
also signs or symbols to which the Quran itself refers in the verse, “We
shall show them our portents upon the horizon [āfāq] and within
themselves [anfus], until it be manifest unto them that it is the truth”
(XLI; 53).7 The āyāt are the Divine Words and Letters which comprise at
once the elements of the Divine Book, the macrocosmic world and the
inner being of man. The āyāt manifest themselves in the Holy Book, the
horizons (āfāq) or the heavens and earth and the soul of man (anfus). To
the extent that the āyāt of the sacred book reveal their inner meaning
and man's outer faculty and intelligence become wed once again to the
inner faculties and the heart, and man realizes his own being as a sign
of God, the cosmos manifests itself as theophany and the phenomena of
nature become transformed into the āyāt mentioned by the Quran, the āyāt
which are none other than the vestigia Dei which an Albertus Magnus or
John Ray sought to discover in their study of natural forms.8 Likewise,
the theophanic aspect of virgin nature aids in man's discovery of his
own inner being. Nature is herself a divine revelation with its own
metaphysics and mode of prayer, but only a contemplative already endowed
with sacred knowledge can read the gnostic message written in the most
subtle manner upon the cliffs of high mountains, the leaves of the
trees,9 the faces of animals and the stars of the sky.

In certain other traditions of a primordial character where the
revelation itself is directly related to natural forms as in the
tradition of the American Indians, especially those of the Plains, and
in Shintoism, the animals and plants are not only symbols of various
Divine Qualities but direct manifestations of the Divine Principle in
such a way that they play a direct role in the cultic aspect of the
religion in question. Moreover, in such traditions there exists a
knowledge of nature which is direct and intimate yet inward. The Indian
not only sees the bear or the eagle as divine presences but has a
knowledge of what one might call the eagle-ness of the eagle and the
bear-ness of the bear as if he saw in these beings their Platonic
archetypes. The revelation of God in such cases embraces both men and
nature in such a way that would be inconceivable for that exteriorized
reason of postmedieval man who externalized his alienation from his own
inner reality by increasing his sense of aggression and hatred against
nature, an aggression made somewhat easier by the excessively rigid
distinction made in Western Christianity between the supernatural and
the natural. In any case, the animal masks of certain archaic traditions
or the waterfalls of Taoist paintings depicting the descent of the One
into the plane of multiplicity are neither animism in its pejorative
sense nor a naive projection of the human psyche upon creatures of the
external world. They are epiphanies of the Sacred based on the most
profound knowledge of the very essence of the natural forms involved.
They represent a knowledge of

the cosmos which is not by any means negated or abrogated by what
physics may discover about the dynamics of a waterfall or anatomy about
the animal in question. One wonders who knows more about the coyote, the
zoologist who is able to study its external habit and dissect its
cadaver or the Indian medicine man who identifies himself with the
“spirit” of the coyote?10

Not only do the traditional sciences of the cosmos study the forms of
nature with respect to their essential archetypes and do contemplatives
within these traditions view the phenomena of virgin nature as
theophanies, but also the astounding harmony of the natural world is
seen as a direct result and consequence of that sacrifice of the
primordial man described in different metaphysical or mythical languages
in various traditions. The unbelievable harmony which pervades the
world, linking the life cycles of fishes on the bottom of tropical
oceans to land creatures roaming northern tundras in an incredible
pattern, has been all but neglected by Western science until very recent
times. But it forms an important element of that traditional science of
nature which, whether in terms of the Pythagorean theory of harmony
related to the World Soul or in other terms, remains always aware of
that harmony between animals, plants, and minerals, between the
creatures of various climes and also between the physical, subtle, and
spiritual realms of beings which make the life of the cosmos possible.
This harmony, whose grand contour has been only partly revealed by some
recent ecological studies, is like the harmony of the parts of the human
body as well as of the body, soul, and spirit of pontifical or
traditional man and, in fact, is profoundly related to this concretely
experienced harmony of man because this latter type of harmony, like
that of the cosmos, is derived from the perfect harmony of the being of
the Universal Man who is the prototype of both man and the cosmos. If
the cosmos is a crystallization of the sounds of music and musical
harmony a key for the understanding of the structure of the cosmos from
planetary motion to quantum energy levels, it is because harmony dwelt
in the very being of that archetypal reality through which all things
were made. If God is a geometer who provides the measure by which all
things are made, He is also the musician who has provided the harmony by
which all things live and function and which is exhibited in a blinding
and miraculous fashion in the cosmos.

The cosmos has of course its own laws and rhythms. Modern science speaks
of laws of nature and even in modern physics, although this concept has
been modified, the idea of statistical laws dominating over aggregates
remains while the laws of macrophysics continue to be studied as the
proper subject of science. Through a long history related to the rise of
the idea of natural law as opposed to revealed law in the Christian
tradition, whose own laws were in fact general spiritual and moral
injunctions rather than a detailed codified law as in Judaism and Islam,
a cleavage was created in the mind of Western man between laws of nature
and spiritual principles. While the integral Christian tradition was
alive in the Middle Ages, the cleavage was overcome by sapiential and
even theological teachings such as those of Erigena and Saint Thomas
which related natural laws themselves to God's Wisdom and Power.
Nevertheless there was no Divine Law in the sense of

the Islamic Sharī‘ah within Christianity itself which could be seen in
its cosmic aspect to include the laws according to which other beings in
the cosmos function. The cleavage was never totally overcome so that
with the advent of the revolt against the medieval synthesis during the
Renaissance, the “laws of nature” and the “laws of God” as found in
religion began to part ways to the extent that viewing the laws whose
functioning is to be observed everywhere in the cosmos as Divine Law
became soon outmoded and relegated to the pejorative category of
“anthropomorphism.” Moreover, since Christianity emphasizes the
importance of the unparalleled event of the birth of Christ and his
miraculous life, the evidence of religion seemed to many a European mind
to rely upon the miracle which breaks the regularity of the laws
observed in nature, whereas that regularity itself is no less evidence
of the primacy of the Logos and the Wisdom of God reflected in His
creation.11 The fact that the sun does rise every morning is, from the
sapiential point of view, as much a cause for wonder as if it were to
rise in the West tomorrow.

It is of interest to note how Islam views this same subject of law. The
Quranic revelation brought not only as set of ethical practices and a
spiritual path for its followers but also a Divine Law, the Sharī‘ah, by
which all Muslims must live as the means of surrendering their will to
God's will.12 By extension the Sharī‘ah is seen by Muslims as embracing
all orders of creation and corresponding to what is understood in
Western intellectual history as “laws of nature.” Many an Islamic source
has spoken of the Divine Law of this or that animal.13 Interestingly
enough, the Greek word for cosmic law, nomos, which reached Muslims
through translations of Greek texts, especially of the Laws of Plato,
became Arabized as nāmūs-the Laws of Plato itself being called Kitāb
al-nawāmīs. Through such figures as al-Fārābī in his Āra' ahl al-maḍīnat
al-fāḍilah (The Views of the Inhabitants of the Virtuous State),14 it
entered into the mainstream of Islamic thought and its meaning became
practically synonymous with the Sharī‘ah. To this day Muslim
philosophers and theologians, as well as simple preachers in the pulpit,
speak of the nāwāmīs al-anbiyā', the Divine Laws brought by the prophets
and nāmūs al-khilqah, the Divine Law which governs creation. There is no
difference of nature between them. God has promulgated a law for each
species of being and order of creatures which for man becomes religious
law or the Sharī‘ah as understood in its ordinary sense. The only
difference is that other creatures have not been given the gift of free
will and therefore cannot rebel against the laws which GoËd has meant
for them, against their “nature”15 while man, being the theomorphic
creature that he is, participates also in the Divine Freedom and can
revolt against God's laws and himself. From a metaphysical point of view
the rebellion of man against Heaven is itself proof of man's being made
“in the image of God,” to use the traditional formulation.

In this crucial question as in so many others, the Islamic perspective
joins that of other Oriental traditions where no sharp distinction is
made between the laws governing man and those governing the cosmos. The
Tao is the origin of all things, the law governing each order of
existence and every individual being within that order. Each being has
its own Tao. Likewise

dharma is not limited to man; all creatures have their own dharma. From
the point of view of scientia sacra all laws are reflections of the
Divine Principle. For man to discover any “law of nature” is to gain
some knowledge of the ontological reality of the domain with which he is
concerned. Moreover, the discovery of such laws is always through man's
own intelligence and the use of logic which reflects an aspect of his
own ontological reality. Therefore, in an ultimate sense, the study of
the “laws of nature” is inseparable from the study of the reality of
that Universal Man or macrocosmic reality whose reflection comprises the
cosmos. It is a study of man himself. To study the laws of the cosmos,
like studying its harmony or the beauty of its forms, is a way of
self-discovery provided the subject carrying out such a study does not
live in a truncated order of reality in which the study of the external
world serves only to fragment further man's soul and alienate him from
himself, creating, paradoxically enough, a world in which man himself no
longer has a place.

What pertains to cosmic laws also holds true for causes which are
reduced to the purely material in modern science as if the material
order of reality could be totally divorced from other cosmic and
metacosmic orders. The traditional sciences take into consideration not
only the material or immediate causes of things but also the nonmaterial
and ultimate ones. Even the four Aristotelian causes, the formal,
material, efficient, and final, are systematized approximations of all
the causes involved in bringing about any effect, for these causes
include not only what is outwardly understood by the formal, efficient,
and final causes but all that such causes mean metaphysically. The
formal cause includes the origin of a particular form in the archetypal
world, the efficient cause the grades of being which finally result in
the existentiation of a particular existent, and the final cause a
hierarchy of beings belonging to higher orders of reality that
terminates with the Ultimate Cause which is the Real as such. It is in
fact in this perspective that many later metaphysical rather than only
rationalistic commentators of Aristotle viewed the significance of the
Aristotelian four causes.

In any case, the causes which are responsible for various effects in the
natural world are not limited to the natural world but embrace all
orders of being, Moreover, these causes operate within man himself and
between man and his cosmic environment. Each being in fact is related by
a set of causes to the milieu in which it exists, the two being
inseparable.16 Man is bound to his world not only by the set of physical
causes which bind him to that world but also by metaphysical ones. The
net of causality is much vaster than that cast by those sciences which
would limit the cosmos to only its material aspect and man to a complex
combination of the same material factors caught in the mesh of that
external environment which penetrates within him and determines his
behavior and manner of being. Modern behaviorism is in many ways a
parody of the Hindu doctrine of karma which expresses the central
importance of causality in the domain of manifestation without either
limiting it to only the psycho-physical realm or denying the possibility
of deliverance, or mokśa, from all chains of cause and effect, even
those belonging to higher levels of existence. To behold the cosmos as
theophany is not to deny either the laws or the chain of cause and

effect which pervade the cosmos but to view the cosmos and the forms it
displays with such diversity and regularity as reflections of Divine
Qualities and ontological categories rather than a veil which would hide
the splendor of the face of the Beloved.

To achieve such a goal and see the cosmos as theophany and not veil, it
is necessary to return again and again to the truth that reality is
hierarchic, that the cosmos is not exhausted by its physical aspect
alone. All traditional cosmologies are based in one way or another on
this axial truth. Their goal is to present in an intelligible fashion
the hierarchy of existence as reflected in the cosmos. The “great chain
of being” of the Western tradition, which survived in the West until it
became horizontalized and converted from a ladder to Heaven to an
evolutionary stream moving toward God knows where,17 was a synthesis of
this idea which has its equivalence in Islam,18 India, and elsewhere,
even if not as thoroughly elaborated in all traditions. The cosmologies
which appeal to the immediate experience of the cosmos by terrestrial
man have no other aim but to convey this metaphysical and central truth
concerning the multiple states of existence in a vivid and concrete
fashion. Cosmologies based on Ptolemaic astronomy or other astronomical
schemes based on the way the cosmos presents itself to man are not in
any way invalidated by the rejection of this geocentric scheme for the
heliocentric one, because they make use of the immediate experience of
the natural world as symbol rather than fact, a symbol whose meaning
like that of any other symbol cannot be grasped through logical or
mathematical analysis.

If one understands what symbols mean, one cannot claim that medieval
cosmologies are false as a result of the fact that if we were standing
on the sun we would observe the earth moving around it. The fact remains
that we are not standing on the sun and if the cosmos, from the vantage
point of the earth where we were born, does possess a symbolic
significance, surely it would be based on how it appears to us as we
stand on earth. To think otherwise would be to destroy the symbolic
significance of the cosmos. It would be like wanting to understand the
meaning of a maṇḍala by looking at it under a microscope. In doing so
one would discover a great deal about the texture of the material upon
which the maṇḍala has been drawn but nothing about the symbolic
significance of the maṇḍala which was drawn with the assumption that it
would be looked upon with the normal human eye. Of course, in the case
of the cosmos the other ways of envisaging and studying it, as long as
they conform to some aspect of cosmic reality, also possess their own
profound symbolism-such as, for example, the heliocentric system, which
was in fact known long before Copernicus, or the vast dark intergalactic
spaces-but the destruction of the immediate symbolism of the cosmos as
it presents itself to man living on earth cannot but be catastrophic.

To look upon the vast vault of the heavens as if one lived on the sun
creates a disequilibrium which cannot but result in the destruction of
that very earth that modern man abstracted himself from in order to look
upon the solar system from the vantage point of the sun in the absolute
space of classical physics. This disequilibrium would not necessarily
have resulted

had the type of man who rejected the earth-centered view of the cosmos
been the solar figure, the image of the supernal Apollo, the Pythagorean
sage, who in fact knew of the heliocentric astronomy without this
knowledge causing a disruption in his world view. But paradoxically
enough, this being who abstracted himself from the earth to look upon
the cosmos from the sun, through that most direct symbol of the Divine
Intellect, was the Promethean man who had rebelled against Heaven. The
consequences could, therefore, not be anything but tragic.

The destruction of the outward symbol of traditional cosmologies
destroyed for Western man the reality of the hierarchic structure of the
universe which these cosmologies symbolized and which remains
independent of any particular type of symbolism used to depict it. This
structure could be and in fact has been expressed by other means,
ranging from traditional music which reflects the structure of the
cosmos to mathematical patterns of various kinds to metaphysical
expositions not directly bound to a particular astronomical symbolism.
The exposition of the hierarchic levels of reality as the “five Divine
Presences” (al-haḍarāt al-ilāhiyyat al-khams) by the Sufis, such as Ibn
‘Arabī, is a perfect example of this latter kind.19 Ibn ‘Arabī speaks of
each principal order of reality as a haḍrah or “Divine Presence”
because, metaphysically speaking, being or reality is none other than
presence (haḍrah) or consciousness (shuhūd). These presences include the
Divine Ipseity Itself (hāhūt), the Divine Names and Qualities (lāhūt),
the archangelic world (jabarūt), the subtle and psychic world (malakūt),
and the physical world (mulk).20 Each higher world contains the
principles of that which lies below it and lacks nothing of the lower
level of reality. That is why in God one is separate from nothing.
Although these presences possess further inner divisions within
themselves, they represent in a simple fashion the major level of cosmic
existence and metacosmic reality without there being the need to have
recourse to a particular astronomical symbolism. This does not mean,
however, that certain other later cosmologists did not point to
correlations between these presences and various levels of the
hierarchic cosmological schemes that still possessed meaning for those
who beheld them.

In Islam we encounter numerous cosmological schemes associated with the
Peripatetics, Illuminationists, the Isma‘īlīs, alchemical authors like
Jābir ibn Hayyān, Pythagoreans, various schools of Sufism, and of course
the cosmologies based upon the language and text of the Quran and
related to its inner meaning, which served as source of inspiration and
principle for the other cosmologies drawn from diverse sources.21 But
throughout all of these cosmological schemes, there remains the constant
theme of the hierarchic universe manifested by the Divine Principle and
related intimately to the inner being of man. The same theme is found at
the center of those sometimes bewildering cosmologies found in India, in
Kabbalistic and Hermetic texts, in the oral traditions of the American
Indians, in what survives of ancient Sumerian and Babylonian religions,
among the Egyptians, and practically everywhere else.22 The diversity of
symbolism is great but the presence of the vision of the cosmos as a
hierarchic reality bound to the Origin and related to man not only
outwardly but also inwardly

persists as elements of what we referred to earlier as cosmologia
perennis. This vision is that of pontifical man and therefore has had to
be present wherever and whenever pontifical man, who is none other than
traditional man, has lived and functioned.

Likewise, these traditional cosmologies as perceived within the
sapiential perspective have been concerned with providing a map of the
cosmos as well as depicting it as an icon to be contemplated and as
symbol of metaphysical truth. The cosmos is not only the theater wherein
are reflected the Divine Names and Qualities. It is also a crypt through
which man must journey to reach the Reality beyond cosmic manifestation.
In fact man cannot contemplate the cosmos as theophany until he has
journeyed through and beyond it.23 That is why the traditional
cosmologies are also concerned with providing man with a map which would
orient him within the cosmos and finally enable him to escape beyond the
cosmos through that miraculous act of deliverance with which so many
myths have been concerned.24 From this point of view the cosmos appears
as a labyrinth through which man must journey in a perilous adventure
where literally all that he is and all that he has is at stake, a
journey for which all traditions require both the map of traditional
knowledge and the spiritual guide who has himself journeyed before
through this labyrinth.25 It is only by actually experiencing the
perilous journey through the cosmic labyrinth that man is able to gain a
vision of that cathedral of celestial beauty which is the Divine
Presence in its metacosmic splendor.26

Having journeyed through and beyond the cosmos, man, who is then “twice
born” and a “dead man walking” in the sense of being spiritually
resurrected here and now, is able finally to contemplate the cosmos and
its forms as theophany.27 He is able to see the forms of nature in
divinis and to experience the Ultimate Reality not as transcendent and
beyond but as here and now.28 It is here that the cosmos unveils its
inner beauty ceasing to be only externalized fact or phenomenon but
becoming immediate symbol, the reflection of the noumenon, the
reflection which is not separated but essentially none other than the
reality reflected. The cosmos becomes, to use the language of Sufism, so
many mirrors in which the various aspects of the Divine Names and
Qualities and ultimately the One are reflected. The Arabic word tajallī
means nothing but this reflection of the Divine in the mirror of the
cosmos which, metaphysically speaking, is the mirror of nothingness.29
Objects appear not only as abstract symbols but as concrete presence.
For the sage a particular tree is not only a symbol of the grade of
being which he has come to know through his intelligence and the science
of symbolism that his intelligence has enabled him to grasp. It is also
a tree of paradise conveying a presence and grace of a paradisal nature.

This immediate experience, however, is not only not separate from the
science of symbols, of sacred geometry, and of the significance of
certain sacred forms, but it provides that immediate intuition which
only increases the grasp of such sciences and makes possible their
application to concrete situations. Zen gardens are based on the science
of sacred geometry and the metaphysical significance of certain forms
but cannot be created by just anyone who might have a manual on the
symbolism of space or rock

formations. The great gardens are expressions of realized knowledge
leading to the awareness of natural forms as “presence of the Void,”
which in turn has made possible the application of this knowledge to
specific situations resulting in some of the greatest creations of
sacred art. The same rapport can be found mutatis mutandis elsewhere in
traditions which do not emphasize as much as Zen knowledge of natural
forms as immediate experience but where complete teachings in the
cosmological sciences are available. Everywhere the knowledge of cosmic
symbols goes hand in hand with that direct experience of a spiritual
presence which results from spiritual realization, although there are
always individual cases where a person may be given the gift of
experiencing some aspect of the cosmos or a particular natural form as
theophany without a knowledge of the science of symbolism or, as is more
common in the modern world, a person may have the aptitude to understand
the meaning of symbols, which is itself a precious gift from Heaven, but
lack spiritual realization and therefore lack the possibility of ever
experiencing the cosmos as theophany. In the sapiential perspective, in
any case, the two types of appreciation of cosmic realities usually go
hand in hand, and certainly in the case of the masters of gnosis,
complement each other.

Of special significance among cosmological symbols which are related to
the contemplation of the cosmos as theophany and the experience of the
presence of the sacred in the natural order are those connected with
space. Space and time along with form, matter or substance, and number
determine the condition of human existence and in fact of all existence
in this world. Tradition therefore deals with all of them and transforms
all of them in order to create that sacred world in which traditional
man breathes. The symbolism of number is revealed through its
qualitative aspect as viewed in the Pythagorean tradition, and certain
theosophers in the West have even spoken of an “arithmosophy” to be
contrasted with arithmetic. Form and matter are sacralized through their
symbolic rapport and their relation to the archetypal realities
reflected by forms on the one hand and the descent or congelation of
existence, which on the physical plane appears as matter or substance,30
on the other. The nature of time is understood in its relation to
eternity and the rhythms and cycles which reflect higher orders of
reality, as we shall see in the next chapter. Finally space, which is
central as the “container” of all that comprises terrestrial existence,
is viewed not as the abstract, purely quantitative extension of
classical physics but as a qualitative reality which is studied through
sacred geometry.

Qualitative space is modified by the presence of the sacred itself. Its
directions are not the same; its properties are not uniform. While in
its empty vastness it symbolizes the Divine All-Possibility and also the
Divine Immutability, it is the progenitor of all the geometric forms
which are so many projections of the geometric point and so many
reflections of the One, each regular geometric form symbolizing a Divine
Quality.31 If Plato specified that only geometers could enter into the
temple of Divine Knowledge, it was because, as Proclus was to assert in
his commentary upon the Elements of Euclid, geometry is an ancillary to
metaphysics.32 The orientation of cultic acts, the construction of
traditional architecture, and

many of the traditional sciences cannot be understood without grasping
the significance of the traditional conception of qualified space. What
is the experience of space for the Muslim who turns to a particular
point on earth, wherever he might be, and then is blessed one day to
enter into the Ka‘bah itself beyond the polarization created upon the
whole earth by this primordial temple built to celebrate the presence of
the One? Why are the remarkable Neolithic structures of Great Britain
round and why do the Indians believe that the circle brings strength?
Most remarkable of all is the immediate experience of a wholly other
kind of space within a sacred precinct. How did the architects of the
medieval cathedrals create a sacred space which is the source of
profound experience even for those Christians who no longer follow their
religion fully? In all these and numerous other instances what is
involved is the application of a traditional science of space which
makes possible the actualization of a sacred presence and also the
contemplation of an element of the cosmic reality as theophany. It is
through this science of qualified space that traditional science and art
meet and that cosmological science and experience of the sacred become
wed in those places of worship, rites, cites of pilgrimage, and many
other elements which are related to the very heart of tradition.

This science is closely associated with what has been called “sacred
geography” or even “geosophy,” that symbolic science of location and
space concerned with the qualitative aspects of points on earth and the
association of different terrestrial sites with traditional functions,
ranging from the location of sanctuaries, burial sites, and places of
worship to places for the erection of gardens, planting of trees, and
the like in that special form of sacred art associated with the Japanese
garden and the traditional art of the Persian garden with all its
variations, ranging from Spanish gardens to the Mogul ones of India. The
science of sacred geography ranges from, on the one hand, popular and
often folkloric practices of geomancy in China to the most profound
sensitivity to the grace of the Divine Presence which manifests itself
in certain natural forms and locations on the other.

This science is thus closely allied to that particular kind of sapience
which is wed to the metaphysics of nature and that spiritual type among
human beings who is sensitive to the barakah or grace that flows in the
arteries of the universe. Such a person is drawn by this barakah into
the empyrean of spiritual ecstasy like an eagle that flies without
moving its wings upon an air current which carries it upward toward the
illimitable expanses of the heavenly vault. For such a person nature is
the supreme work of sacred art; in traditions based upon such a
perspective, like Islam or the American Indian tradition, virgin nature
as created by God is the sanctuary par excellence. The mosque of the
Muslim is the earth itself as long as it has not been defiled by man,
and the building called the mosque only extends the ambience of this
primordial mosque which is virgin nature into the artificial urban
environment created by man. Likewise, for the American Indian, that
wilderness of enchanting beauty which was the American continent before
the advent of the white man was the cathedral in which he worshiped and
wherein he observed the greatest works of art of the Supreme Artisan, of
Wakan-Tanka. This perspective, moreover, is not

limited to only certain traditions but is to be found in one way or
another within all integral traditions. This sensitivity to the barakah
of nature and the contemplation of the cosmos as theophany cannot but be
present wherever pontifical man lives and breathes, for nature is a
reflection of that paradisal state that man still carries within the
depth of his own being.

Such a vision has, needless to say, become blurred and is denied in the
world of Promethean man whose eminently successful science of nature has
blinded human beings to possibilities of other sciences and other means
of beholding and understanding nature. Moreover, this negation and
denial has occurred despite the fact that the cosmos has not completely
followed man in his rapid fall. It might be said that, although both
nature and man have fallen from that state of perfection characterized
as the paradisal state, what still remains of virgin nature is closer to
that prototype than the type of Promethean man who increases his
domination upon the earth every day. That is why what does remain of
virgin nature is so precious not only ecologically but also spiritually.
It is the only reminder left on earth of the normal condition of
existence and a permanent testament to the absurdity of all those modern
pretensions which reveal their true nature only when seen in the light
of the truth. Excluding revealed truth, nothing in the orbit of human
experience unveils the real nature of the modern world and the premises
upon which it is based more than the cosmos, ranging from the starry
heavens to the plants at the bottom of the seas. That is why Promethean
man has such an aggressive hatred for virgin nature; why also the love
of nature is the first sign among many contemporaries of their loss of
infatuation with that model of man who began his plunder of the earth
some five centuries ago.

During the last few years so many critiques have been written of modern
science and its recent handmaid, technology,33 that one hardly needs to
go once again into all the arguments ranging from the ecological and
demographic to the epistemological and theological. In any case that
would require a major separate study of its own. But to bring out fully
the meaning of the traditional sciences of nature and the significance
of the cosmos as theophany, it is necessary to recapitulate the main
points of criticism made of modern science by the traditional
authorities and from the traditional point of view. The first point to
assert in order to remove all possible misunderstanding is that the
traditional criticisms against modern science are not based on
sentiments, fanaticism, illogicality, or any of the other terms with
which anyone who criticizes modern science is usually associated. The
traditional critique is based on intellectual criteria in the light of
the metaphysical truth which alone can claim to be knowledge of a
complete and total nature.34 That is why traditional authors never deny
the validity of what modern science has actually discovered provided it
is taken for what it is. The knowledge of any order of reality is
legitimate provided it remains bound to that order and within the limits
set upon it by both its method and its subject matter. But this would in
turn imply accepting another science or manner of knowing which, being
of a more universal nature, would set the boundary within which that
science could function legitimately.

Herein lies the first and foremost criticism of modern science. In
declaring its independence of metaphysics or any other science, modern
science has refused to accept the authority which would establish the
boundary for its legitimate activity. That is why despite all the pious
platitudes and even well-intentioned and earnest pleading of honest
scientists, modern science does transgress beyond the realm which is
properly its own and serves as background for monstrous philosophical
generalizations which, although not at all scientific but scientistic,
feed upon the tenets and findings of the sciences and the fact that
modern science has signed its declaration of independence from
metaphysics. Moreover, by token of the same fact, the metaphysical
significance of scientific discoveries remains totally neglected by the
supposedly scientifically minded public which usually knows very little
about science but is mesmerized by it. And here again, despite the loud
protests of some reputable scientists, instead of the metascientific
significance of what science has actually discovered becoming revealed,
the reverse process takes place whereby, through wild interpolations and
usually well-hidden assumptions, metaphysical truths become rejected in
the name of scientific knowledge. What tradition opposes in modern
science is not that it knows so much about the social habits of ants or
the spin of the electron but that it knows nothing of God while
functioning in a world in which it alone is considered as science or
objective knowledge.

This divorce of science from metaphysics is closely related to the
reduction of the knowing subject to the cogito of Descartes. It is
usually forgotten that despite all the changes in the field of modern
physics, the subject which knows, whether the content of that knowledge
be the pendulum studied by Galileo or wave functions of electrons
described mathematically by de Broglie, is still that reason which was
identified by Descartes with the individual human ego who utters cogito.
The other modes of consciousness and manners of operation of the mind
are never considered in modern science. The findings of that reason
which is wed once again to the Intellect and that mind which is
illuminated by the light of the “eye of the heart” is not considered as
science at all, especially as this term is used in the English
language.35 Hence, the irrevocable limitation of a science caught within
the mesh of the functioning of only a part of the human mind but dealing
with a subject of vast import which it then seeks to solve in manners
that are characteristically “unscientific,” namely, intuition, artistic
beauty, harmony, and the like. Many first-rate scientists, in contrast
to most philosophers of science, would in fact accept our contention
that, if one considers all that which is called science has achieved
even in modern times, one cannot speak of the “scientific method” but
has to accept the assertion that science is what scientists do, which
might include playing with possibilities of musical harmony to solve
certain physical problems.

Despite the reality of this assertion, however, the rationalism inherent
in what the modern world considers to be science continues and has had
its lethal effect upon the humanities, the social sciences, and even
philosophy and theology. Strangely enough, precisely because of the
inherent limitation of the original epistemological premises of modern
science, more and more

modern science has come to see in the objective world not what is there
but what it has wanted to see, selecting what conforms to its methods
and approaches and then presenting it as the knowledge of reality as
such. Modern men, influenced by science, think that according to the
scientific point of view one should only believe what one can see,
whereas what has actually happened is that science has come to see what
it believes according to its a priori assumptions concerning what there
is to be seen.36 This epistemological limitation combined with the lack
of general accessibility in the West since the rise of modern science to
that scientia sacra of which we have spoken, has prevented this science
from being integrated into higher orders of knowledge with tragic
results for the human race. In fact, only a high degree of contemplative
intelligence can enable man to look upon the sun and see at once the
visible symbol of the Divine Intellect and an incandescent mass
diffusing energy in all directions.37

These limitations of modern science are to be seen also in its neglect
of the higher states of being and its treatment of the physical world as
if it were an independent order of reality. This neglect of the
unmanifested and in fact nonphysical aspects of reality has not only
impoverished the vision of cosmic reality in a world dominated by
scientism, but it has caused confusion between vertical and horizontal
causes and brought about incredible caricatures of the cosmic reality as
a result of relegating to the physical domain forces and causes which
belong to higher orders of existence. It is not accidental that the more
physics advances in its own domain, the more does it become aware of its
need for another complete paradigm which would take into consideration
domains of reality that many physicists feel almost intuitively to
exist, but which have been cast aside from the world view of classical
and modern physics.38

One of the consequences of this systematic neglect of higher orders of
existence has been the denial of life as an animating principle or
energy which has penetrated into the physical realm. Rather, life is
seen as an accidental consequence of molecular motion according to that
well-known reductionist point of view that does not realize that if life
or consciousness “result” from certain activities of molecules and their
combinations, they must either have already been present there in some
way or come from elsewhere.

This difficulty in solving the question of the origin and meaning of
life, despite its being discussed over the centuries by vitalists and
mechanists, is related to the desacralization of the world which became
the subject matter of seventeenth-century science and the gradual
deformation and finally destruction of the concept of the World Soul. In
all traditional cosmologies there is an Anima mundi or its equivalent
like the Janna Caeli of antiquity, Spenta Armaiti of Mazdaean cosmology,
or the Universal Soul (al-nafs al-kulliyyah) of Islamic sources. This
soul must not of course be confused with the immanent Deity, and belief
in the World Soul does not imply a kind of pantheism. But the World Soul
played a major cosmological function as the soul of the natural order
and its link with the Intellect. It also had a central epistemological
role as the Divine Sophia identified often with the Virgin Mary as the
Theotokos, the Soul in which the Son of the Intellect is born, or

as Fāṭimah who is the mother of the Imams who embody and symbolize the
Divine Light.

In the West the World Soul was typified by the Virgin. Its expulsion
from the world of modern man, which was also a direct consequence of
Cartesian dualism, was almost synchronous with the loss of the
significance of Mary in the rites and doctrines of the Christian
churches of those countries where the scientific world view was
developing most rapidly.39 Gradually, the very idea of animated meaning
“possessing a soul” or “ensouled” (enpsychos) was replaced by “moved”
(kinētos) which soon came to mean moved by history. The Anima mundi or
Weltgeist became the Zeitgeist of Hegel and the other dialectical
philosophers. Instead of the cosmos being animated by a soul which was
its intermediary link with the Intellect as we find in many traditional
schools of cosmology and philosophy especially in Islam,40 it became the
passive instrument of an ambiguous Zeitgeist which could not but mean
the apparent tyranny of becoming over Being Itself, if one is permitted
such an elliptical formulation. The consequence of this change for
religion as such was immense. It was not long before men began to change
the very rites and doctrines of religion not according to the
inspiration received from the Holy Ghost or Heilige Geist but from the
Zeitgeist, or “the times” with which everyone tries to keep up.

Moreover, this impoverishment of the reality with which modern science
deals removed from the consciousness of modern man, influenced by this
science and the philosophies derived from it, the reality of that
intermediate world which has been traditionally referred to as the
imaginal world to which we had occasion to refer before. Without this
world which stands between the purely intelligible and the physical
world and which possesses its own nonmaterial forms, there is no
possibility of a total and complete cosmology nor of the explanation of
certain traditional teachings concerning eschatology. Nor is it possible
to comprehend those mysterious cities and palaces, those mountains and
streams which appear in both traditional myths and cosmological schemes.
Where is the Holy Mountain wherein is to be found the Grail? Where are
those cities of the imaginal world which in Islam are called Jābulqā and
Jābulsā41 and which Suhrawardī considered to exist in the eighth clime,
in that land of “no-where” which he called nā kujā ābād, literally
u-topia? When the eighth clime was destroyed, the gnostic and visionary
u-topia could not but become the utopia of those European secularists
and atheists who, often aided by certain messianic ideas, sought to
establish the kingdom of God on earth without God, as if the good
without the Good had any meaning. When the Weltgeist became Zeitgeist,
history replaced the Divinity, and nā kujā ābād, instead of being the
abode of the gnostic in which he contemplated paradisal forms, became
the Utopia in whose name so much of what has remained of tradition has
been destroyed throughout the world.

This neglect of the multiple levels of existence by the modern
scientific perspective has forced the exponents of this science to take
recourse to belief in the uniformity of “laws of nature” over long
periods of time and expanses of space. This theory which is called
“uniformitarianism” and

which underlies all those geological and paleontological speculations
which speak of millions of years past was rapidly promoted from the
status of hypothesis to that of “scientific law”; and when most honest
scientists are asked on what basis do they believe that the laws of
nature, the so-called constants of the law of gravitation, the law of
electromagnetic theory or quantum jumps have always been the same, they
answer that since there is no other choice they have adopted the
uniformitarian thesis. Actually from the modern scientific point of view
itself there is of course no other way of speaking about what was going
on in the planetary systems eons ago except by considering the laws of
physics to be uniform and simply admitting that this science cannot
provide an answer to such questions without extrapolating cosmic and
natural laws back into earlier periods of time or into the future. Of
course it is not the physical conditions which modern science assumes to
have been the same but the laws and forces which bring about different
physical conditions at different times while supposedly remaining
uniform themselves. As far as these laws and forces are concerned,
whatever means are employed by modern science to check whether or not
there were changes in such laws and forces in the past are themselves
based on the condition of the uniformity of the laws and forces used to
carry out the process of checking. A science aware of its limits would
at least distinguish between what it means to say that the specific
weight of aluminum is such and such or how many protons are found in the
nucleus of a helium atom and to claim that such and such an astronomical
event occurred 500 million years ago or a particular geological
formation was formed so many millions or even billions of years ago. One
wonders what exactly the word year means in such a statement and what
assumptions are made upon the nature of reality to give the kind of
definition of years which is usually given when a question such as this
is posed to a scientist.

What is most unfortunate from the traditional point of view in this
presumptuous extrapolation of physical laws to include long stretches of
time, and in fact all time as such, is that it results in the total
neglect and even negation of cosmic rhythms, the qualitatively different
conditions which prevail in the cosmos in different moments of the
cosmic cycle and that absorption of the whole physical world into its
subtle principle at the end of a cosmic cycle. The denial of the
traditional doctrine of cycles or even one cycle which ends with the
majestic and tremendous events described in all sacred scriptures and
associated with eschatology is one of the greatest shortcomings of
modern science because it has made eschatology to appear as unreal. It
has helped destroy in the name of scientific logic, but in reality as a
result of a presumptuous extrapolation based on metaphysical ignorance,
the reality of that vision of ultimate ends which gives significance to
human life and which over the ages has had the most profound effect upon
the behavior of man as an ethical being. It has also destroyed in the
minds of those affected by scientism the grandeur of creation and the
meaning of the sacrifice of primordial man. That is why this science has
been so impervious to the amazing harmony that pervades the heavens and
the earth. Where does this harmony come from? This question, which is
metaphysical but which has profound scientific consequences, has

been left unanswered as a result of the hypothesis of uniformitarianism
which is metaphysically absurd but which passes as scientific law as a
result of the loss of vision of the hierarchic universe and
understanding of cosmic rhythms.

Also, closely related to this loss of the awareness of the vertical
dimension of existence, is the reductionism so characteristic of modern
science which we have had occasion to mention already in conjunction
with the process of the desacralization of knowledge. From the point of
view of scientia sacra, this reductionism is the inversion of the
traditional doctrine according to which each higher state of existence
“contains” the lower, the Principle containing the root of all that is
real in all realms of metacosmic and cosmic existence. In this reversal
of the normal rapport between grades of being, the Spirit is reduced to
the psyche, the psyche to biological form, living forms to aggregates of
material components, etc. Of course one cannot lay the responsibility
for all the levels of this reductionism at the feet of physics; but even
on the nonmaterial levels, the effect of a purely phenomenal science wed
to the sensually verifiable is to be observed, as, for example, the
reduction of the Spirit to the psyche so characteristic of the modern
world and concern with proofs of the existence of not only the psychic
but also the spiritual through various experiments which indirectly
emulate the physical sciences.42

To be sure, a group of biologists and others concerned with the life
sciences have at least tried to resist this reductionism on the level of
life forms, for those who are concerned with such sciences know fully
well how the whole is a totally other entity than its parts, that form
signifies a reality which is irreducible to its physical or chemical
components and that the energy associated with life functions
differently from material energy. This “morphic” science, to quote the
terminology used by L. L. Whyte,43 is closely akin to the
Naturphilosophie tradition and is fully supported by such important
biologists as A. Portmann,44 who has opposed scientific reductionism as
far as “forms” are concerned. In fact there is a whole critique of
modern science based on this perspective and the quest for the study of
forms of nature from a wholistic point of view;45 but the fact that such
a critique has been made does not hide the fact that reductionism
continues to be associated with modern science, and especially with the
world view of its popularizers, and that this reductionism is one of the
main obstacles which prevents modern man from seeing the reflection of
the hierarchy of existence in the mirror of cosmic manifestation.

This reductionism has its opposite but complementary pole in the
completely unjustifiable generalization of science and its findings in
such a way that it passes itself off as a science of things as such or
metaphysics and, despite the denial of many of its practitioners, plays
the role of a theology while hiding the presence of God and drawing a
veil over the vestiges of God upon the face of His creation. Being a
science of the world wed to a particular manner of envisaging and
studying the external, modern science nevertheless claims absoluteness
as the science of the world as it is, which could not but be the
function of a “divine science.” Hence it cannot but usurp the place of
metaphysics and theology for those who see in it the

only possible way of gaining certitude while everything else appears to
them as conjecture.46

A science which thus reduces the scope of both knowledge and reality to
its particular manner of envisaging the world, and that aspect of the
world which can be envisaged by its way of seeing things, cannot but aid
in the secularization of the world and the spread of agnosticism. This
is especially true since this science functions in a world in which its
tenets become almost automatically generalized far beyond the confines
acceptable to many scientists themselves because this “world” is already
one molded to a great extent by the generalization of scientific
thought, especially in its earlier seventeenth-century form. By refusing
to consider the several facets of a particular reality and by reducing
symbols to facts, this science cannot but contribute to that agnosticism
and desacralization of knowing and being which characterizes the modern
world,47 although such would not necessarily have had to be the case had
this type of science been integrated into knowledge of a higher order.

The traditional perspective sees as the reason behind these limitations
of modern science a concept of nature which goes back even before the
seventeenth century to the traditional schools of Christian thought
where, despite a Hildegard of Bingen, Saint Francis, or Saint
Bonaventure,48 a kind of polemical attitude was entertained toward
nature at least in the official theology.49 It was in Christian
Hermeticism and alchemy that one had to seek an integral vision of
nature and its spiritual significance.50 The quantification of nature by
the seventeenth-century physics was carried out upon a natural order
which was already depleted of its sacred presence. But this science
rapidly accentuated this alienation of man from nature and the
mutilation of nature whose catastrophic results now face contemporary
man. The mainstream of Western thought saw in nature an obstacle to the
love of God. Furthermore, Promethean man and the humanism associated
with him had an innate hatred for nature as a reality possessing its own
harmony, equilibrium, and beauty not invented or created by man and
opposed in principle to the tenets of humanism. These elements, added to
the more active than contemplative mentality of Western man, especially
in the modern period, complemented each other to make possible that
disrupting and finally destructive relationship which Western man has
entertained vis-à-vis nature at the expense of veiling its sacramental
qualities and its revelatory function as theophany.

That is why there is and there must be another science of nature which
is not metaphysics or scientia sacra itself but its application to the
realm of nature. Such a science would not exclude what is positive in
modern science but would not be bound by its limitations.51 It would not
veil but reveal the theophanic character of the cosmos and relate the
knowledge of the sensible domain to higher levels of reality and finally
to Reality as such.52 It would be a science whose matrix would be the
Intellect and not the dissected ratio associated with the Cartesian
cogito. Such a science existed already in traditional civilizations and
embraced their sciences of the sensible order which in many cases were
of considerable breadth and depth. Its principles are still to be found
in scientia sacra from which could be created a science

to embrace and integrate the sciences of nature of today once they are
shorn of the rationalistic and reductionist propositions, which do not
have to be their background, but which have accompanied them since their
birth during the Scientific Revolution. Only such an embrace can nullify
the disruptive and, in fact, dissolving effect of a partial knowledge
which parades as total knowledge or is paraded by others as such. Those
“others” include not only scientistic philosophers but many philosophers
and historians of science infected by a dogmatic positivism53 and a
number of modern mystifiers and pseudognostics who, instead of
integrating science into the gnostic vision, have mutilated the verities
of gnosis into a pseudoscientific science fiction which is no more than
another way of generalizing the partial knowledge represented by modern
science into total knowledge, but with esoteric pretensions.54 This
other science which is traditional in the most profound sense of
implying a transmission in conformity with the destiny of the person who
is able to possess such a knowledge55 cannot but manifest itself when
scientia sacra becomes a reality once again, because it is none other
than the application of this supreme form of knowledge to the cosmic
realm.

It is not possible to say whether such a science which is intermediary
between pure metaphysics and modern science can be created and expounded
to integrate modern science in time to prevent the applications of this
science in the form of modern technology from bringing further
devastation upon nature and destruction upon man himself. What is
certain, however, is that however omnipotent Promethean man may feel
himself to be, it is nature that shall have the final say.56 It is her
rhythms and norms which shall finally predominate. Since truth always
triumphs according to the old Latin adage vincit omnia Veritas, and
nature is closer to the truth than the artificial world created by
Promethean man, she cannot but be the final victor.

The spiritual man, whose mind is sanctified by the Intellect and whose
outward eyes have gained a new light issuing from the eye of the heart,
does not even see himself in such a dichotomy. He is always on nature's
side for he sees in her the grand theophany which externalizes all that
he is inwardly. He sees in the forms of nature the signatures of the
celestial archetypes and in her movements and rhythms the exposition of
a metaphysics of the highest order. To such a person nature is at once
an aid to spiritual union, for man needs the world in order to transcend
it, and a support for the presence of that very reality which lies at
once beyond and within her forms created by the hands of the Supreme
Artisan. To contemplate the cosmos as theophany is to realize that all
manifestation from the One is return to the One, that all separation is
union, that all otherness is sameness, that all plenitude is the Void.
It is to see God everywhere.

Notes
-----

[^1]: See Dante Alighieri, The Divine Comedy, Paradiso, trans. with a
commentary by C. S. Singleton, Princeton, 1975, p. 377. Singleton
explains (pp. 576-77) some of the symbolism of this remarkable passage
including the reference of squaderna to the number four and the verb
s’interna to the triune God.

[^2]: In contrast to those who have spoken of Eastern wisdom and Western
science and have tried to pay tribute to the East by exalting its wisdom
and belittling its “science” which is then considered to be the crowning
achievement of theWest, we believe that besides Eastern wisdom, which of
course possesses an exalted nature and is of inestimable value, the
sciences of the Oriental civilizations are also of much significance in
making available alternative sciences and philosophies of nature to
those prevalent in the West. It is of much interest to note that in
contrast to this juxtaposing of Eastern wisdom and Western science of
the early part of this century, many seekers of authentic knowledge
today are practically as much interested in Eastern sciences as in
Eastern wisdom. We do not of course want to depreciate in any way
Eastern wisdom without whose knowledge the traditional sciences would
become meaningless. But we wish to defend the significance of the
traditional sciences against those who would claim that the Oriental
civilizations may have contributed something to philosophy or religion
but little of consequence to the study of nature. Despite the presence
of practitioners of acupuncture and Hatha Yoga in practically every
European and American city and the appearance of a whole library of
popular works on the Oriental sciences, one still encounters such a
point of view rather extensively.

[^3]: On the traditional meaning and significance of cosmology see T.
Burckhardt, “Nature de la perspective cosmologique,” Études
Traditionnelles 49 (1948): 216-19;also his “Cosmology and Modern
Science,” in J. Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, esp. pp. 122-32.
As far as Islamic cosmology is concerned see Nasr, An Introduction to
Islamic Cosmological Doctrines.

[^4]: The modern discipline of the history of science, with a few
notable exceptions, is able to trace the historical link between the
traditional sciences and the modern ones but is not capable of
unraveling their symbolic and metaphysical significance precisely
because of its own philosophical limitations and its totally secularized
conception of knowledge. On the difference between traditional and
modern science see R. Guénon, “Sacred and Profane Science,” in his
Crisis of the Modern World, pp. 37-50; and Nasr, “Traditional Science,”
in R. Fernando (ed.), vol. dedicated to A. K. Coomaraswamy (in press).

[^5]: On the theme of seeing the Divine Presence in all things see
Schuon, “Seeing God Everywhere,” in his Gnosis, Divine Wisdom, pp.
106-21.

[^6]: Theophany, literally, “to show God,” does not mean the incarnation
of God in things but the reflection of the Divinity in the mirror of
created forms.

[^7]:

[^8]: We have developed this idea extensively in our various works on
the Islamic sciences esp. An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines, prologue; Science and Civilization in Islam, p. 24; and
Ideals and Realities of Islam, pp. 54ff.

[^9]: According to a famous Persian Sufi poem, Upon the face of every
green leaf is inscribed For the people of perspicacity, the wisdom of
the Creator.

[^10]: On the spiritual significance of the identification of the
American Indian with the spirit of a particular animal see J. Brown, The
Sacred Pipe, Brown, Okla., 1967, esp. pp. 44ff., “Crying for a Vision”;
C. Martin, Keepers of the Game, Los Angeles, 1980; A. I. Hallowell,
“Bear Ceremonialism in the Northern Hemisphere,” American Anthropologist
28/1 (1926): 1-175; and Artscanada nos. 184-87 (Dec. 1973-Jan. 1974),
which contains much documentation of interest concerning the relation
between American Indians and the animal world.

[^11]: This does not mean that the significance of miracles is to be
denied or belittled in any way. Even Islam, which emphasizes the order
in the universe as the most evident proof of the power and wisdom of the
One, asserts that there cannot be prophecy without miracles (i‘jaz),
which in fact occupies an important position in Islamic theological
discussions.

[^12]: For the meaning of the Shari‘ah and its significance for Muslims
seeNasr, Ideals and Realities of Islam, chap. 4.

[^13]: Works on Islamic natural history take this practically for
granted; in Arabic various species are often referred to as ummah which
means a religious community bound by a particular Divine Law such as the
ummah of Islam or Judaism. On the spiritual meaning of the animal
kingdom having its own laws and religious significance see Ikhwan
al-Safa’, Der Streit zwischen Mensch und Tier, trans. F. Dieterici,
1969, 1969; and into English by J. Platts as Dispute between Man and the
Animals, London, 1869.

[^14]: See al-Farabı, Idées des habitants de la cite vertueuse, trans.
R. P. Janssen, Cairo, 1949. An English translation with commentary and
annotations was completed by R.Walzer before his death and is to be
published soon by the Oxford University Press.

[^15]: The Ash‘arites reject the idea of the “nature” of things and laws
relating to these “natures.” But they do so in the name of an
all-embracing voluntarism which transforms these “laws” into the direct
expressions of the Will of God. Although this kind of totalitarian
voluntarism is opposed to the sapiential perspective which is based on
the integral nature of the Godhead including both His Wisdom and Power
and not just His Power or Will, as far as the present argument is
concerned, even the Ash‘arite position would be included by the thesis
here presented. They, too, like other schools of Islamic thought, see
all laws governing both the human and the nonhuman world as expressions
of the Divine Will even if they do not distinguish between what God
wills and what reflects His Nature which cannot not be.

[^16]: On the metaphysical relation between a particular being and the
milieu in which it exists see Guénon, Les États multiples de l’être.

[^17]: On the chain of being see the still valuablework ofA. Lovejoy,
The Great Chain of Being, Cambridge, Mass., 1961.

[^18]: For Islamic sources on the chain of being (maratib al-mawjudat)
see Nasr, Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, pp. 202ff.

[^19]: On the “Five Divine Presences” see F. Schuon, Dimensions of
Islam, pp. 142-58.

[^20]: The last three worlds have their own subdivisions, the malakut
including also the lower angels, and being identified with the soul
which has the possibility of journeying to and through the other realms
or presences.

[^21]: There is as yet no exhaustive work which would embrace all the
different kinds of cosmology developed in Islamic thought. We have dealt
with some of the most important ones in our Introduction to Islamic
Cosmological Doctrines.

It should be remembered that in Islam as in other traditions the whole
of cosmology has also been expounded in terms of music since traditional
music has a cosmic dimension and corresponds to the structure, rhythms,
and modalities of the cosmos. That is why traditional sciences of music
emphasize so much the cosmic and metacosmic correspondences of musical
modes, melodies, and rhythms.

On the correspondence between music and the cosmos in Islam see R.
D’Erlanger, La Musiaue arabe, 5 vols., Paris, 1930-1939; N. Caron and D.
Safvat, Les Traditions musicales, vol. 2, Iran, Paris, 1966; Ibn ‘Alı
al-Katib, La Perfection des connaissances musicales, trans. A. Shiloah,
Paris, 1972; A. Shiloah, “L’Epître sur la musique des Ikhwan al-Safa,”;
Revue des Études Islamiques, 1965, pp. 125-62, and 1967, pp. 159-93; and
J. During, “Elements spirituels dans la musique traditionnelle iranienne
contemporaine,” Sophia Perennis 1/2 (1975): 129-54 (which deals with the
spiritual and initiatic rather than cosmological aspect of traditional
music).

See also the classical work of A. Daniélou, Introduction to the Study of
Musical Scales, London, 1943, which deals with the metaphysical and
cosmological foundations of Indian music. This correspondence between
cosmology and music is to be found wherever traditional music has
survived along with the intellectual and spiritual tradition which has
given birth to it.

[^22]: On various cosmologies in the ancient world see C. Blacker and M.
Loewe (eds.), Ancient Cosmologies, London, 1975. The essays in this
volume having been written by different authors, although all
informative, do not all possess the same point of view as far as their
evaluation of the meaning of the traditional cosmological schemes is
concerned.

[^23]: On the gnostic journey through the cosmos in the Islamic
tradition see Nasr, Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines,
chap. 15.

[^24]: Many traditional myths deal with the precarious and dangerous act
of escaping from the prison of cosmic existence considered in its aspect
of limitation. See, for example, Coomaraswamy, “Symplygades,” in Lipsey
(ed.), Coomaraswamy, vol. 1, pp. 521-44.

[^25]: Some traditions envisage this labyrinth as so many dangerous
mountains and valleys, dark forests and the like. The journey of Dante
up the mountain of purgatory is a symbol of the journey through the
cosmos seen as a mountain, a symbolism also found in ‘Attar’s Conference
of the Birds (Mantiq al-t.ayr) and in many other traditions. The
symbolism of the cosmic mountain (the Mount Meru of Hinduism, Alborz of
the Zoroastrians, the Qaf of Islam, etc.) is one of the most universal
symbols to be found in various traditions. On the symbolism of mountain
climbing as related to journeying through the cosmos see M. Pallis, “The
Way and the Mountain,” in his The Way and the Mountain, pp.13-35.

[^26]: The maze of such cathedrals as Chartres relate to this same
principle and is based on exact knowledge of the traditional
cosmological sciences. See K., C., and V. Critchlow, Chartre Maze, A
Model of the Universe, London, 1976.

[^27]: The Prophet of Islam has said, “Die before you die.” It is the
person who has followed this injunction who is able to contemplate
cosmic forms as reflections of Divine Qualities rather than opaque veils
which hide the splendor of their Source.

[^28]: This is essentially the perspective of Zen which does not mean
that one can experience the Divine in things by some form of naturalism
which for many Western adepts of Zen is almost a carry over from a kind
of sentimental nature mysticism into the world of Zen. Such people, in a
sense, wish to experience Heaven without either faith in God or virtue
which would qualify a being for the paradisal state, for what is the
contemplation of natural forms in divinis except an experience of the
paradisal state? In any case, there is no such thing as naturalmysticism
from the traditional point of view; in practice man cannot experience
God as the immanent before experiencing Him as the transcendent, however
these concepts are translated in different traditional languages. One
could also say that man can realize the identity of nirvana with samsara
provided he has already gone beyond samsara and reached nirvana.

[^29]: That is why tajallı is translated as theophany. In his
incomparable Gulshan-i raz, Shabistarı says,

Non-being is a mirror, the world the image [of the Universal Man], and
man

Is the eye of the image, in which the person is hidden.

See Nasr, Science and Civilization in Islam, p. [^345]:

[^30]: We are not using matter here in its Aristotelian but in its
everyday sense as the “stuff” or “substance” of which things are made.

[^31]: During the last few years much interest has been shown in the
West in the rediscovery of the meaning of sacred geometry. See, for
example, K. Critchlow, Time Stands Still; idem, Islamic Patterns; and
the various publications of the Lindesfarne Association including the
Lindesfarne Letters, esp. no. 10 (1980), dealing with geometry and
architecture.

[^32]: See Proclus Lycius, The Philosophical and Mathematical
Commentaries of Proclus, on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements, trans.
with commentary by Th. Taylor, London, 1792. This fundamental work
elucidated by Taylor’s important commentaries, contains the basis for
the understanding of the relation of geometry to first principles. Of
course although geometry is an ancillary to metaphysics, it is not only
an ancillary. Rather, it is one of the most important of the traditional
sciences in its own right and as these sciences are related to art.

[^33]: It is really only since the early decades of the nineteenth
century that technology in theWest has become wed closely to modern
science and has constituted its direct application. Before this
relatively recent past, science and technology followed two very
different courses with few significant reactions between them.

[^34]: For traditional critiques of modern science see Guénon, “Sacred
and Profane Science”; Schuon, Language of the Self, chap. 10; idem, In
the Tracks of Buddhism, chap. 5; Lord Northbourne, Religion in the
Modern World, London, 1963, esp. chap. 5; and F. Brunner, Science et
réalité, Paris, 1954.

[^35]: You’ve managed to get to a note that doesn’t exist.

[^36]: “Modern man was not-and is not-“intelligent” enough to offer
intellectual resistance to such specious suggestions as are liable to
follow from contact with facts which, though natural, normally lie
beyond the range of common experience;in order to combine, in one and
the same consciousness, both the religious symbolism of the sky and the
astronomical fact of the MilkyWay, an intelligence is required that is
more than just rational, and this brings us back to the crucial problem
of intellection and, as a further consequence, to the problem of gnosis
and esoterism.. . Howbeit, the tragic dilemma of the modern mind results
from the fact that the majority of men are not capable of grasping a
priori the compatibility of the symbolic expressions of tradition with
the material observations of science; these observations incite modern
man to want to understand the ‘why and where’ of all things, but he
wishes this ‘wherefore’ to remain as external and easy as scientific
phenomena themselves, or in other words, he wants all the answers to be
on the level of his own experiences: and as these are purely material
ones, his consciousness closes itself in advance against all that might
transcend them.” Schuon, Language of the Self, pp. 226-27.

[^37]: You’ve managed to get to a note that doesn’t exist.

[^38]: The attraction toward Oriental teachings about nature alluded to
above is related to this same phenomenon. On the interest of
contemporary physics in the traditional esoteric and mystical views of
the universe see M. Talbot, Mysticism and the New Physics, New York,
1981.

[^39]: “L’Ame du Monde est donc bien typiftée par la Vièrge Marie du
Christianisme.” J. Brun, “Qu’est devenu L’Ame due Monde?” Cahiers de
l’Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem, no. 6, Le Combat pour l’Ame du
Monde, Paris, 1980, pp. 164-65. This essay traces the steps by which the
world as seen by modern man lost its soul.

On the relation of the Virgin Mary to theWorld Soul see the article of
G. Durand, “La Vièrge Marie et l’Ame du Monde,” in the same volume, pp.
135-[^67]:

[^40]: For example, among all the later Islamic philosophers who
followed the Avicennan and Suhrawardian cosmologies such asQad.ı
Sa‘ıdQummı, whose Glosses upon the “Theology of Aristotle”, containing
an elaborate discussion of this subject, has been analyzed by C. Jambet
in his “L’Ame du Monde et l’amour sophianique,” in Cahiers de
l’Université Saint Jean de Jérusalem, no. 6, Le Combat pour l’Ame du
Monde, pp. 52ff.

[^41]: On the meaning of these cities which appear in folk tales, poetry
such as that of Niz.amı as well as texts of philosophy and metaphysics
see Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. 2, p. 59.

[^42]: It is the allure of empiricism which draws so many people to
various kinds of spiritualism, magnetism, occultism, etc., where the
supernatural is “proven” through phenomenal evidence. Although certain
experiments in parapsychology have certainly demonstrated that there is
more to reality than meets the eye and that the so-called scientific
world view of a limited material-energy complex as the ultimate ground
of all that constitutes reality cannot be sustained, no phenomenal
evidence can prove the reality of the Spirit which lies beyond all
phenomena and belongs to the realm of the noumena.

[^43]: See his Universe of Experience, New York, 1974.

[^44]: His numerous articles and essays in the Eranos-Jahrbuch over the
years comprise a major statement of a nonreductionist “philosophy of
nature” by a contemporary biologist. On Portmann see also M. Grene,
Approaches to a Philosophical Biology, New York, 1965.

For a philosophy of science opposed to reductionism see also the works
of M. Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension, New York, 1966; Science, Faith and
Society, London, 1946; and Knowing and Being, London, [^1969]: His works
have attracted during the past few years the attention of many students
of science opposed to the reductionism inherent in the current
scientific world view.

[^45]: During the past few years much activity has taken place in
Germany to criticize the segmented approach of modern science in the
name of a more wholistic way of studying nature. There is even a review
devoted to this subject with numerous articles by both scientists and
philosophers who deal with this theme and its ramifications. See the
Zeitschrift für Ganzheitsforschung (1957-).

On the criticism of modern science from this perspective see also W.
Heitler, Naturphilosophische Streifzüge, Braunschweig, 1970; and his Der
Mensch und die naturwissenschaftliche Erkenntnis, Braunschweig, [^1970]:

[^46]: “Fondée non pas sur la considération de Dieu, mais sur une
technique particulière, la science moderne cache Dieu et l’enveloppe au
bien de s’ouvrir à la connaissance universelle et transcendante. . ;
elle n’est proprement ni divine ni révélatrice de Dieu et ne peut
definir la réalité véritable du monde.” F. Brunner, Science et réalité,
p, 205. This work contains one of the most thorough intellectual
criticisms of modern science by a contemporary European philosopher.

[^47]: “Symbolic thought is gnostic, while scientific thought is
agnostic; it believes that ‘two and two make four’ or it believes only
what it sees, which amounts to the same thing.” G. Durand, On the
Disfiguration of the Image of Man in the West, Ipswich, U.K., 1977, p.
15.

[^48]: St. Bonaventure could write concerning the beauties of nature as
the reflection of God’s beauty and wisdom:

Whoever, therefore, is not enlightened

by such splendor of created things

is blind;

whoever is not awakened by such outcries

is deaf;

whoever does not praise God because of all these effects

is dumb;

whoever does not discover the First Principle from such clear signs

is a fool.

From E. Cousins (trans.), Bonaventure: The Soul’s Journey unto God, p.
[^67]: But it seems that many of those who followed him after the Middle
Ages, even among theologians dominated to a great extent by nominalism,
would have been classified by him according to the above definitions as
blind, deaf, dumb, or fools.

[^49]: “Il nous semble que la pensée occidentale, traditionnelle ou
moderne, religieuse ou atftée, propose de la Nature une notion ‘mutilée’
ou limitée, corrélative d’une attitude passionnelle ou polémique.” G.
Vallin, “Nature intégrate et Nature mutitée,” Revue philosophique, no. 1
(Jan.-Mars 1974): 77.

[^50]: “La pensée occidentale nous offre, notamment dans le
Néoplatonisme, dans l’Hermétisme ou l’alchimie, ou chez un Scot Erigène,
une approache ou un équivalent de ces que nous proposons d’appeler la
‘Nature intégral’; mais c’est dans le cadre de la pensée orientale, et
notamment de la métaphysique hindouiste du Védanta que cette ‘structure’
à la fois cosmologique et théologique nous paraît présenter toute son
ampleur et sa richesse.” Ibid., p. 84.

We have also dealt with this question in our Man and Nature.

[^51]: “C’est pourquoi il faut qu’il existe une autre science que la
science moderne. Cet autre type de connaissance du monde n’exclut pas la
science sous sa forme actuelle, si l’on envisage la perfection pour qui
sous-tend et justifie dans une certaine mesure la pensée technique
elle-même: la science véritable laisse subsister la science moderne
comme une manifestation possible de l’esprit en nous.” Brunner, op.
cit., p. 208-9.

[^52]: Through such a science “l’ordre sensible, après celui de l’ême,
exprime finalement l’ordre de l’intelligence auquel appartiennent les
lois suprêmes de la production du monde, de la vie spirituelle et du
retour des êtres à Dieu.” Brunner, op. cit., p. 215.

[^53]: It is important to note that the founders of the discipline of
the history of science, who were all either outstanding historians of
thought or philosophers of science, were, with the exception of the much
neglected P. Duhem, positivists. As a result, an invisible positivist
air still dominates the minds of the scholars of this discipline despite
several important exceptions such as A. Koyré, G. Di Santillana and,
among the younger generation, N. Sivan and A. Debus. What is of special
interest is that this positivism becomes rather aggressive when the
question of the Oriental sciences and their metaphysical significance
comes to the fore. That is why so few studies of the Oriental sciences
which would reveal their significance as being anything more than quaint
errors on the path of human progress have come out of those dominated by
the tacit positivism of this discipline, no matter how learned they
might be. S. Jaki in his The Road of Science and the Ways to God,
Chicago, 1978, has referred to this positivism in connection with its
neglect of the role of Christian elements such as a Creator whose will
rules over an orderly universe. Although we do not agree with his
appreciation ofWestern science as a positive

result of the particular characteristics of Christianity, we certainly
share his concern for the limitations imposed upon the discipline of the
history of science by the positivism of its founders.

[^54]: The recent work, R. Ruyer, La Gnose de Princeton: des savants à
la recherche d’une religion, Paris, 1974, supposedly by the group of
scientists at Princeton interested in gnosis but most likely the
thoughts of one person using a fictitious group, is an example of this
kind of phenomenon. The thirst for sacred knowledge in the contemporary
world is such that this work became popular in France where, during
recent years, many pseudognostic and pseudoesoteric works by scientists
have seen the light of day.

[^55]: Traditions emphasize that this knowledge, although attainable, is
not attainable by everyone because not only does it need preparation but
can be taught only to the person who possesses the capability and nature
to “inherit” such a knowledge. That is why some of the Muslim
authorities like Sayyid Haydar Amulı refer to it as inherited knowledge
(al-‘ilm al-mawruthı) which they contrast with acquired knowledge
(al-‘ilm al-iktisabı). See Corbin, “Science traditionnelle et
renaissance spirituelle,” Cahiers de l’Université Saint Jean de
Jérusalem 1 (1974): 39ff.

[^56]: “Nature. . which is at the same time their sanctuary [of the
American Indians ], will end by conquering this artificial and
sacreligious world, for it is the Garment, the Breath, the very Hand of
the Great Spirit.” Schuon, Language of the Self, p. 224.
