Chapter Seven: Eternity and the Temporal Order
==============================================

*Zeit ist wie Ewigkeit und Ewigkeit wie Zeit,*

*So du nur selber nicht machst einen Unterscheid.*

*Eternity is as time, time as eternity,*

*If they are otherwise, the difference is in thee.1*

**Angelus Silesius**

*To-day, to-morrow, yesterday*

*With Thee are one, an instant aye.*

**Joshua Sylvester**

Not only does man stand at the point of intersection of the vertical and
horizontal axes of existence considered in their spatial symbolism, but
he also lives at the moment when the eternal and the temporal meet. He
is at once a being located in time and the process of change and one who
is made for the Eternal and the Immutable and who is able to gain access
to the Eternal even when living outwardly in the domain of becoming. He
can, moreover, live in time and experience it not only as change and
transience but also as the “moving image of eternity.” In the same way
that the periphery of the circle of existence reflects the Center which
is everywhere and nowhere, the experience of that change which is called
time reflects eternity in that whenever which is the ever-recurring now.
As long as man is man, the vertical axis is open before him not only in
the “spatial” sense of enabling him to climb to the higher levels of
reality and ultimately to the Real as such, but also “temporally” in
transcending the experience of profane time to reach the portal of
eternity itself. Likewise, in the same way that the intermediate worlds
possess their own space and form until one reaches the level of formless
manifestation, so also do they possess their own “time” or what would
correspond to time in the terrestrial realm of existence.

No better proof is needed of the meeting of the dimensions of time and
eternity within man than the fact that man is aware of his own death, of
his own mortality, which means that he is also given the possibility to
envisage that which lies beyond the terminus a quo of terrestrial
existence. Man's awareness of his mortality is in a sense proof of his
immortality, of the fact that he was created for the Eternal. Moreover,
there exists within normal man a natural attraction for the Eternal
which is none other than the Absolute and the Sacred as such. The
Eternal is like the original abode of the soul which, being lost, is
sought by the soul everywhere in its earthly exile. The tranquility of a
placid lake or the vibrating rays of the morning sun shining upon the
mountain peaks evoke in man a sense of peace and the joy of a beauty
which melts the hardness of the human soul and quells the agitations of
a being caught in the tumultuous tides of the sea of becoming, of what
Buddhism characterizes so powerfully as samsāra. This joy and sense of
peace are none other than the mark of eternity as it touches the human
soul. Pontifical man lives in time but as a witness to eternity.

Traditional teachings throughout the world are replete with references
to the mysterious relationship between time and eternity both within man
and in the objective order. Since all religion is concerned with the
sacred, it is also concerned with the Eternal, for the Eternal is the
Sacred as such and

also all that is sacred bears the stamp of eternity. Moreover, man lives
in time; his actions are determined by time; and he is finally devoured
by time, for to be born in time is to die. Hence even archaic religions
which, as we shall shortly see, have a very different conception of
history and the march of time than do the Judeo-Christian ones, are as
much concerned with saving man from the withering effect of the temporal
process and enabling him to be saved from all-becoming as the
Judeo-Christian traditions. To be seriously concerned with the human
state, as all the traditions are despite the many differences between
them, is to have to deal with a being living amidst temporality but who
is marked by the signature of eternity, a being who is mortal yet made
for immortality.

In the same way that intelligence is made to know the Absolute and can
know only the Absolute absolutely, the knowledge of all other orders of
reality partaking of an element of māyā which characterizes those
states, it is easier for intelligence as previously defined to grasp the
meaning of eternity than of time. Eternity is associated with
immutability and permanence. It is an attribute of that reality which is
but does not become and in fact transcends even Being. But this first
veil upon the face of Absolute Reality shares with that Reality the
attribute of eternity, for Being like Non-Being, in the metaphysical
sense already defined, does not become. To gain an intellectual
comprehension of the meaning of the Absolute is also to understand the
Eternal. That same intellectual intuition which makes available through
scientia sacra a principial knowledge of Ultimate Reality also provides
a direct intuitive knowledge of the Eternal.

It is from this principial, metaphysical point of view that the
definition of time seems more problematic than that of eternity to the
extent that Saint Augustine could assert that he knew what time was but
had difficulty defining it when asked. Modern analytical philosophers
have tried to “solve” the problem of time by simply reducing it to a
problem of language and of memory, as if one could explain the immediate
experience of time by anything less immediate in such a way that the
immediate experience would cease to exist. The analytical philosophers
now speak of before an utterance, with an utterance, and later than an
utterance instead of past, present, and future, hoping thereby to deny
once and for all the human experience of past, present, and future. They
lay the blame for the impossibility of solving the problem of time in
classical philosophy on the “myth of passage”2 which views time as a
running river. Some philosophers of science try to associate the very
reality of temporality with asymmetrical boundary conditions of
physics,3 while others as “idealists” have denied the reality of time
altogether.4 There is such a bewildering range of views and opinions
concerning time in modern European philosophy that one could conclude
that once man loses sight of the Eternal he no longer has any sense of
the profound significance of time which has become the alpha and omega
of his existence. He may talk about four-dimensional “world-lines”
including and embracing time and space in a unity in the manner of
modern physics but can hardly answer why, if he is located on only a
limited segment of this four-dimensional complex, he can even speculate
about what lies beyond this complex and “where” he as a conscious being
will be when the world

line about which he is speculating now will reach a point corresponding
to the end of his terrestrial life. It is questions such as these that
have caused many modern continental philosophers in the West to look
with skepticism upon the vacuum-cleaning activity of the posirivists and
analysts who would like to remove any metaphysical significance that
time might still possess, since it ends with a supernatural event,
namely, death, that only the philosopher in the Platonic sense has
practiced facing,5

From the metaphysical point of view, in the same way that eternity is an
attribute of that Reality which is at once Absolute and irifinite, time
is the characteristic of the dynamic potential of matter and energy
which, as discussed already, result from the irradiation and effusion of
the All-Possibility in the direction of nothingness. Once cosmic
manifestation reaches the level of the physical world, the matter-energy
of this world which corresponds to the principle of substance on this
level of reality contains within its very nature a dynamism which
entails change and becoming. Time is a consequence of this change. In
this sense, the concept of time in modern physics as being a condition
of material existence rather than an abstract absolute quantity as found
in Newtonian physics is closer to traditional cosmologies. These
cosmologies see both time and space as conditions of corporeality, and
“abstracted” from it, rather than quantitative coordinates extending to
infinity within which objects move and interact. It must be remembered
that Aristotle considered time as the measurement of change.6

Moreover, since cosmic reality is characterized by the polarization
between subject and object, there are two modes of time, one subjective
and the other objective.7 Objective time is cyclic by nature, one cycle
moving within another with a quaternary structure which manifests itself
on various levels ranging from the four parts of the day (morning,
midday, evening, and night), the four seasons and the four ages of man
(childhood, adolescence, maturity, and old age) to the four yugas of the
Hindu cosmic cycle. As for subjective time, it is always related to the
consciousness of past, present, and future which flow into one another,
each possessing its own positive as well as negative aspects. The past
is a reflection of the Origin, the memory of paradise lost and the
reminder of faithfulness to tradition and what has been already given by
God. But it is also related to imperfection, to all that man has left
behind in his spiritual journey, the world that man leaves for the sake
of God. The future is related to the ideal which is to be attained, the
paradise that is to be gained. But it is also a sign of the loss of
childhood and innocence and elongation and separation from the Origin
which means also tradition. As for the present which is man's most
precious gift, it is the point where time and eternity meet; it
symbolizes hope and joy. It is the moment of faith and the door toward
the nontemporal. Contemplation is entry into the eternal present which
is now. But the present is also the moment associated with immediate
pleasure, with instantaneous satisfaction which only accentuates the
fleeting effect of time rather than the pacifying reflection of
eternity.8

Hence both subjective and objective time have a relative reality which
is no less than the reality of the being who is located in the
spatio-temporal

matrix. To deny their reality is valid only from the perspective of the
Immutable which always is but does not become. Scientia sacra,
therefore, while affirming this view on its own level, seeks to provide
meaning for that experience which we call time and which is also real
from the point of view of change and becoming like māyā itself, which
does not exist from the “perspective” of Ātman but whose reality cannot
be denied for those living in the embrace of māyā. From the total
metaphysical point of view then, eternity is an attribute of the
Absolute and Infinite Reality which, because of its Infinitude and
Goodness, emanates outwardly and manifests the many levels of existence.
Of these levels the physical possesses a matter combined with energy
whose very dynamism necessitates that process of becoming and change of
which time is a condition. But time itself is impregnated by the Eternal
in such a way that every moment of time is a gate to the Eternal-the
moment, the present, the now belong to the Eternal itself.

As far as spiritual experience is concerned, the present moment as the
gateway to the Eternal is so significant that practically all the
traditions of the world speak with nearly the same tongue concerning the
present moment, the instant (nil alzemâle), the present now (gegenwürtig
nû), and the eternal now (ewigen nû) of Meister Eckhart in which God
makes the world,9 the waqt or ān of Sufism whose “son” the Sufi
considers himself to be (according to the well-known saying “the Sufi is
the son of the moment”-al-ṣ̄ufī ibn al-waqt),10 the moment or point at
which, according to Dante, all times are present.11 This “now” is the
gateway to eternity; it is to time what the point is to space. To be at
the central point here and now is to live in the Eternal which is always
the present. Hence the preciousness of the “moment” which man must not
let pass him by for as the Buddhists say, “Get ye across this
sticky-mire, let not the Moment pass, for they shall mourn whose
Moment's past.”12 Forgetful man daydreams in either the past or the
future evading the present moment which alone is real in the spiritual
sense. Only he who lives in the eternal present is in fact awake. This
moment is that “twinkling of the eye” in which all things were made13
and which in the Upanishads appears as a name of God.14 To live in this
moment is to experience all that was, is, and will ever be.

The subjective experience of the eternal present, moreover, conditions
and colors man's experience of time itself as does in fact the
experience of anything which bears the fragrance of the immutable and
the sacred. There is not just a single subjective experience of time but
one subjective experience within another. Hence joy and happiness,
issuing from that Supreme Substance which is pure bliss, shorten time
since this experience brings man closer to the eternal now, while pain,
agitation, and dispersion lengthen the subjective experience of time.
That is why it is said that in the Golden Age time was longer than in
the later ages. That is also why in such myths as that of the seven
sleepers in the cave, the aṣḥāb al-kahf mentioned in the Quran, falling
asleep in the cave for a short moment corresponded to the passage of
several generations in the outside world.15 In a sense, eternity
penetrates into time in such a way that the closer man's experience
approaches the realm of the eternal and the joy which is inseparable
from it, the less is the subjective experience of time a burden on him
so that duration

passes by more rapidly.16 If in the embrace of the earthly beloved hours
pass as if they were but a moment, in union with the Divine Beloved all
the eons of time past and future pass not only as if they were a moment
but as they are actually a moment, in fact the supreme moment in which
the spiritual man lives constantly. It is the now which all human beings
experience at that moment which is their last earthly moment, namely,
the moment of death. The now is at once an anticipation of that moment
and a going beyond it in the sense of experiencing an inner resurrection
even before bodily death.17

Eternity then is reflected in the present now, and the now is the solar
gate through which the hero must pass to reach beyond the sea of
becoming and the withering effect of time whose function it is to devour
all that exists in its bosom. But from another point of view it is
possible to refer to eternity as both being “before” and “after” the
moment in which we stand and in fact before and after the world in which
we have our present existence. Eternity is then before all that was and
after all that will be, before and after meaning not in time but in
principle. It is in this sense that the Islamic tradition speaks of
al-azal, that is, preeternity and al-abad or posteternity, the two being
in their own reality none other than al-sarmad or eternity as such.18
The morning of azal referred to so often in Sufi poetry refers to
eternity in its aspect of coming before all creation. It refers to that
“early dawn” when man made his eternal covenant with God.19

Likewise, eternity is sometimes referred to as boundless time or
timelessness as in late Zoroastrianism where boundless time or Zurvan is
considered as the principle of both Ahura-Mazda and Ahriman, Zurvan
meaning metaphysically the Eternal and etymologically boundless time.20
Also, in later Greek thought Kronos as the father of Zeus was often
identified with chronos, despite the fact that such an assimilation is
etymologically inconceivable. In the context of the Maitri Upanishad,
“time” is equivalent with eternity, here again “time” meaning boundless
time, not time as it is usually understood. Since ontologically
existence cannot be completely other than Being which is its principle,
time also cannot be totally divorced from eternity in the sense that
what man experiences in time comes from God and is related to Him. It is
in this sense that the Maitri Upanishad distinguishes “two forms” of
Brahman, as time and timelessness, but possessing one essence. It
states: “From one who worships, thinking that Time [kālas] is Brahma’,
time [kāla, also death] reflows afar.”

From Time flow forth all beings,

From Time advance to full growth,

And in Time again, win home,-

“Time” is the formed and the formless, both.21

This Time which contains all time is in reality none other than that
moment which always is, the “in the beginning” which is always present.
The “once upon a time” of folk tales is not a particular time but Time
which is also the timeless, the Hebrew ‘olam and the Greek aiōn. In
certain languages such as Sanskrit fairy tales simply begin with “there
is” (asti), implying directly the eternal present, while Persian stories
begin with a

statement known to every Persian-speaking child but which contains the
whole metaphysical significance of that eternal moment which is beyond
time and yet the point from which the story begins. The statement is:
“There was one; there was no one; other than God there was no one.”22
The origin of time and all those events which we experience as taking
place “in time” belong to that “once upon a time” which is no time and
yet all times wherein belong both metaphysics and myths and symbols
which, therefore, do not wither with time. They share in the
immutability of that eternal moment from which all things are born.

Although the doctrine of the eternal now in its relation to time is
universal and is to be found in the sacred scriptures and sapiential
teachings of different traditions throughout the world, the attitude
toward the experience of man in the stream of change and process which
is called history is hardly the same among all religions. Nor is the
question of the genesis of the world as it is related to the temporal
process the same. Of course, all traditions are based on the doctrine of
grades of existence issuing from the Supreme Principle but they envisage
the unfolding of time differently, some basing themselves on a single
act of creation and one period of the cosmic drama and others on many
cycles which are repeated according to the rhythms that reflect the
“days and nights of the life of Brahma,” to put it in Hindu terms. There
are also those traditions which live in space and for whom time and
history are of little consequence, and those which live in time and
which take history into account as being of religious and ultimate
significance.

The difference between these perspectives which also is directly related
to the cyclic and linear conceptions of the “march of time” or history
can itself be explained by taking recourse to the traditional doctrine
of cycles.23 According to this doctrine in its Hindu form, each grand
cosmic cycle (kalpa) consists of a thousand yugas which comprise “a day
of Brahma.”24 Moreover, each smaller cosmic cycle concerning a
particular humanity is comprised of four yugas, beginning with what the
Greeks called the Golden Age (the Kṛta Yuga of Hindu sources) and ending
with the Iron Age (Kali Yuga) whose termination also marks the end of
the present terrestrial cycle of history. In one single cycle in which
time is divided according to the Tetractys, that is, 4, 3, 2, 1, the
Golden Age being the longest and the Iron Age the shortest, the process
of change or what we interpret as the flow of time is very slow at the
beginning, increasing its tempo as the cycle advances so that time, far
from being linear and uniform, is itself qualitatively modified during
different yugas. For men of the Golden Age, time as an element of
“secular” change was not of any significance. Time was identified with
cosmic rhythms like that of the seasons. Although the cycle never
returns to the same point but follows a helical rather than circular
motion,25 the changes in nonrepeated patterns were too imperceptible to
be of any consequence. It was only during later phases of the cycle that
gradually the experience of time in its noncyclic aspect became
consequential and that history began to gain significance.

This difference can perhaps be better understood by meditating a moment
upon the symbolism of the hourglass which itself is an instrument for
the

measurement of time.26 One unit of time during which the sand flows from
the upper compartment into the lower could be considered as symbolizing
one cosmic cycle. Now, as the cycle begins, although the sand is pouring
through, there seems to be no perceptible change in the condition of the
upper compartment which appears as being immutable. The reality of such
a condition appears as one of permanence in which the particles of sand
are “seen” as being in space and not in a time which would alter their
condition in an ultimately significant way-in the same way that in the
Golden Age, although individuals did grow old and die, the world in
which they lived seemed to be located in a paradisal permanence in which
the cosmos was rejuvenated by temporal cycles but not affected in a
nonrenewable manner by time. For so-called primitive man, the cosmos and
history were the same, in fact identical, as were time and transcendence
and reality and the symbol. But as the sand continues its flow, the very
situation of the upper compartment begins to change. It is not only the
individual particles of sand that fall through the channel but the whole
configuration of sand in the upper compartments begins to change and
time gains a new significance.

The religions in which time is seen in a cyclic manner and where history
is of little consequence as far as man's “salvation” is concerned are
essentially those archaic religions based on the reality of human
experience in earlier phases of the cosmic cycle and corresponding to
the beginning of the flow of sand in the hourglass. It is the later
religions, corresponding to the last phase of the unit of time measured
by the hourglass, which had to take into account the temporal experience
in a religious manner. Judaism, although in one respect a “primoridal”
religion, was destined to play a major role in itself and also to serve
as background for Christianity in the religious life of the humanity of
the last phase of the human cycle, hence its concern with history and
the metahistorical and metacosmic significance of the historical
experience of the chosen people of Israel, Hinduism, on the other hand,
remains based on the primordial perspective of cyclic time while having
been able to rejuvenate itself and survive to this day. Zoroastrianism,
in a sense, occupies an intermediate position between the religions of
India and the Abrahamic ones as far as history is concerned,27 while
Islam being the last of the Abrahamic religions and yet a return to the
primordial religion confirms the significance of man's actions in
history while refusing to identify the truth itself with history in any
way. It is of some significance that even the events of sacred history
mentioned in both the Bible and the Quran have a more historical color
in the former and a more symbolic one in the latter.28

In any case since it is the function of all religions to save men from
the imperfections implied by their terrestrial state, they have had to
deal with the significance of temporality in different ways depending on
their point of departure and the “archetypal” reality which they
represent on earth. There has developed as a result of these factors a
cyclic as well as a linear conception of time and of history, the first
associated with the non-Abrahamic and the second with Abrahamic
religions. But even within the Abrahamic traditions the situation has
not been the same in the three religions which comprise the members of
this religious family. In Judaism,

because of the presence of a long line of prophets, while the importance
of history is confirmed, the flow of history is not strictly speaking
linear nor has history been identified with the Deity through the
doctrine of incarnation which marks the entrance of the truth into
history. In Islam also the significance of what man accomplishes in this
world either individually or collectively is fully emphasized, the world
of time being called the “cultivating field” for eternity,29 but it is
categorically denied that anything that occurs in history affects the
divine as such since Islam rejects strongly all incarnationism.
Moreover, the Islamic conception of prophecy according to which truth
was present from the beginning and is brought to the world over and over
again by different prophets, ending with the Prophet of Islam after whom
there will be no other prophet but the second coming of Christ is based
on a cyclic conception of time and not a linear one.30

It is most of all in Christianity that one can say that only one part of
a complete cycle or one small cycle was taken and treated in a linear
manner. As a result, Christianity in its exoteric formulations-not of
course in its sapiential teachings which saw Christ as the Logos who
said, “before Abraham was I am”-came to perceive history as marked by
three fundamental points: the fall of Adam on earth, the incarnation of
the Son of God as the second Adam in history, and the end of the world
with the second coming of Christ. This view of the march of time,
combined with the idea of the birth of Christ as a unique historical
event and the incarnation of the Son in the matrix of time and of
history, created a special religious situation which, once Christianity
was weakened, gave way easily to that idolatry of the worship of history
that characterizes much of the modern world. Although the concern of
Marx with every detail of human life is a parody of the concerns of
Talmudic Law, his putting history in the place of the Divinity is a
Christian heresy and not an Islamic or Hindu one. While Christianity was
strong, despite its emphasis upon history, the passage of days and years
was sanctified by the continuous repetition of the events of the life of
the founder and the saints. Christians, like followers of other
religions, lived in the world whose very temporality was transformed by
the ever-repeated themes of the life of Christ and the rites which
flowed from the origins of the tradition along with the grace of the
saints who perpetuated the spirit of the tradition over the ages. The
worship of mammon as history or historical process came only in the wake
of the desacralization of the Christian world, but it was precisely the
secularization of the linear concept of time and historical process that
gave rise to that historicism and denial of the truth as transcendent
that characterizes much of modern thought. Otherwise, traditional
Christian thought, like all traditional thought, had seen the solution
to the problem of space and time through recourse to that Reality which
is beyond space and time yet pervades and transforms both of them.31

The concern of Christianity with the linear time covering the period
from the first coming of Christ to his second coming is also related to
the point of view of the Abrahamic religions which, in their exoteric
aspect, are concerned primarily with the practical goal of saving man
rather than with the nature of things per se which is the concern of the
esoteric. That is why

in the exoteric formulations of these religions eschatology is
simplified into the two opposite states of heaven and hell and the
question of creation is reduced to the theological formulation of
creatio ex nihilo. The question of intermediate states, the final
consummation of all things in God, other cosmic cycles and humanities,
the meaning of the “waters” upon which the light of God shone, the
existence of beings in divinis before that event called creation, and so
many other questions are left for the esoteric dimension of these
traditions.

As far as the question of time is concerned, perhaps no issue
demonstrates the inadequacy of the theological formulations in
themselves and without the aid of sapiential doctrines than creation ex
nihilo. In all the three Abrahamic religions there have been theologians
who have claimed that God created the world from nothing and that the
world has an origin in time, while there have been traditional
philosophers who have insisted that there was no time when the world was
not, since time is a condition of the world. Thousands of treatises have
been written by Muslims, Jews, and Christians since John the Grammarian
wrote his De aeternitate mundi against Proclus.32 To this day in
traditional Islamic circles of learning the problem of ḥudūth and qidam
or “newness” and “eternity” of the world is debated,33 since it
represents a question which cannot be resolved logically on the level in
which the theologies of the Abrahamic religions place themselves. It
must either be accepted on faith or recourse must be had to that
scientia sacra for which ex nihilo does not mean literally from nothing
but rather from “possibilities” in the principial order which, to quote
Ibn ‘Arabī, have not as yet “smelled the perfume of existence” and which
are existentiated and externalized upon the terrestrial plane from a
preexistent state or even states. Creation in this sense is always a
descent. A figure like Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī has already provided the answer
for the incessant debate between followers of ḥudūth and those of qidam,
while those who have not been able to reach an understanding of the
issue even in the traditional Islamic context have been those who simply
have not comprehended the message of a work such as the Mathnawī.34

An element of these teachings concerning creation that does need to be
mentioned is the doctrine of the renewal of creation at every instant
(tajdīd al-khalq fī kulli ānāt), which characterizes much of the Sufi
teachings concerning creation. The Sufis, like all those who speak of
the moment or the now, take recourse to an “atomization of temporality,”
if such a term can be used, and believe that, although time as flow is
indivisible, from another point of view it is no more than the
repetition of the instant like the line which is formed by the
repetition of spatial point.35 During this instant or now the whole
world returns to the Origin through the movement of contraction (al-
qabḍ) and is recreated through expansion (al-basṭ) like the two phases
of breathing. At every moment there is a fresh creation (tajdīd
al-khalq) and the link between the Creator and His creation is
incessantly renewed. As Jāmī says, “The universe is changed and renewed
unceasingly at every moment and every breath. Every instant one universe
is annihilated and another resembling it takes its place,… In
consequence of this rapid succession, the spectator is deceived into the
belief that the universe is a

permanent existence.”36 This doctrine, which has the greatest import as
far as the practical and operative aspects of Sufism are concerned, is a
manner of viewing the problem of creation from the perspective of the
eternal present itself from which nothing ever really departs.
Furthermore, it complements the metaphysical doctrine which sees
creation ex nihilo as the existentiation of the archetypes or essences
which possess a precosmic reality in divinis.37

The deification of the historical process in secular terms has taken
place in the modern world not only because the metaphysical teachings
concerning time and eternity have been forgotten as a result of the
desacralization of both knowledge and the world but also, as already
mentioned, as a result of the particular emphasis of Christianity upon
history which is not to be found in other traditions.38 Christian
thought, at least in its main line of development in the West, took
history seriously, in the sense of believing in the irreversible
directionality of history, the power which history possesses to
introduce novelty of even a radical order, awareness of the uniqueness
of each historic event which was to give rise in modern times to
existentialism, the possibility of certain historical events to be
decisive in a final way,39 the religious significance of human
involvement in historical movements and institutions, and the importance
of human freedom in not only determining the individual man's future but
also the whole of history. From these premises to those of Promethean
man, who secularized all of them and decided to mold his own destiny and
history, was but a single step. And from this secularization of the
Christian conception of history combined with messianism, those
materialistic and secular philosophies have been born which are based on
the view that the historical process is the ultimately real itself, and
that through material progress man is able to attain that perfection
which was traditionally identified with the paradisal state, with the
terrestrial and celestial Jerusalem located at the alpha and omega
points of history which are also the present now. Through historicism,
secular utopianism, and the idea of progress and evolution in a sense
time has, for modern man, tried to devour eternity and usurp its place,
replacing the eternal now in which the eternal and the temporal meet
with the present moment as the fleeting instant of transient pleasures
and sensations. Paradoxically enough, the end result of this process is
that this divinized time has not only destroyed the possibility of the
experience of eternity for those who have fallen under its hypnotic
spell, but it has also eclipsed the meaning of perpetuity and historical
continuity and hence the sense of history itself.40

The deification of historical process has become so powerful and such a
compelling force that, in the souls of many human beings, it has taken
the place of religion. Nowhere is this more evident than in the role
that the theory of evolution plays in the mental and psychological life
of those scientists who claim to look upon all things from a detached
scientific point of view but who react with violent passion when the
theory of evolution is discussed critically from any quarter-whether it
be logical, theological, or scientific.41 In many ways and for profound
reasons, evolution has become the substitute for religion for many
people who defend it with complete

intolerance while claiming to be very reasonable and tolerant beings
without any strong religious beliefs.42 Others speak in categorical
terms of the scientific method, then defend evolution on scientific
grounds without being at all aware that their manner of accepting
evolution as scientific has nothing to do with their own definition of
what science is.43 There lies in these attitudes a factor of the most
profound nature which concerns the depth of the soul of man, for it
involves the substitution of historical process for the Divinity and
therefore brings out a response which is reserved for the sacred to
which pontifical man always responds with the whole of his being.
Moreover, this defense of evolution involves a battle for “faith,” not
scientific truth, for it provides the only way possible to veil over the
penetration of the archetypal realities, of which the species are
earthly reflections, upon the physical plane, and the sole means of
providing some kind of a seemingly acceptable scheme to enable man to
live in this world amidst the bewildering variety of the forms of nature
but in forgetfulness of the transcendent One who is the source of this
variety.

The criticisms which can be brought and have in fact been brought
against the theory of evolution as currently understood, and of course
not as man's vertical ascent toward his own eternal archetype, are at
once metaphysical and cosmological, religious, logical, mathematical,
physical and biological, including the domain of paleontology.
Metaphysically, life comes before matter, the subtle world before life,
the Spirit before the subtle world, and the Ultimate Reality before
everything else, this “before” meaning in principle whatever may have
been the chronological appearance of matter, life, and consciousness
upon the theater of cosmic existence. Intellectual intuition which
enables man to know scientia sacra provides this absolute certitude of
the primacy of consciousness over both life and matter. It provides a
knowledge of that hierarchy which issues from the Source in which all
things are eternally present and to which all things return. It sees
existents in gradation and their appearance on the temporal plane as
elaborations of possibilities belonging to that vertical dimension or
gradation.44 Objects in this world “emerge” from what Islamic esoterism
calls the “treasury of the Unseen” (khazānay-i ghayb); nothing
whatsoever can appear on the plane of physical reality without having
its transcendent cause and the root of its being in divinis. There is,
metaphysically speaking, no possibility of any temporal process adding
something to the Divinity or to Reality as such. Whatever grows and
develops is the actualization of a possibility which had preexisted in
the Divine Order, this development or growth being always of an essence
while total reality resides in the immutable world of the archetypes.
Finally, metaphysically speaking, that which belongs to a lower scale of
being can never give rise to what belongs by nature to a higher level.
From the point of view of the scientia sacra the only meaning that the
evolution of anything can have would be the actualization of the
possibilities latent in that thing. Otherwise not all the eons of time
can produce something out of nothing. The power of creation belongs to
the creating Principle alone which is pure actuality itself. What
evolution does is to deify the historical process not only by
considering it as

the ultimately real but also by transferring the power of creatio ex
nihilo from the transcendent Divinity to it.

Also, from the metaphysical and cosmological points of view, form is the
imprint of an archetype and a divine possibility and not an accident of
a material congregate. Moreover, form is quality and qualities do not
add up as do quantities. Even in the inanimate world green is not the
sum of red and blue in the same way that four is the sum of two and two.
Green possesses a qualitative reality which is simply not reducible to
the qualities of the colors which, materially or quantitatively
speaking, add up to constitute green. This principle is even more
evident in life forms where the reality of any form is irreducible to
its quantitative components. Would half a human body be qualitatively
half of the complete human body? Forms of living beings have a
qualitative reality which cannot evolve from any other form unless that
form were also present “somewhere.” And that “somewhere” cannot
metaphysically have any locus but the archetypal world which is the
origin of all forms.

From the purely religious point of view also, the evidence against
evolution is universal even in traditions such as Hinduism, Jainism, and
Buddhism where cosmic history is envisaged on grand scales and where
there has been perfect awareness among those who read their sacred
Scriptures that the world has been around much longer than six thousand
years, that other creatures have preceded man on earth, and that the
geological configuration of the world has changed. The same can be said
of Islam where, over a thousand years ago, Muslim scientists were
perfectly aware that sea shells on top of mountains meant that mountains
had turned into seas and seas into mountains and that land animals had
preceded man on earth and that sea animals had come before land
animals.45 In all sacred Scriptures and traditional sources whether they
speak of creation in six days or of cosmic cycles lasting over vast
expanses of time, there is not one indication that higher life forms
evolved from lower ones. In all sacred books man descends from a
celestial archetype but does not ascend from the ape or some other
creature. Whatever concoctions of scriptural evidence have been made up
to support modern evolutionary theory since the last century, they are
based upon the forgetting of the traditional and sapiential commentaries
and on interpreting the vertical scale of existence in a temporal and
horizontal fashion as was done philosophically as a background for the
rise of nineteenth-century evolutionary theory itself. The remarkable
unanimity of sacred texts belonging to all kinds of peoples and climes
surely says something about the nature of man. In any case, it is one
more proof against those who would seek to make use of a particular text
from one tradition or a few lines judiciously chosen from a certain
scripture which would lend themselves more easily to misinterpretation
in order to demonstrate religious support for the validity of the theory
of evolution.

From a purely logical point of view it is difficult to explain how one
can get, let us say, five pounds of barley out of a box in which there
were originally only four. When one studies historical geology and
paleontology one runs across many cases where the evolution of one form
into another seems just as absurd. But this absurdity is brushed aside
by positing long

periods of time, with the illusion that somehow if you have enough time
you can explain any problem. Whether one has a thousand years or a
hundred million years, it is logically absurd that inert matter should
become conscious or that a lower order of organization would by itself
become a higher order of organization-apparently against not only logic
but all that we know of the laws of physics. In logic no A can become B
unless B is already in some way contained in A, and surely B can never
come out of A if it possesses something more or is greater than A. No
amount of evolutionary patience can change this primary human demand for
logic. That is in fact why those who defend the theory of evolution
usually make their definition so ambiguous as to be able to evade
critical logical examination of the definition they provide.

There is even a mathematical criticism of the theory of evolution.46
According to modern information theory, one cannot receive from any unit
more information than has been put into it. Now, the cell can be
considered as a unit containing a certain amount of information which in
fact governs the activities of the life form in question. How can this
information within the cell be increased without having new information
put into it through some agent whatever it might be? One cannot study
the cell as it is done today, accept information theory and at the same
time accept the current interpretations of the theory of evolution
according to which, through temporal processes and without an external
cause, which itself must be of a higher order in the sense of being able
to increase the information contained within a gene, the amount of
information contained within the genes does increase and they “evolve”
into higher forms.

As for arguments drawn from physics, it is well-known that life forms
preserve their order and structure and use the energy connected with
life to that end in a manner which is totally different and opposed to
the second law of thermodynamics. The very appearance on earth of more
complicated life forms during later stages in the life of the earth is
opposed to the law of entropy and indicates the presence of another kind
of energy at play. There are in fact many biologists who claim that
there is not one but two different types of energy functioning in our
terrestrial environment: one physical or connected with nonliving matter
and the other with living things; and that the laws pertaining to the
two are very different even if vital energy enters into play only when a
particular set of material conditions are present and not before or
after. Such scientists oppose strongly the possibility of inert matter
evolving into life forms because of the fundamental differences between
the two types of energy involved in the laws which govern each realm.47

As far as biological and paleontological evidence is concerned, there
are numerous arguments outlined by experts in these fields many of whom
hardly dare express their views until old age for fear of being
ostracized by their professional colleagues. Nevertheless, the number of
works by scientists in these fields, which point to the impossibility of
the theory of evolution, the theory that E. F. Schumacher calls science
fiction rather than science,48 grows substantially every day and
includes not only biologists but also geneticists, physiologists, and
men from many other disciplines in the

life sciences.49 As for paleontological evidence, the first fact which
confronts any student of the field is the appearance of new species in
new geological periods in a sudden manner and over very extended areas.
Unrelated major groups such as the vertebrates appear all of a sudden in
the form of four orders and everywhere one detects the sudden rather
than gradual appearance of complex organisms. Moreover, the
strati-graphic record hardly ever reveals fossils which should exist as
intermediates between the great groups, something which should be
present if the theory of evolution as usually understood were to be
accepted.50 Furthermore, all the reasons given by defenders of evolution
as to why the paleontological record does not in fact provide any such
evidence have been refuted by numerous scientists.51 As for plants, the
situation is even more difficult to explain than is the case for
animals. The paleontological record hardly supports the evolutionary
hypothesis no matter how far it is stretched and how farfetched is its
interpretation.52 The most damaging evidence comes of course from the
lack of the trace of life in the pre-Cambrian and its sudden profusion
afterwards. Anyone who studies this record with an open mind cannot but
be impressed by the sudden appearance of a new force or energy upon the
surface of the earth, manifesting itself and leaving its mark upon the
geological record in a manner that can hardly be called evolutionary.
The whole paleontological evidence of the Cambrian as distinct from the
pre-Cambrian points to anything but the gradual evolution of life
forms.53 As for the post-Cambrian, the record reveals that nearly all
the phyla of animals known were already present in the Cambrian-such as
Porifera, Coelenterata, and Annelida-and that as far as phyla are
concerned, no new classes have arisen since the Paleozoic with the
exception of the Chordata.

The mutations of which many biologists speak and through which they seek
to explain what they call evolution by leaps in fact never exceed a very
limited boundary and represent either an anomaly or a decadence of the
species in question. The hiatus remains unexplained by any of the
mutations observed in biology unless one posits at other periods
different forces acting on earth from those now observable. None of the
variations which are presented by advocates of evolution as “buds” of a
new species have in fact been anything more than variants within the
framework of a specific species. There are animals which in a sense
“imitate” animals of other orders such as whales which are mammals
although they act as fishes; and yet fishes, reptiles, birds, and
mammals remain distinct types and such creatures as whales and dolphins,
far from proving evolutionary theories, only point to the immense
creative power of nature. As for adaptations, there are some so complex
that any evolutionary theory would be hard put to explain it, the action
of a wise Creator being a much more logical solution.54 That is why the
more objective among biologists, even when they do accept the theory of
evolution for what they feel is the lack of any other “scientific”
alternative, remain fully aware of the fantastic and even “surrealistic”
character of evolutionary theory as usually understood,55 Certainly
biology has not provided any proofs for this theory in the scientific
sense of proof, but it has provided numerous obstacles which can only be
overcome by a “leap of faith,” which is only a parody of the faith

that God has placed in the human soul for Himself and His messages. The
criticisms against the evolutionary theory and problems associated with
it are so numerous that certain modern scientists have even suggested
that Darwinism and Lamarckism are burdens upon the science of biology
itself and that this science should be allowed to develop without having
to bear the burden of a philosophical assumption which does not
correspond to its findings but in fact puts an immense constraint upon
this science in order to enable modern man to continue to use this
crutch for his unending worship of the historical and temporal process
as reality.56

The few arguments outlined here in such a brief fashion are themselves
the subject of another discourse and cannot be developed in detail in a
study devoted to knowledge and the sacred. But because the theory of
evolution, both in itself and in its wedding to various philosophies and
even theologies, has played such a major role in the desacralization of
what remained in the West of sacred knowledge and even of man's general
sense of the sacred, it has been necessary to refer to these criticisms.
It has also been important to mention the scientific objections to
evolution because it is on the basis of a supposedly scientific
foundation that evolution has been generalized to embrace the whole
cosmos up to the Pleiades and the whole of knowledge including theology
itself.

If in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries evolutionary theory
affected European philosophy in various ways, ranging from Nietzsche's
superman to the emergent evolution of Samuel Alexander and the creative
evolution of Henri Bergson, it nevertheless remained for the latter half
of the twentieth century for this type of thought to enter into the
realm of Catholic theology itself and to produce that Darwinization of
theology, and the surrender of this queen of the sciences to the
microscope,57 which is represented by Teilhard de Chardin. Strangely
enough, in this domain the French Jesuit was preceded by an Oriental,
namely Śri Aurobindo, who in his Life Divine had tried to provide an
evolutionary interpretation of the Vedanta but who did not have the same
influence or effect in India as Teilhard has had in the West.58 It is in
fact noteworthy to mention that, in the Orient, it is only in the Indian
subcontinent that, as a result of Anglo-Saxon education with its heavy
emphasis upon such evolutionary philosophers as Herbert Spencer, there
has appeared not only a figure such as Aurobindo but a whole army of
“evolutionary thinkers” of lesser eminence. Also it is from this world
that that peculiar wedding between pseudospirituality and evolutionism,
with talk of cosmic consciousness and the birth of a new humanity with
evolved consciousness and the like, has spread to the rest of the world.
Neither Buddhist Japan and China nor the Islamic world, despite the talk
of Iqbal about the superman, produced the same blend of religion and
evolution that we find in Aurobindo. It is therefore somewhat strange
that the Western counterpart of Aurobindo should hail not from the land
of Darwin but that of Claude Bernard and Cuvier.

From the traditional point of view Teilhard represents an idolatry which
marks the final phase of the desacralization of knowledge and being, the
devouring of the Eternal by the temporal process, if such were to be

possible. It is therefore all the more strange that some should consider
his work as “the resacralization of the profane world.”59 The fact that
there has been such a flood of popularized writings about him, even
journals being devoted to the study of his works60 and that he has
caught the attention of such a wide audience, including many not at all
attracted to authentic religion, can only mean, in a world such as ours,
that he caters to certain of the antitraditional and even
countertraditional61 tendencies of this world-most of all to that
psychological formation which is the result of the domination of the
evolutionary way of thinking upon the mind and psyche of most modern
men.62

For Teilhard, evolution embraces not only living creatures but even
nonliving matter. All cosmic matter which he addresses as “O Holy
Matter!”63 follows the law of “complexification” which leads the cosmic
“stuff” to rise from stage to stage until it reaches man. All beings for
him have a conscious inner face (not to be confused with the traditional
Hindu doctrine that equates existence itself with consciousness) like
man himself, and evolution also implies the evolution of consciousness
from life and matter. This evolution has not only brought forth the
biosphere to cover the earth but through human culture has led to the
noosphere which has become imposed upon the biosphere. At a later stage
of this supposed evolution human cultures will become one. Through the
psychic concentration thus created a “hyperpersonal” consciousness will
come into being at the “Omega point” where evolution will end in
convergent integration, this point being God in as much as He determines
the direction of history. It is through this fantastic mental
sublimation of a crass materialism that Teilhard seeks to synthesize
science and religion and give Christian significance to the evolutionary
hypothesis cum science.

First of all, from the metaphysical and religious points of view this
amalgamation rather than synthesis cannot be considered as anything but
the inversion of the traditional doctrine of emanation and the
generation of the hierarchy of existence. Theologically it is sheer
idolatry as demonstrated by such assertions of Teilhard as, “There
exists only matter becoming spirit.… Thus much matter [is needed] for
thus much spirit,”64 and the like. What is lacking completely in this
perspective is awareness of the two kinds of rapport between the
Principle and Its manifestation, that is, the relation of continuity and
discontinuity. While the Principle is the source of the cosmos and
nothing can exist without receiving existence from the source of Being
which is to existence as the sun is to its rays, the Principle remains
transcendent vis-à-vis all manifestation through a discontinuity which
cannot be disregarded or overlooked by any authentic exposition of
metaphysics. There is a world of difference between the traditional
doctrine of the transcendent unity of being (waḥdat al-wujūd in its
Islamic form) and a rationalistic pantheism that neglects the absolute
transcendence of the One which is yet the source of all multiplicity.65
For Teilhardism, it is not only the question of neglecting the aspect of
discontinuity between the Principle and Its manifestation,66 which would
result in a kind of philosophical pantheism encountered often in the
history of Western thought, but of even

considering the Principle as the end product of the evolution of
manifestation itself.

Teilhard tries to explain the transition of inert matter to life as the
“coiling up of the molecule upon itself,” forgetting the penetration of
a new cosmic principle into the domain of inert matter as the cause for
the sudden appearance of life on earth. This “coiling up,” moreover, is
nothing but a parody of spiritual concentration as his description of
the transition of life to consciousness as “the threshold of reflection”
is a parody of the divine creative act itself. He speaks about this
process reaching, through evolution, the state of totality as if
totality could have ever not been or could have ever lacked something
which it gained later without ceasing to be totality! When one reads
Teilhard carefully, one realizes that his faith lies in matter and in
this world above all else without an awareness of how matter itself is
generated by higher levels of existence.67 When Teilhard says, “If, in
consequence of some inner subversion, I should lose successively my
faith in Christ, my faith in a personal God, my faith in the Spirit, it
seems to me that I would continue to believe in the world. The world-the
value, the infallibility and the goodness of the world-this is, in the
last analysis, the first and the only thing in which I believe,”68 he is
expressing openly that worship of mammon which theologically could not
but be called idolatry. And even when he asserts his faith in the Omega
point evolving from evolutionary processes, he is denying the totality
of all traditional teachings and clinging to only a truncated and
subverted version of them, for Christ did say that he is the alpha and
the omega; in the Quran God is called not only the last or omega
(al-ākhir) but also the first (al-awwal), not only the outward
(al-ẓāhir) but also the inward (al-bāṭin).

The criticism against Teilhard's amalgamation of religion and science
cannot be limited to the religious pole but includes the scientific one
as well. All the criticism brought against evolutionary and transformist
theories in general apply to Teilhard as well who defended them not with
scientific reasoning but with a “religious” passion. Moreover, Teilhard
has been criticized for his views on biology and physiology with which
he was not very familiar but from which he sought to draw philosophical
and religious conclusions.69 He sought to create a cosmic unity through
the reduction of vital energy to physical energy and to equate the laws
of living beings which possess finality in the biological sense70 with
those of inert matter which is of a very different nature, and in which
the same kind of finality cannot be observed, although from the
traditional metaphysical point of view, very far from that of Teilhard,
everything in the universe possesses a purpose and an entelechy within
the total harmony of the cosmos. His “unity” is more a uniformity,
reducing all levels of cosmic reality to the material one rather than
true unity which integrates instead of leveling and reducing things to
their least common denominator.71 Teilhard saw the world of nature as,
in a sense, “Marxist,” that is, solely determined by temporal and
historical processes. As one of his scientific critics has asserted,
however, “Nature is much more Platonist than Father Teilhard believes
and not at all Marxist.”72

If we have paused to criticize Teilhardism in the midst of this
discussion of time and eternity, it is because the unveiling of the
nature of this type of

phenomenon is one of the most important tasks if one is to resuscitate
traditional doctrines in an authentic manner, for it is not only the
antitraditional but even more the countertraditional that veils the
nature of tradition of which it is a veritable caricature. In fact,
“Teilhardism is comparable to one of those cracks that are due to the
very solidification of the mental carapace, and that do not open upward,
toward the heaven of true and transcendent unity, but downwards toward
the realm of psychism. Weary of its own discontinuous vision of the
world, the materialist mind lets itself slide toward a false continuity
or unity, toward a pseudo-spiritual intoxication, of which this
falsified and materialized faith-or this sublimated materialism [of
Teilhardism]-marks a phase of particular significance.”73 The slightest
intuition of the immutable archetypes and the sense of the Eternal would
have evaporated this fog of illusion which seeks to sublimate the
temporal into the order of the Eternal of which it cannot be but a
shadow.

The traditional response to either the Hegelian or Marxist relocation
and even deification of the historical process or, what is even more
insidious from the traditional point of view, that mixture of
evolutionism and theology found in Teilhard can be discovered not only
in the metaphysical doctrines concerning eternity and the temporal order
but also in those traditional philosophies of becoming which treat in a
more directly philosophical way those currently popular philosophical
theories which would make of the evolutionary process the progenitor of
either the perfect society, or the Spirit or Omega point itself. One of
these philosophies is that of Ṣadr al-Dīn Shīrāzī whose transubstantial
motion (al-ḥarakat al-jawhariyyah) treats fully the significance of
movement and becoming while remaining aware of the archetypal realities
which manifest themselves through this “substantial becoming.”74
Likewise, Jalāl al-Dīn Rūmī deals extensively with dialectic and the
opposition between what Hegel and Marx called thesis and antithesis
without ever elevating the historic process to the level of the Truth
which is by nature immutable and eternal.75 It is such sources, whether
Islamic or otherwise, that alone can explain the meaning of becoming,
the scales of cosmic beings including living forms, the vertical
hierarchy stretching from the lowest material form through man to the
Divine Presence, and even the mutilation and inversion of these
teachings in modern times. And for that very reason it is through the
subversion of such traditional teachings that tradition itself is
betrayed by forces which parade under a religious guise while helping to
accomplish the final shortlived victory of the temporal over the
Eternal, of the profane over the sacred.76

Ultimately the temporal can no more be made to replace the eternal and
to consume it than can the sun be hidden in a well. The traditional
doctrine of eternity and the temporal order cannot itself change or
evolve because it belongs to the eternal order. This doctrine not only
distinguishes between time and eternity but also “modes of time” in
accordance with modes of consciousness.77 Its concern is not only with
profane time and God as the Eternal but also with those intermediate
modes of becoming associated with eschatology whose final end is the
abode of eternity in its absolute sense.78 Finally, this doctrine is
concerned with that present now which is eternity as

it touches the plane of time, the moment which is both alpha and omega
in which man encounters the Eternal that is the Sacred as such, the
moment that is the sun-gate through which he passes to the Beyond,
becoming finally what he always is, a star immortalized in the empyrean
of eternity.

*O soul, seek the Beloved, O friend, seek the Friend,*

*O watchman, be wakeful: it behooves not a watchman to sleep.*

*On every side is clamour and tumult, in every street are*

*candles and torches,*

*For tonight the teeming world gives birth to the world*

*everlasting.*

*Thou wert dust and art heart, thou wert ignorant and*

*art wise;*

*He who has dragged thee this far shall drag thee to the*

*Beyond through His pull.*

RŪMĪ79

Notes
-----

[^1]: F. Palmer, “Angelus Silesius: A Seventeenth Century Mystic,”
Harvard Theological Review 11 (1918); 171-202.

[^2]: Associated with the name of the British philosopher D. C.Williams.

[^3]: This view is of importance for modern physics but cannot explain
either the reason for our experience of time or its nature. This view
has been discussed by such well-known philosophers of science as K. R.
Popper, H. Reichenbach, and A. Grünbaum.

[^4]: Such a point of view has always had supporters ranging from
McTaggart to those Greek metaphysicians like Parmenides who, looking at
things from the point of view of permanence or Being, denied to becoming
any reality at all.

[^5]: On works of modern philosophy, esp. the analytical school dealing
with time, see the article of J. J. C. Smart on time in the Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, vol. 8, pp. 126-34.

[^6]: On the Aristotelian notion of time and its medieval modifications
and criticisms see H. A.Wolfson, Crescas’ Critique of Aristotle,
Cambridge, Mass., 1929. As far as the concept of time among Islamic
philosophers is concerned seeNasr, Introduction to Islamic Cosmological
Doctrines, chap. 13.

[^7]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image013.jpg)

Certain modern philosophers such as H. Bergson and following him the
modernized Muslim poet and philosopher, Muhammad Iqbal, have made a
clear distinction between external time always measured by comparing
spatial positions and inward or subjective time which Bergson calls
duration. But from the traditional point of view this distinction is
hardly new.

[^8]: See F. Schuon, Du Divin à l’humain.

[^9]: “Everything God made six thousand years ago and more when He made
the world, God makes now instantly (alzemâle). . He makes the world and
all things in this present Now (gegen würtig nû).” Eckhart, quoted from
the Pfeiffer edition by A. K. Coomaraswamy, Time and Eternity, p. 117.
This work is an amazing study replete with numerous quotations from the
Hindu, Buddhist, Christian, and Islamic traditions on the metaphysics of
time and eternity with special emphasis upon the present now in its
relation to eternity.

[^10]: This well-known dictum means that the Sufi lives in the eternal
present which is the only access to the Eternal. It is also an allusion
to the Sufi practice of dhikr or invocation which is related to the
eternal present and which transforms, sanctifies, and delivers man by
saving him from both daydreaming about the future or the past and by
facing Reality which resides in the present, the present that
experimentally is alone real.

[^11]: “Il punto a cui rutti li tempi son presenti” (Paradiso,
17.17-18).

[^12]: Quoted by Coomaraswamy in Time and Eternity, pp. 43-44.

[^13]: The Gulshan-i rÒz says

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E014%5D:jpg)

The Powerful One who in a blinking of an eye

Brought the two worlds into being through the k and n of kun

(the imperative of the verb “to be” in reference to Quran XXXVI; 82; see
discussion in chap. 4, n. 14 above).

[^14]: Nimisa, hence naimis.iyah. or “people of the moment” mentioned in
the Chandogya Upanishad which corresponds almost exactly to the Sufi ibn
al-waqt.

[^15]: Variations of the myth of the “sleepers of the cave” abound among
nearly all peoples. For the spiritual significance of this myth and the
Quranic account as they affect the relation between Islam and
Christianity see L. Massignon, “Recherche sur la valeur eschatologique
de la Légende des VII Dormants chez les musulmans,” Actes 20e Congrès
International des Orientalists, 1938, pp. 302-3; and Les Sept dormants
d’Éphèse (Ahl al-kahf ) en Islam et en Chrétienteé, 3 vols., avec le
concours d’Emile Dermenghem, Paris, 1955-57.

[^16]: We do not of course want to deny other psychological factors
which facilitate the rapid passage of time including dispersions of all
kinds. But it is noteworthy to remember that even in such cases the
person in question experiences a rapid passage of time only if he is
enjoying the activity in question, even if that act be spiritually
worthless or even harmful. No one sitting on a needle experiences the
rapid passage of time unless he is an ascetic who no longer feels the
pain and whose consciousness is not associated with the negative
character of that sensation, even if physiologically one would expect
him to experience the pain, 17. The Catholic prayer asking for the
blessings and mercy of the Virgin Mary now and at the moment of death
indicates clearly the rapport between these two moments.

[^18]: The three terms sarmad, azal, and abad refer to the same reality,
namely, the Eternal, but under three different rapports: sarmad being
eternity in itself, abad eternity with respect to what stands “in front
of” the present moment of experience, and azal what stands behind and
before this moment. Azal is related to the Eternal from which man has
come and abad to the Eternal to which he shall journey after death,
while from the point of view of eternity itself there is no before or
after, all being sarmad.

[^19]: Hafiz. says,

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E015%5D:jpg)

May the pre-eternal [azal] grace be the guide of Hafiz,

[^20]: See R. C, Zaehner, Zurvan, a Zoroastrian Dilemma, Oxford, 1955.

[^21]: Quoted in Coomaraswamy, Time and Eternity, p. 15, where he has
dealt fully with the distinction between time and Time, the second being
none other than eternity,

[^22]:*Yikı bud yikı nabud; ghayr az khuda hıchkı nabud.*

[^23]: This doctrine has been expounded and explained in numerous works
of both a traditional and nontraditional character during the past half
century. See, for example, Guénon, Formes traditionnelles et cycles
cosmiques, Paris, 1970; and M, Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return
(also published as Cosmos and History), trans. W. Trask, New York, 1974.

[^24]: Considered by some to be 4,320,000,000 years.

[^25]: This point is emphasized by Guénon in many of his works but
overlooked by M. Eliade in his otherwise masterly study Cosmos and
History or The Myth of Eternal Return.

[^26]: On the symbolism of the hourglass see F. Schuon, “Some
Observations on the Symbolism of the Hourglass,” in his Logic and
Transcendence, pp, 165-72.

[^27]: On the Zoroastrian concept of history and the 12,000 year period
which ends with the victory of light over darkness see A. V. Jackson,
Zoroastrian Studies, New York, 1938, pp. 110-15; and H. S. Nyberg,
“Questions de cosmogonie et de cosmologie mazdéene,” Journal Asiatique
219 (1929): 2ff.

[^28]: Many episodes of sacred history are found in both the Bible and
the Quran although not always in the same versions. But the Quran seems
to be much more interested in the transhistorical significance of these
events for the soul of man and his entelechy rather than the
understanding of God’s will in history or historical events themselves.
There is in fact a singular lack of concern with time as a dimension of
reality as it is found even in traditionalWestern thought of the type
associated with St. Augustine.

[^29]: According to ahadıth, “This world is the cultivating field for
the other world,”

![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image%5B%5E017%5D:jpg)

that is, the fruit of man’s actions in this world affect the state of
his soul in the hereafter. It is perfectly possible to take the life of
this world very seriously as it concerns man’s final end without taking
history as seriously as most Western thinkers have taken it. The case of
Islam is a perfect case in point that there are not just two
possibilities as many modern scholars claim, either the West taking
history and this world seriously or the Oriental, and esp. Hindu, view
for which history is of no consequence. Such a reductionist view fails
to distinguish between this world as the cultivating ground for eternity
and history as determining the nature of Reality or affecting it in some
final and fundamental way.

[^30]: See Abu Bakr Siraj al-Dın, “The Islamic and Christian Conceptions
of the March of Time,” The Islamic Quarterly 1 (1954): 179-93.

[^31]: “The characteristic of the traditional solution of the space-time
problem is that reality is both in and out of space, both in and out of
time.” W. Urban, The Intelligible World, Metaphysics and Value, New
York, 1929, p. 270.

[^32]: This famous work opposed the Biblical doctrine of the creation of
the world ex nihilo to the Greek doctrine of the “eternity” of the world
and became the source and beginning for numerous discussions and
treatises on the subject which in Islamic philosophy is called al-h.
uduh tva’l-qidam. But the truth of this matter was not to be exhausted
by its reduction to one of these categories, hence the incessant debate
about the meaning of ex nihilo itself among Muslim, Jewish, and
Christian authors to which Wolfson has devoted many studies, some of the
most important of which have been assembled in his Essays in the History
of Philosophy and Religion.

[^33]: One of the most thorough philosophical discussions of this issue
in Islamic philosophy during the past few decades is that of ‘Allamah
Taba taba’ı in his Us.ul-i falsafah wa rawish-i ri’alizm, 5 vols., Qum,
1332-50 (A. H., solar).

[^34]: Jalal al-Dın Rumı discusses the theme of huduth and qidam in both
his poetical and prose works of which one of the most astonishing is in
the Fıhi ma fıhi. See Discourses of Rumi, trans. A. J. Arberry, London,
1961, pp. 149-50.

[^35]: That is why Coomaraswamy in his Time and Eternity deals so
extensively with atomism, Hindu, Buddhist, and Islamic. He also
discusses in detail why the now is ever-present and yet not “part” of
time.

[^36]: Lawa’ih, trans. E. H. Whinfield and M. M. Kazvını, London, 1978,
pp. 42-45.

[^37]: On the renewal of creation in Sufism see T. Izutsu, “The Concept
of Perpetual Creation in Islamic Mysticism and Zen Buddhism,” in Nasr
(ed.), Mélanges offerts à Henry Corbin, pp. 115-48; idem, “Creation and
the Timeless Order of Things; A Study in the Mystical Philosophy of ‘Ayn
al-Qud.at,” Philosophical Forum, no. 4 (1972): 124-40. We have also
dealt with this issue in Science and Civilization in Islam, esp. chap.
13; and Burckhardt, Introduction to Sufi Doctrine, chap. 10.

[^38]: If all of the ways in which Christianity has emphasized the
significance of history be considered, even Judaism would have to be
excluded leaving Christianity as the only religion with such a
particular attitude toward history.

[^39]: The Christian idea of kairos, a welcome time, the right and
proper time, or the fullness of time, mentioned in the Gospel of Luke,
contains the seed of that further theological elaboration of the meaning
of history which is of concern here.

[^40]: It is amazing how so many young people of the present day lack an
awareness of or interest in history, seeking to live as if they had no
history.

[^41]: We use the term evolution here to mean the belief that through
natural agencies and processes one species is transformed into another
and not adaptations, modifications, and changes which do occur within a
particular species in adapting itself to a changed set of natural
conditions. Some scientists in fact distinguish between transformism
implying change of one species into another and evolution as the
biological transformations within a species. See M. Vernet, Vernet
contre Teilhard de Chardin, Paris, 1965 p. 30. If we use evolution in
the sense of transformism in biology it is because it contains a more
general philosophical meaning outside the domain of biology not to be
found in the more restricted term transformism.

[^42]: “For in its turn Evolution has become the intolerant religion of
nearly all educated Western men. It dominates their thinking, their
speech and the hopes of their civilization.” E. Shute, Flaws in the
Theory of Evolution, Nutley, N.J., 1976, p. 228.

[^43]: In the late nineteenth century the president of the American
Association and an avowed defender of “the scientific method,” Professor
Marsh, said, “I need offer no argument for evolution, since to doubt
evolution is to doubt science, and science is only another name for
truth.” Quoted in D. Dewar, Difficulties of the Evolution Theory,
London, 1931, p. 3. One wonders by what definition of science such a
statement, which is so typical when the question of evolution is
discussed, can be called scientific.

[^44]: On this theme see Coomaraswamy, “Gradation, Evolution and
Reincarnation,” in his Bugbear of Literacy, chap. 7. See also his Time
and Eternity, pp.19-20, where he discusses traditional doctrine of
gradation and the “seminal reason” of St. Augustine.

[^45]: See, for example, al-Bırunı, Kitab al-jamahir fı ma‘rifat
al-jawahir, Hyderabad, 1935, p. 80. This has led certain Western
scholars to claim that such Muslim scientists were

exponents of Darwinism before Darwin. See J. Z. Wilczynski, “On the
Presumed Darwinism of Alberuni Eight Hundred Years before Darwin,” Isis
50 (Dec. 1959): 459-66, which follows the earlier studies of Fr.
Dieterici and others. But as we have sought to show in our Introduction
to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines, pp. 147-48, and elsewhere, the Muslim
sources are referring to the traditional theory of gradation rather than
the Darwinian theory of evolution.

[^46]: This type of criticism has been developed extensively by A. E.
Wilder Smith, who is a biochemist, pharmacologist, and mathematician.
See his Man’s Origin, Man’s Destiny, Wheaton, 111., 1968; A Basis for a
New Biology, Stuttgart, 1976;and Herkunft und Zukunft des Menschen,
Basel, 1966.

[^47]: An extensive argument concerning the difference between physical
energy associated with inert matter and vital energy associated with
living forms is given by M. Vernet in his La Grande illusion de Teilhard
de Chardin, Paris, 1964.

[^48]: See his Guide for the Perplexed, p. 133, where Schumacher writes,
“Evolutionism is not science; it is science fiction, even a kind of
hoax.”

[^49]: Among the growing number of scientific works critical of the
theory of evolution one can mention D, Dewar, The Transformist Illusion,
Murfreesboro, 1955; his already cited Difficulties of the Evolution
Theory; Shute, op. cit.; L. Bounoure, Déterminisme et finalité, Paris,
1957; E. L. Grant-Watson, Nature Abounding, London, 1941; and G.
Sermonti and R. Fondi, Dopo Darwin, Milan, 1980.

During the past few years a number of works against the Darwinian theory
of evolution have appeared from specifically Christian circles but from
the scientific and not just theological or religious point of view. See,
for example, D. Gish, Evolution, the Fossils Say No, San Diego, Calif.,
1980; B. Davidheiser, Evolution and Christian Faith, Phillpsburg, N.J.,
1978; H. Hiebert, Evolution: Its Collapse in View?. Beaveriedge,
Alberta, Canada, 1979; and H. M. Morris, The Twilight of Evolution,
Grand Rapids, Mich., [^1978]: Most of these works base the religious
aspect of their criticism solely upon Christian sources without
reference to other traditions, but they also all rely upon scientific
criticism of the theory of evolution and not just “Biblical evidence”.

[^50]: “Some biologists appreciate the fact that the lack of fossils
intermediate between the great groups requires explanation unless the
doctrine of evolution in any of its present forms is to be abandoned.”
Dewar, Difficulties of Evolution Theory, p. 141.

[^51]: Ibid., pp. 142ff.

[^52]: In the case of plants, “geological problems raised by
paleo-botany are so great that a botanist must question the evolutionary
sequence of plant forms.” Shute, op. cit., p. 14.

[^53]: Referring to the lack of a trace of life in the pre-Cambrian,
Shute writes, “These despairing suggestions point up the remarkable
dilemma of the evolutionist who leans on Palaeontology for its customary
support. What greater degree of disproof could Palaeontology provide?
Millions of years of ‘NO’ is indeed a resounding ‘NO’!” Shute, op. cit.,
p. 6.

[^54]: “Every text on Evolution or on Biology is replete with
illustrations of adaptation. I do not wish to repeat too many of these,
but to adduce a few of the little-known and more extraordinary
adaptations-adaptations so complex and refined that evolutionary theory
must be very hard pressed to explain them.

The notion of a designing, all-wise Creator fits them much better.”
Shute, Flam in the Theory of Evolution, pp. 122-[^23]:

[^55]: One of the leading biologists of France, J. Rostand, writes, “The
world postulated by transformism is a fairy world, phantasmagoric,
surrealistic. The chief point, to which one always returns, is that we
have never been present even in a small way at one authentic phenomenon
of evolution.” Yet he adds, “I firmly believe-because I see no means of
doing otherwise-that mammals have come from lizards, and lizards from
fish; but when I declare and when 1 think such a thing, I try not to
avoid seeing its indigestible enormity and I prefer to leave vague the
origin of these scandalous metamorphoses rather than add to their
improbability that of a ludicrous interpretation.” Quoted in Burckhardt,
op.at, p. 143.

[^56]: It is amazing that two of the leading biologists of Italy should
write at the end of a major criticism of Darwinism, “Il risultato a cui
crediamo di dover condurre non púo essere, pertanto, che il sequente: la
biologia non ricaverà alcun vantaggio nel sequire gli orientamenti di
Lamarck, di Darwin e degli iperdarwinisti moderni; al contrario, essa
dere

allontanarsi quanto prima della strettoie e dai vicoli ciechi del mito
evoluzionistico, per riprendere il suo cammino sicuro lungo le strade
aperte e fuminose della Tradizione.” G. Sermonti and R.

Fondi, Dopo Darwin, pp. 334-[^35]: This work contains a wealth of
scientific arguments drawn all the way from biochemistry through
paleontology against the evolutionary theory of Darwin.

[^57]: “The speculations of Teilhard de Chardin provide a striking
example of a theology that has succumbed to microscopes and telescopes,
to machines and to their philosophical and social consequences, a ‘fall’
that would have been unthinkable had there been here the slightest
direct intellective knowledge of the immaterial realities. The ‘inhuman’
side of the doctrine in question is highly significant.” Schuon,
Understanding Islam, p. 32.

[^58]: On ´Sri Aurobindo and Teilhard de Chardin and their “evolutionary
religion” see R. C. Zaehner, Evolution in Religion: A Study in ´Sri
Aurobindo and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, Oxford, 1971; also his Matter
and Spirit, Their Convergence in Eastern Religions, Marx, and Teilhard
de Chardin, New York, 1963, which is a study of religion from the
Teilhardian perspective. As Zaehner points out, in the case of both ´Sri
Aurobindo and Teilhard de Chardin, there is a passionate belief in
evolution and the salvation of the whole of humanity in the Marxist
sense along with the “mystical” vision of the spiritual world which
Zaehner interprets as a new synthesis but which from the traditional
point of view cannot but be the eclipse of  Atman by maya to such a
degree that it can only occur in the deep twilight of a human cycle
before the blinding Sun of the Self lifts once again all veils of
illusion, evaporates all clouds of doubt, and melts all those idols of
perversion and inversion of the truth.

[^59]: See P. Chanchard, Man and Cosmos-Scientific Phenomenology in
Teilhard de Chardin, New York, 1965, whose chap. 8 is entitled “The
Resacralization of the ProfaneWorld.” He writes, “Here is the real
meaning of Teilhard’s work … It is a matter of resacralizing a profane
world by giving even the profane its own sacred character” (p. 170).

[^60]: On Teilhard de Chardin see P. Smulders, Theologie und Evolution,
Versuch über Teilhard de Chardin, Essen, 1963; E. Rideau, Teilhard de
Chardin: a Guide to His Thought, trans. R. Hague, London, 1967; H. de
Lubac, The Eternal Feminine, trans. R. Hague, London, 1971; H. de Lubac,
The Faith of Teilhard de Chardin, trans. R. Hague, London, 1965; C.
Cuénot, Teilhard de Chardin et la pensée catholique, Paris, 1965; and M.
Bar-thélemy-Madaule, Bergson et Teilhard de Chardin, Paris, 1963. There
is a veritable flood of writings on him mostly by admirers or apologists
while the most acute criticisms of a scientific nature have come from
such French scientists as M. Vernet.

[^61]: “The modern psyche is dominated by time, matter, change and is
relatively blind to space, Substance and Eternity. To oppose one’s
thoughts to the Theory of Evolution is to think in a way which is
contrary to the common tendency of the modern psyche.” M. Negus,
“Reactions to the Theory of Evolution,” in Studies in Comparative
Religion, Summer-Autumn 1978, p. 191.

[^62]: Teilhard’s type of pseudospiritual evolutionism could not in fact
have gained wide support without that psychological attitude that has
been already molded by the influence of the ideas of progress and
evolution.

[^63]: This being metaphysically a caricature and parody of “O Holy
Mother,” for the Virgin represents esoterically the maternal and
expansive element of the Divine, the feminine materia in divinis which
generates the Logos.

[^64]: From his L’Énergie humaine, Paris, 1962, p. 74 and p. 125. On
Teilhardian idolatry see K. Almquist, “Aspects of Teilhardian Idolatry,”
Studies in Comparative Religion, Summer-Autumn, 1978, pp. 195-203.

[^65]: The prevalent error of orientalists in identifying such doctrines
as wahdat alwuj ud in Sufism with pantheism originates from the same
error that lies at the origin of Teilhardian pantheism, except that the
orientalists at least do not pretend to speak for Catholic theology.

[^66]: “All errors concerning the world and God consist either in a
‘naturalistic’ denial of the discontinuity and so also of
transcendence-whereas it is on the basis of this transcendence that the
whole edifice of science should have been raised-or else in a failure to
understand the metaphysical and ‘descending’ continuity which in no way
abolishes the discontinuity starting from the relative.” Schuon,
Understanding Islam, pp. 108-9.

[^67]: See Almquist, op. cit., p. 201, where the spiritual substance
which through coagulation finally produces matter is discussed in the
light of the primacy of consciousness and subjectivity with which all
knowing of necessity begins.

[^68]: Quoted in Almquist, op. cit., pp. 202-3.

[^69]: “Teilhard n’était pas un biologiste; la physiologie géneérale en
particulier lui était étrangère. Il en résulte que les déductions qu’il
tire des perspectives qu’il prend sur le plan philosophique et religieux
se trouvent faussées, dès lors que les bases elles-mêmes sur lesquelles
il entendait se fonder, s’effondrent.” Vernet, La Grande illusion de
Teilhard de Chardin, p. 107.

[^70]: On finality in this sense see L. Bounoure, Déterminisme et
finalité.

[^71]: “Certains font honneur à Teilhard d’avoir coçcu une unité
cosmique; or, cette unité est fausse. Tout réquire à une seule et même
énergie physique d’où découleraient tous les phénomènes, selon des
processus purement matériels, ne répond pas, nous venons de le voir, à
la realité du monde et de la vie. Telle a été l’immense illusion de
Teilhard.” Vernet, op. cit., p. 123.

[^72]: “La nature est plus platonicienne que ne le croit le P. Teilhard
et pas du tout marxiste.” R. Johannet, introd. to Vernet contre Teilhard
de Chardin, p. 22, n. 2, 73. T. Burckhardt, “Cosmology and Modern
Science,” in J. Needleman (ed.), The Sword of Gnosis, p. 153.

[^74]: The doctrine of transubstantial motion presents, within the cadre
of traditional teachings, one of the most systematically exposed and
logically appealing formulations of the meaning of change in the light
of permanence. It is associated with the school of Sadr al-Dın Shırazı,
who instead of limiting motion to the four accidents of quality,
quantity, position, and place as did the Peripatetics, also accepts
motion in the category of substance without in any way denying the
reality of the immutable archetypes or essences. For an explanation of
this difficult doctrine see the articles of Sayyid Abu’l-H. asan Qazwını
and ‘Allamah T.abataba’ı in S. H. Nasr (ed.), Mulla Sadra Commemoration
Volume, Tehran, 1380 (A. H., solar); also, S. H. Nasr, Islamic Life and
Thought, pt. 3, pp. 158ff.;and idem, Sadr al-Dın Shırazı, pp. 932-61.

[^75]: It is this fact that has caused certain modern Marxists in the
Islamic world to claim Mawlana Jalal al-Dın Rumı as their ancestor,
misinterpreting completely the dialectic of RumÒ with its vertical and
transcendent dimension to make it conform to the Hegelian-Marxist one.

[^76]: It is interesting to note that if such movements in Hinduism and
Christianity have resulted in figures like ´Sri Aurobindo and Teilhard
de Chardin, in Buddhism and Islam they have given rise to that unholy
wedding of ideas taken from these religions and Marxism by those who
have called themselves Buddhist Marxists and Islamic Marxists. The
political consequences of the thought of the first group should at least
cause a moment of pause for those who hoist the banner of Islamic
Marxism.

[^77]: For example, in Sufism certain authorities distinguish between
external time (zamÒn-i afaqı, literally “time of the horizons”) and
inward time (zaman-i anfus ı, literally “time of the souls”) in
reference to the Quranic verse already cited concerning the
manifestation of the portents (ayat) of God “upon the horizons (afaq)
and within themselves (anfus).” They also state that each world through
which the spiritual adept journeys has its own “time.” On zaman-i afaqı
and zaman-i anfusı see H. Corbin, En Islam iranien, vol. 1, pp. 177ff.

[^78]: No exposition of traditional doctrines would be complete without
a discussion of eschatology which constitutes an essential teaching of
every religion and whose full significance can only be grasped through
the esoteric dimension of tradition and the scientia sacra which
provides the necessary metaphysical knowledge for the treatment of the
subject. The bewildering complexity of eschatological realities which
lie beyond the ken of man’s earthly imagination can only be grasped
through the revealed truths as they are elucidated and elaborated by an
intelligence imbued with the sense of the sacred, but even in this case
it is not possible to say the last word about them.

Trans. R. A. Nicholson, in Selected Poems from the Dıvanı Shamsi Tabrız,
Cambridge, 1898, pp. 141-43 (revised).

It is so significant that Zaehner in his already citedwork on Teilhard
de Chardin and ´Sri Aurobindo quotes from this poem as an affirmation of
the evolution of spirit from matter,

whereas this whole poem is about the death of the saint himself, that is
Rumı, and the miracle of the return of the purified and sanctified soul
which has itself descended from the realm of the Eternal into the stream
of becoming back to the abode of the Beloved.

[^79]:![Picture](books/0731-knowledge_and_the_sacred/images/image018.jpg)
