Introduction
============

This article appeared in the journal Mishkat (No 4, spring 1363 H.
Sh.), published by Idareh-ye Umur-e Farhangi, an academic and research
institution attached to Astaneh-ye Quds-a Radawi, that is, Imam Rida's
Shrine at Mashhad. The author is a well-known Iranian scholar.

Undoubtedly, no other book has been the subject of discussion to the
extent of the Qur'an, the number of treatises, books and exegeses
written on which far exceeds those written about any other book.
Although the Torah and the Gospel have been translated into more
languages, the Qur'an has a lead over other scriptures in respect of the
variety of studies, the number of exegeses and the various aspects of it
that have since long been the topic of discussion and writing.

Even in respect of the number of copies circulated the Qur'an has a
lead over all other books. Muslims believe that a spiritual reward
(thawab) lies in not only writing and reciting the Qur'an but even in
looking at its sacred script. Accordingly, as we know, there have been
Muslims who in their lifetime produced more than a hundred hand written
copies of the Qur'an for the sake of thawab. Many others have bought
hundreds of copies of the scripture and donated them to mosques and
shrines to be kept for reading .by visitors.

And-if we take into account the age-old Iranian custom of reading the
Qur'an in majalis-e khatm where copies of it - usually in thirty, sixty
or hundred and-twenty parts, each separately bound - are kept to be read
by those attending, the total number of printed and hand-written copies
reaches an amazingly large number. If to these is added the number of
copies written by young pupils in the traditional schools (maktab
khanah) in the course of their Qur'anic instruction, the-number would be
a truly stupendous one.

The tradition of writing the Qur'an commenced from the time of the
Noble Prophet (S) himself, who had assigned certain persons to write
down and record the Qur'anic revelation as and when it came and was
recited by him. They are known as kuttab al-wahy, Scribes of the
Revelation. These were different from the secretaries who wrote letters,
pacts and treaties for the Prophet (S) or wrote agreements and contracts
between parties in his presence. 1


**1. Compilers of the Qur'an**

Ibn al-Nadim writes that from among the Companions of the Prophet (S)
'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A), Said ibn 'Ubayd ibn al-Numan, Abu al-Darda',
Mu'adh ibn Jabal, 'Thabit ibn Zayd 2 and 'Ubayd ibn Mu'awiyah ibn Zayd
compiled the Qur'an during the Prophet's lifetime. 3

Al-Bukhari narrates from Anas ibn Malik that Ubayy ibn Ka'b, Mu'adh,
Zayd ibn Thabit and Abu Zayd had collected the Qur'an during the
Prophet's era. 4 In another narration he mentions the names of Abu
al-Darda', Mu'adh ibn Jabal, Zayd ibn Thabit and Abu Zayd in this
regard. 5

Al-Zarakshi narrates from al-Sha'bi that those who collected the Qur'an
during the Prophet's lifetime were these six: Ubayy, Zayd, Mu'adh, Abu
al-Darda', Sa'id ibn 'Ubayd and Abu Zayd, and lastly, Mujamma' ibn
Jariyah, who had collected all the Qur'an except for two surahs. 6

Ibn al-Nadim describes the order of the surahs in the compilation of
'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud and Ubayy ibn Ka'b, which shows that Ibn Mas'ud
too had compiled the Qur'an; 7 or perhaps he did so after the Prophet's
demise.

In al-Tamhid, Abu Musa al-'Ash'ari and Miqdad ibn al-'Aswad are
mentioned among the compilers of the Qur'an. It adds that before the
standardization of the codices by the order of 'Uthman, the people of
Kufah recited according to the compilation of Ibn Masud, the people of
Basrah according to the codex of Abu Musa, the people of Damascus
according to the codex of Miqdad, while the rest of Syrians recited
according to the codex of Ubayy ibn Ka'b. 8

Ibn al-Nad'im, al-Ya'qubi and many Shi'i traditionists have mentioned
the episode of the compilation of the Qur'an by 'Ali (A) after the
Prophet's demise. The arrangement of the surahs in 'Ali's mushaf, as
mentioned by al-Ya'qubi in his history, 9 is different from those of Ibn
Mas'ud and Ubayy ibn Ka'b, which have been described by Ibn al Nadim. 10
There are minor differences also in the names of the surahs from the
well-known and presently popular names. 11 There is also a difference of
sequence in the above-mentioned masahif. For instance, in Ibn Mas'ud's
mushaf the Surat al-'Anfal is the twenty-fifth surah, while it is the
ninth one in Ubayy ibn Ka'b's arrangement and the eighth one in the
present compilation. And as we know, the present compilation is the one
made by Zayd ibn Thabit at the order of Abu Bakr, the first caliph.

Zayd says, "Abu Bakr sent for me after the Battle of Yamamah, in which
a large number of the Prophet's Companions and qurra' (reciters) of the
Qur'an were killed. He told me, "'Umar, who is now here, says that
qurra' of the Qur'an have been martyred at Yamamah. If a similar
incident should recur, it is feared that a part of the Qur'an retained
by them in their memories would be lost. Since you are an intelligent
man and happen to be one of the scribes of the revelation and are
trustworthy as well, I ask you to collect the Qur'an.' Accordingly, I
collected the Qur'an from original recordings and from the memories of
men."12

According to al-Ya'qubi twenty-five men from among the Quraysh and
fifty from among the Ansar helped Zayd in this task, 13 among whom 'Abd
Allah ibn al-Zubayr and 'Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Harith ibn Hisham were
permanent members of the committee.

According to al-Tamhid, the work was started by Zayd ibn Thabit along
with some other; but later Ubayy ibn Ka'b assumed responsibility for
reading and Zayd for writing down.

In any case, the Qur'an was compiled in this manner and the compiled
text was deposited first with Abu Bakr and after him with 'Umar and was
a source of reference for the people. After the death of 'Umar, this
compilation remained in the possession of Hafsah until the year 22/642,
when differences of reading appeared during the reign. of 'Uthman.
Thereupon, on the Caliph's order, the mushaf was taken from Hafsah for
transcription, and from it Zayd ibn Thabit (who was the main scribe)
prepared several copies with the help of 'Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, 'Abd
al-Rahman ibn Hisham (both members of the original committee that
compiled the Qur'an) and Said ibn al-'As. While the original was
returned to Hafsah, one of the copies was kept with the Caliph at
Madinah and the rest were sent to major Islamic cities. 14 Thereafter,
the handwritten compilations of the Qur'an were destroyed on the
Caliph's order for the sake of eliminating differences among Muslims.

15 The compilation written during Abu Bakr's days remained with Hafsah
until the reign of Marwan ibn al-Hakam. Marwan wanted to burn it also,
but Hafsah refused to hand it over to him. He waited until her death and
thereat destroyed that compilation also. 16

Thus the task of ensuring the uniformity of the Qur'an was carried out
in the year 22/642, 17 though 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud refused to hand over
his compilation to 'Uthman, who wanted to destroy it. 18 Similarly, the
compilation made by 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A) was retained by him and later
preserved by his family.


