4. Codices Attributed To 'ali (a)
=================================

The codex compiled by 'Ali (A) existed until the time of Ibn al Nad'im,
i.e. the last decades of the 4th/10th century." As mentioned in al
Fihrist, he saw this codex in the possession of Abu Ya'la Hamzah
al-Hasani and it remained as a legacy in the family of al-'Imam al Hasan
(A). 38 Probably, the aforementioned person is al-Sharif Abu Ya'la -
Hamzah ibn Zayd ibn al-Husayn al-Hasani al-'Aftasi who was a disciple of
al-Sayyid al-Murtada. 39 Considering that al-Fihrist was written in the
year 377/987 and al-Sayyid al-Murtada was probably born in 355/966, Abu
Ya'la's meeting with Ibn al-Nadim must have preceded his discipleship of
al Sayyid al Murtada for it is unlikely that Abu Ya'la may have become
the Sayyid's pupil before the latter had reached the age of 22 years.


**5. The Egyptian Codex**

Al-Maqrizi (d. 845/1441) mentions in Khutat Misr 40 a Qur'an written by
'Ali (A) that existed in the library of the Fatimid caliphs in Cairo.
This codex was initially safeguarded in a silver chest in the ancient
grand mosque (al-Jami' al-'Atiq) of Egypt when Ma'mun Bata'ihi, a
minister of the Fatimid caliph Amir Billah, ordered a golden chest to be
made for it. 41 Presently a Qur'an attributed to 'Ali (A) exists in the
collection at the shrine of al-Husayn (A) at Cairo. It is not unlikely
that it is the same one which existed at the ancient grand Mosque of
Egypt and and was later transferred from there.

**6. The Najaf Codex**

Sayyid Jamal al-Din al-Dawudi al-Hasani, known as Ibn 'Inabah (d.
825/1422) - mentions in 'Umdat al-talib a Qur'an which existed in the
collection at 'Ali's shrine at Najaf. He also mentions another Qur'an
written, by 'Ali (A) which he had seen at the shrine of 'Ubayd Allah ibn
'Ali. Any connection between these two Qur'ans and their link with the
one in Egypt requires further investigation.

Even today there exists a Qur'an in the collection at 'Ali's shrine at
Najaf 42 which some scholars believe to be the one mentioned by the
author of Umdat al-talib. It is possible that the codex at the tomb of
'Ubayd Allah ibn Ali might have comprised some parts of the one at
Najaf.

Sayyid Ahmad al-Husayni al-'Ashkawari in Fihrist khizanat al rawdat
al-Haydariyyah, quoting Mawsu'at al-'atabat al-muqaddasah (chapter on
Najaf), writes that in the year 755/1354 the shrine of 'Ali (A) was
affected by fire in which many rare possessions of the collection were
lost including the Qur'an written by 'Ali (A) in three volumes.

On the margin of the manuscript of 'Umdat al-talib present at the
library of Astanah-a Quds-e Radawi, there are useful notes written by a
librarian of Nassabah named Husayn, which include a description about
the Najaf codex. The relevant note says: "The codex seen by al Sayyid
al-Naqib (i.e. Ibn 'Inabah al-Hasani Nassabah, author of 'Umdat
al-talib) at Najaf still exists in the collection at Najaf. However, a
considerable part of it was burnt and only one volume remained, and that
too without the marginal notes since all the margins along with a part
of the text were destroyed in the fire." 43

**7. The Codex at al-'Imam al-Rida's Shrine**

Apart from the Qur'an kept on the sarcophagus (dari') at the tomb of
'Ali (A) at Najaf, two more Qur'anic codices exist in the collection at
al-'Imam al-Rida's shrine at Mashhad that are attributed to Imam 'Ali
(A). The first bears the number 6 and is kept at the library. It is
written in Kufic script on deerskin with the note: "Katabahu 'Ali ibn
Abi Talib." On the first page there is a dedication by Shah 'Abbas, the
Safawid monarch, in the writing of al-Shaykh al-Bahai and with his
signature with the date 1008 H. There, al-Shaykh al-Bahai mentions it as
having been written by 'Ali (A). This Qur'an in 68 folios contains a
part of the scripture from Surat Hud to the end of Surat al-Kahf. 44

The second Qur'an bears the number 1. Parts of its margins are gone and
verses are missing from in between. For instance, between Folios 33 and
34 nearly 79 verses are missing. This Qur'an has been been written on
deerskin and has 341 folios comprising the whole Qur'an. It was endowed
by Shah 'Abbas in the year 1009/1600 to the shrine. We quote below the
endowment deed written in al-Shaykh al-Bahai's hand:

This Glorious Qur'an written by the Amir al Mu'minin, Sayyid al
Wasiyyin, Asad Allah al-Ghalib, Imam ahl al-mashariq wa al-magharib,
Mazhar al'aja'ib wa Muzhir al-ghara'ib, Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali ibn Abi
Talib (A) has been endowed to the sacred, luminous, immaculate, compeer
to the Throne, and blessed shrine of Rida, on whose dweller be thousands
and thousands of salutations and benedictions, by the shadow of God, the
dust of the threshold of the Best of Mankind (i.e. the Prophet), the
disseminator of the righteous faith of the Twelve Imams (A ),

the sincere slave of Amir al-Mu'minin Haydar, Shah 'Abbas al-Husayni
al-Musawi al-Safawi Bahidur Khan, may God immortalize his kingdom and
authority and bestow his kindness, justice and goodness upon mankind.
Amin Rabb al-'Alamin. Written by the dust of the Shrine of al-Rida -
peace be upon him - the humblest of creatures, Baha' al-Din Muhammad in
the year 1009.


