11. Manuscripts Ascribed To the Imams, Sahabah and Tab'iun
==========================================================

Fortunately we have today some very ancient Qur'anic manuscripts which
date back to the time of the Sahabah of the Prophet (S). Though the
authenticity of the ascription of each one of them to its purported
writer is not certain, to be sure there exist among them Qur'ans of the
period of the Sahabah, a number of whom lived until the end of the
1st/7th century. 61

**12. Codices Attributed to al-'Imam al-Hasan (A)**

Among the codices attributed to some famous sahabah of the Prophet
(S) - other than 'Uthman and 'Ali (A), which have been already
discussed - are three codices ascribed to al-'Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba
(A). The first one is kept in the Qur'anic collection of Astaneh e
Quds-a Radawi. It bears the serial number 12 and contains from the
twenty third juz' to the twenty-fifth juz' of the Qur'an in 122 folios
of deerskin. 62 In Kufic script, it has inscribed on it the words: "al
Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib" with the date 41 H. On the first folio is
a dedication (waqfnameh) by Shah 'Abbas Safawi and bearing the signature
of al-Shaykh al-Bahai who attributes it to al-'Imam al-Hasan (A), who is
mentioned thus:

The second codex is the one placed upon the sarcophagus at the tomb of
'Ali (A) at Najaf. 63 The third one, written on ten folios of deerskin,
was seen by this writer in the library of Ustad Mahmud Farrukh
Khurasani. Apparently, it is still in the possession of his family. It
starts with the twelfth verse of Sura al Nisa' and ends at the seventh
verse of Surat al-Tawbah. It bears the signatures of Hasan ibn 'Abbas,
al-Safawi Bahadur Khan and Isma'il al-Musawi al-Hasani Bahadur Khan,
indicating that they got the blessed chance to view this manuscript 64
It is not very unlikely that this third manuscript is a part of either
the Qur'an at Astaneh-ye Quds-e Radawi or the one at Imam Ali's tomb,
from which it might have been separated.

Incidentally, it should be remembered that the Qur'an in the possession
of Ustad Farrukh and his family does not contain more than 10 leaves and
it cannot comprise nearly six parts (juz') of the Qur'an, i.e. from the
fourth to the tenth. Without doubt it consists of scattered leaves of
the Qur'an attributed to the Imam that were collected and bound without
attention to sequence.

**13. The Codex of al 'Imam al-Husayn (A)**

It consists of 41 folios of deerskin in the Kufic script with the
inscription the sixteenth juz' of the Qur'an starting from verse 72 of
Surat al-Kahf and ending with the last verse of Surat Ta Ha. 65 Each of
the pages of this pocket-size codex have seven lines. Its serial number
is 14.

**14. The Codex of 'Aqabah ibn 'Amir**

It was written in the Kufic script in 52/672 by 'Aqabah ibn 'Amir, a
Companion of the Prophet (S) who lived in Damascus. He was appointed in
44/664 by Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan as the governor of Egypt where he
died in 58/678. He used to recite the Qur'an in a good voice. 66 In
Taqrib al-tahdhib, his tenure in Egypt is mentioned as three year and it
goes on to add that he was a faqih and a scholar. Al-Suyuti, in Husn al
muhadarah writes: He was an eloquent qari and a faqih among the sahabah.
67 This Qur'an is kept at the al-'Amanah Library, Istanbul, with the
serial number 40. Its microfilm, numbered 10, exists at Mahad al
Makhtutat al-'Arabiyyah, Cairo.68 **15. The Codex of Khadij ibn
Mu'awiyah**

Another codex exists in the Maghribi script by Khadij ibn Mu'awiyah ibn
Salamah al-'Ansari, who is definitely other than the father of Rafi' ibn
Khadij, a Companion, because the grandfather of Rafi (the father of
Khadij) is 'Adi and the father of this Khadij is Mu'awiyah. 69 Khadij
completed this codex in 47/667 at the city of Qayrawan for Amir 'Aqabah
ibn Nafi' al-Fahri. It is kept at the al-'Amariah Library, Istanbul,
with the number 44. Its microfilm, numbered 9, is at Ma'had al Makhtutat
al 'Arabiyyah, Cairo. **16. The Codex of al 'Imam Zayn al 'Abidin
(A)**

It is attributed to al-'Imam al Sajjad Zayn al Abidin 'Ali ibn
al-Husayn (A) and is kept at the library of Astaneh-ye Quds-e Radawi,
under the serial number 15. Its deerskin folios of 30x20 cms size
contain from verse 180 of Surat al-Baqarah to the end of the Qur'an.
Subsequently the original folios were bound and the margins were
illuminated. **17. The Codex of al Imam al-Sadiq (A)**

The codex attributed to Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (A) is kept at the
al-'Amanah Library, Istanbul, and has been given the number 39. Its
microfilm bearing number 11 is at the Ma'had al Makhtutat al-'Arabiyyah
70 **18. The Codex of al-'Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (A)**

The codex attributed to Musa ibn Ja'far (A) contains verses beginning
from verse 265 of Surat al-Baqarah and ending with verse 84 of Surat Al
'Imran. It is written on medium octavo folios with each page comprising
6 lines. It is kept at the library of al-'Imam al-Rida's shrine and
bears the serial number 20. It has been endowed to the sacred shrine by
Shah 'Abbas Safawi. In earlier times the text and the margins of this
Qur'an written on parchment were pasted with a thick paper of the same
color. **19. The Codex of al-'Imam al-Rida (A)**

The codex attributed to al-'Imam al-Rid a (A) bears the number 86 of
the library of the Astaneh-ye Quds-e Radawi. It contains only a part of
the Qur'an71 written on octavo size deerskin folios with each page
containing 16 lines. On the first page is written:

bears an, oval seal with the inscription In addition to the
aforementioned codices, there are many other 'ancient codices in the
Kufic script some of which even do not have such marks as the madd and
shaddah, which came to be used in Qur'anic writing only later. Most of
them have red dots in the place of the now usual diacritical marks
(i'rab) because that was the mode of indicating 'vowels before the use
of i'rab. Most of them do not contain the name of the scribe and the
date of completion, because most of their pages have been lost or have
been scattered into several parts.

Such manuscripts, which are present in large numbers in museums and
libraries around the world, have been - according to the experts who
date them - mostly written between the 2nd/8th and 4th/10th centuries
when the Naskhi script had not yet replaced the Kufic script. Precious
specimens of these manuscripts can be seen at the exquisite collection
of the Astaneh-ye Quds-e Radawi, the Iran Bastan Museum, the museum of
the shrine at Qumm, the library and museum of Shiraz and Kitabkhanehye
Waziri at Yazd, as well as several libraries abroad.


