About the Author
================

Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari is the son of the late Ayatullah Sayyid Ali
Asghar Lari, one of the great religious scholars and social
personalities of Iran. His grandfather was the late Ayatullah Hajj
Sayyid Abd ul-Husayn Lari, who fought for freedom in the Constitutional
Revolution. In the course of his lengthy struggles against the
tyrannical government of the time he attempted to establish an Islamic
government and succeeded in doing so for a short time in Larestan. 

Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari was born in 1314/1925 in the city of Lar
where he completed his primary education and his preliminary Islamic
studies. In 1332/1953 he departed for Qum to continue his study of the
Islamic sciences studying under the professors and teachers of the
religious institution including the main authorities in jurisprudence
(maraji'). 

In 1341/1962, he became a collaborator of Maktab-i-lslam, a religious
and scientific journal, writing a series of articles on Islamic ethics.
These articles were later collected into a book published under the
title Ethical and Psychological Problems. Nine editions of the Persian
original of this book have been published, and it has also been
translated into Arabic and most recently English. 

In 1342/1963 he travelled to Germany for medical treatment, and
returning to Iran after a stay of several months, he wrote a book called
TheFace of Western Civilization. Thebook includes a comparative
discussion of Western and Islamic civilization, and in it, the author
seeks to prove, by way of a comprehensive, reasoned, and exact
comparison, the superiority of the comprehensive and multidimensional
civilization of Islam to that of the West. This book has recently been
reprinted for the seventh time.

In 1349/1970 it was translated into English by a British Orientalist, F.
G. Goulding and it aroused much attention in Europe. Articles concerning
the book appeared in several Western periodicals and the BBC arranged an
interview with the translator in which the reasons for translating the
book and the reception accorded it in England were discussed. The
English version of the book has up to now been printed three times in
England, five times in Iran and twice in America. 

About three years after the publication of the English translation,
Rudolf Singler, a German university professor translated it into German
and the version he produced proved influential in Germany. One of the
leaders of the Social Democratic Party informed the translator in a
letter that the book had left a profound impression upon him causing him
to change his views of Islam and that he would recommend the book to his
friends . The German translation has now been reprinted three times. 

The English and German versions of the book were reprinted by the
Ministry of Islamic Guidance for wide distribution abroad through the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Islamic Students' Associations
abroad. 

At the same time that the first printing of the German translation was
published an Indian Muslim scholar by the name of Maulana Raushan Ali
translated it into Urdu for distribution in India and Pakistan. This
Urdu translation has now been reprinted five times. 

Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari has also written a pamphlet on tawhid (divine
unity) which was translated in England and published several times in
America. 

In 1343/1964 he established a charitable organization in Lar with the
purposes of propagating Islam, teaching Islam to rural youth and helping
the needy. This organization remained active until 1346/1967. Its main
accomplishments were the dispatch of students of the religious sciences
to the countryside to teach Islam to children and young people;
providing thousands of school children with clothing, books and writing
equipment; building a number of mosques, schools, and clinics in towns
and villages; and the provision of miscellaneous services. 

Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari pursued his interest in Islamic ethics and
writing new articles on the subject. In 1353/1974 a collection of these
articles, revised and supplemented, appeared in book form under the
title “The Function of Ethics in Human Development”. This book has now
been reprinted six times. 

In 1357/1978 he travelled to America at the invitation of an Islamic
organization in that country. He then went to England and France and
after returning to Iran began writing a series of articles on Islamic
ideology for the magazine Soroush. These articles were later collected
in a four volume book on the fundamental beliefs of Islam (tawhid,
divine justice, prophethood, imamate, and resurrection) under the title
“The Foundations of Islamic Doctrine”. 

This four volume work has been translated into Arabic, some parts of it
having already been printed three times. The English translation of the
first volume of this work forms the present book, the remaining volumes
will also be translated and published. Urdu, Hindi and French
translations are also underway; two volumes of the French translation
have already appeared. 

In 1359/1980, Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari established an organization in
Qum called Office for the Diffusion of Islamic Culture Abroad. It
dispatches free copies of his translated works to interested persons
throughout the world. It has also undertaken the printing of a Quran for
free distribution among Muslim individuals, institutions and religious
schools in Africa.   
  


