Resurrection from the Sleep of Death
====================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُشَّعًا أَبْصَارُهُمْ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ كَأَنَّهُمْ
جَرَادٌ مُّنتَشِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Their eyes cast down, going forth from their graves as if they were
scattered locusts. (al-Qamar, 54/7)***

Metaphors and similes are effective rhetorical devices used in
literature to eloquently convey the intended meaning. Three aspects make
up every simile: the first entity, the second entity (which is being
compared to the first) and the similitude between the two. However, the
important point in order to appreciate the eloquence of the speaker or
the skill employed in constructing the imagery contained in the phrase
is to understand the similitude correctly, because the reason for using
the simile to convey the intended meaning is embedded in the type of
similitude that has been used.

Especially in the case of Divine revelation and the Qur’anic verses,
which are precise and full of meaning, it is important to ponder more
carefully about the various aspects of similarity between the two
objects which are being used in a simile, in order to uncover even more
of the fascinating secrets contained in God’s words and to enable man to
imbibe from the limitless oceans of God’s knowledge to the extent of his
own capacity.

In their exegesis of this verse, the eminent commentators of the Qur’an
have explained that the basis of the similitude is the swarming of
mankind out their graves and scattering out into the plains of the place
of gathering (*mahshar*), because of the momentous advent of the day of
Judgement. That explosive event will be heralded by the destruction of
the universe and the abrupt collapse of the cosmic order and the
emergence of mankind from their graves. It will be such a terrifying and
dreadful event that men will scatter in confusion and disperse aimlessly
just like locusts when they swarm out of their larvae. They will begin
to move, but not consciously towards any destination.

The commentators have correctly explained the usage of this simile based
on the description (*muntashir*) which comes at the end of the verse,
and have painted a picture of the extraordinary state of confusion and
terror that will prevail upon mankind on that day, when every order that
is familiar to them will have been transformed; nevertheless, it would
be better not to confine the discussion to just this one aspect of the
similitude, but to explore the meaning of its other aspects also. This
would allow us to better understand the object of the verse, which is to
describe the astonishing scenes of the great day of judgement.

There is no doubt that one day the present order in the cosmos will
undergo a tumultuous upheaval, and following a cataclysmic event, it
will be brought to an abrupt end. Not only shall the earth be subjected
to convulsion and turmoil, but the stars will also die and the galaxies
will break up and fall silent; in other words, that universal explosion
will devastate the heavens and the earth simultaneously, and the
prevailing system and order in creation will be completely transformed,
bringing an end to the life of the universe and its inhabitants and the
annals of created beings.

Indeed, this total annihilation of the cosmos, in which no single
creation will be identifiable, is the inevitable future of our world.
Then, graves will be upturned, and the earth, in obedience to the
directive of its Lord, shall reveal the age-old contents and secrets
that she had hidden in her bosom, and lighten her burden.

If man looks at the constitution of his own body, which is made up of
various elements found in the earth and water, he will realize that this
body will one day be absorbed into the earth and provide sustenance for
fruits and plants and thus be dissipated all over the world; or his
molecules might be ultimately shaped into drops of water that find place
in the vast oceans.

The elements that make up our bodies are the result of changes that have
occurred under a special set of causes and conditions; not only does the
body of every human being reach its form through the same procedure, but
when it decomposes and decays into atoms at the end of its life, it once
more becomes sustenance available to other life forms. And in this way
the constituent elements of one body are preserved, even while
transmuted, in the world. Therefore the idea of a renewal of life after
death is not difficult for man to picture.

Why should it not be possible to rejoin these scattered substances,
which have been dispersed to every remote corner, by gathering them all
from the embrace of the earth and the clutches of the winds, and bring
them together in a new form and shape? In fact, at the beginning of its
creation, the same thing had occurred, and in the same manner.

This was a glance at one aspect of the astonishing and abiding greatness
of God regarding the arrival of the day of judgement.

However, it seems that what is more important and arresting in the
simile used in the verse above describing the dispersal and thronging of
mankind on the day of gathering (*mashhar*), is their emergence from
their graves which resembles the swarming of locusts out of the ground.

The beginning of the verse alludes to this also. Human beings lie in the
earth after death for an interval, waiting for the command of God to
bring the dead back to life and to emerge from the graves.

This will occur after the second blowing of the trumpet and the piercing
shout, which will envelop the entirety of creation and immediately bring
humanity back to life and out of their graves. Similarly, locust larvae
lie dormant and buried in the earth just like the dead. The pregnant
locusts insert their bodies into the ground and lay their eggs deep in
the earth and then secret a liquid over the eggs to cover them. This
liquid protects them from the elements and in fact, forms a temporary
tomb for them.

The larva capsule of the locust remains inert in the ground just like a
dead corpse in the tomb that has been prepared for it to be buried in;
although it possesses a very thin and delicate wall, the wall is
sufficient to protect the larva for the necessary time. In fact, it is
just like the shroud (*kafan*) that has been wrapped around the body of
a dead person.

During the autumn and winter months, the larvae remain motionless and
then, when spring comes, they open up to release the locust within. The
insects are now ready to bring to an end their waiting (*barzakh*) and
to leave their tombs. After emerging out of the ground, according to
certain factors and circumstances, they take to flight.

Indeed, the situation with dead humans is the very same. The various
parts of the human body that have decomposed into the earth are changed
like everything else, according to the laws of nature. By the will of
God, they will become enlivened at the advent of the day of judgement,
and just like the newly hatched locusts, they shall emerge from their
graves and hurry to the appointed meeting place of *mahshar*. They would
display their original features which were shrouded and hidden; once
more the human being would have his essential being restored in a new
form.

The simile employed by the Qur’an is possible the most accurate and
subtle similitude in this regard, and can be readily understood and
perceived by every individual. The verse clearly portrays the state of
man when he is restored to life.

God informs his servants and advises them to observe the newly-hatched
locusts as they emerge from their tombs in the earth, and then bring to
mind the beginning of their own new lives when they will also come out
of the earth. In this manner they will be convinced that this event will
certainly come to pass and that their own fate will unfold in the same
manner and that that day is waiting for him.

Man’s constitution can accept various changes but he will not accept
that the kernel of his being should become non-existent. Through this
example, he will see that just like other bodies, the characteristics of
his constitution are lost but nothing is lessened from his essence. In
fact, his essence and ego remain conscious and indestructible throughout
all his evolution, until the day of his final reckoning arrives.

According to the views stated above and through the use of such an
elegant simile, one can translate the verse under study as follows:
“They go forth from the graves like locusts and are scattered on the
plains of the gathering-place (*mahshar*).”, contrary to the usual
translations which state, “They go forth from their graves, and like
locusts are scattered on the plains of the gathering-place
(*mahshar*).” [^1]  
    
    
  

[^1]: In the science of rhetoric (‘ilm al-ma’ani), there is a discussion
about negation (salb) and affirmation (ijab) in a sentence; if the
similitude in a simile is positive (affirmative simile), then it applies
to both the adjective and the noun of the simile. Now in the verse under
discussion, the word jirad (locusts) has been described by the
adjective muntashir (scattered), therefore the similitude which is the
“emergence from graves” applies to both muntashir as well as jirad.


