The Wise Counsel of Luqman
==========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ لُقْمَانُ لِابْنِهِ وَهُوَ يَعِظُهُ يَا بُنَيَّ لَا
تُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son! do not
associate aught with Allah; most surely polytheism is a grievous
iniquity (Luqman, 31/13)***

Human life is governed by a system of personal responsibility. Duties
begin from the earliest stages of life and continue till its end; at no
moment can an individual claim freedom or separation from some form of
obligation. As long as ability exists, it has an associated
responsibility attached to it, and only when death finally catches up
with a person, it brings to a close the roster of his duties also.

Generally, the sense of responsibility is based on intellectual
principles, and the reasons for abiding by the laws of religion also go
back to these same principles. This is because, in societal affairs as
well as personal life, religious laws and directives conform to the
general perception of the intellect. As an individual’s understanding
and awareness deepens, his desire and readiness to discharge his
responsibilities will increase and intensify, because awareness of ones
responsibilities and obligations is an essential prerequisite for the
felicity of mankind.

The effect of conduct and actions is far greater than that of
conversation and speech; the personal qualities of a teacher and the
manner of his behaviour have a great and fundamental impact on his
students. Practical training by example has a crucial effect on the
minds of those being nurtured, and influences their character to an
extent that cannot be compared to mere literal and verbal exhortation.

When an individual wants to become a mentor and oversee the spiritual
and moral training of others, even if uses the most advanced techniques
of teaching, he still needs to have exemplary personal qualities so that
he can create a suitable environment for nurturing excellence. He must
be able to transfer the wealth of God-wariness (*taqwa*) into the
confines of minds and thoughts so that he can bring about an internal
revolution in his charges, the most important of which is to foster the
virtues of sincerity (*ikhlas*) and safeguarding their minds from
corruption.

One who seeks success in nurturing, must himself display impeccable
virtue and moral conduct, so that his words and advice have the desired
effect; otherwise, if he is lax in performing his own duties, it is
obvious that his efforts at nurturing others will be in vain. This is
especially the case when his actions and manners are closely observed by
the students who then find his words inconsistent with his acts.

When a mentor’s inner self is devoid of *taqwa* of the all-Creator and
he himself does not lead a virtuous life, people will evaluate and judge
him and find his conduct wanting, and consequently common trust in him
will be shaken and weakened. People will not then be prepared to accept
him as a guide and role model in order to achieve moral excellence.

In the verses under discussion, through a series of his recommendations
and sagacious counsel, we are introduced to the wisdom of Luqman, who
had access to the ultimate source of knowledge and information. His
radiant face was familiar and famous amongst his people; and the best
utterances and insights of the day could not match even excerpts of his
statements.

This learned sage turns his attention to the moral training of his son
with particular care and creativeness. He addresses his son by giving
him beneficial advice, and by explaining to him the correct course and
the nature of his duties. He shows him how to lead a noble life, through
which the maxims of spiritual and moral values can best be experienced.

In the beginning, in order to motivate his son, to energise the
intuitive truths latent in him and to guide him towards his ultimate
goal, he clearly sets out for him his duties towards his Creator and
reminds him of God’s unity. This is to illuminate his mind and insight
so that he becomes able to prevent himself from deviating from the path
of monotheism (*tawhid*) and straying into polytheism (*shirk*).
Therefore, he counsels him in the following words:

> وَإِذْ قَالَ لُقْمَانُ لِابْنِهِ وَهُوَ يَعِظُهُ يَا بُنَيَّ لَا
> تُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّ الشِّرْكَ لَظُلْمٌ عَظِيمٌ {o} وَوَصَّيْنَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْإِنسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ وَهْنًا عَلَى وَهْنٍ
وَفِصَالُهُ فِي عَامَيْنِ أَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيْكَ إِلَيَّ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Luqman said to his son while he admonished him: O my son! Do
not associate aught with Allah; most surely polytheism is a grievous
iniquity. And We have enjoined upon man concerning his parents - His
mother bears him in weakness upon weakness, and his*** ***weaning is in
two years - Give thanks unto Me and unto your parents. Unto Me is the
journeying. (Luqman, 31/13-14)***

In the first verse, mention is made of how Luqman draws his son’s
attention to this exalted truth so that he would not digress into the
swamp of error, but rather discover that behind the apparent world and
the intricate complexity of creation, there exists a single unique Power
who has originated the system of the universe and who controls and
regulates it according to an elaborate scheme and an all-knowing
intention and purpose. Therefore, only such a sublime existence deserves
to be worshipped. In this regard, he must fulfil his duty towards this
Eternal, Needless Being and continually express his thanks and gratitude
to Him.

In the second verse, the words of Luqman are cut off, and his silence
here raises a question: why did Luqman stop talking at this point? After
explaining to his son his responsibilities towards his Lord, it was
necessary next to outline his duties towards his parents so that he
could properly discharge his responsibilities to his mother and father.

It seems that the reason why Luqman became silent at this juncture and
did not elaborate upon the duties of a child towards its father and
mother is contained in the subtle point that in this case, it was Luqman
himself who was the father. If he brought up the subject of filial
obligations, which included politeness, respect and gratitude to the
father, it would be as if he was requesting his son to display this
behaviour to him personally. It would be tantamount to asking his son to
repay him for all his efforts and guidance throughout his childhood and
later years, to obey his directives and to never forget his favours.

The speech of a distinguished and wise man like Luqman, who had gathered
within his personality so many diverse virtues, cannot be interpreted in
this manner, and in truth, it would be an injustice to his station to do
so. Secondly, by himself reminding his son of his filial responsibility
Luqman is in fact pointing out to his son’s his obligation and
indebtedness to himself, an act which does not befit a man who has
attained such a high spiritual station.

By considering this subtle and significant matter of courtesy, we can
understand the reason why Luqman stops speaking at this point, and
through his meaningful silence, appreciate his exemplary moral
qualities. As Luqman falls silent and refrains from mentioning the
filial responsibilities of a child, Divine revelation takes over and
instructs mankind about the rights of parents.

Naturally, Luqman’s son is also obliged to toil his utmost to fulfil his
duty towards his father and mother in obedience to the command of God.
Once more, Luqman begins to speak and continues to counsel his son, this
time advising him about his duties toward his fellow members of society:

> يَا بُنَيَّ أَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ وَأْمُرْ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَانْهَ عَنِ
> الْمُنكَرِ وَاصْبِرْ عَلَى مَا أَصَابَكَ إِنَّ ذَلِكَ مِنْ عَزْمِ
> الْأُمُورِ {o} وَلَا تُصَعِّرْ خَدَّكَ لِلنَّاسِ وَلَا تَمْشِ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْأَرْضِ مَرَحًا إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O my son! Keep up prayer and enjoin the good and forbid the evil, and
bear patiently that which befalls you; indeed these acts require
courage; and do not turn your face away from*** ***people in contempt,
nor go about in the land exulting overmuch; surely God does not love any
self-conceited boaster. (Luqman, 31/17-18)***

In this part of his speech Luqman advises his son about the fundamental
external traits which he should adopt so that he may preserve himself
from corrupting his soul; in the same way, from amongst the many inner
moral vices, he singles out one. He admonishes his son, who is about to
enter and participate in society, to beware of behaving with conceit,
which would be an outward manifestation of the negative aspects of his
personality, and it would have far-reaching consequences.  If arrogance
becomes part of an individual’s character it will affect every aspect of
his personal and social interactions, inevitably resulting in his
downfall and disgrace in the society.

In addition, arrogance always results in an adverse reaction from the
people and opens the door to general dislike towards the conceited
individual. This backlash makes societal life difficult for everyone and
thus, it was necessary that Luqman’s son took his father’s advice
seriously and avoided that which, in his father’s wise judgement, was
against the moral code of society life, and which make it difficult to
form sound relationships with his fellow citizens. He must realize that
selfishness and egotism only lead to loss, and is never the desirable
course; moreover, God detests arrogant behaviour, Finally, selfishness
is a factor which stunts man’s spiritual progress and becomes an
obstacle in his journey to the proximity of God.

Thereafter, Luqman counsels his son to inculcate in himself righteous
traits, and purify his soul from that which would corrupt it, as this
was the only way to ultimate felicity and salvation. He urges him to
always adopt moderation in his conduct, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاقْصِدْ فِي مَشْيِكَ وَاغْضُضْ مِن صَوْتِكَ إِنَّ أَنكَرَ
الْأَصْوَاتِ لَصَوْتُ الْحَمِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And pursue the middle course in your going about and lower your
voice; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the asses.
(Luqman, 31/19)***

 


