The Expansive Earth
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالأَرْضَ فَرَشْنَاهَا فَنِعْمَ الْمَاهِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the earth, We have made it a wide extent; how well have We then
spread (it) out. (al-Dhariyat, 51/47)***

> وَالأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنبَتْنَا
> فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَّوْزُونٍ {o} وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَعَايِشَ وَمَن لَّسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the earth - We have spread it forth and made in it firm mountains
and caused to grow in it of every suitable thing. And We have made in it
means of subsistence for you and for him whom you cannot sustain.
(al-Hijr, 15/18-19)***

> أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ كِفَاتًا {o} أَحْيَاء وَأَمْوَاتًا

***Have We not made the earth to draw together to itself; (prepared for)
the living and the dead? (al-Mursalat, 77/25-26)***

One of the branches of the ever-increasing knowledge of mankind in
contemporary times is the methodology of exploiting the earth’s natural
resources and God-given treasures. Scientists have always been
apprehensive that unplanned tapping of the existing resources would
engender problems for future generations. For this reason, elaborate and
extensive programs and projects have been designed by experts to
optimally utilize the natural resources, which are an influential factor
in the determination of the wellbeing of human societies.

Many conferences have been held to discuss the soundest way to exploit
these natural resources, so that adequate attention is paid to the
fundamental and vital needs of humanity as well as ensuring that these
needs are met in a balanced and equitable manner. No scientist will
endorse the principle that each individual is free to exploit nature in
a manner that is to his sole and limitless advantage.

However, God, the All-wise – whose wisdom is barely reflected by the
entirety of man’s knowledge – had also made arrangements for this
important issue at the time of the creation of the earth; indeed this is
a proof of the intelligent, knowledgeable and capable design that
underpins existence. He made man aware of these blessings and invited
him to make lawful use of them. Man has been required to take advantage
of the Divine bounties in the earth in a thoughtful manner and not to
give way to excess and overindulgence in an attempt to acquire as much
as possible, which would ultimately cause a disparity between needs and
consumption. If these resources are managed correctly through a system
of organization and control, then neither scarcity will affect them nor
will these plentiful resources be depleted.

In the days when the human population was not even one-third of the
present number and many of the earth’s resources had yet to be
discovered, poverty and famine arising from ruined crops was much more
common than it is today. Indigence and hunger were constant afflictions
and would cause widespread death amongst human societies.

Nowadays, although the earth’s population has increased manifold, those
unfavourable circumstances no longer prevail (in the same abundance),
even though contentment and moderation in consumption is not only less
than in previous times, but has given way to wastage and shameful
excesses. Furthermore, in order to balance their markets, many countries
actually destroy a substantial amount of their agricultural produce
annually, a fact that distresses the heart of every free-thinking
individual.

Thus, poverty and scarcity arises due to the method of exploiting
resources and its disproportionate distribution – and not because of a
decrease in the earth’s natural resources themselves – and consequent to
the clash between demand and profiteering and the corruption that arises
as a result, the social fabric and harmony is torn apart; in reality
this unfair utilization of resources is due the culture of excess on the
one hand, and the absence of contentment and the insatiable appetites of
today’s greedy and selfish  individuals on the other.

Let us also cast a glance at the very distant past:  
 It is not known when the earth initially acquired the capacity to
support life and when the first living creatures appeared, developed and
multiplied on it. The exact date when man walked on earth is likewise
shrouded in mystery and thus far no convincing answer to this riddle has
been presented by researchers. Whatever has been postulated in this
regard is based on a chain of theories and suppositions and not on any
conclusive and well-accepted facts.

If we consider this earth, we find that we do not know how old it is,
nor do we have any method to determine its age with any certainty, and
every opinion on this matter is no more than a conjecture, which does
not shed much light on its past and its true nature. When historians
commonly disagree about events that are just a few centuries old, what
kind of theory can reliably explain an episode that occurred in the
system of creation several million, or rather billions of years ago?

We do not even know when life and subsequently, man, first appeared on
earth; what we do know for certain, however, is that God has provided an
abundant variety of materials for the benefit and needs of every living
thing (humans, animals and vegetation) without the least
parsimoniousness.

Every creature and plant can draw sustenance and nutrients for its
survival and development from the earth. Since the earth is limited in
size, it follows that the food it can produce is also limited. These
limitations seem to indicate that the earth would be unable to provide
for the needs of all its inhabitants over a prolonged period of time.

This however, through an astonishingly complex and regulated system that
governs this small planet – which has so many diverse and different
aspects and is intricately linked to its store of resources – every
living creature and plant receives its sustenance. And this has been the
case from the obscure beginning of creation, and will continue till the
end of time, while the resources are not exhausted or even diminished.
This amazing miracle of creation is a fact that is undeniable and in
this regard, the Qur’an declares that the earth has the capacity to
support the entirety of its inhabitants and satisfy their various and
diverse needs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ وَمَن لَّسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have made in it means of subsistence for you and for him whom
you cannot sustain. (al-Hijr, 15/19)***

And so we see a constant and continuous process in the earth which
progresses in association with a special system of controls on a
pre-planned and guided course.

When man desired to build houses and the supplies he needed were bricks,
stone and lime, God placed these simple materials at his disposal so
that he could take steps to alleviate his basic needs and make a shelter
for himself.

However, nowadays, due to urban overpopulation, especially as people
move into the main townships, and due to the problems associated with
overcrowding and the increased communication of people with one another,
man even needs buildings with more than one hundred storeys. In His
infinite wisdom and knowledge that encompasses every particle in the
universe of existence, God endowed within the earth – many millions of
years ago - the raw materials that would one day be used for
construction (stone and clay and iron) in the shape of quarries and
mines. He then inspired man to create and invent and made these
materials accessible to him so that he may advance in the world by
extracting these pre-prepared stores from the depths of the earth and
utilizing them in providing for his needs.

The foregoing discussion described the adequacy of the earth’s resources
in catering for the needs of mankind and his fellow creatures throughout
its history and for as long as life-forms exist on it and wish to make
use of its provisions.

The Qur’an also emphasises this very same point, and adds that the earth
not only sustains every living being, but accommodates the dead as
well. [^1]15

Although man’s development and transformation will never evolve away
from his fundamental humanness and the essence of his existence and
constitution, nevertheless, in his material trappings, man has come a
long way in the course of time, and this is evident across the world.

Death is the inescapable end of every living being that inhabits the
earth and the earth itself is ever ready to welcome the remains of the
dead in its embrace. Sooner or later, the bodies of humans go back to
the earth, as do the carcasses of animals. Every variety of vegetation –
from leaves to the trunks of trees – is likewise gradually assimilated
into the earth’s stores.

Therefore the earth is at once the main support for human life and the
source from which mankind can gather bounties, as well as the burial
place for all living things; thus, the Qur’an states:

> أَلَمْ نَجْعَلِ الْأَرْضَ كِفَاتًا {o} أَحْيَاء وَأَمْوَاتًا

***Have We not made the earth to draw together to itself; the living and
the dead. (al-Mursalat, 77/25-26)***

That which resonates with the principles of nature is purpose and the
pursuit of perfection; indeed these are the distinct and well known
properties that permeate creation and are the immediate and consecutive
fruits of Divine planning. Therefore, imperfection and diminution –
which are the outcomes of chaos and unwise planning – have no place or
meaning in the system of existence.

Thus, when we contemplate the foundations of existence, we come to
realize that it abounds with splendour, grandeur and greatness. The
Qur’an states in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا تَرَى فِي خَلْقِ الرَّحْمَنِ مِن تَفَاوُتٍ فَارْجِعِ الْبَصَرَ
هَلْ تَرَى مِن فُطُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***You will not see any incongruity in the creation of the Beneficent
Lord; then look again, can you see any disorder? (al-Mulk, 67/3)***

Behind the system of creation of the all-Merciful God, one will not find
inadequacy and disorderliness; carefully look again and again, do you
see any flaw? No!

Therefore, indifference towards, and ignorance of the various phenomena
that are manifested in the world and of what goes on around mankind, has
consequences that will form obstacles to the ultimate felicity of
humanity.

[^1]:  Have We not made the earth to draw together to itself; the living
and the dead (Al-Mursalat, 77/25,26)


