Guidance in Nature
==================

> وَأَلْقَى فِي الأَرْضِ رَوَاسِيَ أَن تَمِيدَ بِكُمْ وَأَنْهَارًا
> وَسُبُلاً لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ {o} وَعَلامَاتٍ وَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And He has cast great mountains in the earth lest it might be
convulsed with you, and rivers and roads that you may go aright; and
landmarks; and by the stars they find the right way. (al-Nahl,
16/15-16)***

The term “guidance” always brings to one’s mind the notion of spiritual
instruction and direction. However, in the case of God Almighty and His
constant and widespread grace, we cannot confine this term to such a
narrow sense. A study of the great organization of the cosmos and the
intricate detail of our own creation makes us reach the conclusion that
the system of existence is founded on a set of essential principles in
which every creation and phenomenon has its particular place and role.
The Creator has guided every one of His creations according to its
nature and composition and has prepared a program for every aspect and
phase of its existence.

It is not possible for a creature to acquire existence or reach
perfection and yet be independent of God’s nurturing influence; giving
new life, bestowing bounties and conferring favours are amongst the
distinctive prerogatives of the Creator, and the signs of this
invigoration and constant bestowal and favour are clearly evident and
manifest in every creation:

1.    Existential or universal guidance (hidayat-e takwini)
-----------------------------------------------------------

Muslim thinkers unanimously agree that within the scheme of creation,
God guides every creature towards its physical perfection; from the
smallest cell, whose internal processes are governed by a special
system, to the most magnificent phenomena in the cosmos – despite all
their wonders, whenever they attain a certain station, they require and
receive the guidance reserved for that station.

Indeed, everything is in utter need of Him so that not only may He allow
it to achieve its inner potential, but also so that he may gently coax
it along the correct direction of development through His permeating
radiance. If it was not for this guidance, the entire universe would
never be able to stand fast and become stable – in fact, it would not be
able to even realise a tinge of existence.

2.    Legislative or prescriptive guidance (hidayat-e tashri’i)
---------------------------------------------------------------

Just as the order of life has originated from the boundless wisdom and
knowledge of God, guidance about the purpose of man in the system of
existence is likewise from God, because the necessary consequence of
life and intellect is to have an objective and goal. Aside from the
intuitive knowledge that is inherent in every human being and which
assists him in recognizing certain truths so that he may freely, without
any preconceptions, choose his path based on this essential inner
faculty (*fitra*), external guidance that would strengthen and support
the intellect and the*fitra* is also necessary. This is so that he may
reform the rebellious and immoderate elements in his temperament as well
as protect his intellect and *fitra* from perversion.

Just as God Almighty guided man to seek physical perfection through the
instinct of self-interest, He likewise guided him to reach human
perfection through the agency of legislative or prescriptive directives,
in addition to the guidance of the *fitra*. This is because when
existential guidance encounters self-interest, it requires some
assistance.

God appointed Prophets (A) to come to the aid of man, to take his hand
and introduce him to the subtle cognitive abilities latent in his
own *fitra* and to enliven his positive and noble inclinations and
motivations and inspire him to use these faculties in the manner they
were meant to be used, and point out to him all the impediments that
might obstruct his journey towards perfection.

It should be noted that this guidance is a manifestation of God’s grace
and a preparation to examine the worthiness of the individual and to
determine the kind of reward he will earn through his actions; it is not
mean to divest man of choice or the power of independent rational
thought and to extinguish the radiance of his free will, rather this is
the manner in which the measure of the excellences and failures of
individuals is manifested. Every human being can use the internal and
external Divine guidance at his disposal to ennoble his actions and
ascend the ladder towards intellectual maturity and perfection. Indeed,
the path to perfection does not accept stagnation and man’s ascent will
not take place until he consciously takes steps to fundamentally
transform himself.  
  

3.    Guidance about the needs of life (hidayat-e zisti)
--------------------------------------------------------

When we look at the life forms that inhabit the world as a whole and
analyse their various aspects, we find that all members of this system
occupy a position appropriate to their specific status. And when a
particular subset of the creation is subjected to the laws of nature it
starts to flourish in its preordained direction. From this perspective
we can clearly see the general equilibrium that exists in the world
between these members of creation (in the human, animal and plant
kingdoms), all of whom possess their own intrinsic guidance.

When we analyse the characteristics of animals we conclude that their
natural constitutions and habitats are totally different from that of
plant matter, because nature does not place their sustenance at their
disposal; rather animals have to ceaselessly forage and hunt to provide
food for themselves, and obviously this necessitates the development of
the appropriate tools and appendages for the task.

However, man who has reached higher stations and who possesses a
determined and free will, is still at a lower level when it comes to his
instincts. His physical constitution is comparatively weak and poorly
equipped and he is much less able to withstand physical trauma than
animals; indeed, it takes him many years to become self-sufficient and
able to cater for his own needs. These particular characteristics which
embrace all creatures are the means to the gradual progression towards
perfection.

The verse above discusses a type of guidance that helps man in his daily
life, and sheds light on some of the mysterious realities of creation.
God the Almighty, who is the source of mercy, and whose grace is
continually flowing throughout the cosmos, has not neglected to create a
variety of natural features and combinations of structures in the
complex systems of the world which serve to guide its inhabitants during
the course of their earthly lives.

The Creator of the cosmos – that grand Designer and Possessor of
limitless power – has granted to His creatures special and wondrous
perceptive powers and sensitivity so that they are able to live and
flourish to achieve perfection. These abilities allow them to adopt the
correct path in the journey that each must undertake in this world, and
guide them in the course of their amazing lives.

When Musa (A) was asked by Fir‘awn to introduce his Lord, he replied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَى كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(to its goal) [Ta Ha, 20/50].***

Animals and birds have an acute sense of direction by which they
accurately navigate distances. During the course of their lives, birds
use this mysterious sense to easily move between their nests and remote
feeding places without ever losing their way back.

The knowledge that every creature possesses is a bounty that has been
placed in its essence and the majesty and grandeur of creation is amply
manifested by these wondrous abilities that we see in different
creatures.

Migratory birds sometimes travel across hundreds of kilometres to reach
their destination, where they live for a long time before flying back
along the same route until they unerringly return to their starting
point.

What kind of compass do these birds use, that is so faultless and
accurate, to be able to cross vast distances, stay in foreign lands for
several months and then return back to their point of origin? Even today
human science has not been able to completely unravel that mystery.

Many scientists have conducted a variety of experiments to try to
understand more about the sense of direction that all birds possess and
they have not been able to inactivate it in an animal (even by
introducing different factors to confuse it); the birds are even able to
use this calculated system to produce many other wondrous (acrobatic)
movements within themselves which is a product of the same unknown
system.

During their migration, these birds form aerial flocks and converge from
different places and sometimes change places with one another creating a
beautiful and awe-inspiring pattern in flight. What instrument has been
placed in their nature and constitution that allows them to fly in
perfectly efficient formations without colliding with one another?

Consider airplanes, which possess many intricate components and
sensitive and advanced instruments; when they perform air manoeuvres,
they could never gather and fly together in close proximity in these
vast numbers and safely perform the various manoeuvres that birds
effortlessly exhibit.

Often, even modern airplanes, which undergo rigorous testing and are put
through planned simulations in an attempt to cope with any
eventualities, have had accidents and fatal crashes when they
participated in aerial displays.

Apart from birds, other animals and insects also follow established
systems and exhibit many forms of mysterious and unfathomable behaviour;
to fulfil their needs they make use of astonishing locating abilities
which are unique to their own species. Animals have been blindfolded and
relocated hundreds of kilometres away from their normal habitat, and yet
are amazingly able to return unerringly to their homes.

However, according to the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخُلِقَ الإِنسَانُ ضَعِيفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And man is created weak. (al-Nisa’, 4/27)***

Man is relatively weak physically and has no internal direction/location
system to speak of.  At the same time he possesses an efficient and
creative brain and a powerful intellect that is vastly superior to every
other creature.

In any case, the Divine hands fashioned natural phenomena to make up for
this deficiency in human bodies, so that they would serve man as beacons
and signposts for him, and alert and protect him on his travels from
possible dangers on his journey.

In ancient times the mode of travelling was confined to pack animals.
Often, during journeys which were undertaken across deserts and plains
which were devoid of mountains and hills, travellers would lose their
way and become exposed to severe perils. In many cases, they strayed
into unknown trails and lost their lives as a result. However, on routes
which were flanked by mountains on one side, there was less likelihood
of people getting lost because they could use them mountains as a
guiding landmark to reach their destinations.

The verses under study make clear that in order to compensate for the
lack of an internal radar system within man – a system that exists in
various forms in other living creatures – God prepared for man a natural
system to tell direction in the shape of mountains and hills and springs
and rivers and clefts inside mountains so that when man travelled in the
land form one place to another, these unchanging features would serve as
landmarks and signs for him to easily plot his course of travel.

Even in our times, with the advances in scientific knowledge, airplane
pilots, besides relying on their electronic systems to locate their
position, also use mountain ranges, rivers and geographical features to
check their course.

This is one of the innumerable blessings of God and is a testimony to
the various uses and benefits which these natural phenomena afford to
the inhabitants of the earth according to God’s plan, one of which is to
guide and direct human beings. The benefits of these natural features
are clearly visible when the sun shines forth warmly and brightly in the
day; both the heat and the light of this magnificent heavenly body
assist the inhabitants of the earth in their movements and travels.

For travel in the night also, God has created a system of stars in the
heavens whose light and sparkle guide the inhabitants of the earth in
the land and the seas. The system of the movement of the planets, stars,
sun and moon as they follow their ordained orbits, all serve to guide
man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبِالنَّجْمِ هُمْ يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And by the stars they find the right way. (al-Nahl, 16/16)***

A study of the horizons and a survey of how beneficial the various
natural phenomena are for mankind is in itself a source of spiritual
inspiration and knowledge about God.

We know that the cosmos is never-ending and therefore knowing and
understanding all of its secrets is also an infinitely difficult task;
man’s advancing knowledge is still unable to explain many of the
mysteries behind the phenomena that have been created for him. Despite
every one of these signs and systems, which can be witnessed and
perceived in nature, existing in such exalted planes, they cannot be
compared to the intricate and complex constitution of the human being
and the human intellect. For an individual who has intelligence and
insight – which are also granted by God creative will – this matter is
very instructive.

The existence of these landmarks throughout one’s journey from one place
to another is a matter of comfort and peace of mind, and everyone can
select the easiest path to reach their destination across nature’s
mountains, rivers and gullies. Additionally, in travelling through these
natural features they may contemplate on these signs of God and analyse
them; as they marvel at the many amazing sights scattered throughout the
world, they can witness the power and planning of God, most High. In
every single atom in the expanse of nature they will see a testimony to
the existence of the Source of creation and be thus inspired and guided.

The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ مَهْدًا وَجَعَلَ لَكُمْ فِيهَا سُبُلًا
لَّعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and made ways in it
for you so that you may be guided aright (al-Zukhruf, 43/9)***

From the term “*tahtadun*” – guided aright – in the two previous verses,
both meaning can be derived and from both we can get guidance; we
benefit from mountains and rivers and natural trails in the course of
our journeys and travel to our destinations without the anxiety and fear
of losing our way and we also benefit from witnessing these grand and
wondrous living phenomena, and through them appreciate the greater
Reality and the needless, unique and omnipotent Source, Whose qualities
are dimly reflected in man himself.

It is true that the understanding of a physiologist or curious scientist
who examines the intricate inner workings of an animal is far removed
from that of a layman who makes a simple study of the animal, however,
even though both look at creation from different angles, they come to
the same conclusion.  
  


