An Exposition of the Verse of Light (Ayat al-Nur)
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ
فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِي زُجَاجَةٍ الزُّجَاجَةُ كَأَنَّهَا
كَوْكَبٌ دُرِّيٌّ يُوقَدُ مِن شَجَرَةٍ مُّبَارَكَةٍ زَيْتُونِةٍ لَّا
شَرْقِيَّةٍ وَلَا غَرْبِيَّةٍ يَكَادُ زَيْتُهَا يُضِيءُ وَلَوْ لَمْ
تَمْسَسْهُ نَارٌ نُّورٌ عَلَى نُورٍ يَهْدِي اللَّهُ لِنُورِهِ مَن
يَشَاءُ وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth; a likeness of His
light is as a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp is in a glass, (and)
the glass is as it were a brightly shining star, lit from a blessed
olive-tree, neither eastern nor western, the oil whereof almost gives
light though fire touch it not – light upon light – Allah guides to His
light whom He pleases, and Allah sets forth parables for men, and Allah
is Cognizant of all things. (al-Nur, 24/35)***

Whenever there is a discussion about achieving a complete and
comprehensive knowledge of God, the Sublime, we acknowledge that the
human being will have to admit his incapacity and inadequacy to perceive
that Exalted Reality, which is the only Reality in the realm of
existence.

The limited reach of the human intellect is not powerful enough to make
judgements in the Divine sphere, or to unravel God’s unfathomable
secrets or to reach an understanding about such an Exalted Being, by
study and deliberation. Even if man was to extend his imagination and
thought to their limits or to use his formidable powers of reason –
which are able to reveal the mysteries of the entire natural world – to
deliberate and consult with his fellows, he still would not have the
requisite tools to reach his objective. It is for this reason that even
the most elaborate explanations fall well short of describing His Being,
because whatever man can understand from nature and science is created
by God in the first place, and is a product of His command and will.

Our limited intellects are likewise quite unable to acquire a sound
understanding of the nature of His attributes for the reason that when
assigned to the Source of existence, attributes are quite different from
when they are ascribed to other beings. And above all, they are concepts
imagined and concocted by human minds, which are themselves prisoners of
material boundaries, because all that which can be considered in the
realms of human thought is characterized by limitations, and the reach
and judgement of the intellect is likewise constrained and man’s
knowledge despite his many advances is quite inadequate, while God is
Infinite and Absolute.

However, even as we acknowledge our inability and powerlessness to gain
a perfect understanding and deep and expansive gnosis of the limitless
Being, nevertheless we are able to achieve a degree of proximity and a
relative understanding of His Exalted station and *tawhid*.

Even when man’s intellect and thought are not yet fully developed to his
highest potential, he is still able to use his wondrous power of
contemplation – which is a bounty derived from the command of that same
limitless Source, which He has placed in our souls so that we might seek
a way to Him and to try to understand Him – and to use logic and
rational proofs and acquire some understanding of that Eternal Being, in
proportion to the extent of our individual insight and intellect.  In
this way, we may fully realize the existence of that constant Reality,
Whose will is mirrored throughout the breadth of existence and creation,
behind everything that we observe.

One of the most intricate verses of the Qur’an is the verse of light
(*ayat al-nur*), which exegetes, mystics and philosophers have all
discussed, and about which they have offered opinions according to their
respective inclinations.

Undoubtedly, the most satisfying method of explaining unfamiliar
phenomena is by the use of allegory, metaphor and simile; in truth this
style of introduction and familiarization with truths, comprises of  two
important and basic aspects: the first is that the beauty and subtlety
latent in the metaphor makes the heart of the listener incline to the
object being described, and second, the intricate secrets and mysteries
of the object may become better known to the listener through the aid of
the metaphor and allegory that is employed. The verse above also falls
under the category of allegory, however, only to the extent of the reach
of the intellective faculty of man, and the insignificant knowledge that
he possesses and on the other hand, attempting to introduce the
boundless and sacred existence of God.

It must not remain unsaid that even though in their commentaries of this
verse, the great Muslim exegetes have not mentioned the main points that
we will discuss later, nevertheless what they have presented about the
concepts contained in the verse, and their discussions and expositions
of its various aspects comprises of deep and subtle points that conform
to the inner aspect of the Qur’an and based on the perceptions of
researchers they are coherent and plausible.

However, the points that we will presently discuss may be classified as
an alternate possible explanation of the verse of the light.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth;***

That Sublime Existence who encompasses all the stations of perfection at
once; His sacred Light embraces the entirety of existence and
illuminates the heavens and the earth. He is the all-Knowing Creator
whose eternal radiance infuses life in the creation and bestows
assistance to them. He controls, nurtures and completes them through His
power; the Light of His existence shines forth and is clearly manifest
across the expanse of existence.

No corner of the cosmos can be conceived which the Light of His sacred
Essence does not illuminate; however, each being prospers from this
light according to its capacity and ability, ranging from the basic
capacities to the vast benefits that man gathers for his own betterment
and to reach the peaks of human perfection, which is the main objective
of the Divine care.

To prepare the minds of the listeners so that they understand the issue
better, God explains His light with the following simile:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ الْمِصْبَاحُ فِي زُجَاجَةٍ
الزُّجَاجَةُ كَأَنَّهَا كَوْكَبٌ دُرِّيٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A likeness of His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp is
in a glass, (and) the glass is as it were a brightly shining star,***

The Qur’an which is the most fundamental source for acquiring the
cognition of God and for deriving clear guidance about the path that
humanity must traverse in order to reach the Originator of existence,
compares the Divine light to the simplest object that guides man and
illuminates his path in the depths of darkness: a lamp. The first
question that arises here is that, why did God not compare His light to
the most brilliant and luminous object in the world, that is, the sun,
which besides its grandeur and radiance, produces many effects and
benefits for the inhabitants of the earth? Why has the Light of God been
compared to a man-made lamp instead?

It must be stated in reply that:

Firstly, the sun, with all its illumination, benefits and effects on
living beings is still only one of the creations of God in the system of
the universe; it is merely carrying out the task it was designed for. If
God compared His light with that of the sun, it would indicate a
diminution from the state of the Creator to the level of the created,
and this is contrary to the exalted nature of God, whose Power extends
over all His creation; an ordinary believer when walking through nature
and pondering over these same celestial phenomena and the objective
behind their creation will be able to acknowledge and infer His
existence.

Secondly, a believer, an unbeliever and every human being, irrespective
of his beliefs and convictions, seeks and receives the same benefit from
the sun, while the brilliant Light of God only illuminates the pages of
the hearts of the believers, and His eternal radiance polishes the minds
and beings of the people of cognition and bestows upon them hope and
mercy, which are the sources of contentment for the soul; He does not
extend the same bounty to the hearts of the unbelievers, who are
imprisoned by their veils of darkness.

Now why has the Light of God been compared to a lamp, despite it being
an object designed by man, and moreover, its light can only illuminate a
very limited area – while the light of the sun illuminates and shines
over a large expanse of the earth?

The reply is as follows: All the characteristics of the lamp that have
been mentioned in the verse have neither been manufactured by God so
that it is a creation of the Creator, nor do they quite resemble a
similar man-made device, because the brightness of this radiant lamp and
its unique qualities which cannot be found in the expanse of existence,
has been taken as the basis of the similitude.

The similitude of God’s light to that of a lamp:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ نُورِهِ كَمِشْكَاةٍ فِيهَا مِصْبَاحٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***A likeness of His light is as a niche in which is a lamp can be
studied from this perspective.***

If a person wants to travel a certain distance in pitch darkness, he
must first procure a lamp so that he can illuminate the path ahead of
him and through the aid of the light he may not lose his way and thus
reach his destination safely. It would be insensible and ill-advised to
set off on a journey in total darkness and travel across hills and
valleys and still consider oneself needless of a light by which to
illuminate the way.

In order to travel on the path of truth and to avoid the darkness of the
heart and mind and to finally be protected from going astray, one needs
another light, and that is the guidance that illuminates the path of
useful thought and discovering the truth.

If man is intent on seeking salvation, he must make himself concordant
with the constant journeying of creation and people who are travelling
in anticipation of the inevitable meeting with the Lord (*liqa’ Allah*),
so that he may one day reach the exalted vicinity of God and set foot on
the Divine threshold; this means attaining every peak of his potential
and it cannot be achieved except by travelling with the aid of Divine
illumination towards his infinite Essence.

Now, what could the glass that encloses and protects the lamp, as
mentioned in the verse, possibly denote? The function of the glass is to
shield the light from being extinguished by the forces of winds and
storms; the persistence, survival and luminance of the light depend upon
the glass and its continual presence as a protective device against the
elements.

Just as the continuation of the light is linked to the presence of the
glass, which acts as a protective barrier, the Light of God is similarly
continually dependent on His eternal Existence. Since this light
originates from His Sacred Essence, which abides forever, and is not
subject to any change, its illumination also is linked to the infinite
and subsists eternally. Thus, His Essence infuses the universe with
life, while His Light illuminates it (with guidance).

Thereafter, the verse talks of the transparency of the protective glass
which projects the light forth like a sparkling star, because the
transparent glass does not inhibit the transmission of the light in the
least; but at the same time, the presence of the glass forms a barrier
that will prevent man from accessing the source of the light. It is
possible that the brilliant protective barrier that projects the light
is an allusion to the high ranking angels and the bearers of God’s
throne (*‘arsh*).

The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَحْمِلُونَ الْعَرْشَ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُ يُسَبِّحُونَ بِحَمْدِ
رَبِّهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise of
their Lord (al-Ghafir, 40/6)***

And at the same time the existence of the angels themselves is full of
radiance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَأَنَّهَا كَوْكَبٌ دُرِّيٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***As if it were a brightly shining star, (al-Nur, 24/35)***

When we consider the bearers of the throne as a similitude to the glass
that encloses the light, we reach the conclusion that in this metaphor,
because the glass acts a barrier preventing man from gaining access to
the source of the illumination, the angels are also located in four
walls forming an impenetrable barrier. Man, who is a material being,
cannot penetrate into the realm of immaterial beings like the angels,
never mind the Source of the Divine light itself, the profoundness of
whose Essence is beyond all comprehension, thought and sensation.

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali (A) declares in this regard: “[Praise
be to Him Whom]...the flights of intellect cannot reach” (*wa la
yanaluhu ghaws al-fitan*).[^1]

According to the foregoing, the idea of the glass that enclosed the
light is to radiate the light for the benefit of man. The bearers of the
throne (*‘arsh*) and those that inhabit the Divine threshold similarly
are conduits through which the Divine effusion and grace flows from His
sacred Essence towards mankind.

Furthermore, just as people benefit from the light of a lamp that is
situated next to them, God too is close to man, not just beside him but
closer to him than his life-vein (jugular):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And certainly We created man, and We know what his mind suggests to
him, and We are nearer to him than his life-vein (Qaf, 50/16)***

We also observe plainly that the closer a light is to a person, the more
he is able to benefit from its luminance; now since God, the Exalted, is
closer to the human being than every other source of illumination –
closer to him than even than his own jugular vein – His radiant Light
transports hearts and minds to the realms of enlightenment and
cognition, allowing man to observe many truths.

In this lamp, there is oil that has been derived from the bounteous
olive tree, which possesses the exclusive quality that it is not
situated at the “east or west” of the orchard. Perhaps this phrase has
been used to indicate the fact that since the east is the location of
sunrise and the west is the location of the sunset, when the verse
states that it is “not eastern”, it means to imply that the illumination
of that Infinite being is not one that rises, or in other words, has a
point of origination. Similarly it is “not western”, meaning that it is
not an illumination that ever wanes, or in other words, it has no point
of termination either. It is eternal. Just as the Creator of the
universe subsists eternally, so does the illumination that perpetually
flows from the Infinite Source.

Even though the apparent attribution of the description, “neither
eastern nor western” seems to be directed at the olive tree, the
particular and special implications of the phrase employed can be used
to further explain the illumination of the immaculate Essence of God.

Some exegetes have suggested that the phrase, “neither eastern nor
western” has been used to denote that the light of God illuminates the
east and west of the world. This view does not apparently conform to the
latent meaning of the verse, because the question arises, “if it means
the east and west of the world, then what about the north and south and
other areas?”

While we know that the illumination of the Reality that has been present
in every epoch and in every land encompasses every part in existence.
The radiance of His light continually illuminates each atom in the
cosmos; therefore, the intended meaning of God’s words here is not a
geographical reference, because His exalted existence is free from such
constraints.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكَادُ زَيْتُهَا يُضِيءُ وَلَوْ لَمْ تَمْسَسْهُ نَارٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The oil whereof almost gives light though fire touch it not (al-Nur,
24/35)***

Every light that exists in the universe has the feature that in order to
become luminous, it requires a spark to initially set it alight and work
its effect. The factor that sets it alight has a fundamental role;
however the Light of God is the exception. His Light is independent of
every factor from the view that light only originates from His Sacred
Essence, and this is a unique because His attributes, particulars and
distinctions are contained within Himself and no excellence can be
imagined to be other than a Perfect Existence; in other words, His Light
is not other than His Essence.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُّورٌ عَلَى نُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Light upon light (al-Nur, 24/35)***

It is correct that His Light is Absolute and no limit or boundary exists
for it; however in the stages of exposure, its manifestation is relative
to the capacities and merits of the recipients. As man ascends to higher
and higher levels of recognition in *tawhid*, he likewise benefits from
further illumination in his spiritual course:

This part of the verse is also an analogy for this very meaning because
after bestowing the gift of life, God guides His deserving creatures
towards the perfection of their potentials by granting them of other
bounties and makes them the recipients of His guidance.

That which leads man to ultimate contentment and felicity is his sincere
struggle to utilize his latent talents and abilities to benefit from the
guidance and Light of His liberal and beneficent Creator, because all
the paths to prosperity and salvation end there. In the supplication
of *sahar*, we recite:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهما  اني  أسئلك  من  نورك  بأنورها  و  كل  نورك  نيّر  اللهما  اني 
أسئلك  بنورك  كله
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Lord, We ask you from You of Your most illuminating Light, and all
Your Lights are illuminating; O Allah I ask You by all your Light.”

After discussing the matters raised above, we should also think about
the end of the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَضْرِبُ اللَّهُ الْأَمْثَالَ لِلنَّاسِ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And God sets forth parables for men, and Allah is Cognizant of all
things. (al-Nur, 24/35)***

And Allah knows best.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 1


