A Look at the meaning of “Daraba” in the Quran
==============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللاَّتِي تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَاهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِي
الْمَضَاجِعِ وَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (as to) those [women] on whose part you fear desertion, admonish
them, and [if that does not make any difference, then] leave them alone
in the sleeping-places and [if that does not make any difference, then]
strike them. (al-Nisa, 4/34)***

A reliable study of the Qur’an can only be made when the mind is freed
of previously held beliefs and notions, because pre-judging and viewing
its concepts without objectivity will only lead to closed-mindedness and
inflexibility. This is the one danger that every discerning researcher
must avoid at all costs.

One of the verses that the opponents of Islam and the proponents of
women’s rights have singled out in order to impugn the ordinances of
Qur’an is the one mentioned above. The verse concerns the issue of the
desertion (*nushuz*) of women. Instead of trying to objectively
understand the true purport of the verse, they have resorted to strident
criticism, unaware that discussions based around an incorrect
presumption leads away from the truth and obstructs thinking.

In fact, through a detailed and necessary study of the word
“*yadribuhunna*” (strike them) in the verse, one can infer two distinct
meanings, which we will explain in some detail below:  
 The first meaning is derived by considering the apparent meaning
of *daraba*, which is to hit; and the majority lean towards this
interpretation.

The second meaning, which is consistent with a study of the context of
the matter being discussed in the verse, is an alternate translation of
the word *daraba*, which is a word with several different meanings. One
can consider the possibility of this second meaning, which is
indignation and disregard, as a response of the man to
the *nushuz* displayed by his wife. This conforms to the extensive
meaning of *daraba*, which includes parting and separation.[^1] 

Another meaning of *daraba* is to “turn away from” or “to dispense
with”; therefore when referring to the speech of someone who is speaking
nonsense, or to a piece of baseless writing, one may say, *“fadribuhu
‘ala’l jidar”* (throw it at the wall), which is an allegory for, “do not
pay attention to it”.

The meaning of parting and separation for *daraba* can also be applied
to the verse under consideration, and a study of the verse can be done
on this very basis, because it has been mentioned that the
term *daraba*has been used here because it denotes a sudden parting as
opposed to a gradual one*.*[^2]

Therefore, it seems that here the Qur’an advises the husband who has
unsuccessfully tried to censure his rebellious wife by two milder means,
to finally separate (*daraba*) from her. However, he should avoid any
harshness towards her and patiently await for his action to have an
effect; he should allow her to think over matters and to takes steps
towards what is best for her. Therefore, when interpreted in this
manner, we can say that the verse means to say: If a woman shirks her
responsibility and acts inappropriately, then the husband must attempt
to remedy matters in the prescribed stages.

Initially, the man must gently counsel his wife, and remind her of her
responsibilities, and encourage her to reconsider her actions which have
resulted in the unhappiness in the life they share together.

However, if the efforts of the husband are to no avail, and the wife
persists in her improper behaviour, he must react conservatively by only
leaving the marital bed but remain in the house and make no overt change
to the normal routine of the household. This is because the verse of the
Qur’an stipulates only the act of leaving the bed at this stage and no
more.

If this action also does not bring about a change in the wife’s conduct,
and she persists in behaving against her own interest, and the husband’s
efforts are all in vain, then a sterner measure is required in an
attempt to break the impasse. This step requires the husband to cut off
all contact with his wife within the house and lead a completely
separate life. It is as if he has removed the wife from her place of
focus in the household, with the intention that she herself changes her
mind and alters her disagreeable behaviour to prevent a further
deterioration in the situation.

It is true that in this situation the wife still lives in the house and
benefits from material and other comforts, but she will not be in the
spiritual and emotional state to feel at peace, and this may motivate
her to acknowledge her responsibility towards the family and take the
first steps to restore harmony and allow the family to advance towards a
better and happier life.

However, if we take *daraba* here to mean “striking”, and we assume that
the Qur’an requires that in such circumstances, the man should compel
his wife to resume her duties and responsibilities by raising his hand
to her, so that she comes back to her senses, then acting on this
interpretation will probably have an adverse effect for the reasons
discussed below:

1.   The books of jurisprudence state that the slightest physical
violence towards one’s wife, if it bruises her skin, carries a penalty
(*diya*) and such an act of chastisement is not permitted for the man
for any reason. On the other hand, it is doubtful whether a lighter or
soft blow may have any effect in chastising a rebellious wife and
causing her to alter her behaviour; in fact it is highly unlikely that
such an act would resolve anything.

In cases of *nushuz*, the jurists are more concerned with (legislating
for) the action of the man with regards to stopping the maintenance of
his wife and not the matter of beating or physical chastisement. As a
rule, jurists have not made a thorough examination of the issue of
beating, rather they have focused on its secondary details; such as the
number and frequency of blows, the circumstances under which the
perpetrator is excused from having to pay the penalty or blood-money
(*diya*), or if the woman displays her fractious behaviour continually
and every day, how many times may the man resort to hitting her, and for
how long such violence is permitted, etc. These questions need to be
discussed in detail but even a lengthy examination may not be able
address all the issues that arise in this regard.

2.  Usually physical discipline will only push a woman into a position
of bitterness and animosity, especially when she realizes that the
husband has used his last resort and can do no more to stop her; at this
time she may feel there is nothing more he can direct at her.

3.   Any physical action will usually result in an adverse reaction, and
may drive the woman to become even more entrenched and resolute in her
misbehaviour. This is especially the case especially for women who have
a quarrelsome nature and who are more prone to antagonism than women of
a calmer and more level-headed temperament.

Therefore, the use of punishment and force on this type of women will
only harden their obstinacy, sometimes leading to a loss of control on
both sides with unpredictable results. Whenever one embarks on a method
of chastisement to bring about compliance and ultimately restore an
affectionate relationship between the spouses, there is always the
possibility that the outcome may not be positive, or that the rift
between them becomes even deeper or the chance of any mutual agreement
in the future is weakened.

4.   To compel the woman into compliance through physical violence is
not an agreeable process psychologically for both spouses and will not
provide inner contentment to either one. In time it will erode their
love for one another and ultimately may lead to the breakdown of the
marriage. On the other hand, it seems that the previously described step
of total disassociation from the wife, while she still lives within the
household, may be the stimulus that causes her to review matters and
think about the future and persuade her to reform her behaviour.  
 Furthermore, such a rejection by her husband is unpleasant for the wife
and she would not be able to bear or tolerate it for long.

5.   No one can deny that the final step in this series of actions,
which apparently seems irrevocable, where the wife has resolutely
rejected all the efforts of her husband to restore harmonious relations,
is divorce. Divorce is the last resort when every other course of action
fails.

Therefore when all three steps fail to achieve the compliance of the
wife, and no amount of reasoning can change her inappropriate behaviour,
the husband embarks on a course of permanent separation and dissolution
of the marriage by invoking divorce. When the husband is convinced that
nothing will break the impasse and that the marital bond has broken down
completely, he brings about relief from the stormy relationship through
the agency of divorce, without the need for any physical chastisement or
action.

6.   We know that Islam has paid a special attention to the spirit and
true meaning of earthly life, and the paths that lead to the its best
conclusion. For this reason, it promotes a sound relationship between
members of the family and recognizes that a strong attachment between
husband and wife will result in the prosperity of a family.

As a result of the great respect accorded to women in every aspect of
life, the husband has not been allowed to put the least pressure on his
wife to perform household chores or to force her to do something that is
against her disposition. In fact, the wife has also been given the
choice to ask for payment from her husband for breastfeeding their
child.

By appreciating that Islam has adopted a holistic approach to the issues
relating to women, which incorporates their rights and honour in the
household and in society, it is not improbable that in Islam’s view, men
cannot react with physical violence in the face of the rebellious
behaviour of the wives because it is not compatible with the Islamic
ethos of love and harmony amongst the spouses in a family.

The holy Prophet (S) has stated: I am amazed at the one who strikes his
wife, while he is more deserving to be struck himself; do not strike
your wives with canes, because there is a legislative retaliation
(*qisas*) for that. Rather, chastise them with a curtailment in their
maintenance; thus, you shall gain felicity in this world and the
next. [^3]

Here the Prophet (S) reminds men that it is more beneficial to them to
gain the attention of women by punishing them by curtailing their
allowances rather than by physically striking them. This is because, on
the one hand, it will discourage them from rebellious and improper
conduct, and on the other, you will not be answerable in front of God
and, in the hereafter, you will have a defence for your actions.

7.   Finally, if it is insisted that the meaning of *daraba* in this
verse is indeed chastisement through physical means, as the apparent
reading suggests, it must be stated that this is not an obligatory
command, so that this step becomes incumbent on a husband whose wife
exhibits *nushuz* or rebelliousness, and that he has no choice but to
resort to physical chastisement. In fact, there are indications that
suggest the use of other means, such as curtailing living expenses, by
which he can deal with *nushuz*, and compel his wife to reform. Thus,
the step suggested by the verse is instructive in that it mentions one
way of rectifying the wife’s behaviour and recalling her to her
responsibility.

Therefore, if in times when human thought and reasoning had not yet
matured, it was possible to counter the *nushuz* of a wife through
physical discipline, albeit with special conditions, in these times when
we are in a more enlightened era, a different reaction to *nushuz* is
needed. For this reason it is necessary to change and adapt the existing
methodology and not to ignore the needs of the age.

Therefore, nowadays when women have reached a much higher level of
education and maturity of thought, the process of staged separation
initiated by the husband to control the rebellious behaviour of his wife
is likely to succeed in convincing her to change her position. It can
bring about an atmosphere which is free of strife and antagonism, which
is easily achievable, and restore harmony in the relationship and family
life. And this is possible by considering both possible meanings of the
word *daraba* in God’s word, as we have explained.

The Qur’an lends itself to a wide range of interpretation – and indeed,
this is part of the miracle of this divinely inspired text. For this
reason, this independent and living entity shall endure for all time.  
  

[^1]: Thus, it is said, “Daraba  al-dahru baynana”, meaning that, “The
passage of time caused us to part”. (al-Munjid, under the entry
for daraba).

[^2]: For further information, refer to: Lisan al-‘Arab, v. 1, pp
451-477; Mu‘jam Muqa’is al-Lugha, v. 3, p 398-399.

[^3]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, v. 14, p. 250, printed by Mu’asasa Al
al-bayt; and Bihar al-Anwar, v. 103, p. 249, report 38. It is noteworthy
that according to the traditionists and scholars of rijal, this
narration is classified as reliable (muaththaq) or according to other
reports, even authentic (sahih), (such as the tradition narrated from
Abu Maryam). Therefore, other reports which have been cited against it,
for example the tradition of “al-darb bi’l siwak” (striking with the
wooden toothbrush) are problematic in two respects: firstly from the
aspect of reliability, because it is a tradition with an incomplete
chain (mursal); other than featuring in the exegesis Majma‘ al-Bayan, it
does not appear in any original source. Secondly, many senior jurists
have attempted to explain and justify this tradition and this itself
suggests that they regard the usage of the term daraba to be in other
than its apparent meaning. In his discussion on nikah (marriage) in his
work “al-Masalik”, Shahid al-Thani defines the phrase, “al-darb bi’l
siwak” as: “It is intended to mean playfully, otherwise such an act is
unlikely to chastise or encourage reform”. The late Bahrani in his
“al-Hada’iq” agrees with Shahid al-Thani that daraba here is not in the
meaning of striking physically, by adding: “It is not striking with a
whip or with a stick…and there must be no bodily injury as a result.”
(Al-Hada’iq, v. 22, p. 618). Finally, as a further emphasis, we can
quote a tradition from “Al-Fiqh al-Mansub ila’l Imam al-Rida (A)”, in
which Imam al-Rida (A) in the course of explaining the verses, states,
“It is a friendly (playful) strike…”. All this shows that that the term
“fadribuhunna” in the verse has not been used in the commonly held
meaning of hitting or striking.


