The Manifestation of Qur’anic Wisdom in the Laws of Inheritance
===============================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوصِيكُمُ اللّهُ فِي أَوْلاَدِكُمْ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God enjoins you concerning your children: the male shall have a share
(of inheritance) equal to the share of two females; (al-Nisa, 4/10)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كَانُواْ إِخْوَةً رِّجَالاً وَنِسَاء فَلِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if there are (several) siblings, men and women, then the male
shall have the like of the portion of two females; (al-Nisa, 4/176)***

As mentioned in the foregoing verses, Islam has ordained that the share
of the man in inheritance should be twice that of the female and has
called its followers to practice this Divine decree. This matter
requires some deliberation and analysis; however, before we begin a
discussion about this ruling, we need to remind ourselves that:

A debate about the respective inheritance of men and women must not be
devoted to supporting the rights of men while ignoring the high status
and actual rights of women; rather the intention should be to defend the
sanctity of revelation, which has prescribed a course based on the
intrinsic nature of human beings and what is in their true best
interest. Accordingly, it becomes evident that the discussion at hand
will not be influenced by man-made social norms, which are subject to
change in every era, even though the social environment in its own way
exerts such a tremendous influence on the thinking of the populace that
it even sways the opinions of some of its intellectuals.

After this preamble, we now embark on a closer study of the issue:

Islam treats men and women in a manner that is comprehensive, taking
into account all aspects of their existence, in recognition of their
valuable place in creation. On the one hand, in its prescriptive
guidance (revelation), Islam considers the essential worthiness and the
spiritual potential of men and women to be the same; each one of them,
through suitable actions, can achieve their maximum and deserved
potential.

On the other hand, if we consider the opinions and findings of
psychologists and physiologists about the physical, mental, emotional
and spiritual differences between men and women based on their research
and observation, we find that the rights and responsibilities of men and
women have been prescribed by taking into account their inner and real
differences, which does not affect their essential equality or their
dignity as human beings. In other words, in the view of religion, the
actual and natural differences of the two sexes does not mean that there
is any difference in their respective worth.

There is no doubt that in the course of the social development of human
beings, the female sex has always been the subject of oppression and
denial of rights. She has suffered much deprivation at the hands of men.

On the other hand, there is also no doubt that the many remedial and
radical developments through the ages, have inclined towards the
opposite extreme; and the attempts to resolve the conflict has not
achieved a balanced result in this regard, despite well-meaning efforts.

Amongst them, the seekers of women’s rights are no exception and we have
witnessed many times their disproportionate behaviour in the defence of
the rights of women.

As for the fact that equality in every aspect between the rights of men
and women has been declared as a basic and established truth by those
who defend women’s rights; we must analyze the basis on which this view
has been formed, and to what extent it is logical and whether it is
compatible with reality.

It is true that both men and women are partners in the human race, and
both possess equal human rights and virtues; however, there are
undeniable differences in their physical and emotional compositions. Of
course, these differences are not defects, by which one sex can claim
superiority over the other; rather, they are differences that make them
distinct from one another. Consequently, when it is claimed that the two
sexes “must” have the same rights as each other, we need to ask, where
is this “must” derived from?[^1]

The equality of rights of individuals of one sex is a matter that is
logical and tenable; however, the equality of rights, in all aspects, of
two different sexes (in view of their emotional and physical
differences) requires proof to support the claim; and if a proof for
this equality in all aspects and dimensions is not forthcoming or
produced, then the claim of the need for equality of rights is baseless
and illogical; in truth, a robust validation of this claim is still
pending.

A cursory glance at the many and varied feminist ideas and views will
reveal the truth of the matters stated above:

The ideology of feminism was established in the West as a movement that
sought women’s rights; even though it is possible that its proponents,
especially women, started this movement sincerely in order to attain the
true rights of women, the existence of capitalist and economical motives
behind the propagation of the feminist ideology at the stage of its
inception cannot be denied. [^2]

However, aside from the factors that influenced the dawn of this
ideology, even nowadays, feminism has been transformed into many
different schools and theories, and every group who propagates this
ideology has embarked on its own particular course, often criticizing
the stance of others and insisting that their own opinions are the most
progressive.

The proponents of women’s rights originally advocated equality of rights
for men and women. The views of Simone de Beauvoir, as outlined in her
book, “The Second Sex” – which has become famous as the “Bible of
Feminism” – are based on this same principle that since men and women
are both human beings, they should have equal rights.

However, the course of social development forced feminists to review
their thinking, to the degree that they were no longer content with
espousing equal rights for men and women, but went further to state that
females were the superior sex. In essence, this was the exact opposite
of the extreme view that had deprived women of their rights in the first
place. Extremism appeared in the school of feminism, to the extent that
one radical feminist, Andrea Dworkin, embarked on a scathing criticism
of masculinity and considered maleness to be essentially synonymous with
violence, death and destruction.

Today, in practical terms, the principle of equality is not always
practised in western societies; for instance, when they say that men and
women must receive equal rights because of the fact that they are both
human beings, in the matter of child custody the courts rule in favour
of women on the basis of their sex, and not on the basis of their
membership of the human race. Contrary to the claim of equality in every
respect, this is a legal rule that is openly biased and unfair to men
and which the judiciary invariably supports.

Finally, the emergence of post-modernism in contemporary times, which
has influenced many modern ideologies and schools of thought, has also
changed the focus of feminists regarding the pursuit of women’s rights.
Specifically, a new group of feminists have stood up against the
excesses of the era of modernism, by emphasising the importance of  the
maternal role of women. In fact, this group believe that both men and
women possess special unique qualities. Thus, they extol matters such as
pregnancy and the nursing of infants as distinctive values which are
exclusive to women, and criticize the extremists by asking how they
could ignore this precious feminine quality when considering the rights
of women? [^3]8

In any case, in view of the transformations in the ideology of feminism,
in addition to the fundamental question already mentioned about the
absence of logical and decisive proofs to validate their main claims, we
also need to ask how long and to what degree will these various
contrasting opinions about women’s rights continue to change? And where
will this development ultimately stop and settle?

Furthermore, who is the most qualified to select the correct view from
amongst the plethora of opinions on the subject, and will the view of
these experts not be later subjected to criticism and review?

It must not be forgotten that that although the proponents of equal
rights for men and women have not explicitly discussed the different
faculties of reasoning, intellect, labour and management of the two
sexes, nevertheless they always take into account these undeniable and
fundamental differences that are integral to the two sexes and apply
them in the variety of social issues. This fact is borne out by
statistics which analyse how, in practice and in different social
settings; men are selected much more often than women to managerial
posts. They also conclusively show how, in societies which clamour about
equality of rights between men and women, the intellectual and labour
output of men and women are rewarded in an inconsistent and biased
manner.

It is a clear reality that the physical constitutions of men and women
are suited to particular responsibilities; men are suited to performing
heavy and rugged work and in contrast, women are more suited to lighter
and more delicate tasks. This is a difference that the Creator has
placed in the essence of the two sexes.

If the rights of both sexes must be identical, then the work that the
two can do should likewise be distributed in an identical manner,
because it is not logical that the tasks be different but the rights be
the same!

The other factor that results in the difference in rights, is the
difference in responsibilities. Let us consider a factory, an office or
a manufacturing plant** **in which there are many workers busy doing a
variety of tasks. One is the president, and others, depending on their
level of expertise, are advisers, employees and labourers. It is obvious
that the rights of the president are different from that of everyone
else and this difference will not be considered to be unjustified,
because his rights are proportional to the responsibilities he bears.

This is a sensible system that has been accepted by all societies. If
all the salaried workers in one department are men, or all of them are
women, or both men and women run the department, even then, the
situation will be the same. A president, even if she is a woman, will
have a higher salary than the male employees, because her
responsibilities are different. Therefore, in these situations, no one
will claim equal rights for men and women.

This difference in responsibilities, which in turn causes the difference
in rights, is an accepted convention. At this point, the question arises
that when a difference in responsibilities results in a difference in
rights – and this matter raises no protest or objection – then why
should the differences in the responsibilities of men and women due to
their nature and disposition, which are immutable and go back to the
essence of their respective existences, not result in a difference in
the rights of the two? Is there an argument that proves that the
differences in responsibilities which raise and lower individual rights,
are only limited to conventional responsibilities, and do not encompass
natural and existential differences?

The implication of the foregoing question is that, if the proponents of
equal rights between men and women want to ignore the natural and
distinct responsibilities of the two sexes by formulating laws bases on
equal rights, then they are acting contrary to nature. Laws can always
be made according to their whims and desires, but nature itself cannot
be changed!

And finally, there is another question that arises here, and that is:
When national and private companies are allowed to make distinctions in
the job specifications of the male and female employees, and thereby,
allocate different rights to them, and diverse societies also accept
this practice as normal, why is a religious school of thought not
allowed to pronounce the rights of the men and women who are its
adherents on the basis of the responsibilities it has allocated to each
one?

If the differences in conventional rights as practised by private and
public institutions or by particular individuals have raised no
objections and are accepted norms in all societies, why are the
differences in rights as espoused by a religion challenged? When an
ordinary employer has the right to decide the duties of the employees
working in his company as well as their rights, why can’t the founder of
a great intellectual and spiritual movement not do the same for its
followers and adherents? That too, a religion that has placed a great
financial responsibility on the shoulders of its male followers; a
religion that makes a man responsible for procuring every necessary
provision for his wife commensurate to her status and rank; in these
circumstances, justice dictates that the share of men and women in
inheritance must be different.

Let us assume that a father who wishes to allocate some money to his two
sons, gives the married son twice as much as the one who is unmarried.
Can one say that the right of the unmarried son has been violated, or
that he has been disadvantaged because he received less? Here too, there
is a difference, but it is based on justice and fairness, because if the
father gave both sons the same amount, morally he would be guilty of
unjust discrimination; similarly there is a difference in the
inheritance of men and women according to the law of *sharia*; however,
it is a just distribution based on the lighter responsibility placed on
the woman, and which is fairly reflected in the lesser amount that she
inherits.

This is when in general, for most families, one can reasonably say that
the expenses a man incurs in supporting his wife in the course of their
married life is many times greater than the amount which the woman would
inherit if she was to receive equal shares to her male siblings.

As a rule, the financial commitments that a man undertakes has an
influence; when the man guarantees the living expenses of his wife, he
feels a greater sense of responsibility towards her. This will engender
a positive reaction from the wife, who sees herself as indebted to her
husband and strives to repay her debt by fostering a relationship with
him based on love, respect and collaboration.

As a result of the increased sense of responsibility on the part of the
husband towards his wife on the one hand and the sense of indebtedness
on the part of the wife towards the husband on the other, there is an
increase in their mutual love and affection and this will help to
strengthen the foundations of their family life. This same strengthening
effect would not arise if the woman received a greater share in
inheritance.

From the dawn of Islam to the present, millions of Muslim brothers and
sisters, wives and husbands have lived genially side by side, without
the disparity in the share of inheritance causing any disruption in the
order of Muslim family life; in fact, there has not even been much
evidence of dissatisfaction at this arrangement which would cast a
shadow on their cordial relations or cause rifts between family members.
And, the rare events when there have been family disputes due to the
shares in inheritance, do not invalidate the general situation stated
above.

One of the interesting developments in recent times is the increased
tendency for women in the West (in comparison to men) to turn towards
Islam. Despite all the efforts of some western agencies to convince
women that Islam denies women their rights – and in their widespread
propaganda they do not refrain from every allegation of the violation of
rights – nevertheless, more women turn to Islam than men.

This fact can be easily seen from statistical reports and must not be
dismissed lightly; rather we need to study this matter carefully and
think about the possible factors that would make a woman from the
western society become prepared to ignore the equal right of inheritance
that she has been granted through the laws of her country (a law that
was enacted with the material benefit of women in mind), in favour of a
religion which has directed that the share in inheritance of men is
twice that of women.

Is it possible to overlook the influential factor of innate human nature
(*fitra*), which is related to the true essence of human beings and
ignore the specific essential nature of the female sex in this regard?
Especially when we know that Islam has taken into account the spiritual
and physical differences between men and women as the basis for the laws
of inheritance. When a law has been enacted on the basis of justice and
is rooted in the depths of human nature, why should it be subject to
change and reform? And what should it place as its focus instead of
justice and innate human nature?

If man-made laws had positively addressed the needs that originate from
the depths of the human being and satisfied his inner feelings, then
such issues would not warrant consideration.

In addition to what has already been mentioned, another aspect of the
Divine wisdom in the laws of inheritance is the economical aspect;
specifically: In the west, the wealth that reaches women through
inheritance is equal to that which men receive in the same way. 

However, in most cases the wealth of women is used less in the way of
industry and sound business, and a large portion of it is usually spent
on decorations, superfluous ceremonies, luxuries and jewellery,
nonessential goods and various diversions; not only is this wasteful,
but it is also against moral decency, causing emotional anguish in poor
families and ultimately resulting in a social malaise and a culture of
overindulgence and extravagance; it is possible that if this same wealth
was in the hands of men, they would use it to develop business and
financial enterprises and investments that would appreciate in value,
resulting in a betterment of their economical status.

It is not without reason that the development and flourishing of the
economies in western societies has come about from the wealth of men,
and most businesses and financial institutions in these same societies
that are clamouring for equal rights for men and women, are in fact
related to men.

Another factor is to do with the supervision of the family. In reality,
the role of men and women is to complete and perfect one another,
therefore, the correct use of the capacity of each one in the assistance
of the other enables their joint life to proceed smoothly, and this
division of responsibilities and planning in their associated lives
caters for the needs of the family.  
 When the Qur’an places the responsibility of protection and supervision
on the shoulders of men by stating:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Men are the protectors of women (al-Nisa, 4/34)***

it does not mean to say that men are the leaders or that one sex is
superior to the other at the level of humanity. When a man and woman
live together as partners and embark on family life, especially a family
founded on the principle of mutual cooperation and understanding, which
of the individuals has the better ability to supervise the family and
provide for its expenses; the man, the woman or the children? [^4]

When we look at the prevailing situation in society, we see that the
owner of a business, who has employed several individuals, and whom he
pays for their services, naturally takes over the role of supervisor of
his employees without having been elected to the post by anybody. This
is a conventional practice and the employees accept the situation
without question.

The Qur’an also mentions the role of the man as the supervisor of the
family unit as a matter of accepted practice and not a new innovation.
It supports what is the normal practice in society, and by the use of
the phrase, “and because they spend out of their wealth”
(*bima* *anfaqu*), in the verse above, it alludes to the same issue that
the greater claim of the man to the role of supervisor and protector is
linked to the responsibility of providing for the family’s needs that
rests on his shoulders.

This rational principle is intertwined with the essence of existence;
meaning that, in addition to human beings who have acknowledged, out of
a natural instinct, the role of the man as a supervisor and protector,
the same situation exists naturally in the animal kingdom as well, and
examples of this behaviour are clearly observable in many aspects of
their life.

Here it is appropriate to mention another issue also; that which is
commonly heard in the west from the same groups of enlightened thinkers
and proponents of freedom is the rights of homosexuals, and there is a
tendency even amongst the most distinguished thinkers to be drawn
towards this matter in the name of the defence of freedom. Perhaps it
will not be many years before the rights of homosexuals are catered for
in the whole of western society and their rights are accepted as a
natural and expected feature to a point where any objection raised will
be considered as an unacceptable about-turn and no one will be able to
say anything or raise any objection about the matter.

When it becomes acceptable to base legislation on the low and base
desires of humanity, every sacred value will be discarded and society
will descend into moral decadence and decay. The fact is that the
procedure of this legislation is fundamentally incompatible with the
essential nature of mankind, and that which is presented in the name of
the preservation of freedom, should be confined to that kind of freedom
that facilitates the wholesome and balanced needs of humankind, and not
the demands that arise from unnatural and unhealthy temperaments.

If, under the banner of freedom and the protection by law, this abnormal
and aberrant sexual conduct becomes pervasive and common, then, as a
consequence of the actions of the same enlightened and broadminded
thinkers and defenders of women’s rights, half of humankind in western
society itself – its women – will become deprived of marrying and having
a normal physical relationship with the opposite sex and in the fullness
of time, this community will have to face the threat of extinction. Is
the enactment of such laws in the best interests of mankind and do they
have results and consequences worth defending?

If we review the history of legislation in different nations of the
world, we come across laws for which thinkers and experts had put in a
lot of thought and effort; yet with the passing of time, and on deeper
reflection and analysis, the miscalculations of the legislators, and the
weakness, inadequacy and ineffectiveness of those laws have been
ultimately exposed. That which in yesteryears was considered by
visionaries to be the ideal and most effective manner of governing their
societies, has come to be acknowledged as the product of an improper and
incomplete understanding.

Therefore, they turn to a new system of legislation, and despite the
progress in ideas and thoughts of intellectual and experts, the search
(for perfect law) still occupies the minds of researchers.

How often have a large group of scholars unanimously backed a particular
ideal, yet with the passage of time and the advance of knowledge, the
weakness and error of their views is conclusively proved.

It is universally accepted by scientists, working in different fields,
that without understanding and taking into account the essential nature
of man, planning and the creation of schemes and programs will be of
little worth.

It cannot be denied that today, despite the vast knowledge at mankind’s
disposal in every field, there are many peaks that have not yet been
scaled, especially in matters to do with the inner and spiritual realm
that exists inside man; indeed in his spiritual potential man is a deep
ocean and our knowledge about it is negligible. As a consequence,
planning and the formulating of legislation to govern the life of man,
whose true identity and essence is shrouded in mystery, is similar to
planning a course of treatment for an invalid whose illness is unknown.

The formulation of legislation not only calls for a complete and
all-encompassing knowledge about every facet of man’s being, rather it
also requires a thorough knowledge of society and its convoluted social
interrelationships as well as the knowledge of other creatures whose
lives are also interwoven with mankind.

On what authority and knowledge do those who claim that they desire the
flourishing and felicity of human society base their plans and schemes?

The fact is that the knowledge and perception of mankind is not yet able
to fully comprehend the inner physical and spiritual properties of human
beings and the mysteries of social conduct that arise from the
interaction of individuals with one another. As a result, man is unable
to address the diverse needs of humanity and distinguish the correct
course from the multiple paths that present themselves before him.

Even if the principles that lead to human perfection are understood,
human knowledge and intellect is unable to solitarily answer the
multitude of questions that arise, and take sole responsibility for
directing the progress of humanity in every sphere according to the
Divine plan. It is only when man searches within himself and makes use
of the values that are buried in his heart and nature that he will
achieve success and create a system that takes into account the
different aspects of his existence.

The truth is that when formulating legislation, man is not able to
remain immune from his own personal nature and character; the
differences amongst individuals in their upbringing, cultural and social
norms, familial customs and other factors deeply influence their
perceptions, decisions and opinions. The interpretation of terms and
ideas are not the same by all individuals in a society, each understands
according to his own insight and views. The thoughts and ideas of
legislators and regulators who embark on studying human nature are also
drawn, knowingly or unwittingly, towards preconceptions acquired from
their particular environment and therefore they are unable to make
impartial analyses of situations.

All this indicates the futility of expecting human intellect and
knowledge to single-handedly be able to serve this need and it is a
decisive affirmation of the fact that human legislation can be
potentially very damaging. It is here that we must acknowledge that one
cannot submit with certitude and confidence to such a doubtful system
and entrust one’s prosperity to it. Even if we assume that a day will
come when the knowledge of man will be able to encompass all facets of
human existence, even then that will not guarantee the wellbeing of
mankind because man is naturally prone to making decisions based on his
personal and selfish interests.

Keeping these various difficulties in mind, the well-known western
thinker Rousseau writes:  
 “To discover the best laws which will be beneficial to nations, one has
to necessarily seek out a perfect intellect, who is cognizant of all
human lusts and frailties but is himself not affected by them. He should
have no relationship to nature, but yet have a complete knowledge of it.
His own prosperity should not depend on us, but he should be ready to
assist us to achieve our own prosperity...” [^5]

Dr Carrel writes on the same subject:  
 “The systems of government, entirely constructed in the minds of
doctrinaires, are valueless. The principles of the French Revolution,
the visions of Marx and Lenin, apply only to abstract men. It must be
clearly realized that the laws of human relations are still unknown.
Sociology and economics are conjectural sciences – that is,
pseudo-sciences.

Thus, it appears that the environment, which science and technology have
succeeded in developing for man, does not suit him, because it has been
constructed at random, without regard for his true self.” [^6]

Therefore, the right to formulate law is more suited to the One whose
sacred being is not subject to the conditions and influences of the
environment, nor can failure in any task be ever imagined for Him.  His
limitless knowledge completely encompasses the entirety of existence and
He knows the fundamental and true needs of man and is aware of the
boundaries of his potential and the changes and developments that human
beings and the universe are yet to go through. And He is God, and the
right to systematize legislation is only befitting for Him.  
 The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَحُكْمَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَبْغُونَ وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللّهِ
حُكْمًا لِّقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is it then the judgment of (the times of) ignorance that they desire?
And who is better than Allah to judge for a people who are sure?
(al-Ma’ida, 5/50)***

 

[^1]: To date, those who defend the rights of women have always
presented the principle of equal rights as fundamental and undeniable
and therefore, they have questioned why there is a difference between
the inheritance of men and women in Islamic law. However, they have
ignored the point that the actual question they should first answer is
that on what basis is the principle of equal rights of the sexes
founded, when there are clear differences between men and women.

[^2]: The historical background of this ideology and coincident with its
inception, is the industrial revolution in England, which led to the
movement demanding voting rights for women. In the face of the
industrial changes that were sweeping across Europe the governments
could now tax women, because only those who paid taxes had the right to
vote in elections.

[^3]: For a more comprehensive review, refer to “Modern Political
Ideologies”, by Andrew Vincent. (The author has relied on a translation
of this work by Murtada Thabitfar); also “Huquq-e Zan dar Keshakesh-e
Sunnat wa Tajaddud”, by Muhammad Hakimipur, “Feminesm ‘Alayhi Zanan”, by
Sayyid Ibrahim Husaini, as quoted in the Journal of Book reviews,
Faslname-ye Kitab naqd, No. 17, Winter 1379 (lunar).

[^4]: It is possible that in some cases women are more qualified to
supervise than their husbands, however, invariably, the law does not
mention all special cases, and is concerned with the general situation
amongst human beings.

[^5]: Social Conventions, p. 81.

[^6]: Man, the Unknown, p. 30.


