The Correct Approach to Reconciliation and its Positive Consequences
====================================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن طَائِفَتَانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا
بَيْنَهُمَا فَإِن بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَى فَقَاتِلُوا
الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّى تَفِيءَ إِلَى أَمْرِ اللَّهِ فَإِن فَاءتْ
فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them;
but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which
acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command; then if it returns,
make peace between them with justice and act equitably; indeed Allah
loves those who act equitably. (al-Hujurat, 49/9)***

God Almighty has stated that amongst the qualities of the nation of the
Prophet of Islam (S) is their temperance and moderation. The directives
of God, the All-Wise, are also based on these qualities and indeed, it
is an integral feature of Divine wisdom that God advocates a medium
course distinct from any sort of extremes, known as the straight path
(*sirat al-mustaqim*). In the verse above also, which discusses
reconciliation between two disputing parties, all aspects have been
considered so that the prescribed remedy is not just based on sentiment
and accommodation; rather, compromise is tempered by reason, and moral,
instructive and social considerations are taken into account as well.

An exposition of the actual message contained in the verse is as
follows:

A dispute or altercation between two parties is not always of one type
or category; rather it arises from a variety of disagreements that can
flare up between individuals, leading to a disruption in the calm and
peace in a society. The various forms and manner of the disagreements
and the objectives behind them and the nature of the confrontation will
each influence the strategies adopted to defuse them. For this reason,
it is necessary to carefully consider all the issues so that the
remedial strategy and reconciliatory effort does not lead to an
undesirable result. In the verse under consideration also, the manners
of resolving the dispute differ according to the type of dispute, and
each must be countered with the appropriate action.

Occasionally, it is possible that a suspicion or mistake or
misunderstanding angers individuals – and often there will be those who
will inflame the situation and increase the mistrust even further –
resulting in an argument setting two parties at one another’s throats,
even when initially neither side intended any harm to the other.

In this case, the Qur’an advises the well-wishers and peacemakers of the
society to step in and mediate between the two parties and attempt
reconciliation before the situation escalates out of control and blood
is shed. However, unlike the last portion of the verse, the Qur’an does
not initially state that peacemaking be contingent on justice, it merely
states that the well-wishers should bring about peace and reconciliation
between the two factions (*faslihu* *baynahuma*). This is in the
particular case where neither party has violated the others’ rights, and
only a quarrel has broken out. At this point it was not necessary for
God to order reconciliation, that too, accompanied by an emphasis on
justice.

However, if one of the two quarrelling parties aggressively resorts to
violent behaviour and tramples on the principles of decency and
civility, then it must be stopped by any means. If stern action that
causes the aggressors to desist and accept God’s law, then the Qur’an
directs that reconciliation be affected by keeping in mind fairness and
justice.

There is a very subtle but important point that can be inferred here
from the verse, which is that, one must in every situation keep in mind
Islam’s primary objectives of nurturing and developing society, and its
emphasis on establishing and administering the nation of Islam on the
foundation of justice and fairness in its truest and widest meaning, and
its desire to remove every tendency for injustice and transgression from
the minds of individuals in the society; it is only through these
considerations that we can gain a profound understanding of the Qur’an’s
emphasis on reconciliation accompanied by justice. 

When the Qur’an advises mediators and peacemakers to reconcile between
two quarrelling parties with absolute justice and equity, it does not
mean to warn the mediators not to do themselves injustice to one part
while they seek peace and compromise, because mediators are normally
impartial and well-meaning. In fact, the intention is to advise them
that the manner in which they attempt reconciliation should be such that
each party precisely receives their legitimate right, neither having to
give up something, nor receiving anything undeserved, even if it is by
mutual understanding. Therefore, the mediators must not make it their
ultimate objective to achieve reconciliation at any cost.

In reality, this means that granting concessions should not be the basis
of reconciliation and arbitration, even if it is with the consent of the
wronged party, because the aggressors have deliberately brought about
confrontation so that they may gain concession by extortion.

In such cases, it would be a mistake if the mediators, who wish to
investigate and verify the incident from close quarters before taking
the steps to resolve the dispute by arbitration, direct their efforts to
insisting on indulgence and overlooking the past in an attempt to end
the conflict. If they advise one party to forgo its rights to the
benefit of the other in order to achieve peace and in this manner bring
the matter to a close, it will only serve to increase the recalcitrance
of the aggressors who had tried to gain the upper hand through force and
oppression.

And often, whenever opportunities arise in the future they would use
these precedents as a leverage for personal gain; usually mediators
also, at the time of peacemaking, satisfy the offenders by granting them
concessions so that they might desist from their transgression and give
up their oppressive behaviour, and leave their victims in peace. Here,
the oppressors become the winners and the oppressed are the losers. In
this manner, peace may be achieved but justice has not taken place.

Although the oppressed part may concede certain rights to extricate
themselves from further trouble from the aggressors, these concessions,
even when offered voluntarily, will invariably have negative
consequences. For this reason, the Qur’an insists that reconciliation
must be enacted without recourse to compromise or renouncing one’s
rights.

In these circumstances, if the transgressors insist on continuing on
their course, according to the Qur’an, they will have to confront the
whole Muslim community, who are duty-bound to come to the aid of the
oppressed faction. Thus, the reason for the Qur’anic insistence on
reconciliation coupled with equity in the verse under consideration,
which can be deduced from the repetition of the terms
‘*adl* and *qist* (justice and equity) three times,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا بِالْعَدْلِ وَأَقْسِطُوا إِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُحِبُّ الْمُقْسِطِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***make peace between them with justice and act equitably; indeed Allah
loves those who act equitably. (al-Hujurat, 49/9)***

is realised when the mediators, in their reconciliatory efforts,
consider thoroughly the deeper and fundamental nature of the
altercation, and deliberate carefully over the motives behind the
dispute. If they determine that the motivation was extortion or
bullying, then they should use force to stop the aggressors from
achieving their objectives.

If reconciliation and resolution of conflicts is carried out in an
incorrect manner, that is, by giving and taking concessions, it will be
like a double-edged sword which will damage both factions; on the one
hand, the oppressed individual will feel that the mediators would not,
or could not, prevent his rights from being infringed and bring about a
just resolution, because in practical terms, his aggressor has profited
at his expense.

On the other hand, the aggressor will feel that his unreasonable tactics
were ultimately successful and got him what he wanted. However, what is
befitting for a true Islamic society is a settlement that is equitable
and just overall, not one in which the one individual eschews his rights
allowing another to achieve his unjust goals.

If, during the course of the altercation, the possibility of resolution
by compromise arises, then an aggrieved individual can personally
extricate himself from the crisis by offering a concession and thereby
deliver himself from the malice of the aggressor. In this case, there
would be no need for others to involve themselves in the matter and seek
mediation.

However, in this verse, the Qur’an has placed the responsibility of
reconciliation on the shoulders if the Islamic society and compelled the
nation to resolutely rise to the defence of the oppressed whenever they
witness any injustice. They should limit the actions of the aggressor,
and stop him, and not try to make the oppressed party accept the unfair
actions perpetrated against them, or embark on a course of action that
results in the benefit of the perpetrator.

The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُم بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَن تَحْكُمُواْ بِالْعَدْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***and that when you judge between people you judge with justice;
(al-Nisa’, 4/58)***

It is true that in the reconciliation that we are discussing we do not
mean the recourse to a court of law. Rather, we have been concerned with
the efforts of mediators to reconcile between two quarrelling factions.
Islam attaches much importance to a comprehensive justice system; indeed
one of the main objectives of the great Prophets (A) was to constantly
strive to establish justice and equity in human societies. In this
regard, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَأَنزَلْنَا مَعَهُمُ
الْكِتَابَ وَالْمِيزَانَ لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity; (al-Hadid, 57/25)***

Therefore if we ponder over the matter carefully, we will realize that
exceeding the bounds of justice and violating the rights of others – at
every occasion and stage, even in the case of reconciliation and
arbitration, and even with mutual consent – is not compatible with the
Islamic spirit of justice.

Renouncing and forgoing one’s rights may sometimes be a necessary, even
admirable action, and beneficial in its own right; it may get results
and indeed, bring about a change of heart. However, when it is at the
expense of justice, not only is it not helpful, it is counterproductive
and as we stated, in the long run it will invariably have a negative
effect on the mind of the aggressor who set out to gain an advantage
through intimidation, and will encourage him to act in a similar fashion
in the future. The result will be that he will gain and benefit from
every altercation, whereas the objective of Islam is to eradicate
oppression and injustice from the midst of Muslim society, so that
people can be assured that no one will be able to acquire anything by
force or unfairness.  
 The commander of the faithful, Ali (A) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ظلم الاحسان واضعه في غير موضعه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The disservice to ihsan (goodness) is exercising it in the wrong place.
(Ghurar-al-Hikam, p. 498) *


