An Analysis of Two Qur’anic Terms
=================================

> 1)      وَأَنجَيْنَا مُوسَى وَمَن مَّعَهُ أَجْمَعِينَ {o} ثُمَّ
> أَغْرَقْنَا الْآخَرِينَ {o} إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
> أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We saved Musa and those with him, all of them. Then We drowned
the others. Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not
believe. And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
(al-Shu‘ara’, 26/65-68)***

> 2)      كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ نُوحٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

***The people of Nuh rejected the messengers. (al-Shu‘ara’, 26/105)***

> فَأَنجَيْنَاهُ وَمَن مَّعَهُ فِي الْفُلْكِ الْمَشْحُونِ {o} ثُمَّ
> أَغْرَقْنَا بَعْدُ الْبَاقِينَ {o} إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا
> كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So We delivered him and those with him in the laden ark. Then We
drowned the rest afterwards. Most surely there is a sign in this, but
most of them do not believe. And most surely your Lord is the Mighty,
the Merciful. (al-Shu’ara’, 26/119-122)***

> 3)      كَذَّبَتْ عَادٌ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

***Ad gave the lie to the messengers. (al-Shu‘ara’, 26/123)***

> فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
> أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So they gave him the lie, then We destroyed them. Most surely there
is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe. And most surely your
Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful. (al-Shu‘ara’, 26/139-140)***

> 4)      كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

***Thamud gave the lie to the messengers. (al-Shu‘ara’, 26/141)***

> فَأَخَذَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
> أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So the punishment overtook them. Most surely there is a sign in this,
but most of them do not believe. And most surely your Lord is the
Mighty, the Merciful. (al-Shu‘ara’, 26/158-159)***

> 5)      كَذَّبَتْ قَوْمُ لُوطٍ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

***The people of Lut gave the lie to the messengers. (al-Shu‘ara’,
26/160)***

> وَأَمْطَرْنَا عَلَيْهِم مَّطَرًا فَسَاء مَطَرُ الْمُنذَرِينَ {o} إِنَّ
> فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا كَانَ أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We rained down upon them a rain, and evil was the rain on those
warned. Most surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not
believe. And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
(al-Shu‘ara’, 26/173-175)***

> 6)      كَذَّبَ أَصْحَابُ الْأَيْكَةِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ

***The dwellers of the thicket gave the lie to the messengers.
(al-Shu‘ara’, 26/176)***

> فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَأَخَذَهُمْ عَذَابُ يَوْمِ الظُّلَّةِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ
> عَذَابَ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ {o} إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَةً وَمَا كَانَ
> أَكْثَرُهُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ {o} وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But they called him a liar, so the punishment of the day of covering
overtook them; surely it was the punishment of a grievous day. Most
surely there is a sign in this, but most of them do not believe. And
most surely your Lord is Mighty, the Merciful. (al-Shu‘ara’,
26/189-191)***

The history of mankind and a thorough analysis of its development
reveals a unique repository of information; realities are revealed
through deep contemplation of these events – indeed, this is one of the
soundest ways of discovering truths.

The Qur’an encourages man to discover these truths by studying the
factors that led to the successes and failures, and the rise and fall of
previous nations, and the fate of those who violated the truth. By
deliberating over the laws and regular trends of history and studying
accurate analyses of historical events, he can better interpret the
various incidents and draw lessons and benefit from the events of the
day.

The term, “*’aziz*” (mighty) is one of the most beautiful qualities of
God that the Qur’an employs with great emphasis and frequency. This
great attribute has nearly always been used in conjunction with the
term, “*hakim*” (wise) in the Qur’an, and this pairing is an indication
of the wisdom of God’s speech; God, who is Mighty and Powerful, is at
the same time all-Wise.

However, in Surat ul Shu’ara’, this attribute of God has been mentioned
in conjunction with another attribute: *rahim* (merciful). In fact,
these two attributes recur in successive verses in this chapter; verses
that recount the abominable behaviour of communities who rose in
defiance against the Prophets sent to them, and hindered their attempts
to guide the people.

In addition to the usage of the two terms side by side, their repetition
is also instructive and noteworthy, as we will now explain:

Surat ul Shu‘ara’ mentions the incidents that invariably occurred with
the Prophets of God. In this chapter the account of Prophet Musa (A) and
Fir‘awn is narrated first, and then after relating the accounts of other
Prophets, namely Prophets Ibrahim (A), Nuh (A), Hud (A), Salih (A), Lut
(A) and Shu‘aib (A), the Qur’an talks of their tireless and determined
efforts to propagate their messages, which contained the most
fundamental and deep truths, all over the world.

And by recounting their struggle against the polytheism, corruption and
oppression of their time, the verse consoles the Prophet of Islam (S)
regarding the unpleasantness and difficulties that he was facing, and
strengthen his heart with the following beautiful phrase, “so rely on
the most-Mighty and Merciful.” (*wa tawakkal ‘al’l ‘aziz l-rahim*)

In all the verses in which the terms *‘aziz* and *rahim* are mentioned
together, the subject is the Divine retribution against the stubborn
disbelievers for their lifelong recalcitrance and corrupt conduct and
for rejecting the truth despite witnessing clear proofs. Their
continuation down this path of darkness and their constant
transgressions ultimately caused their hearts to be sealed, and left
them to forever wander in darkness.

A question that arises here is: Why does the Qur’an use the
terms *‘aziz* and *rahim* to describe God, the Holy, after describing
the descent of His wrath and the deserved punishment of a nation who
were destroyed for their atheism and defiance?

To answer this question, we must understand the true meaning contained
in these two Divine attributes and in particular, the significance of
their repetition in Surat ul Shu‘ara’. Additionally, we need to uncover
what message there is for mankind in the usage of the two terms in
juxtaposition and what lesson we can learn from it.

We know that amongst man’s deviant inclinations is his selfish nature
and his love of power. In human society we frequently see individuals
who have an inflated sense of self-importance and are fond of
exaggerating their achievements. This perverse inclination only serves
to mislead and further increases the domination of base desires over the
intellect of the individual and brings about many misfortunes for him.
Of course, this quality is weaker in some individuals than in others.

Even though there are individuals whose actions in life are principally
motivated by noble intentions, who are able to distinguish the sensual
elements of their predisposition from their true and sincere
aspirations, and try hard to protect themselves from the allure of
extreme and undesirable emotions, such individuals are very few in
number and are rarely found amongst the general population in society.
This is because to achieve such a harmonious balance requires a hard and
determined struggle against the soul.

On the other hand, there are many who, due to their weak morals and
desire to gain whatever limited power they can lay their hands on, will
be prepared to sanction any transgression or destruction that will give
them what they seek. They will react violently against any authority who
attempts to forestall them while they try to slake their insatiable
thirst for power. This is the nature of those who seek to rule over
others, who always create in their minds an image of a perfect role
model which satisfies their feeling of superiority, and then try to
mould and change their persona accordingly.

We also clearly see that high ambition and power-seeking is always
accompanied by a marked intolerance. This is not only limited to the
case of men of power at the head of one or several countries, but is
evident in the leaders of a township or village or even a small
department. Even the leader of the smallest group is extremely sensitive
and intolerant of the smallest infraction from those under him.

On the other hand, there is a close relationship between power and
mercilessness; usually, the more the power a person has, the less
merciful he becomes. He will blow out of proportion, and become enraged
at, the smallest resistance to his power, he will harbour feelings of
rage and revenge, and respond to any defiance of his authority in an
intemperate manner, and this merciless behaviour will even extend, in
the case of disobedience, to those closest to him.

The Prophets of God taught mankind how to contemplate about the truth
and freed them from the shackles of customs and baseless ancient
rituals. Their opening message, which illuminated the horizons of human
thought in every generation, was the call to *tawhid* (unity of God) and
the repudiation of every form of polytheism and idolatry; they
emphasised that salvation only lay in the belief in one God. Indeed,
throughout history, every Divine caller has begun his message with the
teaching of the unity, divinity and lordship of God. The understanding
of this primary reality compels man, by moving on this divine path, to
recover his footing and to attain perfection in harmony with the rest of
existence.

The messengers of God bore the terrible tribulations that were directed
at them with patience and fortitude so that, by passing on God’s
message, they could faithfully discharge the duty of ensuring the
felicity of mankind that had been placed on their shoulders by the
Creator.

Thereafter, for the salvation of their communities from the grip of
spiritual malaise in an environment where the foundations of
spirituality and morality were crumbling and which had dragged mankind
down from their true and noble state, they were commanded to educate
their people and make them aware of their potential. They informed them
that throughout the life of this world, man is in constant danger of
lapsing into error, so he should strive towards the source of goodness
and felicity, and distance himself from his previous conduct and reform
himself.

The Prophets did not expect any recompense for their efforts in
combating the corruption in their societies, not even a word of thanks.
They all stated, “Our recompense is with God, the Lord of the universe”.
It is here that the excellence of their personalities and their selfless
characters can be clearly appreciated.

Amongst the other objectives of the Prophets was to controvert the
worship of power and excessive selfishness and to transform the minds of
individuals so that they could work continuously to become free of their
shackles. In this way, people could gather their strength and work
together to create for themselves a meaningful destiny, because in the
course of history, irreparable damage and loss has been caused to
humanity by selfish and power hungry men.

The message of the verses of Surat ul Shu‘ara’ is that those arrogant,
selfish and rebellious communities who knowingly turned away from the
path of salvation, and obstinately persisted in their vain ways were
seized by God’s punishment and retribution and were obliterated from the
pages of existence; these were communities who opposed the Prophets of
God with impudence and ignored their advice and rejected the Divine
message with satanic impunity.

For this reason, day by day their lives grew bleaker and the dossier of
their transgressions grew longer until they closed all the doors of
return behind them, so that no hope for their rehabilitation remained
and no more respite to purify their souls and gain a reprieve from God’s
punishment was available. They had easily given up the opportunities
that had been granted to them and had now become enmeshed in a trap of
their own making; a trap that was only filled with Divine punishment and
retribution.

After every mention in this chapter of the ignominious end and
destruction of a rebellious nation, the Qur’an closes the account by
recounting God’s attribute of might and power (*‘aziz*), but also
immediately adds the attribute of mercy (*rahim*). From a cursory glance
at the verse it would appear that the mercy of God has nothing to do
with His punishment, and it might be more appropriate to cite the
attribute of vengeance or anger or omnipotence of God.

To appreciate the wisdom hidden in the verse we must first review the
lives of the Prophets of God; those who had access to the richest and
greatest source of information and knowledge, so that we can understand
how their elevated spiritual station is achieved.

One of the ways by which the Prophets (A) were raised in station was by
their resistance against the perversion, disbelief and obstinacy of
their communities, which caused them a great deal of spiritual distress.
Those messengers who were more resolute in the face of ordeals and
tribulations rose higher in station in God’s estimation.

Consider Prophet Nuh (A), who lived in the farthest reaches of history;
he spent 950 years of his thousand year life in propagating God’s
religion. His was a constant, difficult and long struggle. He tirelessly
battled against the idolatry and the foolish behaviour of his fatuous
community. Without losing his temper he ceaselessly tried to lead them
to the truth by imparting spiritual teaching.

During these long years, this great Prophet (A) had no helper and
support except his reliance on God, yet nothing could stop his efforts
and determination to guide his people in the different facets of their
lives. He did not show any reservations in discharging his
responsibilities and propagating his mission; he never hesitated in
plainly stating his message to a hostile and ignorant audience. Despite
all his long endeavours, he did not receive a positive reply from his
nation; instead the people of this ignorant and morally decadent society
persisted in their rejection and fanatically pursued their practice of
polytheism.

This Prophet of God continued with all this sincere effort for a
prolonged time, despite the relentless strain on his spirit, in the
aspiration that he would be able to get through to his rebellious people
and reform their corrupt ways, but these hopes never materialized.
Instead, as time went by, their defiance and disrespect only increased,
and they sank ever deeper into the swamp of ignorance and immorality.
Finally, towards the end of his life, when he lost all hope that his
people would ever change, he cursed them.

Other Prophets (A) had similar experiences with their people,
(forbearance and resoluteness in the face of the defiance of their
nation and their refusal to accept the Divine message, until they would
completely lose hope).

In the main, after passing through the three stages mentioned below,
Prophets (A) would finally imprecate their communities, who had resolved
to continue in their disbelief and totally given their lives over to
Satan. The Prophets would finally pray to God to send down His
punishment on them:

1. Great patience and fortitude in the face of disbelief, obstinacy and
insults of their people.

2. They would show the kind of forbearance that an ordinary person could
not exhibit.

3. Despair and total loss of hope in the reformation of their people,
after continuous efforts to guide them. When all their efforts and ideas
have been in vain and the people persist in their disobedience of God’s
message.

4. When the polytheists would persistently challenge them to bring about
God’s punishment.

Only when these stages had been crossed, would the Prophets (A)
[legitimately] seek God’s avengement and retribution. In the account of
Prophet Yunus (A) we read that he did not exhibit sufficient patience
and forbearance. When his efforts at guiding his people were met with
ignorant derision and rejection and they persisted with their misguided
rituals, he lost patience with them and before he was convinced that
there was no more he could do with them, he resorted to invoking God’s
punishment on them.

Due to his hasty despair and lack of the necessary perseverance in
discharging his duties, God cast him into the belly of the whale and
severely censured him to make him realize that, in the course of
carrying out his mission, if he had to face frustration, defeat and even
torture, he should resolutely see his mission through and stay in place.
The Qur’an states that other Prophets had this steadfastness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِدْرِيسَ وَذَا الْكِفْلِ كُلٌّ مِّنَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Ismail and Idris and Zulkifl; all were of the patient ones [when
delivering their messages]. (al-Anbiya’, 21/85)***

In the end, when the community of Yunus (A) witnessed the signs of God’s
wrath, they were overcome with abject fear and helplessness, and
realized their error just in time. They became remorseful at their
previous sinful conduct and fell on their knees begging for God’s
forgiveness and sincerely pleaded with Him to lift away His impending
punishment. God accepted their appeal and forgave then and rescinded his
punishment.

From this episode we clearly see how, in the face of the defiance and
disobedience of mankind, God patiently keeps the doors of His mercy
constantly open for man to enter through.

It is true that the mercy and grace of God is universal and widespread,
but this does not negate the possibility of punishment and retribution.
The mercy and endless blessings of God must not be misunderstood to mean
that in His sacred presence, the virtuous and the evil, the oppressed
and the oppressors are equal.

If God, the Most High, whose dominion prevails over every ruler and who
has complete authority over every defiant tyrant does not punish
disobedience, and humiliate every transgressor, and overlook the conduct
of every corrupt individual, then  justice and accountability will lose
its meaning. Should God give sanctuary to the oppressors and deal with
them mercifully? Is not the fire of hell the fairest requital for the
defiant sinner? And finally, it is the essence of justice that an atom’s
weight if good or an atom’s weight of evil should not be overlooked.

One of the clear manifestations of God’s omnipotence and mercy over His
ungrateful and disobedient servants is that after the coming of the
Prophet of Islam (S), He has stopped visiting retribution in the earth
and postponed it to the day of Judgement. In fact, even in the case of
the Masih (A), that great Prophet who was the “spirit of God”, who was
subjected to a variety of tribulations and finally marked for death, God
did not punish the perpetrators in this world and reserved the
punishment for their defiance and disobedience for the day of judgement.

Historians have acknowledged that in the early days of his prophethood,
his people persecuted the great Prophet of Islam (S) – the Prophet who
was the Mercy to the worlds (*rahmatun li’l ‘alamin*) – mercilessly and
sabotaged his activities under different pretexts and tried to subvert
his mission by sending ruffians and troublemakers to heckle and harangue
him; in short, they spared no effort to harass him, belie him and defame
his noble character. Throughout all this, he maintained his composure
and exhibited tremendous patience. God also gave these oppressors
respite and did not send down His punishment on them in this world.

By studying all the matters discussed above, and keeping in mind the
events that have occurred throughout the long course of history, we
discover that the communities who were caught up in God’s retribution in
this world usually lived in cities with very limited populations. After
the followers of the Prophets left the scene where the punishment was to
come, so that they would remain immune from God’s wrath, we may say that
the remainder, who were comprised of the corrupt, defiant and
disbelieving individuals of the community, were relatively few.

In other words, those who were destroyed by God’s punishment during the
entire history of the ancient Prophets, which comprised thousands of
years, were a very small number of individuals compared to for example,
the casualties and extensive bloodshed that has occurred in various wars
in the world, or that nowadays are caused by countries seeking power, or
even for no apparent reason at all, where scores of people are killed.

In our time, we are witnessing widespread outbreaks of carnage in
various corners of the globe due to the selfish oppression of weaker
nations; every one of these wars is a testament to the crimes of
individuals who have hunger for power.

This is while God’s retributions and punishment of the defiant in the
past – even though in a small region, and to preserve human values and
to remove oppressors who were not prepared to obey God’s directives at
any cost, had already come down. In addition to punishing the guilty it
was a warning and a lesson for others, which has stopped many from
continuing on the path of the arrogant and the degenerate.

The fact is that from all wars, whose real motives have been to satisfy
the selfishness of warmongering individuals, and which have no purpose
except gaining power, one cannot expect any positive outcome; certainly
not an outcome that would engender an environment in which piety and
goodness would flourish and which would bring about enlightenment and
virtue. In fact these kinds of wars only bring in their wake misery and
corruption, and the resulting hardship and difficulties for the civil
population should not be ignored.

On the other hand, if those who turned their back on the truth and
denied themselves the protection of the true sanctuary, immediately
received the retribution for their actions and the whip of death and
doom came down on them at once and this practice was established for the
unbelievers and sinners in this world, and God did not delay their
punishment only until the day of judgement, what then would become of
mankind?

Now let us take into account various factors of the modern age, such as
the increase in the number of cities and the population of the world,
the speed of communication, the ease with which the teachings of the
Prophet (S) can be disseminated and the duty of making the message of
Islam reach all corners of the world, even while most nations are
steeped in atheism and corruption, or in other words, immersed in the
modern version of idolatry where the arrogant and their disciples assume
a hostile stance against God, which is an unforgivable  insolence. Now
in such an environment, which is full of widespread mischief and lack of
restraint, if God was to decide to manifest His wrath and to punish
those who were culpable in this very world, a great multitude of the
world’s population would be destroyed and annihilated from the pages of
existence.

Next let us bring to mind the limitless power of God, in front of which
the limited and temporary power of every imperious ruler in the world
pales into insignificance, a power which cannot be counted or
quantified, and the whole grand universe exists due to a negligible
fraction of the power, ability and greatness of the Creator and due to
His will. This power is reflected in the mirror of existence that
illuminates every atom in the cosmos.

The chief of the believers, Ali (A) has said, “O Allah! We cannot aspire
to know the real extent of Your greatness ... We see Your creation and
wonder over it because of Your might, and describe it as (a result of)
Your great authority; whereas what is hidden from us...is far
greater.[^1]

At no time or place, in the past or present, has it ever been seen that
a powerful ruler, dominant over all affairs in his personal domain – not
out of social or political considerations or for seeking fame, but only
because of a sincere affection and the love of mankind which is
ingrained in his character – always acts in a humanitarian and moral
manner and overlooks the insubordination and defiance of his opponents
who are under his power; in fact he goes so far as to treat those who
oppose and defy him with clemency and envelop them with his affection
without expecting any positive reaction from them. History cannot
present any powerful ruler, throughout the ages, with such
characteristics, although the issue of the reign of the Prophets of God
are special cases which we are not considering at this time.

Therefore the two attributes of “power” and “mercy” can never be united
in oppressive rulers.

It is here that we should ponder deeply so that we can properly
appreciate the enormity of the manifestation of *‘aziz* and *rahim*,
these two attributes of God, towards mankind. We need to become more and
more familiar with His power and mercy, especially towards those who
dare to be disobedient and sinful and defiant in front of His Grandeur;
one way to understand this is to ponder over His repeated emphasis in
all the foregoing verses, of these two of His great attributes. We thus
realise that true Power and Mercy belongs to God alone. Indeed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَإِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَهُوَ الْعَزِيزُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And most surely your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful. (al-Shu‘ara’,
26/68)***

[^1]: Nahj al-Balagha, sermon 160


