A Bounty in the Hearts of Mountains
===================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء فَأَخْرَجْنَا
بِهِ ثَمَرَاتٍ مُّخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهَا وَمِنَ الْجِبَالِ جُدَدٌ
بِيضٌ وَحُمْرٌ مُّخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهَا وَغَرَابِيبُ سُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the sky, then We
bring forth therewith fruits of various colours; and in the mountains
are*** ***streaks*** [^1]***, white and red, of various hues and
(others) intensely black? (al-Fatir, 35/27)***

In the Qur’an, the descriptions of the wondrous macrocosm designed by
the Creator have been mainly divided into two. The first is the
explanation of the intricate system of creation and the existence of
awe-inspiring phenomena, the endless marvels of which man witnesses
throughout the vast expanse of nature.

For those whose personal beliefs are underpinned by a Divine worldview
and who regard the universe as having been originated by the intelligent
design and perfect wisdom of a Creator, every moment provides an
opportunity to contemplate over an aspect of existence, and gather
important lessons from its structure and organization. In this manner,
they clearly perceive the glory and radiance and the wise hand that has
elegantly penned the pages of existence.

The second is the account of the dazzling realities that lie beyond the
natural world, which are remote from the complex mechanism of the
material realm and possess expansive horizons which are not subject to
the conventional principles and laws that we are used to. As a result,
our perception and understanding of the mysteries of the latent aspects
of existence is naturally limited and in fact, the knowledge of mankind
is like an insignificant drop in front of a vast ocean when it comes to
the unknown and secret elements of the non-material world.

Qur’anic exegetes have commented on this second type of wonder at some
length, although in truth, no amount of deliberation about these
mysteries – even if one manages to pierce the veils that shroud them –
can illuminate more than a small portion of the happenings in the world
beyond. This is because, as indicated earlier, the entire realm of
existence is far more vast and expansive than this natural world, and
within it, the non material world is far richer and more extensive than
the material world and due to their intrinsic limitations, the
scientific tools at the disposal of mankind are not powerful enough to
study and analyze most of these matters.

However, even in the particular case of the phenomena perceived in the
natural world, we can conduct our research and attempt to determine the
facts in two ways; one is to interpret the Qur’anic verses in the light
of modern knowledge and to analyze the various natural orders (animals,
vegetation, inanimate matter, etc.) and compare scientific findings with
the Qur’anic accounts to conclusively demonstrate that there is no
discordance or contradiction in the two, and that reason and intellect
also confirm the word of God.

We should bear in mind that although scientific knowledge provides the
illumination that has solved some mysteries, it is not capable of
dispelling all the secrets in creation. (Of course, one should not
compare the knowledge derived from the Qur’an with scientific
hypotheses, because science is based on experiments and research, and
theorems based on experimentation are shaky and unreliable, and
throughout its history scientific principles have been subjected to
amendments and then the old notions filed away. In fact the Qur’an,
which has an eternal hue, and is remote from every uncertainty, should
be the first point of reference, against which the validity of
scientific discoveries should be judged.)

Secondly, in relation to these wonders of the natural world and when
studying the various creations that make up existence, we must also keep
in mind the prevailing circumstances at the time of the revelation of
the Qur’an, and the capacity of the audience in those days. We need to
consider the level of ability, technology and understanding of the
people who lived in that era, and who did not generally possess the
means to investigate some of the more obscure unexplored and unknown
matters of creation. And through this we come to realize the extent of
the miracle of the noble Prophet (S).

And in fact, about the verse under consideration, the major focus of our
research is of the second type, as we will now explain:

Mines containing multihued precious gemstones are substantial sources of
income for the countries that possess these valuable treasures. These
stones of various colours are stored in the depths of mountains in
particular locations around the world and are extracted by a variety of
tools and skilful processes. Thereafter, they are exported all over the
world bringing much wealth and importance to the countries which produce
them.

Although mines containing precious gemstones are found and excavated in
most countries, however the number of rich mines in countries such as
Iran, Italy, China, South Korea, India and Portugal are more abundant
than in other locations. The primary colours of the stones are white,
black and red, while other colours can be considered as secondary.

In the verse under consideration, the Qur’an describes the primary
colours of the stones found in mines all over the world, as well as
mentioning the secondary colours:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء فَأَخْرَجْنَا
بِهِ ثَمَرَاتٍ مُّخْتَلِفًا أَلْوَانُهَا وَمِنَ الْجِبَالِ جُدَدٌ
بِيضٌ وَحُمْرٌ مُّخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهَا وَغَرَابِيبُ سُودٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud, then We
bring forth therewith fruits of various colours; and in the mountains
are streaks, white and red, of various hues and (others) intensely
black? (al-Fatir, 35/27)***

If the facts contained in the verse above have not come from the Creator
of the mines – the Almighty Creator who has created every atom in the
universe and who possesses comprehensive and direct knowledge of every
part of existence –  where else could it have come from?

The noble Prophet (S) passed his blessed life in the cities of Makka and
Madina, and only undertook two short journeys away from the Arab
peninsula; once in his childhood when he accompanied his uncle who had
taken a caravan to Syria, and another time in his twenties, when he
conducted business as an agent of Khadija, once again to Syria.

As for the various mines that contain precious stones of various hues,
which nowadays are considered as part of the national treasures of
countries and which provide benefit to nations, they are only found in a
handful of other countries, and not in Syria. Furthermore, they are
found deep in the bowels of mountains, so how could the Prophet (S) have
known of their existence and nature from any other source of
information?

Would it be possible for an ordinary person, who did not possess insight
or any spiritual connection with the source of all existence and who
could not display any miracle and who had no access to revelation, to
possess such knowledge in those days? And was the fact that he did
possess this knowledge not a proof that he was connected to the
Originator of creation and received revelation from Him? In fact, in
those days people did not generally spend much time in contemplating
about the mysteries of nature or trying to uncover the innumerable
secrets of the various materials and creatures in the world.

In those days which human being possessed this solid and well-rounded
knowledge where he was not only aware of the existence of these mines,
but also spoke of future generations who would extract precious stones
(which have been enumerated alongside the rainwater as one the bounties
of God) from these mines which were hidden deep in the depths of
mountains?

Aside from the eloquent nature of the verse above, which might have an
outward similarity with other literary works, it possesses a unique
distinctiveness and undeniable majesty that makes it transcend the reach
of human endeavour. The verse mentions two bounties and their intimate
connection with the life of man; one is the bounty of vegetation and the
other is the bounty of inorganic materials.

Vegetation in the form of colourful fruits and some grains  which have
been mentioned at the beginning of the verse ensures man’s nutritional
needs and strengthens his body, while the second bounty, that of
mountain ranges, provide the raw materials from which man can build a
shelter for himself. In truth, the Qur’an mentions these two bounties
and draws the attention of man to these two sources of his most basic
and fundamental needs, food and shelter.

The wise Creator created the surface rocks for man to use while he had
not yet advanced past the scientifically stagnant period of history,
while He had kept more variegated gemstones for human beings to use when
their civilizations flourished and their knowledge developed so they may
harness these better materials to construct modern types of buildings.
We know that in ancient times, people did not have access to (many)
multicoloured stones to use in their constructions.

In those days, most of the rocks that were used by the people were of
the poor variety commonly found in all mountain ranges across the world,
which were easily accessible to all. They would use these rocks to lay
down the foundations of their houses, or occasionally to line the roofs
of their buildings. It is in more recent times that man has acquired the
skills and developed the equipment and modern machinery to successfully
extract precious stones from the deep recesses of mountains and put them
to use in various constructions.  
 In the next verse, God states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ النَّاسِ وَالدَّوَابِّ وَالْأَنْعَامِ مُخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ
كَذَلِكَ إِنَّمَا يَخْشَى اللَّهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاء إِنَّ
اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ غَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And of men and beasts and cattle are diverse colours, likewise; only
those of His servants who are possessed of knowledge fear Allah; indeed
Allah is Mighty, Forgiving. (al-Fatir, 35/28)***

Apart from the colours of objects and the stones inside mountains, in
this verse God mentions the diverse colours found amongst human beings,
who are fair and dark-skinned; and about animals also, there is a
mention of the expansive palette of colours that they exhibit.

As we have seen, the Qur’an clearly alludes to the wide variety of
colours found throughout the mineral, plant, animal and human kingdoms
and opens a door of enquiry so that everyone can can look into nature
and its processes and marvel at the intricate system that is behind even
the minutest particles in the vast fabric of existence.

The Qur’an declares that these wonders of creation, each of which is a
sign of the endless knowledge and grandeur and power of God Almighty,
can only be truly appreciated by those who possess intellect – those
whose minds are illuminated by the light of insight, wisdom and mature
vision – who realize that the grand construction and system of the
universe with all its splendour is but an insignificant manifestation of
His power and capability. They consider the entirety of the pages of the
book of creation to be a testimony to the influence of the design and
supreme intellect that is behind its creation.

Indeed! Those who possess insight and intellect, when they witness the
wondrous design and aim and programming and far-reaching wisdom that is
evident in the world around them and in the celestial bodies and in the
heart of atoms and stones and in every aspect of the universe, from the
smallest to the biggest object, they are irresistibly drawn to the
limitless perfection of the Creator and they constantly hasten towards
Him with eagerness, fervour and perfect faith.

The explanation and exegesis of this verse demonstrates another example
of the miracle of God’s speech, which has not been considered by the
great exegetes in their works.

[^1]: According to the author of the lexicon, “Mu’jam al-Wasit”, the
word “al-jadad” refers to a portion of an object whose colour is
different from the surrounding, and this meaning is more consistent with
our discussion. Mu’jam al-Wasit, 1/110.


