Preface
=======

**Bismillahir Rehamanir Rahim**

Alhamdi Lillahe Rabbil Aalamin Wassalato Wassalamo Ala Nabiyeid-din wa
Aalehi Gurral Mayamin Amma Baad.

When this weak slave Abdullah Mamkani realized this world's short life
and unreliability and when he became sure that death does not give
extension to anybody - you cannot delay the destined time by even a
second - then I became afraid, lest

I depart from this world without teaching my son spiritual guidance!
Therefore I found it necessary to write a book in the form of a 'Will'
which will serve as a guidance to my children, my friends, my relatives
and others who wish to get religious and worldly benefits.

It is my heartfelt desire that all my children and my religious
brethrens should read this 'Will' at least once or once a month.
Whosoever of my children who doesn't read this, will be considered 'Aak'
in my view and there will be no hope of salvation either in this world
or the hereafter. If someone draws salvation from some of the advices in
this 'Will', then he should try to act on the remaining advices also, so
that one day, he is strong enough to act on all the advices in this
book.

Those of my relatives, who may act on this 'Will', I pray to Allah to
bless them in this world as well as in the next world, to protect them
from sins and losses, to increase their life-span and may they live in
peace and ease.

O God! For this 'Will', I reward me and my children on that day - the
day when neither wealth nor children will be of any help.

- Shaikh Abdullah Mamkani (a.r)

A Few Clarifications and Confessions by The Translator
------------------------------------------------------

**In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful**

'Miratur-Rashad' by Ayatulla As-Shaikh Abdulla Al-Mamkani (t.s) was
translated into Urdu by Allama Syed Zeeshan Haider Jawadi and then from
Urdu to Gujarati by Janab Yusuf Jigar.

I have translated it into English from the Gujarati version, though, for
obvious reasons, it would have been much better had it been translated
from the original text. However, I must confess that there were a few
sentences and paragraphs which I could not understand. so, instead of
translating those sentences and paragraphs, I have thought it prudent
not to translate them at all, lest I convey some other meaning that what
the author intended. Besides, at certain places, instead of literal
translation, I have taken the liberty of 'rephrasing' to make the
meaning more clear and explicit. In my humble opinion, these deletions
and 'rephrasings', in no way effect the overall impact of this book.

This is my first attempt at translation. So, it is likely that there may
be some mistakes. I request my readers to point out these mistakes to me
so that they can be corrected in the next edition.

If any Muâ€™min wants to translate any religious matter from Gujarati to
English or vice versa. I will be happy to do it 'Fi Sabilillah' free of
cost -

provided subsequent publishing is not meant for making profits. Those
interested, may contact Mr. Imran Rasool at World Islamic Network,
Mumbai, India.

Your critical comments and suggestions are most welcome.

May Allah give us Tawfik to act on the advices contained in this
scholarly book. Ameen.

**C. I. Valjee - Translator**


