The Importance of Education and Advices on How To Achieve It
============================================================

May Allah give you ‘Tawfeeq’ to earn His will and pleasure. May your
future be better than past. I advice you to obtain religious education.
The performance of obligatory deeds and desistance from “Haram’ deed
mainly depends on it. Besides, to obtain religious education is a matter
of great importance, honour and prestige.

It is the education which differentiates a man from an animal. Every
thing are of 2 types. One is of progress-going ahead and the other is
stagnation. Of these two, one who progresses (goes ahead) is better than
one who is stagnant. There are 2 types of progress-One is emotional and
the other is without emotion. It is evident that one who is emotional is
better than one without emotion. There are two types of emotional
people. One is a scholar and the other is an illiterate. It is crystal
clear that an educated is better than an uneducated and a scholar is
better than an illiterate. Therefore, education is the best and highest
of all.

According to the work of the ‘Musaffirs,’ ‘Sur al-Iqra’ was the first
sura to be sent. In this sura, Allah has declared that after creating
man, he was taught everything. Thus, after the blessing of life,
blessing of education is mentioned. This proves that education is the
best blessing of the whole world. The biggest honour that Allah has
bestowed on man is that from ‘Alaq’ (clot of blood), he rose him to the
exalted position of a learned person.

It is stated in ‘Sura al-Zumar’: Can an educated and illiterate be
equal? Never. Only an intelligent person can understand that the
position of an educated is far superior to that of an illiterate.

It is mentioned is ‘Sura al-Fatir’: Amongst the Mu’mins, only’ Alims’
are afraid of Allah.

In addition to this, are some ayaats, Alims are mentioned along with Him
which is the best proof of respect and honour. Traditions also mention
the importance of education

Abdulla Bin Maymun Kaddah, through Hazrat Imam Ja’far Sadiq (a.s.) has
narrated a tradition of the Holy Prophet (S): One who walks on the path
of religion, Allah guides him to the path of paradise, the angels spread
their wings below his feet. All living beings in heaven and earth
including fishes in ocean, pray for him, The status of an ‘Abid’ as
compared to an ‘Alim’ is that of stars as compared to full moon. Alims
are the inheritors of the prophet.

Prophets do not leave dirham-dinar as legacy, their legacy is education.
One who inherits this, he has obtained a lot.

Asbagh bin Nabata has narrated from Amirul Mu’mineen Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.)
that obtain ilm. It’s learning is a pious deed, discussion is its rosary
(Tasbih), argument is its jihad and teaching is its sadqa. Through
education one can understand Haram-Halal. You can obtain paradise
through education.

Education is a friend in loneliness, helper in loneliness, mental peace
in war. Allah has made some people ‘leaders of good deeds\` by
education. Look at their good deeds and follow them. Education is the
life of the heart, light of the eye, strength of the body and
destination of pious people. Through education, you obey Allah’s orders,
you can understand the exalted position of Allah and his oneness.
Through education, you realize the importance of kindness, Halal and
Haram. Education is Imam (leader) of intelligence[^1].

Hasan bin Abil Hasan Al-Farsi has cited from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) that the Holy Prophet (S) has said: It is compulsory for every
Muslim to obtain education. Allah be-friends those who obtain
knowledge[^2].

Abu Ishaq has cited the following words of Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.): O people!
The completion of religion is to obtain knowledge and to act on it. It
is more compulsory to obtain knowledge than to obtain wealth. The
quantity of wealth is destined. Allah, the Just, has taken the
responsibility of its distribution and He will fulfill His promise. Ilm
is preserved by Aalims and you have to obtain it. So obtain ilm as
ordered by Allah[^3].

Abu Hamza Omali has cited a tradition of Imam Sajjad (a.s.): If people
realized the importance of religious education, they would give their
lives even by drowning in the sea to obtain Ilm. Allah, through His
messenger, told Janab al-Daniyal that the worst believer is one who is
illiterate insults the Alim and does not follow him. The best believer
is one who is pious, eager to earn thawab, companion of alims, follower
of Alims and who learns from the scholars[^4].

In another tradition it is stated that an Alims, from whose Ilm benefit
is derived, he is better than 70,000 Abids[^5].

It is stated by Muaviya bin Ammar: I asked Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.): What is the difference between a Ravi (collector of Ahadith) who
preaches your tradition, who is able to convince Mu’mins to follow the
tradition and an abid who has no such qualities? He replied: Such a ravi
is better than thousand Abids[^6].

The Holy Prophet (S) has said: In life, Khair (betterment) is only for
two types of people.

(1) The Alim who is obeyed and

(2) a person who listens carefully and obtains knowledge (Ilm)[^7].

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) told Bashir Dahan: There is no betterment
for those of my companions who do not obtain

religious education. Bashir! Remember, a person who does not learn Fiqh
is dependant on others’ Ilm and people will lead him astray because of
his ignorance[^8].

Suleman bin Ja’far has cited from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
that Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s.) has said: The status of an Alim is more
than that of a person who is fasting, one who prays the whole night and
one who fights in the way of Allah. The death of an Alim is an
irreplaceable loss to Islam[^9].

Imam (a.s.) has stated: In the opinion of Iblis (Satan) there is no
better death than that of an Alim[^10].

Hazrat Imam Moosa bin Ja’far (a.s.) has said: When a Mu’min dies, the
angels in heaven, each and every place of worship and all the doors of
heaven through which his good deeds used to soar, they all cry. It is a
loss to Islam. The Alims of Mu’mins are the citadel of Islam just like
the walls, which protect the city[^11].

Besides these, there are innumerable traditions, which are cited in the
books of Ahadith (traditions). So my son, beware! Don’t let this big
blessing, great status and source of much ‘thawab’ slip from your hands.
Beware, in your anxiety for worldly wealth, don’t neglect religious
education. On the contrary, to obtain religious education, be ready for
poverty. In this way, you will obtain permanent wealth, honor and
prestige.

If you have difficulty in earning your daily bread, remember the rewards
and thawab in the next world. This will lighten all your troubles. Just
look at all those people who left religious education and became busy
amassing wealth. How happy and contented they are! They have been
deprived of benefits of both the worlds. At least you are assured of
benefits in the next world.

Son, be contended. Don’t go after the show and splendor of the world.
This world has not appreciated the worth and dignity of the grandson of
the Holy Prophet (S) Hazrat Imam Hussein (a.s.), then who are you? This
world gave importance to Yazid over Imam Husain (a.s.). Don’t fall in
love with this unfaithful and double-crossing world. It is against
intelligence. Philosophers like Ibn al-Sina have strongly opposed it.

Son, don’t be disappointed with all the trials and tribulations which
you have to suffer in obtaining ilm. Do your work. Remember, this world
is a house of misery and troubles. It is useless to search for happiness
and ease in this world. If this world gets attracted towards you, then
it will push you further from the next world, take you away from piety
and get you entangled in useless talk and deception. It will put all its
burden on you by distracting you.

One who desires this world will always be in distress. His condition
will always be like hell, which is always shouting ‘Hal Min Mazid’. Its
stomach is never full. There is always one way to escape from it - fall
in love with the next world. Then there will be neither uneasiness, nor
misery nor sadness.

Son, I mean by my life, that pleasure and happiness, which you get in
rejecting this world, you will not get one thousandth of it, if you go
after this world. But yes, remember, by rejecting this world, it does
not mean that you should give away all you have, cutoff relations with
everybody and become a ‘sufi’. The shariat does not like this at all.
‘Rejecting this world’ means not to fall in love with this world, not to
get carried away by its pleasure. It means to have faith in Allah in
whatever you get and be happy in Allah’s will.

On this subject, there is a reference in the ‘Sahih’ of Abdulla bin
Yasur. A man said to Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.): I loved this
world. I hope I get it. Imam said: You love it so much? What will you do
if you get it? The man replied: I will use it for my benefit as well as
for the benefit of my children, I will do charity in the way of Allah, I
will perform Haj and Umra. The Imam replied: This is not the love of
this world but this the love of the next world[^12].

Qasde Qurbat
------------

Son, may Allah bless you in this world as well as in the next world.
When obtaining ilm, keep your intentions pure. Keep your heart away from
worldly selfishness and turn your soul towards obtaining strength of
action. Keep away from evils. Develop strength of character. Keep anger
and evil desires in control. Always remember the following words of
Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.): Who ever obtains ‘Ilm’, acts on it
and teaches it to others, will be called ‘Great’ in heavens. It will be
announced that this man learned for the sake of Allah, acted on it for
the sake of Allah and taught it to others for the sake of Allah[^13].

Ubad bin Suhaib has narrated from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.):
There are 3 types of students: The first type of student learns so that
they spread ignorance and in–fighting. The second type learn for pride
and conspiracy. The third type learn for ‘Fiqh’ and reasoning.

The first type of people brag about their ilm in gatherings and social
functions, pretend about ilm, make a show of sincerity in public though
in reality they are devoid of ‘Taqwa’ Allah will rub their noses and
break their back. The second type who learns for pride and conspiracy
will be polite with rich people, enjoy their hospitality and destroy
their religion.

One who learns for pride and conspiracy will be polite with rich people,
enjoy their hospitality and destroy their religion. One who learns for
‘Fiqh’ and reasoning will be always sad, worrying about the next world.
He will pray in the darkness of night and shiver. He knows the people.
He is not misled by those near to him. Allah has strengthened his
‘Arkan[^14]’.

Salim bin Kais has given reference of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s.) about the
following words of the Holy Prophet (S) that two types of thirst cannot
be quenched: The thirst of one who seeks this world and thirst of one
who seeks ilm. A person who is satisfied with ‘Halal’ will be safe
otherwise he is doomed. Whoever obtains ilm from it’s ‘Ehl’ and acts on
it will be saved. If he obtain ilm with the intention of getting this
world then he will get this world only. He will be deprived of
everything in the next[^15].

Abu Huzayfa has cited the following from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
that, one who obtains Ahadith with the intention of earning this world,
will be deprived of the here after. One who desires blessings in the
hereafter, he will get it in this world as well as the next world[^16].

Hafas bin Gayas has quoted the following saying of Hazrat Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s.) that whenever you see an Alim tilting towards this
world, than be careful about your religion because every friend worries
about his friend.

At another place, it is stated that, Allah (s.w.t.) sent the following
message to Janab Dawood: Beware, Don’t make an Alim who is engrossed in
this world, a medium between you and me. He will lead you astray from
the path of religion. These type of Alims are robbers. My minimum
behaviour towards them will be to destroy from their hearts the pleasure
of my praise[^17].

Sakuni has cited the following from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) that
Mursal al-Azam (S) has said that; fakihs are the trustees of the
prophets as long as they do not enter this world: He was asked: O
prophet of Allah! How will they enter the world? He replied: By obeying
the kings. When they do this, then be careful of your religion (Beware
of them)[^18].

Rabai bin Abdulla has cited from Imam Muhammad Baqer (a.s.) that
whosoever procures knowledge to oppose Alims, to fight with foolish
people and to draw people’s attention towards him, will go to hell on
the day of judgement. Leadership is the right of those who deserve
leadership[^19].

Son, do not sin after procuring Ilm. Allah’s hujjat is very essential
for an Alim. Allah only forgives those who are ignorant not Alims[^20].

Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) told Ibne Gayas: Allah will forgive
seventy sins of an ignorant person before forgiving one sin of an
Alim[^21].

(This does not mean that everyone should remain ignorant so that his
sins are forgiven because not to procure ilm deliberately is also a sin.
This is for those people who cannot study due to circumstances and they
cannot reach those who are Ahle-Ilm - Jawadi)

Whenever you want to procure Ilm, then search for righteous, good and
pious teacher, because there is always a danger from those who are not
Muttaqi.

Son, read Munyatul Murid by Sahahid al-Sani (a.r.). In this book there
is a detailed description of relationship between a teacher and pupil.
No deed is praiseworthy without manners and respect. Respect all Alims
especially your teachers. Teacher is in the place of your father[^22].

Sabit bin Dinar has cited from Hazrat Imam Sajjad (a.s.) that whosoever
guides you in Ilm, it is his right that you respect him, you listen to
his lecture very attentively, you should not raise your voice over his
voice, you should not talk of others in his presence nor backbite. If
someone speaks bad about him then you should defend him. You should
cover his defects and declare his virtues. You should not mix with his
enemies. If you do all these, then angels will also say that you have
procured ilm for Allah and not for public.

The right of the pupil over his teacher is that the teacher should look
after his pupil. Allah has made the teacher his guardian. He has opened
his treasures for him. If, during studies, he behaves well, does not get
angry, then Allah will give him more. If he refuses to impart knowledge,
rejects his request, then it is incumbent upon Allah to snatch away the
glitter of his ilm and obliterate the respect, which the people have for
him[^23].

Suleman bin Ja’fari has cited from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) this
narration from Hazrat ‘Ali (a.s.) that it is the right of an Alim that
you should not ask him too many questions, and you should not tug at his
clothes. When you enter the assembly of people, besides saluting
everybody, do special salam to him, sit in front of him and not behind
him.

Don’t make gestures with your eyes or hands. Don’t talk too much. Don’t
harass him by sitting for too long. Their example is that of a date
tree. One sitting below the tree waits patiently for the fruits and
takes whatever he gets[^24].

Son, may Allah count you amongst ‘Religious Alim’. Act on whatever ilm
you have obtained. The popularity of ilm is because of its
implementation. An Alim who does not act is like a tree without fruits.

Beware, never stop acting on your ilm because knowledge Becomes useless
without actions. Someone has rightly said that it is the responsibility
of every Mu’mineen to act but the responsibility is very severe on an
alim. It is for this reason that the wives of the prophet (S) earn
greater reward for their obedience and get more punishment for their
sins. Reward and punishment may vary according to circumstance
prevailing conditions.

Salim bin Qais has cited from Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s) the following
saying of the Holy Prophet (S) that alims are of two types. Some alims
act on their ilm and are saved, some alims do not act on their ilm and
are doomed. Those in hell will be disturbed by the foul smell emitting
from alims who did not act. The most unlucky alim will be the one who
will go to hell because of his inaction while those who followed his
guidance and advice will go to heaven! Beware of becoming a slave to
your desires and excessive hopes. Slavery to desires, stops you from the
right path and excessive desires make you forget the hereafter[^25].

Ismail bin Jabir has narrated from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s)
that ilm is enjoined with action. Whosoever obtains ilm should act on
it. Ilm demands action. If there is no action, ilm is frittered
away[^26].

Abdullah bin al-Qasam al Ja’fari has narrated from Hazrat Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s) that an alim who does not act on his ilm, his guidance
and advice will flow down the heart as water follows down from a
mountain stone.

‘Ali bin Hashim bin Burid has stated that a man came to Hazrat Imam
Sajjad (a.s). he asked him a few questions. Hazrat (a.s.) replied to all
the questions. Than he wanted to ask some more questions. Hazrat (a.s.)
said: It is stated in the Bible that before obtaining more ilm you
should first act on the ilm which you already have. Ilm without action
is the cause of kufr and he strays away from Allah[^27].

In some of the sermons of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s.), it is said that act
on your ilm so that you are guided. An Alim without action is like an
ignorant man who never gets out of his ignorance and is always confused.
This type of alim and ignorant man both will be doomed. So beware do not
have doubts otherwise you will become kafir. Don’t be lazy about right
and truth otherwise you will be the loser. ‘Right’ is that you should
learn ilm and religious ilm is that you should not go astray. Order your
‘Nafs’ to obey Allah, Don’t fool’ Nafs because it is a sin. One who
obeys ‘Allah’ is happy while one who sins is disappointed and unlucky.

Abdullah bin Maymun bin Kaddah has narrated from Hazrat Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s) that a man asked Holy Prophet (S): O prophet of Allah,
what is ilm? He (S) replied: Silence. Second question: After that? He
(S) replied: ‘To remember’. Again he asked: After that? The Holy Prophet
(S) replied: Act on it. Last question ! After that? He (S) replied
‘Propagate, Propagate[^28]’.

Haris bin Mugira has narrated from Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
the explanation of the Ayat Innama Yakshallah…… that an Alim is one
whose words and deeds complements each other. Otherwise there will be
contradiction between words and action.

Son, inculcate the above mentioned qualities of an Alim in yourself.
Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s) has stated that: Obtain Ilm, decorate
yourself with ilm. Behave politely with your students as well as with
your teachers. Beware don’t become a tyrant Alim because this makes
right (truth) useless and destroys it.

In ‘Sahih al-habli’ Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s) has stated a
saying of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s.): I will give you the sign of a real
faqih. A real faqih and religious alim is one who does not make people
lose hope from the blessings of Allah and also does not make people
unmindful about the punishment of Allah; does not give permission to sin
and does not depend on any thing else except the Holy Qur’an. There is
no goodness in the ilm in which there is no useful lesson and there is
no benefit in it’s reading, in which there is nothing to think and
ponder. Such prayers are useless in which there is no fear of
Allah[^29].

Muawiyah bin Wahab through Hazrat Imam Sadiq (a.s) has cited the saying
of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s.) that: O seeker of Knowledge! There are three
signs of an Alim ‘Ilm’, 'Hilm’ (politeness) and ‘Silence’, there are
three sign of so-called Alims they fight with their superiors through
sin, they suppress those under them by tyranny and they help
tyrants[^30].

At another place, it is stated that the heart of an alim is devoid of
ignorance and treachery.

Abu Baseer has said that he had heard from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.)
the saying of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s): “O seeker of knowledge! There are
many blessing of ilm which you should remember. Its head is full of
politeness, its eyes are devoid of jealousy, its ears are understanding,
its tongue is truthfulness, its memory is anxiousness, its heart is good
intentions, its intelligence is understanding of things and deeds, its
hands are blessing, its legs are ‘Ziarat’ of alims, its courage is
safety, its wisdom is ‘Taqwa’, its center is ‘Najat’, its benefit is
‘Aafiyat’, its mount is faithfulness, its weapon is to speak slowly, its
word is ‘Reza’, its army is debate and discussion, its wealth is good
manners, its collection is to desist from sin, its food is good deeds,
its place of rest is mutual relations, its argument is righteousness,
its companion is love of righteous people[^31].

The Holy Prophet (S) has said that the best vazir of Imam is ‘Ilm’ and
the best vazir of Ilm is Hilm (politeness) and the best vazir of Hilm is
kindness and the best vazir of kindness is patience[^32].

Son! Beware, if you do not have knowledge, then don’t say anything.
Hazrat Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) told Mufazzal: Beware of two traits in which
there is destruction of man: Religious rituals through Batil (falsehood)
and to give ‘Fatwa’ without ilm.

It is stated by Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) that: Whosoever
gives ‘Fatwa’ without ilm and guidance, the angels of mercy and
punishment both will curse him and he will be responsible for deeds of
all those who follow his ‘fatwa[^33]’.

The Holy Prophet (S) has said that one who gives ‘Fatwa’ without
understanding and knowing ‘Nasikh’, 'Mansukh,’ ‘Mohkam’ and
‘Motashabeh,’ will be ruined and he will ruin others[^34].

Son, remember, if you do not know anything, then say openly and frankly
that you do not know, don’t say ‘Allaho Aalam.’ Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.) has said that by saying ‘Allaho Aalam’, doubt is created in the
mind of the listener that possibly you know while by saying ‘I do not
know,’ it becomes clear – you are speaking honestly[^35].

At another place it is stated that if an alim does not know a problem he
can say ‘Allaho Aalam’ but an ignorant man has no right to say it
(because he is not qualified to do research, so he should clearly state
his ignorance[^36].)

At one place, it is stated that: Keep silent and behave with restrain
about an order of which you are ignorant. Ask about it to ‘Saheban
al-Ismat’ (Masooms). They will lead you to the right path, clear the
darkness and clarify the truth. Allah has ordered that ‘whatever you do
not know, ask ‘Ahl al-Zikr’, and Alims[^37]’.

Beware don’t act without ilm. By acting without ilm, man is lead astray.
The more he moves forward, the more he is misled away from right
(truth)[^38].

The Holy Prophet (S) has stated that one who acts without Ilm spoils the
work instead of doing it properly. Son, keep company of those alims who
practice what they preach, love them. Those who love are counted along
with their beloved by Allah. A person who likes the deed of a community
is considered a partner in their deeds[^39].

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) told Abu Hanifa: Become an alim or a seeker of ilm or
a friend of ilm.

By becoming an enemy of an alim you will be ruined[^40].

There is a famous tradition from Imam Sajjad (a.s.) that a person who
desires the company of Alims and who is pious, is dear to Allah.

Give 'Ilm’ to one who deserves it. Teaching is ‘Zakat’ of Ilm.

Janabe Isa (a.s) said in a sermon to the people of Bain Israel: Beware
don’t speak words of wisdom in front of illiterate people because it is
a tyranny on ‘Hikmat’. If you hide ‘Hikmat’ from those who deserve it,
then it is a tyranny on them.

Son may Allah keep you alive and give you ‘Tawfiq’ to be contended with
whatever He gives. Beware learn all the ilms as much as necessary, spend
the rest of the time in learning ‘Fiqh’. The love of ilm is the secret
of ‘Amal’ (deed) and ‘Amal’ is related to ‘Fiqh’. It is by ‘Fiqh’ that
you understand ‘Amr’ and ‘Nahi’. Allah’s Ehkam is the best information
in this word. It is through ‘Ehkam’ that you can prosper in this world
and the hereafter and through it there is the perfection of humanity.

In Ma-abinul Usul’, the author has said very beautifully: Allah has
created all things with some purpose. He has made human being “Ashraful
Makhluqat” (best of his creation), so the purpose behind this must also
he Ashraf (best).

It is clear that the purpose behind it is definitely not to harm human
beings. Only an illiterate and ignorant can do such a thing. Since Allah
is Alim and Gani, the purpose behind the creation is to benefit him, The
worldly benefit is not the benefit in the real sense. So we conclude
that the real purpose is the benefit of the next worlds. Everyone will
not get this benefit. For this, you ought to have ‘authority’, and you
cannot get “authority” without Amal (Deed)’ and ‘Amal’ is derived from
‘Ilm’, so it is essential to have Ilm for the benefits of the hereafter.

There is no greater ilm than the ilm, which gives you these benefits.
Therefore Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s.) has said to Aban bin Taghlab that:
I wish I could whip my companions so that they obtain religious
education[^41].’

‘Ali bin Hamza has cited this tradition from Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq
(a.s.): Learn religious education. One who does not learn religious ilm
is ignorant and uncouth. Allah has made learning religious education
compulsory and made its propagation absolutely necessary[^42].

Mufazzal bin Umair has cited the following tradition of Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s) that: Whosoever does not obtain religious education will
not be blessed on the day of judgment. His Deeds will not considered
pure and sacred[^43].

Ibrahim bin Abdul Hamid has cited the following from Hazrat Imam Musa
al-Kazim (a.s.) that Mursal al-Aazam (s.a.w) entered a mosque and he saw
a person surrounded by many people. He asked ‘what is this? The people
said’ “He is Allama.’ The Holy Prophet (S) asked ‘what do you mean by
Allama?’ The people replied “ he has good knowledge of Arabian
dynasties, history of Arab wars, arabic poetry etc.”

The Holy Prophet (S) replied: “Beware, this is such a type of ilm which
is neither beneficial nor harmful. There are different types of alims:
Mohkam Ayat, Aadil Fazira and Mustakim sirat. Anything else is
superficial. (it means that Allama is one who is expert in these three
ilms, which are called ilms by shariat. In addition to these, a good
poet, a good writer a good thinker, and a good philosopher cannot be
called “Allama” – Jawadi)

Hazrat Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) has said: The finished achievement
of a man is to obtain ‘Religious Ilm’, to be patient during calamity and
to search for financial means[^44].

It is stated by hammad through Hazrat Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s) that
when Allah wishes to bless any body He gives him religious
education[^45].

The Holy Prophet (S) has said that Aalims are the trustees, followers
are the forts and oasis are the leaders.

Son, remember the discussion about ilm is prayer. Don’t neglect it. The
Holy Prophet (S) has said: Discuss religious topics, meet each other and
talk about it. The hearts shines by listening to tradition. Heart also
gets rusted like a sword. Tradition remove the rust and sharpen it[^46].

Hazrat Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s) said: Allah blesses one who keeps alive
Ilm. ‘It means that discuss religious topics with ahle al-deen and Ahle
Taqwa (those who are pious).

May Allah guide you to words religious Ilm and good deeds. If
circumstances demand that you do business, if you don’t do it you are
liable to incur loss for yourself and there is a possibility of your
committing sins (then definitely do business) but in doing business
don’t neglect your religious studies. Spend some time for business and
some time to obtain Ilm. The essence of tradition and experience is that
by running around more, income does not increase nor it decreases by
spending some less time[^47].

Beware don’t spend your whole life in business, there by neglecting the
procurement of ilm. Doing like this is like following the habits of
animals. As a matter of fact, it is very unfortunate that man does not
understand his responsibilities. His recitation and Duas are just
fluttering of lips which have no meaning.

It is appropriate and necessary that ‘Majlis al-Husain’ (a.s) should be
made the basis of life. There is ‘this world’ and hereafter both in it.
It has worldly benefit and you also obtain religious ilm.

(Alas, in this age, lectures are devoid of ilm. Now it is not necessary
to have religious ilm for Zikr and lectures).

Be careful that the tongue remains pure of lies and allegation. Without
proper research, don’t say anything in the name of Aeima al-Masoomeen
(a.m.s.). In reciting ‘Masaeeb’ depend on trustworthy tradition. Don’t
ever think that by reciting more ‘Masaeeb’ there will be more weeping.
Wailing and crying happens due to its effect on the heart and not by
creating traditions. The best way to arouse the feelings is by first
reciting the high status and wonderful deeds of Ahle Bayt (a.s) so that
their greatness and personalities are made known, then their calamities
and sufferings should be described. This will have an immediate effect
on heart.

Beware even after attaining a high position in Ilm. Don’t desire
leadership or power, It is like putting yourself in trouble and
destroying your ‘Deen’. I am telling you this from experience. After
becoming a leader, if you keep speaking the bitter truth, then you will
not have peace of mind and people will start abusing you. If you act as
per the wishes of the people, then, you will suffer in the next world.

Run away from leadership as if you are running away from a lion because
there is no benefit in a thing, which keeps you away from Ibadat. In my
whole life, I have not come across such a leader who acts honestly and
has not become a victim of public criticism. People think it fair to
attack his wealth and honour. They even consider it legitimate to abuse
him. Not only that, they treat him as ‘Kafir al-Harbi’.

Beware, don’t create tools for leadership nor hatch plots for it. By
doing these things, you will bring harm on yourself and you will be
deprived of happiness in this world and your religion also will be
effected. Yes, if leadership comes automatically, then accept it but be
careful about ‘Nafs’ every Mu’mint of your life because there is danger
of ‘Nafs’ (desires) and the possibility of falling prey to your desires.
Advantages are less and disadvantages are more. Those who can save
themselves are few and those who fall from grace are many. There are few
‘danger spots’ for ‘leadings Alims’ which need to be pointed.

Danger spots
------------

### 1st Danger spot: Becoming a judge

This is a deadly poison so beware of it. Many a times, you err and are
ruined, specially in such a time when honest men are few and satan’s
followers are many. Cunning people will do such deeds which will take ¾
of them to hell and only ¼ will go to heaven.

Will any sensible man be ready to do such a deed in which the
possibility of loss is more than that of profit? Can any pious man dare
to sit on a seat where prophet and wasi used to sit or some wretch evil
man used to sit[^48]?

Can there be someone who has so much self-confidence in himself that he
considers himself equal to ‘prophet’ and a wasi so that he can save
himself from above mentioned misfortunes?

Beware, don’t go astray by satan’s treachery and don’t fall into the
trap of judgeship by considering it as ‘Wajibe al-Aini’, otherwise you
will be ruined by your ignorance. Of course, if you go to such a place
where there is no one else and if, thinking cooling and calmly, you feel
judgeship as Wajib al-Aini, then as far as possible, try to make peace
and reconciliation with both the parties and even after knowing the
truth, deal with restrain.

### 2nd danger spot: Usurping Someone’s Rights

Sometimes, rights of beggars, destitute, prophets’ house hold, people
etc. are usurped and sometimes, without any solid base of Shariat rights
are usurped by giving importance to self over others or relatives.
Sometimes, because of the desire to spend money according to one’s
wishes, rights of other are usurped due to lack of sincerity.

If you become ‘Marja’ regarding ‘ Shariat’s Rights’ then remember the
following advice of my father (Taba Sarah):

(1) As far as possible, don’t spend ‘Huquq al-Shariya’ money on
yourself. Be contented with whatever gifts and presents you get,
because, I am afraid, that, if, in the beginning, you form the habit of
spending from ‘Huquq al-Shariya’ for your needs, then, with the passage
of time, the limit of needs will also increase. Money will be spent on
luxuries and eventually, the purchase of property and estate will also
be considered a necessity’, which is a sure way of destruction and
ultimately you will become the rightful candidate for permanent Allah’s
punishment.’ Rights’ are like doubts. One who moves around it, is bound
to get trapped one day.

Yes, if you are not a ‘Marja’ for ‘Taqleed’ and Huquq’, then you can
take your right as per your needs. And yes, never for a Moment think
that if I do not spend from ‘Huquq al-shariya’, I will die of hunger
because one who is responsible for providing livelihood is very
reliable, If he sees you running away from the use of ‘Huquq’, then he
will send gifts and presents which our conscience also accepts.

There is an extraordinary effect of not using ‘Huquq al-shariya’. There
is ‘Noor’ in the heart, increase in life span, ‘Taufiq’ of Allah’s
obedience and freedom from mistakes - sins. May Allah give you such
experience whereby your faith in Him becomes strong and implicit.

(2) While distributing ‘Huquq’, remember the ‘Qurbat’ (nearness) of
Allah. It should not happen that because of your personal selfishness.
You distribute ‘Huquq’ amongst your servants and followers and those who
are far away are deprived of it or you give more to those who are near
to you and less to those who are far because one who is near is showing
love and affection to you while who is far away is not able to show it.

Beware, always keep in mind the reasons and rules of ‘Shariat’ and
accordingly, give prominence to one over the other, because to deliver
the ‘Huquq is ‘Ibadat’ and in ‘Ibadat’ the ‘Niyyat’ of Qurbat’ is
necessary. If the ‘Niyyat’ is not proper and right, then there will be
responsibility from both the sides-giver of the ‘Huquq’. You will be
loser in this world as well as in the next world because you will not
get ‘Thawab’ as your Niyyat’ was not good.

### 3rd danger spot: Haste in Issuing Fatwa

Instead of doing haste in issuing fatwa, use discretion because it is
the worst illness. Don’t issue fatwa without taking all the aspects of
‘Fiqh’ into consideration. It is quite possible that you will issue
fatwa by looking at one part while some valid argument may be there is
another part and you may become liable for ‘Azaab’.

I have seen several times that some Alims give fatwa by taking into
consideration one part of the related tradition and the fatwa was proved
against ‘Ijma’ because they did not take the trouble of looking at the
other part.

If you will read the tradition of Abu Dalad about renting a mule, you
will realise how difficult it is to give ‘Fatwa’. If a ‘Fatwa’ about a
few ‘Dirham’ can stop rain falling from the sky, then what would result
if one issues wrong fatwa about huge wealth, someone’s reputation and
precious life.

It is written about Allama Hilli that after his death, he told his son
that if the book ‘Al-Fayn’ and Ziarat al-Husain (a.s) were not there,
‘Fatwas’ would have ruined him. If this is the condition of Allama
Hilli, what would happened to others!

Beware, don’t issue ‘Fatwa’ before obtaining all facts and information.
Even after obtaining all information, avoid it as far as possible.
However, if there is likelihood of people going astray and illiterate
people holding sway, then do issue ‘Fatwa’ but be very careful.

### 4th Danger spot: Lust of power

Along with ‘Marjiyyat’ is born the love for pomp and splendor and this
destroys the ‘Thawab’ (reward) and ruined the man. Beware of this danger
. Take care of your ‘Nafs’. ‘Nafs’ always leads towards evil. As long as
Allah does not shower His blessing, till then, may Allah give you and me
‘Taufiq’ to stay away from selfishness and desires. He is the only one
Who bestows compassion and mercy on his servants.

### 5th dangers spot: Pretence – Fraud

Beware, your heart should not go against the soul by showing piety and
contentment in public which is not there in actual reality. In the
present age, this type of behaviour is seen everywhere (public life is
different from private life).

Beware, this is ‘Shirk al-Khafi’ (hidden shrink) and if you ponder
deeply, it is ‘Shirk al-jali’ (open shrink) also, as if a servant wants
to glorify someone else expect Allah and he is engrossed in his
thoughts, though his private life is not going to be hidden for long.
Someday it will be disclosed and then he will fall from grace and his
reputation will be ruined.

[^1]: Beharul Anwar, p. 54

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, p. 30

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 30

[^4]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 35

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi – 1, p. 33

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 33

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 33

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 33

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi 1, p. 38

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, p. 38

[^11]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 38

[^12]: Waselush-shia-2, p. 530

[^13]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 35

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 49

[^15]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 46

[^16]: Usul al-1, p. 46

[^17]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 46

[^18]: Usule al-Kafi-1, p. 46

[^19]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 30

[^20]: Sur al-Nisa

[^21]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 47

[^22]: Ishna ashariy, p. 81

[^23]: Behar - 5, p. 24

[^24]: Usul al-Kafi-1, p. 37

[^25]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 44

[^26]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 44

[^27]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 42

[^28]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 48

[^29]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 36

[^30]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 37

[^31]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 42

[^32]: Usul al-kafi - 1, p. 48

[^33]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 42

[^34]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 42

[^35]: Usul al-kafi

[^36]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 42

[^37]: Sur al-Namal, Ayat 43

[^38]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 43

[^39]: Tafseer al-Safi, p. 56

[^40]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 34

[^41]: Maalimul Usul-2, p. 21

[^42]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 31

[^43]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 33

[^44]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 32

[^45]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 32

[^46]: Usul al-kafi-1, p. 32

[^47]: Mustadrak Wasaelush Shia - 2

[^48]: Wasaelush shia-3 p. 359


