Advice regarding Business
=========================

Son, May Allah improves all your deeds, increase your life span and give
you more ‘Taufiq’. As far as possible, reside at Najaf al-Ashraf because
you are in neighbourhood of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s) and Amirul Mu’mineen
(a.s) takes special care of his nieghbours. He saves his nieghbours from
evil deeds. This has been experienced in this age (Hijri 1324). It is
related about Najaf and Kufa that any cruel oppressor who tries to
destroy it, he himself will be destroyed.

(May Allah punish the present day tyrants for their cruel deeds and
protect Najaf al-Ashraf. Insha Allah, the blood of Martyrs will not go
in vain.)

In Najaf, there is the Ziarat of Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s). No sensible
person can be unaware of the ‘Fazila’ of Ziarat and praying Salat
(prayer) near the tomb[^1].

Residing at Najaf will save you from many sins. Here there are no
allurements which, you find at other places like Iran, etc.

(Here, author has given the example of Iran. However now Iran has become
Markaz al-Khair (center of virtues) while rulers of Najaf al-Ashraf have
established centers to ruin the moral character. May Allah punish these
tyrants for their sins and destroying the sanctity of the ‘Shrine’ -
Jawadi).

If, for some reason, it is not possible to reside at Najaf al-Ashraf,
then stay at some other sacred place expect Karbala’ because it is
‘Makruh’ to stay at Karbala’. Residing at Karbala’ makes a man cruel.
His attention towards the tragedy of Karbala’ decrease which is a very
big loss.

Son, if you can spend your life at some sacred place then don’t reside
at any other place. If you are helpless, then search for such a place
where virtuous people and Alims are residing. When staying at a sacred
place, find some house near the shrine (Haram), so that you can always
have the good fortune of Ziarat. If you are residing some where else,
then reside in the central part of the city because central part is more
protected from calamities.

Remember, if you can get a house on ownership or ‘Wakf’, don’t search
for a rented house because your own house or wakf house is better than a
rented grand mansion.

Before purchasing a house, inquire about the neighbours. Whenever I have
not paid attention to this aspect, I have had bitter experience.

If you want to construct a house, don’t construct the whole house at a
stretch but do it in stages. Also don’t demolish the whole house without
valid reasons but do the necessary repair work so that there is no waste
of money. Even if you have lots of wealth, don’t waste it on unnecessary
show and splendour.

This world is not a place of permanent residence. Spend the rest of your
money on improving your status in the next world by giving financial
assistance to someone to repair his house, helping bachelors to get
married and helping the needy etc.

If possible, stay in a spacious house, the speciousness of the house is
the cause of good luck and ‘Barkat’ whether in this would or the
hereafter[^2].

Son, adopt the middle courses in wearing clothes. Wear such clothes
which can be worn both by the rich and the poor. If you are poor then
you will be spending within your means and it will not be considered
extravagance (Israf). If you are rich, then it will be considered as
‘zohad’ and ‘Taqwa’, and it will give some consolation to the poor.
Remember, this world is a house of upheaval. It can turn upside down
anytime. So adopt such behaviour that changes do not create
embarrassment for you.

Don’t wear such clothes which exhibit your poverty or affluence. Both
these extremes have been criticized in the tradition. Be careful about
cleanliness and purity in clothes. This is appreciated by ‘Shari at’.

Keep good friends. A man is know by his friends. Beware, don’t keep the
company of men of bad faith, sinners and bad character. Because man is
influenced by his company. Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s) has pointed at it in
his ‘Diwan al-mash-hoor’. Lookman Hakim had also advised his son to
think before sitting in any company. Wherever you see discussion about
Allah, sit there. If you are an alim, then people will benefit from you
and if you are ignorant, then you will get the benefit of ‘ilm’. If
Allah sends His blessings on them, you will also be included in His
blessings[^3].

Hazrat Imam Musa al-Kazim (a.s) has said that it is better to talk with
an ‘Alim’ near a garbage heap than talking with an illiterate man
sitting on a soft carpet.

The Holy Prophet (S) has said that Hawaris (companions) asked Hazrat Isa
(a.s): In whose company should we sit? Hazrat Isa (a.s) replied: The
company of those, whose presence remind you of Allah, whose talk
increase your knowledge and whose action remind you of the
hereafter[^4].

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

Sitting in the company of a trustworthy person is better than one years
deeds[^5].

Amirul Mu’mineen (a.s) has said: Beware, don’t keep the company of mean
people. There is no hope of goodness from them.

Shaikh Sadooq (a.s) has said that: ‘Mean’ person means:

(1) One who is not aware what he is saying nor is he aware of what is
being said about him. That man is ‘mean’.

(2) One who blows his own trumpet is called ‘mean’.

(3) One who does not get happiness by good behaviour nor he feels sorry
by bad behaviour is called ‘mean’.

(4) A ‘mean’ person is one who claims leadership even through he has no
qualifications.

Of course, if there is hope of their improvement by keeping company of
such people and if their actions and thoughts are not going to influence
you, then surely there is no harm in keeping their company. This is
because it is not sufficient to control your ‘Nafs’ and save yourself
from hell but it is also necessary to guide others to the right path.
Therefore ‘Amr-bil-maaruf and ‘Nahi-aml-munkar’ had been made compulsory
much emphasis has been laid on these, so that other could be guided
towards the obedience of Allah and saved from the fire of hell.

Son, when you desire marriage, find a girl from a noble family because
it is through her that your family will increase. She is like a model
for your family. A child is always influenced by model and milk. Look
out for good qualities- ‘Iman - Taqwa’ and also at her face and external
appearance so that you are not attached towards some other woman and
mutual love and affection is maintained.

The reason behind warning against marrying only for beauty, is that it
should not be made the only criteria instead of religion and good
character. This does not mean that you should not consider beauty at
all. The same thing applies to wealth and riches, lest you place wealth
in place of religion and character. If there is some rich lady who is
religious-minded also, then there is no harm in marrying her.

On the contrary, there is the additional advantage that her wealth will
be useful for your children. They can study religious ilm in peace and
do all their work without any financial worries, But that is only
possible, if both ‘religion’ and ‘noble family’ are their. Beware, don’t
marry a woman who has recently acquired wealth. She will be proud of her
wealth and she will consider you inferior to her. In the tradition, it
is ‘Makruh’ to take loan from newly rich people. They have more ego and
superiority complex. If however, you have to choose between a newly rich
woman, then marry the poor woman.

Son, keep your wife, daughter and other household women in the confine
of your house. Don’t allow them to go out unless it is necessary. They
have very little understanding of good and evil. Therefore, they ruin
both this world and hereafter by coming under the spell of some other
woman.

Pay attention to the education and upbringing of your children. Teach
them ‘Shariat’ and good manners. Don’t think that ‘still they are kids
and they do not need any knowledge about Allah’s order’s. One, who has
not been brought up properly from childhood, will be difficult to mould
after he has grown up.

Teach ‘Deen’s Ehkam’ and ‘Shariat’ to your children because impressions
made during childhood cannot be erased. After teaching them Qur’an
al-Majid, let them read and learn from the books of

‘Mojizats’ (miracles), so that they not only get their ‘Aqida’ (beliefs)
from their parents but they strengthen their beliefs with reason and
logic.

Take maximum care that children do not go out of the house alone and
they don’t play with other children. If they want to play, let them play
in the house because they can be easily influenced by other children. It
should not happen that they came under the influence of other. Even
while studying, see to it, that your children do not stay in the company
of others more than necessary.

Arrange religious discussions at such a place where some third person is
present so that he may not learn mischief or ‘Shaytaniyat’ from his
companion. I am writing all these from my personal experience. During my
childhood, I had a companion, who was very well mannered and coming from
a good family. Yet, because of him, I cultivated the habit of cigarette
smoking, as a result of which, I am suffering till today, Whenever I
decided to quit smoking, I suffered one illness or the other and till
today I have not been able to quit smoking. In other words, I am
suffering from the influence of companionship.

Beware, don’t spoil your children by giving them money. There are many
disadvantages in it. Their hearts start loving wealth and afterwards
craving for money cannot be erased from their hearts. In future, they
will try to obtain money by any means. This is a bad example of
character deficiency.

Son, whether you have a son or a daughter, don’t inculcate the habit of
wearing costly dresses and eating high quality food, because, if
circumstances are not helpful in future, they will be greatly
inconvenienced. If you make them follow ‘middle-path’ then they will be
happy in whatever they get. Also keep in mind to get them married as
soon as they become ‘Baligh’. In this way, their ‘religion’ and
‘respect’ can be safe guarded and character deficiency will not arise.
By doing this, don’t think of poverty or scarcity because Allah has
already promised ‘Rizq’.

If you do not act on my orders, then I will consider you ‘Aaq’. My soul
will be displeased with you.

If you are extremely poor then do ‘Muta’ so that you do not fall prey to
sexual abuses.

Son, the essence of all these advices is that always think about
religious and worldly problems. Do whatever is better according to
Shariat. Always keep an eye on results so that Allah gives you ‘Taufiq’
to do good deeds and make your future better than your past.

**7th** **Jamadi-ul-awwal 1324 Hijri - Abdullah Al-Mamkani**

[^1]: Mustadrak –2, p. 195

[^2]: Mustadrak-2, p. 534

[^3]: Waselu-Shia-1, p. 442

[^4]: Usual al-Kafi-1, p. 39

[^5]: Usual al-Kafi-1, p. 39


