Kumayl's Life
=============

Kumayl b. Ziyad b. Naheed b. Haytham b. Sa'd b. Malik b. Nakhai was
chief of his tribe in Kufah, Iraq. He was a reliable reporter of Hadith,
though he did not report much, and a great devotee to worship of, and
service to, Almighty God.

He was born c. 18 A.H., became the Governor of Heet, Iraq during the
time of Imam Ali, c. 35-40 A.H. The Imam used to advise him on the
general characteristics of a Muslim ruler. On one occasion, the Imam
told him,

"Neglecting the (immediate) duty and being concerned about what is not
(urgent) is the permanent weakness," i.e., in order to succeed, one must
have clear agenda with a list of priorities and focus on one duty at a
time.

In 81 or 88 A.H. the tyrant of Iraq, Hajjaj, killed Kumayl and many
other believers for no reason but their faith. The shrine of Kumayl is
in the suburb of Najaf, Iraq.

(For details see al-Irshad by Shaykh al-Mufeed, d. 413 Najaf 1962, and
Tahdhib al-Tahdhib by Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani,d. 852, Hyderabad, India,
v8, P.448, 1328.)

**The Invocation's Merit**

Kumayl reports that he was with the commander of believers, Imam Ali,
at Basra Mosque, listening to him who was saying, "Whoever worships (the
Almighty) on the night before the middle of Sha'ban (8th month of
Islamic calendar) and recites the Khidr invocation, his wishes would be
fulfilled." Shaykh al-Tusi, d. 460 A.H., reports the Kumayl had observed
the commander of the believers during his prostration on that night,
reciting this invocation.

Sayyid Ibn Tawus d.664 A.H. adds: Kumayl further asked the Imam about
the merit of the invocation. Then, Imam replied: "When you (fully)
understand the invocation, recite it every night before Friday, or once
every month,
or once every year, or once in your lifetime, you will be protected,
helped, blessed, and forgiven (by the Almighty)." (for details see
al-Tusi d. 460, "Misbah al-Mutahajjid", p.774, and Ibn Tawus, d.664,
Iqbal al-Amal, p706.)

**THE ORIGINAL TEXT**

The Arabic text of Kumayl's Invocation is an excerpt from the following
sources:

1. "Key to Paradise", the concise edition of "Mafathih al-Jinan", by
Shaykh Abbas al-Qummi, d. 1359 A.H., edited by Sayyid Hadi Suhufi, and
the calligraphy by Abdul Rahim Afshari in 1381 A.H. However, the
original Arabic text has been compared with the following sources:

2. "Misbah al-Mutahajjid", by Shaykh Muhammad b. al-Hassan al-Tusi, d.
460 A.H., edited by Haj Ismail Ansari, Qum, Iran, 1401. This edition is
offset of the following:

3. Lithograph edition dated 1082 A.H., copyist, Muhammad Yahya b. Habib
Allah. this was copied from the following:

4. Manuscript dated 1068 A.H., Copyist Ahmad b. Haj Tawwali. This has
been compared with the following:

5. Manuscript dated 971 A.H., Copyist: 'Imam al-Din' Ali al-Sharif al-
Istrabadi. This was copied from the following:

6. Manuscript dated 571 A.H., Copyist: Muhammad b. Idris al-'Ijli. This
has been compared with the original manuscript of "al-Misbah" written by
the author, Shaykh Muhammad b. al-Hassan Abu Jafar al-Tusi, d. 460 A.H.
The chain of documents to Shaykh al-Tusi is mentioned in "al-Mashikha"
by Shaykh Muhammad Muhsin al-Tehrani, d.1389 A.H. in Najaf, Iraq, as
well as other sources.

In this translation, we have made all possible efforts to present an
English version of Kumayl's Invocation as close as possible to the
original Arabic text, based on the meanings of the equivalent roots in
both Arabic and English lexicons.


