Why Invocation?
===============

In Arabia, fourteen centuries ago, a man asked his friend for a
recommendation: what prayer would be the most useful to the one seeking
assurance of God's mercy? This prayer was given in response. The man's
name was Kumayl, son of Ziad, and his friend was Ali (AS), the Leader of
the Faithful.

Kumayl was a trusted companion of Ali (AS), well-known for his
devotion, and unflinching adherence to his great master. Kumayl has
transmitted a number of important sayings and teachings of the Leader of
the Faithful.

The famous supplication, known by the title Du'a-e-Kumayl or
supplication of Kumayl, is one of the most important of those
teachings.

The instructions delivered with this prayer emphasize that it should be
recited as frequently as possible. Faithful Muslims enjoy a weekly
recitation, usually on the evening of Thursdays.

A sincere reading of this prayer can reveal many things: the Islamic
concept of God, His Attributes, man's well-founded hopes for reply to
prayer and a tranquillity of spirit to be obtained with few other
prayers.

O' Nourisher, how can we thank You enough for the kind permission You
have given us, that at any time and under any condition we can call upon
You and You will take our hands.

You have insisted that at any incident we should come to Your door,
saying "I will support you and with My assistance you can overcome your
problems."

O' Lord, people are constantly wondering about invocation, which should
be defined as relation with You. Sometimes people ask "what is
invocation (Du'a)?" or they often ask "What effect does it have?"
Sometimes they complain, saying their invocations (Du'a) are not
accepted.

Questions are raised about the invocations (Du'a) by sinless people and
spiritual leaders, and the groans and wailing that accompany these
prayers into Your Holy Presence. I now ask for help from You, for Your
Aid in expressing this idea to present some points within a concise
essay, hoping to provide a solution to the problems of researchers.

Human beings live in a world with billions of creatures, known and
unknown. Their numbers seem impossible to know for human beings. The
span of man's vision is so small that he can not even obtain knowledge
of creatures that are around him.

Sometimes he can not even perceive them or get information concerning
their existence. With the recognition of his own knowledge as so
insufficient, when he reaches the climax of mental greatness, he cries
out by saying "I am uninformed of other than myself."

How can a human being, a trivial portion of the Universe live in such a
way that he always finds success and prosperity? Every moment he is
surrounded by problems, with heavy waves pushing him through unbearable
ups and downs and blights. Can a path be found through all these
difficulties?

The way that a human being can take to bring himself to the coast of
rescue? And in some manner continue his route and strive for the
development that he desires and find his God by reaching Him and joining
with the Sublime Essence, to grasp the real development that he was
created for?

Yes, the Creator of the World through the power which He entrusted to
human beings directs all them to development. All human beings eagerly
want to attain such development. This propensity that has been instilled
in every human heart by the Nourisher pulls man to his Creator and aids
him in heading on the path of development.

The only way to enhance this inclination is an attempt that must be
made, according to the order of God, for the protection of the relation
between the human being and his Creator.

If this link to God is broken, it is like an electrical wire that is
cut. The connection between the power plant and the light bulb does not
exist any longer, and therefore the light is extinguished. When the
connection between man and God is cut, man becomes a corrupt being and a
painful element in the society, and he is only filling space and making
the space tighter for others.

This relation or connection is invocation (Du'a) that an alive human
being offers to his Nourisher. With an expressive language, the
supplicant presents his inability and helplessness and confesses to the
ability, complete independence and absolute power of his Nourisher.

Obviously the smaller we see ourselves and the greater we see Him, the
more potential and more ability is there for us realize the importance
of this connection, and we would therefore gain more benefit from it.
From the Reservoir of Power, humans ask for the fulfillment of their
needs.

As a result of this connection, the invocation (Du'a) adds to his
scientific and moral abilities in every moment. The more intensively the
human being prays, the more his scientific grasp will be stronger, with
man viewing himself as less and less, and His Creator as stronger and
greater.

As a result of this attempt, it gets to a point that an advanced human
being according to his genuine nature does not make any hesitation in
following the path of Almighty God. In every step that he takes towards
development, the greatness and grandeur of the power of the Almighty
will become more obvious him, and he will look at his past from a higher
level.

For what he has done he will sometimes apologize, even if what he has
done was his duties. That is because he now comprehends its inadequacy.
HE INTERPRETS HIS PAST WORSHIPS AS SIN and does not see any value for
his work when presented to the Great position of the Lord.

With his elevated view, he perceives his submission to God's presence
as SINFUL and even an action far from politeness.

**What is My Performance?**

Offering praise in Your Presence is a lack and a sin. I am nobody and
full of flaws and needs. Whatever goes from me to Your Presence is not
only valueless but it is a fault due to my weakness and incapability.

The only way out of this for me is to know myself with my imperfections
and know You by Your Perfection. With the net of kindness that you have
opened, I can reach complete development and benefit from the Grace
pouring from the Essence of Being.

We strive moment by moment to reach You. Of course, in this path all
people are not the same, and do not strive in the same manner. When the
range of our knowledge about ourselves and about the Creator increases
and we do not stray from the path of humanity, we can travel in a
better, easier, and stronger way.

The Prophets and the Imams have reached this point. Since they realize
the Magnificence of their Lord and comprehend the position of the
Life-Giver, they see themselves, their activities, and their
prostrations and praises so little that THEY INTERPRET THE WORSHIP OF
THAT MUCH AFFLUENCE AND GREATNESS AS SIN, and with supplication and
invocation, they ask for pardon and they hope for forgiveness.

When they face the divine commandments and consider the Holy Position
of the Almighty, they submit themselves to the Master. They see this
action in front of the Lord as nothing, and recognize it AS NOT SUITABLE
FOR PRAISE. They hope it would be accepted by the Generosity and Majesty
of the Creator, OTHERWISE IT IS A SIN TO SUBMIT SUCH INADEQUATE WORSHIP
TO THE HOLY PRESENCE OF THE LORD.

Those people like the Prophet Muhammad and his Ahlul-Bayt realized the
Divine position with a much wider view. Continuously upon the two wings
of knowledge and action, they progressed to a higher and superior
position.

They were at every moment finding out more about the Magnificence of
the Life-Giver of the world, and more about their own incapability;
consequently better understanding their inadequate actions in comparison
with that much Power and Greatness.

To compensate for that, they confessed to their sins and asked the Lord
for the permission to apologize with the excuse that they CAN NOT do to
the extent of what Allah deserves, with the hope that He would guide
them to a higher and superior position until they could continue their
development process in order to reach the sublime of morality.

Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (AS) has proclaimed these instructions for
invocation: "First we must testify to the Omnipotence of Almighty God,
then we have to send greetings to the Prophet and his descendants, and
then confess to our sins, flaws, and shortcomings.

Then whatever we desire we should present before Him." It should be
kept in mind that first a human being should make an acquaintance with
his Lord and confess to His Grandeur, and then following the method of
the Prophet (PBUH&HF) and the Chaste Leaders (AS), make a connection to
him.

He should then get to know himself, how many imperfections he has that
ask the submission of his worship an impolite act toward Him. When he
finds out about the two aspects: His ability and his own incapability
and how to reach to the Source of Power, then it is time to share his
statements with his Lord.

It is at this time that a human being discovers the greatness of
supplication and the degree of its value. This is the way of success in
the existing world. Indeed, supplication or prayer is recognition of God
and recognition of his own, and review and deliberation on one's past
with an expectation to one's future.

The more the human being becomes curious at these stages and studies
the world of nature, the greater will be his understanding:
How great is his Lord and with what ability He has created such a vast
universe and how small and incapable are human beings in such an
environment. He must realize that he could never be rescued all by
himself in this world which is full of disturbances, except to be under
the Guidance of the Creator of the world and ask assistance from Him.

In that way, he can attain the position (that according to the
tradition) he has been created for. In that way, he finds his way to the
door of the Prophets and Saints. With the help of the Guider of the
Righteous, he can continue his development process. When he makes
progress, he becomes MORE SHAMEFUL OF HIS PAST and becomes more needful.
With the power from the Hidden Source of the world, he enters society.

In his life, he overcomes all problems, solving any thing he faces,
with the favor of God. Under these circumstances he neither abjects
himself to others or is cruel to others. He is a human being that on his
humanistic path, he benefits from everything and is supported by the
Divine Power.

He is not afraid of anyone except Him, and he is not lax in action and
work and he never fails on any battlefield. That is because he sees
himself connected to the endless Divine Power, with a world of strength
in the battles of life, and with a tireless power he smoothes out all
unevenness.

It is based on this principle that all Prophets and purified Imams, at
every small or important event were first praying and begging for help
from God, and then they began their task.

The messenger of Islam first of all worshipped God before he was
preparing to go to battle; he was offering his inability before the Holy
Presence of the Almighty and resorting to the infinite Divine Power;
only then, he was entering the battlefield with good moral, knowing that
conditions for the real victory were His.

Yes, first power must be obtained and then action. Invocation can be
this power-giver to all human beings.


