Birth Control
=============

**Rule 1:** In general, it is permissible to use birth control to
prevent pregnancy, and it is (also) permitted to use the (various) forms
of birth control.

**Rule 2:** If becoming pregnant would lead to a danger or hazard to the
woman’s life, then the woman is permitted – for as long as there is a
probability of her life being in danger – to employ the methods of birth
control and it does not make any difference if the danger (to her life)
is immediate or if it would come about later on.

**Rule 3:** The religiously approved methods which one may make use of
to prevent pregnancy include:

a) Birth control by using devices such as an I.U.D. *(Intrauterine
Device)*, condoms or the injection of a drug (to prevent pregnancy) and
other things such as these.

b) Natural methods of birth control: This would include *Coitus
Interruptus* or ejaculating outside of the wife. However if this method
of birth control leads to other forms of physical or mental illness for
the woman and man, then it would not be permissible.

c) Conditional Birth Control: What is mean by this is that at the time
of reciting the marriage contract, the woman makes a condition that for
a certain period of time or for as long as they are married, she would
use birth control and her husband also accepts this condition.

**Rule 4:** It is permissible to have one’s tubes tied *(Tubal
Ligation - Tubectomy)* to prevent pregnancy as long as this procedure is
temporary (reversible) and would not lead to a woman being permanently
unable to conceive nor would this act cause any sort of life-threatening
conditions. In addition, once the tubes have been re-opened, she would
once again have the ability to conceive. In other than this scenario, it
would not be permissible to perform the *Tubectomy*.

**Rule 5:** The ruling on having one’s tubes tied *(Tubectomy or
Vasectomy)* is the same for both men and women (as has been mentioned
above).

**Rule 6:** In using any of the methods of birth control that are
available, it is essential for the woman to have the consent of her
husband and the wife is not permitted to go forth and use any of the
methods without first taking the approval of her husband.

*It is permitted to employ birth control methods, keeping in mind the
following three conditions:*

1) The procedure does not damage the (sexual) organ nor would it lead to
permanent sterilization.

2) The husband approves of the use of birth control.  
 3) The procedures that would be employed for birth control and placing
the device related to it (inside the person) would not involve the
performance of a forbidden *(haram)* act.

Controlling the number of children and regulating ones’ family can be
examined from two different aspects:

1) The steps which are employed before conception (birth control).

2) The steps which are employed after conception (abortion).

According to the fatwa of the late Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased
with him), the first method (of birth control) is permissible as long as
no forbidden acts are performed in order to achieve it.

As for the second method (abortion), it is forbidden (haram) except if
necessity expedites that it be done however this act must be performed
before the soul is infused into the fetus – meaning before the fetus has
reached to the age of four months – in which case it is permissible.

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) has
said: *“The best of you is the person who acts in the best way with his
family and I am the best of you in relation to my family.”*

 Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 14, Page 122, Hadith 8

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Birth Control
--------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Generally speaking, is Islam is favour of birth control?
In addition, is it permissible to make use of the various means to
prevent pregnancy - such as medications – which are available?

**Answer 1:** (Islam) has given permission (for the use of these) and it
is not a problem.[^1]

**Question 2:** In relation to making use of the various forms of birth
control, is it necessary to have the consent of the wife and husband?

**Answer 2:** The consent of the husband is mandatory.[^2]

**Question 3:** Are we permitted – keeping in mind that we have
knowledge concerning the health and cultural problems, etc… that result
from an increase in population (and also keeping in mind that this task
is also one of our responsibilities as specialists in the field of
public and family health) – to disseminate information to others in
relation to prevention of pregnancy, even if this is not requested (from
us)?

**Answer 3:** First and foremost, it behooves the Administration in
charge of the affairs of the Islamic land to use all means possible in
increasing life expectancy – which is something that is desired by the
holy law – and in the case where (such) correct management is put in
place and if (still) we reach a point where it is not possible to manage
a greater population, then birth control (information) should be
disseminated.[^3]

**Question 4:** Just as it is customary in order to prevent unwanted
pregnancies and abortion of the fetus when the woman’s life is in
danger, with the permission of their husband, women make use of
medicines and things such as an I.U.D.s (Intrauterine Device) (an item
that is placed inside the womb), a galea, the diaphragm, creams, jells
and injections – all of which prevent fertilization of the egg. Through
this act, the men, with the consent of their wives, are spared from
needing to use condoms (a rubber cover over the penis) and from
practicing Coitus Interruptus (ejaculating outside of the woman).

We request you to please put in writing the Islamic injunction in
relation to what has been mentioned (above).

**Answer 4:** If the issues mentioned do not entail any danger or lead
to defects of the (private) parts, and the husband has given his
permission, then they are not a problem.[^4]

**Question 5:** Is the woman and her husband - who from the point of
view of the society and culture (that they live in) and by keeping in
the mind conditions that exist within their surroundings and who know
that they do not have the ability to bring up their children - permitted
to provisionally not have any children?

**Answer 5:** Preventing a pregnancy using the religiously approved
methods is not a problem.[^5]

**Question 6:** In the event that the permission of the husband is
necessary however he will in no way permit (any form of birth control),
then what should be done?

**Answer 6:** There is no other option except (to engage in birth
control) with his permission.[^6]  
**Question 7:** In order to control population growth – according to the
teachings of Islam - is it permitted for a woman to make use of the new
methods of birth control such as the I.U.D., to have one’s tubes tied or
birth control pills which would result in the prevention of pregnancy?

**Answer 7:** Temporary birth control methods such as the birth control
pill and other things such as this - if they do not pose any imminent
danger - are not a problem. However if the tying of the tubes of the
womb of the woman is done for a logical reason and will protect the
woman from an imminent physical or mental danger, then with the
permission of the husband, this act in itself is not a problem.[^7]

**Question 8:** There are various methods and means of preventing
pregnancy and population control. Can a person who has information
regarding these (various means and methods of birth control) voluntarily
pick one of them (to use)?

**Answer 8:** As long as the Islamic position is maintained (in all of
the methods of birth control), then it is not a problem.[^8]

**Question 9:** Is it permissible for women to employ means of birth
control to avoid pregnancy or not?

**Answer 9:** It is not a problem with the consent of her husband.

**Question 9b:** Assuming that it is permissible, what is the ruling of
each of the following forms?

**1)** Through the use of birth control pills and other things like
this?

**Answer:** It is not a problem.  
**2)** Placing an instrument inside the womb to prevent pregnancy?

**Answer:** In itself, it is permitted, however there must not be any
forbidden look or touch.[^9]

**Question 10:** Is temporary birth control permitted for a healthy
person through the use of the means and methods (available) which would
prevent the fertilization (of the egg) from taking place?

**Answer 10:** It is not a problem as long as the husband and wife both
consent to it.[^10]

**Question 11:** Are the methods that are being propagated and
recommended by the administrators within the sacred establishment of the
Islamic Republic (of Iran) in relation to family planning and birth
control without any impediment from the point of view of the Islamic
teachings?

**Answer 11:** Simply having a method (of birth control) in vogue within
the society does not constitute a religious confirmation that it is
allowed or permissible according to the Islamic regulations.[^11]

**Question 12:** If a temporary method of birth control hinges
Interruptus on performing a forbidden act such as the doctor looking (at
the private parts) of the patient of the same sex (woman doctor looking
at a female patient and a man doctor looking at a male patient) or a
male doctor treating a female patient, or the opposite (female treating
a male), then in what instances is the impermissibility of this act
revoked?

**Answer 12:** It is not permissible to look at and touch (the private
parts of) another person – even if it is a doctor of the same sex and
this act is forbidden except in cases of necessity which shares the same
ruling as other acts of necessity (in the religion).[^12]

**Question 13:** Is the religion of Islam in agreement with the
(population) growth of the society?

**Answer 13:** Islam is in agreement with the growth of the society
since with the growth in the number of Muslims, this is proof of the
greatness and strength of them (the Muslims). However in some specific
circumstances, (Islam) is not in favour of a (population) growth within
the society.[^13]

**Question 14:** Is it permissible for a woman – without the permission
or consent of her husband - to exercise birth control so as to not get
pregnant, such as using birth control pills?

**Answer 14:** If there is major harm in it (in her becoming pregnant),
then it is permissible even if her husband is not happy with it.[^14]

**Question 15:** In order to prevent pregnancy, many Muslim women take
birth control pills and other medications, have injections or place an
instrument inside themselves so that the fertilization does not take
place and thus, they do not become pregnant. Is it permissible or not to
stop the fertilization through the ways mentioned?

In addition, at the time of ejaculation, some men discharge outside of
the woman or use a condom so that the sperm does not enter into the
womb, rather, it stays inside the condom. From the Islamic point of
view, is this act permissible or not?

And also, does the woman being healthy or sick change the ruling in this
issue?

**Answer 15:** In the stated question, if any of the methods used for
preventing pregnancy would result in a defect to the sexual organ and
would result in infertility, then it is not permissible. However if
these do not result in the defect of the sexual organ, rather, they
temporarily prevent fertilization, then it is not a problem as long as
it does not result in any other complications to the body. Nevertheless,
this act should not be prolonged since it is preferable to have a large
number of Muslims.

However if the pregnancy poses a physical danger or risk to the woman,
then she is fully permitted to use birth control for as long as the
danger persists.

In relation to men, if ejaculating outside of the woman is done without
the consent of his wife, then it is reprehensible.[^15]

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Semen Testing
--------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** In order to know if a man is able to father a child or
not, in some hospitals they require the man to masturbate so that the
semen can be sent to the laboratory for examination. Is this act
permissible or not?

**Answer 1:** It is forbidden (haram).[^16]

**Question 2:** Examination of a man’s sperm necessitates masturbation,
however not performing this test is not of vital importance – is it
permissible to perform this act?

**Answer 2:** If it not necessary (to do this test) to cure an illness,
then it is not permissible. However in the case of necessity, the ruling
of this act is the same as the ruling of other forbidden acts.[^17]

\*\*\*

Imam al-Ridha (peace be upon him) has said: *“The person who struggles
through the permitted means to provide for his family is similar to the
combatant who fights in the way of Allah.”*

Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 104, Page 72, Hadith 14 & Fiqh al-Ridha

Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him) has said, *“Always be a companion with
your wife and always deal with her in a pleasant manner so that you may
have a pleasant life.”*

Makarimul Akhlaq, Page 218

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Preventing Pregnancy
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Is it permissible for the husband to employ methods of
birth control to prevent his wife from becoming pregnant? If it is
permissible, then what is the ruling on using the methods listed below?

**Answer 1:** It is not a problem.

**Question 1a:** Ejaculating outside of the woman without her approval?

**Answer 1a:** It is permissible.

**Question 1b:** Ejaculating outside of the woman with her approval?

**Answer 1b:** It is permissible.

**Question 1c:** Using a condom or special medication to prevent
pregnancy?

**Answer 1c:** It is permissible.[^18]

**Question 2:** Is it permissible to use the method of *coitus
interruptus* to prevent pregnancy?

**Answer 2:** In itself it is not a problem however one must make sure
that no other haram act is performed and the woman must have the
permission of her husband (to employ this method).[^19]

**Question 3:** What is the ruling on *coitus interruptus* utside of the
woman – and is it necessary to have the approval of one’ spouse for
this?

**Answer 3:** It is not a problem and it is not necessary to have the
consent of the wife.[^20]

\*\*\*

Muhammad ibn Salam has said that Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was
asked concerning coitus interruptus to which the Imam replied, *“This is
up to the man and he is permitted to act in any way which he sees fit.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 14, Section 750, Hadith 1051

\`Ata has narrated from Jabir that during the time of the Prophet, they
used to practice coitus interruptus and then the verse of the Qur\`an
was revealed that did not prevent them from continuing in this way.

Sahih Bukhari, Volume 3, Section on Coitus Interruptus (94)

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Norplant and Injections (to Prevent Pregnancy)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Of the ways that is used to prevent pregnancy is in
relation to controlling the hormones of the woman in which the
prevention of the fertilized egg being placed in the womb is achieved
(which is almost similar to the birth control pills that are used).

In relation to this, there are two methods employed – to have a Norplant
implant and the other is through the injection (of certain drugs). The
Norplant implant goes under the skin of the shoulder (of the woman) and
after implant, it prevents pregnancy for up to three months from the
time that it is given.

We would request you to please provide us with your opinion is in
regards to using these forms of birth control.

In addition, since using these forms of birth control in some women may
result in spotting or a prolonged monthly period, in relation to their
religious responsibility, must they follow the ruling of irregular
bleeding (Istihadha)?

**Answer 1:** This issue has the same ruling as the previous question
(Question number 6 in relation to the usage of the I.U.D.).

If the blood does not continue for more than three days, then it is not
considered as the menstrual blood (Haidh) and thus, it falls under the
ruling of irregular bleeding (Istihadha).[^21]

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) has
said, *“Accept my advice to you that you must do good to your women.”*

Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, Volume 14, Page 250, Hadith 6

Imam al-Baqir (peace be upon him) has said, *“In the same way that a man
love to see items of beautification on his wife, the women too love to
see items of beautification on their husbands.”*

Makarimul Akhlaq, Section 5, page 80

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Prevention of Fertilization after Intercourse
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** If after the act of intercourse, the husband and wife
then decide to prevent a pregnancy from occurring or in instances such
as if the condom rips and thus, the sperm of the husband unintentionally
goes into the vagina of the woman, in the books of medicine, it has been
advised that one can take a special hormone pill three days after
intercourse.

The way that these hormone pills work is that:

1) If they are taken before the egg is released, then they prevent the
egg from being released.

2) If they are taken after the egg is embedded in the womb, then the
following two scenarios come up:

a) The medication has an effect on the movements inside the womb of the
woman to prevent the sperm from reaching to the egg.

b) It prevents the fertilized egg from attaching itself to the wall of
the womb and thus, prevents the woman from becoming pregnant.

We would appreciate it if you could explain to us the Islamic ruling on
the use of this medication.

**Answer 1:** If it does not result in the abortion of the fetus, it is
not a problem.[^22]

**Question 2:** If the couple had made the intention of using one of the
methods of protection to prevent pregnancy and in the event that a
problem comes up in the method of usage such as the ripping of the
condom at the time of intercourse, is it then necessary to use another
method to prevent an unwanted pregnancy which would not have negative
psychological, societal or economical effects?

According to the medical books it can be deduced that it has been
recommended that a special hormonal medicine should be taken in the
first three days after intercourse, and the way that this medicine works
– up until now – has remained unknown.

**Answer 2:** Even though the original question remains ambiguous,
however there is no problem in birth control – in and of itself -
however the forbidden acts that may be related to it such as the
forbidden touching or looking or an imminent danger (to the woman) must
be observed. One must refrain from all of these things, and in addition,
the woman must have the consent of her husband for these things.[^23]

**Question 3:** The medication that prevents pregnancy which is taken in
the first week following intercourse results in the fetus being aborted
if one was pregnant. If one is not pregnant, then it has no effect. What
is the ruling on the use of such medication?

**Answer 3:** In the event that one does not have knowledge of being
pregnant, then it is not a problem.[^24]

\*\*\*

Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said, *“It is enough of a sin for
a person that he does not pay attention to the rights of his family and
that he does not provide for them their needs.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 15, Page 250, Hadith 4

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Fulfilling the Religious Obligations after Menopause
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Keeping in mind that for many women who are
non-Sayyid[^25], once they reach to the age of fifty lunar years (48
years, 7 months and 15 days according to the solar calendar), just as
they naturally have their monthly period, in the examinations that are
performed in the laboratories, it has been proven that their sexual
hormones are no different than before they reached to the age of fifty.

We would be grateful if you would please explain to us - does this group
of women have to follow the rules of irregular bleeding (Istihadha)?

If the answer is positive, since it is difficult to act according to the
Islamic injunctions in regards to irregular bleeding (Istihadha), there
are some women who request an operation to have their womb removed. In
this event, is the Physician obliged to carry out the operation?

**Answer 1:** Such a woman would apply the rulings of irregular bleeding
(Istihadha) and the act mentioned (removal of the womb), in and of
itself is not a problem however one must make sure that no forbidden
touching or looking is done and that it is carried out with the
permission of the husband.[^26]

\*\*\*

Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said, *“Whoever acts in a kind way
with his family will have years added to his life by Allah.”*

Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 103, Page 225, Hadith 9

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to taking Birth Control Pills
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** What is the ruling on a person using birth control
methods when they know or there is a possibility that it may have some
harm related to it (for example the birth control pills which clearly
harm the heart and the blood vessels)?

**Answer 1:** If there is an open hazard or danger (in using such
things), then one must not make use of them.[^27]

**Question 2:** In order for women who have from five to twelve children
to not become pregnant again, they request that they be given birth
control pills or that an instrument is placed inside the womb (to
prevent pregnancy) – is this permitted or not?

**Answer 2:** If the prevention of the pregnancy does not harm the
private parts nor is the woman made permanently sterile and it is done
with the consent of her husband, then it is not a problem however the
forbidden touching or looking (at the private parts) must be
avoided.[^28]

**Question 3:** Women who would like to prevent their monthly period
take a medication. However when they take it, then they see spotting
(however it does not continue) and even during the time of their monthly
period (this spotting occurs).

Is this spotting part of the menstrual cycle (hayd) or not?

**Answer 3:** If she does not see this blood for three straight days,
then it is not considered as her monthly cycle (haidh).[^29]

**Question 4:** There are some women who, in order to avert their
monthly period during the trip to the Hajj[^30], take a medication.

Sometimes, when they take these pills, they still have their menstrual
cycle however through taking an injection, they are able to stop it once
again.

Does preventing the menstrual cycle through the injection result in the
ritual purity (taharah) of the woman from the menstrual cycle (haidh)
and thus, is she permitted to perform those actions which demand ritual
purity?

Once she has stopped the monthly period, under what intention must she
perform her Ghusl (ritual bath)?

**Answer 4:** If she does not see blood for three straight days, then
the ruling of her monthly menstrual cycle (haidh) would not apply to her
and her Salat and fasting are correct and any blood seen for less than
three days has the ruling of irregular bleeding (Istihadha).[^31]

**Question 5:** During the period of the hajj, a woman takes some
medication so that she will not have her monthly menstrual cycle so that
she can perform the rites (of the hajj).

However from the time that she takes this medication, she continuously
sees discharge which is yellow in color and which she thinks may be
blood.

Since it was the time that she normally had her menstrual discharge, she
doubts if this is Istihadha or not.

Seeing as how she does not have the ability to carefully deduce this,
thus, she takes it as not being the blood of irregular bleeding
(Istihadha) and thus, she does not follow the rulings related to this
condition and performs the Salat and Tawaf (circumambulation).

In this state, are her actions correct or not?

**Answer 5:** If she has doubt as to the discharge as has been mentioned
if it was blood or not, then it does not have the ruling of irregular
bleeding (Istihadha), and all of her actions are correct.[^32]

**Question 6:** Is it correct for the woman who normally sees the blood
of her monthly cycle (haidh) however has taken medication to stop the
blood so that she is able to fast to act in this way?

**Answer 6:** If by taking the medication, her monthly cycle is stopped,
then her fasting is correct.[^33]

**Question 7:** Is a woman permitted to take birth control pills without
the consent of her husband? Or, for example, is she permitted to make
use of the I.U.D. (without his consent)?

**Answer 7:** She must not do these without the consent of her
husband.[^34]

**Question 8:** Is there any problem with taking medication to stop the
monthly menstrual cycle during the Hajj period or the Month of
Ramadhan?  
**Answer 8:** It is not a problem with the condition that there are no
dangers involved.[^35]

**Question 9:** Any time that a woman uses birth control methods without
the permission of her husband such as birth control pills to prevent
pregnancy, keeping in mind that these are all temporary methods and will
not result in her become sterile, what is the opinion on this?

**Answer 9:** In the example of the question given, apparently, the
permission of the husband is not a necessity.[^36]

\*\*\*

Imam Ridha (peace be upon him) has said, *“Nobody has brought any good
to himself which is better than a righteous spouse such that when he
looks at her, he is filled with pleasure, and when he is separate from
her, she protects her chastity and guards over his wealth.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a Volume 14, Page 22, Hadith 6

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Usage of the I.U.D.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Keeping in mind that there is a difference of opinion
amongst the Medical profession if the internal device placed in the womb
(which prevents pregnancy) actually prevents the fertilization or if
after fertilization has taken place (the joining together of the male
and female cells) this device prevents the fertilized egg from attaching
itself to the will of the womb, thus resulting in the removal of the
fertilized egg:

a) What is the ruling on using this instrument if a person has certainty
that it works in the second way mentioned (prevention and removal of the
fertilized egg)?

**Answer 1a:** If it results in the abortion of the fetus, then it is
not permitted.

b) What is the ruling on using this instrument if the person has a doubt
between the two methods mentioned above?

**Answer 1b:** In the event that there is doubt, there is no problem in
using it.[^37]

**Question 2:** One of the ways to prevent the fertilization of the egg
is that an instrument is fitted inside the opening of the womb of the
woman after which, one of the side-effects is that the woman would see a
discharge of blood.

In addition, it is possible that this blood may last for a long time.

Keeping in mind that this is natural blood, would it be classified as
the monthly menstrual cycle?  
 In general, is this action permissible or not?

**Answer 2:** If the above mentioned action results in damage to the
private parts, permanent sterility of the woman, result in the direct
killing of the fetus in the womb or is accompanied by an external
forbidden act such as a stranger looking at the private parts of the
woman, then it is forbidden (haram).

In other than this, the example given in the question is not a problem
and if the blood that comes out during the period of the woman’s monthly
cycle lasts for three straight days, then it would have the ruling of
her regular monthly discharge. If it lasts for more than her regular
monthly cycle and is more than ten days, then it has the ruling of
irregular bleeding (Istihadha).[^38]

**Question 3:** What is the ruling on using temporary methods of birth
control such as the I.U.D. - which up until now, have not been
determined as to exactly and precisely how it prevents pregnancy,
however the belief of most people - according to the latest research
that has come out - is that it prevents the fertilized egg from
attaching itself to the wall of the womb?

**Answer 3:** If it has not been established that it aborts the fetus
and it does not make the woman infertile and there is no damage to the
private parts, then it is not a problem. However, if it does result in
the abortion of the fetus, then it is not permissible and in any event,
the Islamic rulings in relation to looking and touching (of the private
parts) must be observed.[^39]

**Question 4:** Is it permissible to make temporary use of instruments
like the I.U.D. to prevent pregnancy - keeping in mind that it is not
exactly and positively known how this instrument prevents the pregnancy
from taking form?  
**Answer 4:** If it results in the abortion of the fetus, then it is not
permissible.[^40]

**Question 5:** It is not possible to place the I.U.D. inside the woman
to prevent pregnancy without looking and touching the woman and thus in
this case, is it permissible to have this instrument placed inside the
woman by a male or female doctor?

**Answer 5:** It is not permissible to touch or look (at the private
parts of another person) even though the actual act of placing and using
the device is permissible with the permission of the husband.[^41]

**Question 6:** Through making use of the methods of birth control, the
chances of having an unwanted pregnancy and the physical and
psychological damage that result from such a pregnancy are reduced such
that according to the world statistics, it has shown that through family
planning and preventing pregnancies, we are able to reduce the death
which would arise by 25-30%.

The I.U.D. is considered as one of the effective and successful methods
of preventing pregnancy and according to the Islamic edict of your
Eminence (the issue of placing the I.U.D. – Question 15882/1), we have
been able to deduce that this is one of the permissible methods.

At present, there are close to half a million women in our country who
are making use of this method and most of these women, for various
reasons, are not able to make use of the other methods of birth control.

This item must be put into the womb of the woman by either a midwife or
a gynecologist.

Keeping in mind that placing the I.U.D. inside the womb of the woman
would necessitate directly looking at the reproductive organs of the
woman, please let us know what the religious ruling is in this issue?

**Answer 6:** In its self, this action is not a problem however one must
refrain from any sort of forbidden touching or looking.[^42]

**Question 7:** In relation to using the I.U.D. which works by
preventing the fertilized egg from implanting itself on the wall of the
womb - is it permissible according to the Islamic regulations to use
this method or not?

**Answer 7:** Any time the individual or societal needs necessitate this
(form of population control), it is not a problem.[^43]

**Question 8:** With respect (to you). Through this letter we request
your noble presence that: after releasing a ruling from the office of
the Supreme Leader in relation to one of the methods of family planning,
it was stated that it was prohibited to place an instrument (inside the
woman) - even if this is done by a woman.

However the policies put forward by the Ministry of Health and Medical
Education are based on propagating the use of this method for family
planning.

Please clearly explain what your noble and blessed opinion is in
relation to this and also let us know what the responsibility of those
people who work in this field are.

**Answer 8:** Anytime it does not necessitate a forbidden look or touch,
then it is not a problem except if the individual or societal needs
necessitate it.[^44]  
**Question 9:** Is it permissible to use the I.U.D. in the womb of the
woman to prevent pregnancy?

**Answer 9:** From the point of view of preventing pregnancy – as long
as the wife and husband are both in agreement (with this method), then
it is not a problem.

However if it necessities a stranger looking at the private parts of the
woman, then it is problematic even if the doctor who is responsible for
this task is a woman.[^45]

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) has
said, *“The best of women is that woman who when she gets upset, or when
her husband gets upset with her, she says to her husband, ‘I am placing
my hand in your hand, and I will not allow myself to go to sleep until
you are happy with me (again).’”*

Bihar al-Anwar, Volume 103, Page 239, Hadith 45

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Tubal Ligation (Tubectomy) for Women
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** I am a 31 year old woman who has four children. It has
been some time now that I have been suffering from a sore back and other
medical issues such that I am not able to do a lot of work and thus, I
am forced to rest which is not always possible for me. The doctors have
told me that I must do something so that I do not become pregnant again.

In my example and with the conditions given, is it permissible for me to
have my tubes tied keeping in mind that my husband is content with this,
or not?

**Answer 1:** If this act does not result in any defect in the private
part or becoming permanently sterile, then it is not a problem.[^46]

**Question 2:** The act of tying the tubes of the womb results in the
permanent sterilization (of the woman). The only way that it would be
possible to once again become pregnant would involve delicate
microscopic surgery which can be performed in well-equipped medical
centers at which point, the possibility of once again becoming pregnant
even in the best of medical centers of the world is 50%.

Keeping the above mentioned points in mind, is it permissible for a
healthy woman to have her tubes tied?

**Answer 2:** In the example given in the question, it is not
permissible.[^47]

**Question 3:** Are reasons such as: economic or social problems, (a
large) number of children (in the family) or the age of the woman
reasons for having a permanent form of birth control or for abortion?

**Answer 3:** That which has been mentioned is not permissible.[^48]

**Question 4:** Is a permanent method of preventing a pregnancy in the
case of illness in which pregnancy would be dangerous to the woman’s
life and in which both the physical and mental welfare and well-being of
the woman will - even in the future – not be favourable, permissible?

In other words, if the doctor has necessitated that the woman should
never become pregnant (as far as he can tell from his research), then in
this situation, is it permissible to have one’s tubes tied?

**Answer 4:** If this method to prevent an (unwanted) pregnancy is
permanent, then it is not permissible however in other than this event,
if it is due to a danger related to one’s life, then it is not a
problem.[^49]

**Question 5:** Is it permissible to engage in permanent birth control
for women who are likely to having physically deformed children or a
hereditary physical or mental disease (especially those which have been
made apparent through previous pregnancies)?

**Answer 5:** It is permissible.[^50]

**Question 6:** Is it permissible to engage in permanent sterilization
and to remove all chances to become pregnant for women who are healthy?

Is it permissible for a healthy woman to have her tubes tied which would
result in permanent sterilization so as to prevent pregnancy?  
**Answer 6:** In the event that it is done for a permissible reasonable
cause and there is no considerable harm involved init, then as long as
one has the husband’s approval, it is not a problem.[^51]

**Question 7:** Are economic difficulties a reason for a person to go
forth for permanent sterilization or for an abortion?

**Answer 7:** Simply having societal problems or other sorts of problems
or due to having a (large) number of children and the age of the spouses
and other things such as this are all not complete and logical criteria
(for permanent sterilization or an abortion). And it is not permissible
to abort a fetus for the excuses that have been mentioned.[^52]

**Question 8:** Is the permanent method of preventing a pregnancy in the
case of illness in which pregnancy would be dangerous to the woman’s
life and in which both the physical and mental welfare and well-being of
the woman will not be favourable even in the future, permissible?

**Answer 8:** In the example given in the question, it is not a problem.
Rather, if there is a danger of losing the life of the mother, then it
is not permissible for the woman to become pregnant.[^53]

**Question 9:** Our question is in relation to women who suffer from
psychotic illnesses or an intense form of insanity for whom it is not
possible to make use of methods of birth control such as ejaculation
outside of the woman or birth control pills and who if they were to
become pregnant, they would not have the ability to take care of their
child.

Is the doctor permitted to go forward and permanently sterilize such
women?

**Answer 9:** The doctor does not possess the authority to go ahead with
this.[^54]

**Question 10:** Is it permissible to engage in permanent birth control
for women who are prone to having physically deformed children which has
been made evident from their previous pregnancies?

**Answer 10:** In and of itself and with the permission of the husband,
there is no problem in this act, however one must make sure to refrain
from any forbidden acts related to this.[^55]

**Question 11:** If several doctors tell a woman that in the event that
she becomes pregnant, there is a danger to her life, then is the woman
permitted to have her tubes tied even though this act would result in
her permanent sterilization and would also necessitate a foreigner
looking at her private parts? Are these examples of necessity?

**Answer 11:** If the doctor who is a specialist (in this field) tells
this to the woman and she develops certainty from what he has told her,
then it is not a problem and it is permissible for a foreigner to look
(at the private parts of another person) in the case of a necessity and
where there is no other option available.[^56]

**Question 12:** In relation to the issue of population control and
managing a family, across the country there are some women and men who
are volunteering to – with a written letter of consent of their spouse –
have their tubes tied (and have a vasectomy) to prevent pregnancy. We
would be grateful if you could provide us with the Islamic ruling
regarding this.

**Answer 12:** Having one’s tubes tied to prevent having children as in
the example of the question given, in and of itself is not a
problem.[^57]

**Question 13:** In the event that permission is given for a woman or
man to have their tubes tied or for a vasectomy, which of these two has
the right to go ahead with such an operation?

**Answer 13:** Which ever (of these two) has the right of their own
selves – in which the Religion has permitted them to exercise that
right. Yes, the woman is not permitted to do anything which would
prevent her husband from having complete sexual pleasure from his wife
without his permission. And as for having the tubes tied, it is better
that the permission is taken, however as for who should go first in this
(operation), it is not clear.

**Question 14:** What is the ruling on having one’s tubes tied to
prevent a pregnancy?

**Answer 14:** As long as it is not essential (to have this done), it is
not permissible.[^58]

**Question 15:** What is the opinion of the sacred teachings of the
religion of Islam in relation to having the tubes tied to prevent
various sorts of sicknesses?

**Answer 15:** Any time that there is no possibility of reversal (of
this operation), it is not permissible. In the event that it is
reversible, then it is permissible (with the condition that there is
some individual or societal needed that compels one to go through with
this operation.)

**Question 16:** In those instances in which as a result of having twins
there is a chance of their being physical defects in the child or a
genetic illness – is it permissible for the woman to have her tubes tied
or for the man to have a vasectomy to prevent future pregnancies?

**Answer 16:** Any time that there is a fear of danger or a hazard which
can be observed (for either of the spouses) or even in relation to the
child, it is permissible.[^59]

**Question 17:** Is the woman permitted to go ahead with having her
tubes tied without her husband’s permission?

**Answer 17:** If this act is not a necessity, then it is not
permissible.[^60]

**Question 18:** Keeping in mind that according to the most authentic
sources in relation to those mothers who have been pregnant more than
five times and who are also getting up in age and are 35 years old, if
they become pregnant again, then there will be a physical danger to them
(dangerous pregnancy). Is such a woman permitted to have her tubes tied?

**Answer 18:** If there is a definite danger or even a very strong
probability, then it is permissible.[^61]

Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him) has said, *“Women are a trust from Allah
in your hands thus, do not permit any danger from reaching them and do
not be strict with them.”*

Mustadrak al-Wasa\`il, Volume 1, Page 251, Hadith 7

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Vasectomies for Men
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** Lately, a medical procedure has come around for men in
which they tie a knot in the tube which brings forth the sperm such that
when they have intercourse with their wife, the sticky liquid (that
always comes out with the sperm) is the only thing released. Please
explain to us what the ruling is for the nocturnal emission that such a
man would have in which no sperm is released?

**Answer 1:** If without any relations, some wetness comes out of a man
during his sleep or when awake and it does not have the characteristics
of sperm, then he will not have the ruling of being in a state of Ritual
Impurity (Janabat) except if he has certainty that it was indeed sperm
that came out of him.[^62]

**Question 2:** One of the ways being used within the society at present
and which is even being done free of charge by the Ministry of Health
and Medical Education and is done at the cost of the government is the
medical operation known as the Vasectomy (tying the tubes that carry the
sperm in men).

According to the research that has been done on this procedure, the
specialists have stated that if this operation is done, there is a 10%
to 15% chance of it being reversible.

Thus, keeping this point in mind, what is the religious ruling of having
this operation (vasectomy)?

One of the other methods that is also being used for family planning and
to control the population is for the woman to have her tubes tied. What
is the religious ruling on this act as well?

**Answer 2:** It is permissible to tie the tubes that carry the sperm in
the man and to also tie the woman’s tubes – if it is done for a logical
reason, is not permanent and does not lead to any dangers. There is no
religious prohibition for the woman - with the permission of her
husband - to have her tubes tied.[^63]

**Question 3:** Is there any problem with a man, on his own will, having
a vasectomy which would result in him being sterile and which has been
said to be irreversible? Is it necessary to have the wife’s approval
before it is done?

**Answer 3:** In and of itself, this act is not a problem, however one
must make sure that no forbidden touching or looking is done. Also, it
is not necessary for the man to have the approval of his wife.[^64]

**Question 4:** Is the religious permissibility to have a vasectomy or
to have one’s tubes tied in order to maintain population control and to
prevent an uncontrollable population growth based on the principle of
“Hukm-e-Thanawiyyiah”[^65] (Islamic Government) and if the necessity
(population control) is lifted, does this permissibility become void?

**Answer 4:** This ruling is not one based on the Islamic
Government.[^66]  
**Question 5:** What is the ruling on men having vasectomies to control
the population (growth)? Keeping in mind that a percentage of those
people who go through this operation are once again (with another
operation) able to have children due to the advances in medicine and
this percentage is on the increase.

**Answer 5:** If it becomes an individual or societal necessity, then it
is permissible.[^67]

**Question 6:** In the event that it is permissible for either the man
or woman to have their tubes tied, which of these has the right to go
forth first (for this operation)?

**Answer 6:** In the event that they (the spouces) are equal in the
circumstances (the man has the ability to have the operation and he has
also given his wife the permission), then it is not improbable that the
man would take precedence.[^68]

**Question 7:** What is the ruling on men having vasectomies to control
the population? Keeping in mind that a percentage of those people who go
through this operation are once again (with another operation) able to
have children due to the advances in medicine and this percentage is on
the increase.

**Answer 7:** There is no Islamic regulation to prevent this.[^69]

[^1]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Imam Khumayni, Question

[^5]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^8]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad

[^9]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Office of Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Araki (may Allah be pleased with
him) – Rules on Family Planning

[^13]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Medical Issues

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Ayatullah Gulpaygani (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic
Medical Issues

[^16]: Imam Khumayni, Question, Page 51

[^17]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Legal Questions, Page 198, The Medical
Opinions within Ijtihad

[^18]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^19]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Legal Questions, Page 97, The Medical
Opinions within Ijtihad

[^20]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad

[^21]: Question asked from the Office of the Supreme Leader (Ayatullah
Khamene’i)

[^22]: Question asked from the Office of the Supreme Leader (Ayatullah
Khamene’i), Question 46301

[^23]: Question asked from the Office of the Supreme Leader (Ayatullah
Khamene’i), Question 46301

[^24]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Issues

[^25]: Direct descendents of the Prophet Mu¦ammad (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his family) (Tr.)

[^26]: Question asked from the Office of the Supreme Leader (Ayatullah
Khamene’i), Question 20307

[^27]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^28]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^29]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Enquiries,
Volume 1

[^30]: Annual pilgrimage that all Muslims must make at least once in
their lifetime to the city of Makkah. (Tr.)

[^31]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Enquiries,
Volume 1, Page 71

[^32]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Enquiries,
Volume 1, Page 71

[^33]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Enquiries,
Volume 1, Page 316

[^34]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad

[^35]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad

[^36]: Ayatullah Gulpaygani, Islamic Medical Issues

[^37]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^38]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Enquiries,
Volume 1, Page 70

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^41]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad, Page 99

[^42]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Religious Enquiry from the office of the
Leader

[^43]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^44]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Enquiry Number 19004

[^45]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Medical Issues

[^46]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^47]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^48]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^49]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^50]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^51]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^52]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^53]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^54]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^55]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad, Page
104

[^56]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Medical Issues

[^57]: Ayatullah Sane\`i, Islamic Medical Questions

[^58]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^59]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^60]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^61]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^62]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^63]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^64]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad, Page
151

[^65]: The term Hukm-e-Thanawiyyiah is a term used in Islamic
Jurisprudence which can be translated as the “secondary ruling” which
basically means the “except to the rule” or a ruling that can – for
various reasons – overrule the primary ruling. In this question, that
which acts as the secondary ruling is the formation and establishment of
an Islamic Government (Iran) which is ruled by the Islamic commandments
under the guidance of a competent Islamic leader. Thus, if the leader of
the Islamic nation decides that due to a particular reason such as if
the needs of the society dictate that an Islamic legislation is
temporarily put on hold, he has the power to do so. (Tr.)

[^66]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, The Medical Opinions within Ijtihad, Page
102

[^67]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^68]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^69]: Ayatullah Sane\`i, Islamic Medical Questions


