Abortions
=========

**Rule 1:** In Islam, it is forbidden *(haram)* to abort the fetus and
if this is done, it would result in the *Diyah*[^1] having to be paid.
The Diyah is the responsibility of the person who was in charge of
carrying out the abortion.

If the doctor was to perform it through an operation or by injecting
some medication into the woman and through this act of his, the child
was aborted, then he is responsible.

If it was the mother herself who ate some pills or was to use something
else that the doctor prescribed for her to take, then the mother would
be responsible.

If the father did not know about this taking place, then the Diyah would
have to be paid to him. However if the father knew about it and approved
of it, then the Diyah is the responsibility of both the mother and
father and the Diyah must be given to the indirect inheritor of that
fetus.

**Rule 2:** If the child was to die while in the womb of the mother,
then it is obligatory to remove it from the womb.

**Rule 3:** If the pregnancy is a danger to the life of the mother or
would result in her become handicapped, then it is permissible for her
to abort the child before the time when the soul has been infused into
the body.

However it is not permissible to abort the child once the soul has come
into the body and the fetus starts to move (inside the womb) and the
mother must carefully watch over and give special attention to the child
inside her and must make sure that it is brought into the world at the
appropriate time.

**Rule 4:** If the child which has been aborted was four months old or
more, then it must be given the *Ghusl-e-Mayyit*[^2] and must also be
provided with a *Kafan* (burial shroud) and must be buried. In addition,
anyone that touched the body of the child (such as the mother, grand
mother, or others who were taking care of the mother) must perform a
Ghusl of Mass-e-Mayyit.

If the child was less than four months old, then it must be wrapped in
cloth, and without giving it a Ghusl, it must be buried. If anyone has
touched the body of the child, then it is better that they too perform
the Ghusl (of Mass-e-Mayyit).

**Islamic Medical Issues**

Enquiries from the Religious Authorities in Regards to Abortions
----------------------------------------------------------------

**Question 1:** A woman became pregnant one and a half months ago and
the doctors have told her that her life is in danger if she remains
pregnant and that she will become paralyzed. Is it permissible for this
woman to have an abortion, or not?

**Answer 1:** If there is a hazard or danger to the life of the mother,
then it is permissible to have an abortion before the soul is infused
into the fetus.[^3]

**Question 2:** In the event that the age of the fetus is more than four
months and continuing the pregnancy is a hazard to the life of the
mother, is it permissible to have a medical abortion (ending of the
pregnancy)?

**Answer 2:** It is not permissible (to have an abortion) after the soul
is infused into the body.[^4]

**Question 3:** In the event that the age of the fetus is more than four
months, however a sickness in the mother has advanced quite a bit such
that the continuation of her pregnancy would result in a definite loss
of life for the mother, is it permissible to abort the pregnancy?

**Answer 3:** This issue has the same ruling as the previous question
(once the soul has been transfused into the body, it is not
permissible).[^5]

**Question 4:** In the event that there is a possibility that the mother
would succumb to a natural or acquired physical, mental or psychological
problem in relation to her becoming pregnant (for example the various
types of hereditary illnesses or those which would result from products
(used), medicine, x-rays, etc…), is she permitted to make haste in
aborting the child?

From the point of view of the age of the fetus being more than four
months or less than four months, is there a difference in the ruling?

If one of the defects as was mentioned is confirmed (to occur), then is
it permissible to have an abortion?

**Answer 4:** It is not permissible to abort the fetus and it makes no
difference (in any of the scenarios given).[^6]

**Question 5:** In the event that it is possible that there would be
some form of defect in the fetus, is it permissible to go forth with
aborting the child? And in this issue, is there any difference if the
fetus is younger or older than four months?

**Answer 5:** In the examples mentioned, there is no Religious sanction
for aborting the fetus and in relation to the forbidden nature of the
abortion from the point of view of the Islamic legislation, there is no
difference if the fetus is younger or older than four months.[^7]

**Question 6:** What is the ruling on performing an abortion on women
who are sick and are taking medication such as Lithium which one day,
may affect the child?

**Answer 6:** It is not permissible.[^8]

**Question 7:** What is the ruling in relation to having an abortion for
women who are badly afflicted with psychological illnesses in which
there is a possibility that their sickness may be passed on to the
fetus?

**Answer 7:** It is not permissible.[^9]

**Question 8:** What is the ruling on having an abortion when after
tests and examinations are carried out in which it is made known that
the fetus has some seriously un-normal defects?

**Answer 8:** It is not permissible.[^10]

**Question 9:** After many years, a couple was finally able to have a
child however in the first few months of the pregnancy the doctors were
able to diagnose that:

a) If the pregnancy continues, there is a possibility of danger to the
(life) of the mother.

b) If the pregnancy continues, then the child will come into this world
with defects.

Thus, the doctors ordered that an abortion must be done – is it
permissible to act according to the opinion of the doctors?

**Answer 9:** Simply having a possibility that the fetus will be born
with defects is not an Islamic justification to abort the child.

However, if one is satisfied that there is fear for the life of the
mother in the opinion of the doctor who is a specialist, then there is
no problem in aborting the child before the soul has been infused into
the fetus.[^11]

**Question 10:** Is it permissible to engage in an abortion for medical
reasons in the following examples before the soul has been infused into
the fetus?

a) Illnesses that we know for sure will result in the death of the child
after birth - keeping in mind that such estimations are not definite.

b) Genetic illnesses.

c) Physical deformations in the child (such as Anencephaly[^12])

**Answer 10:** It is problematic to have an abortion in the examples
given above especially seeing as how the predictions are not
definite.[^13]

**Question 11:** At what time is the soul infused into the body? What is
the ruling in the above mentioned examples about having an abortion if
it is done before the soul is infused into the body?

**Answer 11:** This is the time when the child who is in the womb of the
mother starts moving which is normally around the fourth month.[^14]

**Question 12:** In relation to the pregnant woman who has been
diagnosed with uterine cancer whose treatment is through radiation
therapy, and as it is known that going for radiation therapy would
result in the deformation of the fetus - is it permissible to abort the
fetus before one starts the radiation therapy?

**Answer 12:** It is problematic.[^15]

**Question 13:** It is common in women who are pregnant and who are also
diagnosed with cancer (such as breast cancer) that if their cancer has
progressed that in which ever stage of the pregnancy they are in, the
fetus is aborted and they go forth with curing the mother and this is
done for two reasons: the first is since the life of the mother is in
danger and the second reason is because if they were to permit the
pregnancy to continue, the mother would die, and the child would then
come into this world without a mother and as we know, the child is in
need of the love of the mother.

If the cancer is in its early stages and if the pregnancy is in the
final stages, then they would wait until the fetus reaches to such a
stage that it would be able to live (on its own). At this point through
an operation, they would take the child out of the mother’s womb and
bring him into the world sooner than his expected due date and would
keep him under close, special supervision until he develops.

If the pregnancy was in the early stages, then it would be aborted and
thus in this way, the curing of the cancer would also have a better
chance of working (of course either through chemical therapy or
radiation therapy).

Is the explanation given above in line with the rulings of Islam or not?

**Answer 13:** If the life of the mother is in danger and the fetus has
passed through the first few months, then it is not a problem. Also, it
is not a problem to have the child born before its due date and taking
care of it in these special circumstances.[^16]

**Question 14:** Is it permissible for women who are sick and who if
they continue their pregnancy, a conflict between the life of the mother
and that of the fetus would develop - and in addition, the age of the
fetus if more than four months, however the state of the fetus at the
age is such that it does not have the ability to live outside of the
womb of the mother and after the death of the mother, the child too
would die. In order to save the life of at least one individual, meaning
the mother – is it permissible for this pregnancy to be ended?

**Answer 14:** One must wait until the final moments to protect the life
of the mother, and if at that time there is still no possibility of
saving the life of the fetus, then it is not a problem to abort it in
order to save the life of the mother.[^17]

**Question 15:** What is the Islamic ruling in regards to abortion?

**Answer 15:** It is not permissible to abort the fetus after the soul
has his infused into it regardless of the reason. It is also not
permissible even before the infusion of the soul except if the life of
the mother is in danger or if there is some sickness that the mother
would not be able to withstand if the child remains in the mother’s
womb. In any of these two events, it is not a problem to abort the
fetus.[^18]

**Question 16:** Can you please explain to us the scenarios in which it
is not a problem to terminate a pregnancy?

**Answer 16:** Aborting the pregnancy is permissible in the following
circumstances:

a) If according to the observations of the specialist whose word one has
confidence in, the continuation of the pregnancy would result in the
death of the fetus and the mother – both of them. However if the child
was to be aborted, then the mother would stay alive.

b) If the soul has not yet been infused into the fetus and according to
the observations of the specialist whose word one has confidence in, if
the fetus was to remain inside the mother, then it would pose a danger
to the life of the mother or would result in a danger or pain that the
mother would not be able to withstand.

c) If the soul has not yet been infused into the fetus and the pregnant
woman has certainty that without aborting the fetus, she would face
mental or physical difficulties and problems and would fall victim to
great difficulties and troubles. In this event, it is also not
improbable that to abort the fetus would not be forbidden.

In addition, in all of these instances, if the abortion does goes forth,
the Diyah and the Kaffarah[^19] would be required and would be the
responsibility of the person who performed the abortion.[^20]

**Question 17:** If a pregnant woman goes to her doctor and the doctor
aborts the child, would the doctor have the *Qasas* (Islamic punishment
for murder) applied to him?

**Answer 17:** No, rather, he would have to pay the Diyah.[^21]

**Question 18:** If a group of doctors tell a woman that the child that
she has in her womb is underdeveloped from the point of view of its
mental capacity or physical body, is the woman permitted to abort the
child or do something else so that she loses her child?

**Answer 18:** No, it is not permissible.[^22]

**Question 19:** What is your opinion in specific regards to a woman who
is one and a half months pregnant and wants to abort her child, keeping
in mind the following points:

a) She had four children one after the other with a gap for only breast
feeding (each of them).  
 b) She has gone through caesarian section for three of her four
children.

c) She has psychological problems to such an extent that most of her
time at night is spent crying and weeping which results in her entire
family being upset at seeing her like this.

d) She had gone for some sort of birth control, however this child as
well as two of her other children were unwanted pregnancies and thus,
even though she was using some form of birth control, she still became
pregnant.

e) The guardian of these children (her husband) is also in agreement
with this (abortion).

In the event that it is permissible (for her to have an abortion),
please let us know what the amount of the Diyah would be. Both of them
(the mother and father) are followers of Imam Khumayni (may Allah be
pleased with him)

**Answer 19:** Keeping in mind the difficulties that were mentioned in
the letter such as the operations, the caesarian section and the
psychological trauma and other things – since this scenario is one which
is an indication of a difficulty which is unbearable, it can not be said
that aborting this fetus before it is four months old would be haram
(forbidden) or a sin.

Rather, due to the ruling of it being unbearable, the prohibition is
lifted and it is permissible (to have the abortion) and the Diyah is
upon the person who actually performs the abortion and it must be given
to the inheritors of that fetus.

Thus, if the abortion is performed by an injection, then the Diyah is
upon the person who gave the injection. If the abortion is through pills
and the use of medication, then it (the Diyah) is upon the mother
herself who has taken the medicine and in this case, since the mother
herself is the one who performed the abortion, she would not be entitled
to receive any of the inheritance.

In any case, if the abortion is performed with the consent of the father
and mother and what has been stated in the first scenario (done by an
injection) and if in the second scenario, the father forgives (the
Diyah) (where the mother has performed the abortion), then the Diyah
would not be liable.

**Question 20:** The Present Organization of Doctors of Iran in a letter
to the Courts of the city of Qum:

We testify that Mrs.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ the daughter of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ owner of the attached signed photo mention that due
to her own desire and that of her husband, Mr.\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, they
have requested an examination to go through with a medical abortion for
the following reasons:

The above mentioned woman is 1½ months pregnant and since she has a
great deficiency in her aorta valve, she has gone for a transplant of
this valve and through the examination of the specialists and the
medical advisors, it has been confirmed that the continuation of her
pregnancy will be life threatening for her.

Can you permit the medical abortion in one of the Medical Centres
through a female medical specialist and midwife?

**Answer 20:** Even though it is completely forbidden to have an
abortion and it is considered as a sin and if it is performed after the
fourth month, it is classified as the killing of a person and in no way
can it be permissible.

However, if it is done before four months with the supposition that the
pregnancy would cause difficulty and strain - which has been deduced
from the letter – the prohibition is lifted and the (Islamic) Judge can
give the ruling on it being permissible (to have an abortion).[^23]

**Question 21:** By having a sonogram of the fetus that is inside the
stomach of the mother, it is made known that the child is physically
disabled. After birth, he will be like a stick of meat that will be left
aside and will not be able to do anything productive and will also have
no sort of intelligent understanding or perception. Thus, please let us
know:

a) Is it permissible to abort the fetus in the state that it is (before
the soul is infused into the body or even after the soul is placed in
the fetus)?

b) If this child comes into the world and then becomes sick, is it
permissible to not go for any sort of medical treatment so that it will
die sooner and thus, will be freed from the pain and suffering?

**Answer 21:** In reply to questions ‘a’ and ‘b’, it is not permissible
and Allah knows best.[^24]

**Question 22:** If the doctor realizes that the fetus that is in the
womb of the mother has a physical defect and if he was to inform the
parents of this, then there is a very strong possibility that they would
go forth to abort the child and there is a very small possibility in
relation to the curing of the physical defect of the fetus. And if he
does not tell the parents, then the parents will complain to him that
they were not informed of the health of the child.

Please let us know what is the responsibility of the doctor in this
case?

**Answer 22:** Since he does not know that they would go forth with an
abortion since there is a possibility that they may try and find some
cure (for the child), thus, it is permissible to tell them and if they
(the parents) go forth and abort the child, then the one who is
responsible (for this act) would be the one who actually performs
it.[^25]

\*\*\*

Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said, *“Allah has made Jihad
obligatory upon men and women. Thus, the Jihad for the man is that he
gives up his wealth and his life in the way of Allah and gets killed (on
this path). The Jihad for the woman is that she has patience with the
harassment and pride of her husband.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 14, Page 111, Hadith 2

\*\*\*

**Rule 1:** Aborting the fetus after it has been transformed into a
human being with a soul in the womb is a very grave sin and it is
considered as killing a person and all of the Islamic regulations in
relation to *Qasas* (the penalty for murder), the *Diyah* and the
*Kaffarah* would be applicable.

**Rule 2:** Aborting the fetus before it has been transformed into a
human being with a soul in the womb is not classified as the killing of
a person and thus from this viewpoint, it is not forbidden (haram).
However, if this act is not carried out with the consent of the father
and mother, then it is an act of oppression to both of them or to one of
them.

It is sufficient to state that within the teachings of Islam, according
to the *ahadith* (narrations) and that which has been mentioned, a Diyah
has been specified for this act. Apparently, that which we can tell is
that the Diyah would have to be paid by the person who carried out the
abortion - of course in the event that it was done without the
permission of the parents.

**Rule 3:** It is obligatory upon the leader of the Muslims to make sure
that except under special circumstances, this act is not carried out.

Of these special circumstances, we can mention the following: where the
betterment of the society or the betterment of the mother is involved or
when preserving the laws of Allah as has come to us from the Prophet
through the Book (Quran) and the Sunnah (his example) which would
necessitate this act.[^26]

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) has
said, *“It is not recommended for a woman that she force her husband to
do things which are beyond his capability and it is also not recommended
that she complain to any of the creatures of Allah, The Noble and Grand,
about her husband – whether this person be a close family member or an
outsider.”*

Mustadrak al-Wasa\`il, Volume 14, Page 238, Hadith 2422

[^1]: Blood money/ransom (Tr.)

[^2]: This ceremonial bath must be performed if a person touches the
dead body of another person after the body has become cold and the
corpse itself has not been given the ceremonial bath. (Tr.)

[^3]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Islamic Medical
Issues

[^4]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^5]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him)

[^6]: Imam Khumayni (may Allah be pleased with him), Religious Enquiries

[^7]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^8]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^9]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^10]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^11]: Ayatullah Khamene’i, Islamic Medical Issues

[^12]: Congenital absence of most of the brain and spinal cord

[^13]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^14]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^15]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^16]: Ayatullah Makarim Shirazi, Islamic Medical Questions

[^17]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Questions

[^18]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Questions

[^19]: Penalty (Tr.)

[^20]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Questions

[^21]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Questions

[^22]: Ayatullah Fadhil Lankarani, Islamic Medical Questions

[^23]: Ayatullah Sane\`i, Islamic Medical Questions

[^24]: Ayatullah Safi Gulpaygani, Islamic Medical Issues

[^25]: Ayatullah Safi Gulpaygani, Islamic Medical Issues

[^26]: Ayatullah Shahid Beheshti, Health and Family Planning, Page 203


