Opinion of the Scholars and Jurisprudents of the Ahl As-Sunnah in relation to Family Planning
=============================================================================================

**Rule 1:** The first *fatawa* (Islamic ruling) in relation to the
prohibition of any form of birth control to prevent pregnancy given
within the Islamic countries was on the 29th of January, 1937 from
Shaikh \`Abdul Hamid – the great Mufti of Egypt. In this letter which
was a response to a question as to what the opinion of Islam is in
regards to birth control and abortion from the point of view of medicine
and society, it was answered:

a) Both the husband and the wife have the choice of preventing pregnancy
due to medical reasons or societal issues through any preventative way
and it is not a condition to have the consent of the other side.

b) It is permissible to use medicine and other measures which would
result in the abortion of the fetus up until the 16th week (four months)
of the pregnancy with the condition that it has been recommended (to the
woman) that it is necessary to abort the fetus and as long as the life
of the mother is not put into danger (by use of the medicine or other
measures).

c) All the leaders of the religion are in agreement that after this time
period has passed, the abortion is not permitted to take place under any
circumstances.

Those scholars who have been named in the fatawa are of the *Hanafi*[^1]
school of thought who confirmed this ruling and believe that it is
permissible for a woman to have her tubes tied in such a way that the
sperm of the man would not be able to reach to the egg.

Just as can be seen, not only did the Great Mufti of Egypt permit the
various forms of birth control to prevent pregnancy before the act of
conception, rather, he has even permitted abortions to take place within
the first four months of the pregnancy. In addition, he has not
considered the agreement of both sides (the husband and wife) as being
necessary.

*Thirteen years later, (in March of 1953), it was written:*

The Fatawa Committee of Al-Azhar University have given a revised
opinion:

According to the opinions of the Shafi\`i Madhab, it is not forbidden to
use medicine to prevent pregnancy.

***“Surely Allah wishes ease for you and does not wish difficulty upon
you.”***

Surah al-Baqarah, Verse 185

Imam Ridha (peace be upon him) has said, *“It is not recommended for a
man that to refrain from using perfume every day.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 1, Page 441, Hadith 2

\`Allamah Khalid Muhammad Khalid
--------------------------------

In the book entitled, *“We Start From Here”*, he has stated the
following opinion that: “This issue must be made completely clear to the
people that not only is an uncontrolled increase in population not
something that can not be praised, rather, from the point of view of the
society and economy is actually something very dangerous. Unfortunately,
the Islamic nations have not been able to fully grasp this societal
issue and it is because of this, that we are now forced to announce the
correct view of Islam on this issue.

The teachings of Islam – whether they be from the point of view of the
benefit of the individual and whether they be in relation to the
over-all well being of the society - state that family planning is
something which is necessary. According to the Islamic teachings, any
sort of population growth which is not in accordance with the economic
growth and the planning and management of the society is actually
considered as a trial and punishment from the Divine.”

The Late \`Allamah Mahmud Shaltut
---------------------------------

The rector of the Al-Azhar University in Egypt had written in his book,
under the topic of, *“The View of Islam and Family Planning”* that: “The
religion of Islam has never desired to make the society weak, rather, it
has desired to bring forth a safe and powerful nation and the only way
that this is possible is through family planning.”

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
family) has said, *“Have modesty in relation to other women (when you
deal with them) so that when others deal with your women, they too show
modesty.”*

Mustadrak al-Wasa\`il, Volume 15, Page 174, Hadith 5

Respected Administrator of the Center for Health of Gunbud Kawwus Province, Engineer Larijani
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**In His Name, the Most High**

Peace be upon you,  
 With respect – in relation to the answer that was given to letter
number 46851 on the date 1/7/1369 from your office in relation to
question asked in regards to keeping a gap between the birth of two
children through making use of the instruments that prevent pregnancy
according to the beliefs of the Hanafi school of thought.

By carefully reviewing the books in relation to this topic, we make the
following announcement:

1. Keeping a gap between the (delivery of) two children – if it is done
with the consent of the wife and the husband and is done through the
various medicines that prevent pregnancy such as the birth control pills
or the use of a condom, is not a problem from the point of view of the
Fiqh of the Hanafi school of thought.

2. Keeping a gap between the (delivery of) children – if a need
necessitates this, if it is done with the consent of the couple and it
is done through placing something inside the woman such as an I.U.D., or
through having the tubes tied, then it must be done by a female doctor.
This form of keeping a gap between the (delivery) of children – in the
case of necessity – is permissible from the point of view of the Fiqh of
the Hanafi school of thought.

Hajj Akhund Tala\`i  
 Hajj Nur Muhammad Akhund Nuri Zad

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
family) has stated, *“Whoever takes a wife for himself must treat her
with respect.”*

Mustadrak al-Wasa\`il, Volume 14, Page 249, Hadith 2

\*\*\*

**In His Name, the Most High**

Dear Teacher,  
 Peace be upon you. Keeping in mind that my present profession (Health
Teacher) necessitates (the need to ask this question) and with regret
(for troubling you), we would like to request you to answer the
following question and provide as much guidance as possible to those of
us who are in the same locality as you and to assist us in this matter.

In the past, we were able to benefit from the cooperation, guidance and
help in relation to the question on this important issue and also that
you showed acceptance and grace to this humble servant, I am completely
thankful and respect your worth and that we have troubled you and taken
up your priceless time and seek your forgiveness.

**Question:** Dear teacher, please explain to us what the opinion of the
clear religion of Islam - which is also the most complete religion - is
from the point of view of the Fiqh of Imam Shafi\`i in regards to the
birth control pill, condom, I.U.D., tubal ligation (for the woman or
man) and all the other forms or methods that one can use to prevent a
woman becoming pregnant, keeping in mind all of the aspects and proofs –
so that we can make this issue clear in the minds of the readers.

With Thanks,  
 Yadullahi Yakhchalian

\*\*\*

**In His Name, the Most High**

After praise (to Allah) and prayers (upon the Prophet).

**Answer:** In the view of Islam, increasing the number of generations
for that person who has the ability and who possesses a wife and a
(comfortable) life is Mustahab (highly recommended) and a greater number
of children does not result in poverty except if the person’s life goes
against the religion of Islam and the correct principles (of life) since
the Creator of the Universe is the Sustainer and you can not have a
Creator who is not the Sustainer.

That which becomes a source of poverty is ignorance and not going out to
work through employing Tawakkul (reliance upon Allah) and to indulge in
extravagance and miserliness which Islam has prohibited and made
forbidden.

That which acts as a source of (economic) independence is knowledge,
practice (upon which one knows) and proper economics (in one’s life).

In the event that poverty or economic challenges come into play, then
controlling and planning the number of children one has and preventing
pregnancy to control the amount of children one has within the family in
which ever way is permissible. However it is forbidden and not permitted
to abort a pregnancy once the egg has become fertilized and has life
within it.

During the lifetime of the Prophet (of Islam), the method of birth
control that was used was to ejaculate outside of the woman meaning that
when the man was ready to ejaculate, he did so outside of the woman so
that the sperm would not fertilize the egg and this can be seen from the
following Hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كنا نعزل وَ القرآن ينـزل
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“We used to practice coitus interruptus while the Qur\`an was being
revealed (during the time when the Prophet was alive and verses of the
Qur\`an were being revealed to him – and nothing came to prohibit this
act of ours).”*

In addition, on page 293 of the book of Fatawa of al-Shaykh Mahmud
Shaltut and on page 194 of the book *Al-Halal and Al-Haram* in Islam by
al-Shaykh Yusuf al-Qardhawi, and on pages 4 to 16 of the book *Zadul
Ma\`ad* from Ibn Jawzi, there are rulings and proof given in detail to
permit this however we refrain from mentioning these (proofs) here.

Haider Mustafawi  
 Member of the Council of Scholars of Sanaddaj  
 And one of the Teachers of Islamic Studies of Sanaddaj

\*\*\*

**In His Name, the Most High**

Dear Teacher,

Peace be upon you. Keeping in mind that my present profession (Health
Teacher) necessitates (the need to ask this question) and with regret
(for troubling you), we would like to request you to answer the
following question and provide as much guidance as possible to those of
us who are in the same locality as you and to assist us in this matter.

In the past, we were able to benefit from the cooperation, guidance and
help in relation to the question on this important issue and also that
you showed acceptance and grace to this humble servant, I am completely
thankful and respect your worth and that we have troubled you and taken
up your priceless time and seek your forgiveness.

**Question:** Dear teacher, please explain to us what the opinion of the
clear religion of Islam - which is also the most complete religion - is
from the point of view of the Fiqh of Imamn Shafi\`i in regards to the
birth control pill, condom, I.U.D., tubal ligation (for the woman or
man) and all the other forms or methods that one can use to prevent a
woman becoming pregnant, keeping in mind all of the aspects and proofs –
so that we can make this issue clear in the minds of the readers.

With Thanks,  
 Yadullahi Yakhchalian

**Answer:** That which we can write in relation to the answer for your
question is the exact text of the Hadith from the book *Sahih Muslim*
(Imam Abu al-Hasan Muslim ibn Hajjaj ibn Muslim Qashri) from volume 4 in
the Hadith from Harun ibn Sa\`id al-Ayami:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني هارون بن سعيد الأيلي. حدثنا عبدالله بن وهب. أخبرني معاوية (يعني
ابن صالح) عن علي بن أبي طلحة عن أبي الوداك، عن أبي سعيد الخدري. سمعه
يقول: سئل رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم عن العزل ؟ فقال: ما من كل الماء
يكون الولد. وإذا أراد الله خلق شيء لم يمنعه شيء. حدثني أحمد بن المنذر
البصري. حدثنا زيد بن حباب. حدثنا معاوية. أخبرني علي بن أبي طلحة
الهاشمي عن أبي الوداك، عن أبي سعيد الخدري، عن النبي صلى الله عليه
وسلم. بمثله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abi Sa\`id al-Khudri has said that he heard Abil Wadak say, *“The
Messenger of Allah (blessings be upon him) was asked concerning coitus
interruptus (ejaculating outside of the woman) to which the Prophet
replied, ‘A child is not brought forth from every sperm and when Allah
intends to create a thing then nothing can prevent it.’”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أحمد بن عبدالله بن يونس. حدثنا زهير. أخبرنا أبو الزبير عن جابر ؛
أن رجلا أتى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم فقال: إن لي جارية هي خادمنا
وسانيتنا. وأنا أطوف عليها وأنا أكره أن تحمل. فقال: "اعزل عنها إن شئت.
فإنه سيأتيها ما قدر لها" فلبث الرجل. ثم أتاه فقال: إن الجارية قد حبلت.
فقال:"قد أخبرتك أنه سيأتيها ما قدر لها".
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jabir reported that a man came to Allah’s Messenger (may peace be upon
him) and said: *“I have a slave-girl who serves me and refreshes me. I
sleep with her and I fear (or do not want) that she should become
pregnant.” The Prophet said, “Practice coitus interruptus if you want
for she will have coming to her what she deserves (or is her destiny).”*
The man went away (for some time) and then came to the Prophet and said,
*“The slave-girl has become pregnant”*, whereupon the Prophet said:
*“Certainly I informed you that she will get what was decreed for her.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو بكر بن أبي شيبة وإسحاق بن إبراهيم (قال إسحاق: أخبرنا. وقال
أبو بكر: حدثنا سفيان) عن عمرو، عن عطاء، عن جابر. قال: كنا نعزل والقرآن
ينزل. زاد إسحاق: قال سفيان: لو كان شيئا ينهى عنه، لنهانا عنه القرآن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from \`Umru from \`Ata\` from Jabir that he said,
*“We used to practice coitus interruptus (ejaculating outside of the
woman) while the Qur\`an was being revealed.” Ishaq added, ‘Sufyan has
said, that if anything were to prevent us from acting in this way then
it would have been the Qur\`an.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثني سلمة بن شبيب. حدثنا الحسن بن أعين. حدثنا معقل عن عطاء. قال:
سمعت جابرا يقول: لقد كنا نعزل على عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Ma\`qal from \`Ata that he said, *“I heard
Jabir say, Surely we used to practice* *coitus interruptus* *during the
time of the Messenger of Allah (prayers of Allah be upon him).”*

**  
**

وحدثني أبو غسان المسمعي. حدثنا معاذ (يعني ابن هشام). حدثني أبي عن أبي
الزبير، عن جابر. قال: كنا نعزل على عهد رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم.
فبلغ ذلك نبي الله صلى الله عليه وسلم. فلم ينهنا

**  
**
.

It has been narrated from Jabir that he said, *“We use to practice
coitus interruptus during the time of the Messenger of Allah (prayers of
Allah be upon him) and when the Prophet of Allah (prayers of Allah be
upon him) was informed of this act (of ours), he did not prohibit us
(from doing it).”*  
 These ahadith can be found in the book *Sahih Muslim*, Volume 4, Pages
159-160 and also on pages 282-283 of the book *Al-Taj al-Jam\`i al-Usul*
in Volume 2.

The meaning of the last Hadith quoted above is that, *“During the time
of the Messenger of Allah we used to practice coitus interruptus
(ejaculating outside of the woman as a form of birth control so that the
sperm does not reach to the womb of the woman to fertilize the egg) and
the Prophet did not forbid us from doing this.”*

Mr. Mudarris Ruhani  
 Secretary and Trainer of Teachers and Children

\*\*\*

**In His Name, the Most High**

My Dear Brother, Mr. Yadullah Yakhchali whose current job is that of a
Health Teacher.

As it was mentioned in your letter to this humble servant where you had
asked: *Is it permissible from the clear religion of Islam which is also
the most complete religion to make use of the various forms of control
to prevent a woman from becoming pregnant? And from the point of view of
the Fiqh of Imam Shafi\`i (may Allah be pleased with him) which is the
most sound school of thought within Islam, is this an issue which has
been discussed or not?*

With a reply of your greetings and thanks for the love that you have
shown, we must state that: In the book, *“Al-Tajul Jami\`al Usul”*
written by Shaikh Mansur \`Ali Nasif, Volume 2, page 238, it has been
written:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن جابر قال: كنا نعزل على عهد رسول الله فبلغه ذلك فلم ينهنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Meaning that during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, when we used
to have intercourse with our wives, we used to ejaculate outside of the
woman (so that she would not become pregnant) and when this information
reached to the blessed attention of the Prophet, he did not prohibit us
from it.

Thus, the above mentioned act is permissible within the Madhab of Imam
Shafi\`i (may Allah be pleased with him).

In addition, in closing this topic, it has been mentioned on the above
mentioned page of the book that it states:

**  
**

فائدلا حكم العزل هذا يجرى عَلـى الإستعمال دواء لمنع الحمل موقتا وَ يجري
عَلـى إسقاط النطفة قبل نفخ الروح فيها فإن الحكمة في الكل وَ أحد لا وهي
منع الحمل وَ الله أعلم

  
.

This means: *Making use of medication to prevent pregnancy and even to
abort or remove the fertilized egg which is in the womb of the mother
which does not have the spirit infused into it yet in order to prevent
pregnancy is permissible. Therefore, using birth control pills, condoms
and other than these for birth control to prevent pregnancy and to
prevent more children – as long as these things do not have a negative
spiritual and or physical (or both) effect on the woman who is using
them, then within the clear teachings of the religion of Islam and the
Madhab of the late Imam Shafi\`i (may Allah be pleased with him) is
correct and is not a problem.*

In addition, if the fertilized egg has attached its self to the womb of
the woman however there is still no life in it yet and the soul has not
yet been infused into it, then as long as aborting and removing this
would not pose a physical or psychological hazard or danger to the
pregnant woman, then it is permissible (to go forth with the abortion)
and to use the best possible correct method to end the pregnancy.

Of course, making use of the methods of preventing a pregnancy,
according to that which was mentioned, has been permissible in every
time and age especially in this day and age when we all know that the
radio stations of our nation (Iran) and also the most important
newspapers of this country have continuously been speaking about the
various dangers of having a large population.

Leaving all of this aside, we ourselves very well know people who have
children and due to having many children are faced with the pressures of
life. Woe to those people who from the point of view of wealth have been
deprived however at the same time are the ones with a large number of
children.

In closing, we ask Allah the Most High to permit us all to be successful
in acting upon the commandments of the upright and clean religion of
Islam and that He protect us all from the pains and trials (around us).

The lowest,  
 Husain Mudarris Garchi  
 9/12/70

\*\*\*

The Noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) has
said, *“Any time a woman says to her husband, ‘I have never seen
anything good come from you’, the reward for all of her good deeds is
taken away from her.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 14, Page 115, Hadith 7

\*\*\*

**In the name of Allah, most Compassionate, most Merciful**

My dear brother, Mr. Yakhchalian,

In reference to the issue of family planning and the opinion of the
scholars of the Shafi\`i school of thought which you had requested. We
would like to inform you that during the time of the Noble Messenger of
Islam, Muhammad (peace be upon him), his noble companions (may Allah be
pleased with all of them) – who were the students of the school of this
personality – they used to practice \`Azal (ejaculating outside of the
woman) and when the Prophet heard about this, he did not prevent them
from doing it.

Without doubt, the purpose of the companions of the Noble Prophet (in
marrying) was to increase the population and to look after the planning
of their families.

Today, if something else can take the place of *coitus interruptus* and
the doctors declare it permissible, then from the point of view of the
religion, it would be permissible (as well) and would not be a problem.

Muhammad Shaykhul Islam  
 Secretary General of the Security Council

\*\*\*

In relation to using the various methods of birth control, it was asked
from Mr. Mamusta Mullah \`Arif Mudarrasi, the son of the late Mamusta
Mullah Baqir Mudarrasi better known as Mudarris Kurdistani:

**Question 1:** Dear teacher, please inform us what the opinion is
according to the Shafi\`i school of thought for women to use the various
methods of birth control such as birth control pills, condoms, I.U.D.,
tubal ligation and other methods?

**Answer 1:** From the book, *I\`anatul Talibin*, which is a commentary
on the book entitled *Fathul Mubin* in the beginning on the section on
marriage, chapter four, page 254, it has been mentioned that there are
three methods which can be used to prevent pregnancy:

1. Before the husband and wife have sexual relations at which time it is
allowed meaning it is halal (permissible) and there is absolutely no
problem.

2. After the couple have had sexual relations however the fertilized egg
has not yet had life infused into it – meaning the fetus has not yet
reached to four months of age in which case to abort it is Makruh or
highly discouraged however it is still not haram (forbidden).

3. In the event that the egg is fertilized, then to abort it (at this
time – after four months) would be haram (forbidden) and it would be
forbidden to kill that which is living.

From the explanation given by the teacher, it can easily be seen that
not only do the methods of birth control not have any problem from the
point of view of the Islamic legislation, rather, very clearly,
sometimes the order to go forth with it (birth control) has even been
given. Forget about those people who do not have the (spiritual) eyes to
see and understand the commands of the Lord and let them continue in
their pessimistic talks since our religion is the most complete
religion.

21st of the Blessed Month of Ramadhan, 1418 AH

\*\*\*\*

Faruq Rahmatullah Jawid Imam of Jumu\`ah of Dashti
--------------------------------------------------

Administrator of the Center for Health of Kangan Province

**In the name of Allah, most Compassionate, most Merciful**

Our respects to you. Your letter numbered 20.41.10571 dated the 11/11/75
had reached us with your questions in regards to using the various
methods of birth control to prevent pregnancy such as the birth control
pill, condom, I.U.D., in order to create a gap between the birth of
children. In addition, the questions in relation to permanent birth
control such as having one’s tubes tied for the woman or man if it is
done with complete approval of the other party.

All of these are absolutely no problem and from the point of view of the
school of thought of Imam Shafi\`i (may Allah’s mercy be upon him), they
are all no problem. In addition, in relation to blood examinations of
the couple which take place in the Health centre, it is better that
these tests take place before the permanent marriage contract (vows) are
performed and from Allah comes the true success.

Penned by the Imam of Jumu\`ah and the Principal of the Khulafa Rashidin
Theological Seminary of Dashti  
 Faruq Jawid

**\*\*\*\***

Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said, *“Anytime any of you
go on a journey and then return back home, bring back for your family,
as is possible for you, a gift.”*

Wasa\`il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 8, Page 337, Hadith 1

*\*\*\**

“Keeping in mind that within the text of the Qur\`an and the Sunnah (of
the Prophet), there is no clear injunction in regards to birth control
to prevent pregnancy and also remembering that to ejaculate outside of
the woman is permitted, we can deduce that all other methods of
preventing pregnancy – either temporary or permanent are also permitted.
Of course, those methods of permanent birth control must also be done
voluntarily (with the condition that they are reversible).”

Shaikh Muhammad Mahdi Shams ad-Din *(one of the Religious Authorities of
Lebanon)*[^2]

*\*\*\**

• “A majority of the scholars of the Hanafi (school of Jurisprudence),
just as they have permitted *coitus interruptus*, have also permitted
other modern methods of birth control with the consent of the husband.
Of course, the later scholars of the Hanafi (school of Jurisprudence),
keeping in mind that the needs of the time (the decrease in the
(Islamic) teachings and the fear of giving birth to un-righteous
children) also do not consider the permission of the wife for *coitus
interruptus* to be necessary.”[^3]

• “A majority of the scholars of the Maliki (school of Jurisprudence)
have confirmed the permissibility of using the method of *coitus
interruptus* to prevent pregnancy and some of the scholars have stated
that the consent of the wife is a condition (in this).”[^4]

• “A majority of the scholars of the Shafi\`i (school of Jurisprudence)
have deemed it permissible to employ *coitus interruptus* and do not
consider it necessary to take the permission of the wife for this. Of
course, in instances (the wife not being pleased with this), it is
discouraged however in summary, it is necessary for the husband to have
the consent of his wife before he has intercourse with her, however in
relation to *coitus interruptus*, it is not a condition (to have her
consent).”[^5]

• “A majority of the scholars of the Hanbali (school of Jurisprudence)
deem it permissible to use *coitus interruptus* with the wife’s consent
(whether she be young or old). However in certain circumstances, the
wife’s permission is not needed.”[^6]

• “A majority of the scholars of the Zaidiyah (school of Jurisprudence)
are of the belief that it is not forbidden to use *coitus interruptus*
and thus, they deem it permissible however they have a difference of
opinion if it is necessary to have the consent of the wife.”[^7]

• “A majority of the scholars of the Isma\`iliyyah (school of
Jurisprudence) are in agreement with the permissibility of *coitus
interruptus* with the consent of the wife and this consent must be given
by the woman at the time that the marriage is being performed.”[^8]

• “A majority of the scholars of the \`Ibadiyyah (school of
Jurisprudence) deem it permissible to use *coitus interruptus* as long
as her consent has been given.”[^9]

In 1991, Shaikh Jadil Haqq \`Ali Jadil Haqq, the grand rector of
Al-Azhar, published a detailed report on the Islamic regulations in
relation to women’s issues.

This report included various issues such as: how they have come to the
conclusion in regards to the use of birth control to prevent pregnancy,
abortion and permanent forms of birth control.

**Rule 1:** In the clear text of the Qur\`an, there is no prohibition in
relation to birth control to avoid pregnancy or in relation to reducing
the number of children that one should have. However, by making use of
the examples given in the Sunnah of the Prophet and by employing
deductive reasoning, we can presume that the modern methods of
preventing pregnancy are permissible.

**Rule 2:** Preventing pregnancy is not equivalent to killing another
person and it does not go against the issues of Tawakkul (reliance upon
Allah) and the fact that Allah is the sustainer.

**Rule 3:** Making use of the temporary methods of preventing pregnancy
are permissible however in relation to the permanent methods of birth
control, in the event when it is necessary for the individual, then it
too is permissible.

**Rule 4:** It is forbidden (haram) to abort the fetus after 120 days
except in cases when the life of the mother is in danger (after the soul
has been infused into the body). A group of scholars from amongst the
Maliki, Imamiyah, \`Ibadiyah, Zahriyyah and Hanbali (schools of
Jurisprudence) have considered it forbidden (haram) to have an abortion
after forty days.

**Rule 5:** Using the sperm of one’s spouse (to fertilize ones’ self) is
permissible however it is not permissible to use the sperm of another
person (the Sperm Bank).[^10]

[^1]: The Ahl as-Sunnah are divided into four main Schools of Thought –
the Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki and Shafi\`i.

[^2]: Family Planning in the Legacy of Islam, Page 189

[^3]: Ibid., Page 152

[^4]: Ibid., Page 155

[^5]: Ibid., Page 159

[^6]: Ibid., Page 162

[^7]: Ibid., Page 165

[^8]: Ibid., Page 167

[^9]: Ibid., Page 167

[^10]: Ibid., Page 238


