Introduction
============

What is Islam?
--------------

"Islam"[^1] means "submitting or surrendering one's will to the will of
Allah".[^2] Mankind naturally submits to Allah; this instinct was born
with him on the day of his creation. In reality, the entire universe -
the stars, the planets, and the oceans - submits to the will of Allah
through its ordered workings.

Modern science calls this phenomenon "the laws of nature," but these
laws of nature, from an Islamic perspective, are not just any laws of
nature but the laws of Allah for nature. Human beings, as creatures of
Allah who are in need of Him throughout their entire lives, must also
surrender their wills and desires to the will of the Almighty, the
Creator.

Submitting to Allah does not mean humiliating the individual self or
denying the human intellect; rather, it means trusting in the knowledge,
wisdom, and fairness of the Creator. People voluntarily give over their
lives to others almost every day; for example, passengers embarking on
an airplane place their lives in the hands of the pilot because of the
pilot's knowledge, experience, and assumed goodwill.

Similarly, friends trust friends, and if a wise, knowledgeable,
rational, and good-intentioned friend invites another to go into the
middle of the desert in the middle of a dark night, that person would
follow because he knows that his friend would not endanger his life. The
decision to trust a person with more knowledge is logical, and so people
do not abandon their own intellects by trusting in the wisdom of God.

"Islam" has other meanings, one of which is "to have peace." Allah has
said in the Holy Qur'an:

***"He is Allah - there is no God but Him - the King, the Holy One, and
the Peace." (59:23)***

***"And Allah invites to the abode of peace." (10:25)***

By its connotations of peace and safety, "Islam" indicates that the
religion of Islam is free from any deficiencies or defects. As a
religion, Islam is perfect because it was ordained by Allah and not
invented by humankind.

Prophet Abraham (peace be upon him) was the first person that God
commanded to use the words "Islam" and "Muslim"[^3]:

**"It [Islamic monotheism] is the religion of your father Abraham. He
[Allah] has named you Muslims both before and in this [Qur'an]."
(22:78)**

**"Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a true Muslim
(submissive to Allah) and was not one of the polytheists." (3:67)**

Not only Prophet Abraham (peace be upon him) but also all the sincere,
truthful people after him called their religion "Islam." Prophet Joseph
(peace be upon him) says in the chapter of the Qur'an named "Joseph":

***My Lord! You have given me authority and taught me the interpretation
of things. O Creator of the heavens and earth! You are my guardian in
this world and in the Hereafter. Cause me to die as a Muslim, submitting
to Your will, and join me with the righteous.*** **(12:101)**

Thus Allah declares in the Qur'an:

***"Truly the religion before Allah is Islam."*** **(3:19)**

Who are the Muslims?
--------------------

Muslims are the followers of the religion of Islam, i.e. those who
submit to the will of Allah as explained in the Qur'an and the sayings
of Prophet Muhammad (S), the Messenger of Islam. The Muslim population
today is about 1.2 billion and is spread over a vast range of races,
nationalities, and cultures.

Approximately 18% of the Muslims live in the Arab world, but the
majority live in Asia and Africa. The country that has the largest
Muslim population is Indonesia, and significant Muslim minorities exist
in Russia, China, and Europe as well as North and South America. The
Muslim population of the United States is estimated to be around 6
million.

How does Someone Become a Muslim?
---------------------------------

The basic requirement to become a Muslim is to say, *"Ashhadu an laa
ilaaha illa Allah wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasul Allah,"* which means,
"I testify that there is no God but Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah." Anyone who says this phrase joins the ranks of the
Muslim nations. However, saying this only begins the long physical and
spiritual journey to practice all aspects of Islam in life and become
one of those whom the Qur'an terms "the faithful" (mu'min). Although
this journey is long, its rewards are numerous for those who embark on
it with sincere will and intentions.

Practicing Islam requires learning the Islamic ideas, teachings, and
practices, and then adapting to them - a process that does require some
sacrifice. The necessity of sacrifice, however, should not be a
deterrent since the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) has said that whenever
someone gives up something for the sake of Allah, Allah will replace it
with something better.

Sincerity of belief also develops over time. When Prophet Muhammad (S)
was first spreading the message of Islam, some people came to him and
informed him that they were believers. In reply, Allah revealed:

***"Say: 'You believe not, but say, 'We have submitted in Islam,' for
faith has not yet entered your hearts.'*****" (49:14)**

The first successor to the Holy Prophet, Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him),
has described the dynamic process of following Islam:

I am defining Islam as no one has defined it before me: Islam is
submission, submission is conviction, conviction is affirmation,
affirmation is acknowledgement, acknowledgement is performance of
obligations, and the performance of obligations is good deeds.[^4]

[^1]: From the Arabic verb aslama.

[^2]: The Arabic word for God.

[^3]: "Muslim" refers to a follower of the religion of Islam.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balagha (The Peak of Eloquence), saying \#125


