Part 3: Religious Texts
=======================

The Qur'an
----------

The Qur'an is the last in a series of divine books revealed by Allah to
mankind through the prophets. The Holy Qur'an was revealed to Prophet
Muhammad (S) over a period of 23 years and consists of 114 chapters
arranged from longest to shortest. Its length compares to that of the
New Testament. The revelations were written down by a group of people
appointed by the Prophet (S) and, after his death, first compiled by
Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him).

The Qur'an sheds light on many different aspects of life - legal, moral,
social, political, economic, philosophical, mystical, and scientific -
and also contains stories of previous prophets.

***"We have sent down to you the Book as an exposition of everything - a
guidance, a mercy, and glad tidings for those who have submitted
themselves to Allah as Muslims." (16:89)***

Less rigid than poetry but more beautiful than prose, its peculiar music
transcends all other forms of writing. It speaks only the truth, and its
directives are universal for all places and times. In reality, it is the
completion of the earlier revelations, such as the Old and New
Testaments, and is the only divine revelation to exist in its original
unchanged form:

***"Verily, it is We Who have sent down the Qur'an, and surely We will
guard it from corruption." (15:9)***

From the time of the Prophet (S) until today, not one word of the Qur'an
has been edited, altered, added, omitted, lost, distorted, or otherwise
changed.

The Qur'an plays an important role in Muslim life. It constantly reminds
Muslims of their duties, rights, obligations, and destiny. Muslims are
asked to study, memorize, ponder, and reflect on the Qur'an and then to
implement its teachings. The chapters of the Qur'an contain the supreme
divine wisdom which is meant for all seekers of truth - ordinary people,
scholars, specialists, old, young, Muslims, and non-Muslims. It
addresses all mankind; specific verses even clarify this fact by
beginning with the words, "O mankind!" The Qur'an satisfies people with
its symphony of words, its science, its narrations and intellectual
discourse, and fascinates them with its richness and depth.

### Science and the Qur'an

Many scientific facts and realities are present in the Qur'an, which is
the only religious book not to contradict science. Creation is described
on the embryological and cosmological levels:

***"And indeed We created man out of an extract of clay. Thereafter, We
made him as mixed drops of the male and female fluids and lodged him in
a safe lodging (womb of the mother). Then We made the mixed drops into a
clot (a piece of thick coagulated blood). Then We made the clot into a
little lump of flesh. Then We made out of that little lump of flesh
bones. Then We clothed the*** ***bones with flesh. And then We brought
it forth as another creation. So blessed be Allah, the best of
creators." (23:12-14)***

A careful comparison of this verse with the actual details of
embryological development will reveal no contradictions. The creation of
life, the earth, and the universe is also described in a way that
parallels modern scientific theory:

***"Do not those who disbelieve know that the heavens and the earth were
joined together as one united piece, then We parted them? And We have
made from water every living thing. Will they then not believe? And We
have placed on the earth firm mountains, lest it should shake with them,
and We placed therein broad highways for them to pass through that they
may be guided, and We have made the heaven a roof, safe, and
well-guarded. Yet they turn away from its signs. And He it is Who has
created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each in an
orbit floating" (21:30-33)***

Human beings are asked to ponder the creation of the universe and
consider their role therein:

***Verily, in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the
alternation of night and day there are indeed signs for men of
understanding - those who remember Allah always, standing, sitting, and
lying down on their sides, and think deeply about the creation of the
heavens and the earth, saying, "O Lord! You have not created all this
without purpose! Glory be to You! Give us salvation from the torment of
the fire." (3:190)***

***Are you more difficult to create or the heavens above? (79:27)***

Many of the chapters are named after cosmological objects such as "The
Star"[^1] and "The Sun",[^2] the latter of which begins:

***By the sun and its brightness, and by the moon as it follows it, and
by the day as it shows up in the sun's brightness, and by the night as
it conceals it, and by the heavens and Him who built it, and by the
earth and Him who spread it....***

***Although the people of the Prophet's time knew nothing about the
lifetimes or mechanisms of the sun and stars, the Qur'an refers to the
fact that stars exist for a fixed period of time:***

***And the sun runs on its fixed course for a term appointed. That is
the decree of the Almighty, the Omniscient. And the moon, We have
measured for it mansions to traverse till it returns like the old dried
curved date-stalk. It is not for the sun to overtake the moon, nor does
the night outstrip the day. They all swim each in an orbit. (36:38)***

***Even the expansion of the universe is alluded to: "With power did We
construct the heavens; verily, We are able to expand the vastness of
space thereof." (51:47)***

The end of this universe, too, is described:

***And remember the day when We will roll up the heavens like a scroll
rolled up for books. As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it.
It is a promise binding upon Us. Truly, We shall do it. (21:104)***

***When the sun has wound around and lost its light and has been
overthrown, and when the stars shall fall, and when the mountains shall
be made to pass away... And when the seas shall become a blazing far or
shall overflow.... (81:1-3,6)***

***When the Heaven is cleft asunder, and when the stars have fallen and
scattered, and when the seas have burst forth.... (82:1-3)***

***When the Event befalls - and there can be no denying its befalling -
it will bring low some, and others it will exalt. When the earth will be
shaken with a terrible shaking, and the mountains will be powdered to
dust so that they will become floating dust particles.... (56:1-6)***

***And they ask you concerning the mountains. Say, "My Lord will blast
them and scatter them as particles of dust; then He shall leave it as a
smooth, level plain. You will see therein nothing crooked or curved."
(20:105-107)***

The Qur'an does not contradict science because Allah Who revealed the
Qur'an is the same Allah Who made this creation.

### The Qualities of the Qur'an

And know that this Qur'an is an adviser who never deceives, a leader who
never misleads, and a narrator who never speaks a lie. No one will sit
beside this Qur'an but that when he rises he will achieve one addition
or one diminution - addition in his guidance and elimination in his
(spiritual) blindness.

You should also know that no one will need any thing after (guidance
from) the Qur'an and no one will be free from want before (guidance
from) the Qur'an. Therefore, seek cure from it for your ailments and
seek its assistance in your distresses. It contains a cure for the
biggest diseases, namely, unbelief, hypocrisy, revolt, and misguidance.
Pray to Allah through it and turn to Allah with its love. Do not ask the
people through it. There is nothing like it through which the people
should turn to Allah, the Sublime.[^3]

The Du'a, supplication to God
-----------------------------

Supplications and prayers (du'a) focus on the idea that human beings are
in constant need of God. Even those who reach the peak of wealth,
knowledge, strength, and dignity still are in need of God. The word du'a
itself means to call out to God, and du'a is of equal importance to
those inflicted by calamities and hardships and to those living in
comfort and abundance.

Speaking with Allah through du'a defends against adversity and
tribulation and leads to salvation and relief. Islam encourages its
followers to offer du'a constantly, either using their own words,
directly from the heart, or else repeating some of the beautiful words
that have been left behind by the Prophet (S) and his successors (peace
be upon them).

Allah has guaranteed His servants that He will answer their prayers:

***When My servants ask you concerning Me, I am indeed close to them. I
listen to the prayer of every suppliant when he calls upon Me. Let them
also with a will listen to My call and believe in Me that they walk in
the right way. (2:186)***

***And your Lord says, "Call on me, I will answer your prayer."
(40:60)***

### Du'a Kumayl

A man named Kumayl ibn Ziyad once asked Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him)
for a way to approach Allah. In response, Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him)
gave him this prayer and told him to recite it every day, if he could,
or else once a week, or even once a year - and if reciting it once a
year was too difficult, then to recite it at least once in his lifetime.
Muslims usually recite it once a week together on Thursday night:

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

*O Allah, I ask You by Your Mercy which embraces all things,*

*By Your Strength, through which You dominate all things, towards which
all things are humble, and before which all things are lowly;*

*By Your Invincibility, through which You overwhelm all things;*

*By Your Might, which nothing can resist;*

*By Your Greatness, which has filled all things;*

*By Your Power, which towers over all things;*

*By Your Face, which subsists after annihilation of all things;*

*By Your Names, which have filled the foundations of all things;*

*By Your Knowledge, which encompasses all things; and*

*By the Light of Your Face, through which all things are illumined!*

*O Light! O All-Holy!*

*O First of the first and Last of the Last!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which tear apart safeguards!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which bring down adversities!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which alter blessings!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which hold back supplication!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which dash all hopes!*

*O Allah, forgive me the sins which bring about tribulation!*

*O Allah, forgive me ever sin I have committed and every mistake I have
made!*

*O Allah, verily I seek nearness to You through remembrance of You, I
seek intercession*

*from You with Yourself, and I ask You through Your Munificence, to
bring me nearer*

*to Your Mercy, to bless me with gratitude to You and to inspire me with
Your*

*remembrance....*

[^1]: An-Najm/Chapter 53.

[^2]: Ash-Shams/Chapter 91.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balagha (The Peak of Eloquence), sermon 176.


