Part 4: Other Islamic Issues
============================

Leadership of the Muslims after Prophet Muhammad (S)
----------------------------------------------------

The Qur'an emphasizes the role and significance of leadership in Islam.
Allah states:

***"And remember the day on which we will call together all human beings
with their leaders (imams)."(17:71)***

Therefore, Prophet Muhammad (S) was very keen on appointing a successor
after himself by the command of his Lord. Allah commands the Prophet
(S):

***"O Prophet! Proclaim what has been revealed to you from your Lord
[the succession of Imam 'Ali], for if you do not, you will not have
conveyed His message, and Allah will protect you from the people."
(5:67)***

This event has been remembered as the event of Ghadir Khum, which was
the name of a place intersecting Makkah and Madina, and occurred when
the Prophet (S) was concluding his hajj rites and heading back with
110,000 companions. When he received the command of Allah, he
immediately appointed Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him) as his successor
after his death. In approval, the Qur'an says:

***"This day, I have perfected your religion for you, completed my favor
on you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion." (5:3)***

All the companions of the Prophet (S) paid allegiance to Imam 'Ali
(peace be upon him) and accepted him as the first caliph after the Holy
Prophet (S).

However, only 70 days after this monumental incident, the Prophet
Muhammad (S) left this life, and the first setback to his teachings
occurred when the Muslims did not honor their allegiance to Allah to
accept Imam 'Ali (peace be upon him) as the first caliph.

Confusion and disarray overtook the Muslims regarding who should succeed
the Prophet (S) as leader of the Muslim community. In a hasty meeting at
Saqifa Bani Sa'ida in Madina, Abu Bakr assumed leadership (632-634),
followed by 'Umar ibn al-Khattab (634-644), 'Uthman ibn 'Affan
(644-656), and finally 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (656-661).

After the khilafa of 'Ali (peace be upon him), two dynasties followed --
the Umayyids and the Abbasids -- before massive political changes
overtook the Islamic world.

Social Life in Islam
--------------------

Islam places tremendous emphasis on the social aspect of life. The
Islamic practices have not only spiritual dimensions but also social
ones. For example, Islam encourages people to perform their daily
prayers in congregation; Prophet Muhammad (S) has said: "One prayer of a
man in congregation is worthier than his forty years of prayers at home
alone."[^1]

Praying in congregation strengthens the ties between people by giving
them the opportunity to interact with each other and discuss their
issues in a holy place. Once a blind man came to the Prophet (S) and
said that there was no one to take him to the mosque to attend the
congregational prayer.

Prophet Muhammad (S) told him to stretch a thread from his house to the
mosque and use it to go to the mosque to attend the congregational
prayer. Similarly, fasting has many social aspects: it causes Muslims to
feel the starvation and the agony of the poor and deprived in society
and encourages them to extend their hands in help towards them.

The hajj undoubtedly is the largest religious and social convention
bringing millions of people from around the globe into one arena to
strengthen their ties, develop their skills, and exchange ideas and
opinions as to how to improve their situations.

Khums and zakaat (charity)also play an important social role in Islam by
causing Muslims to think that they themselves are responsible for
bridging the gap between the rich and the poor as well as for sharing
their own wealth with the needy and disadvantaged in society.

Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is a social responsibility
which falls on the shoulders of each and every individual in the Islamic
society to promote goodness, kindness, peace and justice and to fight
oppression, corruption, and evil. Therefore, Islam is truly a social
religion.

Marriage and Family Life
------------------------

Another aspect of Islamic sociality is marriage and establishing
families. Islam encourages its followers to get married and avoid
celibacy; Prophet Muhammad (S) has said: "The person who marries gains
half of his faith; then he must fear of Allah for the next remaining
half."[^2] In another saying, the Holy Prophet has said: "He who wishes
to be clean and purified when he meets Allah should marry and have a
spouse."[^3]

The Qur'an describes the union between man and woman:

***"And among His signs is that he created for you spouses from among
yourselves that you may dwell in tranquility with them, and He has put
love and mercy between your hearts. Verily, in that are signs for those
who reflect." (30:21)***

This verse establishes the three pillars of a successful marriage.
First, it should provide emotional and social shelter ("dwell in
tranquility") whereby the husband and the wife find stability and
financial, spiritual, emotional, and social security. The second pillar
of a successful marriage is the love between the spouses. Marriage which
is not based on love is apt to fail at any time. And the third pillar is
the mercy between the spouses which leads to mutual understanding,
appreciation, respect, and care for each other.

Although heavily discouraged, divorce is permissible in Islam. It exists
as a safety valve for a failed marriage which has no possibility of
progress or development. Allah does not want a couple to remain in
misery and sustain emotional, physical, and financial damage. Thus,
Allah explains the laws and rules of divorce in a chapter of the Qur'an
called "Divorce."[^4]

Islam encourages reconciliation between the spouses, and their families
and friends have the responsibility to help them with this as much as
possible, but if this process ultimately fails then the last resort is
divorce. After divorce, there is a waiting period for women to consider
their life and the fate of their children. Most people go back to their
spouses sometime during this waiting period, but if it elapses and the
two people show no interest in returning to each other, then the divorce
will be finalized.

Part of Islamic social life is to have regard for kinship; he who wishes
his sustenance to be increased and his death day to be delayed should
pay attention to his kinsfolk. Kindness and respect for one's parents
holds a high place in Islam:

***The Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you be
kind to your parents, whether one or both of them attains old age in
your life. Say not to them a word of contempt nor repel them, but
address them in terms of honor, and out of kindness lower to them the
wing of humility and say, "My Lord, bestow on them Thy mercy, even as
they cherished me in childhood." (23:24)***

Respect and kindness towards parents is as important as worship. Imam
al-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said: "He who glares at his parents
with wrathful eyes, although they have been unjust to him, Allah will
not accept his prayers unless he repents."[^5]

Respecting one's mother is particularly important; the Prophet (S) said:
"Treat kindly your mother. Treat kindly your mother. Treat kindly your
mother, and be kind to your father."[^6]

Imam al-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has narrated: He who wishes Allah,
Almighty and Glorious, to lighten the agonies of death should have
regard for his kinship and treat his parents with goodness. Then Allah
will make the agonies of death easy for him, and he will not be stricken
by poverty in his life at all.[^7]

In general, human beings should all serve one another whether they are
related or not. Prophet Muhammad (S) has said: "He who decreases a grief
out of the agonies for his Muslim brother, Allah will decrease for him a
grief out of the agonies of the hereafter."[^8]

He (S) also said: "People are the dependants of Allah for sustenance. So
the most beloved person with Allah is the one who is helpful to the
dependents of Allah and makes the family members of a house happy."[^9]

As a social responsibility, Islam also encourages its followers to help
the needy; Imam al-Sadiq (peace be upon him) has said: Whoever satiates
a hungry believer so that the one is satisfied fully, neither a human
being among people nor a near-stationed angel nor a divine messenger
knows how great his reward is in the Hereafter except Allah, the Lord of
the Worlds.

And he also said: Feeding a hungry Muslim is among the means of
forgiveness.[^10]

Even those who are not indigent should still be helped in any way
possible: "He who is referred to by his Muslim brother [to borrow] but
does not give him a loan, Allah will forbid him from entering Paradise
on the day when the righteous will be recompensed."[^11]

Women in Islam
--------------

Islam equalizes men and women on the following issues: creation,
religious obligations, honor and dignity. However, there are natural
differences in the peculiarities of each gender. The female as a mother
differs in her personality and peculiarities from the man as a father.
For each one of them, there is a specified message in life.

The Holy Qur'an declares that men and women are born equal. It gives
women such rights as owning property, engaging in businesses, choosing a
husband, claiming inheritance, receiving education, and being treated
with respect. An entire chapter of the Qur'an (chapter 4) discusses
women's' rights in the society. It starts by addressing people: "O
Mankind! Be dutiful to your Lord Who created you from a single soul, and
He created its mate out of it, and from them both He created many men
and women."

Some of the verses equalizing men and women are as follows:

***There is a share for men and a share for women from what is left by
parents and those nearest related, whether the property be small or
large (5:7)***

***O You who believe, you are forbidden to inherit women against their
will, and you should not treat them with harshness, and live with them
honorably. If you dislike them, it may be that you dislike a thing and
that Allah brings through it a great deal of good. (4:19)***

***For men there is reward for what they have earned, and for women
there is reward for what they have earned. (4:32)***

***Whoever works righteousness, whether male or female, while he or she
is a true believer, verily to him We will give a good life in this
world, with respect, contentment, and lawful provision, and We shall
certainly pay them a reward in proportion to the best of what they used
to do. (16:97)***

Islam grants women full political, financial, social, and educational
rights in society. Women have the right to vote in Islam, and to
participate in the democratic process.

***"O Prophet! When believing women come to you to give you political
and religious allegiance... then accept their allegiance, and ask Allah
to forgive them; verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, most Merciful."
(60:12)***

Women should also have the full right to choose their own husbands
without pressure or intimidation. Arranged marriages in the sense of
women being dragged into marriages that they are unaware of or dislike
are unlawful in Islam.

Women have the right to participate in the educational and cultural
activities as well as religious and spiritual endeavors. No field is
closed to women unless it interferes with their dignity, respect, and
chastity in society.

Therefore, Islam does forbid women to display their attractions and
physical appearance in society and calls for modesty and conservatism in
their behavior and dress, as well as loyalty to the family, ideals which
Islam also enjoins upon men as well. Women are instructed to cover
modestly which includes covering the hair as well as the rest of the
body except the hands and the face.[^12]

Human Rights in Islam
---------------------

Islam has laid down fundamental, universal rights for humanity which are
to be observed and respected in all circumstances. These rights are
those which were specified and granted by Allah and apply to all human
beings, not just Muslims. An integral part of the Islamic faith is to
accept, recognize, and enforce these human rights. The verdict in the
Qur'an is unequivocal for those who fail to do so:

***"Those who do not judge by what God has sent down are the
disbelievers." (5:44)***

The rights guaranteed by Islam and the Qur'an include: the right to
life, the right to safety, respect for women's honor and dignity, the
right to a basic standard of life, the right to individual freedom, the
right to justice, and the inherent equality of human beings.

Mosques (masaajid)
------------------

Mosques are places of worship used by Muslims. Islam encourages people
to perform their prayers in mosques and also encourages people to
participate in building mosques. Prophet Muhammad (S) has said: "Whoever
builds a mosque, Allah will build for him a house in Paradise."

The mosque plays a vital role in Muslim life; in addition to the five
daily congregational prayers and the recommended prayers, the mosque
also accommodates Muslims during the Friday noon prayers and on the
'eid, holidays. Therefore, the mosque is considered a sacred place, and
it should not be sold or defiled, and men and women who are ritually
impure may not enter.

The first mosque built by Prophet Muhammad (S) was called Qoba'a and was
located in the outskirts in the city of Madina, while the first house of
worship built on earth was al-masjid al-haram, the sacred mosque in
Makkah. This mosque is the holiest of the mosques, the second holiest
being the Prophet's Mosque in Madina which was built after the Prophet's
migration from Makkah to Madina.

Mosques have many distinctive features. There are the musallah, or
prayer hall; the minbar, or pulpit, where the preacher or imam stands to
deliver his sermon; the mihrab, the niche which faces the direction of
the Ka'bah in Makkah (al-qiblah); and also there are minarets and domes
from which the call to prayers is raised.

Before entering mosques, the shoes must be removed, and women should be
dressed conservatively (this includes covering the head). Neither men
nor women should carry on loud conversations inside. Mosques belong to
Allah, not to specific individuals, families, communities, or tribes:

***"And the mosques are for Allah alone, so invoke not anyone along with
Allah." (72:18)***

And Allah encourages people to construct and fill mosques:

***"The mosques of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe
in Allah and the last day, perform prayers, and give zakaat and fear
none but Allah. It is they who surely are on true guidance." (9:18)***

Hence, barring people from conducting their worshipping in the mosque is
considered a grave sin in Islam:

***"And who is more unjust than those who forbid that Allah's name be
glorified and mentioned much in Allah's mosques and strive for their
ruin?" (2:114)***

Allah exists everywhere and throughout all time, and the Qur'an states:

***"To Allah belong the East and the West, so wherever you turn your
face there is the face of Allah." (2:115)***

Nevertheless, as a sign of unity Muslims are instructed to face the
qiblah, the direction of the Ka'bah in Makkah, during prayer.

Islamic Law and Punishment
--------------------------

Before speaking of the law and punishment in Islam, many premises must
be introduced regarding Islamic jurisprudence. Islamic ideology
stipulates that Allah is the main source of Islamic law. These laws were
revealed to all divine messengers in different eras and geographical
places in accordance with the intellectual progress of the various
societies, and reached their perfection through the Holy Qur'an which
carries a universal message for mankind. Therefore, the Islamic law is
not bound by time and place and is designed to cater to the different
needs of the human race until eternity.

The Islamic law of punishment is based on prevention, not retribution -
meaning that Islam cares to prevent criminal acts before they happen and
disrupt the peace of society. These laws are dynamic, everlasting, and
not bound by individualistic interests. They take into consideration the
general interest of society. Allah speaks about the punishment of the
criminals by saying:

***"O you who believe, the law of equality in punishment is prescribed
for you in case of murder, but if the killer is forgiven by the
relatives of the killed against blood money, then adhering to it with
fairness and payment of the blood money to the heir should be made in
fairness. This is an alleviation and a mercy from your Lord." (2:178)***

Although Islam tries to combat crime and terror with full seriousness,
it leave room for mercy and forgiveness, emphasizing the human nature of
people and that they should learn mercy and forgiveness from their Lord.

However, Islam has to be introduced as a whole to the people, and to
incorporate Islam in all aspects of life, not only in the judicial
system. Islam invites the rulers and the subjects alike to spread social
justice, equality, and distribution of wealth in society. Once every
individual in society has adequate food, shelter, clothing, and
opportunities for work, education, and marriage and the gap between the
haves and the have-nots has been bridged - then if an individual or
group of people tries to jeopardize the safety and security of society
and terrorize the people, then in this case Islam would stand firmly in
their face and the law of punishment would be exercised.

[^1]: Mustadrak al-wasaa'il, vol. 6 p. 446.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5 p. 328.

[^3]: Man laa yahduruhu al-faqih, vol. 3 p. 385.

[^4]: At-Talaq/Chapter 65.

[^5]: Al-Kafi, 2:162.

[^6]: Safinat al-bihar, vol. 2 p. 553.

[^7]: Shahab al-Akbar, p. 194.

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, 2:349.

[^9]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2 p. 164.

[^10]: al-Kafi, vol. 2 p. 201

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76 p. 369.

[^12]: Qur'an 33:59, 33:53, and 24:31.


