Publisher's Foreword
====================

The Ahl al-Bayt’s heritage, which has been kept in reserve by their
school and saved from waste by their followers, represents an
all-inclusive school comprising the various fields of Islamic knowledge.
This school has succeeded in raising minds that were initially ready to
take along provisions from this source and presenting to the Muslim
nation eminent scholars who, following the unshakable steps of the Ahl
al-Bayt, are well-acquainted with the arguments and questions of the
various sects and intellectual trends, inside and outside the Muslim
community and are capable of providing excellent, irrefutable answers
and solutions over successive ages.

On account of the responsibilities that it has undertaken, the Ahl
al-Bayt (a.s)[^1] World Assembly has taken the initiative to defend the
sacredness of the Divine Mission and its realities, which the contrivers
of misleading factions and the inventors of anti-Islam trends have tried
to confuse. It has also patterned after the steps of the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) and the followers of their orthodox school that has always abided
by refuting such ceaseless challenges and attempted to keep itself in
confrontation with these enemies at the required level for all time and
in all ages.

The experiments comprised by the writings of the scholars of the Ahl
al-Bayt School in this respect are really unique, because they hold a
scientific amount of knowledge based upon reason and clear evidence,
evading personal desires and discommended fanaticism, and conversing
with versed scholars and thinkers through a speech accepted by reason
and approved by sound nature.

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) World Assembly has been attempting to provide for
the seekers after truth a new stage of such abounding experiments,
through a set of researches and writings compiled by contemporary
authors belonging to the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) School, and other authors
upon whom Almighty Allah has bestowed the boon of joining this honorable
school. Besides, the Assembly has published and revised a number of
books of ancient brilliant Shi\`ite scholars, in the hope that these
books will be pleasant resources for truth-seeking souls and enable them
to perceive the facts presented by the genuine school of the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) to the entire world in an age when intellects are attaining
perfection and souls and spirits are swiftly and inimitably
interconnected.

The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) World Assembly would like to express special
gratitude to His Eminence Shaykh Ja\`far al-Hadi, the author of this
book, and thank all the people who have contributed to this project.

Finally, we hope that we have fulfilled a part of our duty towards the
Mission of our Great Lord Who “sent His Messenger with the guidance and
the true religion that He may make it prevail over all the religions;
and Allah is enough for a witness. (48/28)”

**Cultural Affairs Department**

In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful The NEED for
MUTUAL ACQUAINTANCE

The Holy Qur'an reads,

“(We have) made you tribes and families that you may know each other.
49/13”

When Islam dawned, peoples were so disunited that they ignored each
other. Furthermore, they were involved in conflicting and wrangling
against each other. With the spread of Islam among these peoples,
ignorance of each other turned into mutual acquaintance, rivalry into
cooperation, and dissociation into reciprocal relations. This change is
one of the blessings of the monotheistic precepts of Islam, which was
the prime motive of the emergence of a great, united nation that
introduced to the world a magnificent culture and protected its
individuals from the evils of oppressors and tyrants and succeeded to
win the world’s respect and become object of veneration in the eyes of
all despots and arrogant rulers.

What happened is attributed to the unity and intimate relationship of
this nation which discarded ethnic differences and differences in
opinions, cultures, and customs or traditions. Reaching consensus on
principles, fundaments, obligatory acts, and duties contributed to
achieving the unity. Unquestionably, unity is power while separation is
weakness.
The new situation prevailed for a period of time. Then, the unity and
acquaintance turned into disunity so that people began to ignore one
another, the understanding turned into enmity so that some groups began
to accuse each other of atheism, and sects began to wage campaigns
against some other sects. As a result, the nation lost its might, its
strength petered out, and tyrants belittled this nation, which once
enjoyed a pioneering and leading status. This condition paved the way
for foxes and wolves to move freely across the lands of this nation; and
the strangers who are accursed by Almighty Allah and rejected by
humanity gained control over its various parts. So, the fortunes of this
nation were plundered, its sanctity was violated, and its honor became
at the mercy of the immoral ones. The consequence was incessant
collapses and defeats and relapses that afflicted Andalusia, Bukhara,
Samarkand, Tashkent, and Baghdad in the past, and Palestine and
Afghanistan in the present time.

Consequently, the calls of the nation are no longer responded to, and
its appeals for aid are no longer answered. The reason is because the
malady is something else. So is the remedy. Almighty Allah has decreed
that nothing can go into effect without natural causes; and “the last
affair of this nation can be set aright by setting right its first
affair.”

Now that the Muslim nation is facing the most hideous and vehement
campaigns which target its entity, doctrines and unity as well as the
devices intended to harm its sectarian and intellectual coexistence; is
it not appropriate in this stage that Muslims in the world unite and
strengthen their relations? The various Muslim sects share principles
and consider the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Sunnah[^2] as the source of law
and believe that Almighty Allah is the One and Only Lord, Muhammad
(S)[^3] is their Prophet, and that the Hereafter is the final return.
Besides, all Muslims perform the same religious duties; i.e. prayer,
fasting, pilgrimage to the Holy House of God at Mecca, defraying the
poor-rate, struggling against the enemies of Islam, and abiding by that
which is deemed lawful and abandoning that which is deemed unlawful by
Islam and they all love the Holy Prophet and his Household—peace be upon
them all—and all acquit themselves from their enemies, though the
intensity of their feelings may differ in this concern.

Thus, Muslim sects are just like fingers of one hand all of which come
together, though they slightly vary in length, width and shape or
perhaps they are like a body, which has many parts of different shapes
and forms and these parts all cooperate to stimulate a person’s physical
activity.

The comparison between the Islamic nation and the hand or the body can
be an indication of the aforementioned fact.[^4]

In the past, the scholars of the various Muslim sects and trends used
to live side by side without any dispute. On many occasions, they used
to cooperate with each other; they would explain theological or
jurisprudential books of each other; attend the lessons of each other;
applaud each other; support each other; license each other to narrate
their reports; ask permission from each other to quote narrations from
their books; follow each other in prayers; lead each other in prayers;
declare the piety of each other; and approve of each others’ sects.
Moreover, the followers of the various sects used to live together
amicably as if there were no disagreement and variance in opinions
between them and when scholars from one sect criticized one from the
other sect, they would often behave with utter decorum and observe the
rules of scientific and objective discussion.

There are numerous irrefutable historical proofs of such profound
cooperation through which the Muslim scholars were able to enrich
Islamic culture, cite excellent example of sectarian freedom and attract
the attention of the whole world and win their respect.

As a matter of fact, it is not impossible for the scholars of the
Muslim nation to hold meetings and exchange views calmly with
objectivity, sincerity, and good intention and discuss the disagreements
between Muslim sects and have good acquaintance with the proofs and
evidences of each sect in this respect.

It is also good and reasonable that each sect or group will present its
beliefs and ideas and thoughts freely and openly so that the spurious
accusations and arguments aroused against any sect may be known to all
and everyone realizes the areas of similarity and difference and then
apprehend that they have a lot in common and that the points of
disagreement cannot affect their unity or prevent them from getting
closer and closer.

The current work is a step on this way. It is hoped that it will be a
good manifestation of the truth in its real sense so that everybody may
know the truth as it is.

Almighty Allah is the patron of all success.


