The Imamate Ja`fariyyah Shiah
=============================

(1)

(1) The Imamite Ja\`fariyyah form a large group of Muslims in the
present age, which amounts to about one fourth of the total number of
the Muslims. Their historical roots extend to early Islam when Almighty
Allah revealed the following verse:

“Those who have faith and do righteous deeds; they are the best of
creatures. (98/7)”

On that day, the Holy Prophet, in the presence of his companions, put
his hand on \`Ali ibn Abi-talib’s shoulder and said,

“O \`Ali: It is you and your Shi\`ah (followers) who are ‘the best of
creatures.’”[^5]

The followers of this sect, who are ascribed to Imam Ja\`far al-sadiq
because of their adherence to his jurisprudential teachings, are also
called Shi\`ah.

(2)

The followers of this sect live densely in Iran, Iraq, Pakistan,
Afghanistan, and India. They also spread in big numbers in the countries
of the Persian Gulf, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Russia, and the former
Soviet Republics, as well as some European countries, such as England,
Germany, France, and in American, African and South Asian countries. In
these countries, they have their own mosques and scientific, cultural,
and social centers.

(3)

The followers of Shi\`ism belong to various nationalities and ethnic
groups and they vary in language and color. The Shi\`ah live side by
side with their Muslim brethren from the other sects peacefully and
amicably and cooperate with them honestly and sincerely in all aspects
and at all levels. In this regard, they act according to the following
holy texts:

The Holy Qur'an reads,

“The believers are but a single brotherhood, (49/10)”

“And help one another in goodness and piety, (5:2)”

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said,

“The Muslims must act as one hand against the others.”[^6]

“The believers are like a single body.”[^7]

(4)

Throughout the history of Islam, the Shi\`ah have played an estimable
and remarkable role in defending Islam and the honorable Muslim
community. They led many governments and set up many states that
contributed enormously to the Islamic civilization. They have had many
scholars and thinkers who contributed to the enhancement of the Islamic
heritage by compiling hundreds of thousands of writings and books, small
and big, in various fields including exegesis of the Holy Qur'an
(tafsir), traditions of the Holy Prophet (hadith), doctrines,
jurisprudence, principles of Islamic jurisprudence (\`ilm al-uSul),
ethics, investigation of reported traditions (\`ilm al-dirayah),
biography of narrators (\`ilm al-rijal), philosophy, sermons, politics,
sociology, linguistics, and arts. They also wrote books on medicine,
physics, chemistry, mathematics, astrology, and other physical sciences.
Furthermore, they played a major role in founding many sciences.[^8]

(5)

The Shi\`ah believe in Allah: the One, the Single, the Unique, ‘the
eternally Besought of all; Who begets not, nor is He begotten.’ They
thus deem Him too Exalted to be corporeal or have direction, space,
time, alteration, movement, ascension, descent, or any other quality
that does not befit His matchless majesty, holiness, perfection, and
excellence.

They believe that there is no object of worship save Almighty Allah,
and that all decisions and legislation belong to Him, and all kinds of
polytheism, overt and covert, are considered grave injustices and
unforgivable sins.

They draw these beliefs from judicious reasoning supported by the Holy
Qur'an and authentic Sunnah, regardless of the source.

With respect to beliefs, the Shi\`ah rest neither on Israelite
traditions (i.e. those quoted from the Torah and the Gospel) nor on
Magian traditions that anthropomorphize Almighty Allah, ascribe to Him
unfairness, injustice, nonsense, and vainness—Exalted and Great be He—or
indict the Divinely purified Prophets, who are completely protected
against sinning, of dreadful sins and unbecoming evil deeds.

(6)

The Shi\`ah believe that Almighty Allah is Just and Wise; He has
created all things through justice and wisdom; therefore, there is no
futility in the creation, including inanimate, plant, animal, humankind,
sky, or land, because absurdism is in violation of justice and wisdom;
and the absence of justice and wisdom negates the existence of Godhead
because the idea of the divinity of Almighty Allah necessitates that He
is the source of all perfect excellencies and ideal attributes and that
He, the Glorified, is free from any defect.

(7)

The Shi\`ah believe that Almighty Allah, out of wisdom and justice, has
sent Prophets and Messengers, granted them infallibility and expansive
knowledge through Divine Revelation, and sent them to the human beings
since the first day of man's existence on this earth, in order to show
them the right path, help them attain the desired perfection, and guide
them to the obedience to Almighty Allah, for this obedience is their
means that takes them to Paradise and makes them win His mercy and
pleasure.

The most eminent of these Prophets and Messengers are Adam, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, as well as those to whom the Holy Qur'an and
the Holy Sunnah have referred—peace be upon them all.

(8)

The Shi\`ah believe that whoever obeys Almighty Allah, carries out His
orders, and abides by His laws in all aspects of life will be granted
security (from the Divine chastisement), win (the Divine reward) and
deserve praise and incentive even if he or she be ‘an Abyssinian slave’.
On the other hand, whoever disobeys Almighty Allah, disregards His
commandments, and obeys the orders decided by other than Almighty Allah,
will certainly lose, perish, and deserve condemnation and punishment,
even if he or she be ‘a Qurayshite chief’, as is mentioned in a
Prophetic tradition.

They also believe that Divine rewarding and punishment will be decided
on the Resurrection Day when everyone will be called to account and be
interrogated, the Scale of Justice (al-mizan) will be set up, and
Paradise and Hellfire will be witnessed. All this follows the stages of
the Grave Interrogation (musa’alat al-qabr) and the Intermediate World
(\`alam al-barzakh).
However, they reject transmigration of the souls claimed by those who
deny the promised Day of Resurrection, because it contradicts the
principles of the Holy Qur'an and the Holy Sunnah.

(9)

The Shi\`ah believe that Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah ibn \`Abd
al-Muttalib—peace of Allah be upon him and his Household—[^9]is the last,
the seal, and the most preferred of all the Prophets and Messengers.
Almighty Allah has safeguarded him against flaws and slips and protected
him from committing any act of disobedience to Him, be it grave or
insignificant, whether before or after his prophethood, while
disseminating the Divine Mission or on other occasions.

Almighty Allah revealed the Holy Qur'an to the Prophet Muhammad (S) as
an eternal constitution for man. Hence, the Holy Prophet (S) delivered
the whole message and fulfilled this duty honestly and sincerely,
sacrificing everything for it, no matter how precious it would be.

Shi\`ite writers have compiled scores of books and researches on the
Holy Prophet’s life, personality, manners, characteristics and
miracles.[^10]

(10)

The Shi\`ah believe that the Holy Qur'an was revealed to Muhammad (S),
the Prophet of Islam, through Archangel Gabriel the Honest and was
recorded by a group of major sahabah,[^11] at the head of whom was \`Ali
ibn Abi-talib, in the lifetime of the Holy Prophet (S) and under his
supervision and instruction. The sahabah learnt the Holy Qur'an by heart
and had a good command of it, computed its chapters, verses, words and
letters, and then transferred it to the later generations. The Holy
Qur'an is currently recited by all Muslims of divergent sects, “at hours
of the night and at the two ends of the day.” It has been preserved from
adding, deleting, distorting, or alteration of any single character of
it.

On this subject, Shi\`ite scholars have written both voluminous and
short books.[^12]

(11) The Shi\`ah believe that before the Messenger of Allah (S) died,
he had appointed \`Ali ibn Abi-talib as his vicegerent and Muslims’
leader (imam) after him so that \`Ali might lead the Muslims
politically, guide them intellectually and solve their problems.

In the last year of his blessed lifetime and immediately after his last
ritual pilgrimage (hajj), the Holy Prophet (S), by a Divine command,
gathered the crowds of the Muslims who had just completed the rites of
hajj and who were, according to some narrations, more than one hundred
thousand in a place called ‘Ghadir Khumm’ and declared \`Ali to be his
successor. Several Qur'anic verses were revealed concerning this
important event.[^13]

The Holy Prophet (S) also ordered people to swear allegiance to Imam
\`Ali (a.s) by shaking hands with him. The grand personalities from the
Muhajirun (emigrants of Mecca), the AnSar (people of al-Madinah), and
eminent sahabah were the first to pay homage and congratulate Imam \`Ali
on this position.[^14]

(12)

The Shi\`ah believe that Imam \`Ali was appointed by a Divine Command
to lead Muslims after the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) and to take charge
of all the responsibilities of the Holy Prophet (S) which he had in his
lifetime—including the leadership of the Muslim community, guidance to
rightness, educating, teaching, elucidating religious laws, solving
complicated intellectual problems, and taking care of major social
affairs. This means that he enjoys the qualifications that make the
public have confidence in him just as they trusted the Prophet (S) so
that he can lead the nation to redemption. Accordingly, the Imam has the
same responsibilities of the Holy Prophet excluding the reception of
Divine Revelation and prophethood, because prophethood was sealed by
Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah (S), the seal of the Prophets and Messengers
whose religion is the seal of religions, whose law is the seal of the
Divine laws, and whose Book is the seal of the Divine Books.[^15]

(13)

The Shi\`ah believe that as long as Muslims were in need of an orthodox
leader and an infallible guardian, appointing other Imams to succeed
\`Ali (a.s) as successor to and Imam after the Holy Prophet (S) was
indispensable. This succession of leadership is necessary for
establishing the roots of Islamic doctrines and precepts, preserving the
principles of the religious law, and protecting the fundamentals of
Islam against the dangers that threaten and have been threatening all
Divine faiths and godly systems, and so the Holy Imams (a.s) who are
commissioned to play various roles and undertake various
responsibilities in various circumstances, present practical patterns
and programs befitting all the conditions which the Muslim nation may
face in the future.

(14)

In view of this fact and due to the Divine philosophy, the Shi\`ah
believe that the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) has nominated eleven Imams to
lead the Muslim nation after Imam \`Ali (a.s). Hence, these Imams, along
with Imam \`Ali, are called the Twelve Imams.[^16] On various occasions,
prophetic traditions and predictions refer to the number and tribe
(namely, Quraysh) of these Imams though their names and peculiarities
are not mentioned in some traditions.

Some of these traditions are mentioned in different forms in such
sources like sahih al-Bukhari and sahih Muslim, two reference books of
Prophetic traditions which the Sunnites regard most authentic. These two
reference books narrate that the Holy Prophet (S) has said,

“This religion will continue to exist (and on other occasions, in
constancy, might, or invulnerability) as long as there are twelve
princes (or vicegerents) all of whom belong to the tribe of Quraysh (or
according to other books to the family of Hashim).”

In other reference books of merits, virtues, poetry, and literature,
these Twelve Imams are mentioned by names.

Albeit the Prophetic traditions have not mentioned by name \`Ali ibn
Abi-talib and the eleven Imams (a.s) from his offspring, these
traditions are in accord with no school of thought except that of the
(Twelver) Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah. Furthermore, there is no logical
explanation for these traditions except that of the Shi\`ah.[^17]


