Supplement 2
============

(30)

For the same reason which we have just stated, the Ja\`fariyyah
Shi\`ah—like the other cognizant Muslims who recognize the magnificent
positions of the Holy Prophet (S) and his immaculate Household (a.s)—
show great interest in visiting the holy shrines of the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s). They visit them with the intention of honoring them, learning
from them, renewing their pledge with them, and expressing their
commitment to values for which these great people strove for the
preservation of which they sacrificed their lives.

In their visits of these shrines, they recall the virtues of the people
buried in these places, their striving for the cause of the faith, their
devotion to offering prayers constantly, giving alms, and acting
steadfastly against all the harm and torment that they had to suffer. In
addition, through these visits, people express their sympathy for the
wronged descendants of the Holy Prophet (S).

Didn’t the Holy Prophet (S) exclaim after the event of the martyrdom of
his uncle Hamzah, saying:

“How is it that nobody weeps over Hamzah?”[^36]

Didn’t he weep over the death of his dear son, Ibrahim?

Didn’t he regularly visit the graves at al-Baqi\` Cemetery?

Didn’t he urge people to regularly visit the graves and say that they
remind you of the Hereafter?[^37]

Attending the shrines of the Imams (a.s), who are among the Household
of the Holy Prophet, and recalling their life styles and heroic
combative stances remind the subsequent generations of the gross
sacrifices that these great personalities made for Islam and Muslims,
and implant in them the spirits of courage, bravery, altruism, and the
martyrdom in the cause of Almighty Allah.

Indeed, visiting the graves of the Holy Imams is one of man’s civilized
and sensible acts. Nations usually commemorate their great personalities
and founders of civilizations in various ways, because this kind of
commemoration fills them with pride before others and makes other
nations embrace their values and establish close relations with them.
For this very reason, the Holy Qur'an praises the stances of the
prophets (a.s) and pure people and relates what happened to them.

(31) The Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah believe that the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Immaculate Imams can intercede with Almighty Allah for the people, and
so they entreat Him through the intercession of the Holy Prophet (S) and
Imams to forgive them, grant them their needs, and cure the sick among
them. The Holy Qur'an has allowed them and even encouraged them to do
so:

“And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger had asked forgiveness for
them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning to mercy, Merciful.
(4/64)”

Regarding the right of intercession (shafa\`ah) granted to the Holy
Prophet (S) by Almighty Allah, the Holy Qur'an reads,

“Verily your Lord will give you, so that you shall be well pleased.
(93/5)”

It is thus unreasonable that Almighty Allah, Who has granted His Noble
Messenger the right of intercession for the sinful ones and awarded him
the right of mediation (wasilah), will prevent the people from asking
the Messenger to intercede with Him for them, or deprives the Messenger
of this right!

The Holy Qur'an recounts that Prophet Jacob’s sons asked their father
to intercede with Almighty Allah for them, saying,

“O our father! Ask forgiveness of our faults for us. Surely, we were
sinners. (12/97)”

This infallible prophet did not reject their request, but he
responded:

“I will ask for you forgiveness from my Lord. Surely, He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful. (12/98)”

Again, none can claim that the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams are
dead and that returning to them for mediation is of no avail!

As a matter of fact, the Prophets in general and the Holy Prophet
Muhammad (S) in particular are alive. Almighty Allah says about the
Muslims and Prophet Muhammad:

“And thus We have made you a medium (just) nation that you may be the
bearers of witness over the people and that the Messenger may be a
bearer of witness over you. (2/143)”

“And say (to them): Work; so Allah will see your work and so will His
Messenger and the believers. (9/105)”

Evidently, like the perpetuity of the sun and the moon and the
continuity of day and night, this holy verse goes into effect
incessantly until the Resurrection Day.

Similarly, the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (a.s) are martyrs
and as Almighty Allah says in various places of His Book, martyrs are
ever-living.

(32)

The Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah celebrate the birthdays of the Holy Prophet
(S) and the Holy Imams who are from his descendants—peace be upon them
all. They also commemorate the anniversaries of their death. On such
ceremonies, they mention their virtues, merits, and exemplary stances,
which have been authentically reported by the Holy Qur'an that mentions,
praises, and draws the attentions to the virtues of the Prophets and
Messengers so that people may follow them, learn lessons from them, and
gain true guidance.

Of course, in such celebrations, they refrain from committing forbidden
acts; such as unlawful mixture of opposite sexes, eating or drinking
forbidden things, exaggeration in praise and applause or other deeds
that contradict the spirit of the holy Islamic law, go beyond its
acknowledged regulations, are incongruous with the sacred Qur'anic texts
and the authenticated Sunnah, or are incompatible to a general rule,
which has been truly inferred from the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah in a sound
way.
(33) The Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah have recourse to a number of books
comprising Prophetic traditions and the traditions narrated from his
Immaculate Household, such as ‘al-Kafi’ by Shaykh al-Kulayni, a
trustworthy scholar, and ‘man-la-yahzaruhu’l-faqih’ by Shaykh al-saduq,
and ‘Tahdhib al-Ahkam’ and ‘al-IstibSar’ by Shaykh al-tusi. These are
invaluable reference books in the field of hadith.

Albeit that these books comprise authentic narrations, neither their
compilers nor the Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah call them Sahih (pl. Sihah), that
is fully authentic; therefore, the Shi\`ah do not consider all
narrations mentioned in these books authentic; rather they accept
authenticated narrations and reject the ones which are inauthentic,
unsound, or do not accord with the science of investigating reported
traditions (\`ilm al-dirayah), biography of reporters (\`ilm al-rijal)
or the rules of the science of hadith.

(34)

In the fields of doctrines, jurisprudence, supplications, and ethics,
the Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah have recourse to other books which contain
various narrations reported from the Holy Imams, such as ‘Nahj
al-Balaghah’ that is a collection of the sermons, epistles, and
aphorisms of Imam \`Ali (a.s) compiled by al-Sharif al-Razi; ‘Risalat
al-Huquq (The Treatise on Rights)’ and ‘al-sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah’ (also
known as the psalms of Islam) by Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn
al-\`abidin (a.s); ‘al-sahifah al-\`Alawiyyah’ comprising the prayers of
Imam \`Ali (a.s); and Shaykh al-saduq’s books of ‘\`Uyun Akhbar
al-Riza’, ‘al-Tawhid’, ‘al-KhiSal’, ‘\`Ilal al-Shara'i\`’, and ‘Ma\`ani
al-Akhbar’.

(35)

The Ja\`fariyyah Shi\`ah also rest on the authentic narrations on
different topics which are reported from the Holy Prophet (S) in the
reference books of hadith of their Sunnite brethren[^38] without any
fanaticism or stringency.

This idea is affirmed by the Shi\`ite writings, both old and recent,
that comprise narrations reported by the Holy Prophet’s companions and
his wives as well as eminent sahabah and reporters, such as Abu-Hurayrah
and Anas ibn Malik, when these traditions are not inconsistent with the
Holy Qur'an, the authentically proven practices of the Holy Prophet (S),
judicious reason, or scholarly consensus.


