 Is It Good To Be A Muslim?
===========================

   
 A philosopher may debate whether there is such thing as absolute truth,
or truth with a capital T. Another may say that all paths lead to God,
i.e., that all religions or philosophies are equal. If that were the
case, then it would not matter if I were Christian, or Muslim, or
Atheist, or even if I were an Adolf Hitler, a Karl Marx or Mother
Teresa. Each religion would have its own truths, and each person’s deeds
within the context of their own philosophies would be equally valid.
There then becomes no agreeable standard for determining right and
wrong.  
    
 A Muslim scholar once said that we are given the capacity within
ourselves to determine right and wrong. That is plausible, because even
from when we are very little, scientists report that we have ideas about
fairness that are very unlikely to have been taught to us by our
parents. However, I personally believe that the God-given ability to
determine right and wrong can become impaired, or diseased, if we are
not careful. Once it is diseased, as I imagine it is for most of us to
some extent, it becomes difficult to make it well again. Thus, it is
difficult for someone, as an example, raised in the West and surrounded
by Western ideals, to see all the impairments in the judgment of their
society concerning right and wrong. What a person is used to seeing,
hearing, and believing seems fair to them.  
    
***“He [Satan or Iblis] said: My Lord! Because Thou hast put me in the
wrong, I will make (wrong) fair-seeming to them on the earth….” Qu’ran
15:039***  
    
 If we wish to examine our belief systems, the determining factor for
right and wrong can only come from the source of absolute truth. In
turn, I contend that absolute truth can only come from the One who
created all things. To an Atheist, perhaps that would mean that absolute
truth is an inherent characteristic of the Universe. But then where did
the matter of the Universe come from, and who endowed it with that
characteristic? Are these questions unanswerable because science does
not have the means to prove from whence the universe came?  
    
 Scientists used to be called natural philosophers and they tried to
logically prove the existence of God. My favorite of their arguments is
thus: Imagine that you are walking along and find a watch. Upon
examining it you find that it has intricate parts which all work
together to serve a common purpose of telling time. It has hands that
must be placed just so upon a face that must be numbered just so and
inside are a multitude of gears and cogs which all must be placed in
just such a way and be of just such a size. It has to be made from
certain materials and not others. Now imagine that you had never before
seen a watch until that very instant. What would be your natural
conclusion, that the watch was created by someone to serve a purpose, or
that it had come together on its own through a random accumulation of
atoms and molecules as physics and geology permitted over time?  
    
 When it is put that way, it may seem very silly to imagine that the
watch did not have a creator with a purpose in mind. Well, then, what of
the universe? It, too, has numerous intricate parts which all work
together in such a way as to perform certain functions. For our
existence to take place, we require that the universe expanded in uneven
clumps that led to distinct galaxies.

The matter has to have arranged in such a way that stars could form, and
then lots of stars had to live out their life spans so that we could
have the heavier chemical elements. And those have to have traveled
through space and massed themselves together into a roughly spherical
thing called Earth that then has to have formed around a class-M star
within a very narrow range of distances to allow for a proper
environment for life.

This Earth had to rotate at just such a rate so that temperature did not
get too cold or hot one side or the other. It had to be tilted for
proper weather. Water has to have found itself on this planet in
abundance and then, some not-yet-understood circumstances have to have
taken place to allow for the beginning of life. Next, this life has to
have somehow found the way to sustain itself, and has to have found a
food supply and shelter. And then it figured out how to reproduce
itself, and to adapt to other environments, and then some of it became
man and acquired the power of reason….

Look at all the pieces (and I know I am missing quite a few) that had to
come together in order for us to exist. And we would imagine that it was
all by chance? It only makes sense that there is a Creator of the
Universe and of us, just like it only makes sense that there is a
creator for the watch. The Universe is a sign of its Creator, and you
also are a sign of your Creator. This is the argument for God as put
forward by some of history’s best natural philosophers. It is not
impossible to find logical flaws in such a method depending on your
point of view, but at the least it is something to ponder.  
    
 I believe it is possible to see that God exists through these many
signs of His creation. When I was in junior high, lots of people were
telling me that the Universe just happened randomly on its own, as did
life, and I heard it so much that it seemed almost plausible.  
    
 The Qur’an tells us that there are signs of God’s existence all around
us:  
    
***“We have sent down to thee manifest signs, and none reject them but
those who are perverse.” (2:99)***  
    
 I concluded from the evidence at hand that God indeed existed, that the
Qur’an was a sign from God as per my previously mentioned
investigations, and that therefore, as stated in Qur’an, the Prophet
Muhammad (saw) was sent by God. The criterion for right and wrong, I
decided, was in Islam. That left me with a choice: convert or be a
hypocrite, living what I did not believe.  
    
 So, I converted. I was relieved that I was on the path I had been
looking for, but I still knew very little about Islam. And, I knew I had
just done something that would cause more pain to my parents than
anything else I had ever even thought of doing.  
    
 I dreaded telling my family. I knew there would be yelling and
screaming and crying and a long time of anger, hurt, and shock. Well, I
was right. They thought I was being foolish, that I could not possibly
be in a right state of mind. I had been brainwashed. They would have to
lock me up in my house or something. I was going to burn in hellfire. I
was doing it to please that Muslim guy because I could not actually
believe in it. I would be beaten, oppressed and treated like property.
The evil Muslim clerics would come and take me away and treat me
horribly. I would change my mind soon.  
    
 I learned that when your child converts to another religion, it often
feels as if you have lost him or her. There is anger, denial, mourning,
and, eventually, acceptance. Some accept it by accepting that they have
lost the child and having nothing to do with it. Others accept it by
ignoring it as much as possible, or overlooking it, in order to have a
relationship with the child. My parents try to ignore it and sort of
pretend it didn’t happen. But of course you can’t always do that and so
time and again there is pain and conflict.

When I decided to wear *hijab* (Islamic modest dress), I was called a
traitor to my family and a wannabe Arab who was abandoning her culture.
I was told I was slapping my parents in the face. My mother cried
non-stop for a week. And when I wanted to go for *Hajj*, it was
repeated. When I fast in the month of Ramadhan, they are unhappy and
uncomfortable. I am a fanatic because I eat only *halal* (similar to
kosher) meat. I have to pray secretly to avoid their reaction. My mother
insists on displaying pictures of me without proper Islamic dress
throughout the house where non-related guests might see them, because it
is the way that she prefers to remember me.  
    
 It hurts knowing your own mother doesn’t like you the way you are and
cannot accept it, and it hurts to do something knowing how much pain it
causes her and how much strife it causes at home. That probably was the
hardest thing for me about converting. It is strange to be doing what
you believe to be the right thing and yet your family hates it.  
    
***“We have enjoined on man kindness to parents, but if they strive to
make thee join with Me that of which thou hast no knowledge, then obey
them not. Unto Me is your return and I shall tell you what ye used to
do.” (29:8)***  
    
 My dilemma has always been how to be kind and yet disobey when what
they want is contrary to my religious belief? The answer is not always
clear, but I pray to Allah (swt) for guidance.  
    
 My family has been and continues to be one of my greatest trials. I
want to do right by them and also do my best in following God’s
commands. I do not really talk to them about religion, and fear I am
failing them in that regard. But, they can’t stand to hear it because it
is still a very painful issue. I often find myself frustrated with the
daily obstacles they put up for me in following my religion, and I must
struggle to be patient and kind at all times.  
    
 To anyone thinking of converting but worried about a family’s reaction,
you cannot let that stop you if you find Islam to be true. I cannot tell
you it will be easy, but I can say that the house cannot be in turmoil
all the time. Families react differently, and often they react better
than expected in the long run. Almost every convert I have known has
reported that their families reacted better than they expected. There
are a lot of good times, and there are times when it is almost as if
nothing has changed, but your relationship with your family will never
be quite the same – you will not belong to them like you once did. So,
when I am troubled by anything in this life, including my family, I try
to remember this:  
    
***“And as for those who believe in Allah, and hold fast unto Him, them
He will cause to enter into His mercy and grace, and will guide them
unto Him by a straight road.” (4:176)***  
*** ***  
 The purpose of life is not to be happy all the time and have it easy.
Our trials are there for a reason and if we bear them patiently then we
may be one of the successful. It is good to be Muslim, even if it is
sometimes unpopular or misunderstood. It is good to be Muslim even
though others oppose you. It is good to be Muslim because you have a
clear purpose in life.  
    
***“I have created Jinns [spirit-beings living on Earth and created of
fire] and humankind only that they might worship Me” Qur’an 51:56***  
    
 You have detailed guidelines on how to live life and worship God so you
don’t have to doubt yourself. When you become Muslim, instead of finding
a confusing, winding, many-forked road in front of you, you are
confronted with a blessedly straight path. From the day I became Muslim,
I have never looked back or doubted that I made the right choice.  
  

What Happens Next?
------------------

   
 This is the big question once you have undone your life and started
anew as a Muslim. There are quite a few resources and people out there
to help those who want to study Islam, or are thinking of converting.
Initially, they are hard to find, but when one door is found, it tends
to lead to another door and yet another. Muslims seem to like to help
people interested in their religion, even though most of the work must
be done by the potential convert alone. But for those who have already
converted, the situation is sometimes different.

Some Muslims act as if their job is completed and seem to think that
because the person has converted he/she no longer needs any help. They
do not have the personal experiences in their lives to understand the
needs of a convert. The converts may complain that they find themselves
forgotten, and again on their own with their struggles to remain on the
right path. So you may have to be proactive and persistent in your
initial searches for help and information.  
    
 In my experience and study, the state of the new converts is truly a
state of limbo. They no longer fit into the world from whence they came,
and they do not yet fit in to the New World that they have elected to
join. Some converts have access to a mosque, but many do not. Either
way, their situations are often quite the same.  
    
 In my case, that Muslim man that had inspired me to learn about Islam
had moved away, and I didn’t really know any other Muslims. I saw some
men on the university campus who were obviously Muslim, but I didn’t
dare approach them. They were a group of men with long beards who stood
in the engineering building speaking Arabic. And if ever they looked at
me as I passed in the halls, it was certainly not a warm, welcoming
look. That look they gave was one of judgment. I imagined I could read
their minds, thinking that I was an evil American woman.  
    
 I felt very bad because here I was a Muslim and I didn’t know the first
thing about what I needed to do. I only knew that I believed. I tried
hard to find out how to pray, but without success. It was months after I
converted before a man, who had been a friend of the guy that initially
sparked my curiosity in Islam, approached me and taught me how to pray.
He was about the only Muslim man on campus that I had met other than my
friend. Later, he invited me a few times to eat at his house with his
wife during the month of Ramadhan when we were all fasting. When the
month was over I didn’t see them again for a long time. Eventually, I
found that a group of Muslims would get together every week, sometimes
more often than that. And then I was invited by the wife of the man who
had taught me to pray. I went, very excited and eager for Muslim
companionship.  
    
 When I came to her house, no one greeted me except the one who had
invited me. I wore *hijab* (Islamic modest dress) and they all knew I
was Muslim, and still no one talked to me. They all could speak some
English, but it was too burdensome for them, and so they spoke only in
Arabic. At times, it seemed as if they were talking about me, but I
couldn’t tell for sure. Once, one of the ladies who was more talkative
and a little better in English spoke to me. She asked if I was married
or had children, then she relayed the answer in Arabic to the rest of
the group. And that was all. Another time when I was invited, the ladies
had removed their *hijab* and so I did likewise, and the same one spoke
to me again to tell me that my hair was too dry and I should use
conditioner. Again, that was about the sum of their conversations with
me. They met every week, yet I was invited maybe once in four months,
and never spoken to by anyone except the wife of the man who had taught
me to pray. In retrospect, the ladies probably would’ve talked to me
more if I had been more outgoing, but I was rather shy in this strange,
new foreign environment.  
    
 Another time I was fortunate enough that the man and his wife invited
to take me with them to the nearest large city, about an hours’ drive,
to go to the mosque. There, the women stayed in a small overhang above
the mosque floor. It had one-way glass so that supposedly we could see
down to the floor and the men couldn’t see us. But the glass was so dark
that really we couldn’t see; the only people who could see were those
few who were closest to the glass and could put their foreheads on it to
look down.

Whatever happened at the mosque that night was in Arabic, but that
didn’t matter because I couldn’t hear it anyway. It was hard to hear
from the overhang, and the ladies up there made it worse because all
they did was talk and play with the children. Later, we moved to a
basement room and had dinner. This time several ladies greeted me after
I had been introduced, and one of them asked me if I would be interested
in marrying her brother so he could come to the United States. During
dinner, some of the Muslim boys were reciting something but again I
could not hear. I wondered why the women bothered coming if all they
were going to do was talk. I was pretty disappointed because I had
expected more a religious rather than social experience at the mosque.  
    
 One day, it came back to me that many ladies felt I had converted so
that I could marry one of “their” men. It was then that I realized that
not only was it hard for a lot of non-Muslims to understand my
conversion, but it was also hard for some of the Muslims. They
apparently doubted that anyone would convert to their religion because
of its Truth. They preferred to think that people converted for the men,
or to associate themselves with the Muslim people and get benefits from
them. Even my own husband’s family could not believe that any American
woman could be a suitable Muslim woman.

This is a strong statement, but perhaps they lack confidence in their
religion if they cannot see how others would find the Truth in it. If
they knew how much mental turmoil was involved in conversion, or if they
realized how much converts give up (their family relationships, their
previous way of life, friends, status among their non-Muslim associates,
etc.), then maybe they would realize those negative ideas about converts
generally have no basis. Out of the many converts I have met, I have
never known one who found conversion easy or took it lightly, nor have I
ever known one who converted for any other reason except true belief in
the religion.  
    
 Many Muslims, on the other hand, act as if they love converts. They
tell us, “We so much admire you.” Maybe that is true, but these same
people also tend not to build strong associations with the converts.
Some Muslims consistently do not invite us into their circle of friends.
Someone once told me that this was because the presence of the converts
reminds them of their own shortcomings, or because they do not know how
to relate to the converts.  
    
 My eyes and skin are light. I can speak only English. I am not from
their country or culture. My parents are not Muslim. Islam has no place
for bigotry, but sometimes Muslims (usually unintentionally) find a
place for it anyway. I am sure that frequently they are unaware of what
they are doing, but I also know that we are responsible for our actions
whether we are aware of their results or not. Often a convert finds it
very difficult to understand the apparent cold-heartedness of some
Muslims when the religion itself is so contradictory to that behavior. I
think it takes converts by surprise to find that the Muslims are mostly
just like everyone else, except for those who are truly steadfast in the
religion. The Muslims know, however, better than any other group, that
their religion is the right one, and so they tend to be confident in
their superiority over the non-Muslims. I believe this is a serious
shortcoming because it leads to arrogance.  
    
 Among Muslims exist some of the most arrogant, judgmental, and
tight-fisted people, yet among them also exist the best people of the
Earth. I have been fortunate enough to meet some of these, as are most
converts eventually.  
    
 Many converts are first inspired to study Islam upon encountering a
Muslim. This is only true because of the behavior of that Muslim. They
see peace of mind, unmatched generosity, uncommon patience, amazing
steadfastness, and genuine humbleness before God. These stellar
qualities often exude even in the Muslim who is only mildly practicing
his faith. And it is these that make the non-Muslims take another look.
Perhaps more than in any other religion, Islam is judged by the behavior
of its adherents.

When a Christian in a foreign country commits a murder that has nothing
to do with his religion, his religion is unlikely to be mentioned. But,
if a Muslim does the same, it is very likely that he will be identified
as a Muslim and the act will be associated with his faith. I do not know
why this occurs, other than the fact that Islam itself does not
differentiate between politics and religion. Thus, it becomes confusing
for outsiders when Muslims themselves often do differentiate between the
two and are capable of committing acts without it having directly to do
with Islam.  
    
 Many Muslims tend to isolate themselves from the non-Muslims due to
lack of commonality and because of Qu’ranic verses which say to not
choose non-believers as friends over believers. I think this is often
taken to the extreme, leading them to neglect their duties of
neighborliness.  
    
***“Allah forbiddeth you not, those who warred not against you on
account of religion and drove you not out from your homes, that ye
should show them kindness and deal justly with them. Lo! Allah loveth
the just dealers.” (60:8)***  
    
 An average Christian in my country would not think twice of giving
charity to a Muslim, but many Muslims would not offer major help to a
Christian even if he were his next-door neighbor. They seem to think
that there is no reward with God for helping a non-Muslim, or that if
they are going to be charitable, there is only enough room in their
pocket or time for the Muslims. However, I believe that in Islam it is a
duty to help any living thing regardless of its faith, unless doing so
would be helping to commit an act against the Muslims.  
    
 I firmly believe that those Muslims who are open to appropriate
interaction with non-Muslims and treat them with kindness are helping to
spread the faith. But before rushing out into the non-Muslim world, the
Muslim needs to be sure and strong in his faith and practice. On the
other hand, those Muslims who shun non-Muslims and treat them poorly are
helping to spread the negative stereotypes of Islam. Those evil stares
from the Muslim men in the engineering building made me think their
hearts were filled with hate and darkness. And if I had not already
found Islam I would have associated that strong negativity with Islam
itself.  
  

The One Who Sticks Around is a Blessing
---------------------------------------

   
 Islam is truly a social religion, and an isolated Muslim is an
incomplete Muslim. Someone who is born to a Muslim family and community
may not realize the effect of isolation. An unmarried convert lives in a
place where no one else rises for prayer in the morning, no one else
pays attention to the approach of the next prayer, no one else fasts, no
one else is concerned with Islamic behavior, no one else avoids pork or
alcohol. When this persists for a long time, it takes its toll. I am
sure those who were born to a Muslim family can relate if they have
tried to be the only one in their family who prays on time or wears
*hijab*, etc. Initially, they are able to keep their focus on the right
path, but when surrounded with people who aren’t doing that, they lose
strength in time, or what the others are doing again starts to become
more fair-seeming.  
    
 It is only when faced with a Muslim who is better in faith that they
are able to see where they have started to slip and find the strength
and inspiration to work harder. To me, this is an example of why the
Qur’an says,  
    
*** “…so strive as in a race in all virtues.” (5:48)***  
    
 Just as a pious Muslim is an inspiration and a help to a non-Muslim, he
or she is also an inspiration and a help to other Muslims.  
    
 My advice to a new convert or a struggling Muslim, other than simply to
pray constantly for help and be patient, would be to seek out the
inspiring Muslims until they are found, and then make them your friends,
and do not let go of them.  
    
 To this day, I do not know what would have happened to my faith if
Allah (swt) had not blessed me by leading some of these people to me.
When I was at my lowest and did not know where to turn for help, it
came. Through the Internet, I found a new wellspring of information and
a new source for Muslim companionship. The information helped me to
improve my faith and increase my knowledge. It is the people who stick
around who make all the difference. A lot of us like to help other
people, but in the busyness of our lives, we do it and then move on. We
like to send some books and then we forget or lose touch with the
recipient; we answer a question and then leave. But, the companionship
of a steady friend, one who does not disappear in a day or a week or a
month, is the best support.  
    
 Truly, I think this companionship is not only the best help, but it is
essential. The one who sticks around serves as an unfading link to
knowledge, advice, and good example. Further, he/she serves as an access
to the Muslim community; becomes the means through which the convert or
struggling Muslim establishes a network of other friends, and, finally,
a place where they are welcome and where they want to belong. For the
convert, these individuals may serve as the Muslim foster-family where
their natural family is unsupportive.  
    
 What did these people do that made the difference to me? They kept
writing back. They were patient. They went out of their way to figure
out what I needed and help me get it. If they didn’t know an answer,
they admitted it and asked around for it. They opened up their hearts
and their homes and made me feel like a member of their families. They
shared their meals, their thoughts, and the happenings in their lives.
They overlooked my shortcomings. They encouraged me. They didn’t judge
me. They did not hesitate to spend time or money, and they did not make
me feel bad when they did so. They kept confidences. When they couldn’t
help, they still listened. They made me feel as if I was not just taking
from them but giving them something in return. They taught me.  
    
 These are the inspiring Muslims. They are the blessings to the rest of
mankind, although they do not know it. Although none of them are
perfect, their efforts make a world of difference.  
    
 Too many people think they cannot help when they can. They think they
can do little so they do nothing. Allah (swt) has effectively said that
He is more pleased with one who has two dollars and gives one than the
one who has more but gives a smaller proportion of what he has. One
dollar or one minute may make a difference for the person you seek to
help, and it certainly makes a difference for you in the Hereafter. We
are so neglectful of our duties to others. There is enough food in this
world that everyone should be able to eat five meals a day, and yet
millions of people are starving. We look in our own communities and say,
“No one is truly needy here.” Isn’t that just an outrageous lie?  
    
 There are people in every community in need of mentoring, education,
companionship, prayers, transportation, employment, interest-free loans,
encouragement, or other gifts. How many youth are there who are confused
and in danger of being lost?  
    
 How many elderly in your community are sitting alone? How many could
use assistance in obtaining forgiveness and worldly needs through your
prayer? How many need a ride to the store, to a friend’s house, or to
the masjid? How many are struggling to do right and need a hand up? How
many are worried about how to send their child to college, or pay their
bills or fix their car?  
    
 The Muslims and non-Muslims should extend their sight and see the
countless opportunities for doing good. Remember that doing good does
not cost a thing but rather at least doubles what you have. That is a
promise of Allah (swt). In truth, the most reliable investment of all is
charity, because it has a God-guaranteed 100% profit margin:  
    
***“If ye lend unto Allah a goodly loan, He will double it for you and
will forgive you, for Allah is Responsive, Clement….” (64:17)***  
    
 Our time and money are not really ours. They are Allah’s (swt), just as
everything is His.  
    
 Therefore, we should spend it in goodness rather than waste. When we
give, we should give something that we ourselves would like to receive
if we were in the other person’s shoes.  
    
 Did you realize that when you give what you do not want for yourself,
you are doing yourself a favor by getting rid of that thing more than
helping the other person? Islam teaches that when you give, never
mention it again, do not allow yourself to desire something in return,
and do not act as if it is difficult or a burden for you even if it is.
If you do any of those things, you make the recipient feel bad for
needing and accepting your help, and you have lost any reward that you
had earned. The inspiring Muslims vie with one another in helping others
because they realize that it does not cost them but rather increases
what they have; they believe Allah’s Word.  
    
 Sometimes we forget Allah (swt), and we allow ourselves to be confused
by this world and its distractions. We think, for example, that we
should not wear a beard or *hijab* because we will not be able to earn
as much money. However, if we pause to reflect on Allah’s (swt) Word, we
would realize this is nonsense because the money comes from Him. If you
obey Him, you will be rewarded; it is not the other way around. If you
are disobedient to Allah (swt) and find yourself with abundant wealth,
this may be a curse, not a blessing.  
    
***“So let not their riches nor their children astonish thee. Allah
thereby intendeth but to punish them in the life of the world and that
their souls shall pass away while they are disbelievers.” (9:55)***  
    
 Since whatever we have is not ours but God’s anyway, we should not
despair if we have less than others do and should give it freely. A
fancy car will do us no good in the Hereafter; neither will a large bank
account or hours in front of the television. Whatever passes through our
hands may be a test from Allah (swt) to see if we forget that it is
His.  
    
 God knows, I do not always remember that it is all His. And I know I
fail in my duty to those around me. So writing this is a reminder and
help to me -- one that I am led to reflect on the selflessness and
tirelessness of those that I have called the inspiring Muslims. I leave
them nameless here for their sake, and lest I forget to name one, but
they do not remain nameless in my prayers and Allah (swt) surely knows
who they are.  
    
 In summary, the path after converting is not always smooth and a
convert may find trials both from Muslims and non-Muslims alike, but he
or she will also find a lot of support and in time should find
him/herself as a welcome member of a Muslim community, and able to make
a positive contribution to it. Allah (swt) is the best supporter.


