 Appendix: If You Decide To Convert
===================================

   
 Although this is an appendix, this section should not be regarded as an
afterthought. It is merely serving a different purpose than the rest of
the book. You may regard this section as a brief technical manual on
what to do and the basics of what you need to know if you decide to
become Muslim. This section contains some information on web sites and
mailing addresses that are accurate at the time of writing but I can’t
guarantee their accuracy for all future dates.  
    
 If you decide to be Muslim, this means that you believe that there is
only one, indivisible God, and you believe in all the prophets sent by
Him, including Prophet Muhammad (saw). You must state this belief to
God. This is called Shahada and is stated as follows:  
    
*Ash hadoo an laa ilaahaa ilallaah* [I bear witness that there is no god
but Allah (one god)]  
    
*Ash hadoo anna Muhammadan Rasoollallah* (I bear witness that Muhammad
is the Prophet of Allah). If you state those two things with belief and
conviction, you are Muslim.  
    
 The following may be added if you wish to declare that you have
consciously decided to accept the Ja’fari school of thought with Imam
Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) as the divinely appointed guide and ruler after
the Holy Prophet.  
    
*Ash hadoo anna Alioon Wallioollah Wasiyo Rasoolillaah, Wa Khalifatahoo
Bilaa Fasl* [I bear witness that Ali is the successor appointed by
Allah, inheritor of the Prophet, and the rightful ruler or Caliph
(immediately after the Prophet)]  
    
 It is tradition to state your belief in the presence of a few Muslim
witnesses, often in a mosque, but this is not required for your
conversion to be valid before God. So, what’s next?  
    
 The information and instructions I will provide now are based on the
Shia (Ja’fari) school of thought in Islam and may have slight variations
from other schools. It is intended to be general to get you started and
is not meant to be an authoritative set of instructions, as I am not at
all qualified to be authoritative.  
    
 There are five roots of religion (Usool e deen) that are considered the
major components of Shia Islamic belief. These are monotheism, justice
of God, prophethood, imamat, and resurrection.  
    
 Monotheism – This is the belief in a single, indivisible God.  
    
 Justice of God – This is the belief that God is by nature just and
fair.  
    
 Prophethood – This is the belief in all the prophets sent by God and
their uniform message of guidance.  
    
 Imamat – This is the belief in maintainers and protectors of religion
appointed by God, particularly the twelve appointed after the death of
Prophet Muhammad (saw), including the Imam of our time. (as)  
    
 Resurrection – This is the belief in a life after death, including a
Judgment Day and punishment or reward in hell or heaven.  
    
 Similarly, there are ten branches of religion (Furoo e deen) that are
considered the major components of Islamic practice. These are *salaat*
(the daily prayer), *sawm* (fasting), *hajj* (pilgrimage), *zakat* (tax
on wealth), *khums* (tax on money),  
    
*Jihad* (struggle), *amr bil ma’ruf* (enjoining good), *nahi ‘anil
munkar* (forbidding evil), *tawalla* [loving the Prophet and his family
(as)], and *tabarra* [disassociating with the enemies of the Prophet and
his family (as)].  
  

Prayer
------

   
 The first major obligation once you become Muslim is the daily prayer.
Most converts are very eager and stressed about knowing how to perform
it correctly immediately. Following are some basic instructions to get
you started with the daily prayer. You can hold this if necessary for
awhile until you start to memorize things. When you get the chance, meet
with someone who already knows the prayer and they can help you with the
Arabic and little details, God willing. In the meantime, try to pray
with concentration and when you prostrate place your forehead on soil,
rock, wood, or blank paper.  
    
 The five daily prayers are as follows:  
    
 Morning prayer is two *rakaats* (cycles) performed approximately 70
minutes prior to sunrise.  
    
 Noon-ish prayer is 4 *rakaats* performed just after true noon (when the
sun reaches the highest point in its path across the sky, or passes from
the eastern half into the western half of the sky.)  
    
 Afternoon prayer is 4 *rakaats* performed anytime between the noon
prayer and the evening prayer, with its ideal time when an object’s
afternoon shadow just becomes longer than the object itself.  
    
 Evening prayer is 3 *rakaats* performed roughly 15 minutes to half an
hour after sunset, when redness has left the western half of the sky.  
    
 And the night prayer is 4 *rakaats* performed after the evening prayer
ideally when twilight is over, which is usually about one and a half
hours after sunset.  
    
 Prior to praying you should perform *wudhu*, the ritual ablution. This
is done by washing your hands with water, then covering the face with
water from the top down. Then using your left hand, cover your right arm
from the elbow to the finger tips with poured water, then using your
right hand do the same to your left. Next, without getting new water,
wipe the top of you head with the wetness on your right hand fingers
(usually done in a parting in your hair), and finally, similarly wipe
the top of your right foot with your wet right hand from toes to ankle,
and likewise wipe your left foot with your left hand.  
    
 If you are a female just finishing your monthly cycle, or if you have
had intercourse or a wet dream since your last prayer, or in a few other
less likely cases, instead of performing *wudhu*, you should perform
*ghusl*, which is a shower, prior to your prayer. This is usually
performed by rinsing your head and neck area, then your right front all
the way to your toes, then your right back, left front and left back so
that your whole body is touched by running water. It is best to overlap
your coverage area (do a little of the left front while washing your
right front and vice versa) to guarantee coverage.  
    
 Also, whenever you use the toilet, you should rinse the affected area
with water three times and make sure no more urine or feces are present.
Men should learn how to perform *istibra*, which is a process of pushing
out any left over urine from the urethra. Detailed instructions on
*wudhu*, *ghusl*, *istibra* and so on may be found in books of Islamic
laws such as *“Islamic Laws”* published by The World Federation and
available online from .  
    
 Finally, before beginning, if you are a male you should make sure your
privates are covered, or preferably from the navel to the knee (more is
better). And if you are female everything should be covered but hands,
face and feet.  
    
 Prayer is performed facing a house of worship to God built by Prophet
Ibrahim (as) in Mecca. Look at a globe and find the shortest curve from
your location to Mecca (a great circle) and that will show you which way
to face in prayer. For North Americans, that is Northeast.  
    
 Prayer begins with *Niyyat* (You make an intention in your mind that
you are praying so and so prayer for seeking nearness to Allah). Then
recite *takbir* (saying *Allahoo Akbar* (*God is greater than
description,* roughly, with hands held up by your ears). Then lower your
arms to your sides.  
    
 1st cycle *(rakat)*  
* *  
  STANDING:  
    
 1) Recite *Surah Fateha:*  
    
*Bismillaahir Rahmaanir Rahim* (In the name of Allah, the Compassionate,
the Merciful)  
    
*Alhumdoolellaahi Rabbil Aalameen* (Praise be to Allah, Lord of the
worlds).  
    
*arrahmaan irraheem* (the Compassionate, the Merciful)  
    
*maaliki yowm ideen* (Owner/master of the day of Judgment)  
    
*iyaaka na’ boodoo wa iyyaaka nas taeen* (Thee alone we worship and Thee
alone we ask for help.)  
    
*ihdinas siraatal moostaqeem* (Show us the straight path)  
    
*siraatal ladheena anamta alayhim* (The path of those whom Thou hast
favored)  
    
*ghayril maghdoobi alayhim waladhaalleen* (Not the path of those who
have earned Thine anger nor of those who have gone astray.)  
    
 2) Then recite any other *surah* of Qur’an. Probably the shortest and
easiest, and one that is also highly recommended to recite, is *Surah
Ikhlas:*  
    
*Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem* (In the name of Allah, the Compassionate
the Merciful)  
    
*Qul hoo wallahoo ahad* (Say: He is Allah, the One!)  
    
*Allaahus samad* (Allah, the eternally besought of All!)  
    
*Lam yalid walam yoolad* (He begetteth not nor was begotten)  
    
*walam yakool lahoo koofoo wan ahad* (And there is none comparable to
Him.)  
    
 3) Say *Allaahoo Akbar* again  
    
  BOWING (Bend forward with your hands on your knees, males keeping the
knees unbent and ladies bending their knees slightly):  
    
 1) Say*: Soobhaana rabbi al adheemi wabihamdih* (Roughly, Glory be to
my High Sustainer and I praise Him)  
    
 2) While going back to standing position: *Sami’ Allahu liman hamidah*
(Allah hears and accepts the praise of one who praises)  
    
 3) While standing again briefly: *Allahoo Akbar*  
* *  
  PROSTRATING/SITTING:  
    
 1) After that *Allahoo Akbar*, go to the ground and put head, knees,
toes, and palms on the ground (elbows usually recommended for women as
well).  
    
 Say: *Soobhana Rabbi al Aa’laa wa bihamdih* (Glory be to my Great
Sustainer, Most High, and I praise Him)  
    
 2) Go to sitting position, say *Allahoo Akbar*, then say
*Astaghfirullaahaa Rabbi wa atooboo ilayh* [I seek forgiveness from
Allah my Sustainer and I turn to Him (repent)] then *Allahoo Akbar*
again  
    
 3) Repeat \#1 *(Soobhana Rabbi al Aa’laa wa bihamdih)*  
    
 4) Sit up, say *Allaahoo Akbar,* and return to standing position while
saying *Bi haw lillaahi wa qoowwatihi aqoomoo wa aqa’ood* (I stand and
sit with the help and strength of Allah.)  
    
  THAT IS END OF RAKAT \#1.  
    
 RAKAT \#2  
    
 Perform like rakat \#1, except for the addition of *qunoot* and the
following modification to step\#4 in  
    
 PROSTRATING/SITTING: (new parts are marked with asterix\*)  
    
 \**Qunoot*: In the second *rakat*, after reciting the two *surahs* and
before bowing, place you hands palms up, together at about chest level
and say:  
    
*La ilaaha illallaahool halimool kareem* (There is none worshipping but
Allah, the Forbearing and Generous.) There are many other things you
could say here, but that is a simple one to learn for starters. After
*qunoot*, continue with the prayer as in the first rakat, with bowing.  
    
 Then in step 4) take note of these modifications:  
    
  Sit up, say *Allahoo Akbar,*  
* *  
 \*Then say *Al hamdoo lillaah, Ash hadoo an laa ilaha il Allahoo wah
dahoo laa sharika lah* (All praise is for Allah, and I testify that
there is none worth worshipping except Allah, who is one and has no
partner.)  
    
 \*Then say: *Wa Ash hadoo anna Muhammadan ‘abdoohoo wa Rasooloh* (And I
testify that Muhammad is His servant and messenger)  
    
 \*Then say: *Allah hoomma salli’ala Muhammadin wa aali Muhammad* (O
Allah, send your blessings on Muhammad and his progeny).  
    
 IF THIS IS NOT THE LAST *RAKAT*,  
    
 Then say: *Bi haw lillaahi wa qoowwatihi aqoomoo wa aqa’ ood* while
standing up.  
    
 \*\*IF THIS IS THE LAST *RAKAT*, SAY THE FOLLOWING TO END THE PRAYER,
WHILE STILL IN SITTING POSITION:  
    
 \**Assalaamoo alayka ayyoohan Nabiyyoo wa rahmatullaahi wa barakaatoh*
(O Prophet, Allah’s peace, blessings and grace be upon you!)  
    
*Assalamoo ‘alayna wa ‘ala ibaadillaahis saaliheen* (Allah’s peace be on
us, and all pious servants of Allah)  
    
*Assalaamoo ‘alaykoom wa rahmatoollaahi wa barakaatoh* (Allah’s peace,
blessings and grace be on you.)  
    
 IF IT IS NOT THE LAST *RAKAT* CONTINUE AS FOLLOWS:  
    
 3RD & 4TH *RAKAT:*  
    
 Just like 1st *rakat* except for the Standing part:  
    
 STANDING:  
    
 1) While standing say either *Surah Fateha* or the following, which is
most recommended:  
    
*Subhaanallaahi wal hamdoo lillaahi wa laa ilaahaa illallahoo wallaahoo
akbar* (Glory be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, there is no God but
Allah and He is greater than description)  
    
 You may say this once, or three times.  
    
 IF THIS IS THE LAST *RAKAT*, SEE INSTRUCTIONS IN RAKAT \#2 MARKED WITH
THE \*\* SIGN TO END *SALAAT*.  
    
 There are online prayer and *wudhu* instructions at
\<<http://www.playandlearn.org/Fiqh/index.htm>\>.  
    
 Also, you can purchase video instructions from Idara e Jaferia in
Maryland. Their tape is distributed by Khatoons Inc., 6650 Autumn Wind
Circle, Clarksville MD 21029 USA and online at
<http://www.khatoons.com>.  
    
 You can usually obtain a prayer timetable to get the most accurate
local times for prayer from a mosque in your area, or download computer
software that calculates prayer time and direction from this site:
\<<http://www.ais.org/~islam/subject/praytime.html>\>.  
    
 Now, continuing with the Branches of Religion:  
  

Fasting
-------

   
 During the month of Ramadhan Muslims are required to fast from about a
half-hour prior to the morning prayer until the time for the evening
prayer. The month of Ramadhan on the Islamic calendar cycles throughout
the seasons with a nice result that no matter where you live you will
get to experience long days and short days of fasting over the years.
For those living in extreme northern or southern locales so that they
may not experience any sunrise or sunset in a 24-hour period, they
follow the timings of another, less extreme location. Fasting means no
eating, drinking, intercourse, immoral behavior, etc. People who have
medical reasons for not fasting are exempted but should donate the
equivalent of a meal to charity for days when they miss a required fast.
Also, menstruating women do not fast but make up missed fasts at a later
date.  
    
 The month of Ramadhan is a time of spiritual renewal and there are many
special prayers during this time. If you need to know when the month of
Ramadhan is likely to begin, please visit the following website: .  
  

Pilgrimage
----------

   
 Every individual with the physical and financial means is obliged to
perform the pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in his/her lifetime. It is
a very spiritual and exciting event that happens once a year. Its
rituals are generally related to events involving the Prophet Ibrahim
(as), and are designed for spiritual reflection and renewal. If you plan
to go you should read up on it first and make your arrangements through
an established *hajj* travel organization that is based on the
particular school of Islam that you follow.  
  

Zakat and Khums
---------------

   
 Muslims who possess certain things like amounts of gold, grain or
livestock are required to give a percentage of their wealth, usually 5
or 10% to the needy. Since most people don’t have the wealth to have to
pay this, I won’t go into a lot of detail. However, all Muslims are
likely to have to pay *Khums*, the other kind of charity tax. *Khums* is
a tax of 20% on your surplus earnings. Let’s say that at the end of this
month after paying all your expenses you have $500 in unused goods
and/or money in the bank. Next year, you should take new account of your
surplus earnings. If it is less or the same, you do not have to pay
*khums*, and you record the new amount of surplus for comparison with
the following year. If you have more, then you pay *khums* on the
difference. For example, if you have $600, the difference is $100 and
20% of that is $20, so you owe *khums* of $20 dollars. This money should
be sent to people and organizations who have been given authority to
accept and/or distribute *khums* money.  
  

Jihad
-----

   
 This is the struggle for Allah (swt), discussed in the main portion of
the book.  
  

Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil
----------------------------------

   
 These are the practices of encouraging each other to do good deeds and
avoid sin.  
  

Tawalla and Tabarra
-------------------

   
 These are the practices conforming your heart and behavior to standards
that demonstrate your love and devotion to the Prophet and his family
(as). And conforming your heart and behavior to standards that
demonstrate that you are not like and do not associate with those who
act as enemies of the Prophet and his family (as).  
    
 Those are all the branches of religion, but, there are some other acts
that are compulsory, such as observing the Islamic modest dress and
avoiding consumption of certain foods/drinks. For women, as mentioned in
the main portion of the book, this standard of dress requires covering
all but hands and face in loose clothing.

Muslims do not allow any intoxicating substances into their bodies, do
not eat pork, and otherwise only eat meat that is permissible according
to the Qur’an and has been slaughtered in an Islamic manner. This meat
is obtained from special stores and is called *halal* meat. There is a
directory of Islamic clothing retailers (for men, children and women)
at:  
  

   
 and a directory of *halal* meat grocers/restaurants at  
    
 \< <http://www.geocities.com/~iaba/res.html>\>.  
    
 For the sake of not becoming overwhelming, God willing, I will conclude
the appendix at this point. If you are ready for more information, refer
to the suggested reading list, contact Muslims in your area, or examine
the following recommendations:  
  

The Islamic Correspondence Course
---------------------------------

   
 Contact: Islamic Education and Information Center 5359 Timberlea Blvd.,
Unit 52  
 Mississauga, Ontario L4W 4N5  
 Canada  
    
 Phone 905-212-9676 Fax 905 212-9690  
    
 This is a 50 lesson postal mail course that is very nice. The first six
lessons are free so that you can see if you are interested. After that,
there is a one-time fee to help cover the postage costs.  
    
 The World Islamic Network book club  
    
 Contact: World Islamic Network  
 67/69 H. Abbas (as) Street  
 Dongri, Mumbai 400 009 India  
 e-mail: <win@bom4.vsnl.net.in>  
    
 This is an organization that distributes Islamic literature for free to
anyone who asks. In order to receive more literature after the first
shipment, you need to write a summary/commentary of what you read and
send it back to them by post.  
    
 May Allah (swt) guide us all on the straight path and grant us the good
of this world and the hereafter.  
  


