A Brief Glossary
================

   
 I have tried to include all terms used in this text plus other common
ones and have included the most common variant spellings.  
    
 A  
    
*Abadat* or *Ibadat* -Worshiping, praising Allah  
    
*Adel* or *Adil* -just  
    
*Ahl*-House, family  
    
*Asr*- The afternoon, and the prayer of the afternoon.  
    
*Adan* or *Adhan* - the call for prayer  
    
*Ayah* or *Ayat* -sign, verse of quran  
    
*Ayaat*-plural of *ayah*  
    
    
 B  
    
*Batel* or *Batil* –void, not accepted  
    
 D  
    
*Deen*- religion  
    
*Dua*- supplication  
    
 E  
    
*Eed* or *Eid* -holiday  
    
*Eid-ul Fitr*-A holy day following the month of *Ramadan*  
    
*Eeman* or *Iman* - deep belief, faith  
    
*Ehtiyat* or *Ihtiyat* - precaution  
    
*Ehram* or *Ihram* -State of worship, by the entering of which the
worshipper makes certain things *haram* for himself. Associated with
*hajj*. Also, the type of dress worn during *hajj*.  
    
*Eqamah* or *Iqamah* -second call for prayer  
    
  *Esha* or *Isha* -the commencement of darkness, and the prayer of that
time  
    
  *Estebra* or *Istibra*-purification, especially of animals and of the
male organ  
    
 F  
    
*Fajr*-dawn  
    
*Fatwa*-verdict, especially of a mujtahed  
    
*Fiqh*-science of religious jurisprudence  
    
 G  
    
*Ghadeer*-name of a place near Mecca, and the great holiday named after
the event there of announcing Imam Ali’s (as) successorship.  
    
*Ghusl*-ritual bath  
    
 H  
    
*Hajj*-form of worship performed in Mecca, required once in a lifetime
for all Muslims able to perform it.  
    
*Halal*-legal  
    
*Haram*-illegal  
    
*Hejab* or *Hijab* -the screening between non-related men and women, the
Islamic modest dress  
    
 I  
    
*Iddah* - A woman’s waiting period after the end of a marriage.  
    
*Iftar*-the breaking of the Fast  
    
*Ijtehad* or *Ijtihad* - struggle to fathom divine law  
    
*Imam*-Divine vicegerent  
    
*Imam-jamaat* -leader of congregational prayer  
    
 J  
    
*Jafari*, *Ja’afari* – Shia school of thought believing in the 12 Imams
(as)  
    
*Jamaat* -group, congregation, and prayer of,  
    
*Jehad* or *Jihad* –struggle against self or against oppression  
    
*jinn*-a type of creature having like man, free-will  
    
*Jomah* or *Jumu’ah* -Friday, or the Friday congregational prayer  
    
 K  
    
*Kaba* or *Ka’aba* -the Holy House in Mecca, the *qibla* of Muslims  
    
*Kafan*-shroud a corpse must be wrapped in  
    
*Khoms* or *Khums* -a fifth, obligatory tax-like charity  
    
 M  
    
*Maghreb* or *Maghrib* –sunset, also the prayer shortly after sunset  
    
*Mahram*-*haram* to marry, usually due to close blood relation  
    
*Mamoom*-person praying in group-prayer  
    
*Masjid*- Islamic Center or building for prayer and other gatherings  
    
 Mecca-holy city in Arabia where the Ka’aba is located  
    
*Mehrab*-place in the mosque where the Imam *jamaat* stands to pray  
    
*Moadden* or *Muazzin* -caller of the *adhan*  
    
*Muta, Mut’a, Mutah*-temporary marriage  
    
*Mujtahed* or *Mujtahid* -person capable of acting according to his own
religious knowledge and not needing to refer to the verdict of another
scholar  
    
*Makrooh*-abominable act, one is rewarded for not performing it  
    
*Mustahab*-thing done in desire of (divine) love, one is rewarded for
performing it  
    
 N  
    
*Nafelah* or *Nafilah* -defined desirable prayers in addition to the
required daily prayers  
    
*Najes* or *Najis* -dirty and impure  
    
*Najasat* -impurity  
    
*Niyyat* –intention, as in the intention to perform an act  
    
 O  
    
*Olama* or *Ulama*- the learned scholars of Islam  
    
*Omrah* or *Umrah* - a worship performed in Mecca like *hajj* not but
mandatory  
    
 Q  
    
*Qada*, *Qaza*, *Qadha* -performance of a duty that was not performed in
its proper time, as in prayers performed late  
    
*Qasr*-four-*rakat* prayers, which become two-*rakat* prayer for those
ruled as travelers  
    
*Qibla*-direction faced in prayer  
    
*Qiyam*-standing, rise, as in the standing prayer position  
    
*Qonoot* or *Qunoot* -part of the prayer with hands palms up  
    
*Qorbat* or *Qurbat* -the *niyyat* of nearness to Allah  
    
 R  
    
*Rakaat* or *Rakat* - a unit or cycle of prayer  
    
*Ramadan, Ramadhan, Ramazan* -the month of fasting  
    
*Roku, Ruku, Rukoo* -a bow; part of the prayer  
    
 S  
    
*Sajda*-prostration; part of the prayer  
    
*Salaam, Salam* -invocation and greeting, part of the prayer  
    
*Salawat*-invocation of blessings, particularly on Muhammad (saw) and
his family  
    
*Shahada* – declaration, particularly the declaration of belief in
Islam  
    
*Sharia, Shareea, Sharia’ah* - the Divine Law  
    
*Shaytan, Shaitan* -the enemy of man, Satan  
    
*Shia*-follower of the twelve Imams, commonly the Ja’fari school of
thought  
    
*Sojood, Sujood* –prostrating (Plural of *Sajdah)*  
    
*Sunni*- “orthodox” or majority type of Muslim  
    
*Sayyed, Sayyid, Sayed* - descendent of the Holy Prophet  
    
 T  
    
*Taher* or *Tahir* -clean, not impure  
    
*Takbeer* or *Takbir*- the saying of *Allaahoo Akbar*, (God is great)  
    
*Taqleed or Taqlid*- the following of a *mujtahed* for Islamic
jurisprudence  
    
*Tashahhod* or *Tashahud*- declaration recited in the second and last
*rakat* of all prayers  
    
*Tayammom* or *Tayammum*- Ritual cleansing (with sand/mud etc.) which is
a substitute for *wudhu* and/or *ghusl*  
    
*Tawheed*- Divine Unity (Oneness of God)  
    
 W  
    
*Wajeb* or *Wajib* - obligatory  
    
*Wudoo, Wudoo, Wudhu, Wuzu* - ritual wash performed for prayer, etc.  
    
 Z  
    
*Zakat*- an obligatory charity  
    
*Ziyarat*- pilgrimage to the holy shrines  
    
*Zohr, Dhuhr*- noon, the name of the first afternoon prayer


