Introduction
============

The outlook of a school of thought regarding society and history and its
specific approach to them, plays a decisive role in its ideology. From
this point of view, it is essential, in the context of Islamic world
outlook, to throw light on the Islamic approach to society and history.

It is evident that Islam is neither a theory of society nor a
philo­sophy of history. In the sacred Book of Islam, no social or
historical problem is dealt with in the technical jargon of sociology
and philo­sophy of history. In the same way no other problem, ethical,
legal or philosophical, is discussed in the Qur’an, either in the
current terms or according to the traditional classification of
sciences. However, these and other problems related with various
sciences can be deduced from the Book.

Islamic thinking on society and history, because of its special
importance, is a topic that deserves to be studied and investigated
pro­perly, and, like its many other teachings, reveals Islam's
profound­ness in dealing with various issues. Since the problems that
deal with society and history are closely related, and since we wish to
discuss them briefly, it was apt to discuss them together in a single
book. How­ever, we shall discuss the problem related to society and
history only to the extent that would help in understanding Islamic
ideology.

We shall begin with society and then proceed to discuss history.
Following are some of the questions that can be raised about society:

1. What is society?

2. Is man by nature social and gregarious?

3. Is it true that the individual is primary and society is secondary,
or is the truth contrary to it, that is, society is primary and
individual is secondary in importance? Or is there any third possible
approach?

4. The relationship between society and tradition.

5. Whether the individual is free or if he is determined by society and
the social structure?

6. In what institutions, poles, and groups is society classifiable
according to its primary divisions?

7. Whether human societies are absolutely of the same nature and
essence, their differences being similar to the differences among
mem­bers of the same species? Or if they vary according to geographic
varia­tions, temporal and spatial conditions, and levels of development
of their culture and civilization, assuming different forms and essences
with each calling for a separate sociology based upon its particular
ideology?

In other words, is a single system of sociology, ethics, and ideology
applicable to all humanity, in the same way as a single system of
medicine and laws of physiology applies to all human beings regard­less
of their geographic, racial and historical variations?

Does every society, according to its regional, cultural and histori­cal
background, require a special sociology and affirm a particular
ideo­logy?

8. Are human societies, which from the dawn of history up to the present
day have been diversified and grown independent of one another, with a
kind of pluralism governing them (at least in an indivi­dual if not in a
generic sense), moving from plurality and diversity towards attainment
of unity and homogeneity?

Does the future of humanity lie in attaining one society, one culture
and one civilization, and whether at the end its plurality will be
replaced by a stage of homogeneity in which all its contradictions and
conflicts would be overcome and resolved? Or, contrarily, is humanity
eternally con­demned to multiplicity of culture and ideology, and to a
pluralism that reinforces the social identity of its particular, units?

In our view, these are the relevant problems which need to be discussed
from the Islamic point of view, so that these issues are brought to
light and put in a proper perspective. We propose to deal briefly with
these issues one by one.


