Islam and Historical Materialism
================================

Does Islam accept the theory of historical materialism? Is the Qur’anic
logic based on historical materialism regarding the interpretation and
analysis of historical events? There is a group of people who claim that
historical materialism was forwarded by the Qur’an at least one thousand
years before Marx. Dr. 'Ali al-Wardi, a Shi'ite scholar of Iraq and
author of several controversial books includ­ing the one entitled
*Manzilat al- 'aql al-bashari*, ("The Place of Human Intellect"), is
most probably the first to raise this issue. It has become a fashion
among a group of contemporary Muslim writers to analyse history in
Islamic phraseology from this point of view, which is con­sidered a mark
of being an intellectual.

But in our view those who think in this way either do not correct­ly
understand Islam or historical materialism or both. A general review of
the five fundamental principles of historical materialism and the six
conclusions discussed earlier is sufficient to tell anyone well
acquainted with the logic of Islam that the logic of Islam and
historical material­ism are radically opposed to each other.

In view of the fact that this approach to the study of society and
history-especially when it is tinged with Islamic colour and bears the
stamp of Islamic acceptability for enhancing its authority and worth-is
a grave danger for the thought and teachings of Islam, I consider it
essential to investigate and analyse the problems which may otherwise
lead to the misunderstanding that Islam considers economy as the basis
of society and regards history as being materialistic in essence.

I would also like to remind that I have here discussed these issues in a
more comprehensive manner than put forward by the proponents of this
view themselves. The advocates of this view pick up two or three verses
from the Qur’an or a few traditions of the Prophet (S) in support of
certain points. I have dealt not only with their arguments, but also
with those problems which they have not touched at all, but which, in my
opinion, can be raised by them, thus making the whole discussion
inclusive and comprehensive. Following are the arguments of those who
imagine that the Qur’an believes in historical materialism.

1. The Qur’an has put forward various social notions, and I have already
quoted about fifty sociological terms from the Qur’an while discussing
sociology. The study of the verses having sociological implications,
where these terms occur, may lead one to infer that from the Qur’anic
viewpoint societies are in a 'sense bipolar, i.e., they are divided into
two classes. On the one hand, the Qur’an points out a kind of
polarization of society on the basis of material conditions, i.e., on
the basis of prosperity and deprivation of its people.

The Qur’an refers to one class by such names as, *mala'* (ruling
clique). *mustahbirun* (the arro­gant, oppressors, tyrants), *musrifiin*
(the extravagant, the wasteful), *mutrafiin* (the affluent), and refers
to the other class by such names *as mustad'afun* (the oppressed, the
weaken and deprived), *nas* (mankind, masses), *dhurriyyah* (the
insignificant, the unnoteworthy-as opposed to the *mala* '), *aradhil or
ardhalin* (the vilest, the lowest).[^1] The Qur’an regards them as two
opposite poles. On the other hand, the Qur’an puts forward the notion of
bipolarity of society in spiritual terms.

On the on~ side are the *kafirun* (infidels), the *mushrikun*
(idolaters, poly­theists], the *munafiqun* (hypocrites), the *fasiqun*
(the corrupt), and the *mufsidin* (mischief mongers), and on the other
side are the *mu 'minun* (the believers), the *muwahhidun*
(monotheists), the *muttaqun* (the pious, the God-fearing), the
*salihun* (the virtuous), the *muslihun* (correctors, reformers)the
*mujahidun* (the warriors), and the *shuhada* (the witnesses, the
martyrs).

If we study and analyse the material and spiritual polarities in/the
context of the Qur’anic verses, we shall observe a kind of
correspon­dence between the first material pole and the first spiritual
pole and also between the second material pole and the second spiritual
pole. That is, the *kafirun* (infidels), the *mushrikun* (idolaters),
the *fasiqun* (the corrupt), and the *mufsidun* (corrupters) are the
same people who are called the *mala’* (the ruling clique), the
*mustakbirun* (the tyrants), the *musrifun* (the prodigal), the
*mutrafun* (the affluent) and the *taghuti* ones.

They neither form a separate group nor draw other people into their fold
to form a composite group. The *mu’minun* (the believers) the
*muwahhidun* (the monotheists), the *salihun* (the virtuous), and the
*mujahidun* (the warriors) are the same people as the *mustad’afun* (the
oppressed), the *fuqara* (the poor), the *masakin* (the wretched), the
slaves, and the deprived. This pole does neither consist of a separate
group nor is a combination of various other groups or persons. It means
that society is not composed of more than two poles.

The opulent, the oppressors, and the exploiters, who are also the
disbelievers are on one side and the oppressed, who are also the
believers, are on the other side. It is quite obvious that the division
of society into oppressors and oppressed is responsible for giving rise
to two groups at level of faith viz., the disbelievers and the
believers. Oppression is the essential condition accompanying
polytheism, disbelief, hypocrisy, inequity, and corruption; being
oppressed is the condition accompanying belief, monotheism, virtue,
goodness, and piety.

In order to be sure of the meaning of this correspondence, it is enough
to study the verses of Surat al-'A'raf beginning from the verse 59 **لقد
أرسلنا نوحاً الى قومه..** (We sent Noah unto his people…) till the end
of the verse 13, **و دمرنا ما كان يصنع فرعون و قومه و ما كانوا يعرشون**
(... We annihilated all Pharaoh and' his folk had done and that they had
contrived.). ln these forty verses, the stories of Noah, Hud, Salih,
Lot, Shu'ayb and Moses are narrated. In all these stories (with the
exception of the story of Lot) it may be observed that the class that
followed the prophets was the oppressed class (*mustad’af*), and the
class that arose in revolt and negated them was the ruling class
(*mala'*) of the tyrants (*mustakbirun*).

This correspondence is explained by nothing except class consciousness,
which is the requisite condition as well as the result of historical
mate­rialism. Thus according to the Qur’an the conflict between belief
and disbelief reflects the corresponding struggle of the oppressed and
the exploited against the oppressors and the exploiters.

The Qur’an clearly considers *ghina* (i.e. ownership, property and
wealth) to be the source of man's rebellion, against God i.e., the
riches are contrary to the values of modesty, humility, and
submission-the virtues to which the prophets called the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَيَطْغَىٰ ﴿٦﴾ أَن رَّآهُ اسْتَغْنَىٰ ﴿٧﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily man is rebellious when he thinketh himself wealthy {and
contented]. (96:6,7)***

Again we see that, in order to show the evil of property and ownership,
the Qur’an narrates the story of Korah. Korah was not an Egyptian, but
belonged to the tribe of Israel. He was one of Moses' people, the same
oppressed people whom Pharaoh was exploiting. However this man belonging
to an oppressed people, after becoming wealthy, started exploiting his
own fellow sufferers and rebelled against Moses. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ قَارُونَ كَانَ مِن قَوْمِ مُوسَىٰ فَبَغَىٰ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Now Korah was of Moses' folk, but he rebelled against them ....
(28:76)***

Does it not show that the stand of the prophets against rebellion is
actually the stand against the haves, the rich, and their wealth? The
Qur’an 'has disclosed in some of its verses that the real adversaries of
the prophets were the affluent class, the *mutrafin*: those who were
immersed in the good things of life, being the pampered of history In
*Surah Saba’,* verse 34, this view is developed in the form of a general
principle and a universal law:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِّن نَّذِيرٍ إِلَّا قَالَ مُتْرَفُوهَا
إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُم بِهِ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We have sent not unto any township a warner, but its pampered
ones (the mutrafun] declared, 'Lo: We are disbelievers in that which you
bring unto us.' (34:34)***

All. this indicates that the confrontation of the prophets with their
adversaries and the struggle between faith and infidelity reflect the
hostility between two social classes: the oppressed and the oppressors.

2. The Qur’an calls Its addressees *‘nas’* (mankind). '*Nas*' means the
deprived and underprivileged masses. This indicates that the Qur’an
acknowledges the concept of class consciousness, and considers the
deprived masses as the only class capable of responding to Islam's
invitation. This also indicates that Islamic ideology is class-oriented
and it means that Islam is the religion of the oppressed and
underprivileged masses. The addresses of Islamic ideology are the
underprivileged masses alone. This provides another basis for inferring
that Islam regards economy as base and approves of the materialist
conception of history .

3.The Qur’an makes clear that leaders, reformers (*muslihun*), warriors
in the way of God (*mujahidun*), martyrs (*shuhada*)' and ultimately the
prophets, the apostles of God, arise from among the masses and not from
the affluent, the wealthy, and the pampered class Regarding the Prophet
of Islam (S), the Qur’an says: .

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِّنْهُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is Who has sent among the illiterate (ummiyyu) a messenger of
their own .... (62.2)***

The *ummah* (the religious community) is none other than the
underprivileged masses. Similarly, the Qur’an declares about the martyrs
in the way of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَعْنَا مِن كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ شَهِيدًا فَقُلْنَا هَاتُوا
بُرْهَانَكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We shall raise from every nation {the same deprived masses] a
shahid (martyr) and We shall say, 'Bring your proof forward ... .: (i.e
. your martyr;) (28:75) .***

The fact that leaders of revolutions and reform movements necessarily
arise from the deprived masses also implies that there is a necessary
correspondence between social and religious origin on the one hand and
economic and class origin on the other. This necessary rela­tion cannot
be interpreted except on the basis of the materialist con­ception of
history and on the basis of assumption that economy is the real base.

4. The prime target of the mission of the prophets and their social
movement is the base not the superstructure. It is inferred from the
Qur’an that the mission and the message of the prophets aimed at
establishing justice and equity by implementing social equality and
obliterating class distinctions and divisions. The prophets have always
started their mission from the base and later on brought changes in the
superstructure, not the other way round. The superstructures, i.e.
doctrines of faith, dogmas, moral and behavioural reforms, always
occupied a secondary place in prophetic missions, as they were attacked
only after the base was transformed. The Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من لا معاش له لا معاد له
  </p>
</blockquote>

*One who does not have a means of- subsistence does not have Hereafter
either (which is a product of spiritual life).*

This statement indicates the priority of the means of subsistence over
the Hereafter, and the priority of material existence over spiritual
existence. If stretched to its logical conclusion, it means that
spiritual life is synonymous with superstructure and is based upon
material conditions of human life. The Prophet (S) also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم بارك لنا في الخبز، لولا الخبز ما تصدقنا و لا صلينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My God, bless our bread with abundance; for had it not been for bread
we would not have been charitable, nor would we have offered prayers.*

This statement also indicates the dependence of the spiritual
superstructure upon the material base.

Nowadays, majority of people tend to believe that the prophets had set
before them the task of reforming only the superstructure; that is they
aimed at making men true believers and were interested only in the
reform of their beliefs, morals, and behaviour; they were not concerned
with changing the foundation, or at the most they considered matters
related with the base or economic activity merely secondary in
importance. It is imagined that the prophets thought that once the
people became true believers all the matters would automatically be set
right; justice and equality would be established and the exploiters
would come up on their own to surrender their privileges to the
exploited and the oppressed.

To be short, it is believed that the prophets have used faith and belief
as the weapon for attaining their goals, and their followers should
follow the same path. This is nothing but deception and an illusion that
the priests and clergymen associated with the class of oppressors and
exploiters have invented and imposed on the society in order to render
the teachings of the prophets ineffective and futile.

In the words of Marx, "The class which has the means of material
production at its disposal, consequently also controls the means of
intellectual production .... The material rulers are the intellectual
rulers of the society arid rule over the social mind as well." [^2]

The approach and the method of work of the prophets were quite opposite
to the view generally accepted by the majority of people. The prophets
first delivered society from the evils of social polytheism social
discrimination, injustice, repression, and exploitation which are the
root causes of ideological polytheism, and moral, behavioural, and
religious perversions. After socially emancipating the people they
engrained in their souls the faith in the unity of God (*tawhid)*, and
taught them the methods of attaining moral and behavioural piety.

5. The Qur’an holds that the logic of the opponents of the prophets has
always been opposed to the logic of the prophets and their followers
throughout the entire course of history. The Qur’an explicitly explains
that the Ideology of the opponents has been always conserva­tive,
obscurantist, traditional, and backward-looking, whereas the Ideology
advocated by the prophets and their followers has been necessarily
dynamic, anti-traditional, progressive, and futuristic.

The Qur’an clearly propounds the view that the first group practised the
same ideology which according to sociological analysis is practised in a
society divided into two classes of exploiters and exploited by the
class of exploiters, who are the beneficiaries of the existing system
and advocate the ideology of status quo. The prophets and their
followers on the other hand followed and practised the ideology which
socio­logically speaking, is employed by the sufferers and deprived in
human history.

There are frequent references in the Qur’an to the specific logic held
by the opponents and the followers of the prophets, indicating what sort
of philosophy these two groups followed. They are actually meant for
pointing out that these two types of philosophies, like the two groups
themselves, have always been opposed to each other. The Qur’an, by
pointing out the logic of the opponents and that of the followers of the
prophets, provides us with a criterion for today.

The Qur’an pictures several scenes in which these two ideologies
confront each other. Those who are interested may study the following
Qur’anic verses. *Surat al-Zukhruf*, verses (40-50); *Surat al-Mu 'min*,
verses (23-44); *Surat Taha*, verses from 49 to 71; *Surat al-Shu 'ara,*
verses from 16 to 49: *Surat al-Qasas*, verses from 36 to 39. Here, for
the sake of example, we quote verses from 20 to 24 from *Surat al
­Zuhhruf* with some brief explanatory remarks about their meanings:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَوْ شَاءَ الرَّحْمَـٰنُ مَا عَبَدْنَاهُم مَّا لَهُم
بِذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عِلْمٍ إِنْ هُمْ إِلَّا يَخْرُصُونَ ﴿٢٠﴾أَمْ
آتَيْنَاهُمْ كِتَابًا مِّن قَبْلِهِ فَهُم بِهِ
مُسْتَمْسِكُونَ ﴿٢١﴾ بَلْ قَالُوا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ
أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ آثَارِهِم مُّهْتَدُونَ ﴿٢٢﴾ وَكَذَٰلِكَ مَا
أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِّن نَّذِيرٍ إِلَّا قَالَ
مُتْرَفُوهَا إِنَّا وَجَدْنَا آبَاءَنَا عَلَىٰ أُمَّةٍ وَإِنَّا عَلَىٰ
آثَارِهِم مُّقْتَدُونَ ﴿٢٣﴾ قَالَ أَوَلَوْ جِئْتُكُم بِأَهْدَىٰ مِمَّا
وَجَدتُّمْ عَلَيْهِ آبَاءَكُمْ قَالُوا إِنَّا بِمَا أُرْسِلْتُم بِهِ
كَافِرُونَ ﴿٢٤﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they say: 'If the Beneficent had so willed, we should not have
worshipped them (the angels). (Now that we worship them, it means that
it is the will of God-absolute determinism). They have no knowledge of
whatsoever of that; they are only conjecturing (about the matter of
determinism). Or have We given them any Scripture before (this Qur’an)
to which they hold' (i.e. it is nothing of these two. neither a sound
faith in determinism nor any Scripture which could serve as
evidence).***

***Nay, for they say only 'We found our fathers following a religion,
and we are guided by their footprints. ' And even so We sent not a
warner before thee into any township, except that men who lived at ease
(mutrafun) said, 'We indeed found our fathers following a religion, and
we are following their footprints. (And the warner) said: 'What! even
though I bring you better guidance than that you found your fathers
following? [i.e. although the path shown by me is more in accordance
with correct logic?] They answered, 'We disbelieve in that you were sent
with.' (43:20-24)***

We see that the opponents of the prophets sometimes utilize the idea of
fatalism and predestination to impress upon people that we are not free
to act according to our will. This idea, as sociologists point out,
always suits the interests of the beneficiaries of the status quo, who
do not want any change in the existing conditions and, therefore, take
shelter in the doctrine of predestination as an excuse. Sometimes they
lay emphasis upon following the traditions of ancestors and consider the
past as something sacred and worthy of imitation. Everything related
with the past is accepted as right and correct, and is considered
sufficient for guidance. This is the logic preached by the champions of
status quo and vested interests.

In opposition to this view, the prophets never supported tradi­tionalism
and fatalism. They upheld logic, knowledge, and emancipa­tion, which
represent the approach of the revolutionaries and the sufferers under
the status quo. The adversaries, when they see that they cannot win the
battle due to their weak logic and arguments, as a last resort, declare
that whether we believe in fatalism or not. whether we respect tradition
or reject it, we are against your message, your mis­sion, and your
ideology, because your message contradicts the present social reality
and class structure.

6. The most obvious aspect of the Qur’anic teaching is its siding with
the oppressed. The Qur’an promises, in accordance with the prophecy of
historical materialism on the basis of dialectical logic, that in the
struggle between the oppressed and the oppressors the final victory is
on the side of the oppressed.

The Qur’an through this alignment really affirms the necessary course
which history is determined to follow, because according to it the class
which IS revolutionary in character ultimately emerges victorious in its
struggle against the class which is reactionary and conservative due to
its class situation, and is destined to inherit and rule the earth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the
earth, and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors.
(28:5)***

Similarly the verse 137 in Sural al- 'A 'raj declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْرَثْنَا الْقَوْمَ الَّذِينَ كَانُوا يُسْتَضْعَفُونَ مَشَارِقَ
الْأَرْضِ وَمَغَارِبَهَا الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا وَتَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ
رَبِّكَ الْحُسْنَىٰ عَلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ بِمَا
صَبَرُوا وَدَمَّرْنَا مَا كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِرْعَوْنُ وَقَوْمُهُ وَمَا
كَانُوا يَعْرِشُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And We caused the people who were oppressed to inherit the eastern
parts of the land and its western parts, thereof which We had blessed.
And the fair Word of the Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel
because of their endurance; and We annihilated all that Pharaoh and his
folk had done and that they had contrived.*** ***(7.137)***

This view of the Qur’an, that history moves in the direction of the
victory of the oppressed, the exploited, and the enslaved, fully
corresponds to I ill: principle derived from historical materialism,
according to which reaction .md conservatism are the characteristics of
exploitation which are opposed to till: law of evolution, and are,
therefore, bound to face extinction. The essential character of the
exploited is enlightenment, dynamism, and I evolutionary spirit, which
being in harmony and agreement with the law of evolution are bound to be
victorious.

Here it would not be inappropriate to quote a passage from an article
lately published by a group of so-called Muslim intellectuals­ who have
left intellectualism behind to embrace Marxism. There, under the
above-quoted Qur’anic verse, the following explanatory remarks are made:

... What is greatly remarkable is the position of God and all the
phenomena of existence with respect to the world's oppressed. It cannot
be denied that the oppressed of the earth according to the Qur’anic
teachings, are the underprivi­leged, enslaved masses, who are forced not
to play any role in determining their own fate ... If we pay attention
to this fact, taking into consideration the absolute will of God
governing the course of being and all the phenomena of life, which tend
to favour the oppressed, the question arises: Who are the persons that
are instrumental in realization of the Divine Will? The answer to this
question is quite obvious.

When we evaluate the administrative organizations of societies as two
poles of the oppressors and the oppressed, with the knowledge that the
Divine Will can be translated into action, on the one hand, by bestowing
the inheritance and leadership of the earth upon the oppressed, and on
the other by destroying the institutions of exploitation and ultimately
negating them, we find that the oppressed themselves and their apostles
and committed intellectuals, who arise from within the oppressed class,
act as the agents of the Divine Will in realizing this end.

In other words, they are these chosen apostles[^3] and the departed
martyrs from among the oppressed[^4] who make the initial moves in the
struggle against destructive *taghuti* regimes, moves which pave the
road for establishing the leadership of the oppressed and enabling them
to inherit the resources of the earth.

This view, in fact, represents our understanding of the Qur’anic
interpretation of historical upheavals and the monotheistic revolutions
in the sense that in the same way as monotheistic revolutions,[^5] from
a sociological point of view, revolve around the axis of the leadership
of the oppressed and their inheritance of the earth, so also the leaders
and the groups in the vanguard of this rnovement should necessarily
arise from among the oppressed.

Their ideo­logical and social views should also be derived from the
intellectual attitude and social alignment of the oppressed and
exploited masses.

There are several implications of this statement.

a. From the viewpoint of the Qur’an, society is bipolar and is always
divided into two classes representing the oppressors and the oppressed.

b. The will of God (according to the expression used in the article,
'the position of God and all phenomena of existence') with respect to
the leadership and inheritance of the oppressed and the downtrodden is
universal and applies without any discrimination whatsoever to believers
and non-believers, monotheists and polytheists. It means that the
relative pronoun (…) is used in a general sense applicable to all
people.

The Divine promise guarantees the victory of the oppressed qua oppressed
over the oppressors. In other words, the main conflict going on
throughout history up to this date is between the exploited and the
tyrants. The purpose of the evolution of the universe dictates that the
downtrodden should emerge victorious against the oppressors.

c. The will of God is executed through the means of the oppressed. The
leaders, guides, apostles and martyrs necessarily arise from among the
oppressed; not from the other side.

d. The ideological base is always in harmony and correspondence with the
social base and class character .

Thus we see how certain Marxist principles regarding history are derived
and inferred from the Qur’anic verse, and how it is claimed that the
Qur’an, one thousand and two hundred years before Marx came into the
world anticipated and echoed his thought and philosophy!

Well' now that such a view about history has been found in the Qur’an
what conclusions can be drawn in its light while analysing contemporary
history? These gentlemen have hastily tried to draw conclusions from
this so-called .Qur’anic principle, applying it as a test to the
contemporary movement of the 'ulama'. They say that the Qur’an has
taught us that the leaders and guides of revolutions should neces­sarily
be from the class of the oppressed.

On the contrary, nowadays we see that the 'ulama' who represent one of
the three dimensions of the system of exploitation throughout history,
have shifted their social base and have become revolutionary. How is
this phenomenon to be explained?

The solution is simple. We can surely and with certainty conclude that
there is an intrigue involved in this affair. When the ruling class
finds itself in trouble, it asks the allied clergy to arrange a
revolu­tionary pageant to manage its own escape. This is another
conclusion derived from this Marxist-excuse me, Islamic-view. It is
quite clear who will pocket the profits yielded by such interpretations.

Criticism
---------

All that has been said about the justification of historical
material­ism from the Qur’anic viewpoint may be regarded as being either
basical­ly wrong, or if correct the inference drawn from it is totally
wrong. We have to critically examine the arguments given above.

1. The claim that the Qur’an has divided society materially and
spiritually into two classes and that these two classes coincide with
each other, is absolutely false. To say that according to the Qur’an the
group consisting of the *kafirun* (unbelievers), the *mushrikun*
(idolaters), the *munafiqun* (hypocrites), the *mufsidun* (mischief
mongers), is the same as that of the *mala'* (ruling clique), the
*mustakbirun* [^6] (arrogant, oppressors) and the *jabbarun* (tyrants),
on the one hand, and on the other hand the group consisting of the
*mu'minun* (believers), the *muwahhidun* (monotheists), the *salihun*:
(righteous), the *shuhada’* (martyrs) is the same as the oppressed and
the exploited class, and to say that the confrontation between the
believers and the unbelievers reflects the basic conflict between the
oppressed and the oppressors respectively, is not correct. This type of
coincidence is not at all validated by the Qur’an. On the contrary we
find that the Qur’an affirms the absence of such a coincidence.

In its treatment of the lessons of history the Qur’an cites the examples
of believers who belonged to a tyrannical ruling class yet revolted
against that class and its values. The believer of the family of pharaoh
whose story is narrated in *Surat al-Mu'min* is an example of such
individuals. The Qur’an also mentions Pharaoh’s wife, who, in spite of
being his life partner and equally sharing his luxurious life style, was
a true believer in God.[^7]

The Qur’an, in several places, in a moving style recalls the story of
Pharaoh’s magicians, and shows how the natural truth-seeking conscience
of man, when faced with the truth, can rise on occasion against
falsehood and error, setting aside all personal interests and ignoring
with contempt Pharaoh’s threats:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَأُقَطِّعَنَّ أَيْدِيَكُمْ وَأَرْجُلَكُم مِّنْ خِلَافٍ ثُمَّ
لَأُصَلِّبَنَّكُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"I shall assuredly cui off alternately your hands and feet then I
shall crucify you all together." (7: 124)***

Basically, the revolt of Moses (A) as related by the Qur’an, contradicts
historical materialism. It is true that Moses belonged to the tribe of
Israel – he was neither an Egyptian nor a kinsman of the Pharaoh - but
Moses was brought up since Infancy like a prince in Pharaoh's
house­hold. The same Moses who was brought up by Pharaoh revolted
against the tyrannical system of his patron, a system in the midst of
which he had grown up, renouncing him and preferring to work as a
shepherd for the old man of Medina, until he was chosen by God for
prophethood when he formally confronted Pharaoh.

The Holy Prophet (S) was orphaned in childhood and led a life of poverty
until his youth. It was after his marriage with Khadijah that he became
prosperous and rich. The Qur’an refers to this point when it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ يَجِدْكَ يَتِيمًا فَآوَىٰ ﴿٦﴾ وَوَجَدَكَ ضَالًّا
فَهَدَىٰ ﴿٧﴾وَوَجَدَكَ عَائِلًا فَأَغْنَىٰ ﴿٨﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Did He not find thee an orphan; and shelter thee? Did He not find
thee needy, and suffice thee? (93:6,8)***

It was in this period of prosperity that the Prophet (S) devoted his
time to prayer and contemplation in solitude. According to the doctrine
of historical materialism, during this period the Prophet (S) should
have changed and assumed the role of a conservative advocate of the
status quo. But it was during th.is period that he started to propagate
his revolutionary message, rising in rebellion against the capitalists,
the usurers, and the slavers of Mecca, and revolted against the practice
of idolatry which symbolized the corrupt life of those days.

As all the believers, the monotheists, and the monotheistic
revolu­tionaries did not arise from the oppressed class, the prophets
also absorbed the good-natured and the relatively untainted natures from
among the oppressor classes and aroused them to revolt against
them­selves (by way of repentance) or against the interests of their own
class (by way of revolution). In the same way, all the oppressed people
did not belong to the ranks of the believers and the monotheistic
revolu­tionaries.

The Qur’an pictures numerous scenes where the people belonging to the
oppressed class are counted among unbelievers and included among the
doomed subject to Divine chastisernent.[^8]

Therefore, neither all believers belong to the oppressed class nor all
oppressed are believers. The claim that there is complete
correspon­dence between them is absolutely absurd. Undeniably, the
majority of the followers of the prophets have belonged to the oppressed
class, or at least came from those whose hands were not stained with
blood and repression. Similarly the majority of the opponents of the
prophets belonged to the class of oppressors.

This is so because although the human nature which accepts the Divine
message is common to both classes and exists in everyone, but the
oppressors, the affluent, and the extravagant confront a great barrier
because their souls are polluted and their habits are deeply entrenched
in the evil existing system. There are few out of this class who are
capable of freeing themselves from under the mountain load of these
evils. But the oppressed class has no such restraints.

Their nature not only responds readily to the Divine call, but they see
in it the opportunity to recover their lost rights. Identifying
themselves with believers has a double advantage for them. It is on this
account that the majority of the followers of the prophets consist of
the oppressed and individuals of the opposite group among the believers
form only a minority. Despite it the notion that the group of believer
and the class of the oppressed are one and the same is totally
groundless.

There is an acute difference between the fundamental principles
regarding the nature of history laid down in the Qur’an and the basic
doctrines of historical materialism. In view of the Qur’an, the spirit
is a fundamental reality, and matter in no way is prior to the spirit.
The spiritual needs and urges are fundamental to human existence and are
not dependent on the material needs. Thought is also independent of
action and the psychological nature of man precedes the social makeup of
his personality.

The Qur’an, since it believes in the fundamental nature of the human
being, a nature which is found even within extremely de­humanized
persons like Pharaoh, who is a natural human being whose growth has been
arrested, it also admits even for the most corrupt persons the
possibility, however weak, of moving towards truth and self-realization.
Accordingly the prophets were encharged to admonish the tyrant in the
first place and perchance to liberate the natural man imprisoned within
the oppressor, arousing his inherent humanity against his evil social
personality. We know that success was achieved in a great number of
cases, and what is called "repentance" is the name of this phenomenon.

Moses (A) at the initial stage of his prophethood, was entrusted with
the task of persuading Pharaoh and awakening in him the true human
nature by means of admonition. He was advised to fight against him only
if he failed in this attempt. In Moses' view Pharaoh had inter­nally
captivated and fettered the man within himself, and enslaved and
imprisoned other human beings externally. Moses first attempts to arouse
the man imprisoned within Pharaoh to revolt against himself. He
endeavours to arouse the remnants of humanity left in him against his
social personality, i.e. the Pharaoh forged and fabricated by perverse
social conditions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 اذْهَبْ إِلَىٰ فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَىٰ ﴿١٧﴾ فَقُلْ هَل لَّكَ إِلَىٰ
أَن تَزَكَّىٰ ﴿١٨﴾ وَأَهْدِيَكَ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ
فَتَخْشَىٰ ﴿١٩﴾ فَأَرَاهُ الْآيَةَ الْكُبْرَىٰ ﴿٢٠﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Go to Pharaoh, he has waxed insolent. And say, ‘Hast thou the will to
purify thyself, and that I should guide thee to thy Lord, then thou
shalt fear?’ (79:17-19)***

The Qur’an believes in the power and value of guidance, advice,
admonition, reminder, argumentation and logical reasoning (in Qur’anic
terminology, *hikmah*, wisdom). According to the Qur’an these devices
can change a man, alter his course of life, transform his personality,
and bring about a spiritual change in him. This approach is contrary to
Marxism and materialism, which restrict the role of guidance to merely
transforming the ‘class-in-itself’ into the ‘class-for-itself’ by
bringing about consciousness of class antagonism and realization of
class character.

2. It is claimed that the addresses of the Qur’an are *nas* (mankind,
people), and *nas* as a term is synonymous with the deprived masses.
Hence Islam addresses itself to the oppressed class, and Islamic
ideology is the ideology of the oppresses class; therefore, Islam
recruits its followers and warriors exclusively from the underprivileged
masses.

This whole line of argument is wrong. Of course the addressees of the
Islamic message are *nas*, i.e. human beings, which include the whole
mankind. No dictionary of Arabic language gives the meaning of the word
*nas* as the underprivileged or oppressed masses, and this word does not
refer to any particular class of men. The Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ إِلَيْهِ
سَبِيلاً ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…It is the duty of all men towards God to come to the House as
pilgrims; whoever can afford to make his way there…(3:97)***

Does this verse refer to the underprivileged masses only? The phrase
**يا ايها** **الناس**, “O, mankind!” which repeatedly occurs in the
Qur’an, nowhere refers exclusively to the underprivileged masses but to
all mankind in general. The universality of the Qur’anic address is also
derived from the principle of universality of human nature propounded in
the Qur’an.

3. It is said that the Qur’an claims that the leaders, the guides, the
prophets, and the martyrs arise exclusively from among the oppressed.
This is yet another mistake regarding the Qur’an. The Qur’an never makes
such a statement.

The argument concerning verse 62:2…**هو الذي بعث في الاميين** that
messengers of God arise from among the *ummah* (community) and the
*ummah* is equivalent to the oppressed masses, is ridiculous. The word
**أميين** (*ummiyyin*) is actually the plural form of the word (*ummi)*
which means a person who is unlettered. Furthermore **أُمِّي** is
derived from **أُم** (*umm*) not from **أمَّة** (*ummah*). Morever, the
meaning of the word **أُمَّة** is a society which is composed of
different groups and occasionally different classes.

By no means can it be used to signify the ‘underprivileged masses.’
Still more ridiculous is the argument regarding the verse 75 from *Surat
al-Qasas* about martyrs: **و نزعنا من كل امة شهيداً فقلنا هاتوا
برهانكم**. They have interpreted it (or rather distorted it) to mean
this: “We shall raise from every *ummah* (the masses) a *shahid* (martyr
in the way of God); i.e. We shall make him a revolutionary, then We
shall ask every *ummah* to produce its proof, which is the same as its
martyr – the revolutionary killed in the way of God.”

Firstly, this verse follows another verse and both of them are related
to the Day of Judgmenet, the day when God would address idolaters. The
preceding verse is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُنَادِيهِمْ فَيَقُولُ أَيْنَ شُرَكَائِيَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Upon the day when He shall call unto them. and he shall say, 'Where
are now those whom you claimed to be My associates?' (28: 74)***

Secondly, **نزعنا** (*naza’na*) means that “We shall separate,” or “We
shall draw near.” It does not mean “We shall raise” or “We arouse.”

Thirdly, the word **شهيد** (*shahid*) is not used here in the sense of
martyr but in the sense of witness – witness to the actions of his
people.

The Qur’an considers every prophet as a witness to the actions of his
*ummah* (people). There is not a single instance in the Qur’an where the
word **شهيد** (*shahid*) is used for martyr as it is currently today,
for one killed in the way at God. The word **شهيد** was of course used
by the Prophet (S) and the Imams (A) in this sense, but not in the
Qur’an. Thus we see how the verses of the Qur’an have been distorted for
the purpose of reconciling the Qur’anic teachings with an inconsistent
philosophy like Marxism,

4. What was the principal aim of the prophets? Was their primary goal to
establish justice and equality, or to strengthen the relation of man
with God by means of faith and knowledge? Did they combine both the alms
together and were dualist in approach? Do we require some other
explanation? I have already dealt with this problem while discussing
prophethood[^9] and there is no need to repeat what we have said there.
Here we shall deal with this subject only from the viewpoint of the
prophets' methodology.

While discussing the practical implica­tions of *tawhid*[^10] (the
principle of Divine Unity), I have already explained that the prophets
neither concentrated their efforts on reforming man and liberating him
from within by breaking off all bondages to the worldly things-as the
Sufis maintain-nor did they devote all their energies to bringing about
equity and reform in external human relations, considering this reform
as sufficient for the reformation of man’s internal relations (with God
and himself)- as advocated by some materialist schools of philosophy.
The Holy Qur’an, in the same breath and in a single sentence says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... تَعَالَوْاْ إِلَى كَلَمَةٍ سَوَاء بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَكُمْ أَلاَّ
نَعْبُدَ إِلاَّ اللّهَ وَلاَ نُشْرِكَ بِهِ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَتَّخِذَ
بَعْضُنَا بَعْضاً أَرْبَاباً مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Come now to a word common between us and you, that we shall worship
none but God, and that we shall ascribe no partner unto Him, and that
none of us shall lake others for lords besides God ... (3:64)***

But the question is, from where did the prophets start their mission?
From within or from without? Did the prophets initiate their work by
transforming men from within by means of impregnating them with
religious faith and spiritual fervour and after that people had
undergone religious, moral, intellectual, and emotional transformation
they made use of this change for attaining the aims of social unity,
social reform, social justice and equality?

Or did they act other way round by first concentrating their efforts to
change material conditions by calling public attention to deprivation,
backwardness, and oppres­sion and by mobilizing the people to eliminate
social disunity, discrimination and injustice, and attending to the task
of cultivating faith, correct doctrine and morals only after this goal
was realized?

A little study of the methods employed by the prophets and saints would
reveal that they, contrary to the practice of so-called social reformers
and the advocates of human welfare, started their work with emphasis on
right thinking, correct doctrine, belief, spiritual fervour, love of
God, and constant remembrance of the origin of the world (*mabda*’) and
the Day of Resurrection.

A glance at the chronological order of the surahs and revelation of the
Qur’anic verses with reference to the problems discussed in them and a
study of the life of the Prophet (S) and his approach to the problems he
dealt with during the thirteen years of his stay in Mecca and the ten
years of his life in Medina, is sufficient to throw light on the methods
employed by the prophets.

5. That the opponents of the prophets should have maintained a
conservative logic is quite natural. If it could be deduced from the
Qur’an that the opponents of the prophets, without exception, believed
in this logic, one might justifiably say that all opponents of prophets
belonged to the affluent, privileged, and exploiter class. But what can
actually be deduced from the Qur’an is that this type of thinking is the
logic of the leaders of the opponents, the *mala'* and the
*mustakbirun*, whom Marx regards as owners and distributors of the
society's intellectual products.

That the logic of the prophets should be a logic of dynamism,
rationality, and indifference to custom and tradition is also natural.
But It is not justifiable to say that deprivation, exploitation, and
oppression of the lower classes have been responsible for moulding their
conscious­ness in this manner, and that their thinking is naturally
determined by their deprivations and privations.

The prophets have this logic because they have attained to a stage of
human perfection with respect to their logic, reason, feelings, and
emotions. In fact, the more a human being acquires perfection, the
lesser is his attachment and dependence on his natural and social
environment and material conditions, and greater is his independence. We
shall talk more about it later. The independent logic of the prophets
requires that they should not be tied to customs, habits, and
traditions. On the contrary it requires of them to liberate the people
also from the shackles of blind imitation of decadent customs and
traditions.

6. Whatever has been said in the context of oppression (*istid’af)* is
also unacceptable. Why? Because, firstly, the Qur’an has itself clearly
explained the evolutionary course of history and its ultimate goal
variously in several verses. These verses explain and interpret the
meaning of the above-mentioned verse (28:5) and are complementary to it,
as they suggest that its contention is true only under certain
conditions. Secondly, contrary to the common belief, the verse of
*istid’af* (28:5) cannot be interpreted as formulating any universal law
in itself.

This is so evident that there is little need for any elaborate
comparison with other related verses or any detailed interpretation or
explanation. This verse is related to the verse preceding it and the one
following it. When these verses are read in successive order we find
that this verse does not contain the universal principle which has been
inferred from it. I would like to discuss this verse in two parts. The
first part of our discussion is based upon the assumption that this
verse may be separated from the ten verses preceding and following it
and that a universal principle may be derived from it.

Then we compare this verse with other verses which propound another
historical principle which contradicts the assumed principle, and see
what conclusion can be drawn from this comparison. In the second part we
shall show that this verse basically does not propound the universal'
historical principle that has been inferred from it.

(i)

In several verses of the Qur’an the ultimate destiny and fate of history
as well as its course of evolution is pictured as the ultimate victory
of faith over faithlessness, victory of piety over uncontained lust, the
victory of righteousness over corruption, and victory of good and godly
conduct over perverse behaviour. The verse 55 of *Surat al-Nur*, reads
thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَى لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْناً يَعْبُدُونَنِي لَا
يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God has promised those of you who believe and do good works that He
will surely make them to succeed in the earth, even as He caused those
who were before them to succeed [others}, and that He will surely
establish tor them their religion which He has approved (or them, and
will give them in exchange safety after their tear. They shall sense Me,
not associating with Me any­thing .... (24:55)***

In this verse the people who are promised final victory vice­regency of
God, and inheritance of the earth are no doubt the righteous believers.
Contrary to verse 28:5 which mentions the condition of being oppressed,
deprived, and exploited as the main characteristic of the believers,
this verse relies upon ideological, moral and behavioural
characteristics. It proclaims the ultimate victory and' domination of a
particular kind of belief, faith, and mode of behaviour.

In other words this verse promises the ultimate victory of the human
being who has attained conviction of faith, realization of truth and
sublimity of character. One of the implications of the promised victory
is 'suc­cession in earth,' that is, wresting of authority from previous
rulers and powers. The other implication is regarding the establishment
of the rule of Religion, that is realization of all ethical and social
values of Islam, such as, justice, chastity, piety, courage,
self-sacrifice, love, worship of God, sincerity, purity of soul, etc.
Thirdly, it implies rejection of all forms of polytheism (shirk) either
in worship (‘*ibadah)* or in obedience (*‘ita’ah*).

In *Surat al-‘A’raf* the verse 128 states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ اسْتَعِينُوا بِاللّهِ وَاصْبِرُواْ إِنَّ
الأَرْضَ لِلّهِ يُورِثُهَا مَن يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Moses said to his people, 'Seek help in Allah, and be patient;
surely the earth is God's and He gives it for an inheritance to whom He
Will of His servants and ultimately to the God-fearing, [i.e. in the end
the God-fearing would be the inheritors of the earth] (7:128)***

In *Surat al-‘Anbiya,* the verse 105 declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الْأَرْضَ
يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***We have written in al-Zabur, after the Remembrance, 'Indeed the earth
shall be the inheritance of My righteous servants.' (21:105)***

There are other verses also relating to this subject.

What shall we do now? Should we accept the verse 28:5 related with
*istid’af* (oppression) or the verse 24:55 concerned with the matter of
*istikhlaf* (succession) and several other verses of its kind? Can we
say that these two types of verses though apparently different in
meaning express the same fact, that the oppressed are the same as the
believers, the righteous, and the pious, and vice versa? Can we say that
*istid’af* (being oppressed) is the social and class character of the
same people who are ideologically identified as men of faith,
righteousness, and piety? Of course.

As I have already argued, the theory of correspondence between the
so-called ‘superstructural’ characteristics of belief, righteousness,
and piety, and the so-called ‘infrastructural’ characters of being
oppressed, exploited, and deprived is not justified from the point of
view of the Qur’an. Form the Qur’anic viewpoint it is just as possible
that a group of oppressed may not consist of believers. The Qur’an has
introduced both of these groups.

However, as I have pointed out earlier, whenever a monotheistic ideology
based upon the Divine values of justice, self-sacrifice, and benevolence
is presented in a class society, it is evident that majority of its
followers should belong to the oppressed class; because they do not have
to overcome the obstacles which block the way of nature as in the case
of the opposite class. But it does not necessarily mean that the class
of believers is exclusively comprised of the oppressed class.

Secondly, each one of the above-mentioned verses presents two different
mechanisms of history. The verse concerning oppression (28:5) identifies
the course and movement of history with class struggle. The mechanism of
movement is explained as being due to the pressures created by the
oppressors and their reactionary character on the one hand, and the
revolutionary spirit of the exploited class on the other hand.

This struggle undeniably results in the victory of the oppressed class,
irrespective of their commitment to the Qur’anic ideal of good conduct,
and applies also to such peoples, for example, as that of Vietnam and
Cambodia. If we try to interpret this verse from the religious point of
view, we shall have to say that this verse expounds the principle of the
Divine support for the oppressed. The Qur’an declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ اللّهَ غَافِلاً عَمَّا يَعْمَلُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And deem not that God is unaware of what the wicked do ....
(14:42)***

This is an affirmation of Divine justice. The verse concerned with
*istid'taf* (oppression) containing the notions of leadership (*imamah*)
and inheritance (*wirathah*) is indicative of Divine justice.

But the verse relating to *istikhlaf* (succession) (24: 55) and other
similar verses, expound a different mechanism operating in history as a
natural process. From the religious point of view this mechanism implies
a principle more comprehensive and inclusive than the principle of
Divine justice, since the latter is included in it.

The mechanism expounded in the verse 24: 55, and other similar verses,
can be explained in this fashion: Among the various kinds of struggles
throughout the course of world's history, almost all of which have had
waged for the sake of some material interest and gain, only that
struggle which has been waged for the sake of God (*lillah wa fillah*)
has been exclusively motivated by sacred values, free of any selfish
material interest. This struggle, under the leadership of the prophets
and the believers following them, has been instrumental in the
advance­ment of humanity and human civilization.

Only this type of struggle is worthy of being called the battle between
good and evil. It were these battles which pushed forward history from
the humanistic and spiritual point of view. The real motivating force
behind these struggles was not the upsurge of a certain class but man's
natural and instinctive urge for truth and understanding of the mystery
of existence and his craving for justice, which aims at creating an
ideal social order.

It was not the sense of deprivation and loss but the natural urge for
self-perfection that had been instrumental in man's progress.

The animal faculties in man have remained unchanged from the beginning
of history until now; they have neither developed in any way nor can
they develop now. But his human aptitudes gradually develop and blossom,
so that in future, more than today, he will be able to emancipate
himself from material and economic bonds and incline more and more
towards faith and spiritual perfection. The ground on which history has
developed and evolved was not the battles fought for class interests and
material gains, but the ideological and spiritual struggles based on
Divine faith. This is the natural mechanism of man's evolution which
ensures the ultimate victory of the righteous, the pious, and the
warriors of the Divine path.

Let us discuss the Divine view of this victory. Whatever participates in
the process of history and undergoes gradual evolution, attaining its
ultimate goal as history approaches its culmination point, is
manifestation of God's Lordship (*rububivvah*.) and Benevolence
(*rahmah)*, which necessitate that creatures attain perfection. It is
something more than what is is called Divine justice which necessitates
only 'compensation.' In other words, what has been promised is issuance
and manifestation of the Divine Attributes of Lordship, Benevolence, and
Bountifulness, and His His Attributes of Omnipotence and Vengeance
[retribution].

Thus, we see that the verse 28:5 concerning *istid’af* and the verse
concerning *istikhlaf* (and other verses similar to it), each has a
specific logic of its own. They differ in import with respect to the
perspective of history, the class which is victorious, the course
followed by history to ensure the promised victory, the mechanism or the
natural process responsible for the movement of history, and with
respect to the manifestation of relevant Divine Attributes.

Nevertheless, we see that the verse 24:55 concerned with succession is
more comprehensive than the other one in respect of the conclusions it
yields. Whatever man obtains on the basis of the verse concerning
oppression is only a part of what he attains on the basis of the verse
concerning succession. The moral value we derive from the verse
concerning oppression is deliverance of the oppressed from the tyranny
of the oppressor, which implies that God is the Saviour of the oppressed
(thus highlights only one attribute of God), whereas the verse
concerning succession embraces all the Attributes of God, including the
one designated by the former.

(ii)

Now the second part of our discussion regarding the verse concerning
oppression. The fact is that this verse is not meant to lay down any
universal principle. It consequently, neither describes the course of
history nor indicates the mechanism of history for the ultimate victory
of the oppressed qua oppressed. The erroneous pre­sumption that this
verse lays down a principle is caused by separating it from its
preceding and succeeding verses and generalizing the meaning of the
relative pronoun الذين in the phrase الذين استضعفوا to deduce a
principle which conflicts with the one deduced from the verse 24: 55
concerning succession. Consider the following three verses:

> إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَجَعَلَ أَهْلَهَا شِيَعاً
> يَسْتَضْعِفُ طَائِفَةً مِّنْهُمْ يُذَبِّحُ أَبْنَاءهُمْ وَيَسْتَحْيِي
> نِسَاءهُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ{4} وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ
> عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً
> وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ{5} وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ
> وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ وَجُنُودَهُمَا مِنْهُم مَّا كَانُوا
> يَحْذَرُونَ{6{

***Indeed Pharaoh exalted himself in the earth and made its people into
castes, Abasing one party of them, slaughtering their sons and sparing
their women, surely he was of those who work corruption, And we desired
to show favour unto those who were oppressed in the earth, and to make
them leaders and to make them the inheritors, and to establish them in
the earth, and to show. Pharaoh and Haman (his prime minister) and their
hosts that which the) feared from them, (28:4-6)***

These three verses are interrelated and can be interpreted only when
read together.

We see that the clauses **وَنُمَكِّنَ لَهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ** …'and to
establish them in the earth,' and **وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ**
…’and to show Pharaoh and Haman…’ in the third verse are related to the
phrase **أَن نَّمُنَّ,**‘that We shall favour,’ in the second verse
which is complementary to their meaning. Therefore, these two verses
cannot be separated from each other.

Besides, the content of the second clause in the third verse, i.e.
**وَنُرِي فِرْعَوْنَ وَهَامَانَ** is related to the content of the first
verse, and makes an assertion -about the fate of Pharaoh whose tyranny
is described in the first verse. Thus we cannot separate the third verse
from the first verse, as the third verse is related to the second verse
and complements it. The second verse, also, cannot be separated from the
first verse,

Had the third verse not been there or had it not dealt with the fate of
Pharaoh and Haman, it would have been possible to separate the second
verse from the first, and to consider it as independent, so that a
universal principle could be deduced from it. But the inseparable
connection of these three verses absolutely excludes the possibility of
deducing any principle. What is meant is that Pharaoh indulged in acts
of self-aggrandizement, discrimination, repression and infanticide,
while God had determined to bestow leadership and inheritance of the
earth upon those who were humiliated, oppressed, and deprived of their
rights. Hence the pronoun **الذين** in the second verse should be taken
in the restricted sense of reference to the people who were promised,
not in a general sense applicable to all oppressed.

Moreover, there is another point in the verse to be noted. The phrase
**و نجعلهم ائمة** ‘We shall make them as leaders…’ refers to the phrase
**أن نمن**, ‘that We shall favour…’ It does not say **بإن نجعلهم** which
would have been more proper if it was meant that the Divine favour
involved amounted to bestowing of leadership and inheritance.

This is the general interpretation of the verse. However, the verse
means to say, ‘We intended to show favour unto the oppressed through a
prophet and a revealed Scripture (Moses and the Torah), through
religious teaching and training, and through generation of monotheistic
faith in them, making them righteous believers, and as a result the
leaders and inheritors of the land [their own land]. Hence the verse
intends to make this statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُرِيدُ أَن نَّمُنَّ عَلَى الَّذِينَ اسْتُضْعِفُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ
(بموسى والكتاب الذي ننزله على موسى) وَنَجْعَلَهُمْ أَئِمَّةً
وَنَجْعَلَهُمُ الْوَارِثِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We desired to show favour unto those who were oppressed (by sending
Moses and the revealed Scripture) and to make them leaders and
inheritors…*

Therefore, though the verse 28:5 concerning oppression (*istid’af*)
bears a specific meaning, it is quite similar in import to the verse
24:55 concerning succession (*istikhlaf*), i.e. it partially conveys the
general meaning of the verse. Furthermore, aside from the relation of
the phrase **أن نمن** with **و نجعلهم ائمة**, basically we cannot
presume that the verse intends to say that the children of Israel would
have obtained the leadership and inheritance of their land by sole
virtue of being oppressed whether Moses would have appeared as a prophet
or not, irrespective of his heavenly teachings and regardless of their
following those heavenly teachings,

Possibly, the advocates of justifiability of the theory of historical
materialism from the Islamic point of view may raise another point. They
may say that the Islamic culture in its essence and character is either
the culture of the oppressed or of the oppressors, or it is a blanket
culture. If the Islamic culture is the culture of the oppressed, it is
bound to have the character of its class: its audience, its message, its
alignment, and everything must revolve around the oppressed class. And
if the Islamic culture is the culture of the oppressors, as claimed by
the opponents of Islam, besides having its class character and revolving
around its interests, it should be a reactionary and anti-human culture
and so necessarily of a non-Divine origin.

No Muslim would accept this point of view. Moreover, the entirety of
this culture bears witness to the contrary. Now the claim that the
Islamic culture is a blanket culture. A blanket culture is a neutral
culture, a culture of isolation and indifference, without
responsibility, and commitment, whose motto is, "Give back to Caesar
what belongs to Caesar, and give back to God what belongs to God." It is
a culture which attempts to reconcile water with fire, oppressed with
oppressor, exploited with exploiter, by bringing together all of them
under the same roof, a culture that neither roasts the meat nor hums the
spit.

Such a culture is practically a conservative culture which serves the
interests of the oppressors and the exploiters. A neutral, indifferent,
and noncommitted group, which does not participate in any social
conflicts between the exploiter and the exploited, practically supports
the exploiting class by not constraining its freedom. Similarly a
culture whose spirit is neutral and indifferent should of necessity
considered to be the culture of the oppressive class. Taking this into
account, it is claimed that since the Islamic culture is neither neutral
nor a supporter of the oppressive class, it should be a culture of the
oppressed with respect to its origin, its alignment, its message, and
its audience, all revolving around the axis of this class.

This argument is totally fallacious. I think, there are two fundamental
reasons for the inclination of this section of Muslim intellectuals
towards historical materialism. Firstly, they presume that if Islamic
culture is to be regarded as a revolutionary culture--or if Islam is to
be equipped with a revolutionary culture--the recourse to historical
materialism is inevitable. The rest of their talk and their claims that
it is an idea inspired by the Qur’an and specifically derived from the
verse 28:5 about *istid’af* are nothing but excuses and devices to
conceal this prejudgement. This is the reason for their outright
depa'rture from the essence of Islamic logic, which makes them degrade
the sublime, natural, Divine and human logic of Islam to the level of a
materialistic philosophy.

These intellectuals have imagined that the only way open for a culture
to be revolutionary is to identify it with the oppressed and the
deprived class, to consider it bound to its interests, and as being
exclusively related to it with respect to its source, alignment, and
audience. Therefore, they think, all leaders and ideologues should arise
solely from this class, the relation of this culture to all the other
classes and groups being one of sheer hostility, antagonism, and
conflict.

These intellectuals presume that the way to a revolutionary culture
should necessarily end in the stomach, and that all great revolutions of
history, even those led by the prophets, were the revolutions of the
stomach, for the stomach. For the same reason, out of the great Abu
Dharr, the wise man of the *urnrnah*, a staunch monotheist, a sincere
and honest supporter of Islam, a determined warrior in the way of God, a
man who fearlessly fulfilled the duty of *al-amr bi-al-ma’ruf wa al-nahy
‘an al-munkar*, they have carved an Abu Dharr of the stomach, a
psychopath remarkably sensitive to the pangs of hunger, who, for the
sake of satisfying his hunger, considered in not only permissible but
obligatory to draw the sword against all men.

The highest value attributed to his life, in their view, is his personal
experience of hunger, due to which he could understand the agony of the
hunger class. His sympathy with the hungry caused him to develop a
complex against those who were fighting against them. That’s all there
is to Abu Dharr. The whole personality of this Luqman of the ummah, this
monotheist see, this ardent crusader, and one of the greatest
personalities of Islam, is degraded to the level of a materialist.

These intellectuals subscribe to the view of Marx according to whom a
revolution can originate only in a violent movement of the masses.[^11]

They are unable to imagine that a culture, a school of thought and an
ideology which has Divine origin and addresses all human beings, and III
fact I he human nature itself, through a universal and comprehensive
message, aligned with the values of justice, equality, piety,
spirituality, love, benevolence and struggle against tyranny, is ever
capable of giving birth to a great revolution accompanied with profound
changes. But it is a revolution guided by the Divine light and the human
conscience, and is accompanied with religious fervour, spiritual
ecstasy, Divine motives, and humanistic values, similar to those
monotheistic revolutions which have been witnessed by history again and
again. The Islamic Revolution is a clear example of such a revolution.

These intellectuals fail to conceive that it is not essential for a
culture to necessarily originate in the oppressed class in order to be
committed and purposive and not to be neutral and indifferent. They
presume that a blanket culture is necessarily neutral and indifferent.
They are unable to understand that it is impossible for a comprehensive
school of thought and a blanket culture to be neutral, indifferent
irresponsible, and noncommittal if it has a Divine origin and is
addressed to the human nature.

That which creates the sense of responsibility and commitment is not
affinity with the oppressed class but dedication to God and human
conscience. Ignorance of this fact is the root cause of their
misunderstanding regarding the relationship of Islam with revolution.

The other main reason for this misconception should be sought in the
relationship between Islam and its social alignment. These intellectuals
have observed that there is a clear inclination in favour of the
oppressed in the Qur’an reflected in its historical discourses about the
movements led by the prophets. On the other hand, they have accepted
with unquestioning credulity the validity of the Marxist doctrine of
correspondence between the social base and ideological base, according
to which the origin and alignment of an ideology correspond with each
other.

Since it has never crossed their minds to question the validity of this
doctrine, they have been forced to draw this inference that since the
Qur’an clearly considers the goals of the sacred movements to be in
alignment with the interests of the oppressed and oriented towards
recovery of their rights, therefore, it means that the Qur’an regards
all the sacred movements as originating from the oppressed and exploited
class. This leads to the conclusion that the essence of history from the
Qur’anic viewpoint is materialistic and economic, with economy as the
base of the social structure.

From what we have said so far it becomes clear that the Qur’an believes
in the principle of human nature and considers it to be the logic which
governs human life. This logic, which may be called the 'logic of the
human nature,' is diametrically opposed to the 'logic of profit,' which
is the logic of the beastly and degenerate human being.

Accordingly Islam does not accept the doctrine of correspondence between
the social origin and alignment of an ideology or the doctrine of
correspondence between the social and ideological bases. Islam regards
it as an inhuman doctrine applicable to semi-human beings who have not
received any human education or training, and so are devoid of any sense
of higher values. Such stick to the logic of profit only. But it does
not apply to human beings who have attained humanhood, having received
human education and training; their logic is the logic of nature.

Aside from all this, to say that the alignment of Islam is in favour of
the oppressed is a sort of loose statement. Of course, Islam is aligned
with the values of equity, equality, and justice. Obviously the people
who are benefited by this alignment are the oppressed and the deprived.
Those who are adversely affected by it are the oppressors, the
exploiters, and the despots.

It means that Islam, even while striving for the rights of a certain
class, its principal goal is realization of a value and promotion of a
human principle. It is here that the extraordinary worth of 'the
principle of nature,' clearly expounded by the Qur’an, becomes evident
in the Islamic culture as the fountain-head of all Islamic
teachings.[^12]

Much that is said about nature [in other philosophies] fails to
elucidate its depth and to comprehend its full dimensions. Even those
who often talk about nature, since they do not pay due attention to the
various aspects of its vast dimensions, ultimately come up with views
which contradict this principle.

Another example of this error, which is more appalling, is the theory
regarding the origin of religions. Whatever we have discussed till now
concerns the nature and origin of historical phenomenon from the
viewpoint of religion (particularly Islam). Now we shall deal with
religion as a socio-historical phenomenon, which has existed from the
dawn of history up to the present time, and concerns with the origin and
alignment of this social phenomenon.

We have recurringly pointed out that the Marxist doctrine of historical
materialism believes in a correspondence between the origin of every
cultural phenomenon and its class alignment. There is a universal
principle generally believed in by Muslim mystics and philosophers,
according to which the end of everything is a kind of return to its
origin.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النهايات هي الرجوع الى البدايات
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The ends return to the origins.*

And Rumi has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جزئها را رويها سوى كل است بلبلانرا عشق با روي كل است
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آنجه از دريا به دريا مي رود از همانجا كامد آنجا مي رود
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
از سرِ كُه سيلهاي تيزرو وزتنِ ما جانِ عشق آميزرو
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The parts are forced towards the whole,*  
*Nightingales are in love with the rose’s face;*  
*What comes from the sea flows back into it,*  
*And everything returns to its source;*  
*Like the restless waves gushing from mountain-tops,*  
*My soul burning with love, is restless to be free from the body.*

Marxism holds a similar view with regard to intellectual, aesthetic,
philosophical, and religious matters, and in fact all socio-cultural
phenomena. This school claims that all ideas are directed towards the
source from which they originate. The end of everything is directed
towards its source and origin. There is no such thing as a neutral or
non-aligned philosophy, religion or culture. There is also no such thing
as a philosophy or religion which seeks social reform that is not wholly
to the benefit of the social class from which it arises.

According to it, every class has its specific intellectual and cultural
manifestations. Therefore, in all societies divided into two classes
from the economic point of view, there are two distinct types of
emotional, philosophical, moral, artistic, literary, aesthetic
approaches, and two different types of sensibilities and world outlooks,
and occasionally even two types of scientific knowledge. Whenever the
infrastructure and property relations are of two forms, this division
leads to bifurcation in two cultural and intellectual patterns and
systems.

Marx personally accepts two exemptions from this principle: religion and
the State. According to him, these two are special creations of the
oppressive class and are used by it as instruments of exploitation.
Naturally, they are aligned with the interests of the oppressors. As for
the exploited class, due to its social position it is neither the source
of religion nor the State. Religion and the State are imposed upon them
by the opposite group. Hence two systems of government or religion do
not exist anywhere.

Certain Muslim intellectuals, contrary to Marx's view claim that
religion can be also divided into two different systems. As morality,
arts, literature and all other cultural phenomena in a class society
represent two systems and each of them has a specific origin and
orientation related to its respective class-one system is related to the
ruling class while the other is related to the ruled -so also religion
is of two types: the religion of the rulers, and the religion of the
ruled.

The religion of the rulers is polytheism (*shirk*), and the religion of
the ruled is monotheism (*tawhid*). The religion of the rulers is
partisan and discriminatory, whereas the religion of the ruled advocates
equity and equality. The religion of the rulers justifies the status
quo, while the religion of the ruled demands revolution and condemns the
status quo. The religion of the rulers is static and stagnant, and
silences all criticism; whereas the religion of the ruled stimulates
upsurge, dynamism, and protest. The religion of the rulers is the opium
of the society, and the religion of the ruled is a tonic for it.

Therefore, Marx's theory, that the social orientation and align­ment of
religion is absolutely to the interests of the rulers, is true only for
the religion of the ruling class, which is against the ruled and is the
opium of the masses. This is the type of religion which has practically
always existed and has been in vogue and power. But it is not true of
the religion of the ruled, i.e., the religion- of the truthful prophets,
which was not tolerated by the ruling class and was suppressed by all
means.

These intellectua1s in this manner reject Marx's theory which considers
all religions as an instrument employed in the interests of the ruling
class, and presu.me that thereby they have rejected Marxism itself. They
do not realize that what they have said, in spite of its going against
the views of Marx, Engels, Mao, and other Marxists, is nothing but a
confirmation of the materialist-marxist interpretation of religion –
something which is far more appalling. After all they accept that the
religion of the ruled has a particular class origin.

Thus they approve of the principle of correspondence between a
religion’s class origin and its class orientation and alignment. In
others words, they have unconsciously affirmed the materialistic
conception of religion and all cultural phenomena and hence the doctrine
of necessary correspondence between the origin of a cultural phenomenon
and its objectives. The only thing they have done is that contrary to
the Marxist views, they have affirmed the existence of a religion which
originates in the oppressed class and serves its interests. They have
given an interesting explanation of the religion of the oppressed and
its social orientation. But they ignore that this view in itself accepts
the doctrine of materialist-economic character of religion.

Furthermore what sort of conclusions are drawn from this view? It is
concluded that the polytheistic religion of the ruling class is the only
religion that has played an objectively significant role in the lives of
people throughout history. Due to the determinism of history, which
supported it, and the economic and political power vested in its hands,
the religion of the ruling class, which necessarily justified its
situation, has been always the predominant religion. On the other hand,
since the monotheistic religion could not materialize and objectify its
social objectives, it did not play any historical role in society, as
the super­structure can not precede the economic base or infrastructure.

According to this view, the monotheistic movements of the prophets,
being the expression of the aspirations of the oppressed and the
defeated, could not play any historical role and were bound to be
defeated, The prophets preached the religion of unity of God and
justice, but all their attempts proved to be short-lived, because the
religion of the rulers under the mask of monotheism and prophetic
teachings distorted the true religion and suppressed It. The religion of
the ruling class flourished by drawing its nourishment from prophetic
teachings while growing in power and using it for exploitation of the
deprived class.

In fact, the truthful prophets of God strove to provide the people with
bread, but brought disaster upon them, as their religion became a tool
of the opposite class for tightening the noose further around the neck
of the oppressed and the weak. The prophets could not achieve what they
desired through their teachings; rather the outcome was contrary to
their objectives, or, to use an expression used by Islamic
jurisprudents, **ما قُصِدَ لم يقعُ وما وقعَ لم يُقصد**, ‘the intended
did not happen, and what happened was not intended.”

What the materialists and atheists say about religion, that religion,
that opium of the masses, it stupefies them, bewitches them, causes
stagna­tion and passivism, justifies tyranny and discrimination, and is
con­ducive to ignorance-all this is true but only for the religion of
the rulers: the polytheistic religion of social discrimination which
predominated throughout history. But it is not true of righteous
religion, the religion of monotheism, the religion of the ruled, the
oppressed, which was always suppressed and was driven out of the arena
of life and history.

The only role played by the religion of the ruled has been one of
criticism and protest. It was similar to the role of a political party
with minority seats in the legislature. The party which obtains majority
forms the cabinet out of its members, carries out its programmes and
resolutions. The other party despite being more progressive, because of
being in minority, is reduced to the role of a critic of the majority.

The party in majority does not pay any heed to these criticisms. Ruling
the society according to its own desires, it may occasionally even
utilize the criticism of the minority for strengthening its own
position. If it were not for the criticism of the opposition, it may
possibly collapse under increasing pressures; but the criticism of the
opposition makes it more cautious and helps it to further consolidate
its position.

The foregoing statement is not true on any account. Neither is it true
in respect of its analysis of the nature of polytheism, nor with regard
to its analysis of the nature of monotheism, nor in its treatment of the
part played by these two religions in history. Undeniably religion has
always existed in the world, be.it in the form of monotheism, or
polytheism, or both of them existing simultaneously. As for the priority
of polytheism over monotheism or vice versa, the sociologists advance
different views. The majority of them hold that in the beginning there
was polytheism, and religion gradually evolved towards monotheism. Some
sociologists hold the opposite view.

Religious traditions, or rather certain religious principles, confirm
the second theory. But as to the question how the religion of
poly­theism came into existence, and whether it was invented to justify
the acts of injustice and tyranny by the oppressors, or if there was
some other reason, researchers offer other explanations; and one cannot
naive­ly accept the view that polytheism is a product of social
injustice. The interpretation of monotheism as the outcome of the
aspirations of the oppressed classes to uphold the values of equality,
brotherhood, and unity, as against the philosophy of discrimination and
injustice of the rulers, appears to be more unscientific as well as
incompatible with the basic tenets of Islam.

The above-mentioned view presents the truthful apostles of God as "the
acquitted failures;" failures, since they failed in the struggle against
evil and were overpowered throughout history; their religion could not
influence society nor could it play any role comparable to the one
played by the false religion of the rulers. Its role was restricted to
passive criticism of the religion of the rulers. And the 'acquitted,'
for the reason that, contrary to the claims of materialists, they never
belonged to the pole of exploiters and plunderers, and were not agents
of stagnation and passivism. Their alignment was not with the interests
of the ruling class. On the contrary, they belonged to the pole of the
oppressed and the exploited, arose from among them, experienced their
agonies, worked in their interest, and strove for the restoration of
their rights usurped by the ruling class.

As the truthful prophets are totally exonerated with respect to their
call, message and their alignment, they are also exonerated from any
accusation of failure; they were not responsible for it. It was the
determinism of history arising out of the institution of private
property which supported and sustained the opponent, the ruling class.
The existence of private property necessarily divided society into two
halves: the exploiters and the exploited.

The half consisting of the exploiters, by virtue of its ownership of
material production, necessari­ly monopolized intellectual products
also. One cannot oppose "deter­minism of history"-which is a
materialistic term for fate and predestination, predestined not by a god
in heavens but on the earth, a deity which is material, not abstract,
whose power represented by the "economic base of society" operates
through the channels of the "tools of production." Therefore, the
prophets are not responsible for their failure.

However, though the above-mentioned interpretation exonerates the
righteous prophets, it negates the notion of a system of creation which
is all good, is governed by truth, and where the good pre­dominates over
evil. The Islamic metaphysician optimistically maintains that the system
of being is based upon truth and good, that evil, falsehood, and
wickedness do not have a fundamental reality and do not exist
independently; they are accidental, relative, and transitory. Truth and
good form the axis of the system of being and the human society:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الزَّبَدُ فَيَذْهَبُ جُفَاء وَأَمَّا مَا يَنفَعُ النَّاسَ
فَيَمْكُثُ فِي الأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…As for the foam, it passes away as scum [upon the banks], while that
which is of use to mankind remains in the earth…(13:17)***

It is also said that in the struggle between truth and falsehood, truth
emerges victorious:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ نَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِّ عَلَى الْبَاطِلِ فَيَدْمَغُهُ فَإِذَا هُوَ
زَاهِقٌ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Nay, but We hurl the true against the false, and it invalidates it,
and behold! Falsehood vanishes away…(21:18)***

It is further asserted that Divine providence has been with the truthful
prophets all along:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا لَنَنصُرُ رُسُلَنَا وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ يَقُومُ الْأَشْهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely We shall help Our Messengers and those who believe, in the
life of the world, and upon the day when the witnesses arise. (40:50)***

The Qur’an also asserts:

> وَلَقَدْ سَبَقَتْ كَلِمَتُنَا لِعِبَادِنَا الْمُرْسَلِينَ{171}
> إِنَّهُمْ لَهُمُ الْمَنصُورُونَ{172} وَإِنَّ جُندَنَا لَهُمُ
> الْغَالِبُونَ{173{

***And verily Our word went forth of old unto Our servants, the envoys;
assuredly they shall be helped, and Our host-they are the victors. (37:
171-173)***

But the view discussed above refutes these principles because although
it exonerates all the prophets, messengers, and reformers of the past
their God is held responsible.

All these conflicting views pose a ticklish problem. On the one hand,
the Qur’an presents an optimist view regarding the general course of the
universe by repeatedly emphasizing that *haqq* (truth or right) is the
axis of being and man's social existence. Theological philosophy on the
basis of its particular principles claims that good invariably overcomes
evil, right conquers wrong, and that evil is accidental, relative, and
unreal, without any real and independent existence of its own.

On the other hand, a study of the history of the past and the present
gives rise to a sense of pessimism regarding the laws governing the
universe and appears to affirm that the view held by the pessimists that
entire history is a cavalcade of catastrophes, oppressions,
exploitations, and violations against right and truth, is not
unjustified.

Is there any way out of this dilemma? Either our understanding of the
system of realiy and human society is wrong, or we are mistaken in our
comprehension of the meaning of the Qur’an by ascribing to it an
optimistic world outlook. Or if we are not mistaken with respect to
either of them, we have to accept an inherent, unresolvable
contradic­tion between the reality and the Qur’an.

I have discussed the doubts which arise regarding the system of
existence in this context andhave solved them by the grace of God in my
book *Divine Justice*.[^13] The doubts which arise regarding the course
of history and human society would be dealt with under the title *“The
Battle between Good and Evil.”*[^14] God willing, there we shall state
our views for the resolution of this doubt. I will be delighted to learn
the well-reasoned views of other scholars regarding this problem.

[^1]: Raymond Aron, op. cit., vol. I, p. 78.

[^2]: Also refer to 18:28, describing the followers of the prophets;
11:27 and 26:111 describing the followers of Noah; 10:83 describing the
followers of Moses; 7:88-90 describing the followers of Shu’ayb; 7:75-76
describing the followers of Salih, etc. There are many more verses of
the kind, but we confine here to refer to the above-mentioned.

[^3]: Karl Marx, German Ideology

[^4]: In the footnote, the verses 62:2 and 2:129 are referred to, to
draw the conclusion that the prophets arise from among the “ummahs,” and
the word “ummah” is taken to mean “the underprivileged masses.” We shall
examine this argument later on.

[^5]: In the footnote, the verse 28:75 has been referred to, and it is
presumed that it means that the martyrs and those slain in the way of
God always arise from among the “ummahs,” and the word “ummah” is taken
to mean “the underprivileged masses.” We shall examine this argument
later on.

[^6]: The Qur’an itself does not use these detracting words, but quotes
the ruling clique which uses them to refer to the followers of the
prophets belonging to the oppressed classes.

[^7]: These gentlemen, without expressing their real intention of
presenting historical materialism of Marx in an Islamic guise, pretend
to have reinterpreted the Holy Qur’an.

[^8]: The Qur’an, 66:11.

[^9]: See verses 4:97, 14:21, 34:31-37, 40:47-50

[^10]: See Wahy wa nubuwwat (Revelation and Prophethood), the third book
of the series, Muqaddameh bar jahan bini-ye Islami, of which the present
book Jami’e wa tarikh is a part, pp. 35, 37-43.

[^11]: Jahan bini ye tawhidi (The World Outlook of Tawhid), the second
treatise of the Muqaddameh’I bar jahan-e Islami, pp. 62-81.

[^12]: Andre Peter, Marx and Marxism, Persian translation by Shuja’
al-Din Diyaiyan, p. 39.

[^13]: Translator’s Note: The author emphasizes the importance of the
principle of nature in the Qur’anic conception of man, and regards it as
being central to Islamic teachings. The term he uses is “umm
al-ma’arif.”

[^14]: Translator’s note: Martyr Mutahhari in his scholarly work “Adl-e
Ilahi” (Divine Justice) has offered a convincing solution of this
problem.


