Islam's 'Philosophy' of History
===============================

Criteria
--------

In order to discover the viewpoint of any school of thought regard­ing
the nature of history we may use certain criteria which help us to
exactly determine its approach to different historic movements and
events. For this purpose, here I offer some criteria which I consider
proper for such a study. Of course, there may possibly be other criteria
which I fail to perceive.

Before we take up these criteria and before we apply them for
determining the viewpoint of Islam, it is essential to point out that,
in our view, there are certain principles laid down in the Qur’an
accord­ing to which the spiritual and intellectual foundation of society
is considered prior to its material bases. The Qur’an has clearly stated
the following as a principle:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُواْ مَا
بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***... God changes not the condition of a people until they change that
which is in themselves .... (13:11)***

In other words, the destiny of a people is never changed unless they
change their mental and spiritual attitudes. This verse clearly negates
the theory of economic determinism of history.

Nevertheless, I shall give an account of the criteria I have deter­mined
and on their basis evaluate the viewpoint of Islam regarding the nature
of history.

1. Strategy of the Call
-----------------------

Every school of thought that has a message for society and calls the
people to accept it, has to adopt a specific method which is related on
the one hand to its principal aims and objectives, and on the other to
its viewpoint about the nature of historical movements. The call of a
school is meant, firstly, to awaken a particular consciousness in the
people, and, secondly, to arouse and mobilize them by using certain
specific means of motivation.

An example is the humanist school of Auguste Comte. Comte advocates a
kind of "scientific religion," and considers the essence of human
evolution to lie in the sphere of the human mind. He believes that the
human mind has passed through two stages. The first stage is that of
mythology and philosophy. The second is the stage of science. Naturally,
he relates all the desirable forms of consciousness to science, and all
the means of motivation required for attaining this objective are also
related to the scientific spirit.

Another example is that of Marxism which is a revolutionary theory of
the working class. The consciousness which it awakens is related to
class antagonism. The means of mobilizing the working class lie in
stirring its complexes and its feelings of deprivation and
victimiza­tion.

In addition to their points of view regarding society and history,
various schools of thought differ from one another with respect to
different types of consciousness they wish to awaken and different types
of means employed for bringing about the desired change. Various
ideologies, in accordance with their interpretation of history and the
course of its development and their outlook of man, also vary with
regard to their target-audience, the reliance of their strategy on force
and their view regarding its moral justifiability.

Some schools like Christianity approve only peaceful way of
confrontation among human beings. Force or violence of all forms and
under all conditions is disapproved of and considered immoral.
Accord­ingly, one of its commandments is: "Offer the wicked man no
resistance ... If anyone hits you on the right cheek, offer him the
other as well; if a man tries to take your tunic, lawfully or
unlawfully, let him have your cloak as well."

On the contrary certain other schools of thought, such as the philosophy
of Neitzsche, regard power as the sole moral value. To him human
perfection lies in power, and his superman is the most powerful among
men. According to Neitzsche, Christian morality is the morality of
slaves, of the weak and the humiliated and is therefore to be blamed for
the arrest of human progress.

Certain other schools of thought associate morality with power and
violence, though do not consider every kind of force as moral. According
to Marxism, the use of force by the exploiters against the exploited is
immoral, because it is intended to preserve the status quo, and causes
stagnation. But the application of force by the exploited is moral, for
it is used for the purpose of transforming society, leading it to a
higher stage.

In other words, there is a continuous conflict in society between two
groups: one playing the role of 'thesis' and the other working as
'anti-thesis.' The force acting as 'thesis,' by virtue of its being
reactionary, is immoral; the force acting as 'antithesis,' by virtue of
being revolutionary and progressive, is moral. It is quite natural that
the same force which is now regarded as 'moral,' at a later stage, after
coming into conflict with its counter force, would become 'immoral,' as
it would then play a reactionary role, and the new rival force would
become 'moral.' Hence morality is relative. What is moral at one stage,
is immoral at a higher and advanced stage.

From the viewpoint of Christianity, its relation with the opposite
group, judged by it to be opposed to progress and salvation, is that of
softness and mildness. Only this kind of relation is morally right.
According to Neitzsche, the only moral relation is the relation between
the powerful and the weak. There is no moral value higher than power,
and nothing more immoral than weakness. There is no sin greater than the
sin of being weak.

According to Marxism the relation between two economically opposite
classes is nothing but a relationship of antago­nism translated into
acts of violence. In this relationship, the acts of violence committed
by the exploiting class are immoral for being anti­progressive, and the
acts of violence committed by the exploited are morally justified. The
relationship between newly emerging forces and old forces is that of
continuous conflict.tand in this conflict morality is invariably on the
side of new forces.

All the above-mentioned ideas are rejected by Islam. Islam does not
confine morality to pacifism, persuasion through mild and peaceful
manners, cordiality and love, as preached by Christianity. It holds that
occasionally force and power are also moral. For the same reason Islam
regards struggle against tyranny and injustice as a sacred duty and
under certain conditions makes jihad, which means armed struggle, an
obliga­tion.

It is evident that Neitzsche's view is absurd, anti-human, and decadent.

The viewpoint of Marxism is based on the supposed mechanism operative in
the development of history. Contrary to it, Islam regards violent
confrontation with the opposing retrogressive group as a second
alternative not the first. The first alternative consists of
communication through rational persuasion (*al-hikmah*) and moral
preaching (*al-maw’idah*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُ إِلِى سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
..
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Invite them to the path of God by appealing to reason and moral sense
....*

Confrontation with the retrogressive forces through acts of violence is
morally approved only when the methods of intellectual, moral, and
spiritual persuasion have been unsuccessful. That is why the prophets
who waged war against their adversaries had tried initially to convey
their message through persuasion and preaching and occasional­ly through
theological debating. Only when they failed in these attempts, or could
attain only partial success, they considered the path of violent
confrontation, Jihad, and acts of force as morally justifiable. The main
reason of this attitude is that Islam, since its approach is spiritual
not materialistic, believes in the wonderful power of rational argument,
logical demonstration, and moral persuasion. Just as it believes-to use
an expression of Marx-in the power of weapons for the purpose of
criticism, it also believes in the power of the weapon of criticism, and
makes use of it. However, Islam does not consider it the sole weapon
that should be used everywhere. The fact that armed struggle against the
forces of reaction is permissible in Islam only as a second alternative
not the first, and the fact that Islam has a strong faith in the power
of reasoning, persuasion, and moral teaching, both point towards the
characteristic spiritual outlook of Islam regarding man, and,
consequently, society and history.

Thus, we come to know that the relation of a school of thought with its
adversaries-whether it is one of sheer persuasion or of sheer conflict,
or a two-stage relation consisting firstly of persuasion and secondly of
conflict-clearly reveals the faith of any school of thought in the power
of logical persuasion, and moral preaching, their effective­ness and
their limits, and also reveals its outlook regarding history and the
role of conflict in the course of history.

Now we shall discuss the other aspect. Let us see what kind of
consciousness Islam strives to awaken and what means it employs to
invite people for embracing its message.

Islamic consciousness attaches foremost importance to the belief in the
Divine origin and resurrection (*al-mabda' wa al-ma'ad*), This method of
cultivating this consciousness has been used by the Qur’an and,
according to it, also by the prophets of the past. The prophets awakened
among the people the awareness of their origin and goal:

Wherefrom have you come; where have you come; to where are you bound?
From where has the world emerged, which course does it pursue, and in
which direction is it moving? The primary concern in­stilled by the
prophets into people's consciousness is the concern and responsibility
towards the whole creation and existence. The concern for social
responsibility is only a part of the concern for responsibility towards
the whole universe and being. It has been pointed out earlier that the
Meccan surahs, revealed to the Prophet (S) during the first thirteen
years of this mission, bring into focus little except the issues of
creation and resurrection.[^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) started his mission with the declaration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قولوا لا إله إلَّا الله تفلحوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Say, there is no god except God, that you may be delivered.*

This was a religious movement which aimed at purifying human belief and
thought. It is true that the principle of *tawhid* (Divine Unity) has
many dimensions-if all teachings of Islam are analysed, they are found
to be reducible to the principle of *tawhid*; in the same way, the whole
system of Islamic ideas can be constructed on this principle[^2] but it
should be noted that in the beginning this declaration was meant for no
purpose except changing the current polytheistic modes of thinking and
worship into monotheistic belief and worship; nor if such a
comprehensive objective was upheld would it have been comprehen­sible
for the people.

When this consciousness, whose roots go down deep into the human nature,
created a feeling of enthusiasm for defending and spreading this faith
in a follower, he would not hesitate to sacrifice his life, property,
social position, and children for its sake. The prophets started with
what in our days is called "the superstructure," working towards what is
called 'the base' or 'infrastructure.' According to prophetic teachings,
man is more committed to faith and ideology than to material interests.
In fact, it is this faith and ideology which is the base, and labour,
which is a relation with nature, natural resources or society,
constitutes the superstructure.

Every religious call, in order to be effective, must be 'prophetic,'
that is.it should be accompanied by persistent reminding of origin and
resurrection. The prophets mobilized the society by awakening this
awareness, and by cultivating this con­sciousness, by removing all dust
from the face of human conscience and by relying on the notions of God's
good pleasure, His sovereignty, His reward and retribution. In thirteen
places the Qur’an makes mention of the *ridwan* (good pleasure) of God.
This shows the kind of spiritual motivation employed by Islam for
mobilization of the society of believers. This awareness may be called
Divine or cosmic consciousness.

Of significance at the second level in Islamic teachings is man's
consciousness of his humanity, and realization of the nobility and
honour of man's station. In the view of Islam man is not the animal who
in the beginning was like all other primates for hundreds of millions of
years, who survives and has attained this stage of evolution by
treacherously eliminating others in the struggle for existence.

On the contrary, he is a being who carries within him the light of
Divine Spirit, before whom the angels prostrated, a being to whom are
address­ed calls from the Divine Throne. Despite all animal propensities
toward lust, sensuality, corruption and evil, his being is endowed with
a sacred spark which is essentially averse to wickedness bloodshed,
falsehood, corruption, meanness, degradation, and humiliation and which
resists repression and tyranny. That spark is a manifestation of Divine
honour and majesty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Honor belongs to Allah and to His messengers and the
believers…(63:8)***

The Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شرف المرء قيامه بالليل و عزه استغناؤه عن الناس
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Man’s nobility is in his nightlong vigils, and his honour lies in his
being in no need of people.*

‘Ali (A) said to his fellowmen during the Battle of Siffin:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحياة في موتكم قاهرين و الموت في حياتكم مقهورين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Life is to die victorious, and death is to survive in subjugation.*

Al-Husayn ib ‘Ali (A) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا أرى الموت إلَا سعادة و الحياة مع الظالمين إلا برماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I can see happiness only in death, and find nothing but agony and
disgust in life in the company of tyrants and oppressors.*

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هيهات منَّا الذلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We and disgrace? How preposterous!*

All these saying rely on man’s sense of honor and nobility which are
inherent in human nature.

Of significance at the third level in Islamic teachings is awareness of
one’s social rights and responsibilities. There are several instances in
the Qur’an which, by relying on the necessity of fighting for
restoration for one’s rights or the rights of others, use this
obligation as a means of motivation and mobilization. For an example, we
may refer to the following verse of *Surat al-Nisa*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا لَكُمْ لاَ تُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَالْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ
مِنَ الرِّجَالِ وَالنِّسَاء وَالْوِلْدَانِ الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ
رَبَّنَا أَخْرِجْنَا مِنْ هَـذِهِ الْقَرْيَةِ الظَّالِمِ أَهْلُهَا
وَاجْعَل لَّنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ وَلِيّاً وَاجْعَل لَّنَا مِن لَّدُنكَ
نَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How should you not fight for the cause of Allah and of the oppressed
among the men, women, and children, who say, 'Our Lord, bring us forth
from this city whose people are oppressors, and appoint to us a
protector from Thee, and appoint to us from Thee a helper'? (4:75)***

This verse relies on two spiritual values for motivating towards jihad.
The first value is necessity of struggling in the way of God; the
second, human responsibility to.rescue helpless and defenceless human
beings out of the clutches of oppressors. In *Surat at-Hajj*; God says:

> أُذِنَ لِلَّذِينَ يُقَاتَلُونَ بِأَنَّهُمْ ظُلِمُوا وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ
> عَلَى نَصْرِهِمْ لَقَدِيرٌ{39} الَّذِينَ أُخْرِجُوا مِن دِيَارِهِمْ
> بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ إِلَّا أَن يَقُولُوا رَبُّنَا اللَّهُ وَلَوْلَا دَفْعُ
> اللَّهِ النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُم بِبَعْضٍ لَّهُدِّمَتْ صَوَامِعُ وَبِيَعٌ
> وَصَلَوَاتٌ وَمَسَاجِدُ يُذْكَرُ فِيهَا اسْمُ اللَّهِ كَثِيراً
> وَلَيَنصُرَنَّ اللَّهُ مَن يَنصُرُهُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَقَوِيٌّ عَزِيزٌ
> 40}} الَّذِينَ إِن مَّكَّنَّاهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
> وَآتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَمَرُوا بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَنَهَوْا عَنِ
> الْمُنكَرِ وَلِلَّهِ عَاقِبَةُ الْأُمُورِ {41}

***Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been wronged
–and surely God is able to give them victory-who were driven from their
homes unjustly only because they said: 'Our Lord is Allah. ' Had it not
been for Allah's repelling some men by means of others, cloisters and
churches, oratories and mosques, wherein the Name of Allah is oft
mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled down. Assuredly Allah helps
one who helps Him-surely Allah is All-strong, Almighty-who, if We
establish them in the land, establish prayers, pay the poor-due, and bid
to honour and forbid dishonour. And to Allah belongs the issue of all
affairs. (22:39-41)***

We notice in this verse that the sanction of jihad and defence begins
with reference to the rights of those who are permitted to fight. But,
at the same time, the underlying philosophy of defence is regarded as a
matter over and above and more fundamental than the injustice done to
certain people. This philosophy of defence is that if the believers and
the faithful do not act and do not rise to wage war against unbelievers,
the mosques and other places of worship, which form the heart of the
spiritual life of a society, would be demolished, ruined and deserted.
In *Surat al-Nisa*, the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ يُحِبُّ اللّهُ الْجَهْرَ بِالسُّوَءِ مِنَ الْقَوْلِ إِلاَّ مَن
ظُلِمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***God likes not the utterance of harsh speech unless one has been
wronged .. (4:148)***

Evidently this is a sort of encouragement of the uprising by the
oppressed. In the Qur’an after censuring the poets for their
extravagantly fanciful ideas, adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَذَكَرُوا اللَّهَ
كَثِيراً وَانتَصَرُوا مِن بَعْدِ مَا ظُلِمُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Except those who believe, do good deeds, remember Allah much and
vindicate (by means of poetry) themselves after they have been
wronged."*** ***( 26:227)***

Although according to the Qur’an and the Sunnah (the conduct of the Holy
Prophet) it is a grave sin to submit to tyranny and it is the duty of
everyone to realize one's rights, these things have been mentioned as
values having human aspect. The Qur’an does not rely on any psychic
obsession nor does it excite jealousy or a carnal desire. For example it
never says that such and such group is enjoying a lavish style of life,
eating, drinking and making merry; why don't you take its place?

If an attempt is made to seize the property of someone, Islam does not
allow the owner to keep quiet on the plea that material goods have no
value. Similarly if an attempt is made to violate the honour of a
person, it is the duty of that person not to take the matter lightly or
keep quiet. According to a tradition, a person who is killed defending
his honour or his property is to be regarded as a martyr who has laid
down his life for the cause of Allah.

If Islam urges people to defend their property, that does not mean that
Islam asks them to amass wealth or to be greedy. It only asks them to
defend their rights. Similarly when it considers it a duty to defend
one's honour, it does so because it regards chastity as the highest
social value and considers man to be the custodian of it.

2. An Ideology's Nomenclature
-----------------------------

Every school of thought identifies its followers with a specific name.
For example the racial theory is the distinctive mark of the adherents
of that theory. When they say " We", they mean the whites. The Marxist
theory is the theory of the workers. The followers of this school call
themselves workers and identify themselves by this name. When they say
"We", they mean workers. The Christians simply ascribe themselves to the
person of Christ as if they have no doctrine nor any ideology. Their
mark of identification is that they look for Christ and want to join
him.

It is a characteristic of Islam that it has not chosen any racial,
class, professional, local, regional or individual label to introduce
its school and its followers. The adherents of this school are not known
by any such designation as the Arabs, the Semites, the poor, the rich,
the oppressed, the whites, the blacks, the Asians, the Easterns, the
Westerns, the Muhammadans, the Qur’anians, the Qiblites etc. None of the
above names represents the real identity of the adherents of Islam.

When the question of the identity of this school and its followers
arises, all these names vanish. Only one thing remains, that is the
relation between man and Allah. Islam means submission to Allah. The
Muslims are an ummah that submits to Allah, to truth and to the
revelation and the inspiration rising from the horizon of truth and
communicated to the heart of the most worthy persons. Then what is the
nature of the identity of the Muslims? What label does their religion
attach to them and under what banner does it want them to assemble? The
answer is Islamic submission to truth.

The criterion of unity that every school approves for its followers is a
reliable means of judging its aims and objectives.

It also helps us to understand the outlook of school regarding man,
society, and history.

3. Favourable and Unfavourable Conditions for Acceptability
-----------------------------------------------------------

We have said earlier that different schools have different view about
the mechanism of the movement of history. One school is of the opinion
that the natural mechanism of this movement is the pressure of one class
against another class. Another school holds that it is the friction
between a reactionary class. Still another school maintains that the
real mechanism should be looked for in the pure state of human nature,
which is evolutionary and progressive.

Some other schools have some other opinions. Every school in its
teachings enumerates such causes, conditions, obstacles and impediments
of the movement of history. as are appropriate to its conception of its
mechanism The school which believes that the mechanism of the movement
of history is the pressure of a class against another, in order to
mobilize society and bring it into motion tries to create such pressure
if it does not already exist. Marx in some of his works has pointed out
that the existence of a subjugated and oppressed class is absolutely
necessary for the emergence of a class of free people.

At the end of his study he says: " Where does the possibility of
liberation for the German nation lie? Our answer is that: We must form a
class which is decisively in chains.' [^3] Such an ideology regards
reforms as an obstacle in the way of a revolution, because reforms
reduce pressure and a reduction in pressure prevents the explosion or at
least delays the revolution. In contrast, a school that believes that
movement is an intrinsic and essential quality of society never suggests
the creation of shackles for any class, for it does not regard pressure
as a necessary condition of evolution, nor does it consider reforms as
an obstacle in the way of progress.

What are the favourable and unfavourable conditions from the viewpoint
of Islam? The Islamic interpretation of these conditions revolves around
the nature of the human being. Sometimes the Qur’an stresses the
condition of adherence to primordial piety **هدىً للمتقين**) …”guidance
for the God-fearing” [2:2]). Sometimes it mentions anxiety and
apprehension arising from awareness of responsibility vis-à-vis the
whole system of existence as a condition (**الَّذين يخشون ربهم بالغيب**
“who fear God in the Unseen,” [21:49]; or , **و خَشِيَ الرحمن بالغيب**
“who fears the All-merciful in the Unseen,” [36:11]). Sometimes it
mentions the condition that the God-given nature within one should have
remained intact and alive: **لِينذِرَ من كان حيَّاً** “to warn him who
is alive” (36:70). Thus the essential conditions according to Islam for
acceptance of its call are piety, anxiety and apprehension arising out
of a sense of res­ponsibility towards the system of creation, and intact
survival of one's God-given nature.

In opposition to these conditions are such spiritual and moral vices as
**إثم القلب** “sinfulness of the heart,” (2:283); **رَين القلب**
“rusting of the heart,” (83:14); sealing of the heart (2:7), inner
blindness or loss of sight (22:46); deafness of the heart (41:44);
corruption of the book of the soul (91:10); blind adherence to the
practices of ancestors (43:23); personality cult or hero worship
(33:63); reliance on surmise. and conjecture (6:116), and so on.
Extravagance, affluence, and habitual luxury are also regarded as
deterrents, because they strengthen the animal qualities in man and
transform him into a beast and even a predator. According to the Qur’an,
these factors impede advancement towards the welfare of the society and
are injurious to its development.

According to the Islamic teachings, young people as compared to the
aged, and the poor as compared to the affluent, are more receptive to
the teachings of Islam; since the youth due to their young age escape
psychological pollution and their nature is purer; and the poor also are
purer because their souls are not distorted by luxury and wealth.

These positive and negative conditions for the acceptability of Islam
affirm that the mechanism of social and historical change sugges­ted by
the Qur’an is more spiritual-psychological in nature than materialistic
and economic.

4. Rise and Fall of Societies
-----------------------------

Every sociological school usually deals with the causes of the rise and
progress of societies and reasons of their degeneration and decline. The
viewpoint of a school regarding the main factors of progress or decline,
indicates its approach to society and history and their movement towards
development and decline.

The Holy Qur’an, especially with reference to the stories and anecdotes
related to these matters, explains its view. We have to see whether the
Qur’an interprets the causes of change in terms of the so­-called
infrastructure or in terms of the superstructure. To be more precise, we
have to know what things' are considered by the Qur’an as the basis and
what matters are regarded as constituting the superstruc­ture. Does the
Qur’an emphasize the material and economic factors as being basic, or
does it attach basic importance to matters pertaining to faith and
morality? Or does it consider all the factors combined to­gether
responsible for the rise and fall of a society without giving pri­onty
to anyone of them?

The Qur’an, on the whole, enumerates four factors influencing the rise
and fall of a society. In passing, I will give a brief account of these
factors.

### A. Justice and Injustice

This notion finds reflection in many verses of the Qur’an. One of them
is the fourth verse of *Surat al-Qasas*, which I have already quoted in
the context of the 'verse of oppression':

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِرْعَوْنَ عَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَجَعَلَ أَهْلَهَا شِيَعاً
يَسْتَضْعِفُ طَائِفَةً مِّنْهُمْ يُذَبِّحُ أَبْنَاءهُمْ وَيَسْتَحْيِي
نِسَاءهُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مِنَ الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Verily Pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its
inhabitants into castes, oppressing one party of them, slaughtering
their sons, and sparing their women. Verily, he was of those who work
corruption. (28:4)***

This holy verse first describes Pharaoh's lust for power and superiority
and his claim to divinity, which led him to treat others as slaves. His
policy of discrimination had divided them into mutually conflicting
groups. He had humiliated a particular group of his people, killing
their sons and sparing their women (for serving Pharaoh and his clique).
The Qur’an mentions him as a ‘*mufsid’* (one who corrupts). Evidently
the sentence **إنَهُ كانَ من المفسدين** ‘Verily, he was of those who
corrupt,’ is intended to condemn such offences against society which
demolish its very foundations.

### B. Unity and Disunity

In the *Surat Al 'Imran* , the verse 103 lays down a clear command to
unite on the basis of faith and to hold on to the bond of God, and
prohibits disunity and division. In a following verse (3: 105) the
believers are asked again not to behave like their predecessors [Jews
and Christians] who quarrelled with one another and divided. Quite
similar to it is the verse 153 in *Surat al- 'An 'am*. In the same
surah, verse 65 states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ الْقَادِرُ عَلَى أَن يَبْعَثَ عَلَيْكُمْ عَذَاباً مِّن
فَوْقِكُمْ أَوْ مِن تَحْتِ أَرْجُلِكُمْ أَوْ يَلْبِسَكُمْ شِيَعاً
وَيُذِيقَ بَعْضَكُم بَأْسَ بَعْضٍ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say, He is able to send forth upon you chastisement, from above you
or from under your feet, or to confuse you in sects and make you taste
the violence of one another…(6:65)***

In the *Surat al-‘Anfal,* the verse 46 declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. وَلاَ تَنَازَعُواْ فَتَفْشَلُواْ وَتَذْهَبَ رِيحُكُمْ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Do not quarrel with one another for then you will be weak and your
power will depart from you…(8:46)***

### C. Practice or Neglect of the Principle of al-‘Amr bi al-Ma’ruf wa al-Nahy ‘an al-Munkar

The Qur’an puts great emphasis on the duty of of *al-‘Amr bi al-Ma’ruf
wa al-Nahy ‘an al-Munkar* (enjoining right conduct and forbidding
indecency). An evident inference that may be drawn from one of its
verses is that negligence of this great duty on the part of a nation
ultimately results in its destruction and doom. This is verse 79 in
*Surat al-Ma’idah* which explains that one of the reasons for the denial
of Divine mercy and compassion to the infidels of Bani Israel was their
nonobservance of the duty to prohibit others from vices:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانُواْ لاَ يَتَنَاهَوْنَ عَن مُّنكَرٍ فَعَلُوهُ لَبِئْسَ مَا
كَانُواْ يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***They forbade not one another any dishonor they commited; surely evil
were the things they did. (5:79).***

In reliable Islamic traditions there are ample references to the
advantages of observance and perils of abandonment of the duty of
enjoining right conduct and forbidding indecency. However, we abstain
from quoting them here for the sake of brevity.

### D. Moral Corruption and Degeneration

There are various verses in the Qur’an in this context also. In a series
of verses luxury and opulence are regarded to be the cause of
destruction and ruin.[^4] There are also a number of verses in which the
word "*zulm”* (cruelty, injustice, oppression, tyranny) occurs. In
Qur’anic terminology this word does not specifically mean violation of
the rights of an individual or group by other individual or group. It
also includes injustice to one's own self', as well as injustice of a
nation to itself. Actually the word *zulm* is used in the Qur’an in a
general sense.

Any kind of deviation from the right path of humanness is injustice, and
includes all acts of injustice to others as well as all acts of
impro­priety, corruption, perversion and immorality. This word is more
often used in the Qur’an in the second sense (i.e., moral deviation).
Such verses which consider *zulm* in its general sense as the main cause
of destruction and ruin of nations are very numerous. It is beyond the
scope of the present work to discuss them here.

Taking in view all these criteria as a whole, we can grasp the view of
the Qur’an regarding the basis of society and that of history. The
Qur’an allots a decisive and determining role to most of the factors
which some consider as superstructural.

[^1]: Translator’s Note: Martyr Mutahhari could not complete this book
as he had originally planned. There is no such heading in the present
edition of the book. See note No. 21 below.

[^2]: Certain so-called Muslim intellectuals, in a number of
commentaries they have written on various Surahs in the Qur’an, totally
deny the presence of even a single verse in the Qur’an dealing with
resurrection. They say that wherever the word “dunya” (the present
world) occurs in the Qur’an it always refers to the lower level of
social existence, i.e. the system of discrimination, inequality, and
exploitation, and wherever the word “akhirat” (the Hereafter) occurs, it
means a “superior system of social existence,” a system which permits no
exploitation and discrimination, and which abolishes the institution of
private property. If this meaning of “akhirah” is to be accepted, it
means that the Qur’an, a thousand years before the emergence of Marx’s
materialist philosophy, announce the death of religion and closed its
file.

[^3]: ‘Allamah Tabatabai, al-Mizan, see the commentary on the last verse
of Surat Al-Imran.

[^4]: Andre Peter, op. cit., p. 35 (the text and the footnote). Here we
come to know that the viewpoint of Marxism which hols that only the acts
of violence of the oppressed class are moral, because they accelerate
the course of social evolution, while the same kind of acts by the
oppressing class are immoral, because they cause stagnation, is not
defendable. It means that, in accordance with the views of this school,
the exercise of pressure by the oppressors is as moral and effective in
the course of social evolution as violence by the oppressed. The only
difference between them being with regard to their orientation: one is
directed towards the past and the other towards the future – not with
regard to their effective role in social development. Evidently the
retrogressive or progressive orientation cannot solely determine the
morality or immorality of an act, without considering the motivate
behind the act, for judging its morality, and such a position, in the
view of Marxism, amounts to a kind of idealism.


