Evolution and Change in History
===============================

Whatever has been discussed so far concerns one of the two , most
important problems of history, i.e., nature of history ­whether it is
materialistic or not. The other important problem concerns change and
evolution in human history.

We know that social life is not confined to man alone. Some other living
creatures also have social life to some extent. They organize their
lives on the basis of cooperation, division of labour, and sharing of
responsibilities according to set rules and regulations.

We all know that the honeybee is such a creature. But there is a basic
difference between the social existence of man and that of other
animals; the pattern of their social life always remains fixed and
static. Any evolution and change do not take place in the system of
their existence, or in the words of Morris Metterlink, in their culture,
if the term 'culture' can be used for animals. On the contrary, social
life of man is ever changing and dynamic. There is not just a movement,
but even an acceleration; i.e. the rate of movement increases with time.

Thus the history of human social existence has different periods which
are dis­tinguished from one another in various aspects. For instance
there are different periods according to the means of livelihood: the
period of hunting, the period of cultivation, and the period of
industrialization. According to economic system the different periods
may be classified as the period of communism, the period of slavery, the
period of feu­dalism, the period of capitalism, and the period of
socialism. According to political system, we have the period of tribal
rule, the period of despotic monarchy, the period of aristocracy, and
the period of democracy; according to sex, the period of matriarchy, and
the period of patriarchy. In the same way we may have other
classifications from the viewpoint of other aspects.

Why isn't such a change exhibited in the social life of other animals?
What is the secret of this change, and what is the main factor
responsible for transition of man from one social phase to another? In
other words, what is that human faculty that propels human exis­tence
forward, and which is not possessed by the animals? How does this
transition and advancement occur, what are the laws that govern it, and
by what mechanism is it controlled?

There is a question which is usually raised at this point by the
philosophers of history, whether evolution and progress are real? In
other words, are the changes that have been taking place in the social
life of man throughout history actually in the direction of progress and
evolution? What are the criteria of evolution?

Some are skeptical that these changes may be regarded as progres­sive
and evolutionary, and their views are discussed in related books.[^1]
And some others regard movement of history as cyclic, claiming that
history starts from a point and after passing through certain phases
returns again to the same point. 'Once again,' in their view, is the
eternal cry of history.

For example, in the beginning a coarse tribal system is established by
certain venturesome and determined nomadic people, which gradual­ly
evolves into aristocracy. The monopoly of aristocrats results in a
popular uprising and giving birth to democracy. The chaos and anarchy
created by unlimited and unchecked freedom in the democratic system once
again leads to the re-emergence of despotism, helped by a tribal spirit.

Here we do not wish to enter an elaborate discussion on this subject and
postpone it to some other occasion. However, for the pur­pose of the
present study, we assume that the movement and course of history are on
the whole progressive, and proceed accordingly.

Nevertheless, it is essential to remind here that all those who consider
the movement of history to be in the general direction of progress
acknowledge the fact that by no means the future is better necessarily
than the past for all societies under all conditions; neither do they
say that the course of societies is always marked by progress without
any interruptions or set-back. Undeniably, societies become stagnant,
decadent, and retrogressive. They have the tendency of inclin­ing
towards the right or the left and consequently are subject to decline
and fall. All that is meant is that the human society on the whole is
passing through an evolutionary course.

In the books on philosophy of history the problem regarding the dynamics
of history and the motivating factors responsible for social progress is
usually formulated in a manner which is revealed to be defective on some
reflection. In the following sections the views usually advanced on this
issue will be discussed.

1. The Racial Theory
--------------------

According to this theory, certain races are mainly responsible for the
advancement of history. Some races have the ability of creating culture
and civilization, while others do not possess such talents. Some races
contribute to science, philosophy, arts, crafts, and morality, while
others are merely consumers of these products.

It is concluded that there exists some kind of division of work between
the races. The races endowed with aptitude for knowledge, learning, and
statecraft, and with ability to create arts, culture, crafts, and
technology should be engaged in these higher, sophisticated and refined
human activities; while the races not endowed with such talents should
be excused from these activities and instead be engaged in hard physical
labour and menial tasks which do not need refinement of thought and
taste. Aristotle, who holds this view regarding racial differences,
justifies the enslavement of certain races by other races on the same
grounds.

Some thinkers believe that only particular races are able to lead the
course of history. For example, the northern races being superior to the
southern races have been responsible for the advancement of cultures.
Count Gobino, the famous French philosopher who was for three years
French ambassador to Iran about hundred years ago, believed in this
theory.

2. The Geographical Theory
--------------------------

According to this theory, the main factor responsible for creating
civilization and culture and for development of industry is physical
environment. Moderate temperaments and strong minds develop in regions
of temperate climate. In the beginning of his book, "*al-Qanun*," Ibn
Sina has elaborately discussed the effect of physical environmental
factor on the modes of thought, taste, sensibility and other
psycho­logical aspects of human personality.

According to this theory, the factor that directs the advancement of
history is not of racial origin or heredity. It is not true that a
certain race regardless of its region or environment is the maker of
history and responsible for its advancement and a certain other race
whatever its physical environment lacks such abilities. In fact, the
differences of races are caused by different environments. Moreover,
with displace­ment and migration of races capacities are also
redistributed. Thus particular regional and geographical factors are
responsible in the main for the advancement and revitalization of
civilizations. Montesquieu, the French sociologist of the seventeenth
century, supports this point of view in his famous book *De l'ésprit des
lois* (The Spirit of the Laws).

3. The Theory of the Role of Genius or Heroes
---------------------------------------------

According to this theory, all scientific, political, economic,
technological, and moral changes and developments throughout history are
brought about .by men of genius. The difference between human beings and
other animals is that from a biological point of view all other animals
are equal in respect of natural capacities. There is at least no
remarkable difference among the individuals of a certain species.

In contrast, human individuals bear vast differences regarding their
capacities and talents. The geniuses of every society are extra­ordinary
individuals of exceptional abilities endowed with extraordinary powers
of intellect, sensibility, will, and creativity. Whenever such
individuals emerge in a society they contribute to its advancement
taking it ahead scientifically, technically, morally, militarily, and
politically. According to this theory, majority of individuals lack
initiative and creativity. They are simply followers and consumers of
the Ideas and the products of the industry of others.

But there always exists a minority of creative individuals in almost all
societies who act as leaders, forerunners, innovators, and inventors,
who produce new Ideas, new methods, and new technologies. They are the
people who steer society in the forward direction and enable it to enter
into a new higher phase. Carlyle, the famous English thinker in his
well-known book *Heroes, Hero worship and the Heroic in History*,
starting his book with the role of the Holy Prophet (S), holds such a
view.

In Carlyle's view, every nation has one or more historical
persona­lities in whom the whole history of a nation is reflected. Or
more precisely, It may be said that the history of a nation reflects the
personality and genius of one or more of its heroes. For instance, the
history of Islam mirrors the personality of the Holy Prophet (S); the
history of modern France mirrors the personality of Napoleon and certain
other great men, and the last sixty years of the history of Soviet
Russia mirror the personality of Lenin.

4. The Economic Theory
----------------------

According to this theory, economy is the motivating factor of history.
All social and historical modes of every nation, including the cultural,
religious, political, military and social aspects, reflect the mode and
relations of production of a society. Any change in the economic
infrastructure of the society totally transforms it and steers it
forward.

The men of genius, whose role was discussed earlier, are nothing but the
expressions of economic, political, and social needs of society; and
these needs in their turn are the effects of changes in the tools of
production. Karl Marx, and in general all Marxists, and occasionally a
number of non-Marxists, subscribe to this view. This is probably the
most dominant theory of our times.

5. The Religious Theory
-----------------------

According to this theory, all worldly incidents have Divine origin and
are governed by God's consummate Wisdom. All evolutions and changes
occurring in history are manifestations of the Divine Will and God's
omniscient wisdom. Thus whatever moves history forward and transforms it
is the Will of God. The drama of history is written and directed by the
sacred Will of God. Bossuet, the famous historian and patriarch, who
acted as the tutor to Louis the Fifteenth, supports this view.

These are the main theories that are usually discussed in the books of
philosophy of history as the motivating forces or causes of history.

In my view this kind of formulation of the problem is not correct and
there is a confusion of issues. Most of these theories are not prop­erly
related to the motivating cause of history, which we want to discover.
For instance, the racial theory is a sociological hypothesis, which may
be proposed in relation to the question whether or not all races have-or
at least could have had-the same kind of hereditary talents and are of
equal level. If they are equal according to natural talents, all the
races have an equal share in directing the movement of history. And if
they are not equally talented, only some races have played, and could
have played, the role of advancing history.

Then it seems proper to mention this theory in this context.
Nevertheless the secret of the philosophy of history remains in
darkness: it does not make any difference for the purpose of solution
whether we suppose that only a single race has been responsible for the
evolution of history or if all human races participated in the process
of change and advance­ment, because in both the cases it does not answer
the question why man, or a race of men, undergoes this type of change
and evolution while no such changes occur in the lives of animals. Where
does the secret lie? Whether a single race is instrumental in the
movement of history or if all the races participate in this process,
makes no difference at all for answering this question.

Similar is the case with the geographical theory. It is useful in the
context of the sociological problem regarding the role of regional
environment in the development of man's intellectual, cultural,
aes­thetic and physiological faculties. Some environments hold the human
being at or near the level of animals, but in other environments the
distinction of man from animals is made more prominent and pro­nounced.
According to this theory, history's movement is confined to the people
of a specific region; in other regimes life remains static and unchanged
like that of animals. But the main question still remains unanswered,
since the honeybee and all other gregarious animals living in such
geographically superior regions and zones remain unaffected by the
movement of history. Then what is the main factor responsible for this
disparity in the lives of the two different types of living beings, one
of which remains static and unchanged whereas the other type under­goes
unceasing change from one phase to another?

The most irrelevant among these theories is the theory of the Divine
origin of history, because it is not history alone which manifests the
Divine Will. The whole universe, from its beginning to the end, with all
its myriads of causes and effects and all positive and negative
con­ditions, mirrors the Divine Will. The relation of the Divine Will is
the same with all causes and phenomena of the universe. In the same way
as the ever-changing and ever-evolving life of the human being manifests
the Divine Will, so also the static and monotonous life of the honeybee
manifests the Will of God. Hence this theory fails to unfold the mystery
why the Divine Will created and moulded human life in a pattern which is
ever-changing and evolving, and why it created other beings according to
a static pattern which makes them unable to change.

The economic theory of history also lacks in technical and methodical
precision. It has not been formulated in a correct way. The way it is
formulated, it merely throws light on the nature of history as
materialistic and economic, and all the other social modes are regarded
as the accidents of this substance of history. According to it, if any
change takes place in the economic foundation of a society, the
transformation of all other social modes is also accompanied. But the
theory is based on "if". The main question, however, remains
un­answered.

Supposing that economy is the foundation of society, "if" economic
infrastructure changes, the whole society also changes with it. But the
question as to when and under what circumstances and by means of which
factors the infrastructure changes followed by changes in the
superstructures, is not touched. In other words, to say that economy is
the basis is not sufficient to explain the dynamic and changing
character of society. Instead of saying that society is the base, the
advocates of this theory may properly formulate their position in this
manner: by stating that economy is the motivating factor of history,
which is materialistic in essence; the contradiction between the
economic infrastructure and the social superstructure (or between the
two tiers of the infrastructure, viz. the tools of production and the
relations of production) is the moving force that pushes history
for­ward.

There is no doubt that this is what the advocates of the above­mentioned
view mean when they say that economy is the moving force of history.
What they mean to assert is that all changes in history originate from
internal contradiction between the tools of production and the relations
of production. But here we are only concerned with proper formulation of
the theory, not with conjecturing the inner purpose and objective of its
advocates.

The theory of the role of genius in history, regardless of its truth, IS
directly relevant to philosophy of history and the question of
motivating factor of history.

Thus until now we have arrived at two views regarding the moving force
of history. One is the theory of heroes, which considers history to be a
product of certain individuals, and claims that the majority of members
of society lack creativeness and power of initiative. If a society
consisted of such individuals alone, even the minutest change is
unlikely to occur in society.

But a few individuals with God-­gifted genius, when they appear on the
social scene take initiative draw plans, make bold resolutions, and
demonstrate extraordinary resistance and force of will, drawing
multitudes of ordinary folk behind them for realizing the desirable
change. The personality of these heroes is purely a product of
exceptional natural and hereditary processes. Social conditions and
material requirements of a society do not play any effective role in
creating and moulding these personalities.

The second is the theory of contradiction between the social
infrastructure and superstructure, or the theory of economic causation
which has been already referred to.

6. The Theory of Nature
-----------------------

There is a third theory which may be called 'the theory of human
nature.' According to it, man is endowed with certain inherent
quali­ties, which account for the evolutionary character of social life.
One of such qualities is the capacity for collecting and preserving the
expe­riences of life. Whatever has been attained through experience is
retained to provide the basis for subsequent experiences.

Another is man's capacity of learning through speech and writing.
Experiences and attainments of others are communicated through speech
and, on a higher level, through writing. Experiences of a generation,
through oral narration and writing, are preserved for the later
generations. In this way, collective experience is accumulated with
.the. passage of time. This is the reason why the Qur’an gives especial
Importance to the gifts of articulate speech and the pen by making a
prominent mention of them:

> الرَّحْمَنُ{1} عَلَّمَ الْقُرْآنَ{2} خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ{3} عَلَّمَهُ
> الْبَيَانَ{4{

***The Beneficent has taught the Qur’an. He created the human being and
He has taught him articulable utterance. (55:1-4).***

> اقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ{1} خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ مِنْ
> عَلَقٍ{2} اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ{3} الَّذِي عَلَّمَ
> بِالْقَلَمِ{4{

***Read: In the Name of Thy Lord, Who created, created the human being
from a blood-clot. Read: And thy Lord is the Most Bounteous, Who taught
by the pen. (96:1-4).***

The third quality of man is that he is endowed with the power of reason
and inventiveness. This mysterious quality bestows upon him the powers
of creativity and invention which are the manifestation of Divine
creativity. The fourth quality is' his natural tendency for innova­tion.
It means that man not only possesses the ability of invention and
creation which he translates into -action whenever a necessity arises,
but the urge for creation and invention is ingrained in his nature.

The capacity to preserve and store experiences, in addition to the
capacity to exchange and communicate experiences with others, and the
capacity for creation and his natural urge for invention and innova­tion
are the forces that continually drive man towards progress. The other
animals neither possess the capacity of preserving experiences nor the
capacity of transmitting and communicating their experiences[^2] neither
the capacity to create and invent, nor the urge for innovation. None of
these qualities which characterize the human intellect exist in the
animals. It is because of these qualities that man advances and the
animals remain static. Now we shall critically examine these theories in
detail.

The Role of Personality in History
----------------------------------

Some people have claimed that "history is a battle between genius and
ordinariness." It means that common and average people always favour the
existing situation which they are used to, whereas men of genius want to
alter the existing condition into a more developed and advanced one.
Carlyle claims that history starts with the accounts of the lives of
great men and heroes.

This viewpoint is actually based on two assumptions. First, that the
society itself lacks any nature and personality. The composition of
society is not a real synthesis of its members. Individuals are
indepen­dent of one another. The interaction among individuals does not
create any social spirit; any real, synthetic entity which has its own
specific nature, personality, and laws does not come into existence.
There are merely individuals and individual psychologies.

The relation among human individuals in a society regarding their
independence from one another is like the relation among the trees in a
forest. Social phenom­ena are nothing but the sum total of individual
events in the lives of individuals. According to this view the causes
which govern society are determined by accidents and conflicts taking
place in individual lives; there are no general and universal laws of
causation.

The second assumption is that human individuals are created with
different and divergent characteristics. In spite of the fact that human
individuals are social beings or rational animals, almost all human
beings lack originality and creativity. The majority are simply
consumers of culture and not its producers. The only difference between
animals and such people is that the animals cannot be even consumers.
The spirit of this majority is one of imitating, following, and
worshipping their heroes.

But a very small minority of human beings consists of heroes, geniuses,
extraordinary supernormal individuals, who are independent in thought,
creative and inventive, with a strong will power, who stand out distinct
from the majority, as if they belong to a higher order of beings from a
different world. Had it not been for the scientific intel­lectual,
philosophical, mystical, moral, political, social, technical and
artistic geniuses, humanity would have remained in a primitive state and
would not have taken a single step toward advancement.

I personally consider both of these assumptions as vulnerable. The first
one is vulnerable for the reason mentioned earlier. In the discus­sion'
on society I have proved that society itself possesses its own specific
nature, personality and laws according to which it functions. These laws
in themselves are progressive and evolutionary by nature. Hence this
hypothesis should be discarded. Now we have to see whether an individual
can play any role in the development of society which has its own
nature, personality and laws and pursues its course of evolution
according to them.

We shall discuss this matter afterwards. Admitting the differences among
individuals, the second assumption is also incorrect, as it is
unjustifiable to say that only heroes and geniuses possess the power of
creation and the majority of people are merely passive consumers of
culture or civilization. All human individuals, more or less, possess
innovative and creative talents; on account of these talents all
individuals, or at least a majority of them, participate m creative,
productive, and innovative' activities, however small their share may be
as compared to that of geniuses.

Contrary to this theory that personalities make history is another view
which maintains that history makes personalities, not' vice versa. It
means that the objective needs of a society are responsible for
creat­ing personalities.

Montesquieu has said, "Great men and important events are the signs and
results of greater and lengthier processes." Hegel said "Great men do
not give birth to history but act as midwives." Great men are 'signs'
not 'agents.' Some like Durkheim who believe in the independent essence
of society hold that human individuals in themselves have absolutely no
personality. They acquire their whole personality from society.
Individuals and personalities are nothing but expressions and
manifestations of the social spirit, and in the words of Mahmud
Shabis­tari, are just as "holes of a niche screen through which the
social spirit emanates."

Others like Marx put social labour at the centre of human sociol­ogy,
and consider society prior to man's social consciousness '. They regard
the consciousness of individuals as the expression and manifesta­tion of
material social needs. According to their view, personalities are
manifestations and expressions of the material and economic needs of a
society… [^3]

[^1]: Refer to 11:116, 21:13, 23:33, 64.

[^2]: See E. H. Carr, What is History?. See also Will Durant, Studies in
History, The Pleasures of Philosophy, pp. 291-312.

[^3]: Among certain animal species, at the level of routine existence,
not at the level of scientific consciousness, a kind of transfer of
learning exists. For instance, the Holy Qur’an refers to the story of
the ant and Solomon in verse 27:18.


