What is Society?
================

A society consists of groups of human beings who are linked together by
means of specific systems and customs, rites and laws, and have a
collective social existence. Collective life is that in which groups of
people live together in a particular region, and share the same climate
and similar foodstuffs.

Trees of a garden also \`live' together and share the same climate and
the same kind of nourishment. In the same manner, gazelles of a herd
also graze together, and migrate toge­ther from place to place. But
neither trees nor gazelles can be said to have a social life, as they do
not form a society.

Human life is social in the sense that it is essentially gregarious. On
the one hand human needs, benefits, satisfactions, work, and acti­vity
are social in essence, and the social system cannot be maintained but
through division of labour, division of profits and a shared common
satisfaction of needs within a particular set of traditions and systems.

On the other hand, specific ideas and ideals, temperaments, and habits
govern human beings in general, giving them a sense of unity and
integ­ration. In other words, society represents a group of human
beings, who, under the compulsion of a series of requirements and under
the in­fluence of a set of beliefs, ideals and goals, are amalgamated
with one another and are immersed in a continuum of collective life.

The common social interests, and particular ties of human life unite
human beings together, giving to every individual a sense of unity
similar to that experienced by a group of people travelling together in
an automobile or an Aeroplane or a Boat, heading towards the same
destination, and sharing together the common hope of reaching the
destination safely, the dangers of the way, and a common fate.

How beautifully the Prophet of Islam (saws) has described the
philo­sophy of \`enjoining right conduct and forbidding indecency'
(*al‑'amr bil ma'ruf wa nahy \`an al‑munkar*) by means of the following
parable:

A group of people board a ship that sets sail on the sea tearing apart
the waves. Every one of them has a seat reserved for him. One of the
travellers claiming that the seat occupied by him belonged to none other
than him, starts making a hole under his seat with a sharp tool. Unless
all the travellers immediately hold his hand and make him desist from
doing so, they would risk drowning not only themselves but would also
fail to save the poor wretch from being drowned.

Is Man Social by Nature?
------------------------

The problem regarding the factors responsible for the emergence of
social life in human beings has been raised from the ancient times. Is
man born with the instinct of gregariousness, i.e. whether he was
naturally created as a part of a whole, with an urge in his nature to be
united with the whole or if he was not created as a gregarious being,
but external compulsions and determinism imposed upon him a collective
life?

In other words, is he by nature inclined to live freely, and is disposed
not to accept any kind of obligations and restrictions which have been
imposed upon him, although they may be essential for social life? Has he
in fact learnt from experience that no one is able to continue one's
life in isolation, and so he has been forced to surrender to limitations
imposed by social life?

Or, although he is not gregarious by nature, the factor that persuaded
him to accept social existence was not compulsion, or at least
compulsion had not been the sole factor? Or, was it by the ruling of his
reason and through his faculty of calculation that he arrived at the
conclusion that only through co­operation and social life could he
better enjoy the gifts of nature, and, therefore, he chose to live in
company with other human beings? Accordingly, the problem can be posed
in three ways.

(1) Man is social by nature.

(2) He is social by compulsion.

(3) He is social by his own choice.

According to the first theory, man's social life is similar to the
partnership of a man and a woman in married life each of the partners
was created as a part of a whole and by nature yearns to be united with
the whole. According to the second theory, social life is like
co­operation, such as a pact between two countries which are singly
unable to defend themselves against a common enemy and are forced to
work out an agreement of co‑operation and collaboration. According to
the third theory, social life is similar to the partnership of two
capitalists, which gives rise to a commercial, agricultural or
industrial company aiming at attainment of greater profits.

On the basis of the first theory, the main factor is inherent in man's
own nature itself. On the basis of the second theory, it is some­thing
external to man's essence and independent of it. And according to the
third theory, the main factor responsible for social life is man's
intellectual and calculating faculty.

According to the first view, sociability is a general and universal goal
which man naturally aspires to attain. According to the second theory,
sociability is a casual and accidental phenomenon, a secondary and not a
primary objective. According to the third theory, sociability is the
result of man's faculty of reasoning and calculation.

It may be said on the basis of the study of the Qur’anic verses that
sociability is inherent in the very nature and creation of man. In the
Surah al Hujurat the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا  إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِندَ اللَّـهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O mankind! We have created you male and female, and have made you
nations and tribes, that you may know one another [not that on account
of this you may boast of being superior to others]. Certainly, the
noblest of you, in the sight of Allah, is the most God-fearing among
you”*** (49:13)

In this verse, besides an ethical precept, there is an implication which
indicates the philosophy of social existence of man, according to which
mankind is so created that it always lives in the form of groups,
nations and tribes, and an individual is known through his relation to
his respective nation and tribe an identity which is an integ­ral part
of social existence. If these relations which in one way, are the cause
of commonness and association between individual men, and, in the other
way, are the cause of their separation and dissociation did not exist,
it would have been impossible to distinguish one man from another.

As a consequence, social life, which is the basis of relationships of
human beings with one another, would not have come into existence. These
and similar other factors in social life, such as differences in
features, colour, and physique, provide the ground for specific marks of
distinction of an individual and impart individuality to persons.

Had all the individuals been of the same colour, features, and physique,
and had they not been governed by different types of relationships and
associa­tions, they would have been like the standardized products of a
factory, identical to one another, and consequently could not be
distinguished from one another.

It would have ultimately resulted in the negation of social life, which
is based upon relations and exchange of ideas, labour and commodities.
Hence, association of individuals with tribes and groups has a natural
purpose. The individual differences among human beings serve as an
essential condition of social life. It must not, how­ever, be used as a
pretext for prejudice and pride; for superiority is supposed to lie in
human nobility and an individual's piety.

In verse 54 of Surah al‑Furqan, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ مِنَ الْمَاءِ بَشَرًا فَجَعَلَهُ نَسَبًا
وَصِهْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is who hath created man from water, and hath appointed for
him kindred by blood [relationships by birth] and kindred by marriage
[ac­quired relationships].*****”** (25:54)

This verse reveals the purpose of birth relationship and marriage
­relationship, which together bind individuals with each other, as
under­lying the design of creation. It is through these relationships
that indivi­duals are distinguished from one another.

In Surat al‑Zukhruf, verse 32, it is stated:

**  
**
أَهُمْ يَقْسِمُونَ رَحْمَتَ رَبِّكَ

**  
**
 

**  
**
 

**  
**
نَحْنُ قَسَمْنَا بَيْنَهُم مَّعِيشَتَهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا

**  
**
 

**  
**
وَرَفَعْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ دَرَجَاتٍ لِّيَتَّخِذَ بَعْضُهُم
بَعْضًا سُخْرِيًّا

**  
**
 

**  
**
وَرَحْمَتُ رَبِّكَ خَيْرٌ مِّمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ

**  
**

***“Is it they who apportion their Lord's mercy? We have appointed among
them their livelihood in the life of the world and raised some of them
above others in rank, that some of them may tape labour from others, and
the mercy of thy Lord is better than [the wealth] that they amass.***
“(43:32)

While discussing the conception of Tawhid (Divine Unity), in the part
dealing with the world outlook of Tawhid, I have dealt with the meaning
of this verse. Here I will give just the substance of the verse. Human
beings have not been created alike in respect of their talents and
dispositions. Had they been created so, everyone would have possessed
the same qualities and all would have lacked diversity of talents.
Naturally, as a consequence, none would have required the services of
others, thus making mutual co‑operation and mutual obligations
meaningless.

God has created man in diversity with different spiritual, physical, and
intellectual aptitudes, dispositions, and inclinations. He has given
some people special abilities, and has imparted superiority to some over
others in certain talents. By means of this, He has made all human
beings intrinsically needful of others and inclined to associate with
others. Thus He has laid down the foundation of collective and social
life. The above mentioned verse also asserts that social existence is
not merely a conventional or selective or a compulsive affair, but a
natural one.

Does Society have an Essential and Independent Existence?
---------------------------------------------------------

Society is composed of individuals, without individuals a society does
not exist. What is the manner of this synthesis? How is an indivi­dual
related to society, and what kind of relationship is it? Let us take
into consideration the following views:

### First View

Society is constituted of individuals. This is merely a hypostatized
synthesis i.e. a synthesis does not exist in reality. An objective
synthe­sis takes place when a series of elements influence one another,
and when there is a reciprocal and mutual relation of action and
reaction between the elements. These actions and reactions prepare the
ground for the emergence of a new phenomenon with its own specific.
Characteris­tics, as observed in the case of a chemical synthesis.

For example, due to the action and reaction of the two gases, oxygen and
hydrogen, for example, a new compound, namely, water, is produced with a
new form and a new set of properties. The essential condition for a real
synthesis is that the constituent elements are merged into one another
in the process of synthesis, giving up their individual nature and
pro­perties, to bring into existence a new substance: the compound.

In collective life, human beings never merge with one another in this
way, and a society does not represent anything like a \`unified man'.
Thus, society does not possess an essential and independent existence,
but a secondary and a hypostatized one. It is the individual alone who
has independent, real, and essential existence. So, although human life
in society does have a collective form and colour, but members of
society do not merge to form a real compound called \`society'.

### Second View

In reality, society cannot be compared to the natural com­pounds, it is
an artificial compound. An artificial compound is a kind of compound
although it is not a natural one. An artificial compound, like a
machine, is a system of interrelated parts. In a chemical com­pound, the
constituent elements lose their identity, and dissolve in the \`whole'
and essentially lose their individuality. But in an artificial
com­pound, the components do not lose their identity; they just
surrender their independence.

The components are interconnected and related in such a way that the
effect of the resultant product is quite different from the sum total of
the individual effects of its ingredients. For example, an automobile
carries persons or things with a great speed from one place to another.
Its mobility and speed cannot be attributed to the sum of individual
performance of its parts when considered as in­dependent and
disconnected from one another.

There is a sort of co­ordination and coherence between its parts, which
is artificial and im­posed from without. However, merger of identities
of the ingredients in the \`whole' does not take place. Yet, the whole
does not exist with­out its constituent parts. The whole is the sum
total of its parts in addition to the specific connections and relations
among them.

Society, in the same manner, is comprised of several primary and
secondary organizations and bodies. These organizations and the
indivi­duals who are connected with them, all are inseparably related
with one another. Any changes in any one of these institutions cultural,
religious, economic, legal or educational bring about changes in other
institu­tions also. Thus, social life is a phenomenon dependent on the
social machinery. But in this process, neither the identity of
individuals nor that of institutions is dissolved completely in the
society as a whole.

### Third View

Society is a real compound like the natural compounds. But the synthesis
here is of minds and thoughts and of wills and wishes; the synthesis is
cultural and not physical. Like the material elements, which in the
process of action and reaction, reduction and dissolution in one
another, prepare the ground for the emergence of a new substance, and
due to this re‑organization a new compound comes into existence and the
elements continue their existence with a new identity, individuals also,
who enter into social life with their gifts acquired from nature and
their inborn abilities, spiritually merge into one another to attain a
new spiritual identity, which is termed the \`social spirit'.

This synthesis itself is unique and special, with no parallel in the
universe. Since the components do affect and influence one another and
are transformed by mutual effect to acquire a new personality, this
synthesis is a natural and real synthesis. However, in this case, the
\`whole' or the \`compound' does not exist as a single physical entity.
It is different from other com­pounds in the sense that in other natural
compounds the synthesis is physical and the components influence and
affects one another to the extent of acquiring a totally new identity,
and the compound becomes a single indivisible entity, a real unit. The
multiplicity of constituents is dissolved and transformed into the unity
of the compound.

But in the synthesis of society and individual, though an actual
synthesis takes place because, the constituents, the individuals, as a
result of their interaction, attain a new form and identity the
plurality of individuals is not converted into a unity. This synthesis
does not produce anything like a \`unified man', a physical entity in
which all individuals have physically merged. Society conceived as a
single physi­cal entity is only a hypostatized abstraction.

### Fourth View

Society is a real compound of a higher order than a natural compound. In
the case of natural compounds, the constituents have their own
individuality and identity before the synthesis occurs. During the
process of their action and reaction, conditions for emergence of a new
substance are produced. However, the human individual did not possess
any kind of individuality at the stage of pre‑social existence.

At that stage, he is like an empty container capable only of embracing
the social spirit. Without social existence, human beings are absolutely
like animals, with the only difference that they possess human
apti­tudes. The humanity of a human being i.e. his feeling of being a
human being, his consciousness of his human \`egohood', thought, human
likes and dislikes, and other emotions and feelings associated with man
originates under the influence of the social spirit.

It is the social spirit that fills this empty pot and confers
personality upon a person. The social spirit has always been co‑existing
with man and shall co‑exist with him forever through its manifestations
such as morality, religion, education, philosophy, and art. The cultural
and spiritual causes and effects, actions and reactions among the
individuals take a specific shape due to the influence of the social
spirit.

Hence, they are not prior to it. In fact sociology is prior to human
psychology. This view is contrary to the former view, which accepts the
possibility of human psychology even before the stage of social
existence, and regards sociology as belonging to a later development.
According to this view, if man had not acquired social existence and
sociology, he would not have reached the stage of acquiring human psyche
and human psycho­logy.

The first theory is a theory maintaining the priority of individual
because, according to it, neither society has a real existence, nor law,
custom nor social destiny have an independent reality. Only individuals
have an objective existence and are knowable objects in an
epistemolo­gical sense. The life and destiny of every individual is
independent of that of other individuals.

The second theory is also a theory of the priority of individual. It
does not recognize the society as an independent \`whole', and also
denies an objective synthesis of individuals as a necessary condition of
social existence. But it considers the relationship among individuals as
somewhat objective, although confined to physical association.

Accord­ing to this theory, whereas society does not have an existence
indepen­dent of individuals, the individual alone has a real and
objective exis­tence. But according to this view, individuals, being the
constituents of a society, share a common destiny just as the components
of a machine or an automobile are related and linked together in the
form of a mechanical association of cause and effect, their movements
being mechanically interlinked. Moreover, society‑that is the group of
inter­ related and interconnected individuals‑from the point of view of
its specific system of mechanical cause‑and‑effect relationships, has an
identity independent of its individual parts.

The third theory, however, emphasizes the reality of individual as well
as that of society. This theory recognizes the independent exis­tence of
individuals because, according to it, the existence of com­ponents of
society (individuals) is not merged into the existence of society. It,
also, does not accept any unified existence for society like that of
chemical compounds. At the same time, it recognizes the objec­tive
reality of society, because it considers the synthesis of individuals
similar to a chemical synthesis with regard to their spiritual and
intel­lectual makeup.

As a result of this synthesis, individuals acquire a new identity, which
is the dominant character of society‑although society is not a
physically unified entity. On the basis of this theory, due to the
process of interaction between the parts, an entirely new entity has
emerged: a new spirit, a new consciousness, and a new will, which is
over and above the intelligence, consciousness and will of the
indivi­duals, and which dominates the intelligence and consciousness of
all its individual members.

The fourth theory believes in the essentiality and absoluteness of
social reality. According to this theory, whatever exists is the
collective spirit, the collective consciousness, the collective
sensibility, the collec­tive will, and the collective \`self'.
Individual consciousness is nothing but a manifestation of the
collective consciousness.

### The Qur’anic View

The verses of the Holy Qur’an confirm the third view. As I have stated
earlier, the Qur’an does not discuss human problems in our
philo­sophical and scientific terminology. Its language and approach is
dif­ferent. Nevertheless, the Qur’an views the problems concerning
society in such a way that it supports the third view. The Qur’an puts
forward the idea of a common history, a common destiny, a common record
of deeds, a common consciousness, understanding, sensibility and a
com­mon conduct for the ummahs (societies) [^1]

It is obvious that if the entity referred to as \`ummah' did not have an
objective existence, it would be meaningless to talk of fate,
understanding, conscience, obedience, and disobedience with reference to
it. It may be inferred that the Qur’an believes in a certain kind of
life which is the collective and social existence. Collective life is
not just a metaphor or an alle­gory, it is a reality likewise collective
death is also a reality.

In verse 34 of Surat al‑'A\`raf, the Qur’an asserts:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلِّ أُمَّةٍ أَجَلٌ  فَإِذَا جَاءَ أَجَلُهُمْ لَا يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ
سَاعَةً  وَلَا يَسْتَقْدِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And every ummah (society) hath its term, and when its term cometh,
they cannot put it off an hour nor yet advance*** ***(it)***.” (7:34)

This verse refers to life and existence that is given a limited period
of time, the duration of which cannot be changed. The end can neither be
advanced nor delayed; and this life is associated with the nation
(ummah), not with the individuals; or else it is evident that
individuals of a nation are deprived of their existence individually and
separately and not collectively and simultaneously.

In Surat al‑Jathiyah, the verse 28 states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ أُمَّةٍ تُدْعَىٰ إِلَىٰ كِتَابِهَا .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
***
“Every ummah (society) shall be summoned to its record.

  
” (45:28)

Thereupon we come to know that not only individuals have a particular
record of deeds of their own, but societies are also judged by their own
records of deeds, because they, too, are like living beings who are
conscious, responsible, and accountable for their acts, as they have
freedom of will and act accordingly.

In Surat al‑'An\`am, verse 108 states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَيَّنَّا لِكُلِّ أُمَّةٍ عَمَلَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Unto every nation have we made their deeds seem fair*****”** (6:108)

This verse affirms that every nation evolves its own particular
consciousness, its own particular standards and its own particular way
of thinking. The consciousness, understanding, and perception of every
nation has a specific and distinguishable character.

Every nation judges things according to its own standards (at least in
the matters involving practical values and notions every nation has its
own special way of perception and comprehension. There are many acts
which are \`good' in the eyes of one nation and \`evil' in the eyes of
another. It is the social atmosphere that moulds the taste and
percep­tion of the individuals of a nation according to its
value‑system.

In Surat al‑Mu'min, verse 5 says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ هَمَّتْ كُلُّ أُمَّةٍ بِرَسُولِهِمْ لِيَأْخُذُوهُ وَجَادَلُوا
بِالْبَاطِلِ لِيُدْحِضُوا بِهِ الْحَقَّ فَأَخَذْتُهُمْ فَكَيْفَ كَانَ
عِقَابِ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“....And every nation purposed to seize their messenger and argued
falsely, [thinking] thereby to refute the Truth. Then I seized, and how
[awful] was my punishment.*** “(40:5)

This verse is about an unrighteous resolution and decision of a nation.
It refers to a collective decision of immoral opposition to truth, and
asserts that collective disobedience deserves collective retribution and
punishment.

In the Qur’an, there are frequent instances how the actions of an
individual are attributed to the whole group, or sins of a generation
are associated with later generations. [^2]

In such cases, the people had the same (collective) thinking and the
same (collective) will, or, in other words, they had the same social
spirit. For example, in the story of the Thamud, the act of hamstringing
Salih's camel, which was the deed of an individual alone, is attributed
to the whole nation **فَعَقَرُوهْا** (they ham­strung the she camel).

The whole nation was considered to be respon­sible for the crime.
Consequently all of them were considered to deserve the punishment for
committing that crime **فَدَمْدَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّهُم** (so Allah
doomed them for that sin).

'Ali (as), in one of the sermons of the Nahj al‑balaghah, elucidates
this subject in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُها النّاسُ إِنّما يَجْمَعُ النّاسَ الرِضا وَ السَخَطُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O people, actually that which brings together a community [and imparts
unity and a common fate to it], is the common feeling of approval and
disapproval.

Whenever any proper or improper action having collective appro­val has
been performed, even though by a single individual, the whole society is
held responsible for it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّما عَقَرَ ناقَةَ ثَمُود رَجُلُ واحِدٌ فَعَمَّهُمْ اللهُ بالعَذابِ
لما عَمّوهُ بِالرِضّا فَقالَ فَعَقَرُوها فَأصْبَحُوا نادِمين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Indeed only one man had hamstrung the she‑camel of Thamud, but God
included them all in His punishment, because they all condoned his act.
So, God has said (in the Qur’an) “***They hamstrung her and woke up
repentant***.”

God sent down His punishment collectively on the people of Thamud,
because the whole nation maintained the same position and approved the
act of one individual, and when his decision was enacted, it was
actually the decision of the whole nation. God, in His Book, has
attributed the act of hamstringing of the camel to the whole nation,
although the act was performed by one person. It says: “***That nation
hamstrung the camel***,” and does not say that one person from among
them committed the sin.

It is essential to remind here that mere approval of a sin, as long as
it remains a verbal approval alone and practical involvement has not
occurred, is not to be considered as a sin. For example, a person
commits a sin and another comes to know about it before or after its
committal and approves it, even though the approval leads to the stage
of resolution but is not translated into action, it is not a sin as the
resolution of an individual to commit a sin, which is not translated
into action may not be considered a sin.

An approval is considered as participation in sin when it plays an
active role in its planning and execution. The collective sins belong to
this category. The social atmosphere and the social spirit favour the
occurrence of the sin and support it. If one of the members of a society
whose approval is a part of the collective will and whose decision is a
part of the collective decision commits the sin, it is here that the sin
of an individual becomes the collective sin. The above quoted passage of
the Nahj al‑balaghah which refers to the contents of the Qur’anic verse,
explains the same fact. It is not merely the approval or disapproval
which is regarded as participation in the intention or committal of a
sin.

The Qur’an occasionally associates the acts of an earlier generation
with the latter generations. For example, the action of an earlier
nation, namely the people of Israel, has been associated with the
Israelites of the Prophet's age, and the Qur’an says that these people
deserve igno­miny and wretchedness because they slew prophets unjustly.
It is not so because in the view of the Qur’an they were the offspring
of the same race, but because they represented the same evil social
spirit. It has been said that “human society has more dead than living.
[^3]

It means that those who are dead participate in the formation of every
age more than the living. Therefore, it is also said that “the dead rule
the living more than before.” [^4]

In the Qur’anic exegesis, al‑Mizan, it is argued that if a society has a
single soul and the same social thinking, it is as if a single
indivi­dual. In this case, members of society are like the bodily organs
and faculties of one organism, intrinsically and physically united, and
are amalgamated in the form of a single human personality in thought and
action. Their pleasures and pains are like the pleasures and pains of
one person and their bliss and adversities are like the bliss and
adversities of one person. This discussion is further continued on the
following lines:

In its judgement on nations and societies having religious or national
pre­judices or having a unique social thinking, the Qur’an regards the
latter genera­tions punishable for the actions of the earlier
generations. A present genera­tion is regarded accountable and
punishable for the actions of those who have passed away. In the cases
in which people had the same social thinking and the same social spirit,
the Divine Judgement could not be otherwise. [^5]

[^1]: \`Allamah Tabataba'i, al‑Mizan, vol. II, p. 102.

[^2]: Following Qur’anic verses are referred to: فَوَيْلٌ لِّلَّذِينَ
يَكْتُبُونَ الْكِتَابَ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ ثُمَّ يَقُولُونَ هَـٰذَا مِنْ عِندِ
اللَّـهِ لِيَشْتَرُوا بِهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا فَوَيْلٌ لَّهُم مِّمَّا
كَتَبَتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَوَيْلٌ لَّهُم مِّمَّا يَكْسِبُونَ  “Woe, then, to
those who write the Book with their hands and then say: This is from
God, so that they may take for it a small price. Therefore, woe to them
for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they earn.
“(2: 79) ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُوا إِلَّا
بِحَبْلٍ مِّنَ اللَّـهِ وَحَبْلٍ مِّنَ النَّاسِ وَبَاءُوا بِغَضَبٍ مِّنَ
اللَّـهِ وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَسْكَنَةُ ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا
يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّـهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الْأَنبِيَاءَ بِغَيْرِ
حَقٍّ ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا عَصَوا وَّكَانُوا يَعْتَدُونَ “Abasement shall be
pitched on them, wherever they are come upon, except they be in a bond
of God, and a bond of the people; they will be laden with the burden of
God's anger, and poverty shall be pitched on them; that, because they
disbelieved in God's signs and slew the Prophets without right, that,
for that they acted rebelliously and were transgressors.” (3:112)

[^3]: Auguste Comte, as quoted in Raymond Aron's Main Currents in
Sociologi­cal Thought, vol. I, p. 91.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Al‑Mizan, vol. IV, 112.


