Society and Tradition
=====================

If society has real existence, it should naturally possess laws peculiar
to it. If we accept the first theory about the nature of society (which
we have already discussed) and reject the existence of society as a real
entity, naturally we have to admit that society lacks laws which may
govern it. And if we accept the second theory and believe in artifi­cial
and mechanical composition of society, then we would have to admit that
society is governed by laws but that its laws are confined to a series
of mechanical and causal relationships between its various parts,
without the distinguishing features and particular characteristics of
life and living organisms.

And if we accept the third point of view, we shall have to accept,
firstly, that society itself has a comparatively more permanent
existence independent of the existence of individuals­ although this
collective life has no separate existence, and is distributed and
dispersed among its individual members, and incarnates itself in their
existence. It has discoverable laws and traditions more permanent and
stable than those of the individuals, who are its components.

Secondly, we shall have to accept also that the components of society,
which are human individuals, contrary to the mechanistic point of view,
lose their independent identity‑although in a relative fashion to
produce an organically composite structure. But at the same time the
relative independence of the individual is preserved because individual
life, individual nature, and individual achievements are not dissolved
totally in the collective existence.

According to this point of view, man actually lives with two separate
existences, two souls, and two “selves.” On the one hand, there are the
life, soul, and self of the human being, which are the products of the
processes of his essential nature; on the other, there are the
collective life, soul, and self which are the products of social life,
and pervade the individual self. On this basis, biological laws,
psychological laws, and sociological laws, together, govern human
beings. But according to the fourth theory, only a single type of laws
governs man, and these are the social laws alone.

Among the Muslim scholars \`Abd al‑Rahman ibn Khaldun of Tunisia was the
first and the foremost Islamic thinker to discuss clearly and explicitly
the laws governing the society in independence from the laws governing
the individual. Consequently he asserted that the society itself had a
special character, individuality, and reality. In his famous
introduction to history, he has discussed this theory in detail. Among
the modern scholars and thinkers Montesquieu (the French philosopher of
the eighteenth century A.D.) is the first to discuss the laws which
control and govern human groups and societies. Raymond Aron says about
Montesquieu.

His purpose was to make history intelligible. He sought to understand
histori­cal truth. But historical truth appeared to him in the form of
an almost limit­less diversity of morals, customs, ideas, laws, and
institutions. His inquiry's point of departure was precisely this
seemingly incoherent diversity. The goal of the inquiry should have been
the replacement of this incoherent diversity by a conceptual order. One
might say that Montesquieu, exactly like Max Weber, wanted to proceed
from the meaningless fact to an intelligible order. This attitude is
precisely the one peculiar to the sociologist. [^1]

It means that a sociologist has to reach beyond the apparently diverse
social forms and phenomena, which seem to be alien to one another, to
reveal the unity in diversity in order to prove that all the diverse
manifestations refer to the one and the same reality. In the same way,
all the similar social events and phenomena have their origin in a
similar sequence of analogous causes. Here is a passage from the
observations on the causes of the rise and fall of the Romans.

It is not fortune that rules the world. We can ask the Romans, who had a
constant series of success when they followed a certain plan, and an
uninter­rupted sequence of disasters when they followed another. There
are general causes, whether moral or physical ....which operate in every
monarchy, to bring about its rise, its duration and its fall. All
accidents are subject to these causes, and if the outcome of a single
battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the ruin of a state, there was a
general cause which decreed that that state was des­tined to perish
through a single battle. In short, the main impulse carries all the
particular accidents along with it. [^2]

The Holy Qur’an explains that nations and societies qua nations and
societies (not just individuals living in societies) have common laws
and principles that govern their rise and fall in accordance with
certain historical process. The concept of a common fate and collective
destiny implies the existence of certain definite laws governing the
society. About the tribe of Bani Israel, the Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَيْنَا إِلَىٰ بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ فِي الْكِتَابِ لَتُفْسِدُنَّ فِي
الْأَرْضِ مَرَّتَيْنِ وَلَتَعْلُنَّ عُلُوًّا كَبِيرًا  فَإِذَا جَاءَ
وَعْدُ أُولَاهُمَا بَعَثْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ عِبَادًا لَّنَا أُولِي بَأْسٍ
شَدِيدٍ فَجَاسُوا خِلَالَ الدِّيَارِ  وَكَانَ وَعْدًا مَّفْعُولًا 
 ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَا لَكُمُ الْكَرَّةَ عَلَيْهِمْ وَأَمْدَدْنَاكُم
بِأَمْوَالٍ وَبَنِينَ وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ أَكْثَرَ نَفِيرًا  إِنْ
أَحْسَنتُمْ أَحْسَنتُمْ لِأَنفُسِكُمْ  وَإِنْ أَسَأْتُمْ
فَلَهَا  فَإِذَا جَاءَ وَعْدُ الْآخِرَةِ لِيَسُوءُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ
وَلِيَدْخُلُوا الْمَسْجِدَ كَمَا دَخَلُوهُ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
وَلِيُتَبِّرُوا مَا عَلَوْا تَتْبِيرًا  عَسَىٰ رَبُّكُمْ أَن
يَرْحَمَكُمْ  وَإِنْ عُدتُّمْ عُدْنَا وَجَعَلْنَا جَهَنَّمَ
لِلْكَافِرِينَ حَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And we decreed for the Children of Israel in the scriptures: You
verily will work corruption in the earth twice, and you will become
great tyrants. So when the time for the first of the two came We roused
against you slaves of Ours of great might who ravaged [your] country,
and it was a threat per­formed.' [After you had regretted your sins and
became pious again] Then we gave once again your turn against them, and
we aided you with wealth and children and mode you more in soldiery.***

***[Saying] If ye do good, ye do good for your own souls, and if ye do
evil, it is for them. (I.e. Our laws and customs are fixed and constant,
it is by this covenant that people are bes­towed with power, might,
honour and constancy or subjected to humiliation and abjectness). So
when the time for the second [of the judgements] came, because of your
acts of tyranny and despotism, we aroused against you others [of our
slaves] to ravage you, and to enter the temple even as they entered it
the first time, and to lay waste all that they conquered with an utter
wasting. It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you [if ye mend
your ways], but if you repeat [the crime] we*** ***shall repeat [the
punishment], and we have appointed hell a dungeon for the
disbelievers.*** (17:4‑8)

The last sentence, i.e. “***But if you repeat [the crime] we shall
repeat [the punishment]***” shows that the Qur’an is addressing all the
people of the tribe and not an individual.  
 It also implies that all the societies are governed by a universal law.

Determinism or Freedom
----------------------

One of the fundamental problems discussed by philosophers, particularly
in the last century, is the problem of determinism and freedom of
individual as against society, or, in other words, deter­minism and
freedom of the individual spirit vis-à-vis the social spirit. If we
accept the first theory regarding the nature of society, and consider
social structure to be merely a hypostatized notion, and believe in the
absolute independence of the individual, then there will be no place for
the idea of social determinism.

Because, there will be no power or force except that of the individuals,
and no social force that may rule over the individual. Hence, in this
theory, there is no room for the idea of social determinism. If there is
any compulsion or determinism it is of the individual and operates
through the individuals. The society has no role in this matter. Hence,
there can be no social determinism as emphasized by the advocates of
social determinism.

In the same way, if we accept the fourth theory, and consider the
individual and indivi­dual's personality as a raw material or an empty
pot, then the entire human personality of the individual, his intellect,
and his free will would be reduced to nothing but an expression of the
collective intelligence and the collective will, which manifest
themselves, as an illusion, in the form of an individual to realize
their own social ends. Accordingly, if we accept the idea of the
absolute essentiality and primariness of the society, there will be no
place left for the idea of the freedom and choice of the individual.

Emile Durkheim, the famous French sociologist, emphasizes the importance
of society to the extent of saying that social matters (in fact all the
human matters, as against the biological and animal urges and needs,
like eating and sleeping) are the products of society, not the products
of individual thought and will, and have three characteristics they are
external, compulsive, and general.

They are considered to be external, because they are alien to individual
existence and are imposed from without upon the individual by society.
They existed before the individual came into existence and the
individual accepted them under the‑influence of society. Acceptance of
the moral, social, and religious traditions, customs, and values by the
individual comes under this category. They are compulsive, because they
impose themselves upon the individual and mould the individual's
conscience, feelings, thoughts, and preferences according to their own
standards.

Because of being compulsive, they are necessarily general and universal.
However, if we accept the third theory and consider both the individual
and the society as fundamental entities‑although admitting the power of
the society as dominating that of the individual‑it does not
necessi­tate any compulsion or determinism for the individual either in
human or social affairs.

Durkheimian determinism arises due to the failure to recognize the
essential nature of the human being. Man's nature gives him a kind of
freedom and liberty that empower him to revolt against social
compulsions. On this basis, we may say that there is an inter­mediary
relationship between the individual and the society that lies between
the extremes of absolute freedom and absolute compulsion (*amr bayn
al‑'amrayn*).

Although the Holy Qur’an attributes character, personality, reality,
power, life, death, consciousness, obedience, and disobedience to
society, it also explicitly recognizes the possibility of violation of
social law by an individual. The Qur’an in this matter relies on what is
termed as the (*Fitrat Allah*) ‘Divine *nature*’.

In Surat al Nisa, The verse 97 refers to a group of people who called
themselves “*mustad'afun*” (the oppressed and the weak) in the society
of Mecca, and took shelter in their \`weakness and being oppressed' as
an excuse for shirking their natural responsibilities. In fact, they
considered themselves helpless as against the social compulsion and
pressures. The Qur’an says that their excuse cannot be condoned on any
ground, because at least they were free to migrate from the Meccan
society to another one better suited for the fulfillment of their
aspirations. Elsewhere it states:

**  
**
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَنفُسَكُمْ

**  
**
 

**  
**
 

**  
**
لَا يَضُرُّكُم مَّن ضَلَّ إِذَا اهْتَدَيْتُمْ

**  
**
..

***“O believers! You have charge of your own souls. He who goes astray
cannot injure you if you are rightly guided.***”(5:105)

The famous verse (7:172) regarding human nature states that man is bound
by the Divine covenant to believe in monotheism (tawhid), and it has
been made inherent in human nature. The Qur’an says further that it is
ordained in this way so that people should not say on the Day of
Judgement that “our fathers were idolaters and we did not have any other
alternative except helplessly adhering to the faith of our
fore­fathers.” (7:173) [^3]

With such a nature gifted to man by God, there is no compulsion to
accept any faith contrary to the Divine will and to human nature itself.

The teachings of the Qur’an are entirely based upon the notion of human
responsibility man is responsible for himself and for society. The
dictum *al‑'amr bil ma\`ruf wa al‑nahy \`an al‑munkar* (commanding
others to do what is commanded by God and forbidding them from that
which is prohibited by Him), is a command to the individual to revolt
against social corruption and destructiveness.

This is the Qur’anic code of conduct prescribed for the individual to
save society from chaos, disorder, and destruction. Tales and stories
embodied in the text of the Qur’an deal mostly with the theme of the
individual's revolt against a corrupt social order. The stories of Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Prophet Muhammad, the Companions of the Cave
(Ashab al­-Kahf), the believer of the tribe of the Pharaoh, etc. deal
with the same theme.

The notion of social determinism is rooted in the misconception that
society in its real composition needs complete merger of its constituent
parts into one another and dissolution of their plurality into the unity
of the \`whole'. This process is considered to be responsible for the
emergence of a new reality.

Either one has to accept that the personality, freedom, and independence
of the individual are real, and so negate the reality of society and
social structure (as in the case of the first and the second theories
regarding the nature of society and the individual), or the reality of
society is to be affirmed at the cost of the individual and his freedom
and independence (as in the case of Durkheim's theory). Reconciliation
between these two opposite view­points is impossible. As all the
conjectures and arguments of sociology support the supremacy of society,
the opposite view is necessarily rejected.

In fact, from a philosophical point of view, all forms of syntheses
cannot be regarded similar. On the lower levels of nature, i.e. minerals
and inorganic substances, which in philosophical terms are governed by a
\`simple force,' and as interpreted by the philosophers, act according
to one and the same law, are synthesized in a way that they completely
merge into one another and lose their individuality in the whole.

For example, in the composition of water, two atoms of Hydrogen and one
atom of Oxygen are merged together, and both lose their individual
properties. But at the higher level of synthesis, the parts usually
retain a relative independence with respect to the whole. A kind of
plurality in unity and unity in plurality manifests itself at higher
levels of existence. As we see in man, despite his unity, a unique
plurality is manifested.

Not only his lower faculties and powers preserve their plurality to some
extent, but, at the same time, there is also a kind of continuous
inherent opposition and conflict between his internal powers. Society is
the strangest natural phenomenon in which all its constituent parts
retain their individual independence to a maximum possible degree.

Hence, from this point of view, we have to accept that human beings, who
are the constituent parts of a society in intellectual and volitional
activity, retain their individual freedom, and, therefore, their
individual existence precedes their social existence. In addition to
this

fact, in the synthesis at the higher levels of nature, the generic
character of the parts is preserved. The individual human being or the
individual spirit is not determined by the social spirit; it rather
preserves its right to think and act freely.

[^1]: Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Thought, vol. I, p.
14.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Following verses are referred to : وَإِذْ أَخَذَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ
بَنِي آدَمَ مِنْ ظُهُورِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ وَأَشْهَدَهُمْ عَلَىٰ
أَنْفُسِهِمْ أَلَسْتُ بِرَبِّكُمْ ۖ قَالُوا بَلَىٰ ۛ شَهِدْنَا ۛ أَنْ
تَقُولُوا يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّا كُنَّا عَنْ هَٰذَا غَافِلِينَ  أَوْ
تَقُولُوا إِنَّمَا أَشْرَكَ آبَاؤُنَا مِنْ قَبْلُ وَكُنَّا ذُرِّيَّةً
مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ ۖ أَفَتُهْلِكُنَا بِمَا فَعَلَ الْمُبْطِلُونَ  And when
your Lord brought forth from the children of Adam, from their backs,
their descendants, and made them bear witness against their own souls:
Am I not your Lord? They said: Yes! we bear witness. Lest you should say
on the day of resurrection: Surely we were heedless of this. [Or you
should say: Only our fathers associated others (with Allah) before, and
we were an offspring after them: Wilt Thou then destroy us for what the
vain doers did? (7:172-173)


