Social Divisions and Polarization
=================================

Although society has a kind of unity, it is divided from within into
different groups, strata and classes, which are occasionally opposite to
one another. If not all, some of societies are divided into different
and occasionally conflicting poles despite their apparent unity. Thus,
in the words of Muslim philosophers, a specific type of \`unity in
plurality and plurality in unity' governs societies. In earlier
chapters, while discussing the nature of the unity of society, we have
elaborated what type of unity it is. Now we shall discuss the nature of
its inherent plurality.

There are two well‑known theories with regard to this problem. The first
is the philosophy of historical materialism and dialectical
contradictions. This theory, which would be discussed in detail later,
is based upon the origin of private property. The societies in which the
conception of private property does not exist are basically unipolar,
such as the primitive communist societies or those communist societies
which are likely to be formed in the future.

A society in which the right to private property. Exists is, of
necessity, bipolar. Hence, society is either unipolar or bipolar. There
is no third alternative possible. In bipolar societies, human beings are
divided into two groups, viz. the exploiters and the exploited. Except
these two opposite camps, i.e. the group of the rulers and the group of
the ruled, any third group does not exist. All the social modes, such as
philosophy, morality, religion, and art, may also be divided according
to the class character of the two groups.

There are, therefore, two types of philosophy, morality, religion, etc.,
each of which bears the specific economic class character of each group.
Hypothetically, if there were only one philo­sophy, one religion, and
one morality prevalent in a society, it too represents the character of
any one of these two classes and is imposed on the other. But it is
impossible to imagine the existence of a philo­sophy, art, religion or
morality without having a character independent of the economic
structure of society.

According to the other theory, the unipolar or multipolar
charac­teristic of society has nothing to do with the principle of
private ownership. The social, ideological, cultural, and racial
factors, too, are responsible for giving rise to multipolar societies.
The cultural and ideological factors, in particular, play the basic
role; they are not only capable of producing bipolar or multipolar
societies with occasionally contradictory poles but can also create a
unipolar society without necessarily abolishing the institution of
private ownership.

Now we have to discuss the view of the Qur’an regarding the plurality of
society. Does the Qur’an affirm or negate social plurality? And if it
affirms, what is its point of view about the polarization of society?
Does the Qur’an affirm the bipol4rization of society on the basis of
ownership and exploitation, or does it forward some other view? The best
or at least a good method for determining the Qur’anic point of view
seems to be that we should first of all extract the social terminology
used in the Qur’an. In the light of the nature and meaning of the
Qur’anic idiom we can infer the position of the Qur’an concerning this
matter.

The social terminology used in the Qur’an is of two types: some of the
words are related with a particular social phenomenon such as, millah
(community), shari \`ah (Divine Law), shir\`ah (custom), minhaj
(method), sunnah (tradition), and the like. These terms are not relevant
to the present discussion. But a number of terms which refer to all or
some human groups may be taken into account for discovering the Qur’anic
viewpoint.

These words can reveal the point of view of the Qur’an. Such terms as
qawm (folk), ummah (community), nas (mankind), shu\`ub (peoples),
qaba'il (tribes), rasul (messenger, apostle), nabi (prophet), imam
(leader), wali (guardian), mu'min (believer), kafir (unbeliever),
munafiq (dissenter or hypocrite), mushrik (polytheist), mudhabdhab
(hesitant), muhajir (emigrant), mujahid (warrior), sadiq (truthful),
shahid (witness), muttaqi (pious), salih (righteous), muslih (reformer),
mufsid (corrupter).

Aamir bil ma'ruf (one who orders to obey God's command), nahi \`an
al‑munkar (one who forbids indecent or illegitimate deeds), \`alim
(learned), nasih (admonishes), zalim (cruel, oppressive, unjust),
khalifah (deputy), rabbani (Divine), rabbi (rabbi), kahin (priest),
ruhban (monks), ahbar (Jewish scribes), jabbar (tyrant), \`ali
(sublime), mustali (superior), mustakbir (tyrant, proud), mustad\`af
(tyrannized, oppressed), musrif (lavish, prodigal), mutraf (affluent),
taghut (idols), mala \` (chieftains), muluk (kings), ghani (rich), faqir
(poor, needy), mamluk (the ruled), malik (owner, master), hurr (free,
liberated), \`abd (slave, servant), rabb (master, lord), etc.

Furthermore, there are other words which are apparently similar to these
words, such as: musalli (one who prays), mukhlis (sincere, devoted),
sadiq (loyal, true), munfiq (charitable), mustaghfir (one who asks for
God's forgiveness), ta'ib (penitent), abid (adorer), hamid (one who
praises), etc.

But these words have been used only for the purpose of describing kinds
of behaviour and not to refer to certain social groups, poles, or
classes.

It is essential to study the connotation and meaning of the verses in
which the terms referred to earlier are used, in particular the words
related to social orientations. It is also to be seen whether the above
mentioned terms can be divided into two distinct groups. And suppos­ing
that these terms refer to two distinct groups, it should be deter­mined
who are their referents.

For example, can all of them be classified in two groups of believers
and unbelievers, according to a classification based on religious
belief, or into two groups of the rich and the poor according to their
economic position? In other words, it is to be analyzed whether these
divisions are ultimately based on any one primary classification, and
whether or not all the other sub‑divisions are essentially secondary and
relative. If there is only one principle of division, it has to be
determined.

Some people claim that the Qur’anic view suggests a bipolar society.
They say according to the Qur’an, society is divided into two classes:
one is the ruling, dominating, and exploiting class, and the other
consists of the ruled, exploited, and subjugated people. The ruling
class consists of those whom the Qur’an calls \`mustakbirun', i.e. the
arrogant oppressors and exploiters. The subjugated class is of those who
are called by the Qur’an \`mustad'afun' (the weakened).

All other divi­sions, such as mu'min (believer) and kafir (unbeliever),
muwahhid (monotheist) and mushrik (polytheist), salih (righteous) and
fasid (corrupt) are secondary in nature. It means that it is tyranny and
exploitation that leads to infidelity, idolatry, hypocrisy and other
such evils, whereas, on the other hand, subjugation to oppression and
ex­ploitation leads towards iman (faith), hijrah (migration), jihad
(struggle), salih (righteousness), islah (reform) and other such
qualities.

In other words, all such things which are regarded by the Qur’an as
deviation and aberration in religion, morality, and deeds are rooted in
the practice of exploitation and the economic privileges of a class.
Similarly, the source and root of the attitudes and acts morally,
religiously, and practically approved and emphasized by the Qur’an, lie
in the condition of being exploited. Human consciousness is naturally
determined by the material conditions of life. Without changing the
material life of a people, it is not possible to bring about any change
in their spiritual, moral and psychic life.

According to this viewpoint, the Qur’an perceives social conflicts as
basically class conflicts. It means that the Qur’an gives essential
priority to social and economic struggle over moral struggle. According
to this interpretation, in the Qur’an, infidels, hypocrites, idolaters,
the morally corrupt and the tyrants arise from among the groups whom the
Qur’an names as mutraf (the affluent), musrif (extravagant and
wasteful), mala' (ruling clique), muluk (kings), mustakbir (arrogant)
and so on. It is not possible for these groups to arise from among the
opposite class.

In the same way, they say, the prophets (anbiya'), messengers
(mursalun), leaders (a'immah), upholders of truth (siddiqun), martyrs
(shuhada'), warriors (mujahidun), emigrants (muhajirun) and believers
(muminun) emerge from among the class of the oppressed and the weak. It
is not possible that they may arise from the opposite class. So it is
mainly istihbar (tyranny and arrogance) or istid\`af (weakness, or
condition of being oppressed) that mould and direct the social
consciousness of the people. All the other social modes are products and
manifestations of the struggle between the exploiters and the exploited,
and the oppressors and the oppressed.

According to this viewpoint, the Qur’an not only considers the two above
mentioned groups of people as manifestation and expression of the
division of society into two classes of the mustakbirun and the
mustad'afun, but it also divides human attributes and dispositions into
two sets.

Truthfulness, forgiveness, sincerity, service, insight, vision,
compassion, mercy, pity, generosity, humility, sympathy, nobility,
sacrifice, fear of God, etc. constitute one set of positive values on
the other hand, falsehood, treachery, debauchery, hypocrisy, sensuality,
cruelty, callousness, stupidity, avarice and pride etc. constitute
another set of values, which are negative. The first sets of attributes
are ascribed to the oppressed class and the second set is considered to
characterize the oppressors.

Hence, they say, oppression and subjugation not only give rise to
opposite groups, but they are also the fountainheads of conflicting
moral qualities and habits. The position of a class either as oppressor
or oppressed is the basis and foundation not only of all human
attitudes, loyalties, and preferences, but also of all cultural and
social phenomena and manifestations.

The morality, philosophy, art, literature, and religion originating in
the class of oppressors always manifest and represent its character and
social attitude. All of them support and justify the status quo, and
cause stagnation and decadence by arresting social progress. On the
other hand, the philosophy, art, literature, and religion originating
from the class of the oppressed are dynamic and revolutionary, and
generate new awareness.

The class of the oppressors, i.e. the mustakabirun, because of its
hegemony over social privileges, is obscurantist, traditionalist, and
seeks shelter under the shadow of conservatism; whereas the class of the
oppressed is endowed with vision, and is anti-traditionalist,
progressive, zealous, active, and is always in the vanguard of
revolution.

In brief, according to the advocates of this theory, the Qur’an affirms
the view that it is actually the economic structure of a society which
makes a man, determines his group‑identity and his attitudes, and lays
down the foundation of his thinking, morality, religion, and ideology.
They quote a number of verses from the Qur’an to show that what they
teach is, on the whole, based upon the Qur’an.

According to this view, commitment to a particular class is the measure
and test of all things. All the beliefs are to be evaluated by this
standard. The claims and assertions of a believer, a reformer, and even
a prophet or a spiritual leader, can be confirmed or rejected only
through this test.

This theory is in fact a materialistic interpretation of both man and
society. No doubt the Qur’an gives a special importance to the social
allegiances of individuals, but does it mean that the Qur’an inter­prets
all distinctions and classifications on the basis of social classes? In
my view such an interpretation of society, man, and the world is not
consistent with the Islamic world view.

It is a conclusion drawn from a superficial study of the problems
discussed in the Qur’an. However, since we shall discuss this matter
fully in a later chapter dealing with history under the title “Is
History Materialistic in Nature?” I shall abstain from further
elaboration at this point.


