Societies of the Future
=======================

If the present societies, civilizations, and cultures are not to be
considered as belonging to diverse species, it cannot be denied that
they have different forms and colours. What about their future? Will
these cultures, civilizations, societies, and nations continue to exist
in their present form, or is humanity moving towards a certain unified
culture, civilization, and society? Will they abandon their own specific
indivi­duality in the future, in order to assume one common character‑a
character that is closer to their real human nature?

This problem is also associated with the problem of nature and essence
of society, and the type of relationship between the collective and the
individual spirits. Evidently, on the basis of the theory of man's
primordial nature‑according to which his social existence, his social
life and, as a result, the social spirit are the means chosen by human
nature to attain its own ultimate perfection it may be said that
societies, cultures, and civilizations are moving towards homogeneity
and unifica­tion, and ultimately would merge into one another.

The future of human societies lies in a highly developed, single and
universal society, in which all positive human values shall be realized.
Man shall attain true perfection and shall finally realize his own
authentic humanity.

According to the Qur’an, it is evident that the ultimate rule shall be
the rule of righteousness, which would lead to complete annihila­tion of
falsehood and evil. Eternity belongs to the pious and the God­-fearing
(muttaqun).

In his Qur’anic exegesis, Al Mizan[^1], \`Allamah Tabataba'i holds that:

Any profound examination of the conditions of the universe shows that
man, as a part of the universe, shall realize his ultimate perfection in
the future. The statement of the Qur’an that establishment of Islam in
the world is a necessary and an inevitable matter, is just another way
of saying that man shall ultimately attain to complete perfection. The
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يَرْتَدَّ مِنكُمْ عَن دِينِهِ فَسَوْفَ يَأْتِي اللَّـهُ بِقَوْمٍ
يُحِبُّهُمْ وَيُحِبُّونَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever of you turns from his religion, (know that in his stead)
God will assuredly bring a people He loves and who love Him (for the
purpose of communicating and for establishing God's religion).***”
(5:54)

Here the Qur’an aims to describe the purpose of creation of man and his
ultimate future, which, in another verse, is explained in the following
words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللَّـهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِهِمْ وَلَيُمَكِّنَنَّ لَهُمْ دِينَهُمُ الَّذِي ارْتَضَىٰ لَهُمْ
وَلَيُبَدِّلَنَّهُم مِّن بَعْدِ خَوْفِهِمْ أَمْنًا ۚ يَعْبُدُونَنِي
لَا يُشْرِكُونَ بِي شَيْئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God has promised those of you who believe and do righteous deeds
that He will surely make you successors in the earth, even as He made
those who were before them successors, and that He will surely establish
their religion for them which He has approved for them, and will give
them in exchange safety after fear ( by destroying their enemies). They
shall serve Me, not ascribing with me anything (as partners)...***”
(24:55)

Similarly in another place it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 …أَنَّ الْأَرْضَ يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“....My righteous servants will inherit the earth.***” (21:105)

In the same book, under the title “The Frontiers of the Islamic World
are Faith, not Conventional or Geographical Borders”, it is said, Islam
has annulled the role of tribal and national distinctions, and denied
them any effective role in the evolution of [the structure] of human
society. There are two main factors responsible for these divisions. One
is the primitive tribal life, which is based on genealogical
associations, and the other is geographical and regional diversity.

These two main factors are responsible for division of humanity into
various nations and tribes, giving rise to racial, linguistic, and
colour differences. Also, these two factors are responsible for a
nation's loyalty to a particular region; every nation calls its
territory its homeland and is prepared to defend it in the name of \`the
motherland'.

Though it is a natural human urge to be identified with one's group, but
it is, at the same time, opposed to the demand of man's nature that
mankind should live as a \`whole' or as a single unit. The laws of
nature are based on bringing together scattered elements by creating
harmony and establishing unity in place of diversity.

By means of this, nature achieves its ends. This fact is evident from
the natural course of evolution, which shows how pri­mordial matter is
transformed into different elements and then how elements are combined
together to evolve plants, and then animals, and finally culminate in
the emergence of man.

Although the regional and tribal diversity unifies members of a
particular region or tribe and imparts them unity, it also brings one
unit into confrontation against other such units. As a result, although
the members of a nation have the feeling of fraternity among themselves,
they tend to regard other peoples who are treated as \`things' and not
as human beings with hostility to them the outsiders are mere means
whose value lies only in their practical utility.

This is the reason why Islam abrogated tribal and national diversity of
men (which divides humanity into sections), and laid the foundation of
human society on conviction and belief (in which the opportunity to
discover the truth is equal for every individual), and not on race,
nationality, or native soil. Even in affairs of matrimony and
inheritance, Islam made common belief and conviction the criterion for
human relations. [^2]

In the same book, under the title “The Religion of Truth is Ultimately
Victorious”, \`Allamah Tabataba'i says:

Mankind, which has been endowed by nature with an urge to attain self
­perfection and true felicity, strives collectively to achieve the
highest stages of material and spiritual evolution, which it would,
positively, achieve some day. Islam, the religion of tawhid
(monotheism), is in fact a programme of attain­ment of such an end or
summum bonum (sa\`adah).

The deviations that hinder man from traversing his long path, should not
lead us to a negation of his nature and of his humanity. It is the sole
natural law that actually governs human nature. The deviations and
faults should be considered as a kind of error in application of the
natural law. The objective of attaining perfection, for which man
aspires, is directed by his restless, perfection‑loving nature itself‑an
end which he is likely to attain sooner or later one day. Some verses in
Surat al‑Rum (30‑41), which start with the verse:

**  
**

فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا

**  
**
 

**  
**
فِطْرَتَ اللَّـهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا

And end with **لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ** lead us to the same conclusion
that the demand of the law shall ultimately be fulfilled, and man, after
wandering in different directions and experimenting with different ways,
shall finally discover his own path and adhere to it.

One should not pay any attention to the opinions of those who say that
Islam, like other cultural movements, has fulfilled its function as a
phase in the development of human culture and is now an out­dated part
of history. Islam, as we know it and as we have already discussed it,
aims at the ultimate perfection of man, which in accordance with the
laws of nature, has to be achieved one day.[^3]

Contrarily, some people claim that Islam has never favoured the unity
and unification of human culture and human societies. Islam has always,
they say, favoured diversity and variety in cultures and socie­ties, and
this diversity and plurality is not only recognized, but it is also
reinforced by Islam. They say the personality, the nature, and the
\`self' of a nation are synonymous with its culture, which is the
manifes­tation of its social spirit.

And this social spirit is moulded by the specific history of that
nation, which distinguishes it from other nations, who do not share it.
Nature has moulded man's specific essence history shapes his culture,
and, in reality, moulds his personality, character, and his \`selfhood.'
Every nation possesses a particular culture compatible with its
particular nature, taste, perfume, and essence. This culture not only
affirms the personality of that nation, but also safeguards its distinct
identity.

As in the case of individuals, whose individuality and personality is an
inseparable part of his self, the loss of which means distortion of
personality and alienation from one's own self, so also imposition of
any other culture except the one evolved by a nation through the course
of history and which affirms its selfhood, causes self alienation.

The fact that every nation has a particular sensibility, vision,
orientation, preferences, tastes, literature, music, customs, eti­quette
and rituals, and prefers certain ways, contrary to those ac­cepted by
other nations is an outcome of its history, during which, due to various
causes arising from its successes, failures, achievements,
frus­trations, climate, migrations, contacts, connections, and its
eminent personalities and geniuses, develops a specific culture of its
own.

This particular culture moulds the national and social spirit in a
particular form and in special proportions. Philosophy, science,
literature, art, religion, and ethics are the sum total of various
features, which through centuries of common history, have become common
characteristics of a particular group, and are synthesized in a special
form, which distinguishes it from other human groups and renders it a
particular identity.

Due to this synthesis \`the social spirit' is born, which integ­rates
the individuals of a certain group with the whole, in the same way as
different parts of the body are organically interrelated and are
responsible for its life. The same \`spirit' not only gives a nation its
independent, specific, and individual existence, but also gives it a
\`life' that distinguishes it in the course of history from other
cultural and spiritual forms of expression.

It is because of this spirit that a particular culture and its social
orientation, thought, customs, and behaviour are distinguished from
those of other cultures. It is reflected in its approach to nature,
life, historical events, feelings, preferences, ideals, beliefs, and
even in its scientific, artistic, and technical products and
achievements. The impact and imprint of its spirit is manifested in all
the material and spiritual manifestations of a nation's life.

It is said that religion is a type of ideology. It is a faith which
affirms certain feelings and approaches. But nationality means
'perso­nality,' which brings into existence specific distinguishing
characteris­tics that are common in the spirit of the individuals who
share the same social destiny. According to this view, the relationship
between nationality and religion is the relationship between personality
and belief.

It is said that Islam's opposition to racial discrimination and national
prejudice should not be taken to mean that Islam does not accept
diversity of nations in human society. The proclamation of equality by
Islam does not amount to a negation of plurality of nations. On the
contrary, it implies that Islam accepts the existence of various nations
as undeniable natural realities. The following verse of the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَىٰ
وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَقَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِندَ اللَّـهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O, mankind, indeed we have created you male and female, and have
made you nations and*** ***tribes that you may know one another. Verily,
the noblest of you in the sight of Allah, is the most God‑fearing among
you...***” (49:13)

Contrary to the argument of those who use it for a denial and nega­tion,
actually approves and affirms the diversity of nations. Because, they
say, the above mentioned verse, firstly, accepts the division of mankind
according to sex (male and female), which is of course the natural
division then it immediately goes on to refer to national and tribal
divisions.

It shows that grouping of individuals in nations and tribes is also a
natural, God‑willed phenomenon, like their grouping as men and women.
This proves that in the same way as Islam favours a specific
relationship between man and woman, and does not intend to eliminate
sexuality and its manifestations, so also it favours relations between
various nations on an equal level and does not intend to negate
nationalities, which are regarded as a natural phenomenon inherent in
the process of creation.

Further, the fact that the Qur’an considers ta'druf (to know one
another) as the purpose and philosophy of the existence of differences
among, nations, suggests that a community identifies itself and
discovers itself in comparison and contrast with other nations, and it
realizes its individuality and vitality vis-à-vis other nations.

Hence, they say, contrary to the unduly propagated general belief, Islam
affirms nationalism in the sense of cultural heritage, and it is not
opposed to cultural pluralism. What Islam negates is nationalism in the
sense of racialism.

The theory (which aims at an Islamic justification of nationalism) is
inconsistent for several reasons. It is primarily based upon a
particular outlook of man and a specific view with regard to the essence
and cons­tituents of human culture that is philosophy, science, art,
morals, etc. Both of these views lack soundness.

It is presumed with regard to man that his essence is potentially blank.
It is supposed to be devoid of any prior intellectual and emotional
content or perceptual disposition to view his world, himself, and his
role in it, even on the level of potentiality. It is assumed that human
essence is equally neutral towards all modes of thought and emotion,
purposes and goals. Man is assumed to be an empty container devoid of
form and colour, totally subservient to that which fills it.

He acquires his \`egohood,' his personality, his path, and his goal from
the content that is poured into the empty vessel of his essence. He
assumes any form or personality and adopts any path and goal that is
bestowed upon him by the content. His content in fact the first thing
that is poured into this vacuum moulds man in any form, colour, and
charac­ter his \`real' personality and essence being actually identical
with the characteristics bestowed upon him by this content.

That is so because his \`ego' or \`self' is shaped and affirmed by his
acquired content. What­ever is offered to him after this, which would
suggest a change in his personality, colour, or shape, is only borrowed
and alien stuff, because it contradicts with his first personality
formed by historical accident. In other words, this theory is inspired
by the fourth theory regarding the nature of individual and society. It
maintains the idea of absolute primariness of society, and has been
critically examined earlier.

From both philosophical and Islamic points of view, such a judge­ment
regarding human nature cannot be justifiable. Man, according to his own
special nature‑although only potentially has a definite perso­nality,
path and goal that is determined by his God‑given nature. It is his very
nature that determines his real self. Distortion and dehumaniza­tion of
human existence are measurable only on the basis of man's essential
nature, and not according to criteria based on historical fac­tors.

Every system of education and culture which is in harmony with the human
nature and is helpful for its development is man's real culture, though
it may not be the first culture imposed upon him by historical
conditions. Any culture that does not suit human nature is alien to him,
and, in a way, distorts and deforms his real nature and converts his
\`self' into \`non‑self,' even though it may be the product of national
history.

For instance, the ideas of dualism and the sanctity of fire were
distortions imposed on the human nature of ancient Persians, although
these notions are considered products of Iranian history. But belief in
the unity of God (tawhid) and rejection of all forms of wor­ship of
non‑Gods signifies man's return to his real nature, even though this
faith is not the product of Iranian soil and history.

Also, it has been wrongly presumed regarding human cultural material
that it is a colourless and formless stuff to be moulded and shaped by
history. It means that, according to this view, philosophy, science,
religion, morality, and art, whatever form and colour they may assume,
are genuine. But as to what colour, mode, type, or form these should
have is relative, and dependent upon history. It is the history and the
culture of every nation which necessitate its own special philosophy,
its own system of education, religion, morality and art.

In other words, as man himself is considered as being without any
specific essence and form, and who draws his identity subsequently from
culture, in the same way, the principles and basic materials of human
culture are also devoid of any form, colour, and expression. It is
history which gives them an identity, a form, and an expression, and
stamps them with its particular seal. Some have gone further to the
extent of claiming that even “mathematical thinking is influenced by the
particular approach of a culture.” [^4]

This conception is based upon the theory of relativism of human culture.
We, in the Principles and Method of the Philosophy of Realism” have
dealt with absolutism and relativism in regard to the principles of
thought. There, we have proved that whatever is relative is concerned
with subjective and practical perceptions of reality.

It is these perceptions of reality which are different in different
cultures, according to the changing conditions of space and time. These
percep­tions do not provide us with any test of truth or falsehood, and
right or wrong, regarding the reality lying beyond them, to which they
refer. But the theoretical sciences, scientific thought, and theoretical
prin­ciples, which provide secure ground for philosophical and
theoretical knowledge of man‑like the principles of religious world
outlook and the primary principles of ethics, are absolute, permanent,
and non ­relative. Here, I am sorry to say, we shall abstain from
further prolonga­tion of this discussion.

Secondly, the claim that religion is belief and nationality is perso­nal
identity, that the relation between the two is determined by the
relation of faith and personality, and that Islam affirms national
iden­tities as they are, and officially recognizes them, amounts to a
total negation of the most important mission of religion.

The most important mission of religion, and above all that of Islam,
lies in offering a world outlook on the basis of a universal system
whose central idea is the belief in the unity of God (tawhid) ‑and in
moulding the spiritual and moral personality of man on the basis of this
world outlook. It seeks to cultivate and develop a new relation between
the individuals and society.

Such a project necessitates the foundation of a radically new culture a
culture which is human and not national. The culture which Islam offered
to the world, and which is known as the Islamic culture today, was not
aimed to be a culture similar to those cultivated by other religions by
assimilating more or less the elements of the previous culture of the
people.

Such religions were influenced by the pre‑existing culture, and in their
turn influenced the society. The culture that Islam developed was
peculiar in the sense that culturalization was inherent in the basic
message of this religion. The message of Islam is dissociation of man
from cultures unworthy of him and association with a culture worthy of
him.

It affirms only that which is essentially positive in an existing
culture. A religion which has nothing to do with various types of
cultures, and which adjusts with varied cultures, is a religion which
feeds itself upon the cultural leftover, and is satisfied with a casual,
once‑in‑a‑week visit to the church.

Thirdly, the meaning of the verse (49:13) that says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is not that \`We have created you as two sexes,' so as to substantiate
the claim that mankind is classified in various groups on the basis of
sex, and is similarly divided into different nations and nationalities,
and, in this way, to justify the conclusion that the verse means to say
that, as the difference of the sexes is natural, an ideology should be
based on affirmation of such differences and not their negation, and the
dif­ferences of nationality are of the same kind as those of sex!

In fact what the verse wants to say is that \`We have created you from a
male and a female.' This either means that all human beings are
genealogically related to and originate from one man and woman (Adam and
Eve), or it means that all people are equal since they are the progeny
of the same father and mother, and there should not be any
discrimination.

Fourthly, the phrase **لِتَعَارَفُوا** , which has been used in the
verse to refer to the purpose of creation, doesn't mean that nations are
diversified so that \`they may be distinguished from one another,' so as
to justify the conclusion that all the nations should retain their
specific character permanently in order to be identifiable as compared
with other nations.

If the Qur’anic verse aimed at emphasizing this point, it should have
used the word **لِيَتَعَارَفُوا** (that they may know their identity)
instead of the word **لِتَعَارَفُوا** (that you may know one another).
As those who are addressed are the individuals, the Qur’an tells them
that \`the divi­sions that have taken place in such a manner are
inherent in the process of creation, so that you individuals may know
each other by means of the national and tribal associations.' We know
that the purpose of this I verse is not to preach that different nations
and communities should necessarily retain their individualities,
remaining independent of one another forever.

Fifthly, whatever we have described in the last chapter concerning the
Islamic point of view regarding homogeneity and heterogeneity of
societies is sufficient to prove that, according to Islam, the natural
and creative process itself leads different societies towards the
establishment of a unified society and culture, and the main programme
of Islam is to establish such a culture and such a society. It is also
sufficient to reject the above mentioned view.

The concept of Mahdism (the belief in the coming of the promised Mahdi)
in Islam is based upon such a view of the future of Islam, mankind, and
the world. Here, we conclude our discussion on society to initiate the
discussion about history.

[^1]: Al‑Mizan, vol. IV, p. 106

[^2]: Ibid, pp. 132, 133.

[^3]: Ibid, p. 14.

[^4]: Spengler, the well known sociologist, as quoted by Raymond Aron's
Main Currents in sociological Thought, vol. I, p. 107.


