What is History?
================

History may be defined in three ways. In fact, there are three closely
connected disciplines related to history.

1. Knowledge of the incidents, events, circumstances, and condi­tions of
people living in the past in relation to the present conditions and
circumstances. All situations, conditions, events, and episodes which
take place belong to the present, that is, the time during which they
take shape, are judged, reported, and recorded as matters of the day by
daily newspapers. However, as soon as their time elapses, they are
merged with the past and become a part of history.

Hence, history, in this sense, is the knowledge of the bygone incidents,
events, conditions and circumstances of the people in the past.
Biographies, records of battles and conquests, and all such chronicles
compiled in the past, or at the present, by all nations, come under this
category.

History in this sense is, firstly, the knowledge of the particular; that
is, it is the knowledge of a sequence of personal and individual
episodes, not the knowledge of a series of general laws and
relation­ships. Secondly, it is a study of narratives and traditions,
not a rational discipline. Thirdly, it is the knowledge of \`being,' not
that of \`becoming.' Fourthly, it is related to the past, not to the
present. This type of history we shall term as \`traditional history'
(*tarikh naqli*).

2. History is the knowledge of laws that appear to govern the life of
the past, obtained through investigation and analysis of the past
events.

The stuff with which the traditional history is concerned, i.e. the
events and incidents of the past, provides the rudimentary and basic
material for this study. For the study of history in this sense, such
events and incidents are similar to the material gathered by a natural
scientist for his laboratory analysis and investigation to discover
certain general laws, through induction, regarding the nature and
properties of his material and the causal relations governing its
changes.

The historian, in this analytical endeavor, wishes to uncover the true
nature of historical events and their causal relationship, and to
discover the general and universal laws applicable to all similar events
of the past and the present. We shall call history in this sense
\`scientific history'.

Although the object of research and the subject matter of scienti­fic
history are the events and episodes of the past, the laws which it
deduces are not specifically confined to the past. They have the ability
of being generalized in order to be applied to the present and the
future also. This aspect of history makes it very useful, making it one
of the sources of man's knowledge regarding himself, and enables him to
exercise control over his own future.

The difference between the task of a researcher in the field of
scientific history and a researcher in the natural sciences is notable.
The material of research for the natural scientist is a chain of real
and verifi­able occurrences that are present.

Hence, necessarily, all his investiga­tions, analyses, and results are
empirical and verifiable. But the material on which a historian works
belongs to the past and does not exist in the present. What is
accessible to a historian now is only a bundle of chronicles about the
past.

A historian is like a judge in a court of law who decides on the basis
of circumstantial evidence and indications on record in his files, not
on the basis of the testimony of any eye‑witness. In this way, the
analysis of a historian is logical, rational, and mental, not one based
upon verifiable external evidence. A historian makes his analysis in the
laboratory of his mind and intellect, with the instru­ments of logic and
inference, not in the external physical laboratory with instruments of
observation and measurement.

Hence, the job of a historian is more akin to that of a philosopher than
of a scientist. Scientific history, like traditional history, is
concerned with the past, not with the present. It is the knowledge of
\`being' not of \`becoming.' But unlike traditional history it is
general, not particular; it is rational, not based upon tradition.

Scientific history is actually a branch of sociology; i.e. it is a
socio­logical study of the societies of the past. The subject of
sociology includes the study of the past and the present societies.
However, if we restrict sociology to the study of contemporary
societies, then scientific history and sociology should be considered as
two disciplines, separate but closely related, complementary, and
dependent upon each other.

3. Philosophy of history is based upon the knowledge of gradual changes
and transformations which lead societies from one stage to another. It
deals with the laws governing these transformations and changes. In
other words, it is the science of \`becoming' of societies, not of their
\`being' only.

Perhaps this question might have arisen in the mind of the honoured
reader, whether it is possible for societies to have simul­taneously
\`being' as well as \`becoming,' and that being should be the subject of
one discipline, viz. scientific history, and \`becoming' of societies
the subject of another discipline, viz. philosophy of history. Isn't any
synthesis between the two impossible, as \`being' implies rest and
\`becoming' movement? Only one of the two should be chosen. Our picture
of the societies of the past should be either a picture of \`being' or a
picture of \`becoming'.

Probably the honourable reader may pose this problem in more general and
comprehensive terms: Our picture of the universe as a whole‑and of
society as a part of it‑is either a static or a dynamic one. If the
universe or society is static then it has \`being,' not becoming; and if
it is changing and dynamic, it has \`becoming' and not \`being.'

From this point of view, the most significant division of the schools of
philosophy is made. It has been said that philosophical systems are
divided into two main groups: the philosophies of \`being' and the
philo­sophies of \`becoming.' The philosophies of \`being' are those
which hold that being and non‑being are incompatible with each other,
and they. regard contradictions as impossible. It is supposed that if
there is \`being' there cannot be \`non‑being' and if there is
\`non‑being' there is no \`being.'

Hence one has to choose one of these two alternatives. As being is
necessary and there is nothing except being in the world and society,
the world is governed by rest and stillness. But the philo­sophies of
becoming, on the other hand, hold that being and non‑being co‑exist in
each and every single moment, and this is what we call motion. Motion is
nothing except that a thing \`is' and at the same time it \`is not.'

Hence, the philosophy of being and the philosophy of becoming are two
opposite views regarding existence, and one has to choose any one of the
two. If we associate ourselves with the first view, we should hold that
societies have \`being' not \`becoming,' and, contrarily, if we
associate ourselves with the second view, it should be assumed that
societies have \`becoming' and not \`being.' Either we can have
scientific history, in the light of the above discussion, without having
any philosophy of history, or we can have philosophy of history without
a scientific history.

The answer to these questions lies in the fact that such thinking about
being and nothingness, about motion and rest, and about incompatibility
of opposites, is a characteristic feature of the Western though and
originates in the West's ignorance of the philosophical problems o:
being (problems concerning existence) and specially the profound problem
of principality of existence (asalat al‑wujud) and a number o: other
problems related to it.

Firstly, take the statements that \`being' is synonymous with rest, or,
in other words, rest is being, and that motion is a synthesis between
being and non‑being and means unity of two opposites. These notions are
some of the gross errors made by some schools of Western philoso­phy.

Secondly, what is maintained here has nothing to do with the
above‑mentioned philosophical problem? The positions taken here are
based upon the hypothesis that society, like all other living beings,
follows two different sets of laws: one set of laws which is confined to
a particular species, and the other set of laws which deals with changes
of species and their transformation into one another. We shall term the
first kind of laws, \`the laws of being', and the other, \`the laws of
becoming.'

Incidentally, this point has been realized by some sociologists. Auguste
Comte is one of them. Raymond Aron says about him:

Statics and dynamics are two basic categories of Auguste Comte's
sociology... Statics consists essentially in examining, in analyzing
what Comte calls the social consensus (social unanimity). A society is
comparable to a living orga­nism.

It is impossible to study the functioning of an organ without placing it
in the context of living creature. By the same token it is impossible to
study politics of the state without placing them in the context of the
society at a given moment ....As for dynamics at the outset it consists
merely of the des­cription of the successive stages through which human
societies pass. [^1]

If we take into consideration any species from among the species of
living beings, like mammals, reptiles, birds etc., we shall see that
they have a group of particular laws specific to their kind, which
govern them as long as they are related to that particular species. (For
example, the laws related to. an animal's embryonic stages, its health
and survival, its conditions of sickness and disease, its food habits
and nourishment, reproduction and growth, or the laws related to the
patterns of its habitation or migration, and its mating habits.)

But according to the theory of evolution and development of species, in
addition to certain specific laws that operate within the species, there
is another set of laws which are concerned with the process of evolution
and transformation of .the lower species into the higher ones. These
laws are formulated philosophically, and sometimes termed as the
\`philosophy of evolution' as distinct from the science of biology.

As society is considered to be a living organism, it is also governed by
two types of laws: biological laws and evolutionary laws. The laws which
are concerned with the causes of birth and decline of civiliza­tions,
and the conditions which determine social existence, are laws which are
universally applicable to all the varying forms and changes taking place
in various societies.

We shall call them the \`laws of being' of societies. And those laws
which are concerned with the causes of evolution of societies from one
epoch to another and from one system to another system, would be termed
as the \`laws of becoming' of societies. The difference between them
will become clearer when we discuss each of the two types of problems.

Hence history, according to its third meaning, is the study of evolution
of societies from one stage to another. It is not merely the knowledge
of the existence of the society at a particular stage or at all stages.
For the sake of avoiding any possibility of confusion, these problems
should not be mixed with the problems of scientific history. We shall
call the study of these problems the \`philosophy of history.'

Very often the problems related with scientific history, which deals
with the non‑evolutionary movement of society, are not clearly
differentiated from the problems of philosophy of history, which deals
with the evolutionary movement of society. This is what gives rise to
misunderstandings and errors.

Philosophy of history, like scientific history deals with the general
not with the particular. It is rational (\`aqli), not traditional
(naqli). It is the knowledge of becoming of societies, not of their
being. And also, contrary to the case of scientific history, the use of
the word \`history' ir. the term \`philosophy of history' should not
lead us to think that philosophy of history is related to the past;
rather it means that philo­sophy of history is the study of a continuous
stream which originated in the past and continues to flow towards the
future. Time, for the sake of study of these types of problems, cannot
be assumed to be merely a container [occupied by historical reality],
but it is to be regarded as one of the dimensions of this reality.

The study of history is useful in all of its three senses. Even the
descriptive traditional history, which deals with the lives and
characters of individuals, may be useful, moving, directive, educative
and constructive. But it depends upon who the individuals whose life
histories are discussed are, and what conclusions we infer from their
lives. Men are made, according to the law of imitation, under the
influence of the behaviour, treatment, resolutions, moral habits, and
companionship of their fellowmen.

As the lives of contemporaries serve as a lesson and example for man,
and he learns manners and customs from his fellow beings‑or, according
to Luqman, learns good manners even from the ill‑mannered, so that he
does not commit their mistakes‑the same principle is applicable to the
biographies of the men belonging to the past. History, like a film,
transforms the past into the present.

The Quran itself refers to the beneficial aspects of the lives of such
worthy people whom it considers as fit and imitable models. About the
Prophet (S), the Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّـهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ لِّمَن
كَانَ يَرْجُو اللَّـهَ وَالْيَوْمَ الْآخِرَ وَذَكَرَ اللَّـهَ كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, in the Messenger of Allah you have a good example for
whosoever hopes for God and the Last Day, and remembers God much.”***
(33:21)

About Abraham (A), the Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ كَانَتْ لَكُمْ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ فِي إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَالَّذِينَ
مَعَهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You have a good example in Abraham and those with him ....”***
(60:4)

Whenever the Quran refers to the characters of persons as examples for
others, it does not give importance to their worldly positions, but
always emphasizes the moral and humanistic aspects of their
personali­ties.

It is from this viewpoint that the Quran remembers Luqman, a Negro
slave, as a wise man, although he was neither a king, nor a weal­thy
man, nor a famous philosopher. He is introduced to the world as a
paragon of wisdom. The examples cited in the Quran of the true
believers‑one belonging to the Pharaoh's tribe and another mentioned in
Surat Yasin‑also belong to the same category.

In this book, where we intend to discuss sociology and history from the
Islamic point of view, we will confine our attention solely to
scientific history and philosophy of history because of their relevance
to the world outlook of Islam. Accordingly, we will discuss these two
topics somewhat elaborately, starting with the nature of scientific
history.

Scientific History
------------------

To begin with, I would like to remind that scientific history is to in
the light of the view discussed earlier that the society has a reality,
and personality independent of the individual. If society does‑ not have
a reality independent of its members, there may not be any laws except
those governing individuals,' and, consequently, scientific history,
which is the science of the laws and principles that govern societies,
would be pointless.

That history is governed by laws is a necessary corollary of the
proposition that history has its own nature, which again follows from
the proposition that society has its own nature and reality. In the
context of scientific history, the following problems should be studied.

1. As has been pointed out earlier, scientific history is based on
traditional history. Traditional history provides the material for the
laboratory of scientific history. Hence, firstly, it should be
thoroughly investigated whether the contents of traditional history are
authentic and reliable. If the material is not reliable, all research
and scientific inference regarding the laws governing the societies of
the past would be futile and pointless.

2. If we proceed with the supposition that traditional history is
reliable, and that society has an essence and personality independent of
individuals, then deduction of general laws from historical events and
episodes would depend upon the hypothesis that the law of causation, or
causal determinism, governs the sphere of human activities‑that is the
sphere of problems associated with human freedom and will, which are
expressed in historical events.

Without accepting it; the laws of history can neither be generalized nor
universalized, nor can there be any orderly system of such laws. The
question is whether the law of causation governs the course of history,
and if it does, what are we to think of human freedom and
responsibility?

3. Is history materialistic in nature and governed by materialistic
forces? Is the principal force dominating human history a material
force? Are intellectual and spiritual forces secondary, subordinate, and
dependent upon the material forces that shape history? Contrarily, is it
true that history is essentially spiritual, and the dominating force of
history a spiritual force, the material forces being secondary,
subsidiary, and subservient to it?

In other words, is history in itself \`idealistic’? Or do we have a
third alternative, i.e. history possesses essentially a composite
character, governed by two or more forces? Is it true that a number of
material and spiritual forces‑more or less harmonious and occasionally
conflicting, depending on a system‑govern history?

### 1. Authenticity and Inauthenticity of Traditional History

There are some who severely criticize traditional history, considering
it as a series of fabrications of the narrators based on the
histo­rian's personal interests and objectives, his social affiliations,
or on national, communal or religious prejudices‑all of which have more
or less led to fabrications or distortions.

The historians have compiled history according to their own wishes, and
even those who, from a moral point of view, refrained from deliberate
fabrication and distortion of facts, were selective in their choice
while recording incidents.

That is, they have invariably related only those incidents which did not
go against their objectives and beliefs. They avoided giving accounts of
such events which happened to be against their beliefs and feelings.

In this way, though they might not have added anything of their own, or
recorded any fabricated material, yet through their choice they gave
history their desired form. A significant event or an impor­tant
personality can be studied and analysed only when all the relevant
material is accessible to the researcher.

If only a fraction of the required material essential for the study is
available and the rest is not, the true face of reality is hidden and,
replaced by a radically different face.

The pessimism of these critics of traditional history is similar to the
attitude of some skeptics among Islamic jurisprudents (fuqaha' or
mujtahidun) about Islamic tradition (hadith) and narrations (riwayat)­an
attitude which has been termed “insidad bab al‑\`ilm” (“closure of the
door of knowledge”).

Some have made such ironic statements about history as, “History means,
a series of events that never occurred, recorded by a person who was not
at all present at the time.” A journalist is quoted to have said that
“realities are sacred, but one has freedom of faith [ to believe or
disbelieve them].” Some are not so pessimistic, but they, too, prefer to
be skeptical regarding history.

In the book What is History?, the following statement has been quoted
from Sir George Clark:

... Knowledge of the past that has come down through one or more human
minds, and has been processed by them, and therefore cannot consist of
elemental and impersonal atoms which nothing can alter ....The
exploration seems to be endless, and some impatient scholars take refuge
in skepticism, or at least in the doctrine that, since all historical
judgments involve persons and points of view, one is as good as another
and there is no \`objective' historical truth. [^2]

The fact is that though we may not entirely trust even the records of
the most reliable historians, but there are, firstly, a series of
definite indubitable in history, similar to the self‑evident postulates
accepted in other disciplines. These can form the subject of the
historian's study, analysis, and research.

Secondly, the researcher can exercise his discre­tion in reaching a
conclusion regarding the truth or falsehood of some narrations by
subjecting them to critical scrutiny. Today we see that researchers have
conclusively proved the unreliability of certain matters which were
exaggerated out of proportion and were held in reverence for several
centuries. The story of burning of the library at Alexandria, which
began to be circulated since the seventh century of Hijrah, gradually
found its way into several books of history.

But the findings of the last century researchers have proved it
absolutely base­less, only a fabrication of some prejudiced Christians.
In the same fashion, sometimes certain truths are obscured and hidden,
but after sometime they are somehow uncovered. Therefore, it is not
justifiable to be totally skeptical of the historical records.

### 2. Causation in History

Does absolute causation govern history? If the law of causality
dominates history, it would be essential to accept that occurrence of
every incident in itself should be certain and inevitable, and that some
type of determinism prevails over history. If determinism governs
history, then, where is the place for the individual's freedom and
choice?

If in reality occurrence of events is deterministic, then no one has any
responsibility, and no one may deserve any praise or reproach for his
deeds. If the law of causation does not govern history, there can be no
universality, and if there is no possibility of generalization or
universalization, history cannot have any law because law is dependent
upon universality, and universality is a corollary of the principle of
causality.

This is the main difficulty with regard to scientific history and
philosophy of history. There are some who, on the basis of the
prin­ciple of causation and the principle of universality, negate
freedom and choice. They maintain that whatever is accepted in the name
of freedom is not actually freedom. Contrarily, there are others who
approve the principle of freedom and negate the view that history
follows certain laws. Many sociologists accept the incompatibility of
causality and freedom, and, therefore, they accept causality and negate
freedom.

Hegel, and Marx following him, accept historical determinism. According
to Hegel and Marx, freedom is nothing but consciousness of historical
necessity. In the book Marx and Marxism, the following passage of Engels
is quoted from his work Anti‑Duhring:

Hegel was the first to state correctly the relation between freedom and
necessity. To him freedom is the appreciation of necessity. Necessity is
blind only in so far as it is not understood. Freedom does not consist
in the dream of independence from natural laws, but in the knowledge of
these laws and in the possibility this gives of systematically making
them work towards definite ends. This holds good in relation both to the
laws of external nature and those which govern the bodily and mental
existence of men themselves.[^3]

And also in the same book, after a brief discussion of the view that man
can and should act according to his particular historical conditions and
in the direction determined by those conditions, Engels says:

Identifying and understanding these given conditions render human action
more effective. Every act in the opposite direction amounts to resisting
and obstructing the historic course. To act in the direction determined
by the historic course means moving within the course of history and
participating in the process.

But the question, as to what is meant by freedom, still remains to be
answered. The Marxist school answers that freedom of the individual lies
in his appreciation of the historical necessity, and the social movement
towards which the whole course of history is directed.[^4]

It is evident that these remarks do not solve the difficulty. The real
problem regarding man's relationship with historical conditions is as
follows: Does man control historical conditions? Can he give history his
preferred direction? Is he able to change the course of history?

If man is unable to direct the course of history, or change it, he is
forced to follow the course of history. This is the only way through
which he can not only survive but also continue to evolve. If he goes in
a direction opposite to that of the historic course, he will definitely
perish.

Now the question arises whether man is free or determined to participate
in the course of history. If we accept the principle of pri­ority of
society over the individual and that the consciousness and awareness of
the individual and his feelings are moulded by historical and social
conditions‑especially economic conditions‑does there remain any room for
individual freedom?

Moreover, what is meant by the statement that \`freedom is the
consciousness of necessity'? Does it mean that an individual whose life
is threatened by a storm and who has the full consciousness of the fact
that after some time the tide would take him down into the depths of the
sea, or an individual falling from a high cliff who is conscious that
according to the law of gravity his bones would be crushed into pieces
within a short time, is \`free' to drown into the sea or fall into the
valley?

According to the materialistic theory of historical determinism, social
conditions act as restraining factors for man, which determine his
direction and mould his personality, his consciousness, his
determination and choice. Man is nothing but an empty pot, merely a raw
material in the hands of social conditions. Man is the product of the
conditions, which are not created by him. Pre­ceding conditions
determine the future course for man. It is not man who determines the
future course of historical conditions. On the basis of these notions,
freedom has no sense and meaning.

In reality, human freedom cannot be conceived apart from the theory of
(specific human) nature. According to this theory, in the general course
of the essential movement of the universe, man enters into the world
with a certain dimension that is over and above the physical universe,
and this extra dimension is the essence and core of human existence.

Afterwards, under the influence of the environ­mental factors, man's
personality develops and matures. It is this existential dimension that
gives man a unique human personality, so that he may rule over the tide
of history and determine its course. I have already discussed this
problem under the heading “Determinism or Freedom,” and I shall discuss
this issue further under the title, “The Role of Personality in
History,” when discussing the historical role of heroic figures of
history.

Human freedom, in the sense pointed out, is neither inconsistent with
the law of causation, nor is it incompatible with the universality of
the laws of history. That man, in spite of his freedom of choice, his
will and his thought, should have to adopt a predetermined, specific,
and an inviolable course in social life‑a freedom loaded with
necessity‑does not imply anything but the rule of blind necessity over
man and his will.

The problem regarding history being subject to laws and their
universality poses another difficulty. It is revealed through the study
of historical events and incidents that sometimes a sequence of trivial
accidents changes the course of history. Of course, the accidents­
contrary to the belief of some people‑do not occur without any cause;
such events are called \`accidents' because they cannot be explained by
a general and universal system of causal laws.

If accidents do not follow any universal law and have played an
effective role in the movement of history, then history would be
regarded as devoid of any kind of specific laws. Among the accidents
which have been effective in deter­mining the course of history, the
nose of Cleopatra, the well‑known queen of Egypt, has become proverbial.
Many times there have been in history where, according to the well‑known
saying, “A waft has ruffled the pages of history.”

In his book: What is History? Edward Hallett Carr writes:

The other source of the attack is the famous crux of Cleopatra's nose.
This is the theory that history is, by and large, a chapter of
accidents, a series of events determined by chance coincidences, and
attributable only to the most casual causes.

The result of the Battle of Actum was due not to the sort of causes
commonly postulated by historians, but to Antony's infatuation with
Cleopatra. When Bajazet was deterred by an attack of gout from marching
into central Europe, Gibbon observed that “an acrimonious honour falling
on. a single fibre of a man may prevent or suspend the misery of
nations.”

When King Alexander of Greece died in the autumn of 1920 from the bite
of a pet monkey, this accident touched off a train of events which led
Sir Winston Churchill to remark that “a quarter of a million persons
died of this monkey's bite.” Or take again Trotsky's comment on the
fever contracted while shooting ducks which put him out of action at a
critical point of his quarrel with Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Stalin in the
autumn of 1923: “One can foresee a revolution or a war, but it is
impossible to foresee the consequences of an autumn shooting ‑trip for
wild ducks.” [^5]

In the Islamic world the instance of the defeat of Marwan ibn Muhammad,
the last Umayyad caliph, is an evidence of the role of accident deciding
the fate of history. During his last battle with the \`Abbasids, Marwan,
feeling the necessity to answer the call of nature, went aside to ease
himself.

Accidentally, a person from the enemy's camp happened to pass by, he saw
and killed him immediately. The news of his death spread among the
soldiers of his army. As such an accident was never antici­pated, his
soldiers became panicky and fled from the battlefield. The Umayyad
dynasty was thus overthrown. It was on this occasion that it was said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَهَبَتِ الدَّوْلَة بِبِوْلَة
  </p>
</blockquote>

(“a dynasty was swept away by urine.”).

Carr, after explaining that every accident, far from being without
cause, is governed by a chain of causes and effects, which terminates
another causal chain, says:

...How can one discover in history a coherent sequence of cause and
effect, how can we find any meaning in history, when our sequence is
liable to be broken or deflected at any moment by some other, and from
our point of view, irrelevant sequence? [^6]

The solution to this difficulty is dependent upon the question whether
society and history have a particular direction. If history in itself
has direction, the role of accidents would be insignificant, which means
although certain accidents may change the position of some pawns on the
chess‑board of history, they do not exercise any signifi­cant influence
on the course of history as a whole.

At the most, they can accelerate or arrest it for a moment. But if
history is devoid of nature and personality and does not follow a path
determined by its own nature, it would be without any particular
direction, and also it would be impossible to formulate any universal
laws and to forecast the future.

In my view, history has a specific nature and personality which is a
composite product of the individual human beings who make it, and who
have a natural urge for perfection. I believe that the role of
accidental events does not affect historical necessity and universality
of history.

Montesquieu has beautifully explained the role of accidents in history,
a part of which I have quoted earlier. He says:

...if the outcome of a single battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the
ruin of a state, there was a general cause which decreed that, that
state was destined to perish through a single battle. [^7]

He further says:

It was not the affair of Poltava that ruined Charles. Had he not been
destroyed at that place, he would have been in another. The casualties
of the fortune are easily repaired; but who can be guarded against
events that incessantly arise from the nature of things? [^8]

[^1]: Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Thought, vol. I. pp.
85,86.

[^2]: E. H. Carr, What is History?, p. 8.

[^3]: Andre Peter, Marx and Marxism, Persian translation by Shuja\`
al‑Din Diya'iyan, p. 249, Appendix V.

[^4]: Ibid., pp. 37,38.

[^5]: E.H. Carr, op. cit. pp. 144, 145.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 146.

[^7]: Raymond Aron, op. cit., p. 27.

[^8]: Ibid.


