Is History Materialistic in Nature?
===================================

What is the nature of history? Is the real nature of history cultural,
political, economic, religious, or moral? Is history materialistic or
non-­materialistic, or a combination of both? This is one of the main
questions related with history. Unless this question is not answered,
our understanding of history would not be correct and sound.

It is evident that all the above‑mentioned intellectual and material
factors have participated in the fabric of history. But the question
arises, which of them is the determining factor that plays the most
important role and is prior to all others. There has been controversy as
to which of the factors represents the real spirit of history and its
essence, and which of the factors is able to subordinate and explain the
subsidiary role of other factors. Which of them is the base, to which
others serve as superstructure?

Usually, history is compared to a machine with many motors, in which
every motor is independent of the others. In fact, history is considered
to have a complex not a simple nature. But if we regard it as having
many motors, then what are we to think of its evolution and its course
of development?

It is not possible that many motors, each of them having a specific
momentum pushing history in its own direction, could carry history on a
specific course of evolution, unless we consider the above‑mentioned
factors as the moving forces subordinate to a super‑force, the spirit of
history.

This spirit, by employing various historical forces,. drives it towards
a predetermined evolutionary goal. It is this spirit which actually
represents the essence of history. But this interpretation is different
from the doctrine of monistic view of his­tory. The nature of history is
synonymous with the spirit of history, and it cannot be derived from,
what are called, the moving forces of history.

In our age, a theory which has attracted many supporters is that of
\`historical materialism' or the \`dialectical materialistic theory of
his­tory.' Historical materialism, which is an economic interpretation
of history and an economic‑historical view of man‑not a humanistic
interpretation of economy or history‑explains every human activity from
the economic point of view.

In other words, according to historical materialism, history is
materialistic in nature and essence and follows a dialectical process.
This means that the basis of all historical move­ments, revolutions, and
historical manifestations of every society, is its economic structure.

They are the material forces of production of society and its relations
of production which fashion history and give direction to all
intellectual manifestations of a society like morality, science,
philosophy, religion, law, and culture. These manifestations change with
changes in the mode of production and relations of pro­duction.

The expression that history is dialectical in nature means that the
evolutionary movements of history are dialectical movements caused by a
series of dialectical contradictions, which are concomitant with those
contradictions. Dialectical contradictions are different from
non­dialectical ones in the sense that every phenomenon is compelled to
give rise to its own negation from within. As a result of a series of
changes caused by this inner contradiction, the phenomenon under­goes a
radical qualitative change at a higher level, wherein the two lower
stages attain perfection through synthesis.

Thus historical materialism is comprised of two basic stands: first­ly,
that the nature of history is materialistic; secondly, its movements are
dialectical movements. Here we shall study the first problem. The second
shall be taken up while dealing with the evolution and develop­ment of
history.

The theory of materialistic nature of history is based on a series of
certain philosophical, psychological, and sociological principles that
logically lead to other theories of ideological significance. I would
like to throw some light on this subject, especially because some Muslim
writers claim that although Islam does not approve of the philosophical
materialism, it accepts historical materialism.

Consequent­ly they have based their own historical and sociological
views on this theory. It is, therefore, essential to discuss this
problem in some detail, first expounding the foundations and principles
on which this theory is based and then the conclusions which are derived
from them. After this exposition we shall evaluate the basis of this
theory from the Islamic and scientific points of view.

Basic Principles of Historical Materialism
------------------------------------------

### 1. Priority of matter over spirit

Man has body as well as spirit. Human body and its functionings are the
subject of biological, physical, and physiological studies. But the
spirit and processes related with the soul are the subject of
philosophi­cal and psychological studies. Thoughts, beliefs, feelings,
desires, concepts, and ideologies represent spiritual processes.

The principle of priority of matter over spirit implies that spiritual
processes are not independent, but they are only a sequence of
reflections of material processes; i.e., they are caused by the
influence of the conscious matter on the nerves and the brain.

These processes are significant only to the extent that they form a
connecting link between the internal physical forces and the external
world, but they can never dominate human existence in the manner in
which its opposite forces, i.e. the material forces, do.

For example, the psychical processes may be compared to the headlights
of an automobile. An automobile cannot move about without its headlights
in the dark hours of night. It finds its way in the light of its
headlamp. But what drives it is not the headlamp but its engine.

If these psychical processes, such as thoughts, beliefs, theories and
ideologies, participate in the drama of material forces of history, they
assist the movement of history, but they in themselves are unable to
generate any movement. They can never be compared to the material
forces.

Psychical processes are not independent; they depend for their existence
on matter. The real forces are those which signify human existence and
are identified with material forces, and which are measur­able in
material terms.

In this way, the psychical processes are not capable of generating
movement and directing the course of history, and cannot be considered
as a \`lever' for the movement of society. The spiritual values have
absolutely no chance to become the motivating force, the source, and the
goal of a social movement, unless they serve to support and explain the
material values of history and society.

Accordingly, one has to be very careful in interpreting history. This
theory emphasizes that we should be cautious not to be deceived by the
appearances. Occasionally, at some point in history, it may appear that
a thought, belief, or a faith has brought about change in a society, and
stimulated it at a particular stage of development.

But if we analyse history correctly, we shall see that such beliefs do
not have an independent existence; they are only the mirror‑image or
reflection of material forces of society. There were actually material
forces, which in the guise of those beliefs, moved and changed the
society.

Material forces are the progressive, leading force of history. They are
repre­sented, technically, by the society's system of production, and,
from the humanistic point of view, by the deprived and exploited class
of society.

Feuerbach, the famous materialist philosopher, from whom Marx himself
has borrowed many of his ideas, raises the following questions:

What is theory? What is praxis? What is the difference between the two?

He himself answers that:

Everything which is confined to the mind is theoretical. Whatever moves
the minds of many is practical necessity. It is action which unites many
minds together and organizes the masses, and in this manner finds a
place for itself in the world. [^1]

And Marx, his faithful pupil, writes:

It is obvious that the weapon of criticism cannot replace criticism of
weap­ons. Only the material forces can defeat other material forces.

Marx does not believe in the independence of non‑material forces. He, at
the most, recognizes their value in relation to material existence: He
says: “Theory also, only by taking roots into the lives of the masses,
can be transformed into a material force.” [^2]

Priority of matter over spirit, priority of the body over the mind,
inessentiality of spiritual forces; and rejection of intellectual and
spiritual values as fundamental, are among the basic principles of the
philosophy of materialism.

Quite contrary to this philosophy is the other philosophy which is based
on the essentiality of spirit, according to which all the fundamen­tal
dimensions of human existence cannot be interpreted by means of matter
or its modes. In the domain of human existence, spirit is a fundamental
reality, and the spiritual energies are independent of the material
energies.

In this way, the spiritual forces, i.e. the intellectual forces, faith,
belief and emotions, are regarded as independent factors for some
movements at the individual level and at the level of society. They
serve as \`levers' which can be used for the movement of history. Many
of historical movements have ultimately arisen because of these
\`levers,' especially those which belong to a higher human plane. The
higher individual and collective movements are independently origina­ted
by these forces, and derive their sublimity from these very forces.

Psychic forces sometimes strongly influence physical and material
powers, not only at the level of voluntary activity, but also at the
level of mechanical, involuntary, and physiological activity, and employ
them for attaining their own specific purpose. The effects of psychical
suggestions for curing physical ailments and the miraculous effects of
hypnotism, which belong to the same category, cannot be overlooked.

Knowledge and faith, particularly faith, and specifically whenever these
two psychic forces are harmonized, a great and useful force is generated
which can create wonders by playing an extraordinarily prog­ressive and
revolutionary role in transforming the course of history.

Independence of mind and spiritual powers is one of the funda­mental
principles of “epistemological realism.”[^3]

### 2. Primacy and priority of material needs over intellectual needs

Man has at least two types of needs for his social existence. First­ly,
there are the material needs, such as the need for bread, water,
shelter, dress, medicine, and other such needs. Secondly, there are the
intellectual needs, such as the needs for education, knowledge,
litera­ture, art, philosophical speculation, faith, ideology, prayer,
morality, and other such things. These two types of needs accompany man
in all situations and conditions. But which of them precedes the other?
material needs or intellectual needs? Or none of them?

The theory of priority of material needs is based on the notion that
material needs are more important and preferable. Their importance is
not because of the fact that at the initial stage man is in pursuit of
material needs, and when these needs are satisfied, he can divert his
attention and energies towards the attainment of intellectual pursuits,
but because material needs are also the basis and the source of
intellectual needs.

It is not that man is created with two types of needs and two types of
instincts: material needs and material instincts, intellectual needs and
intellectual instincts; rather man has been created with only one type
of needs and one type of instincts. Intellectual needs are only
secondary needs, which serve the sole purpose of gratifying the material
needs in a better manner.

This is the reason why the intellectual needs, from the point of view of
form, quality, and also essence, are subordinated to the mate­rial
needs. In every age, man has given a specific form, character, and mode
to his material needs, according to the stage of development of the
means of production. His intellectual requirements, which originate in
his material requirements, correspond in form, mode, and quality to his
material necessities.

Hence, there is a twofold relationship of prio­rity between the material
needs and the intellectual needs: priority of existence, i.e.
intellectual needs are the by‑products of the material needs; and the
priority of essence, i.e. the form, quality, and nature of the
intellectual needs remain subordinated to that of the material needs. In
his book Historical Materialism P. Royan quotes from page 92 of Hymen
Louis' book Philosophical Ideas:

Man's material course of existence led him to propound theories
correspond­ing to the material needs of the time about his world,
society, art, and morality; all intellectual manifestations are the
resultant products of material conditions and the mode of production.
[^4]

Accordingly, scientific judgment, philosophical thought, artistic and
aesthetic sensibility, moral values, and religious propensities of every
human being are subject to his way of .life. Applying this maxim,

“Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what you think,” which refers
to individuals, to the society, it may be said: “Tell me what is the
degree of development of the means of production, and what are the
economic relations among the members of a society, and I will tell you
what ideology, which philosophy and what ethics and religion the members
of that society follow.”

Radically opposed to this theory is the theory of independence of
intellectual needs. According to it, although in the individual human
being the material needs sprout up early in life‑as soon as a child is
born he gropes for his mother's breast‑‑the intellectual needs which are
hidden inside the human nature, blossom gradually.

During the later stages of his development and maturity, man sacrifices
his material needs for the sake of intellectual needs. Or, in other
words, the urge of intellectual enjoyment is stronger and more
indigenous to human nature than the physical enjoyments and
attractions.[^5]

The greater an individual's education and training, the more he
considers his material needs, material enjoyments, and material
existence as subordinate to his intellectual needs, intellectual
enjoyments‑and intellectual existence. Society also follows the same
principle.

In primitive societies material needs are more dominant than
intellectual needs; but as society advances and becomes more refined,
intellectual needs assume more important position and become the goal of
human life, while material needs, becoming secondary, are demoted to a
lower place as mere means to attain higher ends. [^6]

### 3. Priority of action over thought

Man is a being who thinks, understands, and acts. Is action prior to
thought or vice versa? Is the essence of man action or thought? Does
human nobility depend upon action, or does it depend upon thought? Is
man the product of action or thought?

Historical materialism is based on the idea of independence of action
and its priority over thought. It considers action as the base, and
thought as its offshoot. Ancient logic and philosophy considered thought
as the key to action.

According to that logic, thought is divided into concepts and judgments,
each of which may be further divided into a priori (self‑evident) and
theoretic. A priori ideas are acknow­ledged as the key to theoretical
ideas. In that logic and philosophy, the essence of man (the self) is
regarded as pure thought. Human perfection and nobility is seen as lying
in wisdom. The \`perfect man' is synony­mous with the \`man of wisdom.”
[^7]

But historical materialism is established on the principle that action
is the key to thought and the criterion of thought. The essence of man
is his productive activity. Action is the source of man's identity and
it moulds him also. Marx says, “The entire so‑called history of the
world is nothing but the begetting of man through human labour. [^8]

And Engels says, “Man himself is the creation of action.” [^9]From the
very beginning, man, instead of contemplating over natural calamities,
conquered the external environment by means of his hard labour, and in
the same way (through revolutionary action) he overpowered the powerful
aggressors to establish a society according to his own desires. In the
book Marx and Marxism, the author says:

Whereas in the philosophy of being (a philosophy that interprets the
world in terms of “being” as opposed to the philosophy of “becoming,”
which interprets the world in terms of motion. Marxism belongs to the
group of the philosophies of “becoming”) it was customary at first to
set forth the ideas and the principles from which practical conclusions
are derived; praxis (practical philosophy), on the other hand, regards
action as the origin and basis of all thought. It replaces the faith in
thought by the philosophy of power.

In agreement with Hegel, it asserts: “The real being of man, in the
first instance, is his own action.” In this belief he joins the German
thinker who reversed the famous phrase, “In the beginning there was the
Word”‑in which the Word signifies spirit, for it is through the word
that the spirit expresses itself‑and declared “In the beginning there
was the Act.”[^10]

This is one of the principles of the materialistic philosophy of
Marxism. This principle is known as “praxis” in the Marxist
termino­logy, and is borrowed by Marx from his materialist predecessor,
Feuer­bach, and his another master, Hegel.

Opposed to this principle is the principle of the philosophy of
ontological realism [idealism ] that believes in the priority of thought
over action and reciprocal interaction of thought and action. In this
philosophy, thought is the essence of man (e.g. the self's \`knowledge
by presence' of itself).

Man has a reciprocal relation with action and work: he creates work and
his work in turn moulds him. Man, through his action upon the external
world, acquires the data of his knowledge from the external world; until
the mind becomes enriched with these primary data, it remains incapable
of any intelligent activity.

After collecting this data, the mind reciprocally exercises its powers
on the data in various fashions, as by generalization, abstraction, and
inference (ratiocination). In this way, it prepares the grounds for the
correct understanding of objects.

Understanding is not merely the reflection of external matter in the
mind. It is only after the reflection of external matter is transformed
inside the mind through a series of mental processes, which originate in
the nonmaterial substance of the soul, that understanding becomes
possible.

Hence, action is the origin of thought and thought is the origin of
action. Action is the test of thought and at the same time thought is
the test of action.

This is not a vicious circle. Man's nobility lies in his wisdom, faith,
and dignity, and in turn his work is valuable because through it he
acquires these virtues. Man is the creator of his work, and, at the same
time, he is also its product. This is the distinguishing characteristic
of man, which is not found in any other being, and which is derived from
a mode of Divine creation special to his species. [^11]

Mans' creativity in relation to work is inventive and positive, while
work's formative power in relation to man is only quantitative. It means
that man actually creates his own work, but work does not really create
a man. It is work, exercise, and repetitive practice, which provide the
grounds for the making of man from within. Whenever there is a
reciprocal relationship between two things which is inventive and
positive from one side and quantitative and numerical from the other,
the former is prior to the latter.

Hence man, whose essence is consciousness (\`knowledge by presence' of
his own self), has reciprocal relationship with work. Man creates work
and work moulds man. Considering the fact that man is the necessary
creative cause of work and work is merely a potential or quantitative
cause of man, it may be said that man is prior to work, and work is not
prior to him.

### 4. Priority o f the Social Existence o f Man Over His Individual Existence, or the Principle of Priority of Sociology Over Psychology

From the biological point of view, man is the most perfect of all
animals. He has a kind of capacity for self‑improvement which is
specific to his kind. Man is endowed with a specific personality whose
dimen­sions form his human Dasein (existence).

As a result of continued experiences and learning, the philosophical and
intellectual dimension of man's existence is shaped. And due to the
influence of some other factors his existence gains another dimension
which is the ethical dimension. It is this dimension which is the source
of all values, and basis of the entire moral \`musts' and \`must nots'.

The artistic and religious dimensions are also evolved in a similar
manner. Man himself styles a system of intellectual principles which
serve as the basis of his thinking within the framework of his
philosophical and intellectual dimensions. In the course of his
judgments, he arrives at a set of absolute and semi­-absolute
(comparatively relative) values in the moral and social spheres of life.
All these dimensions combined together constitute human existence.

Human dimensions are entirely effects of social factors. At the time of
birth, man is devoid of all these dimensions; he is actually like a raw
material ready to acquire any form, ideological or emotional, depending
upon the factors that exercise influence upon him. He is like an empty
pot that has to be filled from outside, like a blank recording tape on
which any sound can be recorded. Whatever is recorded on it is
retrievable.

To sum up, the actual maker of human personality, and whatever that
transforms man from a \`thing' into a \`person,' is nothing but the
external social factors, which combined together constitute that which
is called social process. Man in himself is purely a \`thing;' which is
transformed into a \`person' as a result of the impact of social
factors. P. Royan in his Historical Materialism quotes from page 42 of
Plekhanov's *Fundamental Problems of Marxism*:

The characteristics of a social system are determined by the current
level of development of the means of production of society. It means
that when the stage of development of the means of production is
determined, the charac­teristics of the social order and the psychology
(of the people) related to it, and all the other corresponding relations
within the system, on the one hand, and the ideas and the pace of
progress, on the other; are also (of their own accord) determined.

In the same book, it is further stated that:

When psychology, through the means of production, is determined,
ideology too, which is deeply rooted in the psychology of the people, is
also conse­quently determined. But as the ideology at a particular
historical stage is the product of social requirements, and as it always
continues to protect the interests of the ruling class, it necessarily
strengthens and perfects the existing social structure.

Hence the social structure in class‑societies, which comes into
existence for protecting the ruling class and propagating its ideology,
is in reality the result of the social order and its requirements, and,
in the last analysis, is the product of the character of the modes and
the means of production.

For instance, the church and the mosque are for preaching of the
religious beliefs, which in all the religions are based upon the faith
in the final judgment or resurrection. The belief in resurrection is the
logical outcome of the particular social order that is based upon the
division of society into classes, which in its turn is the product of a
particular stage of development of the means of production. Hence,
belief in resurrection is the product of the means of production (at a
particular stage of social development).

In contrast to this principle is another anthropological principle which
is based upon the view that the foundation of human persona­lity, from
which man's intellect and higher ideals arise, is itself inherent in
human nature, ingrained in him by the agents which are responsible for
his creation. It is correct that man, contrary to the well-­known theory
of Plato, is not born with a ready‑made and finished per­sonality, but
the real foundation of his personality is inborn, not acquired from the
society.

If we want to interpret this idea in philoso­phical terms, we shall have
to say that the real source of the human dimensions of man's
existence‑including the moral, religious, philoso­phical, artistic,
scientific, literary, and emotional dimensions‑ have their origin in his
rational self, which is man's distinguishing characteristic, and is
bestowed upon him by the process of creation itself. Society fosters
man, nurtures him, or distorts him according to his individual
aptitudes. At first the rational self is potential, and then it
gradually attains actuality.

In this way, man, according to the basic principles of thought, and also
according to the principle governing his material and intellectual
inclinations and aptitudes, is like all the other living beings, whose
all faculties are potential in the beginning, and as a result of a
series of mutational movements (harakat jawhariyyah) gradually
actualize, develop, and attain perfection.

Man, under the influence of external factors, nourishes and cultivates
his innate personality and attains perfection, or sometimes he deviates
from the normal course and distorts it. This is the same principle which
in Islamic writings is called the “principle of nature,” and is regarded
as the mother principle in Islamic teachings.

On the basis of the principle of nature, human psychology is prior to
human sociology. Sociology itself originates in human psychology.
According to this principle of nature, although at the time of birth man
possesses neither perception nor imagination, neither the power of
judgment nor human aptitudes; he however is born with some existential
dimensions besides his animal dimensions.

It is because of the same dimensions that he gradually evolves a
sequence of abstract ideas and judgments (in philosophical and logical
terms, the \`secondary concepts') which form the real foundation of
human thought, and without which any kind of logical reasoning is
impossible. The same dimensions develop a series of sublime aspirations
in man, and are considered to. be the foundation of human personality.

According to the theory of priority of human sociology over human
psychology, man is merely a passive receiver, not an active seeker. He
is a raw material which is indifferent to any form given to him, a blank
tape on which any song can be recorded. In it there is no kind of
inherent movement towards any fixed preordained form.

Whatever form is given to it is accepted without causing any distortion;
because it neither has any form of its own, nor is any form alien to it.
The tape does not require any particular song, because of its ability to
receive any song without being alienated or estranged from its own
essence or nature. The relation of this raw material to all forms, the
relation of the tape to all songs, and the relation of the pot to
whatever fills it, are similar and of the same kind.

But according to the principle of nature and the principle of prio­rity
of human psychology over human sociology, although in the begin­ning man
lacks actual understanding and actual inclinations, from within he moves
in a dynamic way towards a series of primary judgments, which are called
a priori or primary principles. He also moves towards a series of
higher, sublime values which constitute his ideals of humanity.

After that a set of simple ideas, which are the primary elements of
thought (and are called in philosophical term \`primary concepts'),
enters into his mind from outside; those principles emerge in the form
of a system of theoretical or practical judgments, and the innate human
inclinations gradually assume definite form in the course of time.

According to the first theory, man, under the existing conditions,
believes for example, that the arithmetical formula, 2 x 2 = 4, as being
absolutely true for all times and places. But actually this belief is a
product of specific conditions; which means that it is due to the
prevailing conditions which make it true, and it is just possible that
under different conditions and a different environment the judgment
would be quite different, such as 2 x 2 = 26.

But according to the second theory, although the external conditions
help man to arrive at the idea of numbers 2, 4, 8, 10 and so on, but the
calculations like 2 x 2 = 4 or 5 x 5 = 25 are essential pro­ducts of the
human mind, and it is impossible for them to have different forms:
Similarly the perfectionist tendencies of human nature are also
inseparably essential characteristics of man's mind or soul. [^12]

### 5. Priority of Material Aspect of Society over its Intellectual Aspect

Society is comprised of different strata, classes, and structures:
economic, cultural, administrative, political, religious, legal, etc.
From this angle, a society seems to be quite similar to a complete house
where a family dwells and which consists of a drawing room, bedroom,
kitchen, toilet etc.

One of the different social structures is that which serves the purpose
of the base or the foundation of the whole structure, upon which stands
the system and the superstructure. If it is disturbed or collapses, the
whole structure is necessarily bound to fall. It is the economic
structure of the society. The social structure of the society consists
of whatsoever is related with its system of material produc­tion, such
as tools and means of production, sources and relations of production.

Tools of production, which comprise the most important part of the
social structure, are themselves always changing and developing. Every
stage in the development of the tools of production, necessitates a
specific system of relations of production which negates all that
existed prior to it in the society.

The type of relations of production existing in a society depends upon
particular laws and conditions concerning the institution of ownership,
which really means the laws and conditions that govern the members of
society and their conventional relationship with the sum. total of the
product of society. With inevitable changes in the relations of
production, the basis of all legal, intellectual, moral, religious,
philosophical, and scientific principles is bound to change. In one
sentence: economy is the foundation of society.

In the book Marx and Marxism, a passage from Marx's preface to his work
*The Critique of Political Economy* is quoted:

In the social production of their life, men enter into specific
relations that are indispensible and independent of their will,
relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of
development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these
relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society,
the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure
and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness.

The mode of production of material life conditions the social,
political, and intellectual life‑process in general. It is not the
consciousness of man that determines their being, but on the contrary,
their social being that determines their consciousness. [^13]

In the same book Marx's letter to Annenkov is also quoted:

Assume a particular state of development in the productive facilities of
man and you will get a corresponding form of commerce and consumption.
Assume particular degrees of development of production, commerce, and
consumption and you will have a corresponding organization of the
family, or orders or of classes, in a word a corresponding civil
society. [^14]

Peter explains Marx's view in the following words:

In this fashion Marx has compared the society to a building, the base
and foundation of which are the economic institutions, whose
superstructure (the building itself) is comprised of political,
religious, and legal patterns, customs and norms.

As in the case of a building, it depends upon the position of its base
and foundation, the economic forms (relations of production) and
technical modes are also dependent upon and associated with the modes of
thinking, the political system and the customs, and each of them is
subject to economic conditions. [^15]

The same book quotes from Lenin's *Marx‑Engels* *Marxism* a passage
reproduced from the third volume of *The Capital*:

The mode of production manifests itself in the human activity in
relation to nature and, followini that, in social conditions and
intellectual patterns resulting from them. [^16]

The same book quotes further from the Preface to a Contribution to the
Critique of Political Economy:

My investigations led to the result that the legal relations as well as
forms of the state are to be grasped neither from themselves nor from
the so‑called-general development of the human mind, but rather have
their roots in the material conditions of life ....the anatomy of civil
society is to be sought in political economy. [^17]

Marx, in his book *The Poverty of Philosophy*, has written:

Social relations are closely bound up with productive forces. In
acquiring new productive forces, men change their mode of production;
and in changing their mode of production, in changing the way of earning
their living, they change all their social relations. The hand mill
gives you a society with the feudal lord; the steam‑mill, a society with
the industrial capitalist. [^18]

The theory of the primacy of material structure of society in relation
to other social formations corresponds to the theory of priority of
action over thought. The theory of priority of action over thought is
applicable to the individual level, and the theory of priority of
material aspect over other social aspects is actually based upon the
theory of priority of action over thought but at the level of society.

Since the advocates of this view also advocate the theory of priority of
human sociology over human psychology, hence the priority of individual
action over individual thought is a form and result of the theory of
priority of material aspect over other social aspects.

Contrarily, if human sociology is considered to be prior to human
psychology, the priority of material aspect of society over its other
aspects would be considered as the effect and result of the priority of
individual action over individual thought.

The material aspect of society, which may be also termed as the economic
structure or economic base, consists of two constituents: firstly, the
tools of production, which are the product of man's relation with
nature; and, secondly, the economic relations of the members of society
on the grounds of distribution of wealth, which are sometimes termed as
the “relations of production.” Often both of them are referred to as
“the means of production” or “the mode of produc­tion.” [^19]

It should be noted that these terms used by the founders of historical
materialism are not free from ambiguity, and are not well­ defined and
specific.[^20] When they say that economy is the base and the material
aspect of society is prior to other social aspects, they mean the whole
system of production, but generally refer to the‑tools of production and
relations of production.

Special attention should be paid to an important point fully expli­cit
in the writings of the founders of historical materialism that the base
itself is two‑tiered; a part of it acts as the base for the other part,
which is built upon it. The basis, the real foundation at the bottom of
the structure consists of the tools of production, i.e. the physical
labour materialized. It is the physical labour which creates and posits
particular economic relations according to the distribution of wealth.

These relations, which reflect the degree of the development of the
tools of production, are not only in harmony with the tools of
production, but are also considered to be their incentive and motivating
force. It means that the specific economic relations in a society are
the means of deriving the greatest benefit from the tools of production.
They are like a garment tailored to fit the body, i.e. the means of
production.

But the tools of production in themselves are subject to development.
Any change in the tools of production can disturb the harmony between
the two constituent parts of the system of production. The productive
and economic relations, i.e. those laws which were evolved to suit the
earlier tools of production, become outdated in the same manner as a
child's dress does not fit the fully grown‑up man, and hinders his free
movement.

Similarly the primitive tools do not suit a more developed society and
obstruct its growth by creating contradiction between the two tiers of
production structure. The new tools of production are inevitably
estab­lished and the base, i.e. the economic structure of society, is
totally transformed and, in consequence of this change, the legal,
moral, philosophical, and religious superstructure is also overthrown.

Keeping in mind the primacy of collective labour, i.e. labour
materialized which is represented by the tools of production, and also
considering the fact that Marx is one of those sociologists who regard
sociology as being prior to psychology, who also considers man qua man
as a social being or in his own words “sui generic”, the philo­sophical
role of labour according to Marxism‑which is the essence of the Marxist
philosophy and to which little attention has been paid­ becomes clear.

Marx gives the same importance to human labour in the context of human
existence that Descartes gives to the rational being of man, Bergson to
the dynamic aspect of human existence, and Jean Paul Sartre to man's
feeling of guilt.

Descartes says, “I think, therefore I am” (Cogito ergo sum). Bergson
says, “I have continuity, therefore I exist.” Sartre says, “I
feel‑guilty, therefore I exist.” Marx would have said, “I work,
therefore I exist.”

Apart from these diverse modes of existence (thought, continuity, guilt
etc.), none of these thinkers tries to posit human existence or \`ego'
in absolute terms. Some of them even maintain that man's existence
cannot be conceived beyond and apart from one of these specific modes.
Moreover, everyone of them wants to define man's essence and reality of
human existence in these terms only.

For instance, Descartes intends to say, “My existence is synonymous with
the existence of my thought; eliminate thought, and I am nothing.”

Bergson intends to say, “Human existence is identical with continuity
and time (duration).”

Sartre also intends to say that “man's essence and actuality of his
existence lies in the sense of guilt; take away guilt from human nature,
and man is nothing.”

Marx also in his turn intends to say, “The whole of man's existence and
his actual being is work. Work is the essence of humanity; I labour,
there­fore I am. It is not in this sense that work is the proof of the
existence of my self, but in the sense that work itself is identical
with the existence of my self; work is my actual existence.”

Marx says, “For a socialist person the entire so‑called history of the
world is nothing but begetting of man through human labour.”[^21] He
distinguishes human consciousness from man's real existence, and says,
“It is not the consciousness of man that determines his being, but his
social being that determines his consciousness. “'[^22]

He further says that the premises with which we start are not
self‑willed or absolute, but are derived from real individuals, their
actions, and from material conditions of existence. He explains the term
“real individual” in the following words: “But the real individuals act
not according to the whims which cross their imagination... but
according to what they materially produce and make; i.e. they act on the
basis of definite material conditions and certain limitations‑
conditions which are independent of their will.” [^23]

Engels says: “Labour is the source of all wealth, the political
economists assert... but it is infinitely more than this. It is the
prime basic condition for all human existence, and this is true to such
an extent that, in a way, we should say that it is labour which has
created man himself.”[^24] All these extracts from the writings of the
founders of Marxism indicate their emphasis on the role of labour.

However, Marx and Engels have borrowed this idea regarding the role of
labour from Hegel, who said, “The real being of man, in the first
instance, is his action.” [^25]

Hence, according to Marxism, existence of man is primarily social and
not individual. Secondly, the social existence of man is synony­mous
with his materialized labour, i.e. collective labour. All individual
modes like feelings and emotions, or all social modes such as morality,
philosophy, art, religion etc. are only expressions and manifestations
of man's real being; they are not identical with his being itself:

According­ly, the actual evolution of man is identical with the
development of collective labour. But intellectual, emotional, and
spiritual development or evolution of the social system is only a
manifestation and reflec­tion of the real development and not the
development itself. The mater­ial development of a society is the
criterion of its intellectual develop­ment.

As action is the criterion for judging thought, truth or falsity of an
idea is also judged through action and not by intellectual or logical
standards. In the same way, the measure of intellectual development also
is material development.

Hence, if the question arises as to which school of philosophy,
morality, religion or art is more progressive, the intellectual and
logical standards cannot provide the answer to this question. The only
criterion should be to see what are the conditions of which that
particular school of thought is the product and manifesta­tion, and at
which stage of development of social labour or tools of production it
has emerged.

This type of thinking is, of course, very strange to people like us who
consider the real existence of man as his own \`self' and this \`self,'
too, an immaterial substance and a product of mutational movements of
nature and not the product of society. But for one like Marx, who thinks
in material terms and does not believe in the immaterial sub­stance, is
bound to interpret the essence of man and his a6tuality from a
biological point of view, and say that the essence of man is identical
with the physical constitution of his body, as the ancient materialists,
like the materialists of the eighteenth century, believed. But Marx has
rejected the mechanistic view of life and has claimed that the being of
man is grounded in society not in nature. Whatever has been formed by
nature is the potential human being, not the actual one.

Furthermore, either Marx should regard thought as the essence of
humanity, and work as the manifestation and expression of thought or, on
the con­trary; he should consider labour as the essence of humanity and
thought as the manifestation and expression of labour.

Marx, being a materialist, not only does approve of the primacy of
matter in the individual, but also rejects the idea of any supra
material essence besides the individual's material existence. In the
context of society and history also, he accedes to the priority of
matter. As a result he has to adopt the second alternative.

Here a basic difference between the point of view of Marx and that of
other materialists concerning the nature of history comes to light.
Every materialist, since he considers man and other manifesta­tions of
his existence as material, inevitably tends to regard history also as
materialistic. But what Marx says is more than this. Marx tries to say
that history is essentially economic in character, and in economics,
too, the economic relations of production occupy the most important
place.

Since he considers the economic and production relations, i.e. the
relation of workers with the products of their labour, as essential and
necessary, derived from the stage of development of the tools of
pro­duction, Marx's viewpoint is‑ that history is determined by the
tools or instruments of production.

Merely to say that history is materialistic in nature, or to say that
history is economic in nature, is not enough to define the Marxian
viewpoint. We should notice that according to Marx the essence and
nature of history is “instrumentalist.” I, in some of my works,[^26]
have termed Marx's historical materialism as an “instru­mentalist
theory,” which is opposed to my own “humanistic theory” of history.

Actually, the manner in which Marx is absorbed in his philosophy of
labour and conceives the idea of \`social labour,' shows that human
beings as he conceives them are not the same as those who walk in the
streets and think and resolve, but as if they are, in fact, like tools
and machines in factories. Human beings who walk, talk, and think are
seen as images of the \`real' human beings conceived by Marx.

Marx's view of social labour and tools of production seems to advance a
view according to which man is a being who acts blindly and mechanically
without any resolution and will. He is merely a shadow of man, not man
himself, whose development and progress is determined strictly
externally and who has no will or purpose of his own, and is forced to
follow a predetermined path blindly.

It may be said that whatever Marx has said regarding the priority of
collective labour over the conscious mind and human will sounds to be
quite similar to the views expressed by some of the religious thinkers
about the unconscious functionings of human organs, such as the
functioning of digestive system, heart, liver etc., which are
consi­dered to operate under the influence of a hidden single will.

According to these thinkers, desires, wishes, 'oughts' and \`ought
nots,' and consequently the matters which are related to the practical
aspect of the mind, i.e. the lower, functional, and physiological sides
of the human self, which appear on the surface of the conscious mind and
without its knowing their origin, are reflections of a series of
compulsive natural needs originating from the subconscious. It is
similar to what has been termed by Freud as the subconscious or the
unconscious, which dominates the conscious mind.

The views of those ancient thinkers and that of Freud, however, relate
to a part of the conscious mind and to the influence of a con­cealed
consciousness. Besides, whatever they talk about is not external to
human existence; but what Marx says is external to human existence.

Careful observation shows that Marx's theory is quite astonishing from
the philosophical point of view.

Marx compares his own discovery with the well‑known biological discovery
of Darwin. Darwin has proved that a process quite external to the
animal's will and consciousness gradually and unconsciously causes
biological changes in the course of time. Marx also claims that a blind
process (identical with the real existence of man) gradually and
unconsciously causes the formation of the social structure, i.e. all the
things named by Marx as superstructure, and even a part of the base
also, i.e. the socio‑economic relations.

He says, “Darwin has called the attention of scientists towards the
history of natural selection, the formation of organs in plants and
animals corresponding to the means of production necessary for their
survival. Isn't the history of genera­tion and formation of organs
producing the social human being, i.e. the material basis of all types
of social organizations, worthy of such a treatment? ...Natural
selection lays bare the modes of human action vis-à-vis nature; the mode
of production lays bare man's material exis­tence, and as a result, the
source of social relations, thought, and intellectual products that
spring from it.” [^27]

It is quite obvious from all that we have said about the theory of
historical materialism that it is based on several other theories, some
of which are psychological and others are sociological, some
philosophical and others anthropological.

Conclusions
-----------

The theory of historical materialism itself leads to a series of
conclusions which are influential in practical social strategy.
Historical materialism is not merely a theoretical and intellectual
approach with­out relevance to social behaviour and social choice. Now
we have to see what sort of conclusions can be drawn from it.

### 1. The first conclusion is related to the problem of study of society and history

On the basis of historical materialism, the best and the most reliable
way to study and analyse historical and social events is to investigate
their economic basis. Without studying the economic foundation of
historical events, their correct understanding is impos­sible; because
it is presumed that all social changes are materialistic in essence,
even‑though they may appear to have an independent cultural, religious,
or moral essence.

It means that all these changes are reflec­tions of the economic and
material conditions of society, being their effects. Ancient thinkers
also claimed that knowledge of objects by means of identification of
their causes is the most reliable and the best way of understanding
them.

Hence, if we assume that the root cause of all social changes is the
economic structure of society, the best way of studying history is
socio‑economic analysis. In other words, as the cause has priority over
its effects, at the stage of study, also, priority lies with it. Hence,
the priority of economic base exists not only at the level of external
reality, but it is also to be observed at the level of intellectual
inquiry and study.

In the book *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, this problem has been
discussed as follows:

For analysing social revolutions, one must not judge social conflicts in
political, legal, or ideological terms; on the contrary, they are to be
interpreted in terms of the contradiction between the productive forces
and relations of production. Marx has seriously warned us of the dangers
of such a judgment, firstly because such a judgment is not realistic,
for it replaces the cause, which economic changes and contradictions
are, by the effect, i.e. political, legal, and ideological forms, which
are the effects.

Secondly, such an interpretation is superficial; as instead of probing
deeply into the real causes, it only touches upon the surface, and what
is apparent reality is considered to be sufficient for explanation.
Thirdly, it is illusory; because the superstruc­tures, which are on the
whole ideological, are nothing but inaccurate images of the reality.
Depending on inaccurate images instead of a realistic analysis of the
problem under study, will no doubt lead us into confusion and error.
[^28]

Here the author quotes from the selected works of Marx and Engels:

As in the case of an individual mere self‑introspection does not help us
to make any judgement, in the same way, during the period of disturbance
and chaos, the ideas of that period should not be treated as helpful for
judging its character. [^29]

Marx makes an attempt to reject the role of consciousness, thought, and
innovation, which is generally considered to be a basic agent of
development. For instance, Saint Simon, from whom Marx has borrowed a
number of ideas, writing about the role of creativity in the process of
evolution, says:

Societies are governed by two moral forces which are equally strong and
operate alternately. One is the force of habit or custom, and the other
is inclination towards innovation and creativity. After some time
customs necessarily become evil ....At such times, the need for
something new begins to be felt. It is this need which really
constitutes the revolutionary situation. [^30]

Proudhon, another of Marx's teachers, says about the role of ideas and
beliefs in the evolution of societies:

Political forms of nations have been the manifestations of their
beliefs. Movement of the forms, their transformation and annihilation
are the tests which reveal the value of the underlying ideas, through
which an absolute and unchangeable reality is revealed to us gradually.
But we see that all political institutions necessarily seek adjustment
with the existing social conditions in order to be saved from inevitable
death. [^31]

Despite all this, Marx claims that every social revolution, more than
anything else, is a socio‑economic necessity. It is caused by the
process of polarization of civil social structure, the forces of
production and social relations.[^32]

Marx tries to say that it is neither inventiveness and creativity nor
revolutionary ideas and beliefs that are instrumental in the process of
social change, but it is socio‑economic necessity that makes men develop
and embrace new revolutionary beliefs and ideologies. Hence if we try to
apply the conclusions of historical materialism for analys­ing certain
historical events such as the wars of Persia and Greece, or the
Crusades, or the Islamic conquests, or the Renaissance in the West, or
the constitutional movement in Iran, it would be a mistake to study and
evaluate them from the viewpoint of superficial forms of these events,
which are occasionally political, religious, or cultural.

It would not be right to accept even the views of the revolutionaries,
who might have regarded those movements as religious, cultural, or
political as a ­criterion. We should concentrate our attention on the
real substance of those movements, which is economic and material in
essence, in order to arrive at correct conclusions.

Nowadays we see that the contemporary Marxists, while trying to explain
any historical movement, snatch some rudimentary facts from here and
there, and without having any authentic and conclusive infor­mation
about it discuss the economic conditions of the past events and
movements.

### 2. The law governing history is deterministic, inviolable, and external to human will

In previous chapters, I have already discussed whether a series of
binding causal laws rules history. I have also explained that some
people in the name of accidents, and others on account of the freedom of
human will, have rejected the law of causation and consequently nega­ted
the existence of certain necessary permanent laws for society and
history.

But I have proved that such a theory is baseless. The law of causation,
and consequently the necessary relation between cause and effect,
governs history in the same manner as it governs other natural
phenomena.

In addition to it I have also proved that society and history have an
organic unity and objective existence, and, therefore, possess a
specific nature, whose laws are necessary and universal. Hence
accord­ing to the previous statement, a series of general and necessary
laws govern history and society. We shall term this type of necessity as
\`philosophical necessity.' This necessity is responsible for directing
the course of history according to a series of definite and necessary
laws.

But the Marxist notion of historical determinism means economic
determinism. It is a. unique interpretation of philosophical necessity.
This theory synthesizes two different theories. The first one is the
conception of philosophical necessity, which holds that no accident can
occur without a cause. Occurrence of every historical phenomenon is made
inevitable and certain due to presence of particular causes respon­sible
for bringing it into existence. No accident can occur in absence of its
causes.

The second theory is that of the primacy of material founda­tion of
society as against other foundations. This theory has already been
discussed earlier. The necessary corollary of these theories is
materialistic determinism of history, i.e. dependence of the
superstruc­ture on the base is necessary and inevitable. Any change in
the base necessarily brings about change in the superstructure. Without
a change in the base, any change in the superstructure is absolutely
impossible.

That which, according to the Marxist claim, makes Marxist socialism
\`scientific,' and makes it assume the garb of a natural law like other
natural laws, is the very principle of historical determinism. According
to this principle the tools of production, which are the most
fundamental part of the economic structure, continue to develop
according to a system of natural laws.

Their development is similar to the evolution of animals and plants
which in the course of several hundred million years continued their
gradual development, attaining new forms at every stage. As changes in
species and evolution in animals and plants are independent of their own
will and desire, the process of development and evolution of the tools
of production also takes place automatically.

In the course of their gradual development, the tools of produc­tion
pass through certain stages. At every stage they cause irresistible
transformation in all social modes, and this process is irresistible.
Before it reaches a specific stage of development, the possibility of
initiative changes in the superstructure of the society does not exist.

The socialists, and in general the advocates of a just social order, who
do not pay much attention to the possibilities realized through the
development of the tools of production, and merely cherish the desire
for social justice and socialism on sentimental grounds, cannot achieve
anything; they waste their time and energy in futile daydreaming. Karl
Marx, in his preface to the first German edition of *The Capital*, says:

The country that is more developed industrially only shows to the less
developed the image of its own future.[^33]... And even when a society
has got upon the right track for the discovery of the natural laws of
its movement ultimately ...it can neither clear by bold leaps, nor
remove by legal enact­ments, the obstacles offered by the successive
phases of its normal develop­ment. But it can shorten and lessen the
birth pangs.

Marx himself has expounded certain points in the latter part of his
statement, which either have been ignored or underestimated. He is
actually trying to answer a possible question and objection.

Someone might have said: “The step‑by‑step development of society
follows irresistibly the orderly step‑by‑step development in nature
only, as long as man does not understand this process and fails to
discover it. But as soon as man understands it, it comes under his
control and domination. It is said that as long as man does not
understand nature, it dominates him, but as soon as he understands it,
nature becomes his obedient servant. For example, a disease remains
uncured as long as its causes and cures are unknown, but as soon as it
is understood, it becomes curable and is eradicated. In the same manner
cyclones and other natural calamities may be prevented.”

To elaborate the above‑quoted statement, what 'Marx wants to say is
this: The orderly step by step movement of society is a kind of organic
change. It is the type of automatic internal movement of things, like
the growth of animals and plants.

It is a kind of motion which is not mechanical. But changes brought
about in things by means of external factors, like all technical and
industrial changes, and other­ changes imposed on nature by applying
external pressures, such as killing of insects by insecticides or
elimination of bacteria by means of drugs, are mechanistic. When the
knowledge of natural laws is employed by man to subjugate nature, the
relation between man and nature is mechanical.

In the case of organic transformations and internal and essential
movements of things, the utmost role that human knowledge and
consciousness can play is to act in accordance with them, and to apply
his knowledge for extracting the greatest benefit from them.

Man, by discovering the laws governing the growth and evolution of
plants and animals‑and of these are the laws governing the growth of
embryo inside the animal's womb‑also discovers the necessity and
unchangeability of those irresistible laws.

Marx means to say that, social development of man, which is subject to
development in the tools of production, is a kind of organic,
autogenetic, essential, and spontaneous evolution from within, that
cannot be controlled by knowledge or consciousness. Man is compelled to
pass through the specific stages of a determined social evolution, just
as an embryo has to undergo a definite course of development inside the
womb. Any idea of changing that course is nothing but futile.

It is not possible for society to reach the highest stage without
passing through certain intermediate stages. It is also impossible for a
society to reach the highest stage by adopting a course different from
the paths determined by history.

The Marxist conception of social evolution as a spontaneous,
un­conscious, or involuntary, natural, and necessary process resembles
the Socratic conception of human mind, according to which ideas are
inborn. Socrates used the dialectical method in his teachings. He
believed that if the questions were asked step‑by‑step in a systematic
way with an accurate knowledge of the workings of the mind, it finds the
answers automatically and naturally without any external guidance.

Socrates was the son of a midwife. He used to say that he performed the
same duty with minds as his mother performed in regard to preg­nant
women. A midwife does not give birth to a child. It is nature which
makes mother deliver the child at a certain time. In spite of this she
needs the services of the midwife, who takes care that any untoward
incident does not happen which may endanger the life of the mother or
the child.

From the Marxist point of view, though the knowledge of the laws of
sociology and philosophy of history does not cause a social change, yet
the knowledge of sociology and philosophy of history is valuable. And
scientific socialism is nothing but the discovery of these laws. The
least service it can render is to liberate minds from the influence of
utopian socialism and sentimental advocacy of justice.

The laws of dynamics, on the contrary, although they are unchangeable
and permanent, their knowledge offers an advantage, i.e. they are useful
in predicting the future course. In the light of scientific sociology
and scientific socialism the pattern of every society can be
investigated. We can discover its present stage of development and
predict its future course.

Consequently, one can know in which stage of embryonic development is
the baby of socialism in the womb of society. At every stage one must
expect only what it is right to expect of that stage, avoiding all undue
expectations. A society which is still in the stage of feudalism should
not be expected to enter into the phase of socialism; because, a
four‑month‑old embryo cannot be expected to be born immediately as a
fully developed baby.

Marxism makes an attempt to identify the natural‑dynamic stages of
society, and discover such inviolable laws of evolution of societies
which are applicable to the transition of society from one epoch to
another.

According to Marxism, all societies have to pass through four phases of
development in order to reach the stage of socialism, viz. the period of
primitive communism, the period of slavery, the period of capitalism,
and the period of socialism. Sometimes instead of four periods five,
six, or even seven, periods are enumerated, which means that the periods
of slavery, capitalism, and socialism may be further divided into two
sub-periods.

### 3. Each historical period is quite different from the other period in character and nature

As the process of evolution changes one species into another, in case of
historical epochs the same thing happens. Every period of history has
its own specific laws; the laws belonging to an earlier period or any of
the latter periods can never be applied to a certain period of history.

Water, as long as it is water, follows the laws governing liquids; but
when the same water is converted into steam, it does not follow those
laws but becomes subject to the laws of gases.

Society also follows this principle; for example, as long as it is in
the stage of feudalism it has to follow the laws peculiar to feudalism,
but as soon as it leaves back that stage and reaches the stage of
capitalism, any effort to retain the laws belonging to feudalism would
be absurd.

Accordingly, a society cannot have any eternal and absolute laws.
According to the theory of historical materialism and the doctrine that
economy is the base, all the laws that are claimed to be \`eternal' are
actually dependent upon the base and so transient.

One of the basic differences between historical materialism and
religion, specially Islam, is that religion firmly believes in the
eternity of a set of (Divine) laws. The book *Revisionism from Marx to
Mao*, quotes from an appendix to the second edition of *The Capital*:

Every period of history has laws of its own... accordingly as life
passes from one stage to another stage, it evolves and is governed by a
new set of laws. Economic life, in the course of its historical
development, brings forth a phenomenon that we come across in various
branches of biology... social organisms are distinguished from one
another in the same way as animal and plant organisms are
differentiated. [^34]

4. From the dawn of history, it is development in the tools of
production that is responsible for giving rise to private ownership and
dividing society into the two classes of the exploiters and the
exploited. These two main classes have represented the two basic poles
of society from the beginning of history to the present day.

There has been, and always there shall be, a struggle and antagonism
between these two poles of society. But bipolarization of society does
not mean that all groups are either exploiters or exploited. Possibly
there may be certain groups who are neither exploiters nor exploited.
What is meant is that the important groups that influence the fate of
society are these two groups which form the two basic poles of society.
Other groups are dependent on one of these two main groups.

In *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, the author writes:

We find two different patterns of division of society according to
classes and their conflicts; according to Marx and Engels: one is
bipolar, and the other is multipolar. Definition of class also differs
in both the patterns.[^35] In the first pattern it is an imaginary
class, while in the other it is a real class. The rules regarding the
divisions of classes are also different. Engels, in his preface to *The
Peasants' War in Germany* tries to reconcile these two patterns by
evolving a uniform standard for class division. He distinguishes various
classes in society, and, within each class, he differentiates various
subgroups. But according to his belief, there are only two classes who
accomplish a definite historic mission: the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat; because they form the really opposite poles of
society.[^36]

According to the philosophy of Marxism, as it is impossible for the
superstructure of a society to precede its infrastructure, similarly it
is also impossible for society to be considered as unified whole at the
level of superstructure despite its being divided at the level of the
base (social and economic relations, and property relations) into two
poles of the exploiters and the exploited. Social consciousness. itself
is also, in its turn, to be analysed into two types, i.e. the
consciousness of the exploiters and the consciousness of the exploited.

Thus two types of world outlooks, two ideologies, two moral systems, and
two types of philosophy emerge in society. Social and economic
conditions of each class inspire a specific type of thinking, a specific
social point of view, a particular taste, and a particular social
attitude and approach in each class.

It is not possible that a class's consciousness, taste, and manner of
thinking should precede its economic situation. The only things that are
not bipolar and which are specific to the class of exploiters are
religion and state.

Religion and state are invented by the exploiting class for the
surrender and subjugation of the exploited. As the exploiting class is
the owner of all material resources of society, they impose their own
culture and their religion on the oppressed.

In this manner the culture of the ruling class, i.e. the world outlook
of the ruling class, their ideology, their morality, their tastes, their
sensibility, and more than everything, the religion of the rulers, is
predominant; and the culture belonging to the oppressed remains always
dominated like themselves, obstructing their progress. In German
Ideology Marx says:

The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas; i.e.
the class which is the ruling material force of society is at the same
time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of
material production at its disposal ....

The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the
dominant material relations, the dominant material relations grasped as
ideas, hence of the relations which make the one class the ruling one,
therefore, the ideas of its dominance..

The individuals composing the ruling class possess among other things
consciousness, and therefore think. In so far, as they rule as a class
and determine the extent and compass of an historical epoch, it is
self‑evident that they do this in its whole range; hence among other
things they rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas, and regulate
the production and distribution of ideas of their age: thus their ideas
are the ruling ideas of epoch.[^37]

The class of the rulers and exploiters is by nature reactionary,
conservative, traditionalist and obscurantist. Its culture, which is
imposed by force is also reactionary, traditionalist, and obscurantist.
But the oppressed and the victimized class is by nature revolutionary,
anti‑traditionalist, progressive, and futurist.

Their culture, which is oppressed like them, is a revolutionary,
rebellious, and progressive culture. The condition of being‑ oppressed
is the essential condition for being revolutionary, i.e. this is the
only class which is capable of being revolutionary.

In the book *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, after the passage which I
have quoted from Engel's prefatory note to *The Peasants' War in
Germany* is written:

One year after the publication of this prefatory note, (prefatory note
to *ThePeasants' War in Germany*) the Congress of the German Socialists
has written in its Gotha Program that all classes form a reactionary
front against the labour class.

Marx severely criticized this statement. But if we are logical, we
should admit the fact that since these miserable socialists could not
possibly differentiate between his bipolar or multipolar patterns after
what Marx had written in the Manifesto.

In the Manifesto (Manifesto of the Communist Party), Marx presents the
class conflicts of those days as the war between the proletariat and the
bourgeoisie. He writes: “Of all the classes that stand face to face with
the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone is a revolutionary
class.”[^38]

In some of his remarks, Marx has himself said that the only class that
fulfils all conditions and qualifications of being a revolutionary class
is the proletariat, and these conditions mean:

1. The condition of being oppressed; they should be productive also.

2. The condition of being propertyless (the peasants also fulfil this
and the first condition).

3. Organisation, which requires centralization and solidarity (the class
of proletariat, who work together inside the factories, alone fulfil
this condition, while peasants, who work on fields scattered in
different lands, do not).

Regarding the second characteristic Marx says: “The worker is free in
two ways: free to sell his labour, and free of every kind of property.”
And regarding the third characteristic he says in the Manifesto, “With
the development of industry the proletariat not only increases in
number, but it also becomes concentrated in greater masses. Its power
increases, and it becomes conscious of that power.” [^39]

The above‑mentioned doctrine can be termed as \`the doctrine of
correspondence between the ideological foundation and the class and
social foundation.' On the basis of this doctrine, every class produces
a certain type of thought, ideas, morality, philosophy, art, and poetry
which fulfil the requirements of its life‑style, economic conditions and
interests. We can also name it \`the doctrine of correspondence between
the source of every thought and its direction.'

It means that all types of thought and all kinds of moral and religious
systems originating from a particular class will suit the interests of
that class only. It is not possible that a system of thought originating
from a certain class should aim to serve the interests of the other
class, or a system of thought evolved by a particular class may serve
the interests of humani­ty without having a particular class
orientation.

Thought can become humanistic and can transcend the class only when the
development in the tools of production reaches a stage which affirms the
abolition of all classes. It means that by negating class
contradictions, ideological contradictions are also negated, and by
negating the basis of ideological contradictions, the contradictions
between different currents of thought are also negated.

Marx, in some of his earlier works written in young age (Contribu­tion
to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right), was more inter­ested in
the political aspect of classes (the rulers and the ruled) than the
economic aspect (exploitation and the exploited). He considered class
conflicts as wars for independence and freedom from bondage. He
suggested two stages of these wars: the first as the partial and
political stage, and the second as the total and humanistic stage.

He stated that the proletarian revolution is the last stage of the
revolution of the enslaved of history. A revolution is the basis of
total emancipa­tion of man from all sorts and forms of domination and
servitude. Marx has tried to solve the problem as to how a class
transcends its class character and proceeds forward to attain a goal
which is universal and human, and at the same time to reconcile this
notion with the laws of historical materialism.

He explains that as subordination of this class is a fundamental fact,
its revolution also is of basic significance. This class has not been
subjected to any particular injustice, but the very essence of injustice
itself is imposed upon it, thus stimulating it to aspire for the ideals
of justice and human freedom.

This explanation, if poetic, is by no means scientific. What does Marx
mean by the “essence of injustice” itself being imposed upon a class? Is
it so that the exploiting class before assuming that role had to adopt
this course according to a different logic and indulged in the acts of
tyranny for the sake of tyranny, not for exploitation, and pursued the
acts of injustice for the sake of injustice, not with the purpose of
exploitation, as a consequence of which the proletariat reacted to
obtain justice for itself? Moreover, the assumption that the exploiting
class reaches this position during the period of capitalism, is quite
con­trary to the doctrine of historical materialism, and a kind of
idealism.

The doctrine of correspondence between the ideological and class bases
requires that there should be correspondence between the source of a
thought and its orientation. It also requires that there should be a
relation between the inclination of an individual and the particular
school of thought which is the product of his own class; i.e. the
natural propensity of every individual is towards the ideology which
originates in his own class and is useful for the interests of his own
class.

From the viewpoint of Marxist logic, this principle is of extra­ordinary
sociological usefulness in understanding the nature of ideologies and
the aspirations of social classes.

5. The fifth conclusion is about the limited role of ideology, guidance,
propaganda, exhortation and other such things, as they are matters
associated with the superstructure in directing the society or social
classes. Ordinarily it is presumed that ideology, propaganda, logical
argument, education and upbringing, indoctrination and exhortation are
capable of moulding and changing human thinking in accordance with
preferred ends.

Keeping in mind the fact that the consciousness of every individual and
every group is the product of their social and class character and is
necessarily bound to reflect it, it is also impossible for them to take
a lead over or lag behind their class consciousness.

The notion that the superstructure, and various phenomena related to it,
is a source of social change is an idealistic conception of society and
history. It means that the movement of the forces of the intelligentsia,
reformers and revolutionaries is self‑propelling.

In fact, it is frustra­tion and deprivation of the class which from
within inspires the intelli­gentsia and motivates the spirit of reform
and revolution, not any external factors like education, training, etc.,
or at least it is the class character which is responsible for preparing
ground for these matters automatically.

The maximum role of ideology, leadership, and other enlightening
activities is only to the extent that they help in awakening the
consciousness of contradiction between classes, giving rise to
self-consciousness in the oppressed class; or it helps in transforming a
\`class­-in‑itself,' into a \`class‑for‑itself;' i.e. a class
unconscious of its class character into a class possessing class
consciousness.

Hence the sole intellectual factor that can mobilize a particular .class
in a class society is awakening of consciousness to its condition of
being ex­ploited But other so‑called universal humanitarian approaches
such as love of justice and mankind cannot play any role in a class
society divided into two groups of the exploiters and the exploited who
are alienated from their own selves, and in which social consciousness
has been split into two parts. It is true that with the development in
the tools of production a proletarian government is established,
abolishing class‑distinctions, and man is restored to his original
classless existence.

Human consciousness divided on the basis of ownership is again unified.
At that time the approach of universal humanitarianism, reflecting the
communistic pattern of ownership of the tools of‑production, can play an
effective role. Socialism, which is in fact a superstructure for a
specific period of history, cannot be arbitrarily produced beforehand in
any earlier period (as the Utopian Socialists desired.)

Also, in any particular historical epoch in which society is divided
into two classes, the consciousness of a specific class can in no way be
imposed on the other class, there is nothing like common human
consciousness.

In class societies, therefore, any general and universal ideology
without a class alignment cannot emerge. Every ideology that appears in
class societies inevitably possesses a specific class character.

Even if such an impossibility should occur, it could not play any
prac­tical role. Accordingly, all the claims of religion, or at least
that which in the form of guidance, preaching, moral advice, and
exhortation addresses the whole humanity in the name of universal
justice and equality for all, if not entirely deceptive, should at least
be considered utopian.

6. The other conclusion we should infer is that all revolutionary
figures, leaders, guides, and heroes essentially arise from the
exploited class.

After demonstrating that it is only the exploited class that has the
aptitude for enlightenment, reform, and revolution‑only the condition of
being oppressed and exploited can produce this aptitude, and at the most
the super-structural factors may be credited for awakening class
antagonism and self‑consciousness‑it becomes obvious that those
prominent individuals who come forward to make the ideas of
enlightenment instrumental in awakening class consciousness should
themselves be fellow sufferers belonging to the same class and sharing
its class consciousness.

As it is historically impossible for a super-­structural pattern to
precede its base, and for a class to have a social consciousness that
precedes its class character; in the same way it is not possible that a
person as a \`leader' may precede his class, demanding more than what is
required by his own class. Similarly, it is also impossible for a person
belonging to the exploiting class of society to stand against his own
class in the interests of the exploited class.

In the book, *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, the author says:

Another original contribution of The German Ideology is analysis of
class

consciousness. Here Marx, contrary to his earlier works,[^40] regards
class consciousness as the product of the class itself; it does not come
from without. The real consciousness is nothing but an ideology, because
it is bound to give a generalized form to the interests of a particular
class. But it does not exclude the fact that this consciousness, which
is based upon the awareness of its own conditions, strengthens the
interests of the class. In any case, the class cannot attain maturity
without producing its specific class consciousness.

Marx's view affirms the division of labour within the working class
itself, i.e. the intellectual work (the ideological work, leadership)
and manual work. Some individuals become thinkers or ideologues of the
class, while others rather passively accept and act upon the ideas and
concepts provided for them. [^41]

In the same book, while discussing Marx's philosophy with refe­rence to
the *Manifesto and Poverty of philosophy*, the author says:

In this way, awakening class consciousness and organizing it in the form
of a \`class‑for‑itself' is the task of the proletariat and also the
result of its self‑fuelled economic battle. This upheaval is neither
brought about by any intellectual theory which is alien to the workers'
movement, nor by any political party.

Marx condemns Utopian socialists who despite their prole­tarian
inclination do not see the historical self‑propulsion of the proletariat
and their specific political movement ...and try to replace with their
fancies the gradual and self‑motivated organization of the proletariat
into a class.[^42]

This principle is particularly important for understanding the Marxist
viewpoint about society and social inclinations, and the Marxist
criteria for evaluating individuals, especially leaders and social
reformers.

From whatever has been said above, it is obvious that Marx and­ Engels
did not believe in any independent groups of intellectuals free of and
above classes. That is, there is no room in the principles of Marxism to
allow for the existence of such a class of intellectuals. If Marx
occa­sionally makes statements contrary to this, it is because he
himself does not remain a Marxist.

And such occasions, as we shall discuss later, when Marx has
contradicted himself, are not rare. Now, the question arises as to how
Marx and Engels explain their own position with regard to intellectuals
in the light of the principles of Marxism. None of them belonged to the
proletariat class. Both of them were philosophers, not workers, yet they
have produced the greatest theory of labour and working class.

Marx's answer to this question is interesting. In the book *Revisionism
from Marx to Mao*, the author says:

Marx has spoken little about the intellectuals. He apparently does not
regard them as a special stratum of society, but a part of certain other
classes, particularly the bourgeoisie. In The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Bonaparte, Marx considers academics, journalists, university
teachers, and lawyers as the part of the bourgeois class, like priests
and army men.

In the Manifesto, when he wants to mention the names of the theorists of
the working class who by origin do not belong to it‑like Engels and
himself‑ he does not call them intellectuals, but regards them as
\`groups of people from the ruling class..., who have embedded
themselves amongst the proletariat,' and \`have brought many elements
for the education and training of that class.[^43]

Marx does not offer any explanation as to how he and Engels tumbled down
from the skies of the ruling class to the depths of the subject class,
and how they could manage to bring with them those precious gifts for
the teaching and training of the downtrodden and the “***dha
matrabah***” ***‘The destitute’*** as the Quran calls them (90:17).

In reality, whatever Marx and Engels could attain‑and through them the
lower and the downtrodden class of the proletariat could not be attained
by Adam, the father of mankind, who according to the religious
tradition, fell from heaven to earth. Adam could not bring such a gift
along with him.

Marx does not explain as to how the ideology which can liberate the
proletariat takes shape in the minds of the ruling class. In addition to
this, he offers no explanation as to whether this descent or de­classing
is especially reserved for only these two persons, or if it is possible
for others too.

He also does not throw any light on the matter that if sometimes, though
in exceptional cases, the doors of heaven are opened to earth, whether
it is the \`descent' alone that takes place and the members of the
heavenly class come down to the level of the earthly class, or if it is
possible the other way round too?

Is the \`ascension' also sometimes possible in which the members of the
downtrodden class attain the lofty heights of the ruling class? Perhaps,
even if that were possible, they could hardly carry with them such gifts
as may suit the heavenly ones.

Basically, it is meaningless to carry gifts from the earth to the
heaven; but if one were blessed with the opportunity of ascension and
were not merged into the heavenly class, he might return to earth, like
Mr. Marx and Mr. Engels, with heavenly gifts for the earthly.

[^1]: Andre Peter , op. cit., p. 39.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: "Allamah Tabataba'i, Murtada Mutahhari, Usul-e falsafeh wa
rawish-e riyalism, "Principles and Method of the Philosophy of Realism,"
vol. I and II. (Translator's note: The term "realism" is used by the
author in the specific sense of epistemological realism not metaphorical
realism.)

[^4]: P. Royan, Historical Materialism, p. 37.

[^5]: Ibn Sina, in part 8 of his al‑'Isharat, has discussed this subject
with great insight.

[^6]: Murtada Mutahhari, Qiyam wa inqilab‑a Mahdi, “The Uprising and
Revolution of al‑Mahdi.”

[^7]: The following definition of the purpose and end of philosophy has
been given صَيْرورَةُ الإنْسانِ عالماً عَقْليَّاً مُضاهياً لِلْعالمِ
العَيْنيّ. (The purpose of philosophy) is to transform man into a
rational microcosm analogous to the external macrocosm.

[^8]: Andre Peter, op. cit. pp. 40,41.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Ibid., p. 39.

[^11]: See Murtada Mutahhari, Shinakht, “Epistemology.”

[^12]: For further elaboration see \`Allamah Tabitaba'i, Usul‑a falsafeh
wa rawish‑a riydlism, particularly Chapter V, (“The Source of Plurality
in Impres­sions”). Also refer to \`Allamah Tabataba'i, al‑Mizan, vol.
XVI, (Persian Translation), p. 190, for discussion on \`the Divine
Covenant'; also see vol. XXXI, p. 303, for the discussion on the meaning
of natural religion. Also refer to other brief comments scattered
through this exegesis.

[^13]: Andre Peter, op. cit. p. 246, Appendix III‑ See also Raymond
Aron, op. cit., p. 163. See also Anwar Khameh'i , Tajdid‑e nazar talabi
az Marz ta Mao, “Revisionism from Marx to Mao,” p. 153.

[^14]: Andre Peter, op. cit., p. 247, Appendix III.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 33.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 248.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 32.

[^18]: Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, (Moscow), p. 122.

[^19]: See P. Niketin, Elements of Economics, Persian translation by
Nasir Zarafshan, page iii, P. Royan, Historical Materialism, (chapter
on‑production).

[^20]: Anwar Khameh'i, Tajdid‑e nazar talabi az Marz ta Mao,
“Revisionism from Marx to Mao,” p. 253.

[^21]: Marx, Engels, Selected Works, “Preface to the Critique of
Political Economy.”

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Anwar Khameh'i , op. cit., p. 167.

[^24]: Fredrik Engels, Labour in Transition from Ape to Man.

[^25]: A. Peter, op. cit,, 39.

[^26]: Murtada Mutahhari, Qiyam wa inqilab‑e Mahdi.

[^27]: Anwar Khameh'e, op. cit., p. 223, quoted from Marx and Engels,
Selected Works.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 155.

[^29]: Ibid.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 181.

[^31]: Ibid., p. 198.

[^32]: Ibid., p. 183.

[^33]: That is, technology and industry and as a result the social
superstructure of the industrialized countries advance on a fixed and
determined course. The course of movement of societies is a
one‑dimensional movement. The industrialized countries in every aspect
represent the models of what the underdeveloped countries will become at
some time in the future, and have not yet reached that stage. The
possibility that the underdeveloped countries may reach this stage of
development without passing through the stages covered by the
industrialized countries of today, is non‑existent.

[^34]: Anwar Khameh'i , op.cit., p. 225.

[^35]: By a \`real class' what is meant is a group of people whose
economic life, and profits and losses are common. An imaginary class on
the other hand is supposed to consist of people leading diverse types of
social existence but following a single ideology.

[^36]: Anwar Khameh i , op. cit., p..345.

[^37]: Karl Marx, German Ideology, p. 67.

[^38]: Anwar Khameh'i ‑, op. cit., p. 347.

[^39]: Ibid., p. 357.

[^40]: Karl Marx, German Ideology, pp. 308‑309.

[^41]: Anwar Khameh'e, op. cit,, p. 314.

[^42]: Ibid. pp. 319‑320.

[^43]: Ibid., p. 340.


