Criticism of Historical Materialism
===================================

Now that we have dealt with the fundamentals and the conclu­sions of the
theory of historical materialism, the time has come to make a critical
appraisal of it.

First of all, I would like to point out that my aim is neither to
criticize Marx's views scattered in all of his works, nor to appraise
Marxism in its entirety. I only intend to evaluate his materialistic
interpretation of history or historical materialism, which is one of the
basic tenets of Marxism. Basically, the criticism of Marx's views or
Marxism as a whole is a different thing from the criticism of one of its
elements such as historical materialism.

The criticism of Marx's theories, i.e. the study of his views in
totality based upon the entire bulk of his writings belonging to the
different periods of his life, and which are full of many
contradictions, is a work that has been done by several individuals in
the West. In Iran, as far as I know, the book *Revisionism from Marx to
Mao*, from which I have drawn abundantly and quoted extensively in this
chapter, is the best book on this topic.[^1]

Our purpose here is criticism of historical materialism by analyzing one
or more of the fundamental principles of Marxism which in Marx's own
view were considered indubitable, and by critically examining one or
more principles which Marx himself does not consider as definite, and
has occasionally contradicted them in some of his works, but are
nevertheless the necessary part of Marxism; since Marx's own
contradic­tion is to be regarded as a kind of deviation from Marxism.

Here I have critically examined certain definite and generally accepted
principles of Marxism and the conclusions which necessarily follow from
them. Our purpose is not to point out all the occasions when Marx has
expressed views contrary to his own principles in his writings, which
are replete with contradictions. The real target of my criticism is
historical materialism and not the theories of Marx in general.

It is one of the wonders of history that in his philosophical,
socio­logical, and economic writings Marx is more or less preoccupied
with the idea of historical materialism, but while analysing and
evaluating certain contemporary historical events, he pays little
attention to the principles of historical materialism. Why does he do
so? This question has been answered variously.

Furthermore, this attitude is not confined to this issue alone; on
several problems of Marxism, Marx's attitude is one of
self‑contradiction. Theoretically or practically a sort of departure and
deviation from Marxism in Marx himself can often be observed.
Accordingly, we have to find a comprehensive answer to this question.

Some writers attribute this inconsistency to immaturity and
short­comings which he showed in different periods of his life. But this
explanation is indefensible at least from the Marxist point of view; the
major part of Marxism which is considered today as constituting the
Marxist dogma is related to Marx's youth and the middle years of his
life, and the most part of what are considered his deviations, including
his analysis of contemporary events, belongs to the later period of his
life.

Some other writers attribute this difference to his split personali­ty.
They claim that on the one hand he was a philosopher and an ideo­logue,
which naturally requires of him to be inflexible in his dogmas, trying
occasionally to interpret actual events, either by hook or by crook,
according to his own ideas. On the other hand, he had a scien­tific
temperament and spirit, which always necessitates total acceptance of
reality and absence of adherence to any fixed dogma.

Certain other writers make a distinction between Marx and Marxism. They
consider Marx and his thinking as only a stage of Marxism. Marxism in
itself is considered to be a school of thought in the process of
development. There is nothing wrong if Marxism left behind Marx in the
course of its development.

In other words, the view that the Marxism of Marx represents the primary
stage of Marxism, does not violate the credibility of Marxism as a
school. But this group does not explain what in their view which is the
essence of Marxism. The main condition for the development of a school
is that its basic principles should remain permanent; changes occurring
only in secondary matters without affecting the basic principles;
otherwise there would be no difference between total rejection and
development of a theory.

If we do not consider the permanence of fundamental principles as a
condition for its developmental process, then, why not pre‑Marxian
thinkers, Viz. Hegel, Saint Simon, Proudhon or any other thinker of this
type, should be considered as stages in the evolution of this school?
Why should not Marxism be regarded as a stage in the development of one
of these schools?

In my view, the cause of contradictions in Marx is due to the fact that
he himself was lesser of a Marxist than the majority of Marxists. It is
said that once in a gathering of ardent Marxists where Marx was trying
to defend his position which contradicted his earlier position, he said:
“I am not so much of a Marxist as you are.” It is also said that in his
later years Marx said: “I am Marx, not a Marxist.”

Marx's departure from Marxism in some of his views is because of the
fact that Marx was too intelligent and ingenious to be a hundred percent
Marxist. It needs some measure of stupidity in order to be a staunch
Marxist.

Historical materialism, which is a part of Marxism and the subject of
our present study, as explained earlier, consists of certain
fundamentals and corollaries, which neither Marx the scholar could
impose upon himself for ever, nor Marx could the philosopher and the
thinker accept to be permanently saddled with. Now we propose to
critically evaluate this theory.

1. Baselessness
---------------

The first objection is that this view is not more than a mere \`theory'
without any proofs. A philosophical theory of history ought to be based
upon observation of contemporary events and historical facts, and should
be applicable to other times also. Either it should be formulated on the
basis of historical evidence, being in addition applicable to events of
the present and the future, or it should have been deduced and inferred
from a priori premises based upon a series of scientific, philosophical,
and logical principles.

The theory of historical materialism does not fulfil the conditions of
any of the above mentioned methods. Neither the historical events of the
times of Marx and Engels can be explained on its basis ( as Engels
himself has admitted. Engels says that he and Marx made a mistake in
emphasizing the importance of the economic factor in some of their
works.

But, he adds, they were saved from this error in case of their analysis
of contemporary events where they were confronted with historical
reality itself), nor the historical events that occurred during
thousands of years of human history confirm this theory.

It is amazing to read the writings of some followers of Marxism who
dogmatically try to explain the past history in the light of historical
materialism, and read their master's opinions into the pages of history,
for instance in the book History of the Ancient world.[^2]

2. Revision of Views by Its Founders
------------------------------------

I have repeatedly mentioned that Marx terms economic founda­tion of
society the \`infrastructure; and other of its constituents as the
\`superstructure.' This interpretation is evidently enough to show
one­-sided dependence of all the other structures on the economic base.

Moreover, Marx explains in many of his writings quoted earlier, that the
influence in this relationship is unilateral; i.e. the economic factors
are always the influencing factors, while all other social modes are
passively influenced. The economic factors act independently and other
factors are dependent on them.

No matter in whatever way Marx interprets his basic thesis, his theories
always affirm the priority of matter over soul, ,the priority of
material needs over intellectual needs, the priority of human sociology
over human psychology, and the priority of action over thought.

But Marx, in many of his writings, has raised another issue on the basis
of dialectical logic, which may be regarded as a revision of his view
and also a kind of departure from absolute historical materialism. That
issue is related to the problem of reciprocal causation.

According to the principle of reciprocal causation, the cause‑effect
relationship should not be regarded as a one‑sided process. If \`A' is
the cause of change in \`B', in the same way \`B' also in its turn
becomes the cause of \`A'. According to this principle, there is a kind
of reciprocal causal relation between all parts of nature and all parts
of society.

For the time being I am not concerned here with the validity or
invalidity of this dialectical principle interpreted in this form. But
we may say that, according to this principle, the suggestion of priority
of one thing over the other is meaningless with regard to causal
relation between two things like matter and spirit, or action and
thought, or economic base and all other social institutions.

Because if two things are interrelated and dependent upon each other for
their existence, and the existence of one is conditioned by that of the
other, the question as to which is prior or fundamental, is meaningless.

Marx, in some of his statements, considers all social processes,
essential or nonessential, as based upon economic factors, and has not
suggested the effect of superstructure on the infrastructure, as
referred to earlier.

However, in some of his statements he accepts a reciprocal
cause‑and‑effect relationship between the infrastructure and the
super­structure, but maintains that the basic and ultimate role is
played by the base. In the book *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, two
works of Marx, *The Capital* and *The Critique of Political Economy*,
are compared. The author, while stating that in both the works Marx
regards the economic base as unilaterally determining the entire social
structure, says:

In spite of this, Marx, consciously or unconsciously, has added a new
dimen­sion to this definition by stating that superstructures, despite
primacy of the base over superstructures, can play an essential role in
society. [^3]

The author further asks: What is the difference between the pre­dominant
function or \`determining role' that the economic infrastruc­ture always
plays and the \`essential role' played by the superstructures?

It means that if the superstructure occasionally plays the essential
role, it becomes the main determining and governing factor. In such
cases, it may even be said that what we call the superstructure is not a
super­structure but is really the infrastructure or the base, and what
we call the infrastructure is the superstructure.

Engels, in a letter written in his later years to one Joseph Bloch,
writes:

....According to the materialist conception of history, ultimately
determining element in history is the production and reproduction of
real life.[^4] More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted.
Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is
the only determining one, he trans­forms that proposition into a
meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase.[^5]

The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the
superstruc­ture: political forms of the class struggle and its results,
to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after a
successful battle, etc., juridical forms, and then even the reflexes of
all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political,
juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further
development into systems of dogmas, also exercise their influence upon
the course of historical struggles and in many cases prepon­derate in
determining their form. There is an interaction of all these elements in
which, amid all the endless host of accidents the economic movement
finally asserts itself as necessary.[^6]

Strangely enough, if the view that “the economic element is the only
determining one” is a meaningless, abstract, and senseless phrase, this
phrase has been uttered by no other person than Marx himself.

Moreover, if the elements of superstructure “in many cases prepon­derate
in determining historical struggles,” it means that the determin­ing and
decisive element is not the economic one. After saying this, there is no
need to believe that “the economic movement, amid all the host of
accidents, asserts itself as necessary.”

It is more amazing that Engels, in the later part of the same letter,
accepts that he himself and Marx may be held responsible for this
mistake (or in his own words, twist). He says:

Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger
people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it.
We had to emphasize the main principle vis‑a‑vis our adversaries, who
denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or opportunity to
allow the other elements involved in the interaction to come into light.
[^7]

But some other people offer quite the opposite explanation of this
excessive emphasis by Marx and Engels on the economic elements. They
say, this overemphasis is not meant for their opponents in the other
camp, but aimed at disarming the rival supporters of this view in their
own camp.

In the book *Revisionism from Marx to Mao*, the author, after-­pointing
out that in the Critique of Political Economy Marx has empha­sized the
unilateral role of the economic factors more than in any other work‑and
I have already quoted the well‑known passage from the preface to that
book‑explains Marx's reasons for compiling the Critique:

Another cause of writing the Critique of Political Economy, was the
publica­tion of a book by Proudhon, Manuel du Speculateur de la Bourse,
and another book by Darimon, the follower of Proudhon. When Marx saw
that his rivals in the camp of Proudhon from one side, and the followers
of Lassalle from the other side were relying upon the economic element
in a reformative (not revolutionary) way, he endeavored to seize this
weapon from their hands and used it for the purpose of revolution. This
necessitated a rigidity suited to the purpose of popularizing his
beliefs.[^8]

Mao has reinterpreted the, meanings of historical materialism and
economic base according to the requirements of Chinese conditions. His
new interpretation was aimed to explain his own role as the leader of
the Chinese Revolution also.

His interpretation of historical mater­ialism reaches a point that one
finds this theory and its emphasis on the economic base, and as a
consequence the so‑called scientific socialism whose basis is historical
materialism, reduced to mere play of words and nothing else.

Mao, in his treatise on contradiction, under the title, “The Prin­cipal
Contradiction and the Principal Aspect of Contradiction,” says:

....The principal and the non‑principal aspects of a contradiction
transform themselves into each other and quality of a thing changes
accordingly. In a certain process or at a certain stage in the
development of a contradiction, the principal aspect is A and the
non‑principal aspect is B, at another stage of development or in another
process of development, the roles are reversed change determined by the
extent of the increase or decrease in the strength with which each of
the two aspects struggle against the other in the develop­ment of a
thing.[^9]

He further says:

Some people think that this is not the case with certain contradictions.
For example in the contradiction between productive forces and the
relations of production, the productive forces are the principal aspect;
... in the contradiction between the economic foundation arid its
superstructure, the economic foundation is the principal aspect and
there is no change in their respective positions. This is the view of
mechanistic materialism.

True, the productive forces, practice, and the economic foundation
generally manifest themselves in the principal and decisive roles;
whoever denies this is not a materialist. But under certain conditions,
such aspects as the relations of production, theory, and superstructure
in turn manifest themselves in the principal and decisive role; this
must also be admitted. When the productive forces cannot be developed
unless the relations of production are changed, the change in the
relations of production[^10] plays the principal and decisive role.

As Lenin put it, without a revolutionary theory there can be no
revolu­tionary movement. The creation and advocacy of the revolutionary
theory plays the principal and decisive role.... When the superstructure
(politics, culture and so on) hinders the development of economic
foundation, political and cultural reforms become the principal and
decisive factors. By saying this, are we running counter to materialism?
No.

The reason is that while we recognize that in the development of history
as a whole it is the material essence of things that determines
spiritual things, and social existence that determines social
consciousness, at the same time we also recognize and must recognize the
reaction of spiritual things and social consciousness on social
existence, and the reaction of superstructure on economic foundation.
This is not running counter to materialism; this is precisely avoiding
mechanistic materialism and firmly upholding dialectical
materialism.[^11]

Whatever Mao says contradicts historical materialism. When he says, “if
the relations of production hinder development and progress of the
productive force,” or when he says “a revolutionary movement requires a
revolutionary theory,” or when he says, “the superstructure hinders the
development of economic foundation,” he asserts some­thing which can and
should occur always.

But according to historical materialism, the development of the
productive force necessarily transforms the relations of production, and
revolutionary theory necessarily emerges spontaneously. As a result, the
superstructure is necessarily transformed with change in the base.

But Marx has emphatically stated in his preface to the *Critique of
Political Economy*:

At a certain stage of their development, the material productive forces
of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production;
or‑what is but a legal expression for the same thing‑with the property
relations within which they have been at work hitherto. From forms of
development of the productive forces, these relations turn into their
fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution, with the change of
economic foundation, the entire immense superstructure is more or less
rapidly transformed.[^12]

Such notions as the change in relations of production prior to the
development of productive forces in order to pave the way for the
progress of productive forces, the formulation of revolutionary theories
prior to spontaneous birth of revolutionary ideas, the notion that
transformation of superstructure transforms the base‑all imply priority
of thought over action and priority of spirit over matter. They imply
the essentiality and independence of political and intellectual aspects
with respect to the economic aspect, and this contradicts historical
materialism.

Mao's statement that if the process of effect and action is accepted to
be one‑sided, dialectical materialism is negated is correct. But what is
to be done if the basis of so‑called scientific socialism rests upon
this very principle of unilateral effect, and contradicts dialectical
logic, i.e. the doctrine of unity of opposites, which is one of the laws
of dialec­tics?

We are forced to discard either the so‑called scientific socialism and
reject dialectical logic, or we have to uphold dialectical logic and
reject \`scientific' socialism and historical materialism, upon which it
is based.

In addition to this, what does Mao mean when he says “... we recognize
that in the development of history as a whole it is the material essence
of things that determines spiritual things, and social existence that
determines social consciousness”? Doesn't his own admission that
superstructure can reciprocally act on the base, imply that sometimes
productive forces determine relations of production and sometimes vice
versa, .i.e. the process is reversed?

Sometimes revolutionary move­ment produces revolutionary theories and
sometimes vice versa? Some­times politics, culture, power, religion,
etc. are the factors responsible for bringing about a change in the
economic foundation of society and sometimes the process is reversed?
sometimes, it happens that material things decide spiritual matters and
social existence determines social consciousness, and sometimes the
process is quite reversed?

Actually, Mao's statement that “the principal and non‑principal aspects
of a contradiction transform themselves into each other” is made to
justify his Maoist viewpoint‑which practically goes against Marxist
historical materialism‑not to explain the Marxist theory of historical
materialism, despite the claim that he does so.

Mao too, like Marx, has practically demonstrated that he is too
intelligent to remain a Marxist forever. The Chinese Revolution under
Mao's leadership practically violated scientific socialism and
historical materialism, and, consequently, Marxism.

Under the leadership of Mao, China overthrew the feudal regime of old
China by means of an agricultural revolution to establish a socialist
regime in its place. Though according to the theory of scien­tific
socialism and historical materialism a country that is at the stage of
feudalism should first pass through industrialization and capitalism.

When industrialization reaches its climax, it can proceed towards the
goal of socialism. According to historical materialism, as an embryo
cannot pass through two stages within one leap, similarly a society also
cannot enter into the final stage without passing through the
inter­mediate successive stages. But Mao has practically demonstrated
that he is one of those midwives who can bring forth a four‑month old
embryo in healthy and sound condition.

He has proved, contrary to Marx's claims, that all the factors which are
regarded by him as elements of consciousness such as leadership,
partisan training, political organiza­tions, revolutionary ideology,
social awareness, which do not have concrete existence according to Marx
and are regarded by him as part of the superstructure and not the base,
can transform the relations of production to make a country an
industrial one. In this way the Chinese Revolution has practically
ignored the doctrines of so‑called scientific socialism.

Mao has also contradicted the Marxist theory of history in another way.
According to the Marxist theory though the peasant class fulfils the
first and the second conditions of being revolutionary, i.e. they belong
to the exploited class and are without property, they cannot fulfill the
third condition which demands unity, cooperation, mutual understanding,
and awareness of their own power.

Hence the peasant class can never take any initiative for bringing about
a revolution. The most they can is to participate in the revolution by
following the revolutionary proletariat class in a semi‑agricultural and
semi‑industrial society. Marx sometimes even calls them “the wretched
who are re­actionary by nature” and “completely lacking in any type of
revolu­tionary initiative.[^13]

“In his letter to Engels, dealing with the uprising in Poland, Marx
wrote about peasants, “The wretched peasants, reactiona­ry by nature...
must not be called to struggle.”[^14] But Mao created a revolutionary
class out of the same wretched people who are advised not to be called
to struggle. This very class overthrew the old regime of China.

According to Marx, peasants are not only incapable of leading ,a country
toward socialism, but also they cannot participate in the transition
from feudalism to capitalism. The class that can lead a society in the
transition from feudalism to capitalism arid has a revolu­tionary
character at that historic moment is the bourgeois class, not the
peasantry. But with the help of the same wretched class reactiona­ry by
nature, Mao made a historic leap by traversing two stages in one step,
i.e. from feudalism to socialism.

Hence Mao, with the kind of departure he had to make from Marxism, was
justified in raising the Maoist idea of \`transformation of the
principal and non‑principal aspects of a contradiction into each other.'

Instead of proclaiming deviation from Marxism he pretends to follow
Marxist theory of historical materialism and scientific socialism by
offering a new scholar­ly interpretation.

Mao learnt the lesson from his trusted predecessor, Lenin, that a
Marxist necessarily deviates in practice from Marxism.” Before Mao,
Lenin brought about a revolution in Russia which was then still a
semi-­industrial state and founded a socialist state for the first time.

Lenin realized that he could not hope to live to wait patiently for the
Czarist Russia to become fully industrialized and to wait for
capital­ism and exploitation of workers to reach the ultimate stage so
that a spontaneous revolution may occur with a dynamic and conscious
movement of its own. He saw that he could not wait for the mother to
complete her period of pregnancy.

Accordingly, he started from the superstructure and made full use of
such things as party politics, revolutionary ideology, the war, and
armed struggle, and converted the semi‑industrial Russia of those days
into the Soviet Socialist Republic of today. Lenin practically realized
the meaning of the proverb: a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.

3. Contradiction of Necessary Correspondence between Base and Superstructure:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to the theory of historical materialism there is always a sort
of correspondence between superstructure and base in societies, to the
extent that one can identify the base by means of the superstruc­ture
and one can know the superstructure by knowing the base.

When­ever the base is changed, the correspondence between the base and
the superstructure is affected, disturbing the social equilibrium and
giving rise to crisis, followed sooner or later by a necessary
deterioration of the superstructure. And if the base remains in its
original state, the super­structure also necessarily remains permanent
and unchanged.

Contemporary historical events have practically disproved this Marxian
thesis. Taking into consideration a series of economic crises from 1827
to 1847 accompanied with a series of social and political revolutions,
Marx and Engels concluded that the social revolutions were necessary and
inevitable consequences of economic crises.

But, in the words of the author of Rivisionism from Marx to Mao:

It is the irony of history that there has not been any economic crisis
accom­panied with a revolution in industrialized countries since 1848.
In the very lifetime of Marx before his death four times forces of
production rebelled against relations of production without bringing
about any revolution... later, some economists like Joseph Schumpeter
have gone to the extent of naming these crises caused by technical
innovation as \`gales of creative destruction,' and as safety valves for
reestablishing economic equilibrium and economic growth.

Countries like England, Germany, France, and America have made great
industrial advancement taking capitalism to its peak; but contrary to
Marx's prophecy that these countries would be the first and fore­most to
experience the workers' revolution and to be converted into socialist
states, they have not changed politically, legally, religiously or in
other aspects which are termed as constituents of superstructure. The
baby whose birth Marx was awaiting has not been delivered despite the
lapse of more than ninety years, and there is little hope of it in the
future.

Of course, these regimes shall sooner or later be overthrown, but the
revolution that is expected can never be the revolution brought about by
the working class and the Marxist theory of history shall not be
realized. The regimes of so‑called socialist countries of today shall
also be overthrown, and would not remain as they are now. But the future
regime will certainly be not a capitalist one.

On the other hand the countries of East Europe, Asia, and South America
have become socialist despite the fact that they have not yet attained
the stage of giving birth to a socialist state. We see that there are
certain countries quite similar in respect to the (economic) base, but
different from one another regarding their superstructure.

Two super­powers, U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R., are the best example of this
pheno­menon. America and Japan also have the same type of economic
regime (capitalistic) but with regard to such aspects as politics,
religion, mora­lity, etiquette, manners, and art they are quite
different.

In the same way certain countries having similar superstructure, i.e.
political regime, religion, etc., are different in respect of economic
base. All these cases conclusively prove that the notion of necessary
correspondence between superstructure and base as upheld by historical
materialism is nothing but a mere illusion.

4. Nonconformity of Ideological and Class Bases
-----------------------------------------------

As stated earlier, according to the theory of historical materialism,
the superstructure cannot precede the base at any point of history. On
the basis of this doctrine the consciousness of every epoch is
necessarily associated with that age. With the lapse of every particular
period, the corresponding consciousness also expires. Ideas,
philosophies, plans, predictions, religions‑all are by‑products of needs
of a certain period and cannot be applicable to those of other periods.

But practical evidence goes against this hypothesis. There are a number
of philosophies, personalities, ideas and outlooks‑leave alone religions
and religious ideologies‑which are ahead of their times and their own
class interest. There are many ideas that were the pro­ducts of the
material needs of a specific period which still remain alive even after
the passage of a considerable time, and shine as stars over the horizons
of human history.

What is striking is that in this regard, too, Marx in some of his
statements departs from Marxism. In *German Ideology*, he says:

Consciousness sometimes is seen to precede the contemporary empirical
relations, to the extent that it is possible to find the evidence for
the conflicts of a later age in the writings of theoreticians of the
preceding age.[^15]

5. Independence of Cultural Developments
----------------------------------------

According to the theory of historical materialism, cultural and
scientific temperament of a society like all the other aspects, viz.
political, legal, and religious, is related to its economic mode. It
cannot develop in independence from economic development. The
develop­ment of science follows the development in the means of
production and the economic base of society.

First. of all, it should be noted that the means of production are not
capable of developing automatically without human intervention. The
means of production develop in the context of man's relationship with
nature and his curiosity, inventiveness, and endeavor.

The development in the means of production is accompanied by the growth
of science and technology. But the question arises as to which of them
comes first: Whether man first invents something and then utilizes it in
practice, bringing industry into existence, or if industry comes into
existence and then man tends to invent something. It cannot be denied
that the second alternative is correct.

It is evident that the discovery of scientific laws and technological
methods is made as a result of human inquisitiveness and
experimenta­tion. Without contact with nature, inquiry, research, and
experimenta­tion, man can neither discover any scientific law nor
perfect any technique.

No one can challenge this view. The question arises only with regard to
the priority of man's inquisitiveness, experimentation and growth of his
scientific knowledge over tools of technology: whether man first
develops his scientific knowledge and then exter­nalizes his knowledge
to invent technological tools or vice versa? The validity of the first
part of the statement cannot be doubted.

Moreover, it is to be noted that meaning of expressions such as
\`evolution' and \`growth' is literal in the context of human beings,
and figurative in the context of technological and productive
implements. \`Evolution' and \`growth' are literal in the case of a real
entity which passes from a lower to a higher stage.

The use of \`evolution' in the figurative sense applies to an objective
entity which does not go through actual evolutionary stages, but which
becomes either non‑existent or obsolete and is replaced by another
entity which is different from it.

In the process of the growth of a child, for example, the develop­ment
is real. Now, taking another example, if a teacher teaching a class is
replaced by another more qualified and competent, in this case to say
that the level of instruction has improved and developed, is a
figurative application of the word \`development.'

In fact the human progress in manufacture of production tools is a real
progress. It is man who develops and progresses intellectually; but the
term industrial progress is used in a figurative sense, when what is
meant is that every year a more sophisticated, improved, and better
equipped model of an auto­mobile comes into the market.

In this type of development there is no objective entity that rises from
a lower to a higher stage. The auto­mobile of the last year has not
become more developed and perfect, but is discarded and becomes
obsolete, and a new automobile takes its place.

In other words, in this kind of development, a deficient individual or
object becomes obsolete and is replaced by another which is better and
improved; not that the same individual has attained perfection in the
course of time. Wherever real development and figurative develop­ment
take place side by side, it is quite obvious that the real develop­ment
is to be considered the principal development and the figurative
development is secondary.

Moreover what we have said applies only to technical knowledge and
know‑how. In other sciences like medicine, psychology, sociology, logic,
philosophy, and mathematics, there is not even the possibility of such a
unilateral correlation. Progress in these sciences depends to the same
extent or more or less upon the material and economic conditions as the
material and economic conditions depend upon the growth of sciences. K.
Schmoller, in his refutation of Marxism says:

No doubt, the material and economic conditions are essential for the
attainment of higher culture, but to the same extent it is also
undoubtedly true that intellectual and moral development follows an
independent course.[^16]

If we ignore a defect in August Comte's point of view which con­fines
man and humanity to the mind, which is only a part of human faculties
and only half of the essence of man, his theory regarding social
development is far more valuable than that of Marx. August Comte claims:

Social phenomena are subject to a strict determinism which operates in
the form of an inevitable evolution of human societies‑an evolution
which is itself governed by the progress of the human mind.[^17]

6. Historical Materialism Contradicts Itself
--------------------------------------------

According to historical materialism, all thought, all philosophical and
scientific theories, and all ethical systems represent certain material
and economic conditions, and are inseparably connected with their own
specific objective conditions. Hence their value and validity are not
absolute, but dependent upon a specific period.

With the lapse of a particular period and changes in the material,
economic, and social conditions, which are necessary and inevitable,
every idea or thought, every philosophical or scientific theory or
ethical system is invalidated and is ultimately bound to be replaced by
a different idea, thought or theory.

According to this principle, historical materialism, too, is subject to
this universal law. Because if it is not subject to this universal law
and is an exception, it would mean that there are some scientific and
philosophical laws which are fundamental and independent of any kind of
economic base; and if historical materialism is subject to the general
law, its value and validity are confined to one period and it is
applicable to that period alone which has given rise to it. It is not
relevant to an earlier or later period. Thus, in both cases, historical
materialism is con­tradicted by itself.

It means that historical materialism as a theory, as a philosophical
point of view or as a part of superstructure, either applies to itself
or it doesn't. If it does not apply to itself, it contradicts itself. If
it is governed by itself, it is valid for a limited period only; it
cannot be applied to other periods from which it excludes itself.

This objection is also valid in the case of dialectical materialism,
which considers the principle of dialectical movement and the principle
of unity of opposites applicable to the whole reality including
scientific and philosophical laws.

In the Principles of Philosophy and the Method of Realism (Vol I, II) I
have dealt with these problems. But it is clear that the claim that the
universe is the playground of the forces of dialectical materialism and
society that of historical materialism is absolutely baseless.

Certain other objections are also valid against historical mater­ialism.
For the time being we refrain from mentioning them. But I cannot conceal
my amazement as to how such a baseless and unscienti­fic theory could
become famous as a scientific theory. The art of pro­paganda is indeed
capable of working wonders!

[^1]: This book was first written in French and then translated into
Persian by the author, Dr. Anwar Khameh'i. He has exhibited profound
scholarship in the treatment of the subject and praiseworthy capacity
for evaluation and analysis of the problems involved. He himself has
been once an ardent supporter and exponent of this school for many
years.

[^2]: Publisher's note: here the author, Martyr Mutahhari, had left a
blank space of several lines in the original manuscript to quote a
passage from the book The History of the Ancient World, which was not
accessible to the publishers.

[^3]: Anwar Khameh'i , op. cit., p. 222.

[^4]: As the author says, Engels uses the phrase, “production and
reproduction of real life,”‑ instead of “material 'and economic
production,” in his book Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the
State. Engels says that production is dependent not only on the means of
subsistence alone, but also on human repro­duction. Implicitly, he does
not consider the economy alone as the determining factor, but also
believes in the role of such factors as sex and family. This is another
deviation from the basic position of historical materialism.

[^5]: Here the author adds in parenthesis: “revisionism, plain and
simple!”

[^6]: Marx and Engels, Selected Works, vol. II, p. 443.

[^7]: Ibid., vol. II, p. 444; Apology is worse than crime. In fact it is
a kind of obstinacy and, at the very least, equivalent to sacrificing
truth for the sake of personal interest..

[^8]: Anwar Khameh'i , op. cit., p. 219.

[^9]: Mao Tse‑Tung, Selected Works, “Four Philosophical Treatises,”
(London, Lawrence and Wishart Ltd. 1954), vol. II, p. 38.

[^10]: By the means of superstructural factors, such as military,
political and educational ....

[^11]: Mao Tse‑Tung, op. cit., pp. 40‑41.

[^12]: Andre Peter, op. cit,, p. 243.

[^13]: Anwar Khameh'i , op. cit., p. 368.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 348

[^15]: Ibid., p. 173.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 239.

[^17]: Raymond Aron, op. cit., vol. I, p. 78.


