Introduction
============

I argue that Islamic philosophy has an essence related to the root of
Islamic civilization, while other scholars argue that philosophy itself
is the essence of civilization and they claim that the decline of
philosophy leads to the decline of the civilization(1) .  But in order
to maintain that philosophy is the ultimate irreducible essence, we must
ask them why philosophy declines in the first place.

If this question is answered in terms of “something else,” then that
“thing” or that ultimate explanation becomes more essential than
philosophy. Then we are led to ask about the essence from which all
these philosophical aspects flow. What is it that underlies the many
aspects of a civilization?

We can answer this question by saying that it is the law, especially the
divine law that underlies any civilization(2) .  A civilization is
indeed the systematic set of laws that elevates individuals spiritually
and advances the society socially and materially. A civilization cannot
develop until the more animalistic side of human beings is controlled,
and this is accomplished with comprehensive laws(3) .  The legal system
has a twofold function: (1) to establish what is important and
beneficial for human existence, and (2) to protect what is already
established, by a set of laws, rules, regulations, and punishments. In
Islamic civilization it is the Islamic law (*sharīa* ) that plays this
role.

An important question arises in relation to this thesis. If law is the
essence of civilization, why do civilizations with advanced systematic
laws decline? I argue that they decline because the law itself becomes
ineffective for one of two reasons: (1) it is not sufficiently
comprehensive to fulfil the needs of humans through space and time, or
(2) the people themselves leave the law and respond to their impulses;
the law is practical, but may not be practiced in the society.

In contrast to other civilizations such as the Babylonian, Egyptian,
Greek, Persian, Indian, and numerous western civilizations, in which the
name of the civilization refers to a geographic entity or nation,
Islamic civilization refers to Islam as its core. This core, which is
Islam, is spiritual and intellectual. It provides man with a universal
outlook (weltanschauung) of the origin of the universe, its essence, its
goal, the meaning of life, values, the relationship between man and the
universe, and the end of this life and what follows(4) .

A question may be raised: how can Islam as a religion operate as the
central core of Islamic civilization and specifically Islamic
philosophy? Since philosophy is an activity of knowledge, I utilize an
epistemological paradigm to illustrate how Islam plays this central role
by stimulating philosophers to continue the search for truth.


