Epistemological Characteristics
===============================

The central circle or the core is complete; only this circle is closed,
the other circles are dynamic and have vitality. They are active and
open to interact with other cultures and civilizations, but this
interaction does not occur indiscriminately. For example, the second
circle is cautious in its interaction with other civilizations because
it is closer to the core; the third circle opens itself and interacts
more freely with other cultures than does the second circle, and does so
in a way that permits a number of non-Islamic elements to enter or
infiltrate into Islamic civilization. This interaction can be seen in
the influence of Aristotelian logic in the study of Arabic, the
influence of Roman administration on the Umayyad caliphate, and the
influence of Persian culture on Muslims, particularly in methods of
administration and governance in the Abbasid caliphate.

The fourth and the fifth circles interact most with other cultures and
civilizations. The influence of the fourth circle on Muslim life is
obvious, while the influence of the fifth circle has been very limited.
For example, we can see clearly the ways in which Greek philosophy faced
severe criticism from Muslim scholars; al-Ghazālī’s book The incoherence
of the philosophers [Tahafūt al-falāsifa] is a good example of this.
Later, Aristotelian logic faced a similar fate when challenged by Ibn
Taymiyya (661–728 AH / 1263–1328 AD). Philosophy did not enter the realm
of Islamic civilization until Muslim scholars and philosophers
established that logic and reason do not contradict the core, and in
fact, reason and logic can even be used to defend the core.

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0722-the_epistemological_paradigm_of_iIslamic_civilization/images/image002.jpg)
