I. Introduction
===============

In The Name of Allah, Most Merciful and Most Compassionate.

As the collapse of the cold war, we have seen that a new world order
has unfolded in the eyes of the West, however, as this world ored
unfolds, the West has been in a dilemma on how to define the parameters
of this order.

Indeed, numerous theories and political analysis has been proposed by
the so called "enlightened scholars " of the West. But the Question now
arises: how does Islam and us, the global Ummah look at this world
aroder and how do we also define our parameters today? An How do we,
believers and adherents of Hazrat Baqiyatullah (May Allah hasten his
return) prepare in this context?

We as members of the Global Muslim Ummah, may have to look at different
angles as well as from different perspectives if we may arrive at a
conclusion. This may not be conclusive for all times, it is our humble
effort, so that we may be able to move forward in todays age and leave a
legacy for other Muslims to come.

As one looks at the different theories expressed and espoused today, I
cannot but help but remember the ideals left by those who have come
before us, like Hazrat Imam Khomeini (rahmatullahi alayhi) when he wrote
the then president Mikhail Gorbachev and predicted the demise of the
Soviet Union, saying; that the lac of a spiritual and moral ascendancy
of socialism,

being materialistic in nature will ultimately lead to the collapse of
the socialist world order. And as one American Scholar has said, as the
current trend of Modernization proceeds, the fundamental human value
from the worship of God and the virtues of Tqwa, Imaan and Ihsan are
replaced by values like vice, vanity,

personal interests over the others, self over others, there appears a
ever and more stronger need for us Muslims to propose the need also for
the West to study the high, lofty and ethical values of Islam.

In the traditions of the late Ali Shariati's Ruhshanfekr being today's
enlightened individuals , we will attempt to dissect the theories of the
new global world order proposed by the West and their worldview and how
we must propose to interact with the world in a move to propose also our
own concept of a just and humane society baed on Tawheed and Adalah.

In a way, as we, the adherents of our beloved prophet Muhammad (SAWA)
anxiously await his honored desecendant, how do we view the global
events and act towards preparation of a state of Imam Mahdi's (ATFS)
return to us.


**II. How the West views todays Global order**

After the demise of the Soviet Union as predicted by Hazrat Imam
(rahmatullahi alyh), the West has seen that the eternal archenemy of
Capitalism and Democracy, i.e. Socialism as represented by the Soviet
Union has collapsed; corollary to this the collapse of the Iron Curtain
in Germany, the concept of collectivism and state owned enterprises as
espoused by communism has eventually became a thing of the past, and
even the Sleeping Giant China, has awakened from its slumber to partake
in the eventual Capitalization of the world.

As there appeared a clear and present need to define a new global
order, a prominent think tank from the West, Samuel Huntington in a
response to this need defined a new context, civilizational fault
lines... in short, where cultures clash, civilizations and nations would
clash. This was the eventual definition of this paper, "clash of
civilizations and the rise of a new order".However, another known
Western scholar Edward Said views that the presentation of Huntington
preposterous in the sense paranoic.

This is the ineventual problem of the causality of Huntingtons
concepts..... from a clash of civilizations, it is surmised that such a
clash occurs whenever ignorance takes place. instead of understanding
what causes cultures and civilizations to clash, why not also try to
look at the parallel sum of things like universal human values that are
treasured in every culture and civilization.

The same can be said of looking the the paralellism of anarchistic and
terrrorist groups lingering in the different cultures like the Branch
dravidian, Aum Shinyo or the Baader Meinhof gangs that are much alike
the terrroristic manifestations of al-Qaeda or other groups like the
Tamil Tigers and the Sin Fein in Ireland.

And as Said says, "But we are all swimming in those waters, Westerners
and Muslims and others alike. And since the waters are part of the ocean
of history, trying to plow or divide them with barriers is futile. These
are tense times, but it is better to think in terms of powerful and
powerless communities, the secular politics of reason and ignorance, and
universal principles of justice and injustice, than to wander off in
search of vast abstractions that may give momentary satisfaction but
little self-knowledge or informed analysis.

"The Clash of Civilizations" thesis is a gimmick like "The War of the
Worlds," better for reinforcing defensive self-pride than for critical
understanding of the bewildering interdependence of our time. "

What is needed for civilizations to understand each other is dialogue,
pluralist persepective and an openness to the other. As the West aims
also in defining order, it also aims to define states that in its
opinion are threats to the stability of the new global order,
unconsciously defining these states as "rogue states" at the root of
this definition is "viciousness,lack of principle and propensity to
engage in unilateral action (Herman, 2006).

it is clear that within that context, it is apparent that those that
apparently falls out of context of the Western definition of universal
Human values appears to be part of the target of Western Imperialist
Hegemony. it then appears that even states that are merely guarding
their legitimate interests and protecting their citizens is seen as
rogue and therefore in the eyes of the West are viewed as axis of
evil.

As the West aims also in defining order, it also aims to define states
that in its opinion are threats to the stability of the new global
order, unconsciously defining these states as "rogue states" at the root
of this definition is "viciousness,lack of principle and propensity to
engage in unilateral action (Herman, 2006).

it is clear that within that context, it is apparent that those that
apparently falls out of context of the Western definition of universal
Human values appears to be part of the target of Western Imperialist
Hegemony. it then appears that even states that are merely guarding
their legitimate interests and protecting their citizens is seen as
rogue and therefore in the eyes of the West are viewed as axis of
evil.

What pushes the West to aggressively pursue this Global World Order at
the expense of other smaller sovereign states? The answer lies in the
fact that Neoliberalism and Globalization also has played a significant
role in the pursuance and aggressive implementation of this policy.

In the total sum of things, the world new order that the west (in the
view that is pushed by the United states) proposes is the Globalization
of Markets, where nations are forced to co-opt their national
soveriegnity in the face of tariffs and trade quotas always in the name
of the Balance of Trade (BOT), however, this Balance of Trade always
shifts in favor of first world countries,

Transnational Corporations (TNC) that operate their businesses
internationally and exploit the cheap labor cost , cheap mineral
resources in the Third world at a tremendous profit with no moral
conscience of returning even a small portion of their accumulated
wealth, taking it abroad.

In short this is best manifested bydecreasing of government subsidies
and privatization of government and owned and controlled corporations,
free unrestricted trade by the lifting of tarriffs and barriers (giving
rise to the entry of Multinational and transnational corporations ), and
the non-intervention of Government in many policies to allow MNC and
TNC's to operate as they wish. Neoliberalism also influences first world
countries to focus on absolute gains over other nation states.

This puts minor states like for example the Philippines, Sierra Leonne,
Tunisia or even Egypt at a major trade disadvantage with Trade relations
with the West. This normally would put out Muslims states who are
currently at Economic hardships at the mercy of the West. This is
coupled by Globalization which is the international economic
manifestation of neoliberalism.

This in a nutshell, causes First world countries dominance over us
Muslims, thereby using all available political, diplomatic tools
available to them to achieve their pursuit.

What then happens if this fails to materialize or they see a potential
area to extend their influence? Perhaps recent events in the Muslim
world from Afhanistan, to Iraq, to Sudan are enough evidence to prove
that good intentions are clearly driven by the need to fuel their
capitalist econmies.

We have been always been reminding our brethren to hold to the rope of
Allah and to unite to strengthen the Ummah again in the face of
adversity.

Now however, despite this behemeoth order that the West Wishes to
impose upon us, it itself is in the brink of decay as it is largely
dependednt as in the words of Norman Angel another Neocon proponent,
saying: "We cannot ensure the stability of the present system by the
political or military preponderance of our nation or alliance by
imposing its will on a rival.

( Norman Angell, The Great Illusion, (1909) cited from 1933 ed. (New
York: G.P. Putnam's Sons),p. 137.)It only goes to say that in order for
their global world order to survive, Global Bullying has become
legitimized in the guide of protecting a nations vested interest. Never
the less, Muslim states also possess the right to protect their
collective interests as part of the Global Ummah as well as humanity.

At the head of this Global Order, is the United States, being today
ruled by the NeoConservatives, this ideology has its ramifications to
both US domestic and Foreign policies.


