Leisure Demand
==============

Leisure is the core component of a person's well-being, as he earns and
spends time to enjoy this phenomenon which increases her pleasure from
life. Conventionally leisure is taken to be the residual term from a
utility maximizing (which is money metric) behavior of a consumer, where
he determines the labor supply commitment and the left over is the time
for leisure and consumption. In this case the leisure is taken as a
commodity, which is bought back by paying a price (wage), hence it
becomes a kind of an opportunity cost and taken as an expenditure.

This is the conventional approach, in our analysis we take it from the
perspective that there is a committed leisure requirement and then over
and above that is the consumer choice problem.

As every individual is in a state of dynamic optimization i.e.
maximizing one's happiness at each point of time considering the time
and resource constraint and a planning horizon which goes beyond the
current life on earth (Hamdani 2002, 2004, 2006). He has to obey certain
natural and implicit social constraints for his lively hood.

Which are defined in the divine religions. He distributes his resources
in such a manner, which is based on economic rationality as per
conventional school of thought where as the Divine Economics school of
thought proposes various committed (necessary allocations) and optional
commitments basing on a life horizon which is infinite as well as the
transformed outcomes value to one's well-being.

So in a total sense it is not the Material objectivity of life which
ensures happiness There are certain behaviors, which encompasses those
allocations, which doesn't have a direct impact on ones material
well-being.

There could be other objective functions such as time metric utility
function which can be used Now taking the utilitarian approach the quest
of human being would be to maximize their living standards, and
well-being which are classified as economic, social, religious and
personal.

As revealed by Imam Moosa Kazim (A.S); these are;
a) Moaash (Economic Livelihood),
b) Moasharat (Social Livelihood),
c) Monajat (Religious Livelihood) and
d) Zaat (Personal livelihood)

Using Faith based model of Hamdani (2003), we can re-write the same as
following:

The maximization process would be to:

Choose amounts of time and money resources (which can be converted
totally in time if from income it is converted in no of hours involved)
for Moash (Economic livelihood; market based earning activities; which
includes objects depending on the stage of life and other circumstances,
investment expenditure for human capital, other physical infrastructure,
social capital, children education etc),

then for moashrat (Social Livelihood: society based allocation, which
are not directly related to earning in the first period and may base on
social norms, rituals and practices), then for Monajat (Religious
Livelihood: purely for religious aspirations), then for Zaat (personal
lively hood: which include family, his personal time for rest and other
necessary doings, home production, food and other recreational
consumption, etc)

Subject to:

Income (those resources which are generated un-worked, e.g. bequest,
donation, saving, discount, subsidy, social capital returns, family
providing support etc), and time constraint Which would give:

Over all maximum well-being rather then only metric utility or it's
that utility function which includes all of the above arguments or the
sum of maximised utility of moash, moashrat, monajat and zaat.

The budget constraint which is also linked with the time for moaash
i.e. the total income resource could be written as Yi= vmi\*tm+
un-worked income Where Yi is the total available income, vmi is the
value of market time, usually taken as to be the wage rate, and tm is
the total time allocated to the market for earning actitivyt.

Then the total value time constraint can be written as VT=Vi\* 24=
vmi\*tm+vsi\*ts+vri\*tr+vzi\*tz Where Vi is the average value per unit
of time for ith individual, vsi is the value for time spent on societal
activities for ith individual, ts is the time allocated for societal
activities, vri is the value for time spent on religious activities for
ith individual, tr is the time allocated for religious activities, vzi
is the value for time spent on personal activities for ith individual
and tz is the time allocated for personal activities.

Now we can solve this model for committed and non-committed time
allocation. However the following needs to be taken into account while
following that:

As noted by Hamdani (2003) the goods produced (converted in time metric
equivalent) are taken with reference to their satisfying characters
towards the sub objective functions explained above.

Further all the goods could be either substitutes or complements if
they are taken with reference to time.

Similarly the sub-objective functions also have the same characters of
being substitutes or complements.

As the objective is of time allocation so we don't use the commodity
buying constraint, and that is also built in the time constraint as the
earning and from zaat the consumption is there.

Depending on ones' religiosity or the faith developed, the choice
bundle can vary and each time allocation bundle will carry different
value to oneself .

Conventional stock of knowledge take these allocations as mutually
exclusive, where as the true and divine source of knowledge reveals to
us that investing time in a prescribed, natural way would not only lead
to a rational and fair allocation of these resource but also lead to a
maximum potential level of ones' well-being (Imam Zain-ul-Abdin (A.S) in
Iqwal-e-Chhardeh Masoomeen).

There would be a substitutability and complementarity relations in
these resource allocations towards achieving the goal of maximizing the
well being of individuals. These optimal choices are mostly
complimentary if taken in a faith-based model (See Divine Economics
Framework e.g. Hamdani 2003) and mostly substitute other wise.

One of the four parts of time allocation i.e. time for personal
livelihood (zaat) development which, according to Imam Mosa Kazim (A.S),
actually reinforces other set of allocations and thereby leads towards
reaching a global maxima of individual happiness or satisfaction. As now
the allocation of their time based normalized resources are in a dynamic
and a life horizon model considering among other resource constraints;
the environments he/she is present or has a tendency to develop in
future, such as Human Environment (which includes Nature, type and
quality of human beings around the individual in perspective of their
knowledge, skills, behaviors, faith, moral values, beliefs and
associations). This model is developed in order to explore the following
hypothesis:

1. A more religious person would tend to develop a human environment
which is futuristic; Time allocation of a more religious person would be
more balanced

2. Longer Prostration reduces biological need for rest and sleep
thereby sparing time for other allocations, thus have macro implication
Data and methodology Divine economics Model for leisure based on Hamdani
(2003), would be used. Which is described as For present analysis the
Divine Economics Survey-VI; Survey of Religiosity and Rehabilitation
Patterns in Earthquake Affected Areas of Pakistan & AJ&K (2006) for 764
households in Azad Kashmir and Pakistan conducted by Harvard University
is used.

Estimation results Table10.4: Mean Time Allocation Earthquake Before
After Moash (Economic livelihood) 7.66 7.13 Moasharat (Social
Livelihood) 2.85 3.10 Voluntary Time 0.72 0.95 Monajat (Religious
Livelihood) 2.04 2.18 Zaat (Personal Livelihood) 9.49 9.06 The quest of
human being is to maximize their living standards; whether they are
Moash (Economic Livelihood), Moasharat (Social Livelihood), Monajat
(Religious Livelihood) and Zaat (Personal livelihood).

A comprehensive analysis is required in the present situation to
recommend policy measures. The mean time allocated to the above time
uses, by the respondents has been changed after earthquake. The time
allocated to economic livelihood has been reduced, while this time has
re-allocated to social livelihood, Monajat and voluntary work. The
personal livelihood time has also reduced while religious livelihood
time increased. Our results show that almost 31% of the respondents
almost daily discuss rewards and punishment of deeds with the human
environment he is living in.

Further 85.4% do it on a regular basis. Where as almost 75% discuss
even the futuristic religious variables, as a rationale faith based
human beings they develop moral and other behaviors. The mean time
allocated to the above time uses, by the respondents has been changed
after earthquake. The time allocated to economic livelihood has been
reduced, while this time has re-allocated to social livelihood, Monajat
and voluntary work. The personal livelihood time has also reduced while
religious livelihood time increased.

**Conclusion**

A very small set of socio-cultural-personal and religious dimensions
for appreciating the Mahdaviat principles of an ideal human life were
brought into economic analysis in order to make the subject of economics
more closer to real life phenomenon of present time as well as the time
to come. But clearly there is an ample need for developing our
understanding and presenting to the world how practical in maximizing
global welfare is the Mahdaviat era.

**References**

Frey Bruno s. & Stutzer Alois (2002), Happiness & Economics, Princeton
University Press, New Jersey, New York.

Nadeem Inayat (2002), "Critical Comments on Divine Economics", The
Pakistan Development Review, 41(4), Part II: 627.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2001), Towards Divine Economics: Papers
and Data, Development Resource Centre, AJK.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Eatzaz Ahmad, (2002b), "Optimizing
Human Resources in Islamic Management", International Journal of Islamic
Management, Tehran, IRAN.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Eatzaz Ahmed (2002a), Towards Divine
Economics: Some Testable Propositions, The Pakistan Development Review,
Vol.

41, No. 4, pp. 607-26.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2003a), A Divine Economics Framework for
the Study of Time Allocation Behavior and Religiosity, The Kashmir
Economic Review, VOL. XI, NO 2.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2003b), Poverty, Charity and Religion in
Perspective of Divine Economics, The Kashmir Economic Review, VOL. XI,
NO 1. Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain and Mahmood Khalid (2003),
Philanthropic Behavior in Religion's Perspective, Pakistan Development
Review (PDR), Vol. 42, No. 4.

Hamdani Syed Nisar Hussain (2004), Religiosity as a Factor in Time
Allocation, Ph.D. Dissertation, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad,
Pakistan. Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2004-5), A Future Agenda of
Education and Economic Research in Pakistan, Journal of Education, Sindh
University, Vol. XXXIV, pp.137-153.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain, (2006),"Religiosity and the Emerging
Global Manpower Needs: An Empirical Extension of Valeye Asr Model of
Human Resource Management", Second International Conference on Doctrine
of Mahdism, Bright Future Institute Qum, Iran.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain (2006b),"Disaster Analysis in Divine
Economics, Lecture delivered at Annual Summer workshop on Global
Economic Systems, Harvard University, USA, August 15, 2006.

Hamdani, Syed Nisar Hussain, (2007),"", paper to be presented at Third
International Conference on Doctrine of Mahdism, Bright Future Institute
Qum, Iran.

Siddique Muhammad Zahid (2007), "Measurement of Religiosity: Prospects
and Difficulties for Divine Economics", International Journal of Human
Development, Vol.3, No. I, pp: 1-22

Frey Bruno and Iris Bohnet (1995), " Institutions Affect Fairness:
Experimental Investigations", Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics, Vol 151(2), pp: 286-303.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_(1997), " Identification in
Democratic Society", Journal of Socio-Economics, Vol 26, pp: 25-38 Zaidi
Syed Wasi Ahmed (2005), A Descriptive Index of Quranic Subject: An easy
approach to locate and understand the subjects of Quran, Welcome Book
Port publishers, Karachi, Pakistan.

Camerer Colin F. (2003), Bheavioral Game Theory, Princeton University
Press, New Jersey, USA.

Varian Hal R. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis, W.W. Norton & Company,
Inc. USA, Third Edition.

Zaman Asad (2005), "Towards A New Paradigm for Economics ", Journal of
King AbdulAziz University: Islamic Econ., Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 49-59.

Smith, Adam (1776) An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth
of the Nations, 5th edition published in 1904 by Methuen and Co., Ltd,
London.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, at website
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/well-being/ visited on 10-08-2007.
Najfi Roshan Ali, Iqwal-e-Chhardeh Masoomeen, RehmatUllah Book Agency,
Karachi, Pakistan


