Iii. What Do We Intend To Do With This Current Context?
=======================================================

What appears here is a complex web of complex concepts intertwined with
each other which we may call the Four microcosms of the west.The current
Global World Order as seen by the west is best dissected by what we can
say as the Four Microcosms of the West. these are the ideological tools
that they use to look at the world and interact with it.

After seeing that a new world order has arisen, the west as a policy
has adopted what we may call as a POST WAR HEGEMONY STRATEGY in dealing
with the world. within this context they have underlined a four--set in
which they deal with the world which is as follows:

1. They define who are and can be their allies

2. They identify potential threats and enemies and define them as rogue
states

3. they apply sanctions to countries which refuse to be bullied under
their new world order

1. creation of economic sanctions by:

1. primary boycott of countries allied to the West of any economic
transactions with the Country targetted

2. secondary boycotts by threathening Multinational
corporations/Transnatrional Companies from transacting business with
so-called Rogue States.

2. application of Political Sanctions by outmaneuvering international
organizations like the United Nations Security Council

3. pressuring states allied with the West to apply pressure or
expelling diplomats from rogue states.

4. they create scenarios of which they seek to manipulate the events to
their own benefits

1. Political scenarios wherein they aim to create political tumoil by
fermenting dissension in rogue states

2. International Diplomatic isolation by trying to either neutralize or
pressure diplomats from the so-called rogue states for participating in
international diplomatic and political actions by either
exclusion/expulsion from membership or pressuring other states to
actively support actions against these states.

By looking at this unipolar behemoth movement, we can ascertain that we
can apply a new and novel appraoch of countering this unipolar hegemony.
This we may now call a multi-polar approach.

As we all know that the New global world order as espoused in the West
and articulated by the United states is that it is to globalized,
consumer oriented and prone to machinations of the West who may attempt
to influence smaller countries and economies through coercion and
pressure .

We must understand that indeed in order to usher in a new global order
of Peace, unity, development, social justice....INDEED IT IS INDEED
HAZRAT MUNTAZAR must come, but how can we push over an era wherein the
appearance of Imam Zaman (ATFS) would come to pass.

Indeed we know that hazrat Al-Qaim (ATFS) shall come back as our Hazrat
Maasomin (AS) has narrated in their hadiths.

For such a circumstance to take place we as well must also take part in
awakening the global Ummah as well as the non-Muslim world towards the
accomplishment of these goals.

We as a natural result, will also apply a series of steps aimed to push
for the following:

1. Creation and strengthening of a new non-aligned movement which will
advocate the interests of smaller states.this may also lead the way for
the strengthening of pre-existing regional forums where focus will be
aimed at strengthening of local regions and states as well as political
and economic cooperation among them.

2. Creation of "Centres of Dialogue and Understanding" that aims to
popularize the dialogue of civilizations as a response to the Theory of
"clash of civilizations".These centres of dialogues may be schools,
academic organizations Non-government organizations shall be distributed
regionally among strategic areas. they shall also be tasked to undertake
researches and conferences in the aim of further propagating these
concepts. special focus and emphasis shall be given to East-East and
East-West Dialogue of civilizations.

3. Creation of fora that aims to include other non-aligned states on a
regional basis paving the way for the creation multipolar spheres of
influences as well as alignments to ensure that smaller states be not
coerced by the west into concessions and that these regional states
interests be pursued and protected.

4. Commissioning of regional researches involving an exhaustive study
on Islamic pluralism and concepts of dialogue from a localized
persepective that may equip Muslim scholars and laymen with the proper
knowledge, tools and methodology of dialogue and proper interaction with
other cultures.

5. Open an International Research Organization for the studyon how the
Concept of Mahdiism can fully assist in the development of both the
Global Muslim Ummah and the whole world in general.

No plan is perfect except with the Guidance of Allah, and insha Allah,.
with proper guidance and leadership of the warasatul al-anbiya'a. mwe
shall be successful in the implementation of these projects.


**references**

o Imam Khomeini's (Quddisah Sirruh) letter to President Gorbachev.

o Wikipedia, www.wikipedia.org


o Beyond American Hegemony . By Michael Lind, New America Foundation
The National Interest | May/June 2007

o The clash of Civilizations. by Samuel P. Huntington .Foreign Affairs
Summer 1993

o The Clash of Ignorance. By Edward Said.,The Nation, October 2001
issue

o U.S. Policy on Rogue States :The concept "rogue state" is highly
nuanced. The U.S. does not fall into the category despite its terrorist
attacks against Cuba for close to 40 years.

By
NoamChomsky.,http://www.zmag.org/chomsky/articles/z9804-rogue.html/

o Neocon 101. The Christian Science Monitor (source:
http://www.csmonitor.com/specials/neocon/neocon101.html)

o Beyond American Hegemony .By Michael Lind, New America Foundation
.The National Interest | May/June 2007

o AL-IMAM AL-MAHDI:THE JUST LEADER OF HUMANITY.By:Ayatollah Ibrahim
Amini.Translated by.Dr. Abdulaziz Sachedina

o Discussions Concerning al-Mahdi (May Allah hasten his return)by
Ayatullah al-Uzma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Lutfullah as-Safi al-Gulpaygani
Translated by Sayyid Sulayman Ali Hasan First Edition 2000.Published
by:Islamic Humanitarian Service/Fath al-Mubin Publications.153 Frederick
Street, Suite101

o The Occultation of the Twelfth Imam(A Historical Background) by
Jassim M. Hussain Published by: The Muhammadi Trust of Great Britain &
Northern Ireland In co-operation with The Zahra Trust, P.O Box 29926 San
Antonio TX 78229 USA


