The Doctrine of Mahdism. Tradition and Modernity - Man's Relation With Nature. an Anthropological Approach, a Pathway Out of Clash and Conflict
===============================================================================================================================================

**1. "Expectation".**

Islam - with its own concrete culture and reality - can no longer be
disregarded. It does represent a pivotal moment. No doubt, it is a
key-factor on the stage of history. The sentence "the world is a global
village" is a well-known clich√©. But this global village is pluralistic
in a religious and cultural sense as well, and within this global
village Islamic civilisation has forged its own order and dimension.

Islamic reformism was a modern movement, which came into being in the
wake of European supremacy and expansion. It first emerged in the
nineteenth century, and gave life to various schools of thought and
religious thinking. Neo-reformism is emerging at the dawn of this
present new age, the response to foreign challenges, to the integration
of the Islamic order into the Western secular/economic system.

Without going into the details of another long, thorny topic, in the
following discourse I purposefully leave aside both the
political-strategic dimension and ensuing military-security issues on
the one hand, and inter-religious dialogue on the other. In these
respects there are more appropriate and authoritative forums.

Conversely, I wish to focus my attention on some realities within the
Muslim world, its beneficial experience on other peoples' civilisation
(with whom it has come into contact), and its own highly significant
cultural heritage and legacy within the world order which is nowadays
dawning: the Doctrine of Mahdism and Expectation.

Obviously, these notes are the reflection of my academic life and
personal experience. Both as a Catholic and as a human being, I have
spent many years in the Islamic world, sharing with my Muslim friends
sorrow and grief, joyful days and merry events: mutually beneficial
relationships, which have largely contributed to shaping some of my
worldviews.

The Doctrine of Mahdism has always been at the core of Muslim thinkers
and philosophers. In other Religions too, the ideal and doctrine of a
Saviour, who will come back one day to judge and reform the situation of
the world, represents a focal point, is very deep in thoughts and forges
Men's life, attitudes and behaviours.

The concept of 'Expectation' is a culture. It can give reasonable
answers to some essential questions. It can also provide a valuable
contribution to certain strategic and anthropological domains and lead
to piety, understanding, mutual friendship, hope, felicity,
reformation.

Within its broader framework, the Mahdism Doctrine can have an
anthropological and social impact before and after the age of
appearance.

A closer look reveals that one of the major threats for political and
civil society undoubtedly derives from new inequalities: the new rich
and the new poor, the educated and the ignorant, the powerful and those
who - although having riches - have no access to power.

The Mahdism Doctrine can provide us with the hope of a pathway out of
conflict and clashes. It is a pathway that, drawing from Tradition and
traditional thinking, steps towards Modernity without losing its roots.
No human being is despised for his colour, race, language, social
status, geographical borders.

Piety and friendship nullify distinctions such as wealth, beauty,
social rank and position, and replace them with spiritual qualities.
Hence, the Doctrine of Mahdism can involve society in its entirety,
amalgamating it, creating new links between civil society and political
society, and, through an accurate balance between technological
development and the preservation of ancient traditions, it can make
possible spiritual piety, social and economic justice.

This is the social impact of the Doctrine of Mahdism before the age of
appearance. In this period, people have experienced different pathways,
which they felt could bring them tranquillity, peace, coexistence,
justice and freedom. However, they could not delete disturbances,
environmental crises, global disturbance, suffering from injustice and
exploitations of all kinds and various nature, bringing to relativism,
instability in faith and religious beliefs,

and a positive proliferation of doctrines and dogmas. This is a
reality, which certifies that the contemporary Man will never manage to
overcome his own barriers if he ignores his divine identity. Within this
framework, and with particular regard to Modern-Contemporary times,
Man's demand for Mahdism and the heavenly Saviour can provide a concrete
pathway do deliver himself from this conditions. Modernism,
Post-Modernism, New-Realism are at the core of present-day debates.

The relationship between Man and rationality, between the new-Man and
the metaphysical notions through spirituality and worldly morality are
amongst the most popular means to release himself from psychic illusions
and surmount the anxieties of modernity, technology, material concerns
and find Man's lost identity.

But this pathways can also induce a number of neo-thinkers to prefer
the impending process of Modernity to Religion. Religion is studied
through the lens of social and humanitarian ethics, pre-posing
material/rational interpretation to religious notions. On the other
side, a number of traditional researchers state that time and space are
not genuine, they have no consistency. So, instead of modernity, they
focus on the eternal realities of religion, which enjoy internal,
intrinsic unity and are beyond times and all spatial boundaries.

These issues are largely discussed and heard of also in the traditional
culture of the ordinary people, and lead us to re-think our own
speculative parameters, traditional paradigms and models of society and
power, mankind and statehood. In the eyes of this new intellectual
trend, through studying traditional sources, it appears that we have not
lost (or eliminated) our spirituality and spiritual values, merging all
forms in the material and economic dimension of life.

Within this global, traditional insight, today the anthropological
impact has a role to play.

Following the science reasoning, and the ancestors' experience, the
main principles of Religion never allow us to desist from, or ignore,
the religious thinking and sincerity. In religious thought, one has to
conform the religious precepts of rationality, human affairs, economics
and business, technology, science/sciences and learning, and other
subjects, not at the cost of fencing the religious beliefs.

The peaceful coexistence and the growth of Man's knowledge are here,
amongst and with us. Undoubtedly, to day we are facing a sharp
confrontation between tradition and modernity. I have just very briefly
mentioned some pathways to overcome this contradiction. However, any
consistent pathway cannot disregard religious tenets.

This is the social impact of the Doctrine of Mahdism after the age of
appearance. The study of traditions testifies the need of essential
reforms in such fields as social management, economics, business, social
and human affairs, experimental sciences and some specific cultural
fields.

Some Man's innate needs are common to all peoples, beyond the colour of
the skin, beyond race and language, social status, etc. And religions
cannot treat them with indifference. However, disregarding utopian
solutions, and on a reduced scale, we must admit that, notwithstanding
various schools of thought in both time and space, there are some ideals
which are common to all human beings.

Hence, we are facing a global, anthropological approach, a domain
without geographical borders, language, race, tribe and other
conventions among nations, which can allow us to speculate about
solutions for social and individual problems, representing a positive
pathway out of conflict, towards social justice and peaceful
coexistence.

God is at the centre of the virtuous society, and only His righteous
judgement and His norms can revive what has been sunk into oblivion.

This anthropological impact of the "Doctrine of Mahdism" after
appearance, poses some common views, some common concepts such as
deliverance, salvation, reformation, Divine dominion and perfection: a
universal community, which goes beyond the narrow enclave of boundaries,
race, colour and language. We are confronted with a comprehensive order
where common sense, pragmatic choices, religious feeling, higher
idealism and altruistic concern for humanity's well-being constantly act
and interact.

Within this dimension, there are some major features, such as Man's
relationship with God, Man's relationship with his self, Man's
relationship with society, Man's relationship with nature.

2. Viewed through an anthropological aspect and within this dimension,
Man's relationship with Nature has a fundamental role to play.

Beyond the new technological and economic dimension, Man and the
spiritual dimension of human existence are a critical factor that cannot
be disregarded. Modernisation, progress, efficiency, growth, production
do not clash with principles such as social justice and economic
progress, or with Man's inherent need to transcend and reach out to the
Creator.

The global trend of the resurgence of Islam, observable all over the
world, does not mean either an unhappy existence or militancy, which
must renounce hope of peaceful process of coexistence. It is a orderly
and harmonious universe in its nature and direction, regulated by one
single Law which binds all its parts in harmonious and orderly
sequence.

The task of human beings is to receive, to respond to, to adapt and
apply the immutable characteristics of Divine rules. The human
intellect - although refined, ambitious, scientific, educated, learned -
well, the human intellect has always to swim in the sea of the unknown.
Nevertheless, these human activities do not conflict with development
and technology; they constitute progress and result in gradual
improvement, within the harmony of the cosmic order.

They must take place within pre-determined perimeters and on the basis
of a fixed axis. Man religious instinct is a reflection of the organic
structure of the cosmos and its interrelated components.

Nature surrounds us. Knowledge and the vision of the world and its
order and perfection are translated into a Messianic philosophy of the
Divine, a culture which becomes history, order and law. Rationality,
historicity of scientific knowledge, nature and experience, nature and
human ratio, science and ethics, science and its language, dialogue and
mutual understanding, coexistence and love.

As a global insight and from this perspective, Nature and Landscapes
are perceived by modern / contemporary Humanity with formal, stylistic
and technical characteristics which strongly reflect the teachings of
the Divine prophets and their efforts to direct Man to the right way and
settle his life and affairs according to Divine laws and within Divine
dominion.

Nature and Landscapes, the Environment in its entirety, pertain to the
Divine dominion and its Divine Laws.

To study this issue, one must deal with the impact with a world which
lives its life in close, intimate contact with nature, a world and a
culture which observe nature and the cosmos and perceive them in every
detail over the slow march of days and nights, the rhythmical march of
the seasons and the lunar cycles.

And when human beings perceive Nature, Landscapes and the Environment
as a science, they use knowledge - or the human ratio - through which
Man comes nearer to God and to that infinite, spherical and perfect
universe which He created, and of which Man feels himself to be an
intimate harmonious part.

However, nowadays, we are confronted with a world and a humanity often
at odds with nature for their very survival, or for their personal
delight and satisfaction. We are confronted with a humanity whose
ultimate goal is to reach the maximum control over nature and
environment. We are confronted with a world which conditions,
manipulates nature and its laws.

And nature takes its own revenges conditioning Man and mankind in its
turn. We are confronted with an environment often perceived in its
tension with uncertainty and the blind recklessness of
modern-contemporary times. It is a culture which - in the struggle to
know, to understand the celestial cosmos and its rules, to grasp the
secrets of the whole universe - grapples with this universe for its own
life and survival in peace and at war.

Thus, this culture disregards Divine laws and order, and provokes
environmental catastrophes which arise from ignorance and lead to
dramatic ecological crises and environmental disasters.

Hence, the preservation of environment becomes one of the main human
objectives in order to preserve homeland and environment beyond
geographical boundaries and physiographic frontiers.

Superficiality has often brought to misunderstandings, which prevent us
from the attainment of some ideals such as justice, freedom, human
rights. This objective must go beyond and behind the present
shortcomings of a modernity linked to one country and one society. This
objective must be attained in a cosmic order after the age of
appearance, with the growth of Man's knowledge, and within a new World
and Order.

Then a bright future can spring out, without allowing us to desist from
the religious teachings and principles, surmounting all contradictions
between tradition and modernity.

Likewise, environmental and ecological catastrophes can give way to a
scientific, religious perception of Nature, which uses knowledge
emerging from religious tenets, through which Man comes nearer to God
and to that infinite, spherical and perfect universe which He created,
and of which Man feels himself to be intrinsic and harmonious part.


