Christian Zionist Messianism: How It Views Islam and Muslims
============================================================

Represented by literally hundreds of small denominations and churches
today, particularly in America, evangelical Christian Zionist messianism
is today a formidable force and a major actor in global politics. It
exercises an enormous clout in the current Bush administration in
America.

George Bush, too, himself can be characterized as an arch upholder of
this ideology, and his policies in the Middle East and elsewhere clearly
reflect or tally with the Christian Zionist messianic agenda. Firmly
supportive of Zionism, Israel and Israeli expansionism, Christian
Zionist messianism is today one of the principal fountainheads of
Islamophobia on the global scene.

This paper provides a general overview of the ideology of Christian
Zionist messianism, focusing, in particular, on the way Islam and
Muslims are depicted as an integral part-in the role of the antagonistic
'Other-of this ideology. It shows how Christian Zionist messianic
expectations generate enormously destructive imperialistic and
militaristic tendencies that threaten to drown the world in an
unprecedented global war, with Muslims being projected as the principal
'enemy'.

The implications of this dangerous ideology, a combination of centuries
of white racism and Islamophobia, Zionist claims to supremacy and aims
at global domination and the machinations of the present global
capitalistic order, for Muslims,

and for the world at large, are then sought to be outlined. This it
does by looking specifically at the writings and activities of one of
the leading American Christian Zionist ideologues of today, John Hagee,
senior pastor of the Cornerstone Church in San Antonia in Texas, in
America's notorious 'Bible-belt', which is also the bastion of white
racism and supremacy in America.


**Introduction**

Approximately a tenth of the American population is today a devoted
member of the cult of Christian Zionist messianism, writes the noted
scholar-activist Dan Cohn-Sherbook, himself a Jew and Profesor of
Judaism at the University of Wales in a recently published book, The
Politics of Apocalypse-The History and Influence of Christian Zionism.
'It is the fastest growing religious movement in Christianity today', he
writes. Many followers of the cult are from the middle and upper-middle
classes, followers of televangelists who wield enormous political and
economic clout.

Christian Zionist messianists are impelled by an imperialistic vision,
of Jesus' impending arrival on earth as the Messiah, when he shall, so
they believe, wipe out all his enemies (all non-Christians, presumably)
and establish his global dominion, with his capital at Jerusalem.
Meanwhile, Christian Zionists believe that they, as allegedly God's
chosen people, will be spared the horrors of the global war that shall
precede Jesus' advent, and will be miraculously wafted up to heaven,
where they shall watch the final destruction of the world.

Christian Zionists believe that Jesus can only return the world once
the Jews colonise Palestine. This belief is based on the contentious
claim that God had granted this land to the progeny of Abraham, through
Isaac, that is the Jews, for eternity. This land is not restricted to
the present borders of the state of Israel.

Instead, Zionists, both Jewish and Christian, believe that a vast
swathe of land, stretching from the Nile to the Euphrates, today
inhabited by millions of Arab Muslims and Christians, belongs rightfully
to the Jews, and so must be ethnically 'cleansed' of non-Jewish
presence. Hence the justification they offer for their genocidal project
aimed at the Arabs.

Hence, too, their consistent backing to Israel, their generous funding
of Jewish settlements in Palestine, and their enormous pressure on
successive American governments to adopt rigorously pro-Israel and anti
Palestinian policies.

Cohn-Sherbook traces the origins of Christian Zionism to the changing
attitude of Christian groups towards the Jews following the Protestant
Revolution. The early Catholic Church justified the witch-hunt of the
Jews, labeling them as alleged Christ-killers. However, numerous
Protestant sects, while equally vehemently anti-Jewish, believed that
the Jews needed to colonise Palestine before Jesus would re-appear in
the world to save it. This was, and still is, by no means a generous
acceptance of the Jews.

Rather, they believed, as Christian Zionists today do, that only those
Jews who accepted Jesus as the Messiah would be saved. The rest would
ally themselves with the Anti-Christ and would be defeated by Jesus and
his forces and, consequently, would be sent off to eternal damnation in
the fires of hell.

From the seventeenth century onwards, Cohn-Sherbook shows, numerous
European, and, later American, Protestant churches began evolving
schemes to settle the Jews in Palestine. This was also seen as a
convenient way of getting rid of the Jewish presence in Europe. They
petitioned various European powers to back this scheme. By the early
nineteenth century, numerous British administrators had been won round
to this idea, impelled, no doubt, also by a motive to undermine the
Ottoman Empire, which at that time controlled Palestine, and by a
deep-rooted aversion to Islam.

Increasingly, Christian Zionists began to join hands with secular
Jewish Zionists, whose plans to settling Jews in Israel had nothing to
do with any messianic hopes, but, rather, arose as a response to the
centuries'-old persecution of Jews by European Christians. (In contrast,
Cohn-Sherbook rightly notes, 'In Arab lands, Jews had flourished for
centuries [â€¦] [while] in European countries Jewry had been subject to
oppression and persecution.'

Ties between secular Jewish Zionists and Christian Zionists to pursue
the common project of Jewish colonization of Palestine were strengthened
by the support given to Theodore Herzl (b.1860), the Hungarian Jew who
is regarded as the father of modern-day Zionism.

Cohn-Sherbook traces in considerable detail the course of this close
collaboration down to the present-day, describing the strong political
and financial links between Christian and Israeli/Jewish Zionists and
also the enormous clout of the Zionist lobby in American political
circles.

Christian Zionism, based on a virulently anti-Islamic agenda, is a
major hurdle to peace not just in West Asia but globally, too. Indeed,
some Christian Zionists even ardently wish (and work for) a final global
war or Armageddon, in the belief that this would accelerate their
hoped-for wafting up to heaven and the subsequent arrival of Jesus.
Christian Zionist messianism is a call for global war.

The belief that Christianity is the sole truth, that all other faiths
are 'Satanic' or 'false', that the Jews must all gather in Palestine to
fulfill so-called Biblical prophecies, and that a grand global war will
soon erupt leading to the massacre of hundreds of millions and heralding
the 'second coming' of Jesus, who will establish his Christian kingdom
extending till the four corners of the world, clearly indicate the
hate-driven, global expansionist project of Christian Zionism.

In his remarkable book, The Cross and the Crescent: The Rise of
American Evangelism and the Future of Muslims, Muhammad Arif Zakaullah
brings out in considerable detail how Christian Zionist messianists have
specifically framed and targeted Muslims as allegedly being in league
with the Anti-Christ and against whom Jesus and the Christians must
fight in a bloody war of unprecedented dimensions in the last days.

This explains, Zakaullah writes, their unstinting support to Israel and
its brutal suppression of the Palestinians, and their fervent backing of
America's invasion of Iraq and Afghanistan and its so-called 'war on
terror'. Zakaullah quotes several leading American Christian messianic
evangelists as describing Islam and Muslims in lurid colours and
branding it as irredeemably 'anti-Christian'.

Not surprisingly, he writes, they have been among the most fierce
backers of America's imperialist misadventures that many Muslims see as
directed against them. American imperialism is thus sought to be given a
suitable 'Christian' sanction, and is presented as working to usher in
Jesus' triumphant return to the world. War and bloodshed on an
unimaginable scale, mainly against Muslims, and not peace and
reconciliation, American Christian fundamentalists seem to believe, will
herald the eventual establishment of the Kingdom of God, the rule of
supposedly pious Christians all over the globe.


John Hagee: Ideologue of Christian Zionist Messianic Imperialism and
Advocate Of Cosmic War Against Islam and Muslims

John Hagee is today recognized the world over as one of the leading
ideologues of contemporary Christian Zionist messianism. He is the
founder and pastor of the Cornerstone Church, in Texas, USA, which
claims some 18,000 active members. As with numerous other similar
American Christian fundamentalist preachers, his church is richly
endowed and media savvy. Hagee is the president of the 'Global
Evangelism' media company that broadcasts his daily programmes on
television and radio throughout the USA and around the world. He is the
author of numerous books on Christian Zionism, some of which have been
reprinted by Christian fundamentalist publishers abroad as well.

Final Dawn Over Jerusalem is one of Hagee's major writings on Christian
Zionism that well exemplifies the imperialist agenda that lies at its
very core. The aim of the book is to defend the Israeli occupation of
Palestine, to denounce those who seek to protest Israeli atrocities, and
to advocate the cause of 'Greater Israel', all this in the name of
Christianity and premised on the notion of the Jews as being allegedly
God's 'Chosen People'.

Racism is integral to the Christian Zionist message, as Hagee makes
amply clear. The Bible, Hagee, says, describes the Jews as 'the apple of
God's eye' [Zech 2:8]. He quotes the Bible as addressing the Jews and
declaring, 'For you are a holy people to the LORD your God' and 'the
LORD has chosen you to be a people for Himself, a special treasure above
all the peoples who are on the face of the earth' [Deut.14:2].

This means, so Hagee argues, that those who harm the Jews or the state
of Israel or stand in the way of the design of 'Greater Israel' will
'experience the instant wrath of God'. To those who dare to challenge
the oppressive Zionist state, Hagee announces, 'The man or nation that
lifts a voice or hand against Israel invites the wrath of God'. Such
people will, Hagee insists, be 'cursed' by God.

Hagee's notion of God thus appears to be that of a tribal Jewish deity,
who functions as a willing tool in the pursuit of Jewish expansionism.
The Bible was written by Jewish hands, and given that, as many liberal
Christians would themselves concede, much of it is a human product,
numerous Biblical verses were written in order to legitimise the
interests of the community from which its writers were drawn. This would
seem obvious to any discerning layman, but Biblical literalists like
Hagee vehemently disagree.

For them every word of the Bible is sacrosanct and divine. Biblical
literalism is pressed into the service of the Christian Zionist
messianic imperialist and racist agenda. Drawing upon numerous verses of
the Bible, Hagee argues, 'God watches over Israel as a protective parent
hovers over an only child'. 'The nation of Israel', he makes so bold as
to declare, 'was created by a sovereign act of God.

All other nations were created by an act of war or a declaration of
men, but Israel was intentionally created by God so that He would have a
physical place of inheritance on the earth'.

Accordingly, Hagee would have us believe that for this god, who is seen
as in need of a 'physical place' for himself, non-Jews or Gentiles, are
second-rate human beings or less, and so can easily be dispensed with if
they are seen as coming in the way of Jewish imperialism.

The tribal Jewish version of God that Hagee presents appears entirely
unjust and arbitrary, far from being impartial in the way he deals with
His creation. Given the fact that the God of the Biblical literalist
imagination is a Jewish deity, and not the universal God who looks upon
His entire creation impartially, he is seen as blessing Jewish conquests
of territories of their enemies.

Thus, quoting the Bible, Hagee writes that God gave the land of
'Greater Israel', a vast swathe of land stretching from Egypt all the
way till Iraq, to the Jews, descendants of Isaac, forever.

That being the case, Hagee suggests that people living in those
territories, millions of Arabs, both Muslims and Christians, have no
right to live there or else must accept to live under Jewish rule.
Although Hagee does not say this explicitly, what this means is that
those who refuse to accept Jewish rule must, therefore, be either killed
or expelled.

The god of Hagee's imagination appears as an entirely whimsical real
estate agent. 'God established Israel's national geographic boundaries',
Hagee writes. 'The exact borders of Israel are detailed in Scripture
just as our heavenly Father dictated them', he goes on, adding, 'The
divine Surveyor drove the original stakes into Judean soil and decreed
that no one should ever change these property lines. The real estate
contract and lands covenants were signed in blood and stand to this very
hour'.

Hence, he argues, 'Jews have the absolute right as mandated by God to
the land of Israel and, more specifically, to the city of Jerusalem'.
Hence, he suggests, Palestinians have no claim to their own historical
land, and must make way for Jewish occupiers.

Hagee's defence of Zionist imperialism goes to ridiculous lengths.
Laughable as this may sound, he argues, 'Israel has a Spy in the
sky'-God Himself. God, he claims, provides Israel, the Jewish people and
the state of Israel, with special protection. 'No nation in the world
can match the defensive force guarding the State of Israel.

The archangel Michael has a special assignment to guard Israel'. And
those who, for any reason oppose Israel, and this includes Palestinians
fighting Israeli occupation and oppression, are said to incur God's
wrath. 'The Lord stands watch in the darkest night with an eye trained
on the nation of Israel and, more specifically, Jerusalem. Those who
fight with Israel fight with Him', Hagee asserts.

So central is Israel to Hagee's tribalistic version of God that he goes
to the extent of arguing that the fate of each and every person on the
face of the planet depends essentially on his or her attitude to the
Jews. 'Prosperity or punishment depends on how we treat Israel', he
alleges, because, he claims, the Jews, as descendants of Abraham 'enjoy
heavenly favour'.

To back his claim he quotes the Bible as saying that when God entered
into a covenant with Abraham, He gave him an 'awesome promise', saying,
'I will bless those who bless you, And I will curse him who curses you.
And in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed' [Gen. 12:3].
Hence, Hagee insists, the United States,

and, indeed, anyone else who wishes to please God, must consistently
engage in 'compassionate support of the State of Israel', adding that,
'The quickest and most effective way to be on God's side is to stand
with the State of Israel and the Jewish people in their hour of need'.
By doing this, he claims, one can win God's favour, because, 'God
blesses the man or nation that blesses Israel or the Jewish people'.

At no time before, Hagee firmly believes, has support for Israel and
Zionist imperialism, been more crucial than today. This is because, he
claims, Jesus is returning to the world soon, and Israel must be
protected in order to welcome the Messiah. Hagee's image of Jesus in his
'second coming' bears no resemblance to the familiar notion of the
suffering, loving Christ.

Rather, in his description Jesus appears as a fierce warrior, rallying
Christians to arms and heralding the final, global war, ironically in
the name of the 'Prince of Peace'. In the doomsday scenario that Hagee
outlines, what he calls 'fanatical attacks' by Arabs on Israel,
particularly Jerusalem, would mount. In response, Christians the world
over, he says, must rally behind Israel. At this hour, he insists, 'we
must let the world know that if a line has to be drawn, it will be drawn
around Christians as well as Jews. We are united and indivisible'.

The city of Jersualem, Hagee believes, is the crux of the final battle
before Jesus' 'second coming'. This city, considered sacred by Jews,
Muslims and Christians alike, has been ordained, so Hagee argues, by God
to be 'under the exclusive control of the Jewish people' until Jesus
arrives again. The final battle of Armageddon will, he writes, be
centred on this city, with Arabs or Muslims seeking to wrest control of
it from the Jews.

In this regard, Hagee says, Christians, for their part, must staunchly
defend Israel and must refuse any peace offers, such as allowing for a
shared Jerusalem or joint control of the town by Jews and Arabs. In
particular, he appeals to the United States to do everything in its
power to back Israel and to crush its opponents, claiming this is the
only way to win God's favour. If America fails to do this, so he warns,
it would be crushed by God Himself!

Quoting various verses of the Bible, Hagee describes what he sees as
the unfolding of events of cosmic proportions, ushering in a global war
the like of which has never been witnessed hitherto and heralding the
'second coming of Jesus'. In this global war, he says, Muslims, whom he
regards as followers of a 'false' religion, would ally with the Russians
to fight against Israel. This would lead to a global nuclear war, with
hundreds of millions being killed.

At this point, the 'Anti-Christ' will appear, attack Jerusalem and will
take over the reigns of the world, falsely claiming to usher in peace.
But, this grand deception will not last long, and, instead, will only
lead to even more devastating wars. At this time, Hagee says, Christians
must defend, by every means possible, the Jews and Israel, and wage war
against the armies of those opposed to God's 'Chosen Race', the Jews.
Only then can they be saved, he insists.

After years of global war and terrible destruction, Hagee writes, Jesus
will be sent by God to deliver the world. Mounted on a white horse, he
will arrive at the battlefield at Armageddon. Defeating the
'Anti-Christ' and his army, he will establish his global kingdom with
his capital in Jerusalem, there to 'rule and reign forever'.

Hagee's description of Jesus' future global kingdom offers little cause
to cheer for non-Christians, including, ironically, even the Jews whom
he so ardently defends. It would, as he himself makes clear, be nothing
short of a global Christian empire, and an antiquated one at that, with
kings and queens and presidents still in place! How they would continue
to be around when Jesus rules the whole world is a mystery that Hagee
leaves unsolved.

Ruled by Jesus, Hagee writes, 'Jerusalem, the apple of God's eye, will
become the joy of the world. The city will become the international
worship center, and people from all over the world will make pilgrimages
to worship in the holy temple. Kings, queens, princes and presidents
shall come to the Holy City' to adore Jesus. Presumably, these all will
be Christians themselves, for Hagee quotes the Bible as predicting that
'at the name of Jesus every knee should bow [â€¦] and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father'.

In a more recent book on the same subject, titled Jerusalem Countdown:
A Prelude to War, Hagee further elaborates on the theme of a global war
against Islam and Muslims that he appeals to Christians and Jews to
jointly launch, arguing that this is precisely what Jesus wants to
happen before his Second Coming. Not surprisingly, and like other
Christian Zionist messianic evangelists, Hagee is convinced that there
can be absolutely no room for dialogue with Muslims, principally
because, so he argues, Christians and Jews, on the one hand, and
Muslims, on the other, do not worship the same God.

In fact, he goes so far as to claim that the God of the Jews and the
Christians is the diametrical opposite of the Muslim God. Accordingly,
he presents Islam in the most lurid colours. He claims that Islam aims
at nothing short of exterminating all non-Muslims and establishing a
one-world Islamic government. Islam, he argues, is 'a doctrine of death'
which promotes 'terrorism' , He approvingly quotes George Bush as having
declared that America 'is at war with Islamic fascists' and insists that
'This is a religious war' and that 'there is no room for compromise'.

Hagee writes that America, and 'Christendom' more generally, along with
the Jews, are now deeply involved in the final war that will supposedly
herald the return of Jesus as messiah, a war in which Christians and
Jews are pitted against Muslims. All Christians (and Jews), he asserts,
must participate whole-heartedly in this cosmic war because, he says, if
America loses the war,

'[T]he Law of Shariah, the Islamic law, will rule America and the
Western world. Christian churches and synagogues will be burned to the
ground. Every Christian who refuses to denounce Jesus to accept Allah
will be decapitated [â€¦] Radical Islam does not want us to be quiet-they
want us to be dead.'

Hagee, like many of his fellow Christian fundamentalists, fervently
exhorts America to take the lead in bloody attacks against Muslim states
that are opposed to Israeli brutalities, because he sees these as
fundamentally 'anti-Christian'.

In this regard, he singles out Iran, one of the most militarily
powerful Muslim countries in the world and certainly the most vocally
opposed to American imperialism, for particular attack. He claims that
Iran is rapidly building up a nuclear stockpile, which it intends, so he
says, to use to bomb and destroy Israel and perhaps America.

Before that can happen, he insists, America must take the initiative
and invade and destroy Iran, particularly targeting its nuclear
facilities. This step, he argues, would actually be 'part of God's plan
for the future of Israel and the entire world', in that it would drive
the world to the global disaster of Armageddon, 'the countdown that will
usher in the end of the world'.

This will be, so he claims, followed by the rise of the Anti-Christ,
and then, finally, the Second Coming of Jesus, when all non-Christians,
including Muslims, will be slain. In short, a global war against Islam
and Muslims is precisely what Hagee, like many others of his ilk, want
to see unleashed in the hope that their wild messianic expectations will
thereby be fulfilled.


