The Governance of Imam Mahdi (pbuh) and Contemporary Models of Governments a Comparative Analysis
=================================================================================================

The modern world we live in today is changing is many ways. One of the
areas in academia that has been constantly evolving is the area of
governance, beginning with the thinking of Plato and Aristotle to
contemporary approaches to political theory. Humankind has been in
search of a perfect system of governance that will address the needs of
the peoples governed in a perfect way.

The contemporary approaches to governance primarily seek to balance the
interests of those governed with those governing. The interest of those
governed is the satisfaction of their basic human needs and further to
that, the fulfillment of their intellectual and spiritual needs. The
interests of those governing should be to serve those governed and
assist them achieving what is good for them.

The question that needs to be asked here is, "Are the needs of the
governed met by those who govern? And if not, then what system of
governance will meet the needs of those governed?" To analyse this
statement, we will InshaAllah look at contemporary models of governance,
analyse their shortcomings and compare them to the ideal mode of
governance of the 12th Imam (AS).


**Contemporary models of governance - Democracy and Dictatorship**

The most advanced model of governance since the beginning of modern
political theory is democracy . A democracy is both a form of government
and a political philosophy. A common feature of democracy is competitive
elections. The prerequisites of competitive elections are usually
freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and some degree of rule of law.
Civilian control of the military is often seen as necessary to prevent
military dictatorship and interference with political affairs.

"Majority rule" is a major principle of democracy, though many
democratic systems do not adhere to this strictly - representative
democracy is more common than direct democracy, and minority rights are
often protected from what is sometimes called "the tyranny of the
majority".

No universally accepted definition of 'democracy' exists, especially
with regard to the elements in a society which are required for it. Many
people use the term "democracy" as shorthand for liberal democracy,
which may include additional elements such as political pluralism,
equality before the law, the right to petition elected officials for
redress of grievances, due process, civil liberties, human rights, and
elements of civil society outside the government.

Another form of government that exists in the world today is
dictatorship. A dictatorship is an autocratic form of government in
which the government is ruled by a dictator. In contemporary usage,
dictatorship refers to an autocratic form of absolute rule by leadership
unrestricted by law, constitutions, or other social and political
factors within the state.

For some scholars, like Joseph C.W. Chan from the University of Hong
Kong, dictatorship is a form of government that has the power to govern
without consent of those being governed, while totalitarianism describes
a state that regulates nearly every aspect of public and private
behaviour of the people. In other words, dictatorship concerns the
source of the governing power (where the power comes from) and
totalitarianism concerns the scope of the governing power (what the
government regulates).

In this sense, dictatorship (government without people's consent) is a
contrast to democracy (government whose power comes from people) and
totalitarianism (government controls every aspect of people's life)
corresponds to liberalism (government emphasizes individual right and
liberty).


