Problems With Contemporary Models of Governance
===============================================

The problem with these theories and the application of these models of
governance is that the practice of it is far removed from its principles
and secondly, in the case of a democracy, the majority rule does not
necessarily conform to what is of real benefit to society.

This means that the governed are devoid of intellectual and spiritual
benefit, in most parts of the world, for humankind cannot on their own
accord gravitate towards the absolute good, "the (human soul is)
certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do bestow His Mercy."

On the other hand, we have a desperate situation in the third world
where those governed do not have access to basic human needs. This is
evident from the United Nations Human Development Index compiled
annually since 1990 .

For example, the 2006 Human Development Report studies the underlying
causes and consequences of a crisis that leaves 1.2 billion people
without access to safe water and 2.6 billion without access to
sanitation . Such a situation in the 21st century obviously leads us to
the conclusion that mankind has not shown the ability yet of governing
themselves in accordance to the Divine Will.

In fact, regardless of which form of governance we analyse, we see that
the interest of those governed has not been achieved. Those in positions
of leadership have time and time again overstepped the boundaries of
their responsibilities by only satiating their selfish desires. This
would explain the countless wars, indiscriminate killing of innocent
civilians, voracious exploitation of the resources of others, amassing
and hoarding wealth, and oppressive control over people that the world
is witnessing today.

So the question that begs an answer is what system will bring pure
justice and fairness and serve the interests of those governed. The
answer lies in the belief of the followers of the Ahlul Bayt (AS).

This is the belief in the appearance of a divinely appointed leader
commissioned to establish the law of the Creator on earth. This is the
true form of government, the complete and most perfect, as it is
designed by the Creator for the created and administered by an appointee
of the Creator Himself.


**The ideal model of governance vs. contemporary models**

Abu Na'eem has narrated from the book Sefat-ul-Mahdi from Abu Sa'eed
Khudri that the Messenger of Allah (SAW) said: "I give you glad-tidings
about Mahdi (AS). He will emerge amongst my nation at the time when they
will be in discord and war with each other. Then, he (AS) will fill the
earth with equity and justice just as it was fraught with tyranny and
oppression. The Mahdi (AS) will fill the hearts of Muhammad's (SAW)
nation with riches and make them free from want. His justice would
embrace all of them.

This Hadith alludes to one important point - that the leadership of the
Ummah, and mankind can only be successfully carried out by the 12th Imam
(AS). The fact that the 12th Imam (AS) will fill earth with equity and
justice after it has been filled with tyranny and oppression indicates
to us that the models of governance concocted by man, however 'advanced'
and with whatever terminology they are called will amount to nothing but
tyranny and oppression.

We do not have to go far to prove this in the current political
environment. Sufficed to say, that the Security Council of the United
Nations is made up of a selected few and only imposes their will
regardless of how their will adversely affect other peoples. If this is
not the highest form of formalized oppression, then what is?

In the seventh chapter of the book Eqdud-Durar, the author narrates
from Amir-ul-Mumineen Ali (AS) that the, "Mahdi (AS) will dispatch his
chiefs to various cities for establishing justice amongst the people.
The wolves and sheep shall graze together. The children will play with
the snakes and scorpions without being harmed the least.

Evil will vanish and goodness will remain. People will cultivate about
750 grams and will receive in return about 525 kilograms just as the
same has been mentioned in the Holy Quran. Adultery, wine-drinking and
usury will be uprooted. People will have a relish for worship, divine
laws and faith and a desire for mixing in the society.

Life of man will lengthen, properties held in trust would be returned
back, trees will bear fruits, blessings will double, the wicked will be
destroyed, the virtuous ones will remain and those having grudge against
the Ahlul Bayt (AS) will cease to exist."

Imam Ali (AS) has eloquently described the model and characteristics of
the government of the 12th Imam (AS). Firstly 12th Imam (AS) will
dispatch chiefs to establish justice under his command, and who can be a
more just leader than one who is divinely appointed. The justice will be
divine and as a natural consequence peace, tranquility and stability
will be established.

We pray that InshaAllah we can live to experience such earthly bliss.
The blessing in the crop is the direct result of the leadership of the
12th Imam (AS) - Allah's (SWT) chosen representative.

This is in stark contrast to the real or artificial food shortage that
exists in the world today, and that is the cause of the rise in world
food prices. If as a global community we practice and "advanced" model
of governance, then why are there shortages of basic needs such as food,
water and shelter for many in the world.

Another key aspect mentioned in the Hadith is the absence of evil - in
the form of adultery, wine-drinking and usury - these vices which are
detrimental to the soul will be abandoned as the 12th Imam (AS) will
establish such a comprehensive government that people will know the harm
of these practices in relation to their hereafter and as a result will
despise such activities.

The governance structure of the 12th Imam (AS) will consider the
subject's interests in this world and the hereafter, unlike the
government's today whose primary concern is material in nature. To add
to this point, governments today propagate vice.

Adultery, more commonly known as "common-law" is part of the
legislation in many of the so-called "civilised" countries making it a
recognised form of vice. Promiscuity is licensed, alcohol is openly sold
and usury is entrenched in the economy. Based on the Hadith of Imam Ali
(AS), such governments are far removed from the true reality of divine
governance and there is no way they can establish justices in its
perfect form.

The famous Du'a that we recite every Friday, lamenting the absence of
the 12th Imam (AS), has important elements of the government of the Imam
(AS). The antithesis of the Imam's government can derived from the
statements mentioned. This means that a statement like, "Where is the
awaited saviour who will set the have-nots and the depressed on their
feet?" means that the have-nots and depressed are not on their feet and
that they are being oppressed.

The following statements show what we want in the government of the
12th Imam (AS) that we do not have and will never have until he
appears.

"Where is the The Hope who will put and end to tyranny and
oppression?

Where is the preserved guaranty who shall give new life to rule of law
and refined way of life?

Where is the Chosen in preference good who shall raise the spirits of
the people and give currency to justice and fairplay?

Where is the hope-giving confidante who shall make full use of the
"Book" and define the sphere of action?

Where is he who shall blot out dogma in the matter of religion and his
(Muhammad's) children?

Where is he who shall break up meddlesome trouble and tampering?

Where is he who shall pull down the foundations of confusion
(polytheists) and hypocrisy?

Where is he who shall stamp out corruption, vice, reaction and
injustice?

Where is he who shall trim the outgrowth of despair, longing and
hardships?

Where is he who shall erase the traces of unfairness and self-seeking
conceit?

Where is he who shall untie the twisted knots of falsehood and
disruption?

Where is he who shall separate senselessness and insolence from the
people?

Where is he who shall tear up by the roots obstinacy, corruption and
apostasy?

Where is he who shall love dearly the favourites of Allah and take
pains to tame and train the transgressors?

Where is he who shall make people familiar with "words of wisdom"?

Where is the ultimate (Divine) source of plenty and prosperity?

Where is the "Divine aspect" the God-fearing may look up to?

Where is the link that connects the cosmic complex?

Where is the authority who shall communicate and make known the true
point of view?

Where is the author of the conception of peace, fairplay and welfare?

Where is the defender of the traditions of the Prophets and their
children?"

And most importantly for our hearts that burn at the tragedy of
Karbala:

"Where is the investigator of the blood of the Martyrs of Karbalaa?

Where is he who shall get the upper hand over the perpetrators of crime
and greed?

Where is he who shall not rest until he answers the cries of help when
called upon?"

Judging by these statements that we recite, we are extremely far from
the ideal model of governance and that is why we are asking about the
whereabouts of the Imam (AS) who will come and establish these
conditions.


