Governance of the 12th Imam (as) - Governance Within Religion
=============================================================

The key aspect of the governance of the 12th Imam (AS) that is missing
in contemporary governance is that his government will be based on the
true Islam, the religion that Allah (SWT) has ordained for mankind.
Islam is not a religion confined to belief and worship. It is a complete
system of belief, worship, ethics, politics and society. This is very
different from the democracy or dictatorship of today.

The government of the 12th Imam (AS) will mark the final victory, of
the forces of righteousness, peace and justice over those of evil,
oppression and tyranny; of the world-wide spread of the Islamic faith;
the complete and all-round establishment of high human values; the
formation of a utopian and an ideal society and lastly the
accomplishment of this ideal at the hands of a holy and eminent
personality called the Mahdi (AS).

This final government under the Mahdi (AS) is a Qur'anic concept, which
in very clear terms, predicts:

**1. The final victory of Islam.**

It is He who has sent His messenger with the guidance and the religion
of truth to make it prevail over every other religion. However much the
disbelievers may dislike it.
(Surah al-Tawbah, 9:33 and Surah As-Saff, 61:9)

**2. The absolute supremacy of the good and the pious.**

Indeed We have written in the Psalms after the Torah had been revealed:
The righteous among My slaves shall inherit the earth. (Surah al-Anbiya.
21:105)

**3. The final collapse of the oppressors and the tyrants.**

We willed to show favour to those who were persecuted in the earth and
to make them leaders and masters. It was also Our will to give them
power in the earth and to show Pharaoh, Haman and their hosts to
experience from their victims what they feared most. (Surah al-Qasas,
28:5-6)

**4. A bright and happy future for humanity.**

Moses told his people to seek help from Allah and exercise patience.
The earth belongs to Him and He has made it the heritage of whichever of
His servants He chooses. The Final Victory is for the pious. (Surah
al-A'raf 7:128)

Therefore this belief of the coming of the 12th Imam (AS) is not an
outcome of any wishful thinking; it is grounded in the Holy Quran. It is
a result of the working of the system of nature, the evolutionary
process of history, man's confidence in the future and the total
rejection by him of pessimism about the destiny of mankind.

The author of Yanabi-ul-Mawadda narrates from Shaikh Mohyiddin Arabi
from his book Fotouhat-Makkiyah (chapter 366) about Mahdi (AS) and his
ministers and says, "The Mahdi (AS) will emerge when religion would be
on the decline. The one who would not accept will be killed and the one
who would engage in debate with him will be defeated.

He will so reveal the realities of religion that had the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) been alive, be too would have judged in the same manner. He
will eradicate the (false) religions from the face of the earth. Then,
except for the pure religion, no other religion would remain over the
earth."

This Hadith clearly indicates the religion of Islam will be revived and
that the basis of the rulership will be religion. This is because the
truth of Islam will be made obvious by the 12th Imam (AS) and the only
way to success will be through Islam - because that is the way that
Allah (SWT) has charted out for humankind.

The author of Yanabi-ul-Mawadda also narrates from the book "Manaqib"
which narrate from Imam Ali-ibn-Musa Ar-Ridha who narrates from his
father that the Messenger of Allah (SAW) while mentioning the virtues of
his household and his Mi'raj (ascension to heaven) said: I asked: "O my
lord, who are my legatees?" I heard a call saying: "O Muhammad (SAW)!
Your legatees are those whose names have been written on the enclosure
of my throne."

"I looked and saw twelve lights. A green cover spread over each light
and the names of my legatees were written on each of them where the
first of them was Ali and the last of them Mahdi (AS). I asked: "O lord,
are they the legatees after me?" I heard a call saying: "After you, they
are my friends, chosen ones and proofs upon my creatures. They are your
legatees. I swear by my glory and majesty that I will cleanse the earth
from its tyranny by the hands of the last of the one who is Mahdi
(AS).

I will make him conquer the east and west. I will make the wind to
conquer for him and make the clouds submissive to him. I will grant him
power through some means and will help him by means of his own army. I
will assist him through the angels until he gains power over my
government and gathers the people towards my Tauheed (monotheism).
Thereafter, I will expand his and extend the days for my friends until
the day of judgement.

This Hadith indicates that the Imam (AS) will rule the entire world and
that Allah (SWT) will support him in every way. Again, the notion of
religion - whose basis is Tauheed, is identified as the key element on
which the authority will revolve around.

The author of Eqdud-Durar narrates that Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali-ibn-Abi
Talib (AS) while mentioning about Mahdi (AS) and his reforms said,
"There is no heresy but that Mahdi will uproot it and there is no Sunnah
(practice) but that Mahdi (AS) will enliven it."

In the same book, there is a narration from the book
Fara'ed-us-Simtain, which narrates from Abu-Imamah Baheli that the Holy
Prophet (SAW) said, "The Mahdi (AS) will extract the treasures and will
conquer the cities of the polytheists and infidels."

It suffices to reiterate at this point that the government of the 12th
Imam (AS) under the religion of Islam will, without doubt, cater to both
the physical and spiritual needs of the mankind. So for example, coupled
with the establishment of religion on the earth, will be the best
utilization of the earth's resources. And because the government will
the government of Allah (SWT), the Barakah and blessings of the
resources of the earth will multiply so much so that there will be no
poor to give charity to.

Imam Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Baqir (peace be upon both of them) said :
"When the Qa'im (AS) of the Ahlul Bayt makes his advent, he will divide
(the riches) with equity and will show justice among the people. So
whoever obeys him, has obeyed Allah; and whoever goes against him, has
gone against Allah. Indeed al-Mahdi was named as such because he will
guide to the hidden affairs."

**Conclusion**

The only system that will bring pure justice and fairness and serve the
interests of those governed is the government of the 12th Imam (AS). He
(AS) will InshaAllah establish the law of the Creator on earth. This is
the true form of government, the complete and most perfect, as it is
designed by the Allah (SWT) for the created and administered by an
appointee of the Creator Himself.

The appearance of the Mahdi (AS) is Allah's favour for the oppressed
and the weak and is a means of their coming to power and gaining the
promised Divine succession in the whole world. The holy Qur'an says:

We have decided to grant favour to the suppressed ones by appointing
them leaders and heirs of the earth.

The main difference between Imam Mahdi's (AS) government and the
contemporary ones is that his source of the leadership is divine and
therefore will undoubtedly serve the interests of the people. Whereas
the purpose of contemporary models of governments are to satisfy selfish
human desires, the purpose of the Imam's (AS) leadership is to gather
people towards Tauheed.

In conclusion, the appearance and revolution of the Mahdi (AS) is an
inspiring Islamic belief. Its culmination is perfection. The results of
the Imam's (AS) leadership is that mankind will attain benefit for
themselves like never seen before under any other government.


By: Fatima Kanji-Chagpar

**Bibliography**

"Liberty and Justice for Some".
http://www.economist.com/markets/rankings/displaystory.cfm?story\_id=8908438
Posted on Aug 22nd 2007. Al-Sadr, Baqir and Mutahhery, Murtaza. The
Awaited Saviour. Karachi: Islamic Seminary Publications, 1986. Amini,
Ayatollah Ibrahim, translated by Dr. Abdulaziz Sachedina. Al Imam
Al-Mahdi: The Just Leader of Humanity. Toronto: Islamic Education and
Information Centre, 1996.

http://al-shia.com/html/eng/books/hadith/imam-al-mahdi/frconten.htm
(Accessed June, 2008)

Mugahi, Abdul-Rahim. The Awaited Savior of Humanity (al-Mahdi in the
Eyes of the Ahlul Bayt); translated by Shaykh Saleem Bhimji. Stanmore,
United Kingdom. The Islamic Education Board of the World Federation of
Khoja Shia Ithna-Asheri Muslim Communities.

The Holy Quran

United Nations Human Development Reports.
http://hdr.undp.org/en/reports/global/hdr2006/ (Accessed: June 2008)

United Nations Statistics. http://unstats.un.org/unsd/default.htm.
(Accessed: June 2008)

Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democracy (Accessed June,
2008)

Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dictatorship (Accessed June,
2008)


