Introduction
============

In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful

".... the faith of your father Abraham (is yours); He named you Muslims
before (in the previous scriptures) and in this (the Qur'an), that the
Apostle may be a bearer of witness to you, and you may be bearers of
witness to mankind ...." Sura Hajj (22:78)

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds; and blessings and peace be upon
our master, Muhammad (s.a.w.) on his pure progeny and righteous
companions and followers, until the Day of Judgement.

Islam means surrender; that is, the surrender of mankind to the Lord of
the worlds. It is an absolute surrender or yielding to the One, the only
One, the Besought of all.

Thus, Islam in this context means complete freedom I from any type of
subjection or suppression, and from all forms of deviations or
inclinations towards any of God's creatures, except in the course of
worshipping Allah, the Exalted.

Islam, is thus the law of Allah the Exalted, offered to the whole of
mankind from the beginning of time, in order to liberate man from all
forms of slavery. It is a blessing bestowed on man as the most generous
of all creatures, endowed with such mental powers enabling him if he so
wills, to exploit everything in this universe to his own benefit and
happiness.

It is Allah alone Who has the right to command, forbid and question His
creatures regarding their deeds; to reward the obedient and punish the
disobedient; to grant repentance or forgiveness.

If the obedience of all creatures and their submission to Allah, the
Creator, are inborn and natural instincts, perceptible and tangible, so
that no creature whether inferior or superior, deviates from it, then
the religion of Allah is this very natural obedience:

"Do they seek (follow) other than the religion of Allah, when to Him
submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or
unwillingly, and to Him they will be returned." Sura Aal Imran (3:83)

The duty of the prophets and messengers throughout the history of
mankind has been to guide and direct the people according to this
natural characteristic. In this way, man could be prevented from being
led astray, enabling him to freely submit to the Lord of the worlds
through heartfelt belief and a unified code of practical conduct.

This is Islam in its general context; it is the religion of the whole
of mankind throughout all ages.

By presenting "Islam the Religion of Mankind", Al-Balagh Foundation
endeavors to provide an explanation of one of the most profound
ideological concepts in human history. Through its wide scientific
effects on the conduct of individuals and societies, Islam has made a
profound impression on the different civilizations that have existed
throughout the long history of the human race.

We implore Allah the Almighty to help us and our readers, submit to
Him, and to create out of our progeny a nation obedient to Him. He is
the best Guide to the right way.


Al-Balagh Foundation


**Islam : The Title and the Context**

Names differ greatly in respect to their meanings and implications, and
also in respect to their usage.

There are certain names which we encounter and deal with everyday which
are used quite randomly. There may be no correlation between the name of
an object and the object itself, as is the case with numerous names,
titles and attributes.

For example, when someone is named 'Khaz'al' or 'Ja'far', the actual
relation between this name and the person has not been taken into
consideration. Khaz'al in Arabic originally meant the hyena, and the
word Ja'far meant river. There is, as a matter of fact, no actual
correlation between people and the nature of a hyena or river; yet they
are used occasionally for naming male children. This is a haphazard
naming, a nullifying of the relationship between name and subject.

In other instances, a name is strictly chosen to suit the subject and
to truthfully represent it.

For example, the name chosen by the Qur'an to represent the teachings
of the Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.). is 'Islam' - that is,
absolute submission and servitude to Allah alone.

The Qur'an due to its unrivalled eloquence, chaste language, deep
expression and perfect combination of words, meanings and syntax,
carefully chose the name 'Islam' as a truthful expression of the message
revealed to Muhammad (s.a.w.). Consequently, this Qur'anic selection is
exact and general, maintaining harmony between the manifestations of the
teachings and the teachings themselves.

This connection between the teachings and their contexts and aims can
well be uncovered by first resorting to the lexicons, from which we come
to know that the word 'Islam' means submission and surrender. Then,
moving from the lexical terminology, we should carefully study the
ideology, legislation and direction of the teachings.

We are then apt to recognize that the whole religious structure, in its
complete unity, aims at submission and surrender to the Lord of the
worlds, and freedom from any type of submission or surrender to human
tyrants and illusionary legends.

Thus we recognize the correlation between the name 'Islam', and the
manifestations of the faith itself. The Qur'an, as revealed by Allah
through His Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), has transformed this word, this
name, from its mere linguistic form to the foundation of a faith and way
of life.

There is a complete and exact accord between the term 'Islam' and its
hidden ideological and legislative truths. This religion, this faith, is
called 'Islam' because it is a submission or surrender to the Lord of
the worlds, and is also a way towards the freedom and salvation of
mankind.

"Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet the 'Ummi' (one who neither reads
nor writes), whom they find ordained for them in the Torah and the
Gospel, (who) enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful
for them all good things and prohibits fur them the foul; and removes
from them their burden and the fetters (spiritual and social) which were
upon them; so (as for) those who believe in him, honour him, help him
and follow the light which has been sent down with him, these it is that
are the successful." Sura A'raf (7:157)


**Islam : The Message of the Prophets**

The concept of submission to Allah has thus been described as the core
of the religion and the gist of faith.

Here, 'Islam' as a special title given to the eternal Divine Religion -
the Message of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) - and as a general title for
the calls of all the prophets, will be discussed.

Since all the prophets called for monotheism and invited mankind to
worship Allah alone and liberate themselves from servitude to others,
Islam is thus a general title for their calls.

In attempting to analyze this subject, one should refer to Qur'anic
verses which deal with the concept of 'Islam'. Among these numerous
verses which discuss religion, servitude and submission to the Lord of
the worlds, preached by the prophets and messengers from Noah (a.s.) to
Muhammad (s.a.w.), one should also note when and how the term 'Islam'
has been used. In this way, the clear meaning of 'Islam' and its
relation with the calls of all the prophets becomes readily apparent.

The Qur'an uses this word repeatedly and in diverse forms to define
true faith and complete submission to Allah's commands. 'Islam' has been
used in the form of commands, benedictions and other expressions by the
prophets and their faithful followers, announcing their submission or
response to its call.

Allah the Exalted, proclaims through His servant Noah (a.s.):

"But if you are averse I have asked of you no wage; my wage is only
with Allah, and I am commanded to be of those who are Muslims (submit to
Him)." Sura Yunus (10:72)

Also, Allah proclaims through Abraham (a.s.):

"When his Lord said to him; be a Muslim, he said: I submit to the Lord
of the worlds. And the same did Abraham enjoin upon his sons, and (so
did) Jacob, (saying): O my sons! Surely Allah has chosen for you this
(We) faith, therefore die not unless you are Muslims." Sura Baqara
(2:131 - 132)

"... the faith of your father Abraham (is yours). He named you Muslims
before (in previous scriptures)... ." Sura Hajj (22:78)

Allah also relates Joseph'(a.s.) prayer:

"My Lord! You have given me (something) of the kingdom and taught me
(something) of the interpretation of events: Originator of the heavens
and the earth! You are my Guardian in this world and the hereafter; make
me die a Muslim and join me with the righteous." Sura Yusuf (12:101)

Allah the Exalted, relates Moses' proclamation in the Qur'an:

"And Moses said: O my people! If you believe in Allah, then rely on Him
(alone), if you have indeed become Muslims (those who submit to Him)."
Sura Yunus (10:84)

Allah also says:

"Surely We revealed the Torah, in which Was guidance and light, by
which the prophets who submitted themselves (to Allah) judged the Jews
..." Sura Ma'ida (5:44)

And, "And when I inspired the disciples, (saying): Believe in Me and My
Apostle (Jesus), they said: We believe and bear witness that we are
Muslims (have submitted)." Sura Mai'da (5:111)

Allah also commands Muhammad (s.a.w.) like all other prophets to say:

"I am commanded only to serve the Lord of this land (Mecca), Who has
made it sacred, and His are all things: And I am commanded to be of
those who are Muslims (submit to Him)" Sura Naml (27:91)

Thus, all these divine invitations meet along the line of submission -
Islam - to the Lord of the worlds in its true context; that is,
servitude and true faith in Allah, the Exalted. The explicit meaning
becomes apparent in Abraham's (a.s.) words: "I submit to the Lord of the
worlds"; that is, he regards his submission as a religion for worship,
as a trust he commits to his sons and his followers, as a slogan for the
monotheists, and as a motto for the invitation to faith:

"... the faith of your father Abraham (is yours); He named you Muslims
before (in previous scriptures) ... ." Sura Hajj (22:78)

Through these Qur'anic verses we understand that all the prophets
followed this unified line of faith with a single aim: The
implementation of servitude to Allah mankind's submission to the Lord of
the worlds liberating them from the worship of tyrants or their own
inner desires. As such, the Qur'an regards belief in the prophets as a
major basis of a Muslim's ideology and as a historical and logical proof
of the truthfulness of Muhammad's (s.a.w.) message:

"Say (O Muslims): We believe in Allah and (in) that which has been
revealed to us, and (in) that which was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael
and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to
Moses and Jesus, and (in) that which was given to the prophets from
their Lord, we make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we
submit (become Muslims)." Sura Baqara (2:136)

"Say: I am not the first of the apostles, nor do I know what will be
done with me or with you: I do not follow anything but that which is
revealed to me, and I am (nothing) but a plain warner." Sura Ahqaf
(46:9)

All the prophets, as is understood from the above verses, offered to
mankind the same religion and the same belief which Allah considered to
be the base and the starting point for the reformation of man. It would
deliver him from the dark labyrinth of ignorance which has resulted from
the ages of legends and myths fabricated by primitive peoples.

Man has suffered from this ignorance as he has suffered from the
oppression of tyrants, and from poverty, injustice and corruption. He
will continue to suffer unless he turns to the path of the prophets who
all shared the same call. This call aimed at the salvation of humanity -
generation after generation, nation after nation - from its sufferings
and tragedies.

Allah the Exalted, willed that all His messengers should pour their
offerings into the same stream, that their flames should unite into a
single illumination. This was the call of Islam, the message of Muhammad
(s.a.w.), as the eternal religion, the final message, and the theme
dominating and encompassing all other missions of the apostles.

"And We have revealed to you the Book (Qur'an) with the truth
confirming whatever of the Book(s) was before it and a guardian over it,
so judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and do not follow
their low desires (to turn away) from the truth which has come to you;
for everyone of you We have appointed a divine law and a (traced out)
way ..." Sura Ma'ida (5:48)

"He it is Who sent His Apostle with the guidance and the true religion;
that He may make it overcome (other) religions, all of them, however
much the polytheists may be averse." Sura Saff (61:9)

Islam overcame all other religions as it is characterized by equality,
rationality, universality and eternity, enabling it to expand over vast
periods of man's history, encompassing all aspects of human growth and
development. Religion is thus, like a great river which has flowed
through all eras of man.

This river is represented by Islam - the great religion that was
preached by the prophets in accordance with the needs and potentials of
their nations - which has flowed through all generations, nations and
prophets. Men have taken from this river as much as they needed, yet it
remained flowing with life; fertility and growth for all humanity
through all ages.

For this reason Allah sent the prophets throughout human history .to
guide man to the shores of this great spiritual river which endows him
with prosperity and life.

"O you who believe! answer (the call of) Allah, and the Apostle when he
calls you to that which gives you life ..." Sura Anfal (8:24)

Therefore, the calls of the prophets were alike as all of them
advocated Islam, which is the religion of mankind for all time. As for
differences among the messages of the prophets, these were due to the
particular requirements of societies during the various periods of
prophecy, the societies' level of comprehension and extent of
tolerance.

When man thus attained full maturity, he became ready to accept this
religion-Islam-to carry its message, and to follow its guidance. This
has been explained and confirmed by the Qur'an.

"Surely the religion with (acceptable to) Allah is Islam (submission to
His will) and those to whom (formerly) the Book had been given did not
oppose (about Islam) but after knowledge (of Islam's truth) had come to
them, out of envy among themselves; and whoever disbelieves in the
revelation of Allah then surely Allah is swift at reckoning." Sura Aal
Imran (3:19)

"And whoever follows a religion other than Islam, it will not be
accepted from him, and he will be one of the losers in the hereafter."
Sura Aal Imran (3:85)

This was the religion from which the prophets derived their messages,
but it was not their duty to insure the total acceptance of their
nations. They had been given the task of informing their nations
according to their nation's immediate needs and potentials, leading them
to the way of righteousness and peace. This is what the Qur'an says
about religion and messages, and about the unity of source and aim,
stressing that religion is one- Islam - and the messages of all the
prophets were derived from it:

"He has made plain to you of the religion which He enjoined upon Noah,
and that which We have revealed to you (Muhammad), and that which We
enjoined upon Abraham and Moses and Jesus, (saying): Establish the
religion, and be not divided therein; dreadful for the unbelievers is
that which you call them to; Allah chooses for Himself whom He pleases,
and guides to Himself him who turns (to Him) frequently." Sura Shura
(42:13)

Consequently it is incorrect to describe the calls of the prophets as
different religions, because these emanations originated from a single
source, inviting towards the same religion, though the messages slightly
varied, according to the times, the geographical location, the language
and levels of comprehension of the peoples.

"And We did not send any apostle but with the language of his people,
so that he might explain to them clearly; ..." Sura Ibrahim (14:4)

In this way the Qur'an proves the oneness of the line and direction
followed by the prophets, and affirms that all of them had been
commanded to establish the true religion-Islam.

Going through the Qur'anic verses concerning the concepts of religion
and its messages, we realize that Islam is the frame encircling all the
divine revelations. Islam in fact is the final formulation of the
complete divine message that draws a perfect picture of man and life on
earth. It is the very base from which the divine calls and messages were
made, such as those of Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and others (peace be
upon them):

"And surely it is in the original of the Book with Us, truly elevated,
full of wisdom". Sura Zukhruf (43:4)

Thus what was revealed to the Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.)
was the most advanced programme and the most perfect law of the divine
religion, Islam ,which was to be conveyed to all humanity.

Since Muhammad (s.a.w.) is the last prophet and the divine message has
been revealed in all its entirety and perfectness, therefore all the
former messages are to be regarded as null and void, after the
revelation of the holy Qur'an. Because the messages sent through the
previous prophets were of a temporary nature and limited in time-span,
and were the prelude for the final and great call of Islam.

The divine message revealed to Muhammad (s.a.w.) embraces all future
eras and generations, and is the final stage of mankind's historical
march. Therefore it is life according to the incumbent upon mankind to
mould revealed through the final call and the message of Islam, Seal of
the Prophets.


