Evaluation of the Divine Messages
=================================

**Where do the Messages Meet**

".... and it is not in (the power of) an apostle to bring a portent
save by Allah's leave; for everything there is a time prescribed. Allah
effaces and establishes what He pleases, and with Him is the source of
the Book." Sura Ra'd (13:38&39)

It is quite clear from the above verses of the Qur'an that Allah has
the power and authority to efface, abrogate and change the divine laws
according to what He thinks is best suited for a particular period and
era as also the stage of human development. However these changes are
only legislative in nature, and are firmly based on the unwavering
fundamental principles, which are quite remarkably the same in all
messages preached by all the prophets.

In other words the messages and laws advocated by the prophets and
apostles throughout the course of history were based on the same
principles, foundations and aims, though they differed in certain
secondary points concerning certain legislations and duties, which were
time-bound, depending upon the particular period of human history.

In order to clearly distinguish between the points where these messages
and laws part and meet along the line of this unified religion - Islam -
whose principles and foundations never change and are constant, it is
necessary to trace back the aims of the divine messages, and to
recognize the core of their call and the content of their structure, as
related in the glorious Qur'an, and examplified by the lives and
teachings of the prophets.

**Principles Common in All Messages**

1. All the messages have a common belief which is the major basis on
which the entire structure of religion, as well as man's concepts and
general thoughts about the universe and life are built.

The concept of the Oneness of Allah - monotheism - and the belief in
His messengers, angels, scriptures, and the hereafter, is the meeting
point around which the messages preached by the prophets gather - there
was no prophet who had not called for believing in Allah, in worshipping
Him and accepting His Oneness; and who had not announced reward and
forewarned punishment.

The glorious Qur'an confirms this fact and relates several examples of
the actual words and calls of the prophets addressed to their peoples,
some of which are cited below:

"... and the Messiah said: O Children of Israel! serve Allah, my Lord
and your Lord ... ." Sura Mai'da (5:72)

"And to (the tribe of) 'Aad (We sent) their brother Hud (the prophet).
He said: O my people! serve Allah, you have no god other than Him ... ."
Sura A'raf (7:65)

"Certainly We sent Noah to his people, so he said: O my people! serve
Allah, you have no god other than Him." Sura A'raf (7:59)

"And to (the tribe of) Thamood (We sent) their Salih (the prophet). He
said: O my people! serve brother you have no god other than Him; clear
proof indeed Allah, has come to you from your Lord ... ." Sura A'raf
(7:73)

"And to Midi an (We sent) their brother Shu'aib (the prophet). He said:
O my people! serve Allah, you have no god other than Him; clear proof
indeed has come to you from your Lord; so give full measure and weight,
and do not diminish to people their things, and do not make mischief in
the land after its reform; this is better for you, if you are
believers." Sura A'raf (7:85)

"And (We sent) Abraham when he said to his people: Serve Allah, and be
careful of (your duty to) Him; this is best for you, if you did but
know." Sura Ankabut (29:16)

"And certainly We raised in every nation an apostle, (proclaiming):
Serve Allah and shun false gods. So there were some of them (nations)
whom Allah guided, and there were others upon whom error had just hold."
Sura Nahl (16:36)

"And We did not send before you any apostle but We revealed to him,
that there is no god but Me (Allah), therefore serve Me." Sura Anbiya
(21:25)

2. All the messages have a single aim and advocate good conduct and
behaviour, and call people to be righteous, to purify their souls,
organize life on the basis of truth and justice, and to fight against
injustice , transgression and corruption. The Prophets themselves
embodied the highest ideals and the noblest manners and were worthy
models of emulation as Allah the Exalted says:

"And we made them Imams (leaders) who guided (people) by Our command,
and We revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer
and the giving of the alms, and Us (alone) did they serve." Sura Anbiya
(21:73)

While discussing the elements common in all the divine invitations and
messages, we should not forget to refer to an ambiguity which has been
talked about a lot within the circles of the Orientalists and their
followers whose skepticism is the result of their hostile attitude
towards Islam. They allege that the Qur'an was authored by Muhammad
(s.a.w.)'himself, and that he was influenced by the Torah and the
Gospel,

and they point out a number of common concepts present in the Qur'an as
a proof according to their ambiguity - that it has borrowed its ideals
from these two Scriptures, due to Muhammad's (s.a.w.) contacts with Jews
and Christians. The advocates of this absurd theory thought that they
had discovered a grave defect which according to them questions the very
authenticity of the Qur'an and its being a divine revelation.

But surely any one endowed with rational thinking needs no proof to
refute this ambiguity about the Qur'an being influenced by the Jewish
and Christian thought. It suffices just to remember that all the
messages have actually sprung from the same common source - Almighty
Allah - the aims of all messages are the same, and therefore the
principle elements in the divine proclamations should be common.

This amity of principles, concepts and aims is the result of their
single origin, i.e. the unbroken chain of Divine Inspiration which
strived to guide man to serve Allah alone, and to liberate humanity from
diverse superstitious servitudes to demi-gods and idols. Thus it is
clear that these are neither the result of borrowing nor of personal
affection, as the skeptics allege, but the proof of the continuation of
the Divine Guidance.

Therefore, by recognizing these facts we reach the conclusion that the
common similarities between the divine messages are a divine reality
that gives unquestionable evidence to the truthfulness of Muhammad's
(s.a.w.) prophethood, since it proves that the proclamations of Islam
advocate the same goals and aims that had been advocated by the
preceding prophets.


**Where do the Messages Differ**

In the previous chapters, we explained the basic concepts common in all
the divine messages, since they originated from a single source. As to
the points of difference among the divine messages proclaimed by the
prophets these were necessitated due to the changing times and
circumstances and concerned only certain secondary principles such as
legislation, ways of worship and methods of organizing life.

Each message had its particular legislative form through which the
teachings of Islam and its major goals in life were suitably expressed.
It similarly had its particular way of organizing the society and style
of worship, depending upon the period of revelation, the place, the
comprehension of the people and the distortion done by the deviators to
the previous message and scripture. The Qur'an explains and asserts this
by saying:

"And We have revealed to you the Book (Qur'an) with the truth
confirming whatever of the Book(s) was before it and a guardian over it,
so judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not their
low desires (to turn away) from the truth which has come to you, for
everyone of you We have appointed a divine law and a (traced out) way,
and if Allah had willed, He would have made you (all) a single nation,
but that He might try you in what He gave you, so vie one with another
to hasten to virtuous deeds ..."
Sura Mai'da (5:48)

This Qur'anic explanation is enough to make us realize that the
differences of the messages merely concern points of legislation, ways
of life, and methods of ruling according to a particular time, era or
circumstances.

Here, the Qur'an stresses that it is a divine book confirming the
previous divine messages, and at the same time 'guarding' their goals.
The word .guardian used by the Qur'an is a clear reference to the havoc
wrought on the previous scriptures, especially on the Torah and the
Gospel, by Jews and Christians, who deviating from the messages
proclaimed by Moses and Jesus ( a.s. ), changed, altered, added and
revised these scriptures so frequently, that practically nothing divine
is left in these books, except those points which are common to the
Qur'an.

Hence the Qur'an's emphasis on its laws, regulations and teachings
which are to be dominant and observed by all mankind, because these are
the ones suitable for humanity in its final march, and these are the
most perfect legislative forms ever devised, and are in perfect harmony
with human progress and cultural growth.

Therefore, the differences between one message and the other regarding
certain secondary principles was the result of the changing
circumstances and situations and the stages of human cultural, mental,
physical and psychological development, though basically all messages
advocated the same common concepts and goals. Thus, the duties, the
worshipping precepts, and the laws brought by the previous prophets were
in conformity with, and in accordance to, the prevailing situation and
conditions.

**Why so many Messages**

From the illustrative examples presented by the Qur'an of the lives of
the prophets, the nature of their messages and their struggles against
the disbelievers, it is possible to understand the reasons for the many
messages and more exactly the reason for the coming of so many
messengers and prophets.

Before persuing this subject further, we should know that not all the
prophets brought messages or laws to the people they were sent to.
Actually, a greater number of prophets had no particular message and
were in fact sent only to preach and promote the message of the ,
Reformer - Prophet' who preceded them, because people had deviated from
the original concept of the message or falsified it.

So, these prophets were not 'Law - givers' but mere 'Reminders' calling
people to return to the true message and laws of the 'Reformer -
Prophet'.

**The questions may arise: Why so many messages?**

Why had Allah the Exalted, sent so many messengers, and why wasn't He
contented with just a single prophet to be followed by mankind
generation after generation? To answer these questions we have to study
the reasons which caused so many envoys, with as many messages to be
sent. We must scrutinize the history of the nations, analyse the lives
of the peoples, as well as the contents of these divine messages. By
doing so we come to infer the following points:

1. The foremost cause of so many messages and messengers was human
nature itself and particularly of those people to whom the messages were
addressed. The intellectual, physical and psychological abilities of
people are not equal and may differ due to such factors as the period of
history, development of civilization and etc.

Therefore, religion had to pace along the stages of mankind's gradual
progress and development, in harmony with its mental comprehension. The
more mature man gets in his needs and understanding, the more perfect is
the religion he is in need of. This is in fact, an aspect of divine
wisdom and equity, because Allah the Exalted is Just and Wise, His Will
never contradictory, His Aim never conflicting, and His Judgement never
partial.

For this reason the laws and the duties had to be in accordance with
man's abilities and capacities, in fullfilment of his interest and
good:

"Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability ... ." Sura Baqara (2:286)

On this basis, coordination has been made strong between the progress
of man's existence and the rules of religious legislation, away from any
sort of conflict or contradiction.

It is clear from the above cited reasons that the many messages are in
proportional harmony with the progress of humanity and that each new
message on the ladder of divine proclamations is on a higher rung, more
progressive and more perfect than the preceding one.

2. The second cause explaining the number of messages was the ignorance
and superstitions prevalent among the people, due to their particular
living conditions and social and natural environments, plus the
existence of imposters and hypocrites, who never missed an opportunity
to twist the original meanings and exploit the peoples' ignorance for
their own selfish interests, thus leading them astray. So in these
circumstances a new message was necessary to cure and exterminate the
prevalent moral disease.

It was an act directed to uproot deviation, and to restore the natural
balance to the movement of the soul and the society, and to lead life
towards its sound and humanistic direction.

The Qur'an tells us about the symptoms of these diseases of ignorance
and superstitions which appeared in diverse forms along the course of
history and across the space of human life, and presents them as
selected examples of warnings and deterrent lessons. It tells us about
the greed and corruption of the Nabateans; the decadence of sexual
ethics in the people of Prophet Lot (a.s.) - Sodom and Gomorrah - and
the covetousness of Bani Israel (Jews), etc. Hence, the sending of the
prophets to uproot and exterminate these moral diseases.

3. Sending numerous prophets also implies a continual reminder and
warning, and the unceasing reformative and social interaction with the
new message. It also confirms the divine guidance of man and leading him
along the right path, so that Allah may complete His blessings and
kindness on all peoples, and the evidence of His benevolence may be
nurtured among them, so that no one on the Judgement Day may offer an
excuse for one's sins and disobediences, on the pretext of being kept
ignorant of the truth and left unguided.

Allah, the Exalted says:

"(We sent) apostles as bearers of good tidings and as warners (of
Allah's punishment), so that people should not have any excuse (on the
Day of Judgement) against Allah after the (coming of) apostles; and
Allah is ever Mighty, Wise." Sura Nisa (4:165)

4. Having reached mental maturity and psychological development,
mankind was in need of a perfect and everlasting message, covering all
aspects of the growth and progress of civilization, and possessing the
ability to guide and direct its developing intellectual faculties and
power; a message that would go in parallel direction with time and space
and in perfect harmony with human life and nature.

Humanity at this stage, needs a message that addresses the mind, and
takes into consideration its maturity and development.

In this stage the mind will be the observer and its role an argument
against man, because it is the duty of the mind to rationally cope with
the divine law and realize the importance of prophethood so as to
understand and accept the invitations and in turn call the people to
believe in them, to act according to their teachings and to uplift their
mission.

Man, in this final stage of mental and scientific progress is qualified
for comprehending this religion and its value, and strengthening his
belief, by means of reason and conscience.

It is in this respect, the Prophet's traditions uphold the role of the
intellect, its power of reasoning and hence its responsibility. A
'Hadith' (the Prophet's saying) says: "Allah has two arguments against
man; visible and hidden. The visible argument are the Messengers, the
Prophets and the Imams (the Prophet's infallible successors). The hidden
argument is reason" 1

Thus, a sound and rational mind acts as an inner messenger of religion,
perceiving and manifesting its greatness and value. It is the greatest
justification for the continuation of the message, and during the
absence of messengers it is an argument against man. Another proof
justifying the argument of Islam are those people who propagate and
spread the message of the Prophet, enjoining right and forbidding wrong;
and enlightening people and delivering them from darkness towards the
right path ordained by Allah the Exalted.

Consequently, Islam imposes "enjoining right and forbidding wrong" on
its followers, especially on the learned men and women who enjoy
intellectual superiority which enables them to assume the missionary
role of guides in society and convey the call of Islam; to lead and
reform.

Allah the Exalted says:

"And from among you (O Believers) there should be a party who invite to
good, and enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is
that shall be successful." Sura Aal Imran (3:104)

Therefore it is clear from the reasons cited above, as to why the
messages were many, and how they finally culminated in the message of
Muhammad (s.a.w.); the message which brought religion-Islam-to its
highest degree of perfection and in complete uniformity with human
progress and scientific development.


**Amendments in Divine Messages**

"Say (O Muslims): We believe in Allah and (in) that which has been
revealed to us, and in that which was revealed to Abraham and Ishmael
and Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and (in) that which was given to
Moses and Jesus, and (in) that which was given to the prophets from
their Lord, we make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we
submit (become Muslims)" Sura Baqara (2:136)

All the divine messages meet along the same line and march towards the
same goal; to deliver man from the darkness of unbelief and guide him
towards belief in Allah, the Exalted Creator, by means of the same
supreme principles of faith. As we have already explained, the laws,
legislations, ethics and ritual worship preached by the prophets,
throughout the course of history, and across the expanse of human life
were in stages and forms parallel with mankind's religious and cultural
development, and its intellectual perfection.

Every prophet paved the way for the next, and endeavoured to guide the
human mind, spirit and conduct towards maturity so that it may be
prepared to receive the next divine message, and be on guard against
deviation.

The successive divine messages adhered to the same course, destroying
the corrupt beliefs, the deviated ideas, the distorted laws and the bad
morals, which frequently cropped up in every time and place. They
undertook the task of building a civilized community, by enlightening
the mind and spirit of the individual and the society as a whole, on the
basis of the sublime religious principles which guarantee goodness for
mankind both in this world and in the hereafter.

They actualized the process of development and perfection by means of
wise amendments concerning laws, legislations, rituals, etc.

Divine amendment means the cancellation of a certain law and its
replacement by a more suitable one, according to the stage of human
development, because the Creator best knows what better suits His
creatures.

"... and it is not in (the power of) an apostle to bring a portent save
by Allah's leave; for everything there is a time prescribed. Allah
effaces and establishes what He pleases and with Him is the source of
the Book." Sura Ra'd (13:38,39)

The divine messages passed through the gradual process of change and
amendments, not by any mortal priest or rabbi who distorted scriptures
for their own selfish ends, but by divine revelation, through 'Reformer
Prophets' (Moses for example), according to the needs of the times -
"for everything there is a time" - and in harmony with the developments,
taking place.

The Qur'an refers to this by saying:

"Whatever of the verses We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring
(in place) one better than it or like it. Do you not know that Allah has
power over all things?" Sura Baqara (2:106)

This was in order to devise better rules and legislations and lay a
perfect legal foundation, precisely covering all aspects of human
activities and defining individual and social ethics and relations.

As we already explained earlier, each new message addressed to mankind
surpassed the previous one in all its aspects, was of a wider horizon,
and more exact in handling the growing human faculties.

Thus, the legislating process continued till it reached full perfection
in the message of Muhammad (s.a.w.). The Qur'an profoundly expresses the
unity of relations among the elementary principles of all divine
messages as follows:

"And We have revealed to you the Book (Qur'an) with the truth
confirming whatever of the Book(s) was before it, and a guardian over
it, so, judge between them by what Allah has revealed, and follow not
their low desires (to turn away) from the truth which has come to you,
for everyone of you We have appointed a divine law and a (traced out)
way, and if Allah had willed He would have made you (all) a single
nation, but that He might try you in what He gave you, so vie one with
another to hasten to virtuous deeds; to Allah is your return of all (of
you), so He will let you know that in which you differed" Sura Mai'da
(5:48)

In this way the evolutionary process of the divine messages continued,
reaching its perfection in the last divine message revealed to the Seal
of the Prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.). Humanity had come of age, both
spiritually and mentally and the message preached by the last great
Prophet of Islam was the most perfect scientific version of Divine Laws
and Legislations, that would flawlessly cater to the needs of all the
future generations, till Doomsday.

"... This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My
favour on you, and chosen for you Islam as a religion; ..." Sura Mai'da
(5:3)

"Surely the religion with Allah is Islam ..." Sura Aal Imran (3:19)

"And whoever follows a religion other than Islam (submission to Allah)
it will not be accepted from him, and he will be one of the losers in
the hereafter."

Sura Aal Imran (3:85)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Al-Harrani Abu Muhammad Al-Hassan ibn 'Ali, "Tuhaful Uqool Un Aalir
Rasool" P.285.


