Islam: the Title and the Context
================================

Names differ greatly in respect to their meanings and implications, and
also in respect to their usage.

There are certain names which we encounter and deal with everyday which
are used quite randomly. There may be no correlation between the name of
an object and the object itself, as is the case with numerous names,
titles and attributes.

For example, when someone is named 'Khaz'al' or 'Ja'far', the actual
relation between this name and the person has not been taken into
consideration. Khaz'al in Arabic originally meant the hyena, and the
word Ja'far meant river. There is, as a matter of fact, no actual
correlation between people and the nature of a hyena or river; yet they
are used occasionally for naming male children. This is a haphazard
naming, a nullifying of the relationship between name and subject.

In other instances, a name is strictly chosen to suit the subject and
to truthfully represent it.

For example, the name chosen by the Qur'an to represent the teachings
of the Seal of the Prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.) is 'Islam' - that is,
absolute submission and servitude to Allah alone.

The Qur'an due to its unrivalled eloquence, chaste language, deep
expression and perfect combination of words, meanings and syntax,
carefully chose the name 'Islam' as a truthful expression of the message
revealed to Muhammad (s.a.w.). Consequently, this Qur'anic selection is
exact and general, maintaining harmony between the manifestations of the
teachings and the teachings themselves.

This connection between the teachings and their contexts and aims can
well be uncovered by first resorting to the lexicons, from which we come
to know that the word 'Islam' means submission and surrender. Then,
moving from the lexical terminology, we should carefully study the
ideology, legislation and direction of the teachings. We are then apt to
recognize that the whole religious structure, in its complete unity,
aims at submission and surrender to the Lord of the worlds, and freedom
from any type of submission or surrender to human tyrants and
illusionary legends.

Thus we recognize the correlation between the name 'Islam', and the
manifestations of the faith itself. The Qur'an, as revealed by Allah
through His Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.), has transformed this word, this
name, from its mere linguistic form to the foundation of a faith and way
of life.

There is a complete and exact accord between the term 'Islam' and its
hidden ideological and legislative truths. This religion, this faith, is
called 'Islam' because it is a submission or surrender to the Lord of
the worlds, and is also a way towards the freedom and salvation of
mankind.

"Those who follow the Apostle-Prophet the 'Ummi' (one who neither reads
nor writes), whom they find ordained for them in the Torah and the
Gospel, (who) enjoins them good and forbids them evil, and makes lawful
for them all good things and prohibits fur them the foul; and removes
from them their burden and the fetters (spiritual and social) which were
upon them; so (as for) those who believe in him, honour him, help him
and follow the light which has been sent down with him, these it is that
are the successful."
Sura A'raf (7:157)


