The Originality of the Messages and Later Distortions
=====================================================

The course of the divine messages from the very beginning had to
encounter arrogant attempts by ignorant elements, bent upon effacing
them or at least distorting their true message and principles. No
efforts were spared by the infidels in creating obstacles to hinder the
progress of religion, stop its spread and empty it of its reformative
contents. The prophets were persecuted by these tyrants and even
martyred. The tyrants vainly thought that they would be able to blot the
call of delivery and redemption and keep humanity in bonds.

But the most serious danger faced by the divine calls, was from the
hypocrites and counterfeits. These pretended to accept the divine
messages, but no sooner had a prophet died, they distorted and
fabricated his teachings and scripture, in order to exploit the masses
for their own selfish interests.

An outstanding example of this forgery are the Jewish rabbis and
Christian priests, who so frequently changed, altered, added and deleted
to the divine messages revealed through the Prophets Moses (a.s.) and
Jesus (a.s.), that these were turned into semi-pagan religions having
obscure rituals, with virtually nothing divine remaining therein.

The pure monotheistic religion - Islam - preached by Moses (a.s.) and
Jesus (a.s.) was polluted in the course of time by the sediments of the
rabbis' and priests' devious thoughts, and assumed deformed and
legendary mythical shapes, far removed from intellect and reason and
mocked at by correct learning.

Falsification and deviation of messages gradually made the one single
faith, into different distorted religions. The religion so defined by
the imaginations of the priests, had nothing but legends and fables,
stagnancy and petrification, and made mankind prostrate before tyrants
and despots - a state which caused people to dislike belief, and
encouraged the waging of a war of hostility against the very idea of
religion.

Mankind was absolutely justified in taking such a hostile attitude
towards these forged and distorted illusions, and in recoiling from such
fossil understandings which were neo-paganism in disguise. In stark
contrast to the monotheistic creed, prophets were worshipped as sons of
God - a clear influence of pagan Roman beliefs on Christianity.

The Qur'an highlights these forgeries and falsifications in several
verses concerning the Jews and the Christians:

"Certainly they have disbelieved who say: The Messiah, son of Mary is
Allah; and the Messiah (himself) said: O Children of Israel, serve
Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Surely whoever associates (partners) with
Allah, then Allah has forbidden to him the Paradise and his abode is the
Fire; and there shall be no helpers for the unjust. Certainly they have
disbelieved who say: Allah is the third (person) of three (trinity);
when there is no god but the One God and if they (the Christians) desist
not from what they say, a painful doom shall befall those among them who
disbelieve." Sura Mai'da (5:72,73)

"And the Jews say: Ezra is the son of Allah; and the Christians say: De
Messiah is the son of Allah; these are the words of their mouths; they
imitate the saying of those who disbelieved before; may Allah destroy
them; how perverse are they! They have taken their rabbis and priests as
Lords besides Allah and (also) the Messiah son of Mary and they were
enjoined that they should serve one God only, there is no god but He;
Exalted is He above all what they ascribe as partners (to Him)?" Sura
Tawba (9:30,31)

"Woe to those who write the book with their hands and then say: This is
from Allah, so that they may make a small gain; therefore woe to them
for what their hands have written (fabricated) and woe to them for what
they earn thereby." Sura Baqara (2:79)

The glorious Qur'an draws a clear picture of the perversion done by the
Jewish rabbis and the Christian priests to the original creed, laws and
concepts of the divinely revealed scriptures; the Torah and the Gospel.
By enacting laws and propagating teachings violating the divine message
of the original scriptures the Jews and the Christians not only served
their own vested interests but in the process gave birth to superficial
religions, bearing the clear stamps of their superstitious conscience
and poor imagination.

Distorting the very contents of these two divine messages, they led
astray the greater part of several generations, until that deviation
gradually took the form of a special creed and replaced whatever belief
was there in the hearts of the few remaining followers of the true path
preached by Jesus (a.s.); most of whom due to persecution by Roman
Christianity took to the deserts and remote mountains to finally await
the coming of the promised Reformer.

The majority, either dictated by personal desires or fear of Imperial
Rome - which had cleverly put on the mask of Christianity, preserving
intact most of its pagan beliefs - drove the last nail into the coffin
of the divine message, preached by the uncrucified prophet; Jesus
(a.s.), by blindly and without reasoning accepting the creed which we
know as Christianity today.

By analysing the so-called Torah and the Gospel now in the hands of
their followers, we discover a disfigured and legendary picture, without
the least resemblance to the spirit of both the divine scriptures
revealed to Moses (a.s.), and Jesus (a.s.). Following are some evidences
proving the point, that these books are in fact mere fabrications:

1. Several Gospels are now in circulation among the Christians, each
one different from the other to a great extent, and even obviously
self-contradicting.

When Allah had revealed only a single Book to Jesus (a.s.), not many;
from where did the so many Gospels come from, and how do the learned
priests explain the phenomena of these conflicting versions?

The only answer, that not even the highest ranking Christian
authorities can refute is, these divine scriptures were subjected to so
frequent revisions that eventually they lost the greater part of their
originality and true contents, and led to so many conflicting versions
of the Gospel.

2. True the source of all divine messages is Allah the Almighty and
they all stress on the concept of monotheism and consider Him to be
above all human attributes; whereas a glance at the present Torah of the
Jews reveals that it is far removed from the very principles of
monotheism. Actually it so disfigures this fundamental principle of the
divine message, that the Prophet Ezra (a.s.) is presented as the son of
God, in close resemblance to the forged Gospel's view of the Messiah.

An interesting point indeed, leaving so many questions unanswered; as
to whether the Jews tried to outdo the Christians or was it vice versa?
Moreover the Gospel itself betrays its pagan Roman influences when it
says that Jesus (a.s.) was an incarnation of God and had a dual nature,
both human and divine.

It is quite obvious to a sound rational mind that these are all
deviated thoughts and heathen beliefs, which proves without doubt that
the hypocrites coined absurd ideas in contrast to the basic principles
of the religion brought by Moses (a.s.) and Jesus (a.s.).

3. Another glaring example of the distortion, which even a layman can
detect, is the self-contradictions in these so-called holy books of the
Jews and Christians. On one hand they sanctify the prophets and present
them as lofty models of excellent character, but on the other hand these
same books degrade them to the ranks of lecherous criminals, capable of
committing every known sin.

Chapter XIX of the Book of Genesis, attributes a horrible crime to
Prophet Lot (a.s.) and his two daughters, whom all good believers regard
as a spotless person. The shameless story is reproduced below from the
Old Testament for our readers, to judge themselves:

"And the firstborn said unto the younger, our father is old, ad there
is not a man in the earth to come in unto us .fur the manner of all the
earth: Come let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him,
that we may preserve seed of our father. And they made their father
drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her
father, and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.

And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the
younger, &hold, I lay yester night with my father: let us make him drink
wine this night also, and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may
preserve seed of our father. And they made their father drink wine that
night also:

and the younger arose, and lay with him, and he perceived not when she
lay down, nor when she arose. Thus we (â€¦..) the daughters of Lot with
child by their father. And the first born bare a son, and called his
name Moab: the same is the father of Moabites unto this day. And the
younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Ben-ammi: the same is
the father of the children of Ammon unto this day."

Genesis (19:31-38)

This passage props up a number of questions, which the learned rabbis
and priests, try to evade and insist on their followers to ignore the
facts and accept blind obedience.

This same chapter of the Book of Genesis, starts with the destruction
of the licentious cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to which the Prophet Lot
(a.s.) had been sent by God as a Reformer. And it says that while
escaping to Zoar, Lot's wife disregarding God's command turned back to
see the destruction of these cities and was instantly turned into a
pillar of salt.

In other words it means that Lot (a.s.) was a pious, God-fearing man
and the cities were destroyed for the sole reason that they did not heed
his guidance and continued their lecherous deeds. And moreover even his
wife could not escape God's wrath due to her disobedience.

Now taking another look at verses 31-38, quoted above, we find that
Lot - God forbid - was a weak character and his daughters wicked
persons. The question arises if the prophets were fools, lechers or
simpletons, what missionary roles were they capable of performing? And
did the Creator who easily created the whole universe erred in selecting
prophets? And lastly, if His messengers themselves were lecherous why
did He destroy the promiscuous cities which were only emulating their
Prophet?

The only answer is that this very passage like so many other ones in
these books betrays its origin. It is a clear case of distortion and
later addition by some prejudiced racist Jew, whose only intention was
to slander other races, because of some deep personal bias. His
distorted mind found the Torah to be the best medium to express his
hatred, regardless of the sacrilege he was committing towards God, a
Prophet and his family.

Another example of a distortion is Chapter XI of book II of Samuel,
which blasphemes the Prophet David (a.s.) and accuses him of committing
adultery with the wife of Uriah the Hittite, his faithful companion and
a true believer. It alleges that having made Uriah's wife Bathsheba
pregnant; David to achieve his sinister designs sent Uriah to the war
fronts where he was killed and thus got rid of him.

Now coming to the New Testament, we find in Chapter XI of the Gospel,
according to St. John, that Jesus (a.s.) attended a wedding, where they
were short of wine and he performed a miracle by converting six stoups
of water into the forbidden drink. The Gospel, also says that Jesus
Christ used to drink wine, and he was a heavy drinker.

Thus it is quite clear to every believer in God that such allegations
are but crafty inventions and cleverly disguised lies against the
prophets by those hypocrites, who wanted to distort religion from
within, in order to disrepute these pure personalities and at the same
time promote a Christ-worshipping cult, appealing to the minds of the
pagan Greeks and Romans. Even a casual look at these books reveals their
forgery and the real aim of their authors, who by mischievously
innovating prophet-worship belittled the doctrine of monotheism and the
spotless characters of such great prophets as Moses (a.s.) and Jesus
(a.s.).

4. Another evidence proving the forgery of these Books is that they are
diffused with polytheism and pagan thoughts, such as the idea of
incarnation; the concept of trinity and the belief that the Messiah is
god in the shape of man.

The authors of the Gospels had long been under the influence of pagan
thoughts and beliefs, then prevailing in Roman society. In order to
conform to the pagan Roman mind they disfigured the pure monotheistic
spirit of the original Gospel, revealed to Prophet Jesus (a.s.). It is
an irrefutable fact of history, confessed even by the Christian priests,
that the versions of Gospel now common among the Christians were
composed by different authors over a two hundred year period after Jesus
(a.s.).

In other words they were forged by the priests according to their own
thinking and greedy desires, conforming on one hand with the pagan Roman
culture, and on the other, the already polluted Jewish thought, which
alienated from the creed of Moses (a.s.) and other prophets had not only
rejected Jesus (a.s.), but was also involved in the far-reaching
conspiracy of distorting the divinely revealed word of Jesus (a.s.).

The Christian Church, in line with the era of moral and spiritual
decadence and ignorance continued to falsify, deface and deform the true
spirit of Jesus' (a.s ) message, so that in course of time such weird
and absurd beliefs were added; as the forgiving of sins by the priests;
promise of Paradise to the wrong-doer despite evil deeds, and the sale
of 'Indulgence Papers' from the Church, in which the Pope guarantees
forgiveness, for the money the customer pays.

On studying the Church's way of life, and scrutinizing the Christian
clerical hierarchy, one is apt to uncover the major motives behind these
disastrous interferences with the divine values preached by the Messiah
(a.s.).

The major motive of the Christian Church was to fill its coffers and
accumulate wealth. By pretending to posses the authority to forgive
sins, it not only blasphemed God; but also deliberately misled simple
people by sanctioning the enjoyment of the forbidden things, in the very
name of religion and under the pretext of a deferred purification'.

It even issued those so-called 'Indulgence Papers' in which it is
written; "May our Lord Jesus bless you, and deliver you by the rewards
of his all-sacred pains ... . I, according to my Apostolic power
bestowed upon me, relieve you from all your punishments, sentences and
clerical consequences that you had deserved; and from all extravagances,
evils and sins which you committed however grave and horrible and
whatever their causes might have been, though they are kept for our
father, His Holiness the Pope and the Apostolic Seat.

I shall erase all the filths of sin and all the signs of blame, which
you might have brought upon yourself in this life, and I shall lift the
punishments from which you should have suffered in the purgatory. I
shall turn you anew to participate in the secrets of the Church, and in
the company of the saints.

I shall turn you again to chastity and goodness which you got when
baptized, so that will be closed before you, at death time, the door
through which the wrongdoers enter to the place of torture and
punishment, while will be opened to you the door leading to the paradise
of joy, even if you lived for long years." 2

In other words by issuing such absurd papers, the Church has given its
followers the free rein to commit whatever crimes they like however
capital they may be. Thus the present moral and spiritual decadence of
the Christian world like atheism, usurping others' properties, violence,
transgression, fraud, adultery, sodomy and other sorts of crimes,
including the oppression on Third World countries and political and
moral bankruptcy, directly rest on these Papal Papers.

It actually inspires them to commit every known sin, crime and
aggression, because after all the 'Pope is there to forgive these
offences and throw open the doors of paradise to his flock'. No wonder
Christian missionaries are spreading across oppressed Africa and other
Third World countries, to seek new converts; which in reality means
lulling the unsuspecting people to loose their rationality by accepting
this dangerous slow poison called Christianity, and ultimately paving
the way for the Imperialist countries to plunder the rich natural
resources of Africa and the Third World.

This proves that the Pope substitutes himself for God, Who is the only
One to forgive sins and the only One to admit into paradise. The Pope
very well knows that he has neither the right nor the power to forgive,
since he is but a mere mortal like other human beings, and himself
cannot avail any benefit nor ward off any harm. In fact all he and his
group of atheists want is to accumulate wealth to satisfy their secret
desires and pleasures, and run the fabulous theatrical show under his
control called the Church , by making fools of millions around the
world.

The Qur'an attacks this greed and avarice of the priests and the
pontiffs who exploit religious responsibility by taking advantage of
peoples' simplicity and suck their blood and lead them astray. It
exposes the true nature of this so-called religious establishment, and
uncovers its selfish aims which contradict reason and the very essence
of religion and its universal reformative call to enlighten mankind and
deliver them from darkness. The Qur'an says:

"O you who believe! Indeed many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the
(Christian) priests falsely consume the wealth of the people (their
followers) and prevent (them) from the way of Allah; and (as for) those
who hoard up gold and silver and do not spend it in the way of Allah,
announce to them (O Muhammad) a painful doom."
Sura Tawba (9:34)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

2. Even Christian authorities have questioned the very conception of
the Church. Says the Encyclopaedia Brittanica, "Some of the futurist
sayings, if taken by themselves, raise the question whether Jesus
intended to found a Church."(Vol. 4, p.535).


