The Historic Struggle of the Prophets
=====================================

"Thus have We made for every prophet an opponent from among the sinners
..." Sura Furqan (25:31)

An observer following humanity's historical march and the process of
its long and bitter struggle, discerns two directly opposite currents,
two conflicting forces. On one hand, there is the power of evil,
transgression, perversion, deviation, blasphemy and tyranny, personified
through a number of tyrannic despots and dictators, such as Pharaoh,
Nimrod, Abu Jahl and the unjust dominating classes in every era and
nation.

On the other hand, there is the power of faith, piety, truth, peace and
the call to justice, mercy and equality, personified through such great
prophets as Abraham (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), Jesus (a.s.) and Muhammad
(s.a.w.) and their sincere followers who spread the message of
monotheism and proclaimed the call of faith, to save humanity from
slipping in the darkness of disbelief and idolatory.

That faithful group always appears, on the stage of history to wage a
sacred struggle against the forces of perversion and deviation. There
was not a single prophet who did not suffer, together with his
followers, from tyranny, oppression, torture and persecution, because of
his invitation towards truth and righteousness, and opposition to
injustice, disbelief and tyranny.

And there were no advocates of truth who did not suffer the same fate
as the prophets did. In the way of Allah they endured imprisonment,
terror, torture, banishment and martyrdom at the hands of the tyrants
and dictators, the enemies of Allah and mankind. The glorious Qur'an
illustrates this epic struggle between the prophets and their followers
on one side, and the enemies of Allah and truth on the other:

"And how many a prophet has fought with whom were devoted men (beside
him), so they did not become weak-hearted on account of what befell them
in the way of Allah, nor did they weaken (in their faith) nor did they
abase themselves; and Allah loves the patient. And their saying was none
other than what they said: "Our Lord! forgive us our faults and our
extravagance in our affair, and make firm our feet (on the right path)
and help us against the unbelieving people." Sura Aal Imran
(3:146,147)

"Thus ham We made for every prophet an opponent from among the sinners
and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and Helper." Sura Furqan
(25:31)

The Seal of the prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.) along with his brave cousin
Imam Ali (a.s.) and his sincere companions, was always in the forefront
of the struggle for the sake of truth and for making this earth a place
of peace and happiness. The glorious Qur'an testifies to the role played
by the great Prophet and his faithful followers in defending justice and
faith, with the spirit of self-sacrifice and redemption, in harmony with
the teachings of Allah, and in pursuit of the logic of reform and divine
examination:

"Therefore bear up patiently as did the apostles endowed with constancy
had patience, and do not seek to hasten for them (their doom). On the
day that they shall see what they are promised they shall be as if they
had not tarried save an hour of the day. A clear message! Shall then any
be destroyed save the transgressing people?" Sura Ahqaf (46:35)

Thus through this long and bitter historical struggle, the prophets and
their followers resisted disbelief, injustice and corruption and
inspired the oppressed people with the spirit of heroism and
self-sacrifice and guided them in raising the banner of protest for the
realization of their deprived rights, in the face of the despots and the
dictators, who had enslaved mankind , and had considered themselves
god-heads on this earth. Allah, the Strong and Mighty, helps and guides
the faithful who struggle in His way and will surely punish those who
are disbelievers.

"And (as for) those who strive hard for us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the doers of
good." Sura Ankabut (29:69)

"... then We gave the punishment to those who were guilty and helping
the believers is ever incumbent upon Us." Sura Rum (30:47)


**Why we became Muslim?**

In this age of reason and scientific progress, when all religions and
traditional sets of beliefs have been exposed in their true colours as
being nothing but superstitious .ignorance, Islam with its emphasis on
rationality has made a great impact on the modem human mind. With the
gradual removal of the veils of prejudice, bigotry and ignorance, more
and more people are realizing the truth, and joining the Universal
brotherhood, called Islam, which knows no barriers of race, colour,
language and even geographical boundaries.

Despite the massive anti-Islamic propaganda of the International media
in league with Zionism and the Church, whose global economic
exploitation has put vast resources at their disposal; seekers of truth
from various dimes are coming into the Islamic fold.

Following we present a summarized account from some of our new brothers
and sisters on how and why they became Muslims.

Dr. Gernia (A former French MP)

For a long time I have carefully studied the holy Qur'an and was amazed
to discover that its verses contain a mine of knowledge, dealing with
such diverse sciences as astronomy, medicine, biology, health, social
care, etc. And the interesting point is, all of these remarkably agree
with our own modem rational mind and scientific discoveries made on
these subjects.

However the important thing which convinced me of the truth of Islam
and Muhammad's (s.a.w) prophethood was the fact that without ever
sitting before a teacher, he already knew before 1400 years, what modem
science is beginning to unravel today. I firmly believe that if any
scientist or scholar compares the Qur'anic verses with his own
particular field of research, undoubtedly like me, he will realize the
truth and become a Muslim.


Mr. Yacoub Raymond - France

Three important points made me reject Christianity and accept Islam:

1) Christianity though acknowledging the past prophets, elevates Jesus
(a.s ) to the position of God traces of pagan Roman influences - thus
distorting the fundamental concept of the divinely revealed messages;
Monotheism.

2) The absurd logic of Trinity, which credits Jesus with a dual
personality - human and divine These two irrational ideas are
Christianity's major flaws in the light of the monotheist concept of God
as taught by the Prophets Abraham (a.s.) and Moses (a s ).

3) Finally, Christianity gave birth to the Institution of the Church,
which claims to act as an intermediary between God and man. This
erroneous concept is in fact a green signal to its followers to commit
sins, because of the Church's pretension to forgive them. What a stupid
idea! Does the Church which is run by fallible mortals has the power to
forgive the sinners, instead of the Omnipotent, Immortal God? A
dangerous notion indeed which no doubt explains the vices and their
natural consequences - diseases and social breakdowns rampant in
Christian countries.

Another important factor which drove me away from Christianity was the
intense love for the material world among the Christians.

When we draw a comparison between Islam and Christianity, we discover
the obvious truth Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) not only confirmed the
prophethood of all the previous prophets, but that which was revealed to
him (the holy Qur'an) are the only words of the Almighty , genuinely
preserved unlike the previously revealed books, (Torah and Gospel) which
have been badly tampered with and distorted.


Professor Roger Garaudy (Rajaa')

(French philosopher and man of letters. Speaker of the French
Parliament from 1956 to 1958, whose historical conversion on 11
Ramadhan, 1402 (1982) made quite an uproar in the West.)

The only solution for the great crisis threatening to tear apart the
present day world is the application of Islamic laws. Islam holds the
key to social reforms, because of its subliming character which fosters
spiritual unity.

The holy Qur'an helps us to see in everything or event, signs of
Allah's Majesty, thereby proving the existence of a Higher Being, Who
guides nature and life. Of course the main purpose of religion is to
promote cooperation and unity. Today the West needs Islam more than ever
before, in order to give life its meaning and history its purpose.

The West has unfortunately separated science from wisdom, thought from
its mode, which are so harmoniously knitted together in Islam as a
single unit. Islam is the goal and the refined form of the Abrahamic
creeds and teachings, whose earlier crude forms were Judaism and
Christianity. There is no other way out for the West except to look
towards Islam for deliverance from the catastrophic exploitation of
Capitalism.

**Marmaduke Pickthall**

(British scholar who became a Muslim, changing his name to Muhammad,
famous for his explanatory translation of the holy Qur'an)

There is no greater blessing for a human being to enjoy other than
being guided towards Islam. Once you realize the truth and accept Islam,
the mist will be automatically removed. You begin to differentiate
between faith and disbelief, truth and falsehood, happiness and misery.
I thank Almighty God for bestowing this great blessing on me. My
awakened conscience has filled my life with such great happiness which I
knew not before. In short, I am proud to be part of the Muslim Ummah,
enjoying the shade of this blessed tree called Islam.

**Lord Douglas Hamilton**

(British industrialist, now known as Adel Hamilton)

Islam is the only religion capable of combating social discrimination,
agnosticism and the decadence of modem civilization. It continues to
attract a number of university graduates, who have been disillusioned
with various ideologies and isms.

Sir Archibald Hamilton-U.K.

It was quite natural for me not to resist the magnetic pull of Islam.
What a wonderful system of life! Besides forbidding all generally
frowned upon vices, it explicitly prohibits the drinking of alcoholic
beverages and intoxicants as well as the taking or giving of usury. In
other words Islam does not allow any individual or group to exploit the
other.

These wise injunctions coupled with the philanthropic obligations of
'Khoms' and 'Zakat' (poor-rates) to be distributed by the haves among
the havenots without the latter's need to beg, make Islam a dynamic
religion. Moreover begging is discouraged by Islam as a loss of
self-respect.

These laws, not only maintain a social balance by removing barriers of
ignorance but elevate human dignity to its greatest heights.

In short Islam guides life on a straight forward path, while
Christianity crookedly preaches to its followers that God should be
worshipped on Sunday and humans on the other days of the week.

Miss Brigette Honey - U.K.

Through some of my friends I came across an English translation of the
holy Qur'an. After reading the first two chapters when I had just
started the third one, I suddenly felt an uncontrollable urge to
prostrate myself before God.

It was the first time I had ever done such a thing in my life. The
greater its significance, considering the fact that I had grown up in an
irreligious atmosphere and had studied and dismissed various
philosophies and ideas.

I accepted Islam the same instance, the only religion appealing to
common sense and free from any sort of polytheistic traces. Islamic laws
cover all aspects of human life and are in perfect harmony with science
and nature.

Islam has a most complete code for binding the international community
into a cohesive unit. It is far removed from any superstitious trends
and has given birth to an entirely distinct art, culture, philosophy,
industry and…. Etc., elevating human values to heights never attained
before.

To sum it all, Islam with its profound belief in Allah, maintains a
perfect equilibrium between both the spiritual and the material
worlds.

Miss. Hadia Heidy Walsor - London, U.K.

Christianity in this age of reason is a dead religion, having failed
miserably to keep pace with the progress of civilization. Christianity
with its emphasis on baptism, monogamy and the theatrical funeral
ceremony all of which stem from the polytheist concept of Trinity is not
even weird but defies simple logic. Even when I was a child the very
idea of Jesus (a.s.) being both divine and human sounded absurd to me.
In fact the whole theory blasphemes Almighty God Himself.

Religion should be a source of the most sublime morals and ethics and
in addition to inspiring its followers, should protect them against
temptations. On the contrary an irrational set of beliefs as preached by
the Christian Church undermines morals, breeding vices in the society as
is evident for all.

Compare this with the rationality of Islam Let us take polygamy as an
example, which is allowed in Islam in perfect harmony with human nature,
although with certain reasonable regulations.

Is it not better to practice lawful healthy polygamy rather than stick
to the hypocrisy of monogamy imposed by the Church, which leads to
countless illicit affairs and consequently to diseases and social
perversion? The day Europe realizes the freedom, liberty and rationality
Islamic laws offer, it will get rid of all its social ills.

**Mr. Donald Requil - U.S.A.**

The simplicity of Prophet Muhammad's (s.a.w.) life coupled with the
rationality of Islam made me change my belief. It is the only religion
free of any absurdities and preposterous ideas. Once you realize the
rationality of Islam, you become a true believer.

"We are nearer to him (man) than his jugular vein." Sura Qaf (50:16)

"I am very near, I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls
..." Sura Baqara (2:186)

"... Wherever you look Allah is everywhere ..." Sura Baqara (2:115)

How rational and simple is Islam, no need for any intercessor. All
people are equal before Allah. There is no difference whatsoever of
colour, race, social status, ... etc. And no one is superior to another
except in terms of piety.

Moreover a glance at the life of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) his
teachings, personality and behaviour, all indicate that he is the last
and greatest of the prophets and Islam is a complete set of rules for
humanity unlike Christianity, which utterly fails in this regard and
could be described as against the very laws of nature itself.

**Istraed Shmart - U.S.A.**

I came across several Muslims in Elynews, whose friendship enlightened
me about Islam and eventually I became a Muslim. The turning point in my
life was, when one of my Muslim friends said that if God really willed
to have a son, undoubtedly he would not have adopted one of his own
creatures. "Brother, He the Almighty is Eternal and above all these
defects", remarked my friend.

These magic words awakened my conscience. The sentence was quite
logical and after reasoning, I realized that Jesus Christ (a.s.) was
just one of the Prophets sent by God most high, and had been wrongly
transformed-to suit the pagan mind-into a thing he never claimed he was.
I began to question the belief that why should one man die on the cross
for the sins committed by others and act as redeemer with Almighty God,
when I myself can pray to Him sincerely and He has the power to grant my
prayer. The answers were ably provided by Islam which testified
Jesus'(a.s.) innocence to the whole sordid affair coined by the Church
fathers, and I finally became a Muslim.

**Al - Haj Dr. Abdul Karim Satyo
(Professor of Economics at a Japanese University)**

Islam is without any ambiguity, in proving the existence of the
Almighty One. It convincingly explains this Manifest Truth, without
which everything would be chaos and all our accepted social morals will
lose their meaning and justification. If humanity succeeds in
discovering this Eternal Truth, people will accept Islam in
multitudinous crowds.

**Abdullah Amora-Japan**

My search for truth brought me in touch with Islam.

When I compared Islamic laws to Christianity, I was amazed to discover
that they are so precisely perfect that they have not undergone even the
slightest change since they were revealed, unlike the Bible, which
contains nothing original.

The Qur'an is Allah's genuine word and has been entirely preserved in .
its original state, whereas the Bible, which has come down to us, is
neither the word of God nor His divine laws. In fact the Bible is more
or less a brief biography of a part of Jesus (a.s.) life and has been
tampered with and revised so frequently down the centuries, that it is
doubtful to say what percentage of it contains the actual events of
Prophet Jesus'(a.s ) life.

The greatest and the most glaring defect of Christianity is the absurd
concept of Trinity and its forcing down the throats of simple people.
The very emphasis on its blind acceptance, in utter disregard to reason
and intellect betrays its nosensical nature. Sadly Christian doctrine
has encouraged crimes and loose moralities in society, contrary to Islam
which inspires the building of a pure civilization.

**Leopold Vaise
(An Austrian journalist and writer who changed his name to Muhammad
Assad)**

Honestly I am at a loss to say which particular field in Islam attracts
me more. For me Islam is like a complete and flawless structure whose
parts are inter-related and joined firmly and harmoniously together. In
other words, no part of Islamic laws or values is out of place or
dispensable and is precisely perfect in catering to even the minutest
detail of a human's life. In short Islam is a cohesive unit whose every
idea cosily fits in its right place and this has made a profound effect
on my life.

**Professor Mohammed Ezzeddin (Nishkanata Badhiayya) - Indi
(A former principal of a Hyderabad College and currently Professor of
history at Maharja college Mysore)**

Islam is the only religion in full historical limelight and not of
obscure origins as other religions. Islamic laws are in full conformity
with reason and intellect, making it a practical religion and not a
visionary theory. Besides the above characteristics unlike any other
religion, Islam remarkably caters to the needs of people of every era
and generation and is compatible to all cultures and levels of
intellect. In brief it is the only platform capable of fostering
universal brotherhood among mankind.


**Islam as Seen by Prominent Western Thinkers**

It is unfortunate that the Christian West instead of sincerely trying
to understand the phenomenal success of Islam has considered it a rival
religion. During the centuries of the crusades, this trend gained much
force and impetus and a huge amount of literature was produced to
tarnish the image of Islam.

Truth needs no advocates to plead on its behalf. But the prolonged
malicious propaganda against Islam has created great confusion even in
the minds of some free and objective thinkers. But Islam has begun to
unfold its genuineness to the modern scholars whose bold and objective
observations on Islam belie all the charges levelled against it by the
so-called unbiased orientalists.

The following are some observations on Islam, the Qur'an and Muhammad
(s.a.w.) by well acknowledged non-Muslim Western scholars and thinkers
of modern times which we hope would contribute to initiating an
objective evaluation of the Islamic faith.

**About Islam**

"I am not a Muslim in the usual sense, though I hope I am 'Muslim' as
'one surrendered to God', but I believe that embedded in the Qur'an and
other expressions of the Islamic vision are vast stores of divine truth
from which I and other occidentals have still much to learn, and Islam
is certainly a strong contender for the supplying of the basic framework
of the one religion of the future." W. Montgomery Watt "Islam and
Christianity Today", London, 1983, page IX. "I have always held the
religion of Muhammad in high estimation because of its wonderful
vitality.

It is the only religion which appears to me to possess that
assimilating capacity to the changing phase of existence which can make
itself appeal to every age. I have studied him-the wonderful man - and
in my opinion far from being an anti-Christ, he must be called the
Saviour of humanity. I believe that if a man like him were to assume the
dictatorship of the modem world, he would succeed in solving its
problems in a way that would bring it the much needed peace and
happiness: I have prophesied about the faith of Muhammad that it would
be acceptable to the Europe of tomorrow as it is beginning to be
acceptable to the Europe of today."


George Bernard Shaw
"The Genuine Islam",
Vol. 1, No. 81936.

"History makes it clear however, that the legend of fanatical Muslims
sweeping through the world and forcing Islam at the point of the sword
upon conquered races is one of the most fantastically absurd myths that
historians have ever repeated."

De Lacy O'Leary
"Islam at the Crossroads",
London , 1923, page 8.

"But Islam has a still further service to render to the cause of
humanity. It stands after all nearer to the real East than Europe does,
and it possesses a magnificent tradition of inter-racial understanding
and cooperation. No other society has such a record of success in
uniting in an equality of status, of opportunity, and of endeavours so
many and so various races of mankind... Islam has still the power to
reconcile apparently irreconcilable elements of race and tradition.

If ever the opposition of the great societies of East and West is to be
replaced by cooperation, the mediation of Islam is an indispensable
condition. In its hands lies very largely the solution of the problem
with which Europe is faced in its relation with East. If they unite, the
hope of a peaceful issue is immeasurably enhanced. But if Europe, by
rejecting the cooperation of Islam, throws it into the arms of its
rivals, the issue can only be disastrous for both."

H.A.R. Gibb
"Whither Islam" London, 1932, p.379.

"The extinction of race consciousness as between Muslims is one of the
outstanding achievements of Islam and in the contemporary world there
is, as it happens, a crying need for the propagation of this Islamic
virtue."

A. J. Toynbee
"Civilization on Trial",
New York, 1948, p. 205.

"The rise of Islam is perhaps the most amazing event in human history.
Springing from a land and a people like previously negligible, Islam
spread within a century over half the earth, shattering great empires,
overthrowing long-established religions, remoulding the souls of races,
and building up a whole new world, the world of Islam.

The closer we examine this development the more extraordinary does it
appear. The other great religions won their way slowly, by painful
struggle and finally triumphed with the aid of powerful monarchs
converted to the new faith. Christianity had its Constantine, Buddhism
its Asoka, and Zoroastrianism its Cyrus, each lending to his chosen cult
the mighty force of secular authority, not so Islam. Arising in a desert
land sparsely inhabited by a nomad race previously undistinguished in
human annals.

Islam sallied forth on its great adventure with the slenderest human
backing and against the heaviest material odds. Yet Islam triumphed with
seemingly miraculous ease, and a couple of generations saw the Fiery
Crescent borne victorious from the Pyrenees to the Himalayas and from
the desert of Central Asia to the deserts of Central Africa."

A. M. L. Stoddard
Quoted in "Islam-The Religion of All Prophets",
Begum Bawani Waqf, Karachi Pakistan p.56.

"Islam is a religion that is essentially rationalistic in the widest
sense of this term considered etymologically and historically. The
definition of rationalism as a system that bases religious beliefs on
principles furnished by reason applies to it exactly. The teachings of
the Prophet, the Qur'an have invariably kept their place as the
fundamental starting point, and the dogma of unity of God has always
been proclaimed therein with a grandeur, a majesty, and invariable
purity and with a note of sure conviction, which it is hard to find
surpassed outside the pale of Islam.

This fidelity to the fundamental dogma of the religion, the elemental
simplicity of the formula in which it is enunciated, the proof that it
gains from the fervid conviction of the missionaries who propagate it,
are so many causes to explain the success of Muhammadan missionary
efforts. A creed so precise, so stripped of all theological complexities
and consequently so accessible to the ordinary understanding might be
expected to possess and does indeed possess a marvellous power of
winning its way into the consciences of men."

Edward Montet
"La Propagande Chretienne et ses Adversairs Musulmans",
Paris 1890, Quoted by T W Arnold in "The Preaching of Islam",
London 1913, pp. 413-414.

**About the Qur'an**

"The Koran admittedly occupies an important position among the great
religious books of the world.

Though the youngest of the epochmaking works belonging to this class of
literature, it yields to hardly any in the wonderful effect which it has
produced on large masses of men. It has created an all but new phase of
human thought and a fresh type of character . It first transformed a
number of heterogeneous desert tribes of the Arabian Peninsula into a
nation of heroes, and then proceeded to create the vast
politico-religious organizations of Muhammadan world which are one of
the great forces with which Europe and the East have to reckon today."

G. Margoliouth
Introduction to J M. Rodwell's The Koran,
New York: Everyman's Library, 1977 p. VII.

"A work, then, which calls forth so powerful and seemingly incompatible
emotions even in the distant reader-distant as to time, and still more
so as mental development- a work which not only conquers the repugnance
with which he may begin its perusal, but changes this adverse feeling
into astonishment and admiration, such a work must be a wonderful
production of the human mind indeed and a problem of the highest
interest to every thoughtful observer of the destinies of mankind."

Dr Steingass
Quoted in "Hughes' Dictionary of Islam" pp. 526-7

"Here, therefore, its merits as a literary production should perhaps
not be measured by some preconceived maxims of subjective and aesthetic
taste, but by the effects which it produced in Muhammad's contemporaries
and fellow countrymen. If it spoke so powerfully and convincingly to the
hearts of his hearers as to weld hitherto centrifugal and antagonistic
elements into one compact and well organized body, animated by ideas far
beyond those which had until now ruled the Arabian mind, then its
eloquence was perfect, simply because it created a civilized nation out
of savage tribes, and shot a fresh woof into the old warp of history."

Dr Steingass
Quoted in "Hughes' Dictionary of Islam" P.528.

"In making the present attempt to improve on the performance of my
predecessors, and to produce something which might be accepted as
echoing however faintly the sublime rhetoric of the Arabic Koran, I have
been at pains to study the intricate and richly varied rhythms which -
apart from the message itself - constitute the Koran's undeniable claim
to rank amongst the greatest literary masterpieces of mankind ...

This very characteristic feature - 'that inimitable symphony', as the
believing Pickthall described his Holy Book, 'the very sounds of which
move men to tears and ecstasy' - has been almost totally ignored by
previous translators; it is therefore not surprising that what they have
wrought sounds dull and flat indeed in comparison with the splendidly
decorated original."

Arthur J Arberry
"The Koran Interpreted",
London: Oxford University Press, 1964, p X

"A totally objective examination of it [the Qur'an] in the light of
modern know-ledge, leads us to recognize the agreement between the two,
as has been already noted on repeated occasions. It makes us deem it
quite unthinkable for a man of Muhammad's time to have been the author
of such statements, on account of the state of knowledge in his day.
Such considerations are part of what gives the Qur'anic Revelation its
unique place, and forces the impartial scientist to admit his inability
to provide an explanation which calls solely upon materialistic
reasoning."

Maurice Bucaille
"The Qur'an and Modem Science", 1981, p 18

"The above observation makes the hypothesis advanced by those who see
Muhammad as the author of the Qur'an untenable. How could a man, from
being illiterate, become the most important author, in terms of literary
merits, in the whole of Arabic literature? How could he then pronounce
truths of a scientific nature that no other human-being could possibly
have developed at that time, and all this without once making the
slightest error in his pronouncement on the subject?"

Maurice Bucaille
"The Bible, the Qur'an and Science", 1978, p.125
Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
10. "Idhharul Haq" Vol. 2, P.281.


