The Historic Struggle of the Prophets
=====================================

"Thus have We made for every prophet an opponent from among the
sinners..."
Sura Furqan (25:31)

An observer following humanity's historical march and the process of
its long and bitter struggle, discerns two directly opposite currents,
two conflicting forces. On one hand, there is the power of evil,
transgression, perversion, deviation, blasphemy and tyranny, personified
through a number of tyrannic despots and dictators, such as Pharaoh,
Nimrod, Abu Jahl and the unjust dominating classes in every era and
nation.

On the other hand, there is the power of faith, piety, truth, peace and
the call to justice, mercy and equality, personified through such great
prophets as Abraham (a.s.), Moses (a.s.), Jesus (a.s.) and Muhammad
(s.a.w.) and their sincere followers who spread the message of
monotheism and proclaimed the call of faith, to save humanity from
slipping in the darkness of disbelief and idolatory.

That faithful group always appears, on the stage of history to wage a
sacred struggle against the forces of perversion and deviation. There
was not a single prophet who did not suffer, together with his
followers, from tyranny, oppression, torture and persecution, because of
his invitation towards truth and righteousness, and opposition to
injustice, disbelief and tyranny. And there were no advocates of truth
who did not suffer the same fate as the prophets did. In the way of
Allah they endured imprisonment, terror, torture, banishment and
martyrdom at the hands of the tyrants and dictators, the enemies of
Allah and mankind. The glorious Qur'an illustrates this epic struggle
between the prophets and their followers on one side, and the enemies of
Allah and truth on the other:

"And how many a prophet has fought with whom were devoted men (beside
him), so they did not become weak-hearted on account of what befell them
in the way of Allah, nor did they weaken (in their faith) nor did they
abase themselves; and Allah loves the patient. And their saying was none
other than what they said: "Our Lord! forgive us our faults and our
extravagance in our affair, and make firm our feet (on the right path)
and help us against the unbelieving people."
Sura Aal Imran (3:146,147)

"Thus ham We made for every prophet an opponent from among the sinners
and sufficient is your Lord as a Guide and Helper."
Sura Furqan (25:31)

The Seal of the prophets, Muhammad (s.a.w.) along with his brave cousin
Imam Ali (a.s.) and his sincere companions, was always in the forefront
of the struggle for the sake of truth and for making this earth a place
of peace and happiness. The glorious Qur'an testifies to the role played
by the great Prophet and his faithful followers in defending justice and
faith, with the spirit of self-sacrifice and redemption, in harmony with
the teachings of Allah, and in pursuit of the logic of reform and divine
examination:

"Therefore bear up patiently as did the apostles endowed with constancy
had patience, and do not seek to hasten for them (their doom). On the
day that they shall see what they are promised they shall be as if they
had not tarried save an hour of the day. A clear message! Shall then any
be destroyed save the transgressing people?"

Sura Ahqaf (46:35)

Thus through this long and bitter historical struggle, the prophets and
their followers resisted disbelief, injustice and corruption and
inspired the oppressed people with the spirit of heroism and
self-sacrifice and guided them in raising the banner of protest for the
realization of their deprived rights, in the face of the despots and the
dictators, who had enslaved mankind , and had considered themselves
god-heads on this earth. Allah, the Strong and Mighty, helps and guides
the faithful who struggle in His way and will surely punish those who
are disbelievers.

"And (as for) those who strive hard for us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the doers of
good."
Sura Ankabut (29:69)

"... then We gave the punishment to those who were guilty and helping
the believers is ever incumbent upon Us."
Sura Rum (30:47)


