Why We Became Muslims
=====================

In this age of reason and scientific progress, when all religions and
traditional sets of beliefs have been exposed in their true colours as
being nothing but superstitious, ignorance, Islam with its emphasis on
rationality has made a great impact on the modem human mind. With the
gradual removal of the veils of prejudice, bigotry and ignorance, more
and more people are realizing the truth, and joining the Universal
brotherhood, called Islam, which knows no barriers of race, colour,
language and even geographical boundaries. Despite the massive
anti-Islamic propaganda of the International media in league with
Zionism and the Church, whose global economic exploitation has put vast
resources at their disposal; seekers of truth from various dimes are
coming into the Islamic fold.

Following we present a summarized account from some of our new brothers
and sisters on how and why they became Muslims:

Dr. Gernia
(A former French MP)

For a long time I have carefully studied the holy Qur'an and was amazed
to discover that its verses contain a mine of knowledge, dealing with
such diverse sciences as astronomy, medicine, biology, health, social
care, etc. And the interesting point is, all of these remarkably agree
with our own modem rational mind and scientific discoveries made on
these subjects.

However the important thing which convinced me of the truth of Islam
and Muhammad's (s.a.w) prophethood was the fact that without ever
sitting before a teacher, he already knew before 1400 years, what modem
science is beginning to unravel today. I firmly believe that if any
scientist or scholar compares the Qur'anic verses with his own
particular field of research, undoubtedly like me, he will realize the
truth and become a Muslim.

Mr. Yacoub Raymond - France

Three important points made me reject Christianity and accept Islam:

1) Christianity though acknowledging the past prophets, elevates Jesus
(a.s ) to the position of God traces of pagan Roman influences - thus
distorting the fundamental concept of the divinely revealed messages;
Monotheism.

2) The absurd logic of Trinity, which credits Jesus with a dual
personality - human and divine These two irrational ideas are
Christianity's major flaws in the light of the monotheist concept of God
as taught by the Prophets Abraham (a.s.) and Moses (a s ).
3) Finally, Christianity gave birth to the Institution of the Church,
which claims to act as an intermediary between God and man. This
erroneous concept is in fact a green signal to its followers to commit
sins, because of the Church's pretension to forgive them.

What a stupid idea! Does the Church which is run by fallible mortals
has the power to forgive the sinners, instead of the Omnipotent,
Immortal God? A dangerous notion indeed which no doubt explains the
vices and their natural consequences - diseases and social breakdowns
rampant in Christian countries.

Another important factor which drove me away from Christianity was the
intense love for the material world among the Christians.

When we draw a comparison between Islam and Christianity, we discover
the obvious truth Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) not only confirmed the
prophethood of all the previous prophets, but that which was revealed to
him (the holy Qur'an) are the only words of the Almighty , genuinely
preserved unlike the previously revealed books, (Torah and Gospel) which
have been badly tampered with and distorted.

Professor Roger Garaudy (Rajaa')

(French philosopher and man of letters. Speaker of the French
Parliament from 1956 to 1958, whose historical conversion on 11
Ramadhan, 1402 (1982) made quite an uproar in the West.)

The only solution for the great crisis threatening to tear apart the
present day world is the application of Islamic laws. Islam holds the
key to social reforms, because of its subliming character which fosters
spiritual unity.

The holy Qur'an helps us to see in everything or event, signs of
Allah's Majesty, thereby proving the existence of a Higher Being, Who
guides nature and life. Of course the main purpose of religion is to
promote cooperation and unity.

Today the West needs Islam more than ever before, in order to give life
its meaning and history its purpose.

The West has unfortunately separated science from wisdom, thought from
its mode, which are so harmoniously knitted together in Islam as a
single unit. Islam is the goal and the refined form of the Abrahamic
creeds and teachings, whose earlier crude forms were Judaism and
Christianity. There is no other way out for the West except to look
towards Islam for deliverance from the catastrophic exploitation of
Capitalism.

**Marmaduke Pickthall**

(British scholar who became a Muslim, changing his name to Muhammad,
famous for his explanatory translation of the holy Qur'an) There is no
greater blessing for a human being to enjoy other than being guided
towards Islam. Once you realize the truth and accept Islam, the mist
will be automatically removed. You begin to differentiate between faith
and disbelief, truth and falsehood, happiness and misery. I thank
Almighty God for bestowing this great blessing on me. My awakened
conscience has filled my life with such great happiness which I knew not
before. In short, I am proud to be part of the Muslim Ummah, enjoying
the shade of this blessed tree called Islam.

Lord Douglas Hamilton
(British industrialist, now known as Adel Hamilton)

Islam is the only religion capable of combating social discrimination,
agnosticism and the decadence of modem civilization. It continues to
attract a number of university graduates, who have been disillusioned
with various ideologies and isms.

Sir Archibald Hamilton-U.K.

It was quite natural for me not to resist the magnetic pull of Islam.
What a wonderful system of life! Besides forbidding all generally
frowned upon vices, it explicitly prohibits the drinking of alcoholic
beverages and intoxicants as well as the taking or giving of usury. In
other words Islam does not allow any individual or group to exploit the
other. These wise injunctions coupled with the philanthropic obligations
of 'Khoms' and 'Zakat' (poor-rates) to be distributed by the haves among
the havenots without the latter's need to beg, make Islam a dynamic
religion. Moreover begging is discouraged by Islam as a loss of
self-respect.

These laws, not only maintain a social balance by removing barriers of
ignorance but elevate human dignity to its greatest heights.

In short Islam guides life on a straight forward path, while
Christianity crookedly preaches to its followers that God should be
worshipped on Sunday and humans on the other days of the week.

Miss Brigette Honey - U.K.

Through some of my friends I came across an English translation of the
holy Qur'an. After reading the first two chapters when I had just
started the third one, I suddenly felt an uncontrollable urge to
prostrate myself before God. It was the first time I had ever done such
a thing in my life. The greater its significance, considering the fact
that I had grown up in an irreligious atmosphere and had studied and
dismissed various philosophies and ideas.

I accepted Islam the same instance, the only religion appealing to
common sense and free from any sort of polytheistic traces. Islamic laws
cover all aspects of human life and are in perfect harmony with science
and nature. Islam has a most complete code for binding the international
community into a cohesive unit. It is far removed from any superstitious
trends and has given birth to an entirely distinct art, culture,
philosophy, industry andâ€¦. Etc., elevating human values to heights never
attained before.

To sum it all, Islam with its profound belief in Allah, maintains a
perfect equilibrium between both the spiritual and the material
worlds.

Miss. Hadia Heidy Walsor - London, U.K.

Christianity in this age of reason is a dead religion, having failed
miserably to keep pace with the progress of civilization. Christianity
with its emphasis on baptism, monogamy and the theatrical funeral
ceremony all of which stem from the polytheist concept of Trinity is not
even weird but defies simple logic. Even when I was a child the very
idea of Jesus (a.s.) being both divine and human sounded absurd to me.
In fact the whole theory blasphemes Almighty God Himself.

Religion should be a source of the most sublime morals and ethics and
in addition to inspiring its followers, should protect them against
temptations. On the contrary an irrational set of beliefs as preached by
the Christian Church undermines morals, breeding vices in the society as
is evident for all.

Compare this with the rationality of Islam Let us take polygamy as an
example, which is allowed in Islam in perfect harmony with human nature,
although with certain reasonable regulations.

Is it not better to practice lawful healthy polygamy rather than stick
to the hypocrisy of monogamy imposed by the Church, which leads to
countless illicit affairs and consequently to diseases and social
perversion? The day Europe realizes the freedom, liberty and rationality
Islamic laws offer, it will get rid of all its social ills.

Mr. Donald Requil - U.S.A.

The simplicity of Prophet Muhammad's (s.a.w.) life coupled with the
rationality of Islam made me change my belief. It is the only religion
free of any absurdities and preposterous ideas. Once you realize the
rationality of Islam, you become a true believer.

"We are nearer to him (man) than his jugular vein."
Sura Qaf (50:16)

"I am very near, I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he
calls..."
Sura Baqara (2:186)

"... Wherever you look Allah is everywhere..."
Sura Baqara (2:115)

How rational and simple is Islam, no need for any intercessor. All
people are equal before Allah. There is no difference whatsoever of
colour, race, social status,... etc. And no one is superior to another
except in terms of piety.

Moreover a glance at the life of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) his
teachings, personality and behaviour, all indicate that he is the last
and greatest of the prophets and Islam is a complete set of rules for
humanity unlike Christianity, which utterly fails in this regard and
could be described as against the very laws of nature itself.

Istraed Shmart - U.S.A.

I came across several Muslims in Elynews, whose friendship enlightened
me about Islam and eventually I became a Muslim. The turning point in my
life was, when one of my Muslim friends said that if God really willed
to have a son, undoubtedly he would not have adopted one of his own
creatures. "Brother, He the Almighty is Eternal and above all these
defects", remarked my friend.

These magic words awakened my conscience. The sentence was quite
logical and after reasoning, I realized that Jesus Christ (a.s.) was
just one of the Prophets sent by God most high, and had been wrongly
transformed-to suit the pagan mind-into a thing he never claimed he was.
I began to question the belief that why should one man die on the cross
for the sins committed by others and act as redeemer with Almighty God,
when I myself can pray to Him sincerely and He has the power to grant my
prayer. The answers were ably provided by Islam which testified
Jesus'(a.s.) innocence to the whole sordid affair coined by the Church
fathers, and I finally became a Muslim.

Al - Haj Dr. Abdul Karim Satyo
(Professor of Economics at a Japanese University)

Islam is without any ambiguity, in proving the existence of the
Almighty One. It convincingly explains this Manifest Truth, without
which everything would be chaos and all our accepted social morals will
lose their meaning and justification. If humanity succeeds in
discovering this Eternal Truth, people will accept Islam in
multitudinous crowds.

Abdullah Amora-Japan

My search for truth brought me in touch with Islam.
When I compared Islamic laws to Christianity, I was amazed to discover
that they are so precisely perfect that they have not undergone even the
slightest change since they were revealed, unlike the Bible, which
contains nothing original.

The Qur'an is Allah's genuine word and has been entirely preserved in .
its original state, whereas the Bible, which has come down to us, is
neither the word of God nor His divine laws. In fact the Bible is more
or less a brief biography of a part of Jesus (a.s.) life and has been
tampered with and revised so frequently down the centuries, that it is
doubtful to say what percentage of it contains the actual events of
Prophet Jesus'(a.s ) life.

The greatest and the most glaring defect of Christianity is the absurd
concept of Trinity and its forcing down the throats of simple people.
The very emphasis on its blind acceptance, in utter disregard to reason
and intellect betrays its nosensical nature. Sadly Christian doctrine
has encouraged crimes and loose moralities in society, contrary to Islam
which inspires the building of a pure civilization.

Leopold Vaise
(An Austrian journalist and writer who changed his name to Muhammad
Assad)

Honestly I am at a loss to say which particular field in Islam attracts
me more. For me Islam is like a complete and flawless structure whose
parts are inter-related and joined firmly and harmoniously together. In
other words, no part of Islamic laws or values is out of place or
dispensable and is precisely perfect in catering to even the minutest
detail of a human's life. In short Islam is a cohesive unit whose every
idea cosily fits in its right place and this has made a profound effect
on my life.

Professor Mohammed Ezzeddin (Nishkanata Badhiayya) - India
(A former principal of a Hyderabad College and currently Professor of
history at Maharja college Mysore )

Islam is the only religion in full historical limelight and not of
obscure origins as other religions. Islamic laws are in full conformity
with reason and intellect, making it a practical religion and not a
visionary theory. Besides the above characteristics unlike any other
religion, Islam remarkably caters to the needs of people of every era
and generation and is compatible to all cultures and levels of
intellect. In brief it is the only platform capable of fostering
universal brotherhood among mankind.


