Islam As Seen By Prominent Westren Thinkers
===========================================

It is unfortunate that the Christian West instead of sincerely trying
to understand the phenomenal success of Islam has considered it a rival
religion. During the centuries of the crusades, this trend gained much
force and impetus and a huge amount of literature was produced to
tarnish the image of Islam.

Truth needs no advocates to plead on its behalf. But the prolonged
malicious propaganda against Islam has created great confusion even in
the minds of some free and objective thinkers. But Islam has begun to
unfold its genuineness to the modern scholars whose bold and objective
observations on Islam belie all the charges levelled against it by the
so-called unbiased orientalists.

The following are some observations on Islam, the Qur'an and Muhammad
(s.a.w.) by well acknowledged non-Muslim Western scholars and thinkers
of modern times which we hope would contribute to initiating an
objective evaluation of the Islamic faith.

**ABOUT ISLAM**

"I am not a Muslim in the usual sense, though I hope I am 'Muslim' as
'one surrendered to God', but I believe that embedded in the Qur'an and
other expressions of the Islamic vision are vast stores of divine truth
from which I and other occidentals have still much to learn, and Islam
is certainly a strong contender for the supplying of the basic framework
of the one religion of the future."

W. Montgomery Watt
"Islam and Christianity Today",
London, 1983, page IX.

"I have always held the religion of Muhammad in high estimation because
of its wonderful vitality. It is the only religion which appears to me
to possess that assimilating capacity to the changing phase of existence
which can make itself appeal to every age. I have studied him-the
wonderful man - and in my opinion far from being an anti-Christ, he must
be called the Saviour of humanity. I believe that if a man like him were
to assume the dictatorship of the modem world, he would succeed in
solving its problems in a way that would bring it the much needed peace
and happiness: I have prophesied about the faith of Muhammad that it
would be acceptable to the Europe of tomorrow as it is beginning to be
acceptable to the Europe of today."

George Bernard Shaw
"The Genuine Islam",
Vol. 1, No. 81936.

"History makes it clear however, that the legend of fanatical Muslims
sweeping through the world and forcing Islam at the point of the sword
upon conquered races is one of the most fantastically absurd myths that
historians have ever repeated."

De Lacy O'Leary
"Islam at the Crossroads",
London , 1923, page 8.

"But Islam has a still further service to render to the cause of
humanity. It stands after all nearer to the real East than Europe does,
and it possesses a magnificent tradition of inter-racial understanding
and cooperation. No other society has such a record of success in
uniting in an equality of status, of opportunity, and of endeavours so
many and so various races of mankind... Islam has still the power to
reconcile apparently irreconcilable elements of race and tradition. If
ever the opposition of the great societies of East and West is to be
replaced by cooperation, the mediation of Islam is an indispensable
condition. In its hands lies very largely the solution of the problem
with which Europe is faced in its relation with East. If they unite, the
hope of a peaceful issue is immeasurably enhanced. But if Europe, by
rejecting the cooperation of Islam, throws it into the arms of its
rivals, the issue can only be disastrous for both."

H.A.R. Gibb
"Whither Islam" London, 1932, p.379.

"The extinction of race consciousness as between Muslims is one of the
outstanding achievements of Islam and in the contemporary world there
is, as it happens, a crying need for the propagation of this Islamic
virtue."

A. J. Toynbee
"Civilization on Trial",
New York, 1948, p. 205.

"The rise of Islam is perhaps the most amazing event in human history.
Springing from a land and a people like previously negligible, Islam
spread within a century over half the earth, shattering great empires,
overthrowing long-established religions, remoulding the souls of races,
and building up a whole new world, the world of Islam.

The closer we examine this development the more extraordinary does it
appear. The other great religions won their way slowly, by painful
struggle and finally triumphed with the aid of powerful monarchs
converted to the new faith. Christianity had its Constantine, Buddhism
its Asoka, and Zoroastrianism its Cyrus, each lending to his chosen cult
the mighty force of secular authority, not so Islam. Arising in a desert
land sparsely inhabited by a nomad race previously undistinguished in
human annals.

Islam sallied forth on its great adventure with the slenderest human
backing and against the heaviest material odds. Yet Islam triumphed with
seemingly miraculous ease, and a couple of generations saw the Fiery
Crescent borne victorious from the Pyrenees to the Himalayas and from
the desert of Central Asia to the deserts of Central Africa."

A. M. L. Stoddard
Quoted in "Islam-The Religion of All Prophets",
Begum Bawani Waqf, Karachi Pakistan p.56.

"Islam is a religion that is essentially rationalistic in the widest
sense of this term considered etymologically and historically. The
definition of rationalism as a system that bases religious beliefs on
principles furnished by reason applies to it exactly. The teachings of
the Prophet, the Qur'an have invariably kept their place as the
fundamental starting point, and the dogma of unity of God has always
been proclaimed therein with a grandeur, a majesty, and invariable
purity and with a note of sure conviction, which it is hard to find
surpassed outside the pale of Islam. This fidelity to the fundamental
dogma of the religion, the elemental simplicity of the formula in which
it is enunciated, the proof that it gains from the fervid conviction of
the missionaries who propagate it, are so many causes to explain the
success of Muhammadan missionary efforts. A creed so precise, so
stripped of all theological complexities and consequently so accessible
to the ordinary understanding might be expected to possess and does
indeed possess a marvellous power of winning its way into the
consciences of men."

Edward Montet
"La Propagande Chretienne et ses Adversairs Musulmans",
Paris 1890, Quoted by T W Arnold in "The Preaching of Islam",
London 1913, pp. 413-414.

**ABOUT THE QUR'AN**

"The Koran admittedly occupies an important position among the great
religious books of the world. Though the youngest of the epochmaking
works belonging to this class of literature, it yields to hardly any in
the wonderful effect which it has produced on large masses of men. It
has created an all but new phase of human thought and a fresh type of
character . It first transformed a number of heterogeneous desert tribes
of the Arabian Peninsula into a nation of heroes, and then proceeded to
create the vast politico-religious organizations of Muhammadan world
which are one of the great forces with which Europe and the East have to
reckon today."

G. Margoliouth
Introduction to J M. Rodwell's The Koran,
New York: Everyman's Library, 1977 p. VII.

"A work, then, which calls forth so powerful and seemingly incompatible
emotions even in the distant reader-distant as to time, and still more
so as mental development- a work which not only conquers the repugnance
with which he may begin its perusal, but changes this adverse feeling
into astonishment and admiration, such a work must be a wonderful
production of the human mind indeed and a problem of the highest
interest to every thoughtful observer of the destinies of mankind."

Dr Steingass
Quoted in "Hughes' Dictionary of Islam" pp. 526-7

"Here, therefore, its merits as a literary production should perhaps
not be measured by some preconceived maxims of subjective and aesthetic
taste, but by the effects which it produced in Muhammad's contemporaries
and fellow countrymen. If it spoke so powerfully and convincingly to the
hearts of his hearers as to weld hitherto centrifugal and antagonistic
elements into one compact and well organized body, animated by ideas far
beyond those which had until now ruled the Arabian mind, then its
eloquence was perfect, simply because it created a civilized nation out
of savage tribes, and shot a fresh woof into the old warp of history."

Dr Steingass
Quoted in "Hughes' Dictionary of Islam" P.528.

"In making the present attempt to improve on the performance of my
predecessors, and to produce something which might be accepted as
echoing however faintly the sublime rhetoric of the Arabic Koran, I have
been at pains to study the intricate and richly varied rhythms which -
apart from the message itself - constitute the Koran's undeniable claim
to rank amongst the greatest literary masterpieces of mankind... This
very characteristic feature - 'that inimitable symphony', as the
believing Pickthall described his Holy Book, 'the very sounds of which
move men to tears and ecstasy' - has been almost totally ignored by
previous translators; it is therefore not surprising that what they have
wrought sounds dull and flat indeed in comparison with the splendidly
decorated original."

Arthur J Arberry
"The Koran Interpreted",
London: Oxford University Press, 1964, p X

"A totally objective examination of it [the Qur'an] in the light of
modern knowledge, leads us to recognize the agreement between the two,
as has been already noted on repeated occasions. It makes us deem it
quite unthinkable for a man of Muhammad's time to have been the author
of such statements, on account of the state of knowledge in his day.
Such considerations are part of what gives the Qur'anic Revelation its
unique place, and forces the impartial scientist to admit his inability
to provide an explanation which calls solely upon materialistic
reasoning."

Maurice Bucaille
"The Qur'an and Modem Science", 1981, p 18

"The above observation makes the hypothesis advanced by those who see
Muhammad as the author of the Qur'an untenable. How could a man, from
being illiterate, become the most important author, in terms of literary
merits, in the whole of Arabic literature? How could he then pronounce
truths of a scientific nature that no other human-being could possibly
have developed at that time, and all this without once making the
slightest error in his pronouncement on the subject?"

Maurice Bucaille
"The Bible, the Qur'an and Science", 1978, p.125

Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.


