[An Introduction]
=================

The discussion of the question of Imamat may raise certain queries in
the mind of our readers. Here we advance our views about these queries.
In this respect the main questions are only two.

**I.** Every nation tries to project the good points of its history, and
as far as possible wants to conceal its weaknesses. The events in which
an institution or an ideology may take pride are considered to be the
signs of its authenticity and veracity, and the unpleasant events of its
history create doubts about its genuineness and are regarded as the
signs of the weakness of its creative power. Hence the discussion of the
question of Imamat and Khilafat, especially the repeated narration of
the ugly events of the early Muslim period is likely to diminish the
religious zeal and fervor of the new generation, which is already
passing though a spiritual crisis. In the past such a discussion might
have produced the desired results and diverted the attention of the
Muslims from one denomination to another. But in modern times it only
weakens faith in the very fundamentals. When others conceal the ugly
aspects of their history, why should we, the Muslims try to bring out
the ugly aspects of our history and even magnify them?

We do not concur with the above views. We affirm that should the review
of history mean to bring out the undesirable events only, the effect
will be as disastrous as stated above. But it is also a fact that if we
remain contented with portraying only the bright aspects of our history
and suppress the unpleasant events, that would mean a distortion of
history, not a review of it.

Basically no history is free from ugly and undesirable events. History
of every nation, and basically history of mankind, is a bundle of
pleasant and unpleasant events. It cannot be otherwise. Allah has
created no people free from sins. The difference between the history of
various nations, communities and creeds lies in the proportion of the
happy and ugly events and not in the fact that anyone of them has only
happy or only ugly events.

The Holy Quran has very beautifully expressed the fact that man has good
as well as bad points. The summary of what it has said is that Allah
informed the angels of His intention to create a vicegerent (Adam). The
angels who knew only the weak points of the new being, were astonished
and wanted to know what considerations prompted Allah to take such an
action. Allah told them that He knew the good and the bad points of that
being and that they were not aware of all the characteristics of that
being.

If we look at the history of Islam from the view-point of the events
manifesting faith and human values, we will find that it has no rival.
This history is full of heroic deeds. It is laden with lustre and
brilliance and is replete with a display of human qualities. The
existence of a few ugly spots does not tarnish its beauty and majesty.

No nation can claim that its history possesses more bright events than
the history of Islam, or that the ugly events of Islamic history are
more numerous than the ugly events of its own history.

A Jew in order to taunt Imam Ali with the events which took place in the
early period of Islam over the question of Khilafat, said: "You no
sooner buried your Prophet, than began quarrelling about him.

What a beautiful reply Imam Ali gave! He said: "You are wrong. We did
not differ about the Prophet himself. We differed only as to what
instructions we had received from him. But your feet had not dried of
sea water when you said to your Prophet: "Appoint a god for us like the
gods they have." He said: "You are an ignorant people." (Nahjul
Balaghah)

Imam Ali meant to say: "Our differences did not relate to the principles
of Monotheism and Prophethood. What we differed about was whether the
Quran and Islam foresaw a particular person to be the successor to the
Holy Prophet or his successor was to be elected by the people. In
contrast you Jews during the very lifetime of your Prophet raised a
question which was entirely contrary to your religion and the teachings
of your Prophet."

Furthermore, even if it is supposed that in ordinary cases it is
permissible to overlook the ugly events of history, how can it be proper
to ignore the most basic question affecting the destiny of Islamic,
society, that is the question of Islam's leadership. To overlook such a
question means overlooking the well-being of the Muslims.

Moreover, if it is a fact that some historical rights have been violated
and those to whom these rights were due were the most virtuous
personalities of the Muslim Ummah, then overlooking these historical
facts would mean nothing but cooperation between the tongue and the pen
on the one hand and the sword of injustice on the other.

**II** . The second objection to the discussion of these questions is
that such a discussion is inconsistent with the duty of ensuring Islamic
unity. All the misfortunes of the Muslims have been due to the communal
differences. It is communal discord and disturbances which has swept
away the Muslim power, damaged the Muslims' dignity and made them
subservient to alien nations. The most effective weapon in the hand of
colonialism, whether old or new, is the enflaming of these old rancours.
In all Muslim countries without exception the lackeys of colonialism are
busy with creating dissension among the Muslims in the name of religion
and sympathy with Islam. Have we not already suffered enough on account
of these old disputes so that we should continue to pursue them? Do not
such discussions mean helping colonialism?

In reply to this criticism, we would like to say that there is no doubt
that unity is the most important requirement of the Muslims, and that
these old rancours are the basic cause of all troubles in the Muslim
world. It is also true that the enemy is always ready to exploit these
disputes. But it appears that the critic has misunderstood the concept
of Muslim unity.

Muslim unity which has been a subject of discussion among the scholars
and the broad-minded sections of the Muslims does not mean that the
Muslim sects should ignore their principles of faith and articles of
acts for the sake of unity, adopt the common features of all the sects
and set aside the peculiarities of all. How can this be done when this
is neither logical nor practical. How can the followers of any sect be
asked to ignore for the sake of preserving the unity of Islam and the
Muslims, any of their beliefs or practical principles which they
consider to be a part of the basic structure of Islam? Such a demand
would mean to overlook a part of Islam in the name of Islam?

There are other ways of persuading people to stick to a principle or to
give it up. The most natural of them is to convince others by means of
logical argumentation. Faith is not a matter of expedience, nor can it
be imposed on any people or taken away from them at will.

We are Shi'ahs and are proud of following the chosen descendants of the
Holy Prophet. We do not regard as compromisable any act which has been
even slightly commended or condemned by the Holy Imams. In this regard
we are not willing to fulfil the expectation of anybody, nor do we
expect others to give up any of their principles in the name of
expediency or for the sake of Muslim unity. All that we expect and wish
is the creation of an atmosphere of good will so that we, who have our
own jurisprudence, traditions, scholastic theology, philosophy, exegesis
and literature, should be able to offer our goods as the best goods, so
that the Shi'ah should no more be isolated and so that the important
markets of the Muslim world should not be closed to the fine material of
Shi'ah Islamic knowledge.

The adoption of the common Islamic features and the rejection of the
peculiarities of all sects is contrary to the compound consensus of
opinion among the Muslims and the product of this action will be
something absolutely un-Islamic, for the peculiarities of some sect or
other must be the basic part of the structure of Islam. Islam bereft of
all peculiarities and distinguishing features has no existence.

The most prominent among those who advanced the noble idea of Islamic
unity, in our times, have been the late Ayatullah Burujardi among the
Shiah and Allamah Shaykh Abdul Majid and Allamah Shaykh Mahmud Shaltut
among the Sunnis. But they never had such a view of Islamic unity in
their mind. All that these learned men advocated was that the various
Muslim sects in spite of their different theologies should on the basis
of the large number of common features existing among them, form a
common front against the dangerous enemies of Islam. These learned men
never proposed under the name of Islamic unity a religious unity which
is not practical.

In fact, there is a technical difference between a united party and a
united front. A united party requires that all its members should have a
common ideology and a common way of thinking in all matters except their
personal affairs, whereas a common front means that various parties and
groups, despite their ideological differences should, by means of the
common features existing among them, form a common front against their
common enemy. The formation of a common front against the common enemy
is not inconsistent with defending one's ideology and inviting other
members of the front to follow it. The main idea of the late Ayatullah
Burujardi was to pave the ground for the dissemination of the knowledge
of the Prophet's chosen descendants among his Sunni brethren. He
believed that this was not possible without creating good will and
understanding. The success he achieved in the publication of some
theological books of the Shi'ah in Egypt by the Egyptians themselves,
was one of the most important achievements of the Shi'ah scholars.

May Allah reward him for the services he rendered to the cause of Islam
and the Muslims!

Anyhow, the advocacy of the thesis of Islamic unity does not demand that
we should feel shy of telling the facts. What is to be avoided is to do
any thing that may injure the feelings and sentiments of other parties.
As for a scientific discussion, it relates to the domain of logic and
reason, not to that of sentiments and feelings.

Fortunately in our times there have appeared a good number of Shi'ah
scholars who are following this healthy policy, the most prominent of
them being Ayatullah Sayyid Sharafuddin Amili, Ayatullah Kashiful Ghita
and Ayatullah Shaykh Abdul Husayn Amini, the author of the prominent
book, Al-Ghadir.

The events of Imam Ali's life and the policy he pursued, which has now
been practically forgotten and is rarely mentioned, provide a good
example in this respect.

Imam Ali did not refrain from speaking of his right and claiming it, nor
did he hesitate to complain against those who snatched it away from him.
His keen interest in Islamic unity did not prevent him from raising his
voice frankly. His numerous sermons in Nahjul Balaghah are a testimony
to this fact. But all his grievances did not impel him to leave the
ranks of the Muslims struggling against their opponents. He took part in
the Friday and other congregational prayers. He accepted his share of
the booty of that time. He always gave sincere counsel to the Caliphs
and was counted as one of their advisers.

During the war of the Muslims against the Iranians the Caliph then
intended to take part in the fighting personally. Imam Ali said to him:
"Do not go to the front, for so long as you are in Madina, the enemy
thinks that even if the whole Muslim army is wiped out, you will send
reinforcement from the centre. But if you personally go to the
battlefield, they will say: Here the mainstay of the Arabs is. And then
they will concentrate all their forces to kill you, and if they kill
you, the Muslims will be totally demoralized". (See: Nahjul Balagha,
Sermon 146)

That was the regular policy that Imam Ali pursued. But he never accepted
any post under the Caliphs. He did not consent to be a military
commander, the governor of a province, the Amir of Hajj, nor did he
accept any other such appointment for its acceptance would have meant
the renunciation of his own well-established claim. In other words, the
acceptance of an official post would have been something more than mere
cooperation and preservation of Islamic unity. Although he himself did
not accept any post, he did not prevent his relatives and friends from
accepting such posts, because that did not mean the endorsement of the
Caliphate.

Imam Ali's behaviour in this respect was very graceful and a sign of his
dedication to the Islamic objectives. While others divided, he united;
while others tore apart, he patched up.

Abu Sufyan tried to take advantage of the displeasure of Imam Ali. He
pretended to be a well-wisher of him and tried to wreak his own
vengeance by showing respect to the Holy Prophet's legatee, but Imam Ali
was shrewd enough not to be hoodwinked by him. He with his hand struck
Abu Sufyan's chest as a sign of rejection of his offer and turned him
away.(See Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 5).

Abu Sufyans and Hayy ibn Akhtabs are always busy with their evil
designs. Hayy ibn Akhtabs' finger can be seen in many happenings. It is
the duty of the Muslims, especially the Shi'ah to keep Imam Ali's
traditions in this respect before their eyes and not to be deceived by
Abu Sufyans and Hayy ibn Akhtabs.

These were the objections of those who oppose the question of leadership
and this is our reply to them.

What is amazing is that some other people raise objections quite
contrary to these objections. This group wants the question of Islamic
leadership to become rather a regular pursuit. It wants this question to
be discussed in season and out of season and repeated like a slogan. But
this group is not interested in its being dealt with in a scientific and
instructive way. It wants to keep the feelings strained, but is not
interested in satisfying intellectual quest or sharpening wits. And that
is what the enemy wishes. Otherwise if the question is discussed in a
learned manner, there is no reason why it should become a pursuit?


