Endnotes
========

[^1] Please refer to our footnote of the booklet, Wherefrom to Begin,
page [^39]:

[^2] In one of his footnotes on the booklet, Wherefrom to Begin, page
[^39]:

[^3] In his papers on "Alteration of the Quran" the author says that
distortion of meaning indicates the retention of the wording of the
Quran, but expounding it wrongly as, according to a well-known story
Muawiyah did when he misinterpreted the wording of the prediction
regarding the death of Ammar ibn Yasir. Another case of the distortion
of meaning is the misinterpretation of the verse: "There is no hukm
(decision, judgement) except by Allah." (Surah Yusuf 12: 90) On the
basis of this verse the Khawarij raised the slogan: La hukma illaillah
(There is no decision except by Allah). Commenting on this slogan Imam
Ali said: "Right words, wrong meaning". (See Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 40).
This intentional or unintentional misinterpretation was disastrous and
caused so much damage in the history of Islam. Another case is the
misinterpretation of the tradition: "If you know (Allah), do whatever
you like."

[^4] In this connection a reference may be made to Shaykh Qawam
Wishnawahi's treatise appended to Risalatul Islam and to the Biharul
Anwar, an account of the Prophet's life.

[^5] Shaykh Qiwamuddin says that this tradition has been reproduced in
Sahih Muslim, Vol. VII, p. 122, Sunan Tirmizi, Vol. II, p. 307, Sunan
Abu Da'ud, Vol. V, pp. 182, 189; Mustadrak Hakim, Vol. III, pp. 14, 17,
26, 59, Vol. VI, pp. 366, 371, Vol. V, pp. 182, 189; Mustadrak Hakim,
Vol. III, p. 109, Tabaqat of Ibn Sa'd, Vol. IV, p. 8; Usudul Ghabah,
Vol. II, p.12, Vol. III, p. 147 and Ibn Abil Hadid.

[^6] Some preachers have made a gross misuse of this tradition, for they
invariably use it as a prelude to narrating the misfortunes of the
Prophet's chosen descendants. One may think that when the Holy Prophet
said that he was leaving two things behind him: the Qur'an and his
descendants, what he meant was only that those two things were to be
held in high respect and were not to be insulted at all. In fact what
the Holy Prophet meant was that he was living behind two authorities to
which all religious and social questions were to be referred. In the
concluding part of this tradition the Holy Prophet has said: "So long as
you adhere to them, you will not go astray." So the question is that of
adherence. The Holy Prophet has declared his descendants equal with the
Quran. He himself has said that the Qur'an was the major 'thaqal' and
his descendants the minor 'thaqal'.

[^7] The Shi'ah attach great importance to the religious aspect of
Imamat. As we said earlier in our times Imamat who mostly considered to
be tantamount to the administration of government, but that was a wrong
notion. Imamat is mostly a religious question and the administration of
government is only a function which it involves. In a sense Imamat and
administration of government are two terms which in certain respects
overlap each other. But basically Imamat is one question and
administration of government, although a part of the functions which an
Imam should discharge, a different question. It is funny that during the
period of occultation we talk about the administration of government,
but keep quiet about the real significance of Imamat, which must not be
considered to be equivalent to the administration of government.
According to the terminology of the Shi'ah scholars an Imam is in charge
of religious as well as secular affairs. Being in charge of religious
affairs, he automatically holds the charge of worldly affairs also, just
like the Holy Prophet, who being the religious head, was the head of the
government too. If we suppose hypothetically that no Imam existed at any
time or if we know that the Imam is in occultation, in both these cases
no religious head would be present. Therefore in these cases the
question would of course arise how should be the head of the government.

[^8] The months of Zil Qa'dah, Zil Hijjah, Muharram and Rajab are the
sacred months, during which fighting was kept suspended and vengeance
was not sought. Routes were safe during these months and coming and
going of persons and goods normal. An annual fair was also held at a
Place near Makkah named 'Ukaz.

[^9] The Holy Prophet referred to the following verse, "The Prophet has
more authority over the believers than they themselves have." (Surah al
Ahzab 33:6) Being a Prophet of Allah, the Holy Prophet had authority
over the life, property and everything of the people. He had more
authority over the people than the people themselves had. Of course he
never exercised this authority for his own selfish ends. Allah appointed
him the representative of

the whole Muslim society and as such he had authority over the life and
property of the Muslims on behalf of Muslim society as a whole.

[^10] Last year we had a chance to go to Khayber. Till then we had no
idea how far Khayber and Tabuk were from Medina by the direct route via
Shusa. The whole distance was found to be exactly 600 kilometers. By the
ancient routes the distance might have been greater. The distance
between Medina and Khayber is 360 kilometers. We were really astonished
by the courage and resolution of the Muslims who traversed this long
distance with the poor means available to them at that time.

[^11] The reason why it has been reported by a very large number of
transmitters is that at that time the sayings of the Holy Prophet were
only remembered and not written. Naturally the traditions containing
Imam Ali's name could be remembered by more people than any other
traditions.

[^12] The first part of the book, Khilafat and Wilayat, which has
recently been published, contains Muhammad Taqi Shari'ati's lectures
which he delivered at Husayniyah Irshad some four years ago. In his
lectures he dealt with the same subject with which I am dealing.
Therefore the two books maybe considered to be supplementary to each
other.

[^13] The Holy Prophet performed his farewell pilgrimage during th6 last
year of his life, some two months before his demise. He died on 28 Safar
or according to the Sunnis on 12 Rabi'ul Awwal. He reached Ghadir
al-Khum on 18th Zil Hijjah, that is two months and 10 days before his
demise or two months and 24 days according to what the Sunnis say.

[^14] Some of you might have been to Juhfah. I visited the place during
my second Hajj journey. Our visit to Medina was delayed. So we took an
opportunity to visit Jaddah. There is some difference in the juristic
opinion whether or not one can assume the ritual state of ihram at
jaddah. Actually it may be said that this is not a juristic difference
but a geographical one. The ritual state of ihram can be assumed from
any point lying parallel to any of the miqats. A man who is well-versed
in the geography of Arabia, may be able to say definitely whether or not
Jaddah fulfils this condition. In the beginning we ourselves did not
believe that it did, but later when we obtained maps of Arabia in Makkah
and Medina, we found that Jaddah was parallel to one of the miqats,
provided those maps were accurate. If those who proceed from Jaddah to
Makkah, want to assume the ritual state of ihram from one of the actual
miqats, they come from Jaddah to Juhfah, which lies on the way to Medina
and is the miqat of the people of Syria. Ghadir al-Khum is situated near
Juhfah. It is the place at which the Muslims returning from Makkah after
performing pilgrimage disperse. Some go to Medina and others to their
respective places.

[^15] She is held in very high respect by the Shi'ah and is regarded as
the most eminent wife of the Holy Prophet (SA) after Khadijah. She is
greatly respected by the Sunnis also. According to them, she ranks next
to Khadijah and 'Ayishah.

[^16] Imam Ali (AS) is reported to have said so. (Safinat ul Bihar, vol.
2)

[^17] At that time the word, 'zindiq' was not an abusive term as it is
now. In those days a number of people were called zindiqs and they did
not think it insulting to be called so. In our times the same is the
case with the word, materialist. Of course a monotheist would never like
to be called so, but he who is a materialist, may even be proud of this
appellation. As regards the origin of the word, zindiq, there are
various theories. Mostly it is believed that the zindiqs were
Manichieans who appeared in the beginning of the second century, that is
the century in which Imam Sadiq lived. Many westerners and other
scholars have discussed the question of the zindiqs in Islam. They have
come to the conclusion that the zindiqs were the followers of Mani. It
may be remembered that Mani's creed was not anti-God. Mini himself
claimed to be a Prophet. Anyhow, he was a dualist, not a monotheist, and
for that matter, more dualist than Zoroaster, for some people believe
that Zoroaster was possibly a monotheist, who at least believed in one
eternal source of the whole universe, though it cannot be proved from
his writings that he believed in one Creator. In contrast, Mani was
definitely a dualist and claimed to be a Prophet raised by the god of
good. But later Manichiaean tended towards materialism and naturalism,
and ceased to believe in anything spiritual.

[^18] A compromise on principles may be in the name of expedience which
includes undue regard for someone. A compromise may also be due to
making discrimination in showing favour or accepting an intercession. It
is a known fact that the Holy Prophet awarded legal punishment even to
prominent men of the Quraysh. He abstained from

showing undue favour to anybody. There are three main reasons of a
compromise on principles: One is fear; another is greed. Therefore a
reformer must be bold, and must not be liable to be influenced by any
kind of bribe including money, flattery, women etc. The third cause of
compromise on principles is nepotism and showing undue favour to
friends. A reformer's friendship must be for the sake of Allah only. It
may be noted that undue favour has been described in the Qur'an as
'idhan' which originally meant lubricating and oiling, and hence
includes flattery and deceit, and is used in the sense of compromising
also. Who wish you to compromise so that they may also compromise. A
compromise on principles may be conscious but tacit or may be
unconscious. Another form of a compromise on principles is the
exploitation of the weak points of society instead of combating them,
and being carried away by the prevailing trend of society. The examples
of this attitude are the acceptance of the kissing of hands and showing
too much sensitiveness to the questions of dispute between the Shi'ah
and the Sunnis. The story of the late Mirza Muhammad Arbab can be cited
as an example. The following Qur'anic verse also refers to this subject:
"My people, I delivered my Lord's message to you and gave you good
advice, but you do not like those who give you good advice." (Surah
al-A'raf, 7:79) Sufyan Thawri says: "If you find a scholar having many
friends, you can be sure that he is indiscriminate. Had he been telling
the truth only, people would not have liked him." Abuzar said:
"Enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong have left for me no
friends." Imam Ali said: "Do not try to use artificial manners to be
intimate with me and do not address me with those words with which the
tyrants are addressed." These words of the Imam show that to like
flattery and the use of high sounding titles is also a sort of a
compromise on principles. Those who like such cheap things do not
succeed in reforming society. Imam Ali further said: "For me the strong
is weak till I force him to restore the rights of others." He means to
say that he is not one of those who compromise on principles. We
frequently meet with the word compromise in connection with the Mu'awiya
affair and the proposals put to Imam Ali to come to terms with him. Imam
Ali said that a leader must not be a specimen of the depravity of his
people. "He should not be an impious man commanding others to piety or
an ailing physician treating other people." How can a man who is eating
dates himself ask others not to eat them. "He who puts himself as a
leader of the people, should begin the reform with himself...." A leader
must not be greedy for avarice means permanent bondage, which is
contrary to spiritual and moral freedom. In respect of Christ Imam Ali
says: "He had no wife to seduce him, no child to grieve him, no property
to divert his attention and no cupidity to disgrace him." (Nahjul
Balagha, Sermon 160). In short, a man who is morally a materialist
cannot be a true reformer and a materialist philosopher cannot morally
be a 100 per cent non materialistic. Other qualities of a reformer:
Calmness in spite of sensitiveness. An example of calmness in Imam Ali's
behaviour. A woman from Basrah and a Kharijite once abused him, but he
paid no attention to their foul language. A reformer must be iron-clad.
He should not be delicate, but he should be sensitive. An example of
being sensitive without being delicate is the story of Sufiyan Ghamidi,
who arrived in Anbar. "If any Muslim dies henceforth on account of
sorrow "Should I pass the night while I have overeaten and there are
hungry stomachs around me?"

[^19] It may be noted that these notes were written before Islamic
revolution had taken place in Iran.

[^20] A part of the life account of the Holy Prophet should be studied
from the viewpoint of the principles of leadership.

[^21] Item No. 33 deals with signs of immaturity, which have been
mentioned in the article on Islamic maturity in the Book, Divine Succur
in Human Life.


