[Chapter 1:] Imamat and Dialectic Logic
=======================================

II. An Extract From Notes
-------------------------

Dialectic logic denies that society needs guidance or leadership,
According to this logic at the most society needs an intellectual and
leader to bring inequities, contradictions and inequalities existing in
society to the consciousness of the masses so that dialectic movement
may be initiated. As this movement is compulsive, the passage from
thesis and anti-thesis to synthesis is unavoidable. Therefore society
automatically traverses its course and in the end attains perfection.

The leaflet[^1] - Leadership, Imamat, Dialectic, says: "One of the
important questions concerning leadership and Imamat, especially the
Islamic conception of Imamat is: What is the role of the so-called
intellectual? Is his duty and responsibility merely to depict the
inequities and inequalities, awaken the consciousness of the exploited
classes and inculcate the existence of real class contradiction in the
mind of the deprived masses? Is it true that once the masses become
conscious of the existing contradictions, society moves
forward -automatically and dialectically"

The fact is that above all other things society needs leadership,
guidance and Imamat. Development is not the essential result of the
contradictions. Development is not possible without guidance and
leadership. Dr. Ali Shari'ati in the last pages of his booklet,
Wherefrom to Begin has elaborately discussed this question under the
heading, Responsibility and Mission of an Intellectual. He says:
"Briefly the responsibility of an intellectual is to transmit the
inequities within society to the self-consciousness of the people of
that society. Then society performs its own movement."

Anyhow, after a few lines he makes some remarks, which are contrary to
the above statement, and support society's need of guidance and
leadership.

Dr. Shari'ati says: "It has been supposed that from the point of view of
leadership an intellectual has no responsibility. Dialectic
contradiction chooses its own way. An intellectual's duty is confined to
portraying contradictions and rousing the underprivileged classes
against the ruling classes.[^2] " But only after a few lines he talks of
"determining a solution and the common ideals of society and of
inculcating zeal and a sense of common faith ...." These remarks are
contrary to the theory that society performs its own movement. When Dr
Shari'ati speaks of dialectic corollary of the triangle of thesis,
anti-thesis and synthesis and of compulsory development, he is
consistent, but when he makes his subsequent remarks, he speaks against
his own postulates.

### Leadership and Protection of Faith

###

The scholastic theologians have greatly emphasized that Imam is the
protector and preserver of faith and religion. Probably it is supposed
that he protects religion in the same way as a building is first erected
and then it is maintained and protected against a possible damage by
rain, wind etc. Hence there appears to be no need that a building built
by an unrivalled builder should be preserved by a person having almost
the same degree of skill as the original builder. For example there has
never been felt any need

that there should exist some persons of the calibre of those who created
the Masjid Shah, Ali Qapu, the dome of Masjid Shaykh Lutfullah, the
Bayasanqari inscription of Masjid Gowhar Shad, the writings of Meer and
Bayasanqar, the hand-written Qurans and other master-pieces.

But the fact is that a damage to religion is not a simple affair.
According to psychological and sociological principle as soon as a
revolutionary movement succeeds and the enemy despairs of continuing his
face to face confrontation, he ceases to resist it openly and on the
basis of his assessment of his own advantage, he sometimes even joins
the movement, not because he has really been converted to it, but purely
with a view to exploit its success. He utilizes the movement for his own
ends without having faith in its spirit and objectives. That is what
happened during the constitutional movement of Iran. The opponents of
the constitutional government joined the movement, and pretended to be
its staunch supporters. Ayanuddawlah and Sadr ul Ashraf became prime
ministers of the constitutional government. Such people not only
preserve the external features of the movement, but also try to furnish
it with further adornments. Anyhow, they destroy its spirit, its reality
and its core, and empty it from within. In the words of Imam Ali in this
process, "Islam is overturned as a pot is overturned." (See Nahjul
Balgha -- Sermon 103)Thus they divert the movement from its right
course, preserving its shape and appearance but altering its content and
nature. As most people are only superficial observers and prone to take
things for their face value, they remain happy and satisfied, for they
find the externalities safe to the utmost extent. They do not realize
that the fundamentals have vanished. It is here that mature thinking and
deep observation are required. When Imam Ali said: "In every generation
we have irreproachable successors who defend us against the deviation of
the fanatics and the pretensions of the liars", he might have referred
to the Holy Imams themselves or to the honest scholars who keep a watch
on the people's belief in the Imams. It may be mentioned that struggle
against innovations in religion is not confined to those cases in which
a law is openly violated or something that has nothing to do with
religion is intentionally introduced into religion. Sometimes people's
way of thinking in regard to religion is so perverted that they begin to
have aversion to right thinking. What we mean to emphasize is that there
is no fear of any harm being incurred by Islam from outside the Muslim
world. The Quran says: "Those who disbelieve have now despaired of doing
any damage to your religion. Therefore do not fear them; but have fear
of Me." But there exists a definite threat to Islam from inside. In this
connection the greatest threat is posed not by those who commit
abominable sins out of lust etc., but by the hypocrisy of those who are
afraid of opposing Islam openly. They wear a mask of Islam on their face
and try to achieve their nefarious ends under the cover of Islamic way
of life, a very heavy cover indeed. They devoid Islam of its content,
leaving intact its shape and appearance by changing its courseand its
goal and altering its meaning.[^3] The simple-minded Muslims must be
aware of the fraud of this group.


