Chapter 3: Significance of Imamat
=================================

The subject of our present discussion is Imamat. We know that for us,
the Shi'ah though it is a question of extraordinary importance, other
Muslim sects do not attach so much importance to it. The reason is that
the conception of Imamat which we have is different from that conception
of it which other sects have. There is no doubt that there are some
common features too, but those features of Imamat, which have given
extraordinary importance to it, are peculiar to the Shi'ah creed. For
example when we, the Shi'ah want to enumerate the cardinal principles of
religion according to the Shi'ah doctrine, we say that these principles
are Monotheism, Prophethood, Divine Justice, Imamat and the Hereafter.
We regard Imamat as a cardinal principle of religion. In a sense the
Sunnis also do not reject the idea of Imamat totally, but according to
their belief, Imamat is not a cardinal principle of religion. They
regard it only as a collateral matter. In fact there exists a basic
difference of opinion with regard to Imamat. We believe in one sort of
Imamat and the Sunnis believe in another sort of it. The reason why the
Shi'ah regard Imamat as a cardinal principle of religion whereas the
Sunnis regard it as a collateral matters, is that the Shi'ah conception
of Imamat is quite different from the Sunni conception of it.

The Meaning of Imam
-------------------

Imam means a leader or one who goes in front. The word Imam in Arabic
does not imply any sense of sanctity. And Imam is the person who has
some followers irrespective of the fact whether he is virtuous or
depraved. The Quran itself has used the word in both the senses. At one
place it says: "We appointed them Imams who guide with our permission."
(Surah Anbiya, 21:73)

At another place it says: "The Imams who invite people to the Hell."
(Surah al Qasas, 28:41)

In respect of Fir'awn the Quran has used a phrase which conveys a sense
similar to that of an Imam or a leader. It says: "On the Day of
Judgement he will lead his people down into the Hell fire." (Surah Hud,
11:98).

Thus Imam literally means simply a leader. But at present we are not
concerned with a bad leader. Let us now discuss the conception of
Imamat.

The word Imamat is applied to several cases. Some concepts of it are
acknowledged by the Sunnis also. But they differ with us as to who is an
Imam and what qualities he must possess. They totally disbelieve in
certain concepts of Imamat. It is not that they believe in Imamat in the
sense in which we believe but disagree as to the person who holds this
assignment. The Imamat in which they believe is nothing but social
leadership and this is the sense in which this word has been used in the
books of the old scholastic theologians.

Khwaja Nasiruddin Tusi in at-Tajrid defines Imamat as general charge of
society. Here it seems necessary to mention another point also:

Various Aspects of the Holy Prophet
-----------------------------------

The Holy Prophet in his lifetime by virtue of his special position in
Islam had several aspects as is indicated by the Qur'an and his own life
account. At one and the same time he held several assignments. In the
first instance

he was a Prophet of Allah and in this capacity he conveyed, Allah's
message and commandments to the people. The Holy Quran says:

"Whatever the Messenger gives, take it, and whatever he forbids abstain
from it." (Surah al Hashr, 59:7)

In other words, whatever instructions and orders the Prophet gives to
the people, he gives them on behalf of Allah.

From this point of view the Prophet communicates only that which has
been revealed to him. Another assignment of the Holy Prophet was that he
held the post of the supreme judge, by virtue of which he administered
justice among the Muslims. According to Islam every Tom, Dick and Harry
cannot be a judge, for from the viewpoint of Islam arbitration is a
Divine affair. Allah has enjoined justice and a Judge is the person who
administers it in cases of disputes and differences. This assignment was
also expressly conferred on the Holy Prophet by the Qur'an, which says:
"By your Lord, they will not believe in truth until they make you judge
of what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no dislike
of that which you decide and submit to your decision whole-heartedly."
(Surah an Nisa, 4:65 )

The Holy Prophet was appointed a judge by Allah and hence this
assignment was not an ordinary one; it was Divine. Practically also he
was the Prophet-judge. The third assignment which he officially held and
which was conferred on him by the Quran was that of the head of the
State. He was the head of the State and leader of Muslim society. In
other words in Muslim society he was the policy maker as well as the
administrator. It is believed that it is this aspect of the Holy Prophet
which is visualized by the Quranic verse: "Believers, obey Allah, and
obey His Messenger and your (qualified) leaders." (Surah an Nisa, 4:59).

In fact, the three positions held by the Holy Prophet were not merely
formal or ceremonial. The directions which we have received from him are
basically of three kinds.

(i) The first kind comprises Divine revelations, in regard to which the
Holy Prophet could do nothing of his own accord. His sole function was
to convey to the people what was revealed to him.

(ii) In the field of religious instructions, for example, he told the
people how to offer prayers and keep fast. But when he administered
justice his judgements were not revealed. In the case of a dispute
between two persons, he decided the matter according to the Islamic
standards and judged who was right and who was wrong. In such a case
Jibra'il did not bring any revelation to him. Exceptional cases are a
different matter. On the whole he decided all judicial cases on the
basis of available evidence in the same way as others do. At the most it
may be said that his judgements were better than those of others. He
himself said that he had orders to pronounce judgement on the basis of
what appears to be specious. Suppose a plaintiff and a respondent appear
and the plaintiff produces two irreproachable witnesses. The Prophet
would decide the case on the basis of their evidence. Evidently this
judgement will be the Prophet's own judgement and not a judgement
revealed to him.

(iii) In this third capacity also when the Prophet issued an order as
the leader of society, the nature of this order of his was different
from the nature

of what he conveyed as Divine revelation. Allah appointed the Holy
Prophet the leader of society and authorized him to work as such. In
this capacity he sometimes consulted others also. We see that he
consulted his companions on the occasion of the Battles of Badr and Uhud
and on many other occasions. Evidently there can be no consultation
about a Divinely revealed order. The Holy Prophet never consulted his
companions as to how the dusk time (Magrib) prayers should be offered.
There have been occasions when the Holy Prophet said about certain
questions referred to him that Allah had commanded thus and hence he had
to abide by His command. But on matters in which he had received no
Divine injunction, he often consulted others and asked for their
opinion. If in such cases he issued his own orders, he did so because he
was authorized by Allah to do so. In a few cases connected with social
administration also he received revelation, but those were exceptional
cases. Otherwise as a rule he did not receive any detailed instructions
on social and political questions and he did not work as a mere
messenger in respect of these questions. It is an undisputed fact that
the Holy Prophet worked in all these capacities concurrently.

### Imamat in the Sense of Leadership of Society

###

The first meaning of Imamat as mentioned above is the general charge of
society. One of his assignments which fell vacant on the demise of the
Holy Prophet, was the leadership of society. There is no doubt that
society needs a leader. Who was the leader of society after the Holy
Prophet? Both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree that society is in need of
a leader and a supreme commander. It is here that the question of
Khilafat arises. The Shi'ah say that the Holy Prophet himself nominated
his successor and announced that after him Imam Ali would take the reins
of the affairs of the Muslims in his hands. The Sunnis who have a
different logic do not accept this view at least in the form in which
the Shi'ah accept it. According to them the Holy Prophet did not
designate any particular person as his successor and it was the duty of
the Muslims themselves to elect their leader. The Sunnis accept the
principle of Imamat when they say that the Muslims need a leader. All
that they say is that the leader was to be chosen by the Muslims. In
contrast, the Shi'ah claim that the Holy Prophet himself appointed his
successor by Divine revelation.

Had the question of Imamat been merely that of political leadership
after the Holy Prophet, we the Shi'ah also should not have regarded it
as a cardinal principle of religion. It would have been fit to include
this question in the collateral matters. We could say that the question
of Imamat in which the Shi'ah believe is confined to declaring that Imam
Ali was one of the companions of the Holy Prophet like Abu Bakr, Umar,
Uthman and so many others or even like Abuzar and Salman, but he was
better, more learned, more pious and more capable than all of them and
that the Prophet designated him to be his successor. But the Shi'ah do
not stop here. They believe in two tenets in which the Sunnis do not
share with them at all. One of these two tenets is Imamat in the sense
of religious authority.

### Imamat in the Sense of Religious Authority

###

We have said that the Holy Prophet conveyed the Divine revelations
received by him to the people who were at liberty to ask him whatever
they wanted to know about the teachings of Islam. Similarly they asked
of him what they did not find in the Qur'an. Now the question is whether
what the Qur'an contains and what the Holy Prophet has told the general
people is all that Islam wanted to convey of its instructions; teachings
and knowledge? Evidently the Holy Prophet did not have time enough to
convey all the teachings of Islam. Therefore, he trained Imam Ali, his
successor as an extraordinary scholar and taught him everything about
Islam, at least all the principles and the general rules of it. Imam Ali
was the most outstanding of his companions. He was infallible like
himself, and knew even that which was not expressly told by Allah.

Introducing him, the Holy Prophet said: "0' People, after me refer all
religious questions to Ali and ask him and my other successors whatever
you want to know." In this respect Imamat is a sort of specialization in
Islam, but an extraordinary and Divine specialization, far above the
degree of the specialization which a mujtahid (jurist) can acquire. The
Imams are experts in Islam but their special knowledge of it is not
derived from their own thinking and reason which are liable to commit
mistakes. They receive their knowledge in a mysterious and secret way
unknown to us. Imam Ali received his knowledge of Islamic sciences
direct from the Holy Prophet and the subsequent Imams received it
through him. In the case of each Imam this knowledge was infallible and
impeccable. It was handed down by each Imam to the subsequent Imams.

The Sunnis do not believe that anybody holds such a position. In other
words they do not believe in the existence of any Imam in this sense. It
is not that they do not accept Ali as an Imam but say that Abu Bakr is
an Imam instead of him. In fact they do not admit that any of the
companions of the Holy Prophet, neither Abu Bakr, nor Umar nor Uthman,
holds such a position. That is why they attribute so many mistakes in
religious matters to Abu Bakr and Umar. In contrast the Shi'ah believe
their Imams to be infallible, and will never admit that any of their
Imams has ever committed a mistake. But the Sunnis in their books say
that on such and such occasion Abu Bakr said so, but he was wrong. When
he realized his mistake he said that he had a Satan (Devil) who
overwhelmed him from time to time. Similarly the Sunnis say that once
Umar made a mistake and then referring to certain women declared that
they were more learned than him.

It is said that when Abu Bakr died the women of his family, including
his daughter - the Holy Prophet's wife, 'Ayishah began to weep and cry.
When Umar heard the din of their lamentation, he sent a message to the
women, asking them to be quiet, but they did not comply with his
request. He again sent a message and then threatened to punish them. At
last 'Ayishah was told by some women that Umar was threatening them and
asking them to become quiet. She sent for Umar and when he came to her
asked him what he wanted to say and why he was sending a message after
message. Umar said that he had heard the Holy Prophet saying: "If any
one died and his people wept over him, he would be punished." 'Ayishah
said: "You haven't understood. You are mistaken. That's a different
matter. I know what's that.

Once a wicked Jew died. His folk were weeping over him. The Holy Prophet
said that they were weeping and he was being punished. The Holy Prophet
did not say that he was being punished because they were weeping. He
said that they were weeping over him, but didn't know that he was being
punished. What connection has it with this question? Even if weeping be
prohibited, why should Allah punish an innocent person for the sin which
we commit?" "Strange! said Umar. "Was that the case"? "Yes", said
'Ayishah, "that was the case". Umar said: "Hadn't these women been
there, Umar would have been ruined."

The Sunnis themselves say that on seventy (very many) occasions Umar
said: "Had there not been Ali, Umar would have been ruined." He himself
confessed on so many occasions that Ali often rectified his mistakes,
and Umar used to confess his mistakes.

In short, the Sunnis do not believe in any Imam in the sense in which we
believe. Anyhow it is an indisputable fact that it was the Holy Prophet
alone who received the celestial revelation. We do not say that
revelation is received by the Imams also. The message of Islam was
delivered to mankind by the Holy Prophet alone and to him alone Allah
revealed all the necessary teachings of Islam. There are no injunctions
of Islam which were not revealed to him. But the question whether all
injunctions of Islam were conveyed to the people at large, is a
different matter. The Sunnis say that the Holy Prophet conveyed all
Islamic injunctions to his companions. But still the Sunnis find
themselves in a fix when they face problems about which nothing has been
reported from the companions of the Holy Prophet. To resolve this
situation they have introduced the law of analogy, by means of which
they claim that they complete what is missing. In this connection Imam
Ali says: "Do you mean to say that Allah's religion was incomplete and
you have come to complete it?" (See Nahjul Balagha - Sermon 18)

The Shi'ah on the other hand say that neither Allah revealed the Islamic
injunctions incompletely to the Holy Prophet, nor did the Holy Prophet
convey them incompletely to the people. He conveyed them completely but
he did not say everything to the general people. In fact many questions
did not arise during his lifetime. Anyhow, he conveyed all injunctions
which he received from Allah to his special disciple, Imam Ali and asked
him to pass them on to the people as and when necessary.

It is here that the question of infallibility arises. The Shi'ah say
that just as the Holy Prophet could be neither intentionally nor
unintentionally wrong in what he said, similarly his special pupil Imam
Ali also could not go wrong, for just as the Holy Prophet was backed by
Divine support in many ways, this special pupil of his also enjoyed
Divine support. This was one more feature of Imamat.

### Imamat in the Sense of Wilayat

###

This is the third sense of Imamat and the highest sense for that matter.
Great stress is laid on this sense in the Shi'ah doctrine In a way
Wilayat is a common point between Shi'ism and mysticism (tasawwuf). But
when we say so, we should not be misunderstood, for you may come across
what the orientalists have said in this respects. They say that Wilayat
is a question in which the mystics are greatly interested and which has
been of interest for

the Shi'ah also from the early days of Islam. I remember that some ten
years back an orientalist interviewed Allama Tabatabi. One of the
questions he put was whether the Shi'ah had borrowed the idea of Wilayat
from the mystics or the mystics had taken it from the Shi'ah. The fact
is that the doctrine of Wilayat existed among the Shi'ah even when
mysticism had not emerged yet. If it is supposed that either of these
two have borrowed the idea from the other, it must be said that the
mystics have adopted it from the Shi'ah. The question of Wilayat is
analogous to the questions of the perfect man and the master of the
time. The mystics have laid great stress on this point. Moulavi says
that in every age there exists a wali, qa'im or the master of the age.
In every age there exists a perfect man possessing all human qualities.
There is no age in which, a perfect wali, often described as 'qutb'
(pole, pivot, authority) is not present. The mystics believe that a
perfect wali is also a perfect men. They ascribe to him many positions
some of which are unintelligible to us. One of his positions is his
control of the hearts in the sense that he is the universal spirit
transcending all spirits. Moulavi hints at this position in his story of
Ibrahim Adham. This story is no more than a fictitious tale. But Moulavi
narrates tales to make his points clear. His aim is not to narrate
history. He tells a story only to press his point. Moulavi says that
Ibrahim Adham went to the river and threw a needle into it. Afterwards
he recalled the needle. The fish put their heads out of the river. Each
fish had a needle in its mouth. Continuing, Maulavi says: '0 you having
no endowments, take care of your heart in the presence of those who are
gifted with the qualities of heart.'

Continuing further he says: "That Shaykh (spiritual guide) became aware
of that which was in the heart of the other people. The Shaykh could
know that because he was like a lion and the hearts of other people were
his dens."

The Shi'ah generally use the word Wilayat in its most exalted sense.
They believe that the Wali and Imam is the master of the time, and there
has always been and there will always be one perfect man in the world In
most of the ziyarats (homages) which we recite, we acknowledge the
existence of Wilayat and Imamat in this sense, and believe that the Imam
has a universal spirit. In the ziyarats which we all recite and which we
regard as a part of Shi'ah doctrine we say: "I testify that you see
where I stand; you hear what I say and return my salutation." It is to
be noted that we address that to an Imam who is dead. From our point of
view in this respect there is no difference between a dead and a living
Imam. It is not that we say so to a dead Imam only. We say: "Peace be on
you, Ali ibn Musa al-Riza. I admit and testify that you hear my
salutation and return it."

The Sunnis with the exception of the Wahhabis, believe that only the
Holy Prophet is endowed with this quality of knowing and hearing.
According to them nobody else in the world occupies such a high
spiritual status and has such a spiritual comprehension. But we, the
Shiites believe that this position is held by all our Imams. This belief
is a part of our religious principles and we always acknowledge it.

In short the question of Imamat has three degrees and if we do not make
a distinction between these degrees, we may be faced with difficulties
in respect to certain inferences in this connection. Based on these
degrees

Shiism has three groups. Some Shiites believe in Imamat only in the
sense of social and political leadership of society. They say that the
Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to the leadership of society after him,
and that Abu Bakr, Umar and Uthman could not claim this position. These
people are Shiites only to this extent. They either do not believe in
the two further degrees or keep quiet about them. Some others believe in
the second degree also but do not believe in the third one. It is said
that the late Sayyid Muhammad Baqir Durchal who was Ayatullah
Burujardi's teacher in Isfahan, disbelieved in this third degree.
Anyhow, the majority of the Shi'ah and the Shi'ah scholars believe in
the third degree also.

If we want to discuss Imamat, we should discuss it in three stages:
Imamat according to the Qur'an, Imamat according to the tradition and
Imamat according to reason. First of all let us see whether the Quranic
verses relating to Imamat indicate that sense of Imamat in which the
Shi'ah believe. And if they do so, do they indicate Imamat in the sense
of political and social leadership only, or do they indicate it in the
sense of religious authority and spiritual Wilayat also. After
explaining this we should see what do the Prophetic traditions say about
Imamat. Finally we should analyse Imamat from the viewpoint of reason
and see what reason says about each stage of it. Is the Sunni point of
view that the Holy Prophet's successor should be elected by the people
more reasonable or is it a fact that the Holy Prophet himself has
nominated his successor? Similarly what is agreeing to reason in regard
to the other two sense of Imamat.

A Tradition about Imamat
------------------------

Before mentioning the verses of the Qur'an in regard to Imamat. We would
like to quote a tradition which has been reported by the Shi'ah as well
as the Sunnis. Normally a tradition upon which both the Shi'ah and the
Sunnis agree cannot be ignored, because this agreement shows that the
tradition is substantially authentic, though its wording may differ in
different reports. We the Shiites usually report this tradition in the
following words: "He who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time,
would die a pre-Islamic death." These are very serious words, for in the
pre-Islamic period people neither believed in the unity of Allah
(monotheism) nor in Prophethood. This tradition (hadith) is found in
most of the Shi'ah books of traditions including the Kafi which is
regarded as the most reliable collection of the Shi'ah traditions. The
important fact is that this tradition is found in the Sunni books also.
According to one report they quote the following wording: "He who dies
without an Imam, will die a pre-Islamic death." Another wording is this:
"He who dies and has no bayah (oath of allegiance) in his neck, will die
a pre-Islamic death." Still another text says: "He who dies and has no
Imam, will die a pre-Islamic death." There are several other versions,
and that shows the great importance which the Holy Prophet attached to
the question of Imamat.

Those who take Imamat only in the sense of social leadership say that
the Holy Prophet has attached utmost importance to the question of
leadership because the implementation of the Islamic injunctions depends
on the presence of a virtuous and sound leader and the strong allegiance
of people to him. Islam is not an individualistic religion. Nobody can
say that as he

believes in Allah and His Prophet, he has nothing to do with anybody
else. Everybody must know and understand who the Imam of his time is,
and must carry out his activities under his leadership.

Those who take Imamat in the sense of religious authority, say that he
who is interested in his religion, must recognize his religious
authority and must know whom he should follow in religious matters. It
is absolutely un-Islamic to believe in the religion but to acquire it
from a source which is contrary to it.

Those who believe in Imamat in the sense of spiritual Wilayat say that
this tradition shows that a man who is not under the care of a perfect
wali (guardian) is just like him who died in pre-Islamic days. As this
tradition is a mutawatir hadith (reported by continuity of numerous
authorities) we mentioned it first so that you may keep it in mind while
we discuss the question of Imamat further. Now we look at the verses of
the Qur'an.

Imamat in the Holy Qur'an
-------------------------

Several verses of the Qur'an are cited by the Shi'ah in connection with
Imamat. One of them is the verse which begins with the words, "Your
guardian can be only Allah". Incidentally in all these cases there exist
Sunni traditions which support the Shi'ah point of view. In the Qur'an
this verse runs as follows: "Your guardian can be only Allah and His
messenger and those who believe, who establish prayers, pay the zakat
while bowing." (Surah Mai'dah, 5:55).

The word used in this verse is Wali, which means a guardian. Hence
Wilayat means guardianship. According to the teachings of Islam zakat is
not paid while bowing in prayers. Hence the payment of zakat while
bowing cannot be called a general rule applicable to many individuals.
This verse refers to a particular incident, which took place only once
and which has been reported both by the Shi'ah and the Sunnis. Once Imam
Ali was bowing while offering prayers when a beggar appeared and began
to ask for alms. Imam Ali beckoned and called his attention to his
finger. The beggar promptly drew Imam Ali's ring from his finger and
left the place. In other words Imam Ali did not wait till his prayers
were finished. He was so particular to give alms, that while he was
still praying he told the beggar by gesture that he might pull out his
ring, sell it and spend the money to meet his needs. Both the Shi'ah and
the Sunnis agree that Imam Ali did so, and that this verse was revealed
on this occasion. It may be noted that giving alms while bowing in
prayers is not included in the teachings of Islam. It is neither an
obligatory nor a commendable act. Hence it cannot be said that several
persons might have done so. Therefore (those who do so) is an obvious
reference to Imam Ali. The Qur'an at several places has used the
expression, 'they say. .', while that thing was said by only one
individual. Here also 'those who do so' means the individual who did so.
Therefore by means of this verse Imam Ali was appointed the guardian of
the people. Anyway, this verse needs further discussion, which we are
going to undertake later.

There are other verses which concern the event of Ghadir. This event
itself is a part of the Islamic traditions, but we are going to discuss
it later. One of the verses revealed in connection with the event of
Ghadir says: "0

Messenger! Make known that which has been revealed to you from your
Lord, for if you do it not, you will not have conveyed His message."
(Surah al-Mai'dah, 5:67).

The tone of this verse is as serious as that of the tradition: "He who
died and did not recognize the Imam of his time, died a pre-Islamic
death." Briefly it may be said that the verse itself shows that its
subject is so important that if the Prophet does not make it known, that
would mean that he has not conveyed the message of Allah at all.

The Shi'ah and the Sunnis agree that Surah al-Mai'dah is the last surah
(chapter) revealed to the Holy Prophet, and this verse is one of the
last verses of this surah. In other words it was revealed when the Holy
Prophet had already conveyed all other injunctions and teachings of
Islam during his 13 years' stay in Makkah and 10 years' stay in Medina
as the Prophet. This verse was among the last instructions of Islam. Now
the Shi'ah ask what that instruction could be which was so important
that if it was not conveyed all that the Holy Prophet did in the past
would become void. You cannot indicate any subject connected with the
last years of the Holy Prophet's life which may be so important. But we
say that it is the question of Imamat, which is so important that if
Imamat is lost, nothing remains. Without Imamat the whole structure of
Islam would crumble down. Moreover, the Shi'ah cite the reports and the
traditions of the Sunnis themselves in support of their claim that this
verse was revealed in connection with the Ghadir Khum event.

In Surah al-Ma'idah itself there is another verse which runs as follows:
"This day have I perfected your religion for you, completed My favour to
you and have chosen Islam for you as religion." (Surah al-Ma'idah, 5:3).

This verse shows that on that day something happened, which was so
important that it perfected religion, completed Allah's Favour to
mankind and without which Islam could not be as Allah wanted it to be.
The Shi'ah argue that the stringent tone of the verse shows that the
thing to which it refers is so important that the very existence of
Islam as a true religion depends on it. Now the question is what that
thing can be. The Shi'ah say that they can point out that thing; whereas
others cannot. Furthermore, there are reports which confirm that this
verse was revealed in connection with the question of Imamat. We have
put forward these three verses as the gist of the Shi'ah arguments.

Chapter 4: Imamat and Expounding of Religion
--------------------------------------------

We have already discussed the different aspects of Imamat, in the course
of which we pointed out that in order to be able to discuss the question
of Imamat in its true perspective, it was necessary to understand those
aspects very clearly. One aspect of Imamat, as we have already said, is
the question of government. Following the demise of the Holy Prophet
whose duty was it to choose his successor? Was it the responsibility of
the people themselves to elect their ruler from among themselves or did
the Holy Prophet himself designate his successor? Lately this question
has been put in such a way that at first sight the Sunni point of view
in this respect appears to be more normal and natural.

Usually the question is set forth in this way: We want to see what form
of government has been suggested by Islam. Is it hereditary in which
every ruler designates his successor, and the people have no right to
intervene in the government affairs? Is it that the Holy Prophet
designated a particular person as his successor, that person designated
his successor and that successor again designated his successor, and
thus the constitution of government was to be based on designation and
nomination till the Day of Resurrection? Naturally this process cannot
be applicable exclusively to the Imams, for according to Shi'ah belief
the number of the Imams is confined to twelve, and this number can
neither be increased nor decreased. According to this view the general
rule in respect of the government will boil down to this procedure. The
Holy Prophet, who was the head of the State also, was to appoint his
successor and that successor also in his turn was to appoint his
successor and so on till the Day of Resurrection. In this case if Islam
dominated the whole world as it once dominated the half of it and it so
happened that the injunctions of Islam were observed in all parts of the
world, the same rule would be operative whether there be one government
in the world or several governments. According to this view, it was on
the basis of the general rule that the Head of the State should be a
designated person, that the Holy Prophet nominated Imam Ali as his
successor. But in the light of this philosophy it is not necessary at
all that the Holy Prophet should have designated Imam Ali on receiving a
commandment from Allah, for only he and the Imams, inspired and endowed
with Divine knowledge through the Holy Prophet, could receive such a
Divine commandment, but that could not be the case subsequently.
Therefore if it is admitted that from the viewpoint of Islam the
government is to be based on the principle of designation, it was not
necessary for the Holy Prophet to nominate Imam Ali by revelation. He
could appoint him at his personal discretion. The Imams also could use
their discretion similarly. On this basis Imam Ali's designation to
Khilafat was similar to the appointment of a Governor of Makkah or the
appointment of an Amirul Hajj. In such cases nobody says that the Holy
Prophet on receiving revelation appointed such and such person the
Governor of Makkah or, for example, sent Mu'az bin Jabal to Yemen for
the propagation of Islam. In contrast everybody admits that the Holy
Prophet was entrusted by Allah with the charge of the administration of
people, and so he was authorized to act according to his own discretion
in all matters in which he did not receive

a revelation. In the case of Imam Ali's designation to Khilafat also it
may be said that this was the Holy Prophet's personal decision.

If we advance the question of Imamat in such a simple way, it becomes a
question of worldly government and ceases to be the question of Imamat
that we are discussing. If this be the nature of the question, really
there is no need that Divine revelation should intervene in it. At the
most Divine revelation can tell the Prophet that it is his duty to
appoint as his successor whomsoever he deems fit, and that his successor
also has to choose his successor in the same way. And so on till the Day
of Resurrection. If Imamat simply means government or rulership, then
what the Sunnis say appears to be more attractive than what the Shi'ah
say, for the Sunnis hold that a ruler has no right to choose the next
ruler and that his successor should be chosen in a democratic way by the
people, especially by those who have right to choose. But the question
is not so simple. On the whole the belief of the Shi'ah in the
designation of Imam Ali and other Imams to Khilafat is an offshoot of
another question which is more basic.

Here an important question arises. The question is that the number of
the Imams was not more than twelve. As such who was supposed to take
charge of government after these twelve Imams. Let us suppose that Imam
Ali had become the ruler exactly in the manner he was designated by the
Holy Prophet and had been followed by Imam Hasan, then by Imam Husayn
and so on till the twelfth Imam. In this case on the basis of the
philosophy which we, the Shi'ites have, there would have been no reason
for the occultation of the present Imam. He also like his forefathers
would have had a short span of life and then would have passed away.
What would have happened after him. Could the number of the Imams be
increased? Take another question - the question of the normal government
in the present circumstances. Obviously the Imam of the Age cannot
assume the political leadership of the Muslims during his occultation.
Hence the question of political leadership and worldly government still
remains unsolved.

Government is a Branch of Imamat
--------------------------------

When the question of Imamat is discussed from the Shi'ah point of view,
we should not make a mistake of simplifying it and saying that Imamat
means administration of government, for it is such over-simplification
that creates the above-mentioned difficulties. if it is admitted that
Imamat means rulership, the question arises whether it is necessary that
a candidate for becoming the Head of the State should be the best of
all. Is it not enough that he should be the best only relatively. In
other words, is it not enough that he should be a good statesman, a good
administrator and an honest man, though he may be inferior to some
people in some other respects? Is it necessary that a ruler should be
infallible? What is the need of his being so? Is it necessary that he
should be offering night prayers? If so, why? Is it necessary that he
should be well-versed in the rules of Islamic law? Cannot he consult
others whenever necessary? A man who is relatively the best should be
good enough. All these questions arise when we consider the problem from
a narrow angle. It is a big mistake to think that Imamat and rulership
are identical. Some early scholars, especially some scholastic
theologians, made this mistake. Now-a-days again this mistake has become

too common. When one speaks of Imamat, at once rulership comes to mind,
while in fact the question of rulership is a minor part of the question
of Imamat, and these two questions must not be confused. Then what is
Imamat?

### Imam is the Successor of the Holy Prophet in Expounding of Religion

###

What is most important in connection with the question of Imamat is the
question as to who succeeded the Holy Prophet for the purpose of
explaining and expounding religion. There is no doubt that it was the
Holy Prophet alone who received revelation which was totally
discontinued with his passing away. Now the question is who after the
Holy Prophet was responsible for expounding celestial teachings which
admitted no personal opinion or private judgement.

Did this responsibility devolve on any one particular individual to whom
all queries could be referred as they were referred to the Holy Prophet,
whose answers were always perfectly right and about whom it could not be
suspected that he would even give an answer based on his personal
opinion or would ever make a mistake and rectify it later? About the
Holy Prophet we cannot say that any of his answers was ever wrong or
influenced by his personal whim. Such an allegation would mean not to
acknowledge his Prophethood. Once it is established that a particular
thing was said by the Holy Prophet, we cannot say that it is wrong or
that the Holy Prophet might have made a mistake. In contrast, in the
case of a legislator to whose edicts people adhere, it is possible to
say that in respect of such and such question he made a mistake or that
he did not pay full attention to that particular question or that he was
influenced by extraneous considerations. But it is not possible to say
so in respect of the Holy Prophet, just as we cannot say about any verse
of the Quran that there is a mistake in it or that it has been affected
in any way by some selfish motive.

Was there any person after the Holy Prophet who could really be regarded
as a competent authority for all religious matters and who could expound
religious law in the same way as the Holy Prophet used to do? Did there
exist a perfect man with all these characteristics. We say that such a
man did actually exist. The only difference between him and the Holy
Prophet was that what the Holy Prophet said was based on direct
revelation from Allah and what the Imams said was based on what they
learned from the Holy Prophet, not in the sense that they were
instructed by him in the usual manner, but in the sense in which Imam
Ali said that the Holy Prophet had opened to him a door of knowledge
because of which a thousand other doors had been opened to him. We
cannot say how it happened just as we cannot explain revelation and say
how the Holy Prophet used to receive Divine knowledge direct from Allah.

We cannot say what kind of spiritual relationship existed between the
Holy Prophet and Imam Ali, but it is certain that the Holy Prophet
taught Imam Ali all realities fully and completely and that he did not
impart that knowledge to anyone else. Imam Ali says that he was with the
Holy Prophet in the cave of Hira when he heard a piteous sound as if
someone was wailing. He said to the Holy Prophet: "Messenger of Allah, I
heard the Satan's wailing when revelation was descending on you." He
said: "Ali, you

hear what I hear and you see what I see, but you are not a Prophet".
(See Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 192)

Had there been somebody else in that place with Imam All, he would not
have heard that voice, because that hearing was not the catching of
sound waves reverberating in the space so that anybody having ears could
hear it. It was a different sort of perception.

### The Tradition of Thaqalayn

###

In regard to Imamat the basic question is its spiritual aspect. The
Imams are spiritual leaders below the Prophet in ,rank. They know and
acknowledge Islam spiritually. They are infallible like the Prophet
himself. An Imam is an absolute authority on religion. There is no
question of any mistake or any intentional deviation in what he says.
That is what we mean by infallibility. In this connection the Shi'ah
declare that the Holy Prophet has said: "I leave among you two heavy
trusts: the Book of Allah and my descendants." (Sahih Muslim, Vol. VII,
p. 122)

In fact, it cannot be denied that the Holy Prophet has actually said so.
This is not a tradition reported by the Shi'ah only. In fact it has been
reported by more Sunni sources than the Shi'ah.

When we were staying at Qum a magazine named Risalatut Taqrib was
started by Darut Taqrib of Egypt. In one of its issues a Sunni scholar
quoted the tradition of Thaqalayn in these words: "I am leaving among
you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah." The late
Ayatullah Burujardi, who was a scholar and divine in the real sense,
dealt with such questions very prudently. One of his pupils was Shaykh
Qawam Wishnawah'i, a nice man, much interested in studying books and
collecting references.

The Late Ayatullah asked him to trace the sources of this tradition in
the Sunni books in which this tradition might be found. Accordingly he
collected such references and cited more than 200 reliable Sunni books,
which had reported that the Holy Prophet had said: "I am leaving among
you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my descendants." It is
certain that the Holy Prophet expressed this point in this form on
numerous occasions and at several places. But we cannot rule out the
possibility of his having said on some occasion that he was leaving two
things: the Book of Allah and his Sunnah. There is no inconsistency
between the Holy Prophet's descendants and his Sunnah, for his Sunnah is
explained by his descendants only. It is not that we can refer our
problems either to the Holy Prophet's descendants or to his Sunnah, for
these two do not exist independently of each other. It is the Holy
Prophet's descendants who are the expounders and custodians of his
Sunnah. When the Holy Prophet mentions his descendants along with the
Book of Allah, he means to say that his Sunnah is to be acquired from
his descendants. Furthermore, even the statement that the Holy Prophet
has said: "I am leaving among you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah
and my descendants", itself is a Sunnah. As such there is no
inconsistency between the Holy Prophet's Sunnah and his descendants. If
at one place and even that is not certain, the Holy Prophet has said: "I
am leaving among you two heavy trusts: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah",
at so many other places he has used the other expression. If in one book
this

tradition is written in one form, in two hundred other books it is
written in the other form.

Anyway, Shaykh Qawam prepared a treatise and sent it to Darut Taqrib of
Egypt. Darut Taqrib too was not unfair. It printed and published it.
Being authentic it could not be turned down. Nobody could raise any
objection against it. Had the late Ayatullah Burujardi done what others
usually do in such cases, he would have raised great hue and cry, would
have called the people of Darut Taqrib dishonest and would have accused
them of intriguing against the Prophet's chosen descendants.

The expounding of religion is the true spirit of Imamat. Islam is a
comprehensive and bright religion. But the question is whether the
teachings of Islam are limited to the principles and the general rules
mentioned in the Qur'an and further elaborated and explained in the Holy
Prophet's sayings. Was Islam only this much? There is no doubt that
Divine revelation ceased with the Holy Prophet's demise. Islam was
completed. But had every article of Islam been enunciated by that time?
Or were there many questions of law which were in the custody of Imam
Ali and which were still to be made known to the people and explained
either gradually or on some suitable occasions? In the latter case this
tradition proves the infallibility of the Imams, for the Holy Prophet
has directed the Muslims to get their religion from two sources, the
Book of Allah and his descendants. As one of these sources, that is the
Qur'an is infallible and free from all errors, the other source must
also be infallible. It is impossible that the Holy Prophet would ask his
followers to acquire religion from a person who is liable to commit
mistakes.

It is here that the Shi'ah doctrine basically differs from that of the
Sunnis in respect of gathering and expounding religion. The Sunnis say
that just as revelation ceased with the passing away of the Holy
Prophet, similarly the authentic expounding of religion also has come to
an end. Now there is nothing except what is deduced and inferred from
the Qur'an and the Prophetic traditions.

Prohibition of Recording of Traditions
--------------------------------------

The Sunnis themselves have created a situation which has weakened their
case. Umar disallowed the writing of traditions (Ahadith). This is a
historical fact, not a story invented by any hostile Shi'ah. It is
admitted by the European Orientalists also who are neither the Shi'ah
nor the Sunnis. Even the most sympathetic Orientalists say that Umar
disallowed the writing of traditions because of his fear that tradition
would divert the attention of the people from the Qur'an, which he
wanted to be the sole source of law. This is definitely a historical
fact and not an allegation of the Shi'ites. During the days of Umar
nobody could venture to write a Prophetic traditions and show his
writing to others. Oral transmission of traditions was of course
allowed. This situation continued till the time of Umar Ibn Abdul Aziz,
who became Caliph in 99 A.H. and died in 101 A.H. He issued instructions
that Prophetic traditions should be collected and put down in writing.
Thus he changed Umar's policy. It is to be noted that immediately
following Umar ibn Abdul Aziz's instructions those who were so far

transmitting Prophetic traditions orally, undertook the work of writing
them, but in the meanwhile a part of them had already been lost.

We know that the rules of Islamic law mentioned in the Qur'an are very
brief. The Qur'an mostly mentions general rules only. For example, the
Qur'an lays great stress on prayers. But still all that it says about
them does not go beyond saying: "Establish prayers, prostrate and bow
down." Even it has not been explained how prayers are to be offered.
Similarly there are so many rites connected with pilgrimage. The Holy
Prophet personally observed them. Had not the Prophetic traditions
assumed the present practical form, the Muslims could not know anything
about them. But the question is what opportunities the Holy Prophet had
to enunciate all the Islamic injunctions. During his 13 years' stay in
Makkah because of stern opposition and very tight situation there, the
number of those who were converted to Islam could not probably exceed
400. People used to meet the Holy Prophet only secretly. Some 70
families which constituted half or even more than half of the total
population of the Muslims, had to migrate to Ethiopia.

From this point of view Medina was a better place, but there the Holy
Prophet had so many other commitments. Even if he worked like a
whole-time teacher, during all these 23 years he did not have enough
time at his disposal to impart all the teachings of Islam, especially in
view of the fact that Islam is a complete code of human life
particularly in our present age.

### Use of Analogy

###

As a result of what they hold in this connection, the Sunnis had to face
many practical difficulties in regard to the rules of Islamic law. They
came across questions about which nothing was mentioned in the Qur'an.
They checked the collections of traditions which they had, but there
also they did not find the answer. What to do then? To solve the problem
they resorted to analogy which means to extend on the basis of some
existing similarity the rule of a text to a case not provided for in the
Quran and the Sunnah. For example we say that the law says so in that
case. As this case is some what similar to that, the same rule should
apply to this case also. Possibly, in that case the Holy Prophet gave
that particular order for such and such reason and as that reason exists
in this case also, the same order should apply to it also.

As may be seen, the analogical deduction is based on possibilities only.
The cases where Prophetic traditions were not available, were too many.
The world of Islam greatly extended during the Abbasid period. Many
countries were conquered. Consequently new problems arose everyday, the
solution of which was not found in the Qur'an and the Sunnah. The result
was that analogical deduction became a regular practice. The Sunnis were
divided into two groups. The first group which included Ahmad ibn Hambal
and

Malik ibn Anas, looked at analogical deduction with suspicion. It is
said that Malik ibn Anas resorted to this process only in two cases. The
other group which included Abu Hanifah made use of analogy on a too wide
scale. Abu Hanifah used to say that the sayings attributed to the Holy

Prophet were not reliable. He declared that he found only fifteen
Prophetic traditions trustworthy. In all other cases he resorted to
analogical

deduction. Shafi'i had a midway position. In some cases he relied on
Prophetic traditions and in others he applied analogy, with the result
that he produced a sort of hotchpotch code of law. It is said that Abu
Hanifah made so much use of analogy because he was of Irani origin and
the Iranians by nature tend to take much interest in mental exercises,
and because he lived in Iraq which was far away from Medina, the centre
of the traditionalists. Anyhow, he indulged too much in analogy.

A Sunni writer says that one day Abu Hanifah went to a barber. His beard
had a mixture of black and grey hair but the number of the grey hair was
not very large. He asked the barber to pull out the grey hair. The
barber said: "If grey hair is pulled out, it tends to grow more
copiously." Abu Hanifah said: "Then pull out the black hair, for my
analogy says that in case grey hair grows copiously if it is pulled out,
the same thing should happen in the case of black hair also." But the
fact is that if there is any such rule, it applies to grey hair only,
not to black hair. Anyhow, Abu Hanifah made similar deductions in the
case of jurisprudence also.

#### Analogy From the Shi'ah Point of View

####

When we refer to the Shi'ah traditions we find that according to them
the need of analogy is felt only because of the wrong notion that the
Qur'an and the Sunnah are not enough to provide all the necessary rules
of law. The fact is that this notion is totally wrong. We have received
such a quantity of Prophetic traditions either directly or through the
chosen descendants of the Holy Prophet, that if we refer to the
principles laid down therein, we need not resort to analogical deduction
at all. That is the spirit of Imamat from religious point of view.

Islam is not merely a creed or a doctrine. It cannot be said that after
its ideology has been enunciated by its founder it only requires a
government to implement that ideology. It is a complete code and that
position of it must be kept in mind.

#### No Question of Election in the Presence of an Infallible Imam

####

From the viewpoint of leadership and rulership the position is that Imam
Ali the Holy Prophet's successor who is as infallible as the Prophet
himself and who has been designated by him to be his successor, cannot
be placed at par with other people. His position is exceptional like
that of the Prophet himself. Therefore in his case there is no room for
any election, consultation or any other such thing. In the case of the
Prophet nobody ever said that he was only the Messenger of Allah and the
people were at liberty to choose him or anybody else to be their ruler.
Everybody knew that as he was superhuman and had contact with the Divine
world, in his presence there could be no question of any election or
selection. After the Holy Prophet also there was no room for any such
thing, for he had designated twelve successors to strengthen Islam
during the next two or three centuries and to expound it in a way free
from every error. In the presence of such persons capable of explaining
all the injunctions of Islam, there could be no question

of any election etc. Is it reasonable to choose someone else in the
presence of a person absolutely infallible and extremely competent and
learned in every sense of the word?

Furthermore, when Imam Ali had been appointed an Imam in the sense
mentioned by us, worldly leadership was also naturally due to him. In
fact the Holy Prophet designated Imam Ali to this assignment because
Imam Ali was an Imam and infallible. Anyhow, the case is different
during the occultation of the present Imam, for there exists no
infallible Imam free to exercise his worldly authority. Similarly the
case would have been different if the events of the early period of
Islam had not taken place and. Imam Ali had become Caliph immediately
after the Holy Prophet and had been succeeded by Imam Hasan, then by
Imam Husayn and so on till the times of the last Imam. In this case
there would have been no reason for occultation. After the demise of the
last infallible Imam the question of rulership would have assumed a
different shape. Then it could be asked how this question is to be
solved. Is it or is it not necessary that a jurist fulfilling all the
prerequisite conditions should be the ruler? Can people elect their
ruler?

As such from the very beginning we should not regard the question of
Imamat as a simple question of worldly government. It would be wrong to
ask at this stage whether Islam wants a government based on nomination
or a government based on election, and then to ask why the Shi'ah
advocate a particular form of government. The question is not so simple.
It must be admitted that in the presence of an infallible Imam, nobody
else can have a claim to the rulership in the same way as in the
presence of the Holy Prophet nobody else could be the ruler. The Holy
Prophet had appointed Imam Ali the Imam and as such it was his privilege
to be the ruler also. Besides, on several occasion the Holy Prophet made
it clear that Imam Ali was to succeed him as the ruler of the Muslims.
Anyhow, it is to be remembered that he made this nomination on the basis
that Imam Ali was the Imam after him.

### Question of Spiritual Wilayat:

###

Earlier I mentioned a point in which I believe persona and consider it
to be a basic doctrine, though it might not be a cardinal principle of
Shi'ism. The question is what the special characteristics of the Holy
Prophet's position were? What was revealed to him, did it only confine
to Divine injunctions; and the fundamental principles and collateral
teachings of Islam? Was his knowledge confined to the realities of
Islam, or was any other information also communicated to him by Allah?
Is his excellence in regard to piety confined to his being infallible
and immune from all errors? Almost the same questions arise in respect
of the Imams also. Though they received no revelation from Allah, yet
they received thorough knowledge of Islam, through the Holy Prophet and
their knowledge was as free from the possibility of any error as that of
the Holy Prophet himself. As regards piety, the Imams are also
infallible.

Now the question is whether a Prophet or an Imam has besides these
features some other. special features or qualities also reposed in his
person. Besides religious knowledge what are the other branches of
knowledge with which he is endowed? Is it true that the reports about
the deeds performed

by his Ummah (followers) are presented to the Holy Prophet, and similar
reports are also presented to each Imam during his lifetime. Now the
present Imam knows, hears and sees everything that happens in the world.
He watches the deeds not of the Shi'ites only but of all people. In this
respect there is no difference between a living and a dead Imam. As
stated earlier, when you visit the grave of Imam Riza, and greet him,
this action takes place as if you are calling on a person living in this
world. When you greet the Imam, he hears you and looks at you. That is a
manifestation of spiritual Wilayat.

We said earlier that the question of Wilayat is the point where
mysticism and Shi'ism meet each other. Their ideas in this respect are
very close. The mystics say that in every age there must exist a perfect
man whom they call the qutb. The Shi'ah hold that in every age there
must be an Imam and religious authority, who is a perfect man. As this
question is not a matter of dispute between the Shi'ah and the Sunnis,
we do not propose to dwell on it further at this stage. The disputed
points are two, namely Imamat in the sense of expounding religion and
Imamat in the sense of worldly leadership of the Muslims.

Importance of the Tradition of Thaqalayn
----------------------------------------

In regard to the question of Imamat, you should not ignore the
importance of this tradition. If by chance you have to face a Sunni
scholar or even a non-scholar, you should ask him whether the Holy
Prophet did or did not utter such a sentence. If he says that he did
not, you can put before him so many books of the Sunnis themselves. In
fact the Sunni scholars cannot, and generally do not, deny the existence
and veracity of such a tradition[^6] .

Then say to him: "The Holy Prophet has designated the Qur'an as the
authority No. 1 and his 'descendants' as the authority No. 2. Now tell
us who these descendants are."

It may be noted that the Sunnis make no difference between the Holy
Prophet's descendants and others. They narrate Prophetic traditions more
often on the authority of other companions than on the authority of Imam
Ali. Even when they quote Imam Ali, they quote him as a transmitter of a
Prophet's tradition, not as an authority.

The Tradition of Ghadir
-----------------------

As we have said, he who is the authority for a religion must also be the
leader of that religion. Further, as far as leadership is concerned, the
Holy Prophet expressly designated Imam Ali to that. The tradition of
Ghadir is an instance of such a declaration. The Ghadir declaration was
made by the Holy Prophet on the occasion of the farewell pilgrimage at a
place called Ghadir al-Khum. This pilgrimage was the last Hajj performed
by the Holy Prophet. In all probability he did not perform more than one
Hajj after the conquest of Makkah, but he performed one 'Umrah before
his farewell Pilgrimage. On the occasion of the farewell Pilgrimage he
issued a general invitation to all the Muslims to attend that Hajj. When
all of them assembled, he delivered sermons on different occasions in
the Masjidul Haram, at Arafat, at Mina, outside Mina and at Ghadir
al-Khum. After mentioning some other points at Ghadir al-Khum he finally
mentioned a

point which he greatly emphasized. In our opinion he made it the last
point because of this verse which he recited there: "0 Messenger! Make
known that which has been revealed to you from your Lord, for if you do
it not, you will not have conveyed His message." (Surah al Ma'idah,
5:67).

The Holy Prophet mentioned many principles of Islam and collateral
matters in his sermons which he delivered at Arafat, Mina and Masjidul
Haram. On all these occasions he dealt with important matters. But at
Ghadir al-Khum he made an announcement about which he said that if he
did not make it, all that he had said would become void. Then he said:
"Am I not closer to you than your own selves?" He was referring to a
Qur'anic verse which says: "The Prophet is closer to the believers than
their own selves." (Surah al Ahzab, 33:6 ).

He continued to say "Do I not have more authority over you than you
yourselves have?" All those who were present said: "Yes, Messenger of
Allah, you have." Then the Holy Prophet announced: "This Ali is the
master (Maula) of him, whose master I am."

A comprehensive summary of the question of Ghadir was published a few
years back at Mashhad in the form of a book by the Society for
Publication of Islamic Truths. I have not yet read this book, but those
friends of mine who have read it, say that it is a very good book, at
least worth reading.

It will require too much space if we attempt to study all the sources of
the tradition of Ghadir which we claim to be a mutawatir tradition or
the tradition of Thaqalayn, the sources of which Mir Hamid Husayn, the
author of the 'Abaqatul Anwar has traced in 400 pages of large size.
While dealing with the crux of the problem of Imamat, we would like to
make only a brief mention of the authorities on which the Shi'ah base
their claim in this regard, although the question might need rather a
more elaborate discussion.
