Chapter 6: Imamat and the Verse regarding Despair of Unbelievers.
=================================================================

We have already discussed that the doctrine of Shi'ah regarding the
question of Imamat is basically different from that of the Sunnis. Hence
it is not correct to say that both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis believe in
Imamat alike, and differ in regard to its conditions only. In fact the
Imamat in which we believe is absolutely different from the Imamat in
which the Sunnis believe. It is equally incorrect to put the question
whether the Imam is to be designated by the Holy Prophet or elected by
the people, for the Imam of the Shi'ah concept appointed by a Prophetic
ordinance, is quite different from the Imam of the Sunni concept, who is
appointed by consultation and election.

We have already discussed the various stages and the conditions of
Imamat, and pointed out that the Shi'ah begin the consideration of this
question from the top and then come down to the facts as they exist to
make sure that their theory is not merely hypothetical. They ascertain
if the Qur'an has said something in this respect and whether the Holy
Prophet has actually designated someone to this high office.

First we intended to discuss the relevant points in the order in which
they have been mentioned by Khwaja Nasiruddin, but as the Eid al-Ghadir
(festival of Ghadir) is going to be celebrated shortly, we deem it
better to explain first the verses connected with that occasion.

The Holy Qur'an says: "Today, the unbelievers have lost hope of ever
harming your religion; so fear them not and have fear of Me! This day I
have perfected your religion for you and completed My favour to you, and
have chosen Islam as your religion." (Surah al Ma'ida 5:3).

The two parts of this verse begin with "this day". Both these parts are
naturally interlinked with each other. In this verse this day may mean
'to-day' or may refer to some other day mentioned earlier. When we say
that such and such person has arrived this day, that means that he has
arrived today. Allah says that this day (we will explain afterwards
which day) those who disbelieve are in despair of harming your religion.
Having lost all hope of their success, they have stopped their hostile
activities against Islam. So do not fear them. The next sentence is very
astonishing. Instead, fear Me. It may be noted that the question
involved is that of religion. Does Allah mean to say that 'the
disbelievers can no longer do any harm to your religion. If any harm is
to be done to it, it will be done by Me? We will explain later, what the
verse actually means. Continuing Allah says: This day have I perfected
your religion and completed my favour to you. In this part of the verse
two words, perfected and completed have been used. These two words
approximately mean the same thing, but with some difference.

Difference Between Perfection and Completion
--------------------------------------------

A thing, the various parts of which should appear successively is called
incomplete so long as its final part does not appear. When its last part
appears, we say that it has been completed. A building is still
incomplete even when its pillars have gone up and it has been roofed.
It. is complete only when all parts of it get built up and it is finally
fit for occupation. That

is not the case with perfection. A thing may be called imperfect even
when all its parts are complete, but not fully developed. A foetus is
completed in the womb of its mother. In other words all its parts get
built up. But even when it is delivered, it is not a perfect man. That
means that it is not as mature as it should be. To become fully
developed and mature is different from being complete. In fact the
difference between completion and perfection is the same as between
quantity and quality.

The Qur'an says: "This day I have completed for you your religion, and
then adds: perfected My favour to you and chose for you Islam as a
religion." In other words, Islam is now what Allah wanted it to be.
Evidently the intention is not that Islam is still what it was, yet
Allah has changed His view about it. What is meant is that now Islam,
the chosen religion of Allah, has reached the stage of completion and
perfection.

That is what the verse means. Now the question is to which day the
phrase 'this day' refers. Which is the day on which according to the
Qur'an , the religion of the Muslims was perfected and favour of Allah
completed? That day on which such an extraordinary event took place must
be a very important day. To this point both the Shi'ah and the Sunnis
agree.

It is astonishing that the preceding and the following verses give no
indication as to which day is that day. The context provides no verbal
indication. In the preceding verses no important event has been
mentioned, to which 'this day' may be referring. Very simple rules of
law regarding the meat of certain animals, carrion, blood and pork have
been mentioned in the verses immediately preceding this verse. Then all
of a sudden the Quran says: This day the disbelievers have lost hope of
ever harming your religion; so fear them not, fear Me. This day I have
perfected your religion for you and completed My favour to you, and have
chosen Islam for you as a religion. Then the Qur'an again turns to
previous theme and says: But he who is forced to eat the forbidden meat
by hunger, not by will to sin, for him Allah is forgiving, Merciful.
These verses have been so placed that if the intervening verse is taken
out, the other verses run smoothly and the subject matter is not
disturbed. The subject of meat has been repeated at two or three other
places in the Qur'an, but there this intervening verse is not found.

### Which Day Is Meant By This Day?

###

Both the Shi'ah and the Sunni commentators of the Qur'an have tried to
ascertain what 'this day' signifies. There are two ways of doing this.

One way is to find out its significance from the context and the other
is to refer to history and tradition in order to find out on what
occasion this verse was revealed. Those who have chosen the first course
are indifferent to all that which history and the Sunnah say about the
background of this verse. They look only to the substance of verse, and
claim that it relates to the day on which the Holy Prophet was raised.
According to them 'this day' means that day, not today.

It may also be mentioned that this verse belongs to the Surah al-Maidah,
which is the fifth chapter of the Qur'an beginning with the following
verse: "Believers stand by your contracts (obligations)". (Surah
Ma'idah, 5:1).

All commentators of the Qur'an agree that this chapter is the last one
revealed at Medina. It was revealed even later than the Surah an Nasr.
It is true that one or two verses placed in other surahs were revealed
subsequently, but not a complete surah. Thus the Surah al-Ma'idah is the
last Surah revealed to the Holy Prophet.

### Various Views Regarding What is Meant by 'This Day'

###

#### (i) The Day the Holy Prophet was Raised

####

We have said that according to some people this day means that day, not
this day. The question is what that indicates? They say that as this day
has been described as the day on which Allah chose Islam as His religion
for people. Naturally this day should be the day on which Islam
commenced. But this argument is based on the words: I chose Islam for
you as a religion. It could be valid had these words not been preceded
by the sentence which says: This day I have completed for you your
religion and perfected My favour to you. The day Islam was incepted is
the day of the beginning of Allah's favour, not the day of its
perfection. Hence 'this day' cannot be the day on which the Holy Prophet
was raised to Prophethood.

#### (ii) The Day of the Conquest of Makkah

####

Another possibility is that 'this day' means the day of the conquest of
Makkah. This is also a mere possibility without any evidence in support
of it. It is argued that another day of great importance in the history
of Islam is the day when Makkah was conquered, as on that day the
following verses were revealed: "Surely Allah has given you a signal
victory, so that Allah may forgive you of your sin, that which is past
and that which is to come." (Surah al-Fatah, 48:1-2).

There is no doubt that 'that day' was of great importance. In the
Arabian Peninsula Makkah spiritually had a unique position. Since the
attack on the Ka'bah by the People of the Elephant and their defeat in
an astonishing manner, all Arabs held the Ka'bah in great reverence and
regard it as the most sacred place of worship. Following this event the
Quraysh felt proud of themselves. They said that the Ka'bah was so
sacred that a formidable army attacking it was afflicted by a celestial
catastrophe and annihilated to the last man. The Quraysh believed that
the event showed their importance. It had a psychological impact on
other Arabs also, who began to respect and obey the Quraysh.

Since that time the Arabs had begun to believe that no body could
overpower them and seize the Ka'bah. But against all their calculations
and expectations the Holy Prophet conquered Makkah easily without any
bloodshed. During that operation nobody received the slightest injury.
Perhaps the Holy Prophet had this point in view besides the sanctity of
Makkah when he took special care of ensuring that Makkah was occupied
without any bloodshed. If fighting had taken place somewhere else, and a
hundred Muslims had been killed, nobody would have attributed the loss
to any special cause. But had the Muslims suffered any loss on the
occasion of Conquest of Makkah, the pagans would have said: "Look, the
companions of Muhammad have had the same fate as the People of the
Elephant." So the

Holy Prophet arranged the things in such a way that there were no
casualties on either side. Only Khalid bin Walid killed out of malice
two or three persons in the outskirts of Makkah, where a few persons
were showing resistance. When the Holy Prophet heard the news, he
denounced Khalid's action and said: "Allah, I do not hold myself
answerable for what he has done. I am not happy with his action."

This was the reason why from psychological point of view the Conquest of
Makkah produced an extraordinary impact on the people of Arabia. They
were tremendously impressed by the fact that the Holy Prophet was able
to occupy Makkah and that too without suffering any loss. Consequently
other people of the Arabian Peninsula also surrendered themselves. They
began to come to Medina in large number and embraced Islam.

The Holy Quran says: "Those who spent and fought before the victory are
not upon a, level with the rest of you. Such are greater in rank than
those who spent and fought afterwards." (Surah al Hadid, 57:10)

As before the Conquest of Makkah the Muslims were still a small
community, they performed all good deeds because of their strong faith.
But after the conquest the situation underwent a change. People were
pouring in and embracing Islam. Anyhow, their Islam did not have the
same value as the Islam of those who embraced it before the conquest.
Therefore there is no doubt that the Conquest of Makkah was a great
victory of Islam. We also do not dispute this fact.

As we have said, some people hold that it is the day of the conquest to
which Islam has attached so much importance and said: "This day those
who disbelieve are in despair of ever harming your religion; so fear
them not and have fear of Me! This day have I perfected your religion
for you and completed My favour to you, and have chosen Islam for you as
a religion."

But as we have pointed out there is nothing in the text or in history to
prove that this verse refers to the Conquest of Makkah. Further, a part
of this verse does not support the contention of these people. The
words, 'I have perfected your religion for you and completed My favour
to you, show that by then everything about religion had been revealed
and nothing was left unsaid, but we know for certain many religious
instructions were revealed subsequent to the Conquest of Makkah. This
position does not tally with the words, I have completed My favour to
you. When somebody says that he has completed a building, he does not
refer to a building that is still incomplete. Many verses of the Qur'an,
including those of the Surah al-Ma'idah, which is a lengthy surah, and
contains a good number of rules of law, were revealed after the Conquest
of Makkah. How can this verse which is a part of the Surah al-Maidah
relate to the Conquest of Makkah which took place in the eight year of
the Hijra while this surah was revealed towards the end of the tenth
year. Even if we say that the verse under review alone was revealed on
the occasion of the Conquest of Makkah, the perfection of Divine favour
still does not tally with this event.

There is another difficulty in interpreting 'this day' by the day of the
Conquest of Makkah. The verse says: This day the unbelievers lost hope
of harming your religion. Now the question is whether it is a fact that
the disbelievers lost every hope of resisting Islam on the day of the
Conquest of

Makkah. It is true that the Conquest of Makkah was a victory of far
reaching effect, but is it also a fact that the disbelievers on that day
lost every hope that Islam would ever be vanquished? That does not seem
to be the case.

#### (iii) Recitation of Surah al-Baraat by Imam Ali

####

There is another day which is regarded very important, and so it was. It
is said that 'this day' possibly means the day on which the Surah
al-Bara'at was recited by Imam Ali at Mina in 9 A.H. The conquest of
Makkah was a military victory. It established Islam as a military force
and even as a moral power. But the Holy Prophet still lived under the
terms of the Peace Treaty which he had concluded with the infidels.
Under this treaty the disbelievers had the right of entering Makkah,
circumambulating Ka'bah and even of participating in the Hajj
ceremonies. The Muslims performed Hajj according to Islamic law and the
disbelievers performed it according to their own rites. In 9 A.H. Surah
Bara'at was revealed. At that time it was decided that Imam Ali should
go to Mina, and recite this Surah there, publicly proclaiming that
thenceforth the pagans had no right to take part in the Hajj ceremonies,
which were an exclusive privilege of the Muslims.

Generally it is said that the Holy Prophet first dispatched Abu Bakr at
the head of the Hajj caravan. He was still on his way when the verse
banning pilgrimage to Makkah by the pagans was revealed. There is a
difference of opinion among the commentators of the Quran as to whether
Abu Bakr took Surah Baraat with him or he went only as the Amir of Hajj.
In any case it is unanimously held by the Shi'ah ad the Sunnis and is
considered to be a point of excellence going in favour of Imam Ali, that
the Holy Prophet on his own personal camel sent him to Mina as his
special envoy. The Holy Prophet said to him: "You must go because I have
been Divinely instructed that this surah is to be recited by none except
you or someone related to you". Imam Ali proceeded and met Abu Bakr
while he was still on his way. The story goes that Abu Bakr was in a
tent when the Holy Prophet's special camel uttered a loud cry. Abu Bakr,
who was familiar with this cry, came out to find that Imam Ali had come.
He was set aback, and thought that there must be something very
important. He said to Imam Ali: "Is there any special news?" Imam Ali
said: "I have been detailed to recite Surah Bara'at to the people." Abu
Bakr said: "Has anything been revealed against me?" "No", said Imam Ali.
Here there is again some difference of opinion. The Sunnis say that Imam
Ali proceeded on his way and recited the surah according to his plan. In
the mean-time Abu Bakr continued his journey, though he had lost one of
his assignments. But the Shi'ah believe, and many of the Sunnis also as
mentioned in al-Mizan the commentary on the Qur'an that Abu Bakr
returned from there, called on the Holy Prophet and said: "Messenger of
Allah, has anything been revealed in this surah against me?" The Holy
Prophet said: "No".

The day on which Surah Bara'at was proclaimed, was an extraordinary day
for the Muslims, because on that day the infidels were debarred from
taking part in Hajj ceremonies and entering the holy precincts. It was
made clear to them that they could no longer be allowed to lead a
polytheistic life. Islam does not tolerate polytheism.

It accepts co-existence with Judaism, Christianity and Zoroastrianism,
but not with paganism. Some people say that perhaps 'this day' means the
day on which surah Bara'at was revealed. In reply to them it may be said
that this presumption is not in consonance with the words of the Quran
which says: I have completed My favour to you, for many religious
instructions were received subsequently. This day must be one of the
last days of the Holy Prophet's lifetime after which no fresh religious
instructions should have been received.[^12]

These explanations of 'this day' have no textual indication or
historical evidence to support them.

Shi'ah Explanation
------------------

In this connection there is another explanation about which the Shi'ah
claim that it is supported by the contents of the verses in question as
well as history. Therefore let us consider this explanation in two
parts. First let us see what history says and then what the Quranic
verses say.

### (i) [First Point]

###

If we consider this question from historical point of view, we can find
a great deal of evidence in favour of our explanation. Most of the books
written on this subject emphasize that history and traditions both agree
that the following Qur'anic verse was revealed at Ghadir al-Khum: This
day the unbelievers have lost hope of ever harming your religion; so
fear them not and have fear of Me! This day I have perfected your
religion for you and completed My favour to you; and have chosen for you
Islam as a religion. The research work, al-Ghadir has proved this point.
Apart from the books of traditions, the books of history also tell us
the same story. The History of Ya'qubi is one of the oldest and the most
reliable books on Islamic history, and is regarded as authentic both by
the Shi'ah and the Sunnis. It consists of two volumes both of which have
been translated into Persian by the late Dr. Ayati. The book is superb
and was written in the early third century, apparently during the period
between the end of Mamun's reign and the early period of that of
Mutawakkil. This book which is a book of history, not of tradition, is
one of those books which have mentioned the event of Ghadir al-Khum.
Many other books including those written by the Sunnis also have
mentioned this incident.

As the tradition says, when the Holy Prophet returning from his farewell
pilgrimage[^13] reached a place situated near Juhfah[^15] and known as
Ghadir al-Khum he asked the caravan to halt and announced that he wanted
to talk to the people on a subject. Then he ordered that a pulpit be
arranged for him.

Accordingly a raised platform of pack saddles etc. was prepared. The
Holy Prophet mounted it and talked in detail. He said: "Do I not have
more authority over you than yourselves?" All those present said: "Yes,
you have." Then the Holy Prophet said: "This Ali is the master of him
whose master I am." This was the occasion when this Qur'anic verse was
revealed: This day the unbelievers lost all hope of ever harming your
religion; so fear them not and have fear of Me! This day I have
perfected your religion for you and completed My favour to you.

If we want to discuss this question from historical point of view, we
should study those books which have mentioned this event, especially
those written by the Sunnis. Quotations from these books can be found in
the books like al-Ghadir, which was published in Mashhad a few years
back and is an excellent worth-reading summary of this question.

The argument of the Shi'ah is based on the historical background of this
verse. They say that they find that the phrase, 'this day' does not mean
today. Then what day does it mean? When a reference is made to the
occasion for the revelation of this verse, it is found that not one or
two but tens of continuous reports say that this verse was revealed at
Ghadir al-Khum on the day the Holy Prophet appointed Imam Ali as his
successor.

### (ii) Internal Evidence Existing In the Verse

###

In the verse itself there are internal indications which corroborate
what is confirmed by history. The verse in question says: This day
unbelievers lost all hope of ever harming your religion. Let us compare
this verse to a number of other verses which warned the Muslims and said
that the believers including the People of the Book and others were
always intriguing against them and loved to turn them away from their
religion: "Many of the people of the Book long to make you disbelievers
after your belief, through envy on their own account." (Surah
al-Baqarah, 2:109)

Thus we see that while several other verses of the Quran say that the
disbelievers long to destroy the religion of the Muslims, the verse
under discussion says that now they have lost all hope of harming it and
their hostile activities against the Muslims have come to an end. So
fear them not and have fear of Me. Allah says: Have fear of Me. What
does that mean? Is Allah an enemy of His own religion? No. This verse
stipulates the same basic principle regarding Allah's favour that has
been mentioned in so many other verses. One such verse says: "Allah does
not change the condition of a people until they change what is in their
hearts." (Surah ar-Ra'd, 13:11) Giving the reason for this another verse
says: "That is because Allah never withdrawn the grace He has bestowed
on any people until they first change that which is in their hearts."
(Surah al-Anfal, 8:53)

Allah says that He does not withdraw any favour bestowed by Him on a
people unless they themselves by their own doings want it to be
withdrawn. This is one of the basic principles mentioned in the Qur'an.

### Specific (Mohkamat) and Ambiguous (Mutashabihat) Verse

###

In connection with this verse it appears to be necessary to mention a
point which may be found useful on many occasions. As a tradition says,
some verses of the Qur'an explain some other verses. The Quran is a Book
which is manifest and manifesting. It itself says that its verses are of
two types: specific and ambiguous. It calls the specific verses the
mother verses, which is of course a queer expression: "Allah is He who
revealed the Book to you, some of its verses are specific and they are
the mother of the Book, and others ambiguous." (Surah Ale Imran, 3:7).

The ambiguous verses are those which can be interpreted in different
ways, while a specific verse can be interpreted only in one way. The
Qur'an calls the specific verses mother verses because with their help
the

ambiguous verses can be interpreted. In case we come across a verse of
the Qur'an which can be interpreted in several ways, we have no right to
fix its meaning. We should refer to other verses to find out how it can
best be expounded. An ambiguous (Mutashabih) verse does not mean a vague
or an unintelligible verse. It only means a verse that can be
interpreted in more than one ways resembling each other.

For example there are several verses in the Qur'an relating to Absolute
Divine Will which state that everything depends on the Will and Pleasure
of Allah. They make no exception.

One of such verses is the following verse which is ambiguous for this
very reason: "(Muhammad) Say: 0 Lord! Owner of sovereignty! You bestow
sovereignty on whomsoever you Will and withdraw sovereignty from
whomsoever You Will. You exalt whomsoever You Will and You abase
whomsoever You Will. In Your Hand is all that is good. No doubt You are
able to do everything." (Surah Ale Imran, 3:26).

This verse is ambiguous or mutashabih because it can be interpreted in
more than one ways. It says only that everything depends on the Will of
Allah. This is possible in two way: One way is to say that Allah's Will
is absolutely unconditional. Some people have interpreted this verse in
that way and have inferred from it the wrong conclusion that it is
possible that in the presence of all the conditions conducive to honour,
disgrace appears and similarly it is possible that all the conditions
conducive to humiliation are followed by honour and power. According to
them, success in this world and the Hereafter has no pre-requisite
conditions, for everything depends on the Will of Allah. As a result it
is possible that a people or an individual attains complete success in
his worldly affairs without any pre-requisite conditions or fails
utterly without any tangible reason. Similarly a people may be taken to
the peak of Paradise or to the lowest level of Hell for absolutely no
reason. Unfortunately some Muslims called Asharites have drawn this
conclusion from this verse. They say that it would not be something
impossible if the Holy Prophet goes to Hell or Abu Jahl goes to Heaven.
But this is a wrong interpretation of the verse, which only says that
everything depends on the Will of Allah, but is silent as to how this
Will on which success and failure, honour and disgrace depend, actually
operates. That is why it can be interpreted in several ways.

But when we refer to other verses of the Qur'an, they serve as its
mother verses and explain what this verse actually signifies. For
example one verse expressly says: That is because Allah never changes
the grace He has bestowed on any people until they first change that
which is in their hearts. Another verse says: Surely Allah changes not
the condition of a people until they change that which is in their
hearts. Each of these two verses says something which the other verse
does not say. The second verse says that Allah does not change the
condition of a people whether it is good or bad, unless they themselves
take action to change it. Otherwise Allah neither withdraws His favour
nor disfavour. Only people themselves change their condition. The first
verse is not concerned with the unhappy condition. It talks only of
Allah's grace. But it mentions an additional point. It says: That is
because Allah never changes... Allah is not such as to withdraw His
grace

from any people for no reason, because that would be against His wisdom,
His perfection and His Divinity. These are the mother verses in relation
to the verse under discussion. The verses relating to Allah's Will say
only that everything depends on His Will. Other verses explain how this
Will operates and what law it has. This point has been expressed in the
Qur'an at several places in the form of a firm principle. According to
it those who are grateful to Allah for His bounties, that is those who
put them to a proper use, will continue to enjoy them, but those who are
ungrateful and abuse His bounties, will be deprived of them.

So the verse, This day the unbelievers have lost all hope of ever
harming your religion; so fear them not, and have fear of Me, means that
the unbelievers do no longer pose any threat to the Muslim world. 'Have
fear of Me.' means: be afraid of yourselves, for if there is any danger
now, that lies in your being ungrateful to Allah and not taking full
advantage of His bounties. Should the Muslim not act properly, the law
is bound to come into force against them. Surely Allah does not change
the condition of a people until they change that which is in their
hearts. Henceforward no danger from outside threatens Muslim society,
but danger from inside does threaten it.

Question and Answer
-------------------

Question: We absolutely agree with you that Imamat is a supreme
leadership that covers this worldly as well as the next worldly affairs.
The arguments advanced by you show that it was the exclusive right of
Imam Ali to assume this leadership. Then why did he decline to do so
when people offered to take their allegiance to him after the
assassination of Uthman?

Answer: This question has been discussed in the book, Khilafat and
Wilayat which has been published lately. The answer to your question is
clear from what Imam Ali, the

Commander of the Faithful, himself said. When people came to him to
pledge their allegiance to him, he said: "Leave me alone and look for
somebody else, for we are looking forward to a many-sided situation." It
is a wonderful expression! What he

meant was that the situation was complicated, and it was necessary to
study it from various angels. He continued to say: "The atmosphere is
overcast and the route has changed beyond recognition." In the end he
said: "If I rule over you, I would follow the way I know and would not
act as you want."

What Imam Ali said shows that he fully realized that since the time of
the Holy Prophet the situation had deteriorated a great deal and
undergone a complete change. Imam Ali made his position quite clear. He
wanted the people to give him an undertaking that they would follow him
because it was that what the pledging of their allegiance meant. He did
not say that his Khilafat would be void if they would not pledge their
allegiance to him. He wanted them to make a sincere promise that they
would give him an unflinching support and follow his dictates.

All Shi'ah and Sunni historians agree that Umar appointed a six-member
council for the selection of his successor. Imam Ali himself was one of
its members. Three members of this council withdrew in favour of three
others. Zubayr withdrew in favour of Imam Ali; Talhah in favour of
Uthman and

Sa'd ibn Waqqas in favour of Abdur Rahman ibn 'Awf. Out of the three
remaining persons Abdur Rahman said that he was not a candidate. Now two
persons remained. The choice was with Abdur Rahman. Whomsoever he
selected, he would become the Caliph. First he came to Imam Ali and
said: "I am ready to pledge my allegiance to you provided you give me a
word that you would act according to Allah's Book, His Prophet's Sunnah
and the policy pursued by Abu Bakr and Umar." Imam Ali said: "I am
willing to accept the condition that I would follow Allah's Book and His
Prophet's Sunnah (path), but leave aside the policy of Abu Bakr and
Umar." Then Abdur Rahman went to Uthman and said the same thing to him.
Uthman willingly agreed to act according to Allah's Book, His Prophet's
Sunnah and the policy followed by Abu Bakr and Umar. Although Uthman
readily promised to follow the policy of Abu Bakr and Umar, but as
Muhammad Taqi Shari'ati has pointed out, he actually did not act
accordingly. If we make a comparison, we will find that Imam Ali behaved
exactly like the Holy Prophet. His conduct was closer to that of the
Shaykhayn (Abu Bakr and Umar) also, as far as they followed the Holy
Prophet's style. Imam Ali did not accept the condition that he would act
as the Shaykhayn acted, because to do so would have meant the
endorsement of their deviations also, and as such he could not oppose
those deviations any more. For example, disparity and discrimination
between the Muhajirs (immigrants) and the Ansar (helpers) was introduced
during Umar's time. Imam Ali was severely against this policy. Has he
said that he would follow the policy pursued by Abu Bakr and Umar, he
would have been compelled to affirm the actions taken during Umar's
time. Imam Ali did not want to tell a lie nor could he go back on his
word. That was the reason why he said that he did not want to become the
Caliph.

We know that Abu Bakr and Umar had some deviations. Still after Umar's
death Imam Ali was not willing to make a promise that he would act as
Abu Bakr and Umar did. As such it was but natural that after Uthman's
death when the condition had immensely deteriorated, and in his own
words the future was many-sided, Imam Ali told those who wanted him to
act as they desired, that if he took over the government, he would do
what he himself deemed correct not what they wanted.

These words of Imam Ali do not mean that he rejected the offer of
government. He only explained his position.

Question: We find that the Qur'an has laid great stress on the question
of unity. How did it happen that in spite of its importance the question
of Imam Ali's Imamat was not expressly mentioned in the Quran, nor did
the Holy Prophet refer to this subject on as many occasions as he should
normally have?

Answer: Here two points have been raised. The first point is: Why has
this question not been expressly mentioned in the Qur'an? The other
point is whether the Holy Prophet has or has not referred to this
subject on several occasions and whether the Holy Qur'an has or has not
mentioned this subject at several places. As far as the second point is
concerned. We say that it is a historical question. Even many of the
Sunnis admit that the Holy Prophet referred to it on several occasions,
not only at Ghadir al-Khum, but

other places also. The details are in the books on the question of
Imamat. On the occasion of Tabuk addressing Imam Ali, he said: "You are
to me what Harun was to Musa, although there will be no prophet after
me." On the occasion of the Battle of Khayber he affirmed Imam Ali's
position by saying: "I will give the flag tomorrow to a man who loves
Allah and His Prophet and whom Allah and His Prophet love." Even during
the early period of Islam addressing the Quraysh he said: "Whosoever of
you pledges his allegiance to me first, he will be my legatee and Vazir
(according to a report he said: will be my legatee, Vazir and caliph)."
Such a person was Imam Ali only.

The same case is with the Qur'an. This question has been mentioned not
only at one or two but at several places. The only question is why the
Qur'an has not mentioned Imam Ali by name. Incidentally this question
has been dealt with in the book, Khilafat and Wilayat also. As we
believe that there has been no alteration in the Qur'an and nothing has
been added to it or subtracted from it, we are sure that Imam Ali's name
has not been mentioned any where in it.

Two reasons of it have been given. One of them, which has been fully
explained in Muhammad Taqi Shari'ati's book is that the Qur'an has its
own style. It always deals with such subjects in the form of a
principle, and not as an individual case. This is in itself a merit of
the Qur'an. When the verse, Today I have completed your religion for
you, was revealed, the unbelievers were disappointed because they were
always saying that so long as that man (Prophet) was alive, nothing
could be done, but as soon as he died everything would be finished. But
their last hope was foiled when they saw that the Holy Prophet had taken
a step to ensure the continued existence of his community and had
appointed a successor of him.

Another point which the Sunni writers also have mentioned is that during
the last days of his life the Holy Prophet was worried about the future
of his followers and had that fear which has been expressed in the
Qur'an by the words, 'And have fear of Me'. According to a report which
the Sunnis have also related, Abu Muzayhabah, a slave of 'Ayisha, says:
"During the last days of the Holy Prophet's life once I saw him coming
out of his room and going towards the Baqi graveyard at midnight. I said
to myself that I would not leave him alone. So I followed him. From a
long distance I saw him praying for the forgiveness of Allah for those
who were buried in the Baqi'. I heard him saying what meant: "You are
fortunate to have gone away and achieved salvation. Bad times are
imminent like pieces of dark night." This report shows that the Holy
Prophet visualized the impending ugly events, the dispute about Khilafat
being one of them no doubt.

In reply to the question why the Qur'an has not mentioned Imam Ali's
name, two explanations have been given: Firstly it is the special style
of the Qur'an to describe various problems in the form of principles;
and secondly the Holy Prophet and Almighty Allah did not like to mention
his name expressly because they knew that in any case the question of
Khilafat was going to be distorted and misinterpreted out of
selfishness. As Prophetic sayings have been misinterpreted, so a
Qur'anic verse expressly naming Imam Ali also would have been
misinterpreted. The Holy Prophet said:

"This Ali is the master of him whose master I am." Can there be any
thing more express than this?

Anyhow there is a lot of difference between violating an express saying
of the Holy Prophet and violating a verse naming Imam Ali on the day
very next to the demise of the Prophet. That is why I have quoted the
following event in my preface to the book, Khilafat and Wilayat:

A Jew with a view to upbraid the Muslims for the ugly events of the
early period of Islam once during his caliphate said to Imam Ali: "As
soon as you buried your Prophet you began to quarrel about him." The
Imam gave a wonderful reply. He said: "We were not at variance with him.
We disagreed only about the instructions we received from him. But your
feet were still wet with sea-water, when you said to your Prophet:
"Appoint for us a deity similar to the deities our opponents have."
Thereupon your Prophet said: "Surely you are an ignorant people." So
there is much difference between what happened to the Muslims, and what
happened to the Jews. In other words, the Muslims did not differ about
the Prophet himself. They differed about the meaning and significance of
his instructions only. Hence what they did could be explained away by
saying that they misunderstood what the Holy Prophet had said. (Though
actually that was not the case).

Anyhow, there is a great deal of difference between misunderstanding or
misinterpreting a saying of the Prophet and between ignoring or altering
an express verse of the Qur'an.

Question: The above question may be expressed in this way. It is true
that the Qur'an must lay down principles only. But the principle of
succession and government in Islam is certainly of great importance. A
name may not be mentioned by the Qur'an. But the procedure must have
been laid down in very clear terms. For example it could be revealed to
the Holy Prophet that he should designate his successor, and that
successor also should designate his successor, and so on till the end.
Similarly it should also have been laid down clearly whether the
question of succession is to be decided by designation or election. In
short, the question of succession should not have been left vague,
because it is not such a simple question for Islam which is a religion
that has come to rule. The problem is not whether the name of Imam Ali
should have been mentioned or not. But in view of the difference of
opinion in regard to the method of succession and the form of government
it was necessary that a clear procedure was laid down. At least it could
be revealed to the Holy Prophet that it was his duty to designate his
successor. Even in that case the people might not have agreed as to who
was the successor. But it would have been clear that the Holy Prophet
himself had appointed his successor and that there was no question of
any sort of election by the Muslims. Similarly there was another
question, whether the Holy Prophet's direct successor should nominate
his successor or the next Imam, or should leave the question to the
choice of the people. As far as I know this problem also has been left
vague in the Quran. In any case no procedure has been expressly laid
down.

The second point is that some time back I read a book relating to the
system of government in Islam. In that book many sayings of Imam Ali and

others were quoted, all to the effect that the question of Khilafat
depended upon the Muslims and that it was up to them to express their
opinion about it. For example Imam Ali said on various occasions: "A
Caliph was to be appointed by the Muslims and selected by the people
concerned." He also said that the question of Khilafat was not to be
decided by him, and it was up to the Muslims to hold consultation and
express their opinion about it. In this book many arguments have been
collected in support of the view that the questions of government was an
elective question and no individual was authorized to designate his
successor. What is your opinion in this regard?

The third point is: If we presume that the twelve Imams have succeeded
one another, what is the permanent procedure now for the appointment of
the head of Muslim society? Does there a Divine ordinance exist in this
respect? Will the future appointments be based on the principle of
election or some other principle? Was it stipulated that the twelve
infallible Imams would be appointed by a Divine ordinance and then, for
example, during the occultation of the twelfth Imam, election would be
held. Has it been expressly laid down anywhere? Is it our own inference
that a qualified mujtahid fulfilling all the necessary conditions should
be the head of the government during the occultation of the twelfth
Imam? In fact the Qur'an should have given a constitutional law to the
Muslims directing them that the first twelve Imams following the Holy
Prophet would be appointed by a Divine ordinance and then the Muslims
would be free to elect their ruler, or it should have been expressly
said that then the jurist of the Muslims would be their ruler. But,
anyhow the issue remains unsolved since the death of the eleventh Imam,
and has caused dissension and disputes. How is this problem to be
resolved from our point of view?

Answer: We have already dealt with some of these points, but you have
again turned the question of Imamat into a question of the government
only. As we have already pointed out the question of Imamat is different
from that of government and the question of government in the presence
of an Imam is exactly like that in the presence of the Prophet. In other
words both the cases involve a situation governed by a special law. Just
as the question as to who should be the head of the State does not arise
during the lifetime of the Prophet, similarly in the presence of an Imam
of those characteristics in which the Shi'ah believe, this question is
only secondary and hypothetical.

The questions of the form of government can be considered only with
reference to the times when no Imam is present, for we do not have any
time when no Imam is in existence; but there can be a time when no Imam
is present, and that is why we do not deny the significance of the
Qur'anic verse saying that the affairs of the Muslims are settled by
consultation. But obviously only those affairs are to be settled by
consultation which are not covered by any Divine law or command, not
those in respect of which some Qur'anic ordinance, or instruction
exists.

As for the points mentioned in the book, Government in Islam, I have not
studied this book thoroughly. Anyhow, this book has unfortunately been
unilateral to a great extent. It has produced only a certain set of
arguments and totally missed the arguments going contrary to them. This
is a big

defect, for one should give all the arguments and then should see which
of them are stronger and more reliable.

Another defect of this book is that many quotations in it have been
taken out of their context. I have not made a thorough study of the
book, but those who have made, say that the heads and tails of many
sentences reproduced in this book, have been cut off, with a result that
their meanings have been distorted. If these missing parts were added to
these sentences, they would have quite a different significance.
Furthermore, no Imam is present, regarding which there is no dispute.


