Translator's Word
=================

This is my humble translation for the book of Abdul-Sahib Al-'ameli. Of
course, and because of the high flexibility of Arabic and it's numerous
words and divisions, my translation won't exactly be in the same line of
the book, but I tried my best to give the overall meaning as much as and
as clearer as possible.

This book is considered a valuable item in any Shiite library, and I
would like to notice out that there is another book and considered older
than this one which was written by a scholar and a holy faithful man
called "Al-Sayed Al-Jaza'iri" but I really did not get to know this book
very well, but in this translation of the book of Abdul-Sahib you will
find some reference for the book of Al-Sayed Al-Jazairi.

I faced many troubles analysing and trying to understand the complex
philosophical terms in order to proceed with my translation but I
couldn't be lucky all the time, so whenever I couldn't continue
translating I've put a notice of that between square brackets [..].

Maybe it is important to show some of the characteristics of the creed
of Shiite in order to understand some parts of the book, of course if
you are an Arabic learner and could read, then reading this book by its
Arabic contents would be far more beneficial to you to understand what
is going on.

For Shiite people, they believe that every prophet or a messenger from
God, since the time of Adam until the last messenger which is Muhammad,
every one of them got a viceroy or a saint that would take care of
things after the death of the prophet or the messenger himself.

For example, there is Asaph the son of Berechiah who was a viceroy for
king Solomon, and there is Joshua the viceroy of Moses and lot others,
and so do the prophet Muhammad got a viceroy, which is his cousin and
the husband of his daughter, 'Ali ben Abi Talib, and after 'Ali ben Abi
Talib comes his children and his descendants.

For sunnite muslims, they do not believe in such thing, but believe
that the prophet ordered things to be organized in a committee after his
death, and such thing is denied by Shiite believers. It is important to
note out that Shiite and Sunnite are creeds and not bound to some
borders and to some countries as some others think.

Lot of people think that a Shiite would mean Iranian person which is
something not true at all, but people got this impression because
supposedly that the modern islamic government in Iran is a Shiite
government, although it has different aspects than other sub-Shiite
creeds, and the speech about this will take long time and maybe it needs
a book for its own sake.


**Introduction**

In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful And prays on the most
righteous of His creation, Muhammad and his Household and his mates the
honourable and guided (It is) About what concerns a bunch of prophets,
and viceroys, in some of their own matters.

(Know) that our believe in prophets, and their viceroys and the Angels
(PUT), they are infallible and purified from any impurities and they
don't guilt either a big one or a small one, and never refuse the
commandments of God and do whatever they are commanded with, and whoever
refuse the idea of their infallibility in any situation then he did miss
them.

And our believe in them is that they are described with completeness of
wisdom and honour and patience and bravery and so on and never described
with less aspects in any of their matters.

Then, the prophets and viceroys and the purified Imams and the like
before them (PUT), it is doubtless that their times are busy with God
and their hearts are full of Him and their minds are connected to the
heavens world and always watching for God, for he said (The prophet
PUH): worship God as you see Him, so if you don't see Him, He sees you.
So, they are always watching, attending toward Him, the Exalted, with
their total.

Whatever is apparent in their prays (psalms) and their speeches and
their books and the other of their sayings about falling in sin it is
just to behave humbly for God and it includes the maximum thankfulness
for Him, the Exalted. It is mentioned about our prophet (PUH) that he
used to exhaust himself in worshipping, so one of his wives asked him:
didn't God forgive you for whatever was made and whatever will be from
your sins?

So he said to her: Yes, but shouldn't I be a thankful slave? Until The
Holy called him by His call "Ta. Ha. We have not revealed unto thee
(Muhammad) this Qur'an that thou shouldst be distressed"(Ta Ha:1-2)
meaning not to exhaust yourself and spend the maximum of your power in
worshipping.

In it also there is a teaching for people and directing them towards
Him, the Exalted, and to take people away from pride and preventing the
worshipping and praying, and to be humble for Him, the Exalted. How
shall we consider whatever comes from them (the prophets PUT) from deeds
and sayings what is apparent to be a sin that is indeed a sin towards
God, the Exalted? God forbid! And they are more honourable and faithful
than that level to be blamed for a sin.

Aren't they the commanders by God over the creatures and His loyals for
His laws and His religion and the callers to obey Him, and God put them
for this purpose, so they are the tongue of God that speaks to His
slaves and Its translator to His creation. So, how come they do a sin
and how come they become like normal people and not destinctive from
them,

and they are the ones who take care of His commandments to His
creation, and is it rightful by logic for them to be loyals for God over
His creation and someone would say to them "Enjoin ye righteousness upon
mankind while ye yourselves forget"(Al-Baqarah: 44) Are they mentioned
with sin?

It is the reason to let people go away from them. Doesn't the sinner
get thrown by stones if he tried to forbid people of the sins he did
himself, or gets his head in the sand and told to him: discipline
yourself and your people before you try to discipline others? So, how
come they can be loyals to God and they are polluted with sins and
people should have gone away from them and deny their deeds?

Don't people understand the claim of sins to the saints of God
(apostles of God, faithful people), don't they stop? Was God unable to
Make infallible people and destinctive from others to take care of His
laws? No, and God forbid! But He did not Send any messenger and Made a
viceroy after him except he was purified and infallible and without any
sins and mistakes or impurity.

So, how do we consider anything done by them as a guilt and it is a sin
and that their humilating for themselves for God and sanctifying Him is
because that they are like all creatures and their Lord did not Make
them special or Care much about them. Look with your heart to some of
the slaves in this life whenever they refuse the commands of their
masters and their masters heard about that, won't they be blamed by
people and deserved for punishment as they think.

So what do you think of the Lord of lords and the King of kings that
nothing can be hidden from Him from his kingdom on earth or in heavens,
and for this he pointed out (PUH) [maybe 'Ali ben Abi Talib is meant
here] : the good deeds of the faithful are the sins of the close
relative (?).

Some said: it might be said that doing something undesirable and
leaving the desirable deed and do some of the allowed things might look
like in the eyes of the infallible persons like prophets and saints
(viceroys) that they are sins so they sanctify God (asking for
forgiveness) and if they did it again they become more sad for it and
have great sadness in their holy souls.

Look with the eye of your heart to the psalms (prays) of the Prince of
Believers (PUH) and the psalms (prays) of Al-Imam Al-Sajjad Zain
Al-'abideen[i.e. 'Ali ben Al-Husain ben 'Ali ben Abi Talib PUH] in
Al-Saheefah Al-Sajjadiyah [it is a name of a book that contains prays
and psalms of the Imam]

and his psalm that mentioned by Abi Hamzah Alomaly and to his boredom
in his prays and the hard sadness over him and the great sorrow of him
for what he did beside his Lord and others than him from his fathers and
children and how great is their humilation and their perishableness in
the Self of God for they had the deep view into His might and His power
and pride and they know very well how great He is and how gracious He
is. So, for this, most of their deeds in their worshipping and prayers
were for someone that was sure of the torture and punishment. As if he
commited every crime and done the great sins.

From this concept was the mistake of our father Adam (PUH) where the
fobid of eating from the tree inside paradise was only for honourable
purposes and not a strict forbid as for a sin. As it is mentioned and
approved in books made for this subject (the infallibility of prophets)
by 'Alam Al-Huda Al-Sayid Al-Mortadha and others, check out.

And God forbid that prophets and the messengers and the saints
(viceroys) and the Arch-Angels may commit any sin and they are the ones
that were assigned by God to take care of His religion and the callers
and the ones that take care of His slaves and His rulers over His
creations.

Then if we did accept that they do sins and guilt so then we don't mind
them to do the great sins for which punishments must be applied without
any difference.

So who will do the punishment of them? Only the one that takes care of
religion would do the punishment, so would he do it over himself? Or
someone else would do it over him by an order from him? (Answer me may
God have mercy upon you, isn't that one who claims this shy of God for
this?).

Or maybe the one who claims this have some sickness in his soul to let
other wear this dress [meaning infallibility] and let others take their
places instead (places of prophets), Those who do wrong will come to
know by what a (great) reverse they will be overturned! And your Lord is
not in the least unjust for the slaves.

Then do not forget that all the prophets and saints (viceroys) had been
oppressed and hurt and no one answered their calls except few from their
nations (Few of My bondmen are thankful) (Saba': 13)

Then what does it mean God's saying "Lo! We verily do help Our
messengers, and those who believe, in the life of the world and on the
day when the witnesses arise"(Al-Mu'min, Ghafir: 51)? Al-Imam Al-Sadiq
(PUH) was asked about the meaning of this holy phrase and he answered:
this is,

and I swear by God, in the day of coming back, didn't you know that lot
of the prophets of God did not get a victory in life and the viceroys
after them got killed and never helped in life, but they will gain
victory in the day of coming back before the doomsday. And the witnesses
are the Imams (PUT).

The tidings coming from the Holy Household for this subject are a lot
and in brief it points out that the return of the prophets to the life
after death and before the doomsday is something essential and no way
out of it to get revenge from their enemies that wronged them and hurt
them and fought them and didn't believe in them and set wars against
them and took their rights from them:

but when that is going to happen? It would be at the day when the
witnesses arise and they are the purified Imams from the Household of
Muhammad (PUH) and that is when the "awaited" appears,

the ruler of the current time that we are in and he is the Imam that
his name is the same as the messenger of God (PUH) and his surname is
the same as well and he is the son of Al-Hasan ben 'Ali ben Muhammad ben
'Ali ben Musa ben Ja'far ben Muhammad ben 'Ali ben Al-Husain ben 'Ali
ben Abi Talib (PUT) (the one born in year 256 Hejira) in Samarra' in
Iraq.


Al-Sayid Al-Jaza'iri said in his tales:

The meaning of the messengers in the holy phrase "Lo! We verily do help
Our messengers" is the prophets. The apparent from this Holy Speech and
whatever comes in its meaning is a sign that all the prophets will come
back to life in the small doomsday and God will give them victory by
power and Angels over their enemies and the enemies of the Household of
Muhammad (PUH),

and God will give life again to their nations that hurt them and the
bad ones from Umayyads [Bani Umayya or the Children of Umayya, who had a
kingdom in Syria and the surroundings, they were usually marked with
aggressive nature and even killed the grandson of the prophet, but still
some people deny this although it is a well known fact in history!] and
whoever accepted their deeds from their children and others.

Also God will give life to whoever had a pure faith from the nations to
let them win the rewards of victory and fights and live in the kingdom
of Muhammad's Household (PUH). [here comes a holy phrase but I couldn't
locate it in Quran, maybe the writer didn't memorize it so well!]

Then all the prophets since Adam (PUH) until their end and the master
of messengers Muhammad the Chosen (PUH), and they count for one hundred
thousands and twenty four thousands prophets and one hundred and twenty
four thousands viceroys, for every prophet has a viceroy and their
masters are five upon which life went around and they are the owners of
laws and whoever came with repeated laws they were copied from the
previous and they are Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Muhammad and they
are the "prophets of constancy", may peace be upon them all.

This is what was pointed out by tidings and what was said by our
scholars and as said by Al-Sayed Al-Jaza'iri and whatever points the
opposite of that it would be carried by self trial for interpretation.
About the messengers, as mentioned by the prophet (PUH) and the sure
paths that they were (three hundreds and thirteen) messengers ... etc
and it is probable also that the books are one hundred and four books,
and twenty one books were revealed on Adam (PUH).

It is mentioned also that it was revealed on Seth the gift of God
(PUH), by God, fifty books and on Enoch (PUH) thirty books, and on
Abraham twenty books, and Revealed (God) Torah, Bible, Psalms and Quran
and this speech been repeated many times so no doubt about its contents.
And they were called the "ones of constancy", and they are the five
masters but because they were sent to the east and west and to people
and Djinns and this meaning is mentioned in lot of tidings and mentioned
by lot of Muslims scholars, by Ibn 'Abbas and Qotadah.

And they say that they were called "ones of constancy" because they
were the first to believe in God in the world of atoms and believed in
every prophet that would come before or after them and decided to have
patience inspite of calling them liars and being hurt. And said also
that they were called like that because they were ones of laws and
regulations so that every prophet that came after Noah (PUH) was on his
(Noah's) laws and path and a follower to his books until the time of
Abraham (PUH) and then until the time of Moses the son of Amram (PUH)
then until the time of Jesus the son of Mary (PUH) and then until the
time of Muhammad (PUH).

Then the difference between the messenger and the prophet is that the
messenger is the one that gets inspiration from God the Exalted by a
message or a book or allowances and non-allowances and so on, and so he
is a messenger from God to the ones who are sent to from His slaves and
creation. The messenger could be non-human but it may be an Angel like
Gabriel and Azrael and others (PUT). Or it may be a bird like the hoopoe
of Solomon the son of David (PUH) and so on either from God or from the
creature as it appears.

And the prophet is the one that God inspires and Guides him and
whatever God wants from him flows in his heart without any doubt or
imagination and he listens to the sound of Angels in his dreams but he
can't see them, and the messenger also can dream about Angels and
listens to them and also see them as we see each other.

But the viceroy that is appointed from God to take care of matters
after the messenger can hear the Angels but can't see them. It is
mentioned in Al-Saheeh [seems a book name] from Al-Ahwal said: I heard
Zorarah ben A'yon asking Aba Ja'far Al-Baqir (PUH) so he said to him:
tell me about the messenger and the prophet and the speaker.

So he said in his answer: the messenger is the one that Gabriel (PUH)
come to him so he can talk to him and see, and the prophet is the one
that see in his dreams as it was for Abraham (PUH) and as the prophet of
God (Muhammad PUH) did see the reasons of prophecy before getting
inspired until Gabriel (PUH) did come to him from God with the message
and and when Muhammad (PUH) got the prophecy and the message from God,
Gabriel (PUH) used to come to him and talk to him about it, and the
speaker is the one that speaks and listens but do not see in his dreams
nor in his awakeness.

What is understood from the trusted speeches that one person can have
the prophecy and the message and the imamship [imam = viceroy] like our
prophet Muhammad (PUH) and Abraham (PUH) and others than them, and
Abraham was a prophet and not a viceroy until God said to him "Lo! I
have appointed thee a leader for mankind.

(Abraham) said: And of my offspring (will there be leaders) ? He said:
My covenant includeth not wrong-doers" (Al-Baqarah: 124) and it is that
who ever is wrong and worshipping idols will not get the covenant of God
so won't be a leader (imam) taking care of matters and a viceroy for the
messenger for his nation and whoever the messenger was sent to, and so
he won't be appointed by God for this purpose to save the religion and
the laws after the messenger is lost,

so he won't be good for imamship (caliphate) after him (the messenger)
and doing the things after him except these who are purified from a pure
descendants. Because imamship is the general leadership over all the
creations from human beings and Djinns and it is not to be except from
God, the Exalted, and by His commandments,

and He supported the imam with miracles and virtues and he must be the
most intellegent among people and the most brave and the most faithful
one and the most eloquent the knows the most about everything and about
everything that the creation needs from living purposes and have the
knowledge of every tongue and language and can speak it better than its
natives even. There are other stuff concerning the imamship that the
human brain can't take nor bear but only the special of them, so
imamship is better than prophecy and more honourable and higher with no
doubt.

Then our book that is between your hands, is to obtain some of the
conditions of prophets and messengers that were mentioned in Quran by
names or by some of their characteristics, and Quran may point to
someone by his character only and the Muhammedan laws (tales) mention
him by name and person. We may mention a lot of them that Quran did not
mention but the tales come to mention them where Quran did not mention
of prophets except few of them that do not exceed forty almost.

Then the dependance in obtaining their conditions was on the Muhammedan
tales that were reached by the trusted persons who interpreted it and by
the tidings from the Household of Muhammad (PUT) that were taken from
the trusted books and persons, with a notification of what was taken
from the Torah and the Bible.

Lot of people wrote about this subject but it is a great sorrow that I
did not see any of such writings that would satisfy, but it was the
opposite. Lot of them mixed things together and lost the truth and
deformed the beauty of such thing and so made others be away from
catching some of its seas. And no one of its subjects' matters would be
without a collection of the thin and the fat and edited with weird stuff
and picked from it several straws or written with ill hand, so it looks
with an ill eye and ill heart inclined away from the path of truth.

So there were no subject that keeps up its own matters or collects its
own requirements. But this one between your hands (and thanks be to God,
for Him be the pretty praises) we were lucky to get it organized and
check all of its contents to its certain limits except few which, for
necessity, had to be planted other than its position, and God is the
Guider to the path of truth.


**Introduction of The Second Edition**

I did not expect when I started to write my book (The prophet, their
lifes and tales) that it would be so famous and hands will try to get it
from the press before it becomes available in the markets, although I
did not come up with a miracle.

But all what I was able to do is to show a complete summary for the
lives of some of the prophets and their tales which was written with lot
of mistakes sometimes and fabricated in other times, so my style was
easy and simplified to be fit for all levels, and that had the good
effects over the readers and this is what I thanked God for,

and after a while all the copies were sold out from markets although it
was printed in the offset without a previous permission and we had a
tale with them, and inspite all of that we got lot of requests to
re-print it with some fixes and corrections, so we answered the call of
"Al-Tawjeeh Al-Islami" press, for they publish the islamic book away
from the benefits. May God help these who run it.

Then I ordered our son, the scholar, Mr. Muhammad 'Ali Al-Hasani to
notice out some chapters and check and correct whatever mistakes did
occur by coincedence in the first edition to let out this new edition in
a satisfactory and proper way compared to the researches of this book,
and that it gets the satisfaction from the readers and the Prevention is
for God's only.

I won't exaggerate when I say that when I started writing I've feared
the situation, because the search is in the lives of prophets died
thousands of years ago, and in their lives that was full of action and
humanity and dignity and nobility, and to mention the mysteries of these
long times of their movements and their lives and spreading out the
religion that was assigned to them by God,

and for which God did send them and made them prophets and messengers,
but this fear did fade away when I started and began although it did
take lot of my time in looking at the numerous resources and
investigating that needs a time not be considered easy and checking in
some stories and tales that opposes each other sometimes in the life of
each prophet,

not as the books I made before and after this book whatever was printed
of them and whatever still written, until God helped me with success so
it came out with this relatively good picture to the existence, and
thanks to God firstly and lastly, asking Him to Accept it from me with a
good acceptance and Give me from His grace, and Make the believers that
avoid the stumbles benefit from it, and God is the Helper.


The Author


