About Some Conditions of the Father of Human Beings
===================================================

**"Adam" (PUH) and The Beginning of This Creation**

Said God in his Holy Book: And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo!
I am about to place a viceroy in the earth, they said: Wilt thou place
therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood, while we, we
hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee ? He said: Surely I know that which ye
know not.

Since "Viceroy" by language and tradition points out to what takes the
place of what was before in time, then there must have been another
Responsible agent before him (Adam), and that is pointed out by the
opposition of the Angels, and this opposition is not done except by them
for they bear the knowledge of the ex-mischiefers because they said
"Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed
blood, while we,

we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee?" and it was pointed out by news,
tidings and traces that the existence of pre-Adam creatures did take
place and they are the Djinns and others and earth was full of them.

And also pointed out of the existence of lions, beasts and all of the
other animals, and also the existence of rulers and vicegerents for God,
command by His commandment and prohibit by His prohibition, so they were
ordering for Goodness and prohibiting the Mischiefts, but the Djinn got
wicked and rebelled, and they refused the commandments of God and
changed lot of His orders and laws.

From 'Ali ben Ibrahim from Albaqir (PUH) from the Prince of Believers,
'Ali ben Abi Talib (PUH) that he said: When God wanted to create a
creation by His hand and that was after Djinn and Nesnas spent seven
thousands years on earth, He removed the layers of heavens and Said to
the Angels: Look to the inhabitants of earth from my creation of Djinn
and Nesnas,

and when they saw what was done by them (Djinn and Nesnas) of mischiefs
and evils, that grew hard upon them (Angels), and said: our Lord you are
the Almighty, and this is Your weak worthless creation, live by Your
grace and refuse to take your orders and You don't take a revenge of
them? And when He heard that from the Angels He said "Lo! I am about to
place a viceroy in the earth" and he will be a ruler on earth.

The Angels said: Are You going to place someone that will make
mischiefs and evils as the Djinn did? May you make the viceroy one of
us, and we don't refuse Your commandments and "we hymn Thy praise and
sanctify Thee", so the God said: I know what you know not, I want to
make a creation by my Hand and make out of his descendants prophets and
faithful slaves of mine and guiders.

I will make them rulers on my creations in my earth and purify my earth
from the Nesnas and move the rebellious Djinns those who refused my
commandments away from my creation and make them live in the air and
shattered across the lands and make a veil between Djinns and my
creation. Angels then said: Our Lord You command and prohibit, praise to
You, no other god than You, and You have the knowledge of everything.

Then they got farthest (Angels) from the Holy Throne a distant of five
hundreds years of travelling. Until the Imam ('Ali ben Abi Talib PUH)
said in a long speech: then God held the clay of Adam (PUH) and worked
on it the four natures of air, mucus, bitterness, and blood.

And connected with the air the love of women, length of hope and
caution. And connected with the mucus the love of food, drinks,
goodness, gentleness and easiness. And connected with bitterness the
anger, stupidity, evil, pride, and haste. And connected with the blood
the love of women, pleasure, and doing sins.

And the summary of some of the tidings is that God created Angels from
light, and created Djinn from fire, and created Adam from clay, then He
ran the light, the fire, the air and water, so with light he saw and
understood and by fire he ate and drank, and if it wasn't the fire in
the stomache (the heat of the stomache) food won't be cooked (digested),
and if it wasn't the air in the body of people to flame the fire, fire
wouldn't be existed, and if it wasn't the water existence to cool it
down and extinguish it, the stomache would have been burnt and the body
would be burnt in return.

And it has been said that it was meant by the black wind of
stomache -or soul- that it might be the stomache's movements with
breathing that leads to the foundation of cells with the heat of the
core (?)

And the most probable that Adam (PUH) was created from all types of
clays and if he was created with one type only people wouldn't know each
other and all would be with one shape, but instead he was created from
the easiness of the earth and its sadness, bitterness, sweetness, and
saltness, and from all its shapes and colors, from its whiteness,
redness, yellowness, blackness and (blondeness)..etc and that's why you
see human beings differ in their colors and types.

From the Prince of Muslim (PUH) that God sent Gabriel and ordered him
to bring from the skin of earth (Arabic: Adeem) four clays: white, red,
yellowish and black and that would be from its (earth) easiness and
sadness. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to bring four types of waters:
sweet, saline, bitter, and stinking. Then He ordered him (Gabriel) to
pour all the waters in the clay so He made the sweet in his throat, the
saline in his eyes, the bitter in his ears and the stinking in his
nose.

And in "Tawheed Al-Mofadhal ben Omar" (??) from Al-Sadiq (PUH): The
sweet water was placed in the throat to make him (Adam or the human)
able to eat and taste the food, and the saline water was placed in the
eyes to protect the flesh of the eyes since the flesh will remain when
salt or saline water is placed on it.

And for the bitter water in the ears it is to protect the brain from
the attacks of insects and organisms since they die when they reach the
bitter water in the ear. Maybe they can get pass over the bitter water
and reach the brain for their power and the small quantity of bitter
water in the ears and that might be because of the weak body for it
might be a sick man, old man, or a child.

And they brought many cases, tidings and witnesses for the truthfulness
of such analysis and some of those cases were during the time of Plato
and other perfect doctors that found an animal (organism) that grew up
in the brain and didn't find any other way than the ears to let it reach
there.


**Subjects from different sources with agreement in contents**

Adam was named as Adam because he was created from the skin of the
earth (Arabic: Adeem) and from Al-Sadooq: that the fourth ground (or
earth) was called Adeem and from it Adam was created and that's why he
was called Adam, and the mother of human beings Eve (Arabic: Hawa') was
called like this because she was made from the living (Arabic: living =
Hay) and that is Adam (PUH).

And from Al-Sadiq (PUH): that God created Adam from clay and created
Eve from Adam, and so the work of men is on land (earth, ground) and the
work of women is in men. It was told that when Adam was created and God
placed the soul in his body He made him stand between His hands then
Adam sneezed and praised the God by saying: Praise be to the God.

then God said: O Adam, you praised me, and I swear by my Highness, if
it was but to make two slaves at the end of time, I wouldn't have
created you. Then Adam said: O Lord, by their endearment and their
values to You, what are their names? So God said: O Adam, look to the
Throne. So Adam took a look and found two lines made of light. The first
line was: No God but Allah, Muhammad the prophet of mercy and 'Ali is
the key of paradise. The second line was: I decided to bear mercy for
these who be victorious to them and follow their path, and torture these
who oppose them.

The trustworthy 'Ali ben Ibrahim had told from Abi Jafar Al-Baqir (PUH)
in telling the meaning of God's saying "And verily We made a covenant of
old with Adam, but he forgot, and We found no constancy in him"
(Taha:115) he said: God made a covenant with him in Muhammad and the
Imam's after him (PUT), but he left that out and he never thought they
were (Muhammad and the Imam's PUT) in such high place and value, and the
"Them of Constancy" (meaning: Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad)
are called like that because God made a covenant with them in Muhammad
and the viceroys after him and in Al-Qa'im (PUT) and gathered their
constancies in admitting their (Muhammad and his viceroys PUT) rights
and virtues.

And from Abi 'Abdullah Al-Sadiq (PUH) that he said: the sons of Adam
(PUH) gathered in a house and had an argument about who's better, Adam
or the close Angels. Some of them said that our father Adam is better
and others said the close Angels are, and few others said the carriers
of the Throne. While they were like that, "Gift of God" Seth (Also:
Sheth PUH) entered and they told him the story,

so he got back to his father Adam (PUH) and told him the story of the
fighting men and they asked him (asked Seth) but he didn't have an
answer for this, then said Adam: O son, I've stood between the hands of
God may praise be to him, then I looked into a line on the door of the
Throne that was written on it: By the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. Muhammad and the descendants of Muhammad are the best of what
Allah started.

From Al-'Ayyashi from Amr ben Abi Miqdam from his father that he said:
I asked Aba Jafar Al-Baqir (PUH) from what thing did God made Eve (PUH)?
he said (Al-Baqir PUH): and what thing do they say about this creation?
I said: they say from one of Adam's (PUH) ribs, then he said (PUH): they
lied. Is God unable to create her except out of Adam's rib? Then I said:
O may I be a ransom to you son of the prophet of God, of what thing did
God create her?

He said (PUH): my father told me from his fathers that the prophet of
God (PUH) said: God, may praise be to Him, held a clay and mixed it with
his right hand, and both of His hands are right, so He created out of it
Adam and part of it was left untouched so He created Eve out of it
(Al-Sayed Ne'mato-Allah Al-Jaza'eri said: this Hadith or speech is
trustworthy and believed in among our comrades and partners.

Meaning what had been told by Al-'Ayyashi..etc) and this speech has
what supports it and there is no doubt among us about its contents and
anything oppose it would oppose the rules and laws of what God made what
we are in now, and so the claim of creating Eve out of his (Adam) rib is
something strange and weird instead of creating her out of the remaining
of his (Adam) clay as it was told by them (meaning them the Holy family
of Muhammad PUT) many times.

About the story of creating Eve out of the rib, and that is the little
left rib, is carried by explaining according to the pictorial match for
these who believe it and there are other taken paths and God only
knows.And it is probable that God created Adam and Eve without a mother
and father and created Jesus (PUH) without a father to let know that He
is able to create anything anyhow, and His laws in nature used to be
creating any creation out of a father and a mother except these
mentioned before.

And it is told that the Angels (PUT) when they felt about their mistake
and got sorrowful for their arguing with God about the creation of Adam
(PUH) and saying "Wilt thou place therein one who will do harm therein
and will shed blood" and they knew that they made a mistake and
regretted and got to the Throne praising and asking for pardon for what
they did, and this was a reason to put up a house in the fourth heaven
at the edge of the Throne and was called Ad-Dhirah, then after that He
put up a house in the earth's sky and Called it Al-Bayt Al-Ma'moor (The
Great House) at the edge of Ad-Dhirah, and Put up on earth Al-Bayt
Al-'Ateeq (The Old House, or Holy House) at the edge of Al-Bayt
Al-Ma'moor.

Then after He ordered his slave Adam (PUH) to go around it and so he
did, so He had mercy upon him and that spread out among his sons until
the doomsday. And it was told that Adam (PUH) visited the Holy House for
a thousand times on his feet, for seven hundreds Hijjas (pilgrimages)
and three hundreds 'Omras ('Omrah = A visit not in the pilgrimage
time)

**Angels prostration for Adam (PUH)**

Said God let praise be to Him: And when We said unto the angels:
Prostrate yourselves before Adam, they fell prostrate, all save Iblis.
He demurred through pride, and so became a disbeliever (Al-Baqarah: 34).
And in another position He said to Iblis blaming him for not
prostrating: He said: What hindered thee that thou didst not fall
prostrate when I bade thee?

(Al-A'raf: 12). The damned said then: I am better than him. Thou
createdst me of fire while him Thou didst create of mud, and continued:
Now, because Thou hast sent me astray, verily I shall lurk in ambush for
them on Thy Right Path, then I shall come upon them from before them and
from behind them and from their right hands and from their left hands,
and Thou wilt not find most of them beholden (unto Thee).

And also said: Reprieve me till the day when they are raised (from the
dead). and God answered: Then lo! thou art of those reprieved Till the
Day of appointed time. And God said also: and they fell prostrate, all
save Iblis. He was of the jinn, so he rebelled against his Lord's
command (Al-Kahf: 50)

So the phrases that points out the facts about the creation of Adam
(PUH) and the prostration of Angels before him after the commandments of
God and the rebel of Iblis against God's command for he is created of
fire and Adam was created of mud or clay and God's damnations upon him
and his exile out of paradise and keeping him unable to get through the
veils while he used to go through them with Angles before and the
request of Iblis for God to compensate him for his worship to God for
thousands of years

and the God's answer to him and giving him whatever he likes of life's
goods and the most important of those goods is staying alive as long as
life do exist and being in control of Adam's descendants and being close
to them as blood in the vessels and Made (God) their chests a home for
him and for his sons (Iblis) except the faithful slaves of God, such
phrases are a lot in the Holy Book and they can be founded also in Holy
Books that was revealed before Quran.

Meditate in these Holy phrases a meditation of thinking and not as
memorizing a tale. Without understanding the desired meaning of God's
speech, and you must check out the truth from these who who know Quran
very well, or their viceroys, who act and do as they did, and don't take
saying meant to give explanation to the phrases of the Book of your God
who said: None knoweth its explanation save Allah. And those who are of
sound instruction say: We believe therein;

the whole is from our Lord; but only men of understanding really heed
(Al-Imran: 7), and those who know are only who upon them the Holy Book
was revealed and that is Muhammad (PUH) and his descendants who had the
Prevention (They make no mistakes) and they know better. [Note: this
paragraph contained a high level of philosophical terms which I couldn't
translate nor understand, so it was approperiate to take the overall
meaning and translate it]

And what was told of tidings from them (the Holy Family PUT) that
growing proud was the first sin, so Iblis did say: O Lord, release me
from prostration before Adam, and I used to worship you as no close
Angel did nor a sent prophet, then the God did say to him: no need for
your worshipping,

but I want to be worshipped as I want not as you want. And so Iblis
refused to prostrate, then God said to him: Get out of it, you are
damned. Then said Iblis: O Lord! how? and you are the Just that does no
wrong, so my reward for worshipping is false? Then God said to him: No,
but ask anything of life's matter as a reward for your deeds and I shall
give it to you. The first thing he asked was to be immortal until the
time of the doomsday, so God said to him: it is yours.

Then he asked to be in control of Adam's descendants, so God said to
him: I made you of control. Then he asked to make him run through them
as blood in vessels, so God said to him: I made you run through them.
Then Iblis did say: no one would give a birth for one, shall be
accompanied by two for me, and I will see them but they won't and I
would be shaped in front of them in whatever shape I like, so the God
said then: I give all of that. Then the damned (Iblis) said: O Lord,
give me more.

So then the God said: I made for you and your descendants homes in
their chests. After all that Iblis did say: O Lord, this is enough for
me. Then that he did say: O Lord by your Highness I would make them do
mischiefs except your faithful slaves, then I shall come upon them from
before them and from behind them and from their right hands and from
their left hands, and Thou wilt not find most of them beholden.

It was told about the explanation of the Holy phrase "then I shall come
upon them from before them" is that "I will make them not serious in
thinking of the doomsday" like telling them that God is merciful and
only punishes for worshipping another, but everything else God can
forgive you about. And "from behind them" that is "I will order them to
keep on gathering money and be misers to keep it for their heirs", and
"from their right hands" that is "I will worsen their believes and let
them add and change their creeds", and "from their left hands" that is
"I will make their hearts in great love for joys and amusement and
whatever like it."

From Ibn 'Abbas, that the first one to measure (compare) was Iblis, and
he was wrong in this matter, and whoever after him would do the same he
would be paired by God in the doomsday with Iblis, and the measurement
(comparement) is that when he said: You made me of fire and made him of
mud (or clay), and that meant to be that I'm (Iblis speaking) of more
honour than him (Adam) and better, because fire is higher and of more
honour than mud, and so the prostrate must have been from him (Adam) to
me (Iblis) and not the other wise by the measurements of honour and
priority,

and the damned didn't know the honour of Adam and of what God knows
from his virtues (Adam's) and the Holy Lights that he bore in his
descendants, and it will come from his descendants the prophets and
their viceroys with the saints and the faithful, and the masters of the
creation, Muhammad and his Household (family, descendants) that God wish
is but to remove uncleanness far from them, and cleanse them with a
thorough cleansing, who are the main reason for the creation of the
universe and everything in it.

And so he (Iblis) envied him (Adam) and got wicked. And for the God's
saying "Lo! I am about to create a mortal out of mire, And when I have
fashioned him and breathed into him of My Spirit, then fall down before
him prostrate" (Sad: 71,72) the Prince of Believers ('Ali ben Abi Talib
PUH) commented about this:

They all prostrated, except Iblis who got pride growing into him for
his creation of fire and scorned the mud (or clay) creation, and so God
gave him the delay for he (Iblis) deserved damnations, and for the
completeness of his trouble, and the completeness of his mortality, so
God said to him: Then lo! thou art of those reprieved, Till the Day of
appointed time (Al-Hijr: 37,38).

Notice how much did the Prince of Believers (PUH) overflow us with the
facts about this interesting matter of unique meanings and wisdom that
could be deduced from its deepest secrets and its hidden jokes. We have
left out most of his speech (PUH) for the fear of boredom, and it was
told that after what God gave to Iblis from control and power, Adam
(PUH) said: O Lord, you have given Iblis the control over my descendants
and made him run as the blood in the vessel into them and all of the
other things that you gave to him,

so for what for me and my descendants? So God answered him: the wrong
done would be counted as one, and the good done would be counted as ten.
Then did Adam (PUH) say: O Lord, give me more, so the God answered:
Repentance would be accepted until the soul would come to the throat
[apparently meant at death time],

then Adam (PUH) said: O Lord, give me more. So the God answered: I will
forgive no matter what, then Adam (PUH) said: O Lord this is quite
enough. One questioner did say to Al-Imam Al-Sadiq (PUH): O may I be a
ransom to you, for what did Iblis deserve all of what God gave him? he
answered (PUH): for something he did to God and God appreciated that for
him,

then the question did say: and what did he do may I be a ransom to you?
he answered (PUH): for two bows (kneeling, in prayer) he did in heavens
in a time of four thousands years. And it was told from Al-Nahj [Nahj
Al-Balagha, a book that collected speeches of 'Ali ben Abi Talib PUH]
that Al-Imam 'Ali (PUH) said that he (Iblis) did pray two bows in
heavens in six thousands years. It is not known if it is counted as
years of earthly time, or in time of heavens, and it is not quite far
that both tales are true and God only knows.

From Tawoos and Mojahid: that Iblis before doing the sin was one of the
Angels and his name was 'Azaziel, and he was one of the earth's
inhabitants, and the inhabitants of earth from Angels were called the
Djinn, and among Angels there were on like him in his worshipping and
wisdom, so when he rebelled against God may praise be to Him, God damned
him and made him a demon and called him Iblis,

and he was noted as being a disbeliever in God's knowledge. The
apparent from this tale that Iblis was one of the Angels opposes the
apparent phrase from the Holy Book "all save Iblis. He was of the jinn,
so he rebelled against his Lord's command" (Al-Kahf: 50) and also
opposes the famous opinion among the wise men of Muslims and its tales
and stories,

and it is the base that all Muslims agreed on naturally and the
repeated phrases in the Holy Book about this matter, and the most of the
explanations made for them (the phrases), and even it opposes the
thought of Iblis when he said: You created me of fire and created him of
mud..etc and so this tale opposes the most famous opinions about the
matter so be aware.

From Jameel ben Daraj said: I asked Aba 'Abdullah Al-Sadiq (PUH) about
whether Iblis was one of the Angels or Djinn, so he said (PUH): Angels
saw that he was one of them but only God knew that he wasn't one of
them, and when was ordered to prostrate he did what he did. Some wise
men that are into deep insight said that wise men of Islam differ in
considering whether Iblis is one of the Angels or not.

Most of the speakers about the matter and lot of our wise men [Shiites
wise men are meant here] like Al-Shaikh Al-Mofeed and others that said
that Iblis is one of the Djinn and not Angels, and then he said
(Al-Shaikh Al-Mofeed) that tidings been told frequently from the Imam's
of Guidance (PUT) about this fact,

and it is true in the creed of Imamism. [Imamism: this term is coined
by me and don't know if there is an equivalent term for it. It points
out to the creed of believing in the 12 viceroys or Imams after the
death of the prophet Muhammad, may peace be upon him and his Household],
and other branch believed that he (Iblis) was one of the Angels.

The clue of the second branch that believed that Iblis is one of the
Angels is from some Hadith's (or speeches) and one of them is what have
been mentioned before from Tawoos and Mojahid, and also believed that
Iblis was one of the keepers of paradises, and he held the treasures of
heavens and earth, and other stuff had been said, but anyhow as you can
see nothing of that is convenient to what was mentioned about the
believe of the first branch which is the most choosen and the most
supported with the confession of Iblis himself as mentioned before.

It had been told from Al-Zajjaj that he said: Holy phrases did differ
in mentioning of what did the creation of Adam (PUH) start with. In one
position in the Holy Book that God created him out of sand, and in other
out of mud, and in another out of black mud, and also in another
position out of clay. He continued: and all of the previous belong to
one origin which is the sand, which is the origin of mud, and so God
informed us that he made him out of sand, then made it into mud, then
transferred into black mud and finally as clay.


