Useful Caution
==============

About what was been told in the Holy phrases of the saying of the
damned which is "Now, because Thou hast sent me astray, verily I shall
lurk in ambush for them on Thy Right Path...etc", it is apparent that
the damned thought God made him astray and this is something can't be
accepted by the right-thinking minds and it is against and opposes the
justice and the holiness that are well-known of God may praise be to
Him, and above all these mistaken words about Him He shall be.

And so the damned appointed to God that He made him astray, and this is
what is mentioned in the creed of Jabarism [Another coined term by me]
of Al-Asha'irah (?) [seems a branch of this creed], and it is one of the
corrupted believes without any doubt about that, because its contents is
not accepted by me, nor others would accept it for themselves.

Is it possible for someone to accept for himself being mentioned that
he obliged a slave of him to do mischiefs and sins and then punish him
for doing this? No and no, and this is the case here of what had been
appointed to God, The most exalted. May God make shame be with them, as
He made it with their master and director and teacher the damned Iblis
may damnations be upon him. All of the matter was because of his wrong
chosen path, and God exiled him and avoided him from His mercy and
banned him from His paradise,

because he rebelled and refused His command to prostrate to Adam (PUH)
with the rest of Angels, and them (PUT) didn't stop for one moment but
prostrated directly as they are commanded to do and they did not think
about a reason for this and didn't get a pride against it, but instead
they did obey the command of their Lord and don't think about anything
else except His command, and never argue about it.

When God examined Iblis by prostrating for Adam (PUH), he got so high
with his pride and honour for what he was created of and got rebelled,
and God knew his intention and his perversity, and all of his long
worshipping and praising was only for the sake of life and for what he
wishes and deems, and so he got wicked by his soul and obeyed it and so
it owned him and captivated him away from his Creator.

And when God wanted to put him under the test and wanted him to refuse
what his soul is ordering him to do, he disbelieved in His grace and got
ready for war, and so he is a foe for the Great God, The One of Grace,
and then his greatest foe is this to whom he was ordered to prostrate
before him and that is Adam (PUH) so he sat his hate for him (Adam) and
for his descendants until the time of doomsday.


**The inhabitation of Adam in paradise**

The Prince of Believers (PUH) said in Al-Nahj: Then God made Adam
inhabit a place of much grace and made it a safe place for him, and
warned him of Iblis and his hostility, and so his foe envied him (Adam)
for his place of inhabitation and his company of the faithful, so then
he (Adam) paid for what was so sure with his doubt, and for the power
with his weakness,

and exchanged hilarity with fear, and pride with regret, then God
Relented toward him and Gave him the words of His mercy and Promised him
that he would be back to his paradise, and Got him down to the place of
troubles and breeding. What is apparent from this speech of the Prince
of Believers (PUH) and from lot of tales and Holy phrases about the
subject of Adam's paradise that God made him inhabt, that it is the
paradise that God promised for His faithful after life for their
deeds,

or even as a gift for these of faith in His prophets and Holy Books,
and so his saying (PUH) about the place of inhabitation and the company
of the faithful, do appoint out to the paradise after life and not the
gardens of this life, and it is apparent for these who got a cautious
hearts and a well mind, and then meditate in his saying (PUH) about
getting back to his (Adam) paradise and getting him down to the place of
troubles and breeding.

And there is no need to explain and interpret more than that and saying
the opposition of what had been said in the speech, and the more
opposition that might be made against it, then it is an ignorance and
perversity that are not needed.

It is told from some tales and speeches that the inhbaitation of Adam
and Eve (PUT) in paradise lasted for seven hours as measured in this
life's days, and so their out was in the same day that they got in and
if they did obey the commandments of their Lord, they would have been
lasted for more time and never got out of it.

**How was it correct to prostrate before Adam by angels and he's just a
creation**

Prostration, is not allowed and not correct except for God may praise
be to Him, because it is a worshipping and it won't be except for God,
otherwise it would be a disbelieve or paganism and such thing is
impossible to be done by the Angels that are protected against doing any
sins.

The real matter is that this prostration is done by a commandment from
God and so it is a prostration for God as it was mentioned by them (PUT)
["them" meaning the prophet and his Household PUT] about this matter.

From Al-Sadiq (PUH): whoever prostrated by a command from God, then it
is a prostration for God and obeying his order, and if it wasn't the
commandment by His Highness he wouldn't prostrate. And this is what had
been told also by Al-Imam 'Ali ben Muhammad Al-Hadi (PUH) when he said:
prostration before Adam by Angels was not for Adam but for obeying God
and endearment for Adam.

After all, prostration before Adam was but as an endearment for him and
in real it was worshipping for God because it was done by His command.
Al-Mohaddeth Al-Qommi in "Safeenat Al-Bihar" in Al-Moqam[apparently
seems it is a book name done by a person called Al-Mohaddeth Al-Qommi]
did say: you should know that Muslims all agreed that prostrating was
not for the purpose of worshipping,

but as an endearment for Adam (PUH) and in deep it was a worshipping
for God since it was by His command and this is chosen by most of the
interpreters, and God's sayings "then fall down before him
prostrate"(Sad: 72) and about Joseph (PUH) "they fell down before him
prostrate" (Yusuf: 100) both have the same interpretation, and the
prostration was for God only and for obeying His commandment and was for
the endearment of Adam and Joseph (PUT),

like prostrating for God for the occurence of grace or the disappearing
of a grace. It is told from Prince of Believers (PUH) that he said that
the first spot on earth that God was worshipped on is that on Kufa[a
city in Iraq that had been made a capital during the rule of 'Ali ben
Abi Talib PUH] and that was when God ordered Angels to prostrate before
Adam (PUH) and so they did that on the surface of Kufa.


**Some tales related to our research**

From Musa ben Jafar (PUH), that a jew came and asked the Prince of
Believers (PUH) about a miracle for the prophet (PUH) like the miracles
of other prophets, and that God made Angels prostrate before Adam so
would that be also for Muhammad (PUH)? so 'Ali (PUH) answered: that was
indeed, but God made the Angels prostrate for Adam not for obeying nor
worshipping Adam instead of God, but it was as a confession from them
for the virtues of Adam (PUH),

and for Muhammad (PUH) he was given what is better than this and
higher, and that is because God assigned blessings upon him in His
Highness and ordered the Angels to say the blessings upon him, and also
the believers worship and pray by saying the blessings upon him and this
is in a place much higher and greater than prostrating before Adam
(PUH), and in the speech of God to the damned Iblis: Art thou too proud
or art thou of the high exalted? (Sad: 75),

and in a speech for the prophet of God (PUH) that these "high exalted"
are the prophet himself (PUH), Muhammad ben 'Abdullah (PUH) and 'Ali,
Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT), then said the prophet (PUH): we
were in the awning of the Throne, sanctifying God and Angels with us,
before creating Adam by two thousands years, and when God created Adam
He commanded the Angels to prostrate before him but Did not command
us,

and so all the Angels prostrated except Iblis, so then God said to him:
Art thou too proud or art thou of the high exalted? Meaning of the these
five that their names are written on the awning of the Throne.

From 'Ali ben Al-Husain (PUH): Adam did look to the apex of the Throne
and saw the lights of our ghosts, so then God said to him: O Adam, these
ghosts are the best of my creation. Then He told him their names and
Told him: By them I take and by them I give and by them I punish and by
them I reward, O Adam ask me by them,

and when you are in trouble make them your intercessors to me, because
I decided not to refuse any requests (prayers) made by them. That's why
after that after he and Eve got into the trouble of the sin, he prayed
and asked God by their names so then God made a repentace upon him.

From an interpretation from Al-Imam Al-'Askari (PUH) in a long speech
and this is part of it: When God put Al-Husain ben 'Ali (PUH) and these
who were with him under the test by the army that wanted to kill him, he
(Al-Husain PUH) saw their large numbers and saw his folks and knew that
they want not but him, and whenever they would kill him they wouldn't
ask for another, and so he released them (his folks) from their swear of
fealty and commanded them to quit and depart him and said to them: let
me with these.

God helps me as He used to be with our ancestors, and his folks did
depart him except few of them. His closer relatives and household
refused to leave and told him: we will not leave you until we die for
thee O Aba 'Abdullah [another name for Al-Husain PUH] and when he saw
their assertiveness and that they would not leave him until they die for
him,

he said to them: if you decided for yourselves what I decided for
myself then know that God gives the high places for his slaves by their
patience for the troubles they face and that you will have that from
God's gifts to you, and know that this life is just a dream and the
after life is the real awakening. Shall not I tell you our beginnings?

They answered: for sure O son of the prophet, then he said: When God
created Adam, He told him the names of everything, and when He showed
them to the Angels they said "We have no knowledge saving that which
Thou hast taught us" (Al-Baqarah: 32) and He made the lights of
Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and they are the five
ghosts, at the back of Adam, and their lights were shining in the
horizons of heavens, veils,

paradises, the Chair (?) and the Throne, and God then commanded the
Angels to prostrate before Adam as an endearment for he was but a
container for these ghosts that their lights shined in the horizons, so
the Angels did prostrate except Iblis who denied to be humble for our
lights we the Household, after the Angels did humbling and obeyed the
command of God and for this their level got higher and got the honour,
and Iblis was damned and exiled out and shame got upon him and so he is
a foe for Him and His faithful slaves until the doomsday.

It was mentioned in some tales of Al-Sadiqiyah [here, maybe it meant
tales that was told by Al-Sadiq PUH] and also from 'Ali ben Ibrahim
about the saying of God: Till the Day of appointed time (Al-Hijr: 38),
what is meant here is the time when he (Iblis) gets slaughtered by the
hands of the prophet of God (PUH) on the Rock that is in Jerusalem.
Al-Sayed Al-Jaza'eri said that he (Iblis) was appointed til the day of
the appearance of Al-Mahdee (PUH) and it is the minor doomsday,

and there are lot of tidings about this matter, and we have explained
what is related to this subject in the introduction of this book that
you read now, and the return of the prophets and messengers and in
special our prophet Muhammad The Chosen (PUH) and the purified Imams
(PUT) after the appearance of the "Awaited Absent" may our souls be in
ransom to him to take revenge of their foes, is something that must be
and it is one of the believes for Shiites,

or lets say most of the Muslims in general, and it is called the minor
doomsday, but only after the long journey with troubles and when most of
the created would turn away from the path and life would be full of
wrong and injustice, it is then when we shall see the release is close
and it is the time. May God paces up the re-appearance of Muhammad and
the Household of Muhammad and May He make us one of their supporters and
companions, and martyrs between their hands by the rights of the prophet
and his purified Household (PUT)

**The reason for getting Adam down from paradise to earth**

From Mos'adah ben Sadaqah from Al-Sadiq (PUH) from the prophet (PUH)
that Moses the son of Amram [Arabic: Musa ben Imran] (PUH) asked his
Lord to let him see Adam (PUH) and so He answered him and made him see
Adam, and then Moses did say: O Father! you are the one that God created
with His own hands and made you live in His paradise and prohibited you
from one tree so you couldn't be patient enough til you fell on earth
because of it, and couldn't you control yourself away from it and so
Iblis seduced you and you followed him and so you are the one that got
us out of paradise because of your sin. Then did say Adam (PUH): O son
take it easy on your father for the matter of this tree.

O son my foe approached by trick and plot, so he swore to me by God
that his opinion is a good advice and he said to me: O Adam I am sad for
you, so I said to him: and how is that? he said: I enjoyed being with
you and you will be out of what you are in now to what you hate, I asked
him: and what to do? he said to me: here is what to do, do you want me
to guide you to the tree of eternity and an endless reign so you can eat
from it with your wife and then you shall both be in paradise with me
for eternity,

and he swore to me by God and he was a liar that he has the truthful
advice, and O Moses I never thought that someone would swear by God and
he is a liar, so I trusted his oath and this is my excuse, so tell me
son, do you find out from what had been revealed to you from God that my
sin was noted before I get created, then Moses said to him: before a
long time. Then said the prophet (Muhammad PUH): and so did Adam
overcame Moses in the argument.

From Al-Sadiq (PUH) also: when Adam was put out of paradise, Gabriel
(PUH) came down to him and said: O Adam, didn't God create you with His
hands and Breathed into you of His Spirit and made the Angels prostrate
before you, and Got you Eve as a wife and Made you inhabit paradise and
Prohibited you directly from eating from that tree but you made the sin?
Then Adam (PUH) said: Iblis did swear to me by God, and I never thought
that someone from God's creation would swear by Him falsely!

And what is understood from the previous conversation between Moses and
Adam (PUT) that the sin was something meant to be and predestinated long
ago before Adam's creation and from the world of atom [It is believed
that everything exists in this life including people existed before
becoming alive or born in a world or a dimension where they were just
atoms],

at the time of creating the spirits before his (Adam) existence by two
thousands years, and it is a case which was a battle field for several
opinions and many people got doomed for their mis-interpretations and
not understanding the truth in it, and it is a case of God's judgement
and what He Has predestined for His creation before his existence.

And the solution for this case for us in general is: God founded in
this human the power that could aid him in doing what God appointed to
him and Made him able to do, and Left him the selection and Gave him the
mind and brain with which he can differentiate between what's wrong and
whats true, and what would make God satisfied or dissatisfied. After the
knowledge and looking into the path of these faithful to God and their
viceroys and every allowed path that leads to it (?),

that God knows whatever he chooses or does from wether it be a sin or
obeying for His commandments, for He knows the ends of workings and
deeds that are done by His slaves and no incidents would happen without
His knowledgement before his (the human) existence, by his well or bad
chose, and He His Highness the one that knows the the guilt of Adam
whatever would be acted by him and whatever he would choose, as it is
the case with all His creations and slaves,

so from Him may praise be to Him the powers and destinies in doings and
not-doings, and the selection is made for these of responsibilities by
mind, heart and reality, and He is the one who Knows the ends and what
these of responsibilities might choose for themselves, if it was good it
is good, and if it an evil it is an evil, and there is no forcing for
the slave, but it is something in between, because the force and power
is from His Highness, and the full choice for these of responsibilities,
and God knows what might the slave choose for himself.

**What is the tree that was prohibited for Adam (PUH)**

Tales and speeches had differed about of what type is it and what is
it. Some said it is wheat and some said it is vine and grape while
others said it is camphor and still others said it is the fig. It is
said also that it is the tree of good and evil and it was said it is the
tree of eternity that the Angels used to eat from, and more had been
said.

From M'anee Al-Akhbar [seems a book name] in its basing to Al-Harawee
said: I said to Al-Ridha (PUH): O son of prophet of God, tell me about
the tree that Adam and Eve ate from, what was it? because many people
differ in its nature, some say it is wheat, some say it is grape and
some say it is tree of the envy, then he said (PUH): all of that is
right, then I said: then what is the meaning of all these different
opinions? then he said (PUH): O Aba As-Silt [=Al-Harawee], the tree of
paradise carries types,

so it was wheat carrying grapes and it is not like the trees of our
life, and when God honoured him and Reminded him of the prostrating of
Angels before him and Letting him into the paradise, he (Adam) said to
himself: did God created a human better than me? and God knew what was
between him and himself and so Called him and told him: O Adam, left up
your head and look to the leg of the Throne, so then Adam left up his
head and looked into the leg of the Throne and found there it was
written on it: No other God but Allah,

Muhammad is the prophet of Allah, 'Ali ben Abi Talib is the Appointed
from God and his wife Fatima is the mistress of all women, and Al-Hasan
and Al-Husain are the masters of paradise's young people, so said Adam:
O Lord, who are they? then said His Highness: they are from your
descendants, and they are better than you and than the rest of my
creation,

and for them only I did create you, and Created paradise and hell, and
heavens with earth, so be aware not to envy them and wish for their
place and so demon would take control over you, so then he got something
in hisself about them and then did the demon control over him until he
ate from the tree that he was prohibited from, and took control over Eve
for her thoughts of envy about Fatima (PUH) until she ate from the tree
like Adam did, and so God put them out from His side down to earth.

And in contents of the tale as it is with other tales, the word "wish
for their place" points out that the meaning is "glee" and not "envy" in
its real meaning, because glee like wishing for their place, and envy is
wishing for their obsolescence, because envying is a sin and points out
to a lame character and the glee is totally against that, and it is
impossible for the father of human beings and prophets and messenger,
and the one whom Angels did prostrate before by God's commandment and
whom God Had created with His Hands and Inhabited in paradise then had
been chosen by God and Made him a prophet, it is impossible for him to
be an envious one,

and from this point we believe that the prohibition from eating from
that tree was a prohibition for the purity and not for a taboo, and it
was mentioned before something about the protection of prophets against
doing sins and there is more to do about that to come to you by God's
well, and the meaning of the tree of envy is that eating from it was
because of envy, and if it was the envy it would not have been eaten.

And it is mentioned that if it wasn't Adam's (PUH) guilt, no faithful
would have done any guilt ever, and if it wasn't that God relented
toward Adam, there would not have been any repentance for any guilty
ever, and from Al-Sadiq (PUH) that he was asked that how come the
inheritance of man is as much as twice of that of females so he said
(PUH): that is because the number of fruits that Adam and Eve ate were
eighteen, twelve were eaten by Adam and six were eaten by Eve and so the
inheritance is made up as mentioned before.

It had been told that when Adam was down from paradise a black mole
appeared in his face from the top of it til its feet and so long was his
sadness and crying for this, then came Gabriel (PUH) and said to him:
why crying Adam? so he (Adam) said: for this mole that occured in me, so
then he (Gabriel) told him: get up and pray,

it is time for the first prayer, so Adam did that and the mole shrinked
to his chest, then he (Gabriel) came again at the time of the second
prayer and said to him: get up Adam and pray this is the time for the
second prayer and so he did and the mole shrinked to his navel, and then
came again at the time of the third prayer and said to him: get up Adam
and pray this is the time for the third prayer and so he did and the
mole shrinked to his knee,

then he came at the time of the fourth prayer and said to him: get up
Adam and pray this is the time for the fourth prayer and so he did and
the mole shrinked to his legs, then he came at the time of the fifth
prayer and Adam did the same and the mole was out of him and he thanked
God for this a lot, then Gabriel did say to him: O Adam, your sons in
this prayer are like you in this mole, and who would pray from your sons
each day and night five prayers he would be out of his sins as you got
out of this mole.

And also in a speech that when Adam (PUH) got down on earth he got a
beard as black as coal, so he held it with his hand and said: O Lord,
what is this? and He answered him: this is the beard, I made it as an
ornamet for you and your male descendants until the doomsday. And it was
mentioned before that the inhabitation of Adam and Eve in paradise was
for seven hours until they got out of it, and that God breathed in Adam
with His Spirit after the sunset of Friday and then Created Eve after
him, then Commanded the Angels to prostrate before him and Made him
inhabit His paradise since then,

and the Imam (PUH) swore [not mentioned which Imam is it] that they did
not stay more than these hours on that day until they did what was
prohibited then God got them out after sunset and didn't stay in it
(Paradise) and they were moved to the yards of paradise until it was the
morning and their loins appeared then their Lord said to them: Did not I
prohibited you from that tree, so Adam got ashamed and shy of his Lord
and said: O our Lord, we did wrong to ourselves and made a confession of
our sins, O may You forgive us, then did God say: get down from My
heavens to earth for no sinners would be in My paradise nor My
heavens.


