The Place of Falling of Adam and Eve When They Got Down From Paradise
=====================================================================

What is famous from the Household (PUT) that Adam (PUH) fell down on
Al-Safa and Eve on Al-Marwah [Al-Safa and Al-Marwah are two hills in
Mecca and people go in between them seven times in pilgrimage season],
and what is famous for the most of Muslims is that Adam (PUH) fell down
on a mount called Sarandeeb [Notice: Sarandeeb is the old Arabic name
for Ceylon, Sri Lanka now] and it is called Nud also,

and Eve did fall in Jeddah, and some people suggested that this is the
truth and their fall on Al-Safa and Al-Marwah was after they got into
Mecca. From Hayat Al-Hayawan for Al-Domayri [hayat al-hayawan means the
life of animals and seems it is a book's name] he said: Ka'b Al-Ahbar
did say [Ka'b Al-Ahbar was a nickname for the chief priest of jews]:

God revealed the snake in Asbahan [maybe he means Asfahan in Iran?] and
Iblis in Jeddah and Eve in 'Arafah [a mount around Mecca] and Adam in
Sarandeeb and it is in the higher region of China in the sea of India
[this description is somehow close to modern day Sri Lanka], and it is a
high place where seamen can see it from a distance of days and it bears
the footprint of Adam (PUH) in stones, and this mount is seen each night
as a lightning without clouds, and it rains in everyday to wash the foot
steps of Adam (PUH), and it is told that Rubies are found in this mount
and also Diamonds with Aloeswood (Agar wood, Oud, Ood).

In tales, that when Adam (PUH) came to Mecca from India by a
commandment from God, every step he would take there would be a
prosperity of land in its place, and everything in between was just a
desert, all along the way until he reached Mecca, and when he reached
Mecca he went around the Holy place.

It had been told also that when God got Adam down, He got down with him
one hundred and twenty rods and branches that got every seed for every
type of grains, and that he died on Friday, in the sixth of April in the
same hour that he was created in, and he was nine hundred and thirty
years old, and it had been said also that he died after he got forty
thousands of his sons, grandsons and grand grandsons.

And from Abi Jafar Al-Baqir (PUH) that he said: God the Exalted one
Inspired to Adam: O Adam, I would collect all goodness for you in four
words, one for Me, one for you, one between Me and you, and one between
you and people. The one for Me is that you worship Me and no one else,
and the one for you is that I will reward you for your deeds as much as
you need, and the one between Me and you is that you have to pray and
praise Me and I will answer you, and the one between you and people is
that you have to love for people what you love for yourself.

Some tidings mentioned that God revealed a book written in Syriac made
of tweny one pages, and it is the first book ever to be revealed on
human beings, and in it there was one thousand thousand [a million]
tongues, no people with one of these tongues would understand the other
without education, and Adam has the knowledge in every tongue and can
speak it better than its native speakers, and contained also the clues
of God and His worshippings, judgements, rules and laws ... etc.

from Ibn 'Abbas that he said: When God created Adam, and Breathed in
him from His Spirit, he sneezed and God inspired him to thank Him so he
said: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, so his Lord said to him:
mercy of your Lord be upon you. And when God made Angels prostrate
before him, he got exclaimed and said: O Lord, You created a creation
that is beloved to You more than me? but God didn't answer him, then he
asked again, and God didn't answer,

then he asked for the third time but god didn't answer him, then God
did say: Yes, and for them only I did create you, then he said: O Lord
let me see them, then God ordered the Angels of the veils to left off
the veils, and when they did and Adam looked, he found out five ghosts
in front of the Throne, then he said: O Lord who are they? then God did
say: O Adam, this is my prophet Muhammad, and this is 'Ali the Prince of
Believers, the cousin of my prophet and his viceroy,

and this is Fatima the daughter of my prophet, and these two are
Al-Hasan and Al-Husain the sons of 'Ali and sons of my prophet, then He
said: and they are your descendants, so Adam got happy for this. And
when he did the sin he said: O Lord I ask You by Muhammad and 'Ali and
Al-Hasan and Al-Husain to relent toward me, and so God relented toward
him by them, and this is what is meant by God's saying "Then Adam
received from his Lord words (of revelation), and He relented toward
him" (Al-Baqarah: 37).

When Adam got down on earth, he made a ring and carved on it: Muhammad
is the prophet of God and 'Ali is the Prince of Believers. It is
mentioned also that Adam was called "Abi Muhammad" [meaning: father of
Muhammad, it is a common Arabic way also to call men by the names of
their elder males children as: Aba Nasir, meaning father of Nasir and so
on. Aba could be Abu and Abi and this is subject to change according to
the grammar of the Arabic language]

The mention of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT) is
repeated, and viewing them by Adam (PUH) is repeated also, once upon the
leg of the Throne, once on the door of the Throne and once in front of
the Throne and so on. They are mentioned once by the Holy name of God,
the Exalted, one time and another without It, and all of this would not
be a reason for confusion and it would be fine to consider all of that
is correct to show their virtues and how they are different from the
others and so people would not have to argue about it with God, and so
everyone would die and live with its knowledgement and Allah is no
oppressor of (His) bondmen.


**Crying of Adam (PUH) for paradise**

It was told that Adam (PUH) cried for paradise until it was like great
rivers on his cheeks because of tears, and he stood at the door of Kaba
and his clothes were of the skins of cows and camels and said: O Lord
help me with my mistake and Make repentace upon me and Let me back into
the place that I were in.

Then said God, the Exalted one: I helped you, and Made repentace upon
you and I will let you back in the place that I got you out from. It is
doubtless that what we understand and everyone with the right mind would
understand as well that the paradise that Adam is asking his Lord to be
back into is the paradise of eternity, and it was the place that he were
in and got out from,

and the clue to that is the tidings about him viewing the place (level)
of Muhammad, 'Ali, Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain (PUT) and that he saw
their names written on the corners of the Throne and it was told that
the Throne is the roof of paradise as mentioned in Hadith, and it is
behind heavens and its roof is the Throne.

Add to that, the words of revelation that Adam received from his Lord
and Relented toward him were of Muhammad and his Household (PUT) and His
Holy saying "fulfilled them"(Al-Baqarah: 124) meaning until Al-Qa'im
Al-Mahdi from the Household of Muhammad (PUH), they are the twelve Imams
adding the nine descendants of Al-Husain (PUT).

Also mentioned that the words that Adam received from his Lord are His
Holy saying "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves..etc"(Al-A'raf: 23) and
also mentioned they are the prayer of the prophet (PUH): O praise be to
You my Lord and Thanks..etc [This is a line from a prayer that seems
famous but I didn't get to know],

and other things had been mentioned also but the probability that all
of that is true is not impossible, but the most common base is what was
mentioned by the purified masters that the words that was received were
their names (PUT). As supported by Al-Mofadhal ben 'Omar he said: Abu
'Abdullah Al-Sadiq (PUH) said: God, the Exalted, may praise be to Him,
created the souls before the bodies by two thousands, and Made the
higher of them and the most honourable are these of Muhammad, 'Ali,
Fatima, Al-Hasan and Al-Husain,

and the rest of the Imams after them (PUT), and Showed them to the
heavens and earth with mounts and their lights covered them all, then
God did say to the heavens and earth with the mounts: these are my
judges and rulers over my creations, for them and for these who follow
their path I made My paradise, and for these who oppose them I made My
hell, and whoever claims their position from Me and their greatness I
would torture him like I did not Do to anyone else, and whoever agreed
to be loyal to them and never claimed their position I shall Let him be
with them in paradise, and being loyal to them is a fidelity to be taken
by My creation..etc.

It is a long speech where he mentioned their virtues and the goodness
that would be to these who would be loyal to them and the damnations on
whoever take them as a foe and took over their rights and helped others
over them and whoever does this, God Prepared for him the shame and
torture. Also in it there is a warning for these who wishes for their
places, and that when Adam and Eve (PUT) got down to earth, Gabriel
(PUH) came to them and guided them to ask their Lord by the right of the
names that they saw on the leg of the Throne to Relent toward them,

so then they said: O Lord we ask You by the right of the closest to
You, Muhammd and 'Ali and Fatima and Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and the
Imams after them to Relent toward us and Have mercy upon us, so then God
relented toward them. All the prophets after that kept this fidelity
then and advised their viceroys and the loyals of their nations so they
denied to claim it for themselves and never forgot about it,

and whoever's soul might get sick and get wicked by his demons to put
himself in such place, damnations he will get from God and torture, and
for this God, the Exalted, did say "Lo! We offered the trust unto the
heavens and the earth and the hills, but they shrank from bearing it and
were afraid of it. And man assumed it. Lo! he hath proved a tyrant and a
fool"(Al-Ahzab: 72).

And it is never thought of Adam (PUH) being one of these who wished for
their place and so he would be one of these who took their rights, but
No and Never. But what is meant by the previous Holy phrase in "man
assumed it" is assuming this trust (fidelity) without any right for
doing this, as it is mentioned by some famous wisemen with little
difference between each tale (explanation), "Those who do wrong will
come to know by what a (great) reverse they will be
overturned!"(Al-Shu'ara': 227) [This paragraph was shortened by the
overall meaning translation]

It is told by the holy prophet (PUH) that when Adam (PUH) did the sin,
a call came from the Throne towards him saying: O Adam, leave My
vicinity, because no one stays in and refuses My commandment, then Adam
did cry and the Angels cried with him, then God sent him Gabriel to get
him down to earth with blackened face,

then when Angels did see that cried loudly and lamented and said: O
Lord, a creation You did Create and Breathed in it by Your Spirit and
Made Your Angels prostrate before him, so You did Change his whiteness
to blackness with one sin? Then a call came toward him from heavens: O
Adam, fast for your Lord this day, and it was the thirteenth day of the
month,

and one third of the blackness was removed from Adam (PUH), then he was
called again in the fourteenth day to fast for Lord and so two thirds of
the blackness went out, and then called again in the fifteenth day to
fast and so he did and all of the blackness went out, and for this these
days were called "Al-Ayam Al-Beedh" (The White Days) in which Adam
retained his whiteness, then a called from heavens called him: O Adam,
these three days I made for you and your descendants and whoever fasted
these three days from each month he would be as if he had fasted all of
his life.

From the explanation of Al-Imam Al-'Askiri (PUH) in his explanation of
God's saying "but come not nigh this tree..etc"(Al-Baqarah: 35), that it
is the tree of wisdom of Muhammad and his Household that God made it for
them only and it was for them only in special and no one would eat from
it except them, and they were eating from it after they fed the wretch,
the orphan and the prisoner and the revelation of the chapter of Al-Dahr
[Also called Al-Insan.

Al-Dahr means The Life and Al-Insan means The Man] about them with the
agreement of all interpreters, and so they did not feel any hunger,
thirst, nor tiredness after they ate from it. It is a tree that was not
like any tree in paradise and carried many charactersitics and has lot
of different types of wheat, grape,

fig and the rest of fruits, and this is why many interpreters did
interpret the type of this tree in many ways, so some of them said it is
the wheat and others said it is the grape and so on, so God did say:
come not nigh this tree, meaning you will be seeking the place and level
of Muhammad and his Household and their virtues,

and this is something that God made so special for them only, and it is
the tree that whoever eats from by the will of God, he would be inspired
with the knowledge and wisdom of those of old and those of later time
without any need to learn. This speech and its contents is not a weird
because of what was mentioned about the rights of the Household (PUT)
before.

And then if you meditate fairly and neglected the partisanship and the
love of the self, and looked with the eye of your heart to what was
mentioned for 'Ali and the Household of 'Ali by the special and the
normal people, and asked these of thoughts and fair of your wisemen
about the place and level of 'Ali and the Household of 'Ali and their
knowledge and what God made them special with from virtues and true
characteristics, you would win the great luck and the happiness of the
two lifes [meaning this life and the after-life] and you would know that
they are the top of all creatures and they are the path to the God,

and their knowledge is not taken by someone else but was given by God,
the Exalted, and by the prophet (PUH) in a special position that no one
else would be able to count and limit (the knowledge). Look to all what
the wisemen of Islam agreed on about the rightness of what was mentioned
that the holy prophet (PUH) taught 'Ali one thousand doors of knowledge,
from each each door there is one thousand doors are opened to him.
Meditate about this and what does it mean and what is wanted by it, and
do not take it easy and lose.

Their knowledge is not compared by their age, but it is all equal to
whatever age they are, and whoever took a look into their lives and
history would know that fact clearly. Their hearts never stop praising
God, and they know the most about what people need in their lives, rules
and laws, and the disciplines of all the heavenly religions of rules and
laws, worshippings and policies as revealed in its truthful state.

Nothing is hidden from them about what people and artists did make of
industries, careers, tiniest inventions and the weirdest sciences to the
fullest and they know more than its inventors in these inventions and
nothing of what mankind did make would be out of their knowledge by the
care of God, the Exalted, and His inspiration, because they are the
rulers by God over His creations by whatever means this word would be
understood, and whoever would deny this would be of incomplete faith,

and there are clues and prooves that cut out the road for the opponent
and narrow his way, and they have the knowledge of troubles and what
happened or what will happen until the doomsday, add to that the
knowledge of the Islamic laws as it was revealed on their grandfather
the Chosen [meaning the prophet] (PUH), and 'Ali is the one who tells
about himself the holiness and he's the most truthful sayer after God,
the Exalted and His chosen prophet (PUH) when he said: in here (and
pointing to his holy chest) a great knowledge, if only I can find
someone to bear it. He said also (after he swore by God): I've become to
know a secret that if I told you about you would be diffused as the
robes of buckets in the far distant wells.

And he's the sayer also: I know what are in heavens and earth and I
know what is in paradise and hell, and i know what was and what will
be..etc. He said also: ask me before you lose me, and a lot more of the
same sayings and what was been told about his rights by the holy
prophets (PUH) is not countable and one of the most famous speeches for
him (PUH): if I wasn't just afraid that you would say in 'Ali like what
the christians said about Jesus the son of Mary, I would say something
that would make you take the sand from beneath his feet.

And from him (PUH) speaking to 'Ali: O 'Ali, no one loves you but a
believer, and no one hates you but a hypocrite, and so the love of 'Ali
is faith and his hate is hypocrisy. Could anyone count his virtues and
miracles?, here is Nahj Al-Balaghah in front of you, meditate through it
and it will guide you through,

and how many times they did the books and detailed his virtues and
miracles and Ahmad ben Hanbal [an Islamic wiseman or scholar that
created a creed in Islam known by his name] did show a lot of these
[Nahj Al-Balaghah: a famous book that collects lot of 'Ali ben Abi
Talib's speeches, it is a great source for anyone that would like to see
the magic of Arabic tongue, for 'Ali ben Abi Talib was and still one of
the greatest personnes that bore the great knowledges of the Arabic
language].

Al-Shafi'i [another scholar that created another creed] did make poems
about him ('Ali PUH), add to that me also [the author of this book], and
also Ibno Abi Al-Hadeed Abdul-Hameed, and Abdul-Baqi Al-Omari and
others. The wiseman Al-Hilli issued a book that he called "Kitab
Al-Alfayn" (Book of the two thousands) that contained two thousands
clues by logic and by chained speeches for that 'Ali being an Imam and
protected against the wrong doings and the same for his eleven
descendants one by one until the last of them Al-Mahdi the awaited
absent, may our souls be a ransom to him. It is not a speech to show
their virtues and their levels, however, but it was necessary to show
this in this position.


**Having a tent for them in the place of the Holy House**

From Abi Jafar Al-Baqir (PUH) from his fathers (PUT): God sent to
Gabriel (PUH) that I had mercy upon Adam and Eve so get them a tent from
the tents of paradise and make it stand in the place of the House and
its base that was lifted before by the Angels, and so did Gabriel, and
made a stand for it in the place of the House then he got them down from
Al-Safa and Al-Marwah and gathered them together in the tent. The pillar
of the tent was made of ruby and its light enlightened the mounts of
Mecca,

and the light reached the borders of Al-Haram, and it is the position
of Al-Haram nowadays [meaning borders of Mecca maybe?], and so God made
it sacred for the tent and the pillar that are from paradise. Then the
tent was stretched and the end of the tent's ropes were the mosque and
it is Al-Masjid Al-Haram (the Holy "Sacred" Mosque). Then God revelaed
seventy thousands angels to guard the tent against demons and cheer Adam
and Eve, and so they were going around the tent and guard it.

It is probable that God after that sent to Gabriel (PUH) to get down to
Adam and Eve and make them depart the place of the House and build it
with stones and raise up its basis and complete it for the rest of the
Angels and the creation of Adam's descendants. So he got down to them
and made them out of the tent and moved them away from the House and the
tent as well. Then Gabriel raised the basis of the House by a stone from
Al-Safa, and a stone from Al-Marwah, and a stone from the mount of
Sinai,

and a stone from the mount of Al-Salam [Al-Salam means The Peace] and
it is at the hind of the House at the back of Kaba, and made these
stones the corners of the Holy House, and so he completed it by stones
from the mount of Abi-Qubays as he was commanded by God, and made for it
two doors, to the east and to the west. When he was done with its
building, Angels started to go around it and when Adam and Eve saw that,
they also started going around it seven by seven and it is the law that
went on in his (Adam) descendants until the doomsday.

And in Ilal Al-Sharaye' (Reasons of Laws) from Bakeer ben A'yon he
said: Abu 'Abdullah Al-Sadiq (PUH) said to me: do you know what it was
the black stone in the Holy corner of Kaba? then he said: I said no, he
said (PUH) then: it was one of the greatest Angels that God, the
Exalted, did Have and when God took the covenant from the Angels, he was
the first to admit it and so God made him the guardian for all of His
creation and Gave him the covenant to keep and Decided to Make all the
creations to renew their covenants with him each year,

then God made him in company with Adam in paradise to remind him of the
covenant and renew it each year, so when Adam did the sin and got out of
paradise, God made him forget the covenant that He took over him and his
descendants, for Muhammad and his viceroy and his descendants the
protected against wrong doings, and Made him buffled and lost, but when
He relented toward Adam He made this Angel in the picture of a white
pearl and Sent it down from paradise to Adam when he was in the lands of
India.

When Adam saw this, he got pleased though he didn't know what it was
except it is some treasure, then God made him speak and said: O Adam,
did you know me? then Adam said: no! then he answered: O yes, the demon
overcame you and made you forget to praise your Lord, then he changed to
his true shape as it was in paradise with Adam (PUH) and said to Adam:
where is the covenant? And when Adam remembered that jumped to him and
cried and kissed him and renewed his covenant,

then God changed him to a clear white pearl and Adam (PUH) carried him
over his shoulders for his honour, and when he gets tired, Gabriel (PUH)
would take it over, until they got to Mecca. It was there in Mecca that
Adam kept it and renew his covenant every day and night and when God
wanted to build the Kaba and sent Gabriel for this purpose and started
in building, made this stone and it is the white pearl in the corner
that it is in nowadays, and he (Gabriel) sactified God and praised Him,
and that's why the law goes for praising and sanctifying everytime being
in front of the corner that carries the Holy stone, and so it is until
this very day.

One of the religious duties to do when visiting the Holy House is to
come to the Black Stone and kiss it if it was possible, or raise up the
hand towards it and say: O Lord my fidelity I've done, and my covenant
I've made to Testify me with the deed. [this is a line from a prayer
said on pilgrimage time] This is the way of Muslims and all who came
before them from the various religions and laws that admit the honour of
the Holy House and the honoured Stone,

and it is widely believed by these of the right wisdom and knowledge
that an angel can be shaped in any shape even a stone, so it not a weird
thing that it is indeed an angel in the shape of a stone [meaning the
Black Stone], then how you Muslim raise your hand towards it, and though
you speak to your Lord, but you are pointing toward the Holy stone, and
it is not like any stone that appear to the public.

Some unbelievers make it as a fictitious tale to mock at it and mock at
what the Muslims do and the people of the past time religions did, so we
take refuse to God the Almighty from these who mock at what God had
ordered to be honoured by His prophets and Ordered His creations to
glorify and honour it."He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no
guide"(Al-Ra'd: 33) Of what was the dog created It is mentioned from the
prophet (PUH) when he was asked about the dog, of what he was created,

he said (PUH): God created it from the saliva of Iblis, and the
questioner asked: and how was that O prophet of God, he then said (PUH):
when God got Adam and Eve down to earth, He got them down like shaking
chicks, and when their foe Iblis the damned saw them he ran to the lions
,and they were on earth before Adam, and then said to them: there are
two birds got down from the sky like them no one saw before, come and
eat them. Then the lions ran with Iblis,

and they were in a far place away from them (Adam and Eve) and Iblis
went out shouting and seducing them and tell them of how close they are,
and because of his haste and his many words coming out of his mouth,
some saliva came out and from that saliva did God create two dogs, one
male and the other a female, and they stood before Adam and Eve
protecting them from the lions and they didn't allow the lions to
approach and since that day the dog is an enemy for the lion and the
lion is an enemy for the dog.

It is mentioned also that when God got Adam (PUH) down to earth,
Ordered him to till the land and Gave him plants from paradise, so He
gave him palms, grape, olive and pomegranate and so on, and so he(Adam)
planted them to be for him and for his children and descendants after
him and he ate from the fruits, and the grape were the most aromatic and
prettier than musk and sweeter than honey, and the palm of Mary the
daughter of Amram (PUH) is the Al-'Ajwah [type of palms, it might be
translated as "pressed dates"],

and it is one of paradise's palms and was revealed in Kanun [what is
meant here it might be revealed in the month of Kanun as it is named by
people of Iraq and Syria and the surroundings where the Assyrian names
still in use for solar months], and also revealed with Adam (PUH)
Al-'Ateeq [another type of palms] and from it did the palm get diverse,
and it was mentioned before that Adam (PUH) got down with him some rods
and branches that carried every seed for every grain,

and mentioned also many things more than we had said about what did he
face but all left out to mention only the most important things for who
got the heart of caution and an ear to listen, and they mentioned also
that he was seventy arms in length and Eve was thirty five arms in
length, and he lived for nine hundreds and thirty years and was burried
in a cave in the mount of Abi-Qubays and his face to the Kaba, and Eve
lived after him by one year then got sick for fifteen days and died then
burried beside him, and when they died there did exist forty thousands
from their descendants.

Whoever scans through the life of Adam and Eve (PUT) since they were
created by God until the last day of their lives, he would surely know
that they were and still beloved by God and faithful ones and He only
knows their secrets and what are they in real and they are the parents
of human beings and the prophets and messengers, and everyone is out of
them and their son, though some might be better than them and all on
earth and on earth they live and die and on its surface will be grouped,
and He, praise be to Him,

know all that and whatever might happened by them and what will be from
their descendants even before their creation, since the enterance of
Adam and Eve into paradise and their exit and whatever happened to them
before their enterance and after their exit, for a secret that no one
knows but Him and a wisdom of His own and it is all in His hands and no
one would share Him in this or in any other matter or any command, and
so no power and no strength but by Him.

Meditate, understand and notice the company of Gabriel (PUH) for them
and his contact with Adam (PUH) without any delay and telling him(Adam)
about anything from God and about everything he met and happened with
him, and the consignment of God for him toward Adam in paradise and
after getting out of it and getting him down on earth and amusing
him(Adam) and carrying the Black Stone (the white pearl) with him from
India to Mecca and revealing the tent for him from paradise by
commandment of God and revealing the Angels to his side to amuse him by
commandment of God and teaching him the hermitage of pilgrimage,

so how we would say something that is not proper about him(Adam), and
that he did something wrong against God, the Exalted, and that he
refused the commandment of God by doing such sin, No and Never, and even
though God called it a sin, then it is like that and it is better to
leave it for Him to judge, and we showed something in the introduction
of this book about the infallibility of the prophets.

And Adam (PUH) did say to Moses the son of Amram (PUH) when God
gathered them together: Take it easy on your father O son..etc, and
mentioned that Moses asked God to gather them together, so then Adam
(PUH) did not let his heart forget about God even for a twinkling of an
eye, and God, the Exalted,

blamed him and he knew that he had done something wrong and regretted
about it and been sorry for what he had done by eating from the tree,
and he cried and been sad for so long for the anger of God, his beloved,
his Creator and his Master and Lord, and Who founded him from nothing
and from sand to existence,

completed with thought and sense, and he knew that God did not Want him
to eat from the tree that is well known with its type and he did ate
from it by the seduction of Iblis the damned and it is against the will
of the Master, the High, the Exalted and Almighty, and so the sin of
Adam and his deed with the tree that was prohibited and to Whom
prohibited him was great, and not a taboo,

but what he had done was something disliked, and this is the truth that
we believe in and no doubt we have about it for what we had explained.
[the previous paragraph was a highly philosophical in its terms and
might contain uncorrect translations].


