Introduction
============

**Introduction by the Editor, M.M Sharif, M.A, *****Director, Institute
of Islamic Culture, Lahore (Pakistan)***  
* *  
 A  
    
 Histories of philosophy have been invariably written in the light of
the philosophies of history presupposed by their authors. The result of
this has been that errors vitiating their philosophies of history have
crept into and marred their histories of philosophy. In the present work
our effort has been to steer clear of these errors.  
    
 Instead of reading history in the mirrors of presupposed philosophies
which may give distorted images, it is the study of history itself
through which the dynamics of history can be clearly seen and its laws
discovered. We hope this study of Muslim philosophy and the empirical
survey of its course will spot­light at least some of the misconceptions
current among philosophers and historians about the nature of history
and the laws governing it.  
    
 It will perhaps be generally agreed that human nature is fundamentally
the same the world over. All human beings and the cultures they develop
have the same fundamental needs, customs, impulses, and desires which,
organizer as personalities, determine their march towards their personal
and social goals.

The fundamental nature of men being the same, the basic laws of cultural
development and decay always remain the same. But owing to different
environmental conditions, cultural groups evolve differently in
different parts of the world and thousands of years of indigenous
experience give those groups their own social and psychological
character; and their character in response to environmental stimuli
creates all the differences that appear in their re­spective
life‑histories.

Muslim society forms a single cultural group. It has been subject to the
same laws of growth and decay as any other cultural group, but it has
also developed some peculiar features of its own.  
    
 B  
    
 Philosophers of social history individually differ in their views about
the universal laws of history. There is a group of
fourteenth/twentieth‑century philosophers of history who believe that
social history is like a wave, it has a rise and then it falls never to
rise again, and view a society or a culture as an organ­ism which has
only one cycle of life.

Like the life of any individual organism, the life of a culture has its
childhood, maturity, old age, and death, its spring, summer, winter, and
autumn. Just as a living organism cannot be revived after its death,
even so a culture or a society can see no revival once it is dead.
Biological, geographical, and racial causes can to a limited extent
in­fluence its life‑course but cannot change its inevitable cycle.

To this group belong Danilevsky, Spengler, and Toynbee. Our study of
Muslim culture and thought supports their view that in certain respects
the dynamism of society is like the dynamism of a wave; but are the two
other doctrines ex­pounded by these philosophers equally true? First, is
it true that a given society is a living organism? And, second, is it
true that it has only one un­repeated life‑course?

Let us first take the first. Is a society or a culture an organism? Long
ago Plato took a State to be an individual writ large. Not the same, but
a similar mistake is being made now. All analogies are true only up to a
point and not beyond that point. To view a society on the analogy of an
individual organism is definitely wrong.

As Sorokin has brilliantly shown, no society is so completely unified
into an organic whole that it should be viewed as an organism. An
individual organism is born, it grows and dies, and its species is
perpetuated by reproduction, but a culture cannot repeat itself in
species by reproduction. Revival of individual organism is impos­sible,
but the revival of a culture is possible.

It is achieved by the activization of its dormant vitality, by responses
aroused by fresh challenges, and by the infusion of new elements. The
first revival of Muslim culture‑its revival after the Mongol onslaughts
which began when hardly half a century had passed and reached its full
fruition in two centuries and a half‑was partly due to its inherent
vitality which could not be sapped completely even by these
unprece­dented events.

They seemed to affect total devastation of Muslim lands, but in fact
could produce only a depression. Soon rain‑bearing clouds gathered and
these lands were again green and teeming with life. Though the challenge
itself was the strongest the world has ever seen, it was, nevertheless,
not strong enough to destroy all response.

This revival of the Muslim culture was partly due to the infusion into
it earlier of the fresh blood of the Turkish slaves and mercenaries and
later that of the Mongol conquerors, for they themselves came into the
fold of Islam bringing with them the vigour and vitality of their
nomadic ancestors.

Each individual organism is a completely integrated whole or a complete
Gestalt, but though such an integration is an ideal of each cul­ture it
has never been fully achieved by any culture. Each culture is a
super­system consisting of some large systems such as religion,
language, law, philo­sophy, science, fine arts, ethics, economics,
technology, politics, territorial sway, associations, customs, and
mores.

Each of these consists of smaller systems as science includes physics,
chemistry, biology, zoology, etc., and each of these smaller systems is
comprised of yet smaller systems as mathematics is comprised of
geometry, algebra, arithmetic, and so on. Besides these systems there
are partly connected or wholly isolated heaps within these systems and
super‑systems.

Thus, a total culture of any organized group consists not of one
cultural system but of a multitude of vast and small cultural systems
that are partly in harmony, partly out of harmony, with one another, and
in addi­tion many congeries of various kinds.

No past empire was as well‑knit as the Umayyad Caliphate of Damascus and
yet groups like the Kharijites and the Shiites fell apart from its total
structure.

After the fall of the Umay­yads in the religious field there appeared
some isolated groups like the Qarma­tians and the Isma'ilites, and in
the political sphere Muslim Spain became not only independent of but
also hostile to the \`Abbasid Caliphate of Baghdad under which Muslim
culture and thought may be said to have reached their golden prime.  
    
 So much about the organismic side of the theory of Danilevsky,
Spengler, and Toynbee when examined in the light of the history of
Muslim culture and thought. What about its cyclical side? Is the life of
a people like a meteor, beginning, rising, falling, and then
disappearing for ever? Does the history of a society or a culture see
only one spring, one summer, and one autumn and then, in its winter,
completely close?

The philosophers of history men­tioned above, except Spengler, concede
that the length of each period may be different with different peoples
and cultures, but, according to them, the cycle is just one moving curve
or one wave that rises and falls only once.

This position also seems to be wrong. As the researches of Kroeber and
Sorokin have conclusively shown, "many great cultural or social systems
or civilizations have many cycles, many social, intellectual, and
political ups and downs in their virtually indefinitely long span of
life, instead of just one life‑cycle, one period of blossoming, and one
of decline."

In the dynamics of intellectual and aesthetic creativity, Egyptian
civilization rose and fell at least four times and
Graeco‑Roman‑Byzantine culture, several times.

Similarly, China and India had two big creative impulses and the third
has now surely begun. The Muslim civilization rose from the
first/seventh to the fifth/eleventh century. Then it gradually declined
till it received a deadly blow in the form of the Mongol onslaughts. Its
chief monuments of political and cultural greatness were almost
completely destroyed. And yet it did not die.

It rose again and saw its second rise from the last decade of the
seventh/thirteenth century to the end of the eleventh/seventeenth
century during which period its domain covered three of the biggest
empires of the world‑Turkish, Persian, and Indian‑only to fall again
from the beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth to the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century; and as this study will clearly indicate
there are now signs of a third rise in almost all Muslim lands (Book
Eight).  
    
 This shows that there is "no universal law decreeing that every culture
having once flowered must wither without any chance of flowering again."
A culture may rise in one field at one time, in another field at
another, and, thus, as a whole see many rises and falls.

In both periods of its rise Muslim culture was marked by its
religio‑political and architectural ascendancy; but while in the first
period its glory lay also in its commercial, industrial, scientific, and
philo­sophical fields, in the second it distinguished itself chiefly in
the fields of poetry, painting, secular history, travels, mysticism, and
minor arts.

If by the birth of a civilization these writers mean a sudden appearance
of a total unit like that of an organism, and by death a total
disintegration, then a total culture is never born nor does it ever die.

At its so‑called birth each culture takes over living systems or parts
of a preceding culture and integrates them with newly‑born items. As the
reader of this work will find, Muslim culture integrated within itself
what it regarded as the intrinsically or pragmatically valuable parts of
Arab Paganism, Hellenism, Judaism, Christianity, Hindu mathematics and
medicine, and Chinese mysticism and alchemy with its own contributions
to human life and thought.

Again, to talk about the death or disappearance of a culture or
civilization is meaningless.

A part of a total culture, its art or its religion, may disappear, but a
considerable part of it is always taken over by other groups by whom it
is often developed further and expanded. The Muslims did not only annex
certain areas of other cultures but they expanded their horizons much
further before annexing them as integral parts of their own culture.
Here it is important to remove a miscon­ception.

If some thought of earlier speculation runs through the fabric of
Mus­lim thought even as a golden thread, it does not mean that, like
many Western Orientalists, we should take the thread for the fabric. No
culture, as no indi­vidual thinker, makes an absolutely new start. New
structures are raised with the material already produced. The past
always rolls into the present of every culture and supplies some
elements for its emergent edifice.  
    
 States are born and they die, but cultures like the mingled waters of
different waves are never born as organisms nor die as organisms.
Ancient Greece as a State died, but after its death a great deal of
Greek culture spread far and wide and is still living as an important
element in the cultures of Europe.

Jewish States ceased to exist, but much of Jewish culture was taken over
by Chris­tianity and Islam. No culture dies in toto, though all die in
parts. In respect of those parts of culture which live, each culture is
immortal.

Each culture or civilization emerges gradually from pre‑existing
cultures. As a whole it may have several peaks, may see many ups and
downs and thus flourish for millen­nia, decline into a latent existence,
re‑emerge and again become dominant for a certain period and then
decline once more to appear again. Even when dominated by other cultures
a considerable part of it may live as an element fully or partly
integrated in those cultures.  
    
 Again, the cycle of birth, maturity, decline, and death can be
determined only by the prior determination of the life‑span of a
civilization, but there is no agreement among these writers on this
point. What according to Danilevsky is one civilization, say, the
ancient Semitic civilization, is treated by Toynbee as three
civilizations, the Babylonian, Hittite and Sumeric, and by Spengler as
two, the Magian and Babylonian.

In the life‑history of a people ones notices one birth‑and‑death
sequence, the other two, and the third three. The births and deaths of
cultures observed by one writer are not noticed at all by the others.
When the beginning and end of a culture cannot be determined, it is
extravagant to talk about its birth and death and its unrepeatable
cycle.

A civilization can see many ups and downs and there is nothing against
the possibility of its regeneration. No culture dies completely. Some
elements of each die out and others merge as living factors into other
cultures.  
    
 There is a group of fourteenth/twentieth‑century philosophers of
history who confine themselves to the study of art phenomena and draw
conclusions about the dynamics of culture in general. Peter Paul Ligeti,
Frank Chambers, and Charles Lalo belong to this group.

We may not quarrel with them about some of their conclusions; but should
like to make an observation about one of their hypotheses‑a hypothesis
on which the study of Muslim thought throws considerable light.

According to most of them, it is always the same art and the same type
or style of art which rises at one stage in the life‑history of each
culture: one art or art form at its dawn, another at its maturity, and
yet another at its decline, and then gradually both art and the
corresponding culture die. We do not accept this conclusion. The
life‑history of Greek art is not identical with that of European art or
Hindu or Muslim art.

In some cultures, like the Egyptian, Chinese, Hindu, and Muslim,
literature; in some others such as the French, German, and English
architecture; and in the culture of the Greeks, music blossomed before
any other art.

The art of the Paleolithic people reached the maturity and artistic
perfection which did not correspond to their stage of culture. In some
cultures, as the Egyptian, art shows several waves, several ups and
downs, rather than one cycle of birth, maturity, and decline.

Unlike most other cultures, Muslim culture has given no place to
sculpture and its music has risen simultaneously with its architec­ture.
Its painting is not an art that developed before all other arts. It was
in fact the last of all its artistic developments. Thus, it is not true
that the se­quence of the rise of different arts is the same in all
cultures.

Nor is it true that the same sequence appears in the style of each art
in every culture. Facts do not support this thesis, for the earliest
style of art in some cultures is symbolic, in others naturalistic,
formal, impressionistic, or expressionistic.  
    
 Another group of the fourteenth/twentieth‑century philosophers of
history avoid these pitfalls and give an integral interpretation of
history. To this group belong Northrop, Kroeber, Shubart, Berdyaev,
Schweitzer, and Sorokin. Northrop, however, weakens his position by
basing cultural systems on philo­sophies and philosophies on science.

He ignores the fact that many cultural beliefs are based on revelations
or intuitive apprehensions. Jewish, Muslim, and Hindu cultures have
philosophies based on revelation as much as on reason. The source of
some social beliefs may even be irrational and non‑rational, often
contradicting scientific theories.

Kroeber's weakness consists in making the number of geniuses rather than
the number of achievements the criterion of cultural maturity.
Schweitzer rightly contends that each flourishing civilization has a
minimum of ethical values vigorously functioning, and that the decay of
ethical values is the decay of civilizations.

Neither the collapse of the Cali­phate of Baghdad was caused entirely by
the Mongol invasions nor was the ruin of the Umayyad Caliphate of Spain
affected by the attacks of Christian monarchs of the north; nor indeed
was the second decline of the Muslim world due merely to the
imperialistic designs of Western powers.

These were only contributory factors to these downfalls. The basic
conditions of the rise and fall of nations invariably arise from within.

In each case the real cause was the lowering of moral standards brought
about by centuries of luxury and over­indulgence in worldly pleasures,
resulting in disunity, social injustice, jealousies, rivalries,
intrigues, indolence, and sloth‑all the progeny of fabulous wealth­ and
in the case of the second decline from about 1111/1700 to 1266/1850,
all­ round moral degeneration combined with conformism of the worst type
dead­ening all original thought.

Without this moral downfall there would have been no cultural decline in
Islam.  
    
 As it has been said before a culture may rise in one field at one time,
in another field at another, but while it may be rising in one field it
may yet be declining on the whale. The politico‑social rise or fall of a
culture necessarily goes with its moral rise or fall. But the case seems
to be different with intellec­tual development.

A people may decline in the politico‑social sphere and yet its decline
may itself under suitable circumstances become a stimulus for its
intellectual advance.

The political and moral decline of the \`Abbasid Caliphate of Baghdad
began in about the middle of the third/ninth century, and the collapse
of the Umayyad Caliphate of Spain and decadence of the Fatimid Caliphate
of Egypt in the beginning of the fifth/eleventh century. Yet the
deep‑rooted tradition of the patronage of learning in the Muslim world
kept its intellectual achievements rising from peak to peak right up to
the time of the Mongol devastation.

Thus, despite its downfall in other fields, in the field of learning
Muslim culture saw its ascendancy right up to the middle of the
seventh/thirteenth century. In fact this period of political and moral
fall‑­the period during which Muslims everywhere lost their solidarity
and the three Caliphates broke into petty States or sundry dynasties‑was
exactly the period when the Muslim intellect reached its full flowering.

It was during this period of political and moral decline that flourished
such illustrious philoso­phers as al‑Farabi, ibn Sina, Miskawaih, ibn
Hazm, al‑Ghazali, ibn Bajjah, ibn Tufail, ibn Rushd, and Fakhr al‑Din
Razi; the famous mystic Shihab al‑Din Suhrawardi; great political
philosophers like al‑Mawardi and Nizam al‑Mulk Tusi; renowned scientists
and mathematicians like al‑Majriti, ibn Yunus, ibn Haitham, ibn
al‑Nafis, al‑Biruni, al‑Bakri, al‑Zarqah, \`Umar Khay­yam, ibn Zuhr, and
al‑Idrisi; and such celebrated literary figures as al‑Tabari, al‑Masudi,
al‑Mutanabbi, Firdausi, Baqillani, Sana'i, al‑Ma'arri, Nasir Khusrau,
al‑Zamakhshari, Kashani, Niyami, \`Attar, and ibn al‑Athir.

Though three celebrities, Rumi, Sa'di, and Nasir al‑Din Tusi, died long
after the sack of Baghdad, they were actually the products of this very
period and much of their works had been produced within it.[^1] When
moral degeneration sets in, a culture's intellectual achievements may
stray but cannot avert the evil day.  
    
 In this example there is a lesson for those who are using their high
intellectual attainments for the conquest even of the moon, Venus, and
Mars, for they may yet be culturally on the decline, if superabundance
of wealth leads them to luxury, licence, and moral degradation on the
whole.  
    
 C  
    
 In the Introduction to the *History of Philosophy, Eastern and
Western*, it is complained that histories written since the beginning of
the thirteenth/nine­teenth century suffer from the defect that they
ignore all developments in philosophy before the time of the Greeks.

This complaint, or rather indict­ment, is perfectly justified, not only
in the case of the historians of the thir­teenth/nineteenth century but
also of those of the twelfth/eighteenth century. Every thinker of these
two centuries understood history as if it were identical with Western
history.

They viewed history as one straight line of events moving across the
Western world; divided this line into three periods, ancient, medieval,
and modern; and lumped together the Egyptian, Indian, Chinese, and
Babylonian civilizations, each of which had passed through several
stages of development, in the briefest possible prelude (in some cases
covering not even a page) to the Graeco‑Roman period designated as
"ancient."

Histories of other civilizations and people did not count, except for
those events which could be easily linked with the chain of events in
the history of the West. Toynbee justly describes this conception of
history as an egocentric illusion, and his view is shared by all recent
philosophers of history.

Whatever their differences in other matters, in one thing the
twentieth‑century philosophers of history are unanimous, and that is
their denunciation of the linear concep­tion of progress.

We associate ourselves with them in this. Just as in biology progress
has been explained by a trend from lower to higher, or from less
per­fect to more perfect, or from less differentiated and integrated to
more differ­entiated and integrated, similarly Herder, Fichte, Rant, and
Hegel and almost all the philosophers of the twelfth/eighteenth and
thirteenth/nineteenth cen­turies explained the evolution of human
society by one principle, one social trend, and their theories were thus
stamped with the linear law of progress.

The present‑day writers criticism of them is perfectly justified in
respect of their view of progress as a line, ascending straight or
spirally, whether it is Fichte's line advancing as a sequence of certain
values, or Herder's and Kant's from violence and war to Justice and
peace, or Hegel's to ever‑increasing free­dom of the Idea, or Spencer's
to greater and greater differentiation and integ­ration, or Tonnie’s
advancing from *Gemeinschaft *to *Gesellschaft, *or Durkheim's from a
state of society based on mechanical solidarity to organic solidarity,
or Buckle's from diminishing influence of physical laws to an increasing
influence of mental laws, or Navicow's from physiological determination
to purely intellectual competition, or any other line of a single
principle explaining the evolution of human society as a whole.  
    
 Every civilization has a history of its own and each has its own
ancient, medieval, and modern periods. In most cases these periods are
not identical with the ancient, medieval, and modern periods of Western
culture starting from the Greek. Several cultures preceded the Western
culture and some start­ing earlier are still contemporaneous with it.

They cannot be thrown into oblivion because they cannot be placed in the
three periods of the cultures of the West, ancient, medieval, and
modern. Western culture is not the measure of all humanity and its
achievements. You cannot measure other cultures and civilizations or the
whole of human history by the three‑knotted yardstick of progress in the
West.

Mankind consists of a number of great and small countries each having
its own drama, its own language, its own ideas, its own passions, its
own customs and habits, its own possibilities, its own goals, and its
own life‑course. If it must be represented lineally, it would not be by
one line but several lines or rather bands of variegated and constantly
changing colours, reflecting one another and merging into one another.  
    
 While the learned editors of the History of *Philosophy, Eastern and
Western,* have endeavoured to remove one flaw in the treatment of
ancient history, they have failed to remove similar flaws in the
treatment of what the Western writers designate as the "medieval" period
of history.

A very large part of this period is covered by the phenomenal rise and
development of Muslim thought which carried human achievement in the
intellectual field, as in many other fields, to one of its highest
peaks.

For this the most glorious part of medieval history not more than four
out of forty‑eight chapters have been assigned in the history
of*Philosophy, Eastern and Western.* 

Nor, indeed, has even a word‑been said about the well‑recognized role of
Muslim philosophy in transmitting Greek thought to the West, in
advancing human knowledge, in supplying a mould for the shaping of
Western scholasticism, in developing empirical sciences, in bringing
about the Italian‑Renaissance, and in pro­viding stimulus to the
speculation of Western thinkers from Descartes to Kant.  
    
 More-over, in the account given of the "modern" period of history, the
philosophical achievements of the East, except those in India, have been
completely omitted. The reader of this historical work gets the
impression that from the time of Descartes to that of Sartre, i.e., the
present day, the East, outside India, intellectually ceased to exist.  
    
 It is true that the *History of Philosophy, Eastern and Western, *is
not alone characterized by these omissions. The same gaps, even more
yawning, are found in the histories of philosophy written by Western
scholars; but while in the works of the Westerners they are
understandable, in those of the eastern scholars they are unpardonable.

Nevertheless, in this particular case they became unavoidable for the
able editors did intend to have some more chapters on Muslim philosophy,
but the writer to whom these chapters were assigned‑was also a minister
of the State holding an important portfolio and his heavy official
duties left him no time to write them.  
    
 D  
    
 The history of Muslim thought throws a flood of light on the logic of
history. A controversy has gone on for a long time about the laws that
govern historical sequences. Vico in the twelfth/eighteenth century
contended, under the deep impression of the lawfulness prevailing in
natural sciences, that historical events also follow one another
according to the unswerving laws of nature. The law of mechanical
causality is universal in its sway.

The same view was held by Saint Simon, Herbert Spencer, Karl Marx and in
recent times by Mandelbaum and Wiener. On the other hand, idealists like
Max Weber, Windel­band, and Rickert are of the view that the objects of
history are not units with universal qualities; they are unique,
unrepeatable events in a particular space and a specific time.

Therefore, no physical laws can be formed about them. Historical events
are undoubtedly exposed to influences from biological, geo­logical,
geographical, and racial forces; yet they are always carried by human
beings who use and surmount these forces. Mechanical laws relate to
facts but historical events relate to values.

Therefore the historical order of laws is dif­ferent from the physical
laws of mechanical causation. To us it seems that both the groups go to
extremes. The empiricists take no account of the freedom of the will and
the resolves, choices, and goals of human beings and the idealists
forget that even human beings are not minds, but body‑minds; and though
they initiate events from their own inner resources, they place them in
the chain of mechanical causality.

It is true that historical events and the lives of civilizations and
cultures follow one another according to the inner laws of their own
nature, yet history consists in the moral, intellectual, and aesthetic
achievements of individuals and groups based on resolves and choices,
using causation‑a divine gift‑as a tool, now obeying, now revolting
against divine will working within them aid in the world around them,
now co‑operating and now fighting with one another, now falling, now
rising, and thus carving their own destinies.  
    
 E  
    
 The thought of Hegel and of Marx is having a great influence on the
deve­lopment of the philosophy of history. As is well known, Hegel is a
dialectical idealist.

The whole world for him is the development of the Idea, a rational
entity, which advances by posing itself as a thesis; develops from
itself its own opposite, antithesis; and the two ideas, instead of
constantly remaining at war, get united in an idea which is the
synthesis of both; and this synthesis becomes the thesis for another
triad and thus triad after triad takes the world to higher and yet
higher reaches of progress.

Thus, the historical process is a Process of antagonisms and their
reconciliations. The Idea divides itself into the "Idea‑in‑itself" (the
world of history) and the "Idea‑in‑its‑otherness" (the world as nature).
Hegel's division of the world into two watertight compartments has
vitiated the thought of several of his successors, Rickert, Windle­band,
and Spengler, and even of Bergson.

If electrons, amoebas, fleas, fishes, and apes were to speak, they could
reasonably ask why, born of the same cosmic energy, determined by the
same laws, having the same limited freedom, they should be supposed to
be mere nature having no history.

To divide the world-­stuff into nature and history is unwarranted.
History consists of sequences of groups of events, and we have learnt
since Einstein that objects in nature are also groups of events.

There is no essential difference between the two. The only difference is
that up to a certain stage there is no learning by experience; beyond
that there is. According to Hegel, the linear progress of the Idea or
Intelligence, in winning rational freedom, culminates in the State, the
best example of which is the German State. Such a line of thought
justifies internal tyranny, external aggression, and wars between
States.

It finds no place in the historical process for world organizations like
the United Nations or the World Bank and is falsified by the factual
existence of such institutions in the present stage of world history.
Intelligence is really only one aspect of the human mind, and there
seems to be no ground for regarding this one aspect, the knowing aspect,
of only one kind of the world‑stuff, i.e., mankind as the essence of the
world‑stuff.  
    
 The mind of one who rejects Hegel's idealism at once turns to Marx.
Marxian dialectic is exactly the same as Hegel's. But, according to
Marx, the world‑stuff is not the Idea, but matter. He uses this word,
matter, in the sense in which it was used by the
thirteenth/nineteenth‑century French materialists.

But the idea of matter as inert mass has been discarded even by
present‑day physics. World‑stuff is now regarded as energy which can
take the form of mass. Dialectical materialism, however, is not
disproved by this change of meaning of the word "matter." It can still
be held in terms of a realistic dialectic‑the terms in which the
present‑day Marxists hold it.  
 With the new terminology, then, the Marxist dialectic takes this form:
Something real (a thesis) creates from within itself its opposite,
another real (antithesis), which both, instead of warring perpetually
with each other, get united into a synthesis (a third real) which
becomes the thesis of another triad, and thus from triad to triad till,
in the social sphere, this dialectic of reals leads to the actualization
of a classless society.

Our objection to Hegel's position that he does not find any place for
international organizations in the historical process does not apply to
Marx, but the objection that Hegel considers war a necessary part of the
historical process applies equally to him.

Hegel's system encourages wars between nations; Marx's between classes.
Besides, Marxism is self‑contradictory, for while it recognizes the
inevitability or necessity of the causal law, it also recognizes
initiative and free creativity of classes in changing the world.

Both Marx and Hegel make history completely determined, and completely
ignore the most universal law of human nature, the law that people,
becoming dissatisfied with their situation at all moments of their lives
except when they are in sound sleep, are in the pursuit of ideals and
values (which before their realization are mere ideas); and thus if
efficient causes push them on (which both Hegel and Marx recognize),
final causes are constantly exercising their pull (which both of them
ignore).  
    
 Our recognition of final causes as determinants of the course of
history leads us to the formulation of a new hypothesis. According to
this hypothesis, human beings and their ideals are logical contraries or
discreprants in so far as the former are real and the latter ideal, and
real and ideal cannot be attributed to the same subject in the same
context. Nor can a person and his ideal be thought of in the relation of
subject and predicate.

For, an ideal of a person is what the person is not. There is no
*essential* opposition between two ideals or between two reals, but
there is a genuine incompatibility between a real and an ideal. What is
real is not ideal and whatever is ideal is not real.

Both are opposed in their essence. Hegelian ideas and Marxist reals are
not of oppo­site *nature.*They are in conflict in their *function. *They
are mutually warring ideas or warring reals and are separated by
hostility and hatred.

The incom­patibles of our hypothesis are so in their nature, but not in
their function, and are bound by love and affection and, though rational
discrepants, are volitional­ly and emotionally in harmony. In the
movement of history real selves are attracted by ideals, and then, in
realizing them, are synthesized with them.

This movement is dialectical, but it is totally different from the
Hegelian or Marxist dialectic. Their thesis and antithesis are
struggling against each other. Here, one is struggling not "against" but
"for" the other. The formula of the dynamic of history, according to
this conception, will be:

A real (thesis) creates from within itself an ideal (antithesis) which
both by mutual harmony get united into another real (synthesis) that
becomes the thesis of another triad and thus from triad to triad. The
dialectic of human society, according to this formula, is not a struggle
of warring classes or warring nations, but a struggle against
limitations to realize goals and ideals, which goals and ideals are
willed and loved rather than fought against.

This is a dialectic of love rather than of hatred. It leads individuals,
masses, classes, nations, and civili­zations from lower to higher and
from higher to yet higher reaches of achieve­ment. It is a dialectic
which recognizes an over‑all necessity of a transcen­dentally determined
process (a divine order), takes notice of the partial free­dom of social
entities and of the place of mechanical determination as a tool in
divine and human hands.  
    
 This hypothesis is not linear because it envisages society as a vast
number of interacting individuals and intermingling, interacting
classes, societies, cul­tures, and humanity as a whole, moving towards
infinite ideals, now rising, now falling, but on the whole developing by
their realization, like the clouds constantly rising from the foot‑hills
of a mountain range, now mingling, now separating, now flying over the
peaks, now sinking into the valleys, and yet ascending from hill to hill
in search of the highest peak.  
    
 This hypothesis avoids the Spencerian idea of steady progress, because
it recognizes ups and downs in human affairs and rises and falls of
different civilizations and their thought at different stages of world
history.

It avoids measuring the dynamics of history by the three‑knotted rod of
Western cul­ture and does not shelve the question of change in human
society as a whole. It leaves the door of future achievement open to all
and does not condemn certain living cultures to death.  
    
 Briefly stated, the hypothesis to which the study of Muslim thought, as
the study of Muslim culture as a whole, lends support has a negative as
well as a positive aspect.

Negatively, it is non‑organismic, non‑cyclic, and non‑linear; and,
positively, it involves belief in social dynamics, in progress in human
society through the ages by rises and falls, in the importance of the
role of ethical values in social advance, in the possibility of cultural
regeneration, in the environmental obstacles as stimuli to human action,
in freedom and purpose as the ultimate sources of change, and in
mechanical determinism as an instrument in divine and human hands.  
    
 F  
    
 The chief aim of this work is to give an account not of Muslim culture
as a whole, nor of Muslim thought in general, but only of one aspect of
Muslim thought, i.e., Muslim philosophy. But since this philosophy had
its beginning in a religion based on philosophical fundamentals and it
developed in close association with other spheres of thought, sciences,
humanities, and arts, we have thought it desirable to give brief
accounts of these other disciplines as well (Book Five).

Book Five has become necessary because in many cases the same thinkers
were at once philosophers, scientists, and writers on the Humanities and
Fine Arts.

Besides writing on philosophy al‑Kindi wrote, to number only the main
subjects, also on astrology, chemistry, optics, and music; al‑Farabi on
music, psychology, politics, economics, and mathematics; ibn Sina on
medicine, chemistry, geometry, astronomy, theology, poetry, and music;
Zakriya al‑Razi on medicine and alchemy; al‑Ghazali on theology, law,
physics, and music; and the Ikhwan al‑Safa on mathematics, astronomy,
geography, music, and ethics.

Likewise ibn Haitham left works not only on philosophy but also on
optics, music, mathematics, astronomy, and medicine, and Nasir al‑Din
Tusi on mathematics, astronomy, physics, medicine, miner­alogy, music,
history, and ethics. In Muslim Spain, ibn Bajjah wrote on philo­sophy,
medicine, music, and astronomy; ibn Tufail on philosophy and medi­cine;
and ibn Rushd on philosophy, theology, medicine, and astronomy. And what
is true of these thinkers is true of a host of others.  
    
 In the Introduction to the *History of Philosophy, Eastern and
Western, *to which reference has already been made it has been rightly
observed that the histories of philosophy written before the nineteenth
century might be aptly described as the histories of philosophers rather
than the histories of philosophy.

But it seems to us that when a history aims at giving an account
of‑theories and movements, it cannot do without dealing with
philosophers, for the relation between them and the movements they start
or the theories they propound is too intimate to allow their complete
severance.

Therefore, in our endeavour to give a historical account of the
movements, systems, and disciplines in Muslim thought we have made no
effort to eliminate the treatment of indivi­dual philosophers where it
has been called for. In this procedure we have fol­lowed the excellent
example of T. J. de Boer who can be justly regarded as a pioneer in this
most neglected field.  
    
 We have begun our treatment of the subject by giving in Book One a
brief account of the whole field of philosophy in the pre‑Islamic world
in general and Arabia in particular. We have devoted Book Two to
philosophical teachings of the Qur'an. This we have done with the
express hope that these two books together will give the reader a
correct idea of the real source of Muslim philo­sophy and enable him to
view this philosophy in its true perspective.  
    
 Muslim philosophy like Muslim history in general has passed through
five different stages. The first stage covers the period from the first
first/seventh cen­tury to the fall of Baghdad. We have dealt with this
period under the heading "Early Centuries." This is followed by a
shock‑absorbing period of about half a century. Its third stage is that
of its second flowering treated under the heading "Later Centuries."

It covers the period from the beginning of the eighth/fourteenth to the
beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth century. The fourth stage is that of
the most deplorable decline covering a century and a half. This is in
the truest sense the Dark Age of Islam. With the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century begins its fifth stage covering the period
of the modern renaissance.

Thus, in the curve of its history, Muslim philosophy has had two rises
and two falls and is now showing clear signs of a third rise.  
    
 We have said very little about the periods of decline, for these have
little to do with philosophical developments. During the first period of
its greatness Muslim philosophy shows four distinct lines of thought.
The first is the theo­logico‑philosophical line, the second is mystical,
the third philosophical and scientific, and the fourth is that taken by
those whom we have called the “middle‑roaders.”

These have been treated respectively in Book Three, Parts 1, 2, 3, and
4. In Book Four we have traced the same lines of thought running through
the second rise of Islam in order to bring it in clear contrast with the
first.  
    
 During both of these periods of Islamic rise, considerable activity is
notice­able in other disciplines. We have dealt with all these in Book
Five.  
    
 The period of modern renaissance in Islam, a brief account of which is
given in Book Eight, is marked by political struggle for emancipation
from foreign domination and freedom from conformism in both life and
thought.

The philo­sophers of this period are not mere philosophers. They are
more political lead­ers, social reformers, and men of action. Therefore,
although chapters 72, 73, 74, 77, 80, and 83 contribute little to
aca­demic philosophy, yet they throw a flood of light on the
philosophies of life and history, and for that reason have been
considered indispensable for our work.  
    
 So much about the past. But what about the present and how about the
future? The position of philosophy amongst the Muslim peoples today is
no worse than it is in the rest of the world. What type of philosophical
thought the future has in store for them we shall try to forecast in our
concluding re­marks.

[^1]: As Rumi's most important work, the Mathnawi, was written between
659/1261 and 670/1272, we have included him among writers of the
centuries following the sack of Baghdad.


