Chapter 1:Pre-Islamic Indian Thought
====================================

*Pre-Islamic Indian Thought by C.A Qadir, M.A, Professor of Philosophy,
Government College, Lahore (Pakistan)*

Maurice Bloomfield says paradoxically in The Religion of the Rig‑Veda
that “Indian religion begins before its arrival in India.”[^1] By this
he means to imply that Indian religion is a continuation of the
primitive faith of the Indo­-European race to which the Aryans that came
to India belonged.

“The Sanskrit word deva (to shine) for God is similar to the Latin word
deus; yaj a Sanskrit word for worship is common to more than one
Indo‑European language; while the Vedic god Mitra has his counterpart in
the Iranian god Mithra.”

From a comparative study of the beliefs and practices of the Teutonic,
Hellenic, Celtic, Slavonic, Italian, Armenian, and Persian peoples which
all sprang from the Indo‑European race, it has been established beyond
the slightest doubt that the basis of their religion was an animistic
belief in a very large number of petty gods, each of which had a special
function.

They were worshipped with sacrifice, accompanied with potent formulas
and prayers. Magic was highly regarded and much used.

It is greatly regretted that there is neither any formal history nor any
archaeo­logical remain to throw light on the early home of this ancient
race or on the time when the great historical people hived off from it.
Our principal source for the history, religion, and philosophy of the
Indian branch is the Vedas besides the Epics and the Puranas.

The Vedas
---------

Among the Vedas, the oldest is Rg‑Veda which consists of more than a
thousand hymns composed by successive generations of poets during a
period of many centuries. The hymns are connected in various ways with
the sacrifices, the domestic ceremonies, and the religious speculation
of the time, and are concerned chiefly with the worship of gods, who
represent personifi­cation of natural forces, and the propitiation of
demoniac beings.

In the Indo‑Iranian period the refreshing drink prepared from the
soma­plant was offered to gods in a special ritual and the singing of a
hymn was a necessary part of the ritual. The Aryans brought this custom
with them and continued to compose verses for the sama‑ritual and for
the occasions of annual sacrifices in their new homeland. As the hymns
were to be sung, a class of priests arose whose duty it was to recite
poems of praise in honour of gods.

The priests who could sing better hymns and were in possession of a
secret lore, which enabled them by conducting sacrifices in the right
way to win the favour of gods for their patrons, were in great demand.
Consequently, a number of priestly families vied with one another in
composing hymns in the best language and metre then available.

The Rg‑Veda gives evidence of seven such families each bearing the name
of a patriarch to whom the hymns are ascribed.

At first the hymn collections of six families were brought together and
then of nine. At a much later stage some scholars collected one hundred
and ninety­ one poems which were taught as the last section of the oral
curriculum of hymns. Thus, there became ten books of the Rg‑Veda.

The mantras of the Atharva‑Veda consist largely of spells for magical
pur­poses and advocate pure and unalloyed polytheism. The other Vedas
are entirely sacrificial in purpose. The Sama‑Veda consists of verses
borrowed from the Rg‑Veda to be applied to soma‑sacrifice. The
Yajur‑Veda consists of ritual formulas of the magical type.

For a long time the number of the Vedas was limited to three, the
Atharva Veda being totally excluded from the group of the Vedas. In
support of this contention the following verse from Manu can be cited:
“From Agni, Vayu, and Ravi, He drew forth for the accomplishment of
sacrifice the eternal triple Veda, distinguished as Rik, Yajush and
Saman.”[^2] Similarly, in Satapatha Brahnmanas it is said, “The
Rik‑Yajush‑Saman verses are the threefold science.”[^3]

A probable reason for the exclusion of the Atharva‑Veda from the Vedas
is that “it consists mostly of magic spell, sorcery, and incantations
which were used by the non‑Aryans and the lower classes to achieve
worldly goods such as wealth, riches, children, health, and freedom from
disease .... The Atharva­ Veda was recognized later on when hymns
relating to sacrifices seem to have been added to it to gain recognition
from the orthodoxy.” [^4]

### Vedic Conception of God

The religion of the Vedas is polytheism. It has not the charm and grace
of the pantheon of the Homeric poems; but it cer­tainly stands nearer
the origin of the gods. All gods whether great or small are deified
natural phenomena. The interesting thing about them is that they are
identified with the glorious things whose deifications they are and are
also distinguished from them.

They are still thought of as being sun, moon, rain, wind, etc., yet each
god is conceived as a glorious being who has his home in heaven and who
comes sailing in his far‑shining car to the sacrifice and sits down on
the grass to hear his own praise recited and sung and to receive the
offerings.[^5] The hymns sung by the priests were mainly invocations of
the gods meant to accompany the oblation of soma‑juice and the
fire‑sacrifice of the melted butter.

The Vedas are not consistent in their account of the gods. In one myth
the sun is a male, in another‑a female. The sun and the moon are
mentioned in one place as rivals, elsewhere as husband and wife. The dog
is extolled in one place as a deity and in another mentioned as a vile
creature. Again the sun, the sky, and the earth are looked upon
sometimes as natural objects governed by particular gods and sometimes
as themselves gods who generate and control other beings.

In the Rg‑Veda, heaven and earth are ordinarily regarded as the parents
of gods, pitra[^6] or matra.[^7] In other passages heaven (dyaus) is
separately styled as father and the earth (prithivi) as mother.[^8] At
other places, however, they are spoken of as having been created.

Thus it is said,[^9] that he who produced heaven and earth must have
been the most skilful artisan of all the gods. Again, Indra is described
as having formed them, to follow him as chariot wheels do a horse. At
other places the creation of the earth and the heaven is ascribed to
Soma and Pushan.

Thus, while the gods are regarded in some passages of the Rg‑Veda as the
offsprings of heaven and earth, they are at other places considered
independent of these deities and even their creators.

In various texts of the Rg‑Veda the gods are spoken of as being
thirty‑three in number. Thus it is said in the Rg‑Veda: “Come hither
Nasatyas, Asvins, together with the thrice eleven gods, to drink our
nectar.”[^10] Again, “Agni, the wise gods lend an ear to their
worshippers. God with the ruddy steeds, who lovest praise, bring hither
those three and thirty.”[^11]

In the Satapatha Brahmanas this number of thirty‑three gods is explained
as made up of eight vasus, eleven rudras, and twelve adityas, together
with heaven and earth, or, according to another passage, together with
Indra and Prajapati instead of heaven and earth.

The enumeration of gods as thirty‑three is not adhered to throughout the
Vedas. In the Rg‑Veda, the gods are mentioned as being much more
numerous: “Three thousand, three hundred, thirty and nine gods have
worshipped Agni.”[^12] Thus verse which is one of the many shows that
the Vedic Indian believed in the existence of a much larger number of
supernatural beings than thirty‑three.

The gods were believed to have had a beginning; they were stated to be
mortal, but capable of overcoming death by the practice of austerity.
The Rg Veda says that the gods acquired immortality by drinking soma.
Still the gods are not self‑existent or unbeginning beings.

It has been seen that they are described in various passages of the
Rg‑Veda as offsprings of heaven and earth. In various texts of the
Rg‑Veda the birth of Indra is mentioned, and his father and mother are
also alluded to. [^13]

The Vedic gods can be classified as deities of heaven, air, and earth:

#### 1. Celestial Gods

The oldest god is Dyaus, generally coupled with Prithivi when the two
are regarded as universal parents. Another is Varuna, the greatest of
the Vedic gods besides Indra. It is he who sustains and upholds physical
and moral order. In the later Vedas, when Prajapati became creator and
supreme god, the importance of Varuna waned, and in the post Vedicperiod
Varuna retained only the dominion of waters as god of the sky.

Various aspects of the solar activity are represented by five gods,
namely, Mitra, a personifica­tion of the sun's beneficent power; Surya,
the proper name of the sun, regarded as the husband of dawn; Savitri,
the life‑giving activity of the sun; Pusan, a pastoral deity
personifying the bountiful power of the sun; and Visnu occupying the
central place in this pantheon.

#### 2. Atmospheric Gods

The most important of these gods is Indra, a favourite national deity of
the Aryan Indians. He is not an uncreated being. It is said of him, “Thy
father was the parent of a most heroic son; the maker of Indra, he also
produced the celestial and unconquerable thunder . . . was a most
skil­ful workman.”[^14] Again, “A vigorous (god) begot him, a vigorous
(son), for the battle; a heroic female (nari) brought him forth, a
heroic soul.”[^15]

His whole appearance is golden; his arms are golden; he carries a golden
whip in his hands; and he is borne on a shining golden car with a
thousand supports. His car is drawn by two golden steeds with flowing
golden manes. He is famous for slaying Vrta after a terrific battle, as
a result of which water is released for man and light is restored to
him.

Certain immoral acts are also attributed to him. He occasionally
indulges in acts of violence such as slaying his father or destroying
the car of Dawn. Less important gods of this group are Trita, Apamnapat
and Matarisvan. The sons of Rudra, the malignant deities of the Vedas,
are the Maruts (the storm‑gods) who help Indra in his conflicts. The god
of wind is Vayu while that of water is Apah.

#### 3. Terrestrial Gods

‑Rivers are deified. Thus Sindu (Indus), Vipas (Bias), and Sutudri
(Sutlej) are invoked in the Rg‑Veda. The most important god is
Sarasvati, often regarded as the wife of Brahma. Another very important
god is Agni, the god of fire. The number of hymns addressed to him far
exceeds those addressed to any other, divinity with the exception of
Indra. In the Rg‑Veda he is frequently spoken of as a goblin‑slayer.
Another god is Soma, the divine drink which makes those who drink it
immortal. A priest says in the Rg‑Veda: “We have drunk Soma, we have
become immortal, we have entered into light, and we have known gods.”

In addition to these, there is a host of abstract deities and also
deities of less importance which cannot be described here for want of
space. Suffice it to say that an attempt was made by the sages (rsis) to
introduce order in the bewildering multiplicity of gods. As several gods
had similar functions, they were in some cases bracketed together, so
that it might be said that when Indra and Agni performed identical
functions, Agni was Indra or Indra was Agni.

Hence arose many dual gods. A farther effort in the direction of
systematization was made through what Max Miller has called henotheism­
a tendency to address any of the gods, say, Agni, Indra, Varuna, or any
other deity, “as for the time being the only god in existence with an
entire forget­fulness of all other gods.”

Macdonell has a different theory to explain the so­ called henotheism by
ascribing to it exaggeration, thus retaining the charge of polytheism
against the Veda. Some modern Hindus under the influence of Swami
Dayananda repudiate both these theories as inconsistent with the true
spirit of the Vedas “[^16]He is One, sages call Him by different names,
e.g., Agni, Yama, Maarishvan.”[^17]

No doubt, a few verses of this nature can be found in the Vedas; but the
consensus of scholars is that monotheistic verses are a product of the
later Vedic period and that they do nt express the do­minant strain of
the Vedic thought. Shri Krishna Saksena in his chapter “Indian
Philosophy” in A History of Philosophical Systems edited by V. Ferm says
that the early mantras contain a religion of nature‑worship in which
powers of nature like fire (agni) and wind (vayu) are personified.

In later hymns and the Brahmanas, monotheistic tendencies began to crop
up a little. Swami Dayananda was a product of Hindu‑Muslim culture and
his insistence on monotheism shows the extent to which Muslim thought
has influenced Indian religious beliefs.

### Vedic Eschatology

The Rg‑Veda makes no distinct reference to a future life except in its
ninth and tenth books. Yama, the god of death, was the first of the
mortals to die. He discovers the way to the other world; guides other
men there, assembles them in a home, which is secured for them for ever.
He grants luminous abodes to the pious and is an object of terror for
the wicked.

Yama is said to have two insatiable dogs with four eyes and wide
nostrils that act as his messengers and convey the spirits of men to the
abode of their forefathers. After a person's dead body has been burnt,
his spirit soars to the realm of eternal light in a car or on wings and
enters upon a more perfect life which fulfils all of his desires and
grants him unending happiness.

Since the Vedic gods did not have purely spiritual pleasures but were
often subject to sensual appetites, it can be said that the pleasures
promised to the pious in the world to come were not altogether
spiritual. Yama is described as carous­ing with the gods,[^18]
Gandharvas, a class of gods who are described as hairy like dogs and
monkeys, often assume handsome appearance to seduce the earthly
females.[^19] Indra is said to have had a happy married life.

### Brahmanas

Each of the four Vedas has three sub‑divisions: the Samhitas (sacred
texts), the Brahmanas (commentaries), and the Aranyakas (forest books):
The Brahmanas are, therefore, an integral part of the Vedas. Sayana, a
great scholar of the Vedas, says, “Veda is the denomination of the
Mantras and the Brahmanas.”[^20] (Swami Dayananda differs on this
point.)

By the Mantras are meant hymns and prayers; and the Brahmanas are
intended to elucidate objects which are only generally adverted to in
the hymns. The Brahmanas comprise precepts which inculcate religious
duties, maxims which explain those precepts, and arguments which relate
to theology.

Considering the fact that the Brahmanas often quote from the Vedas and
devote themselves to the clarification of the ritualistic and the
philosophical portions of the Vedas, it may be concluded that the
Samhitas must have existed in their present form before the compilation
of the Brahmanas was undertaken.

In fact in the Brahmanass, we find fully developed the whole Brahmanical
system, of which we have but faint indications in the Vedas.

We have the whole body of religious and social institutions far more
complicated than the simple ritual of the Samhitas; four castes with the
Brahmins at the top and the Sudras at the bottom have been recognized
both in theory and in practice‑all this shows that the Brahmanas must
have been composed a long time after the Vedas.

It is, however, obvious that the Brahmanas were a kind of a scriptural
authority for the Brahmanical form of worship and social institutions.

### Upanisads

The third integral part of the Vedas, namely, the Aranayakas, intended
for the study of the anchorites in the forests in the third stage of
their life, led ultimately to the Upanisads or Vedantas as the
concluding por­tion of the Vedas. These were meant for the ascetics in
the fourth stage of their lives called the Sannyasa Asrama.

Literally, the word Upanisad means “a sitting besides.” i. e., a lesson
taught by the teacher to the pupils sitting by his side. These
discourses expounded in enigmatic formulae a series of esoteric
doctrines to the selected few students, mainly Brahmins, who were
deemed, fit to receive such a course of instruction.

Considering the age which gave birth to the Upanisads for understanding
some of the major problems of life, one marvels at the depth and insight
of the early Hindu seers. Their attitude towards the Vedas was not one
of veneration; it was on the contrary an attitude of doubt and
disrespect. While they considered Vedas to be of divine origin, they
felt at the same time that the Vedic knowledge was inferior to the true
divine insight and could not liberate them.[^21]

They were not concerned with the world of phenomena and denounced with
all the force at their disposal the rich and elaborate ritualism then
pre­valent. Sacrifice, an integral part of the Vedic faith, had no
significance for then. Their interest lay not in the outer world but in
the inner and, within that, in the mystery of the self.

The introverted Brahmins were accordingly carried far beyond the realm
of the anthropomorphic deities of the early Vedic period and devoted
attention to that all‑transcending principle from which all natural
forces and events were supposed to proceed. The Upanisads, however, fall
short of offering a coherent presentation of the Brahmanic doc­trine of
the Universal Soul‑in‑all‑things. “This is only found in them in
frag­ments, some small, some large. And in addition these fragments are
the work of various schools and various ages. Those who have described
the Upanisads as chaotic are not altogether wrong.”[^22]

It would be hard to say what philoso­phical opinions might not be
supported on their authority, for the most part contradictory statements
find a place in them, yet the tendency is on the whole towards
pantheism. The Upanisads teach the identity of the soul of all beings
both animate and inanimate with the Universal Soul. Since the Universal
Soul dwells in all, one finds one's own self in all things, both living
and non­living.

In this light alone can the meaning of the famous tat tvam asi (That art
thou) of the Upanisads be understood. The human self is not a part of
the Divine Self, but is the Brahman‑Atman whole and undivided. The Self
is consequently a single principle, which, philosophically speaking, can
offer an explanation for the entire spectacle of nature.

It is often said that the pillars on which the edifice of Indian
philosophy rests are Atman and Brahman. These terms have no fixed
connotation in the Upanisads. Generally speaking, Atman is used to
designate self or soul, while Brahman is used to denote the primary
cause of things.

What is remarkable about these terms is that though their significance
is different, one denoting an inner world of subjectivity and the other
an objective principle of explana­tion, yet in course of time the two
came to be used interchangeably‑both signifying an eternal principle of
the universe.

The notion of the self was arrived at through introspection and it was
thought by the Upanisads thinkers that the outer reality should
correspond exactly with the psychical reality within. In this way what
was simply a psychical principle came to be recognized as a world
principle.

This strain of thought was supported by another which objec­tively
traced the visible universe to a single source, namely, Brahman, and
Brahman was identified with the Atman. Thus, two independent currents of
thought met together and paved the way to monism of an idealistic type
which has remained till now the hallmark of Indian philosophy.

By combining subjective and objective principles into one, the ultimate
principle partook of the characteristics of both‑it became infinite as
well as spiritual. All this is very well expressed in Chandogya‑Upanisad
in a dialogue between a father and a son. The sum and substance of the
story is that the primal spiritual principle is all‑comprehensive and
that the principle is no other than the self of the person then engaged
in the discussion.

With regard to the nature of Brahman (the Absolute) there is a great
divergence of opinion. At some places He is conceived as cosmic, i.e.,
all‑comprehensive, at others acosmic, i.e., all‑exclusive. Further, at
some places Brahman is imagined as the imper­sonal Absolute without
attributes; at other places he is recognized as the highest spiritual
Being that unites all forms of perfection in Himself.

Hence it would be no exaggeration to say that though the Upanisads
contain flashes of insight, yet they are not a self‑contained
homogeneous system and that they also lack completeness.

It is for this reason that Samkara believes that there are two types of
doctrines in the Upanisads: esoteric, understanding God as the
impersonal, unknowable Absolute without attributes, and the other
exoteric, regarding God as a Person who manifests Himself in the various
divinities.

The second interpretation of the Absolute as a Person led to the
develop­ment of a theology largely theistic in spirit yet polytheistic
in practice, since it sanctioned symbol‑worship which expressed itself
in various forms of idol­worship. The Upanisads are not, however,
responsible for the excesses of later theology. In them breathes a
spirit of monism. They preach a cult of mystical union with the
Absolute, and suggest practical methods for its realization.

In the main the stress is laid upon complete detachment from all that is
mun­dane and belongs to the world of phenomena. Accordingly, one finds
in the Upanisads a whole series of sayings in which complete
renunciation is recom­mended. “When all desires which are in his heart
disappear, then man be­comes immortal.

Here he has already reached Brahman. As the old slough of a snake lies
on an ant‑hill, so now does the body lie there.”[^23] According to the
Upanisads, the highest merit called Preryas, which consists in the
realization of one's true self, can be reached through knowledge alone.
The purpose of ethics, on the other hand, is quite distinct, namely,
mundane good called Preyas which is reached by moral actions.

The two ends are consequently poles apart, one concerned with the
timeless good and the other with the temporal and evanescent good. It is
said in Katha‑Upanisad[^24] that the ethical and the spiritual goals are
opposed to each other as light and darkness and cannot co‑exist. A man
has to renounce all activity for worldly goods if he wants to achieve
spiritual unity with the Supreme Being. One cannot, therefore, select
both knowledge and action as two ends of life, since the highest end
must be ­one and not many.

The ideal of detachment was emphasized by the Indian thinkers not only
for the reason that it was necessitated by their theory of human
deliverance, but also because they regarded the whole phenomenal world
of names, forms, and plurality as maya or a mere unreality, an illusion
having only a temporary reality which is transcended ultimately in the
being of the Supreme Self.

The Upanisads demand the votaries of Brahma to ponder over the
illusoriness and unreality of the world of senses and to extricate
themselves from its tempta­tions and enchantments by contemplation of a
transcendental reality within the soul of each person. Thus can a person
get to spiritual heights and achieve mukti or salvation.

Hence along with the renunciation of the phenomenal world another thing
required is the concentration of the spirit on the supersensible
reality. The Upanisads contain detailed instructions on this subject.

The aim is to reach a stage of ecstasy in which a person has the
psychical experience of feeling one with the Ultimate Reality.

The ethics‑negating tendencies, however, could not be maintained
consis­tently in face of the demands and concrete realities of life. The
ideal of human salvation as outlined by the Upanisads cannot be achieved
easily and so many are destined to fail. This is realized by the Indian
sages. “What is hard for many even to hear, what many fail to understand
even though they hear: a marvel is the one that can teach it and lucky
is its obtainer; a marvel is he that knows it when taught by the
wise.”[^25]

The majorities are born again after death and can win release from the
cycle of births and deaths through the performance of good deeds. Thus
ethics rejected by Brahmanic mysticism enters through the doctrine of
the Transmigration of Souls‑a doctrine un­known to the Vedas.

The doctrine referred to above appears in connection with a myth. “All
who depart from this world go to the moon. The waxing half fills itself
with their lives; in the waning half it is effecting their rebirth. The
moon is the gate of the heaven. He who knows how to reply to it, him it
allows to pass by.

He who cannot reply, it sends him as rain down to the earth; he is
reborn here and there according to his deeds and knowledge as worm,
moth, fish, bird, lion, wild bear, jackal, tiger, man, or whatever it
may be. For when a man comes to the moon, the moon asks: \`Who art thou?
'Then he ought to answer: Iam thou . . . .'

If he speaks thus, then the moon lets him get away, out above
itself.”[^26] One finds no reference to the myth in the Vedas. From this
it is concluded that it is not Aryan in origin but belonged to the
religious world of the aboriginal inhabitants of India.

The law which governs the kind of birth a soul is destined to have after
each death is the law of karma, which signifies that nothing can happen
in the moral world without a cause. But the recognition of the fact that
moral events are caused by antecedent factors cannot explain the
palpably indemonstrable and poetic way in which the moral causes are
believed to operate.

Those moral causes can work in samsara, that is to say, in a series of
births and deaths, all of which do not necessarily pertain to human
beings, is a hypothesis of a very doubtful nature and utility.

That the doctrine of reincarnation is incon­sistent with the Brahmanic
mysticism of the identity of the individual with the Universal Soul goes
without saying. Instead of the doctrine that every individual soul
returns to the Universal Soul after inhabiting the body once, we are
required to believe in a theory which starts from new premises
al­together.

This theory is based on the supposition that souls are prisoners in the
world of sense and can return to their Primal Source not at once after
their first death, as required by the theory of mystical absorption of
the Brahmins, but after undergoing a long process of reincarnation
necessitating a series of births in the animate and inanimate realms.

Schweitzer thinks[^27] that the acceptance of this doctrine created
insuperable difficulties for Hindu thought. On the older hypothesis of
mystical reunion with the Divine Source it was easy to explain world
redemption on the assumption that all souls return­ed to their Source
after their death.

But if the theory of reincarnation is accepted, world redemption becomes
possible only if all souls reach the level of human existence and become
capable of acquiring that knowledge and conduct which is required for
liberation and of which human beings alone are capable.

The Epic Period – Two great events belong to this period. The first is
the expedition of Rama from Oudh to Ceylon to recover his wife Sita who
had been carried off by Ravana, the king of that island, and the second
is the struggle for supremacy between two rival Ksatriya groups, the
Pandavas and the Kauravas, in which Lord Krsna played a significant
part.

Rama is an avatar, i. e., a divine incarnation of Visnu, who being the
pre­server of the universe had to leave his celestial abode very often
and to assume different forms in order to destroy evil and establish
truth. The purpose of this avatar was to kill the ten‑headed Ravana, who
had pleased the mighty gods through his austerities and as a result had
received a boon from them which was that he could not be killed by any
god.

Feeling secure, he started a campaign of terror against both gods and
men. The gods ap­proached Brahma who had granted immunity to Ravana. He
remarked that Ravana could be killed by a god assuming the form of a man
since Ravana had not been granted immunity from mankind. Visnu undertook
to be born as a man to rid the world of evil.

He was accordingly born in the house of a king, Dasaratha by name, who
ruled over Ayodhya and bore the name of Rama. As he came of age he
married Sita, who “was an incarnation of Laksmi, Visnu's wife, and was
born of no woman but of mother earth herself, and was picked up by
Janaka from a paddy field.”[^28]

Rama became the victim of court intrigues, and for fourteen years had to
suffer exile in jungles from where Sita was carried off by Ravana. To
rescue Sita from the clutches of Ravana, Rama contracted military
alliance with ganuman, the king of monkeys, with whose active support he
reached Ceylon and learnt the secrets of Ravana's power from a brother
of Ravana. Then ensued a fierce battle in which the armies suffered
losses.

At last Ravana came out and met Rama in a single combat. “Each like a
flaming lion fought the other; head after head of the ten‑necked one did
Rama cut away with his deadly arrows, but new heads ever rose in place
of those cut off, and Ravana's death seemed no wise nearer than before.
The arrows that had slain Maricha and Khara and Bali could not take the
king of Lanka's life away.

Then Rama took up the Brahma weapon given to him by Agastya, the Wind
lay in its (weapon's) wings, the Sun and Fire in its head, in its mass
the weight of Meru and Mandara. Blessing that shaft with Vedic Mantras,
Rama set it with his mighty bow and loosed it and it sped to its
appointed place and cleft the breast of Ravana and, bathed in blood,
returned and entered Rama's quiver.”[^29]

The most popular avatar of Visnu is Lord Krsna, whose main object was to
kill Kansa, a demon born of a woman, and who was well known for his
childish tricks and many practical jokes on milk‑maids. He was, however,
a great warrior and a strategist. He killed many demons and kings.

Bhagavad‑Gita - It was Lord Krsna who sang the Bhagavad‑Gita (the song
celestial) to Arjuna, giving the most widely accepted view of life among
the Hindus. Says Mahatma Gandhi, “I find a solace in the‑Bhagavad‑Gita
that I miss even in the Sermon on the Mount. When disappointment stares
me in the face and all alone I see not a ray of light, I go back to the
Bhagavad­-Gita. I feel a verse here and there and I immediately begin to
smile in the midst of overwhelming tragedies, and if they have left no
scar on me I owe it all to the teachings of the Bhagavad‑Gita.”

According to Sankaracharya, a great scholiast, the main function of the
Gita is to epitomize the essentials of the whole Vedic teachings. A
knowledge of its teachings leads to the realization of all aspirations.
The real purpose of this great song, as Zimmer thinks,[^30] is to
harmonize the non‑Brahmanical pre‑Aryan thought of aboriginal India with
the Vedic ideas of the Aryan invaders.

The Gita, therefore, “displays a kaleidoscopic interworking of the two
traditions that for some ten centuries had been contending for the
control and mastery of the Indian mind. Its teachings are founded upon
the Upanisadic principle of an all‑unifying, transcendental reality, but
they also accommodate not only the gods of the earlier Vedic pantheon
but also the philosophic and devotional formulae of the non‑Aryan and
aboriginal tradition.

It was not an easy task. The Gita had to pick up scattered and
heterogeneous material to reconcile the irreconcilable tendencies of
that age and to present a unified view of life. Little wonder that the
attempt has appeared to the Western scholars as no better than an
\`ill‑assorted cabinet of primitive philosophical opinions.'[^31]

There were the Vedas with their belief in multiple divinities; there
were the Upanisads with their revolt against the ritualism of the Vedas
and their anthropomorphic conception of gods; there was the doctrine of
renunciation; and finally there were the Sanikhya and the Yoga
principles. And if we add to them the heretical tendencies, particularly
those represented by Buddhism, we realize how confusing the situation
was and what an uphill task Lord Krsna had before him.

It would be futile to look for a consistent and neat metaphysical system
in the Gita, for the Gita is not primarily a book of recondite and
abstruse think­ing, written with the object of presenting a world‑view.
It has a much loftier purpose, which is to relate the broad principles
of metaphysical reality to the fundamental aspirations of mankind. This
is not accomplished through ab­stract reasoning which only a few can
understand but by selecting a specific situation involving a moral
dilemma and pointing out how it is overcome.

The occasion was a battle between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. The
latter were led by Arjuna whose spirits were unmanned and who felt
reluctant to start the battle seeing on both sides his friends,
relations, and teachers who were likely to be killed in the event of a
war. At this juncture his charioteer who was none other than Lord Krsna
himself addressed to him the Song Celestial, propounding to him as well
as to the whole of mankind the Yoga of selfless action (karma‑yoga).

The significance of this teaching will become obvious if we refer to the
two ideals which were prevalent then: one, the negative one of
renunciation and the other, the positive one, of active life. The first
recommended complete with­drawal from the work a day world and the
second encouraged living in society undertaking all the obligations
implied thereby.

The object of the Gita is to discover a golden mean, to reconcile as it
were the claims of renunciation and active participation in the affairs
of society. This is done through the doctrine of karma‑yoga which means
doing one's duty without the thought of conse­quences.

“Giving up or carrying on one's work, both lead to salvation; but of the
two, carrying on one's work is the more excellent,” says Lord Krsna in
the Bhagavad‑Gita. He also says, “Neither does man attain to (the state
of) being without work by undertaking no work, nor does he reach
perfection by simply shunning the world.” What is required is a spirit
of detachment where the heart of a person is free from the outward
motives to action. “Thy interest shall only be directed to the deed,
never to the fruits thereof,” says Lord Krsna.

A natural consequence of this theory is that even what is judged as evil
from human standards can be approved of, if the agent feels that the
task selected by him is one which must be fulfilled. “Even if a thorough
scoundrel loves me and nothing else, he must be deemed good; for he has
well resolved.”[^32] “Even if thou wert the most sinful of all sinners,
yet thou wouldst pass over all guilt with the boat of knowledge
alone.”[^33] With these words Arjuna is urged to fight against his
relations, for his killing would not be an evil: it would be a necessary
consequence of the duty he has to discharge.

The ethics of detachment as preached by the Gita is laudable no doubt,
but, as Schweitzer says, “It grants recognition to activity, only after
activity has renounced natural motives and its natural meaning.”[^34] An
action loses its significance when it ceases to be purposive. The Gita
raises a voice of protest against the soul‑killing and life‑negating
cult of renunciation, but it has not gone far enough.

Renunciation remains when the end of an activity is no concern of a
person. “The Bhagavad‑Gita has a sphinx‑like character. It contains such
marvellous phrases about inner detachment from the world, about the
attitude of the mind which knows no hatred and is kind, and about loving
self‑devotion to God, that we are wont to overlook its non‑ethical
contents.”[^35]

### The Heterodox Systems

Among the systems which defied the authority of the Vedas may be
mentioned the Carvaka, Jainism, and Buddhism:

#### 1. The Carvaka

This system seems to be fairly old. It is mentioned in the Rg‑Veda, the
Epics, and the Bhagavad‑Gita. The main work on the system, the
Brhaspati‑Sutra (600 B.C.), is lost and its teachings have to be
reconstructed from criticism of it in other works.

The Carvaka is a non‑Vedic, materialistic, and anti‑supernaturalistic
doc­trine which holds that only this world exists and there is nothing
beyond. There is no future life. Madhava Acharya says in
Sarvadarsanasangrgha, “The efforts of Carvaka are indeed hard to be
eradicated, for the majority of living beings hold by the refrain:

While life is yours, live joyously;

None can escape Death's searching eye:

When once this frame of ours they burn,

How shall it e'er again return?”[^36]

“The mass of men, in accordance with the Sastras of policy and enjoyment
are found to follow only the doctrine of Carvaka. Hence another name for
that school is Lokayata ‑ a name well accordant with the thing
signified.”[^37]

The four elements alone are the ultimate principles and these are earth,
water, fire, and air. Only the perceived exists; the unperceivable does
not exist, simply for the reason of its never having been perceived. The
only source of know­ledge and the criterion of validity is perception.
Every other source including that of inference is rejected. Inferential
knowledge involves inductive relations and can never be demonstrably
certain.

Empirical generalizations may pos­sess a high degree of probability, but
their operation in unknown cases can never be guaranteed. To avoid this
difficulty, if it is maintained that the empirical laws connect the
common features of the particular instances observ­ed by a person, the
Carvaka objects to it by saying that such a course would leave the
particulars unrelated and that it is the particulars alone which matter.

As against the Upanisads which postulated five elements, the Carvaka
admits of only four discarding the fifth one, viz., space. The whole
universe includ­ing souls is interpreted strictly in terms of these
elements. The self is nothing but the physical body as characterized by
sentience. “The soul is but the body characterized by the attributes
signified in the expressions, I am stout, I am youthful, I am grown up,
I am old, etc. It is not something other than that body).”[^38]

The Carvaka rejects outright all types of spiritual values and has faith
in the present world only. “There is no world other than this; there is
no heaven and no hell; the realms of Siva and like regions are invented
by stupid impostors of other schools of thought ....

The wise should enjoy the pleasures of this world through the proper
visible means of agriculture, keeping cattle, trade, political
administration, etc.”[^39] The authority of the Vedas is repudiated not
only on the ground that their teachings are irrational, but also because
of the inconsis­tencies which render it impossible to know what they
really teach.

The Carvaka is a protest against the excessive spirituality of the early
Brahmanic thought. It recognizes neither god nor conscience. It cares
not for a belief in the life to come. Hence the ethical ideal is
pleasure in this life and that too of the individual.

Since the main trend of Hindu thought: has been idealistic, the Carvaka
system has contributed very little to the sum of Indian thought,[^40]
and this is rather unfortunate. In view of the fact that the Vedas, the
Upanisads, and the Gita reject the evidence of the senses as illusory,
the Carvaka contention might have served as a corrective.

#### 2. Jainism

Jainism, according to Tomlin,[^41] is the most perplexing of all
religions, for it is not only incredible but also impracticable. It
denies life to the extent of recommending suicide as the most sacred act
of which man is capable, and yet it has survived for two thousand years.

The founder of Jainism, Mahavira, was born in a Ksatriya family. His
father was a wealthy person belonging to a religious sect which was
opposed to the Vedas. This school of thought had materialistic
tendencies and sceptical atti­tude very much akin to that of Carvaka.
But it was not a thoroughgoing materialism.

It shared with the masses the horror of rebirth and advocated slow
suicide through starvation as a remedy against transmigration.
Maha­vira's father got his wife converted to his viewpoint and in due
course shared with her the martyrdom they desired.

Before following the example of his parents, Mahavira embarked upon a
quest of wisdom and adopted an ascetic life. After two years of
abstinence and self‑denial he withdrew himself from civilized life and
dispensed with all the amenities of life including those of clothing.
During the first six years of his peregrination, he observed frequent
fasts of several months duration.

He voluntarily exposed himself to be maltreated by the Mlechcha tribes
of Vajrabhumi and Lat who abused and beat him, and shot arrows at him,
and baited him with dogs, to all of which he offered no resistance. At
the end of the ninth year, Mahavira relinquished his silence, but
continued the practice of self‑mortification.

The whole of the time spent by him in these preparatory exercises was
twelve years acid six months, and of this he fasted nearly eleven years.

The Jains have a tradition that saviours are sent to the world whenever
mankind is plunged in corruption and sin. Mahavira was twenty‑fourth in
the line.

Mahavira denied the divine origin and infallible authority of the Vedas.
His religion is, therefore, reckoned as a heterodox religion. Its
cosmology and anthropology is non‑Aryan. While Brahmanism is the
representative of Vedic­ Aryan thought and beliefs, Buddhism; Jainism,
and a host of other doctrines relate themselves to the native genius and
expose the pessimistic dualism which underlies so much of Indian
philosophy.

Jainism is a philosophy of the pro­foundest pessimism. It visualizes the
world as a round of endless rebirths, full of sufferings and entirely
useless. One shall have to pass through periods of inconsequential
pleasures and unbearable pains unless one obtains a release through
austerities and self‑abnegation.

In the Jaina‑Sutras, suicide is called “the incomparable religious
death,” requiring in some cases a whole life‑time to cultivate a proper
frame of mind for its performance.

It is essential that all types of longings including those of death be
completely eradicated from one's consciousness. Hence one has to bring
about one's extinction in a mood be­yond both desire and aversion.

As regards the philosophy of Jainism, it may be said that an eternal and
presiding First Cause forms no part of this system, nor do the Jains
admit of soul or spirit as distinct from the living principle. They do
believe in the inde­pendent and eternal existence of spirit and matter,
but by spirit they do not mean universal spirit as they have no faith in
the Supreme Soul.

The spirits called jivas are eternal but limited and variable because of
which they can adjust themselves to the size of the body they happen to
inhabit. Their essence is knowledge which is not empirical or sensory.
As a matter of fact, perception is a check upon the absolute sight of
the soul. In order that the soul may regain its true nature, it is
necessary that limitations imposed by the senses be done away with.

The Jains believe in both transmigration and karma. The latter operates
by itself. Being a subtle particle of matter, it enters the soul and
soils it. Hence no supreme being in the form of God is required to allot
rewards and punishments.

Mahavira says, “The world is without bounds like a formidable ocean; its
cause is action (karma) which is as the seed of the tree. The being
(jiva) invested with body, but devoid of judgment, goes like a
well‑sinker ever downwards by the acts it performs, whilst the
disembodied being which has attained purity goes ever upwards by its own
acts like the builder of a palace. “[^42]

Ajiva, the second predicate of existence, comprises objects or
properties devoid of consciousness and life. It is regarded as
five‑fold. Out of these, matter is atomic in the final analysis. It
possesses the qualities of colour, taste, odour, and touch.

All the atoms are supposed to possess souls so that the whole universe
seems to be pulsating with life. Time, another ajiva, is eternal. The
world has neither an origin nor an end.

As already observed, the karmic particles are mingled with the
life‑monads. It is held that they communicate colours to them which may
be white, yellow, flaming‑red, dove‑grey, dark‑blue, or black. These
colours are perceived by the Jaina Tirthankaras by virtue of their
boundless intuition or omniscience.

Ordinarily, black is the characteristic colour of the cruel and the
merciless, dark‑blue that of the greedy and the sensual, dove‑grey of
the reckless and the hot‑tempered, red of the prudent, yellow of the
compassionate and the white of the dispassionate and the impartial.

In the ethics of Mahavira, social life has no place. It is perfect
non­activity in thought, speech, and deed that is recommended. One
should be dead to pain and enjoyment and also to all other interests
including the intellectual, social, and political to achieve liberation
from the bondage of physical existence. Cessation of activity is a
stepping‑stone to the super­human sphere‑a sphere which is not only
above human beings but also be­yond gods.

The doctrine of ahimsa which means renunciation of the will to kill and
to damage is an article of faith with the Jains. In the Ayaramgasutta, a
Jaina text, it is written, “All saints and Lords . . . declare thus: One
may not kill, nor ill‑use, nor insult, nor torment, nor persecute any
kind of living beings, any kind of creature, any kind of thing having a
soul, any kind of beings.”[^43]

The Jains do not offer bloody sacrifices, do not eat meat, never hunt,
and take care that they do not trample on creeping things and insects.
The laying down of this commandment is a great thing in the spiritual
history of man­kind; but it has to be said that the principle is
altogether impracticable. It has been assumed that non‑killing and
non‑harming are possible of fulfilment in this world of ours.

Even on purely biological grounds, if on no others, it be­comes
necessary sometimes to kill as well as to damage both intentionally and
unintentionally. “It is crueler to let domestic animals which one can no
longer feed die a painful death by starvation than to give them a quick
and painless end by violence. Again and again we see ourselves placed
under the necessity of saving one living creature by destroying or
damaging another.”[^44]

#### 3. Buddhism

As a prince, Buddha's name was Siddhartha and his family name Gautama;
his father's name Suddhodana, and his mother's Maya. It is interesting
to note that all these navies have meanings from which it is conjectured
that Buddha might not have been a historical person. Suddho­dana means
“he whose food is pure,” Maya means “an illusion,” Siddhartha means “he
by whom the end is accomplished,” while Buddha signifies “he by whom all
is known.”

These meanings suggest an allegorical signification, very much in the
style of the Pilgrim's Progress. The city of Buddha's birth,
Kapilavastu, which has no place in the geography of the Hindus, lends
weight to this supposition.

But, in spite of the allegorical interpretation as suggested by the
etymology of the names, the historians are pretty well agreed in
regard­ing Buddha as a historical person who lived six centuries before
Christ and who was so much disturbed by the transience and miseries of
the earthly existence that he renounced his power and wealth and devoted
himself to solitary meditation.

He engaged himself in sacred study under different Brah­mins, but
dissatisfied with their teaching he retired into solitude. For six years
he practised rigorous austerities. Finding their effect upon the body
unfavourable to intellectual energy, he desisted from it and adopted a
more genial course of life. At last knowledge dawned upon him, and he
was in possession of the object of his search, which he communicated to
others.

Buddha had no doubt that the mundane existence is replete with sorrows,
afflictions, and tribulations. Not only this; he also believed that the
misery of life is unending. All fulfilment of desires is attended by
pain. The causes of pain, according to Buddha, are not economical,
social, or political. They are rooted in the very nature of human life
because of the fact that like every­thing else it is ephemeral and
transitory.

Even souls are impermanent and our ignorance on this point is the major
reason of our suffering. Everything is in a flux. We deceive ourselves
into thinking that there is a permanent base for change. It is the Law
of Causality which binds together the continuous vibration and infinite
growth which characterize this world.

Buddha did not believe in any ontological reality which is permanent and
which endures beneath the shifting appearances of the visible world. He
also repudiated the Upanisadic view of a permanent Atman and held that
search for a permanent soul inside the body is in vain.

Buddha supposed that the law of karma worked into our very nature and
that there was no escape from it, the present and the future being the
result of the past. Karma is overcome through nirvana which puts an end
to the cycle of births and deaths.

Nirvana literally means blowing out; hence it sug­gests extinction. It
is sometimes contended that nirvana is not a negative goal; it has a
positive aspect as well. It is not simply extinction but also a state of
blessedness or perfection. It is a kind of existence, devoid of egoity
and full of peace, calm, and bliss.

To achieve nirvana, Buddha recommended a path of self‑discipline which
is eight‑fold: right faith, right resolve, right speech, right action,
right living, right effort, right thought, and right concentration. The
emphasis is on right living which is different in the case of a layman
and a monk. The first four are applicable to all, while the remaining
four are applicable especially to the priestly class.

The practical part of Buddha's system has the same duality. Five
negative injunctions, namely, not to kill, not to steal, not to commit
adultery, not to lie, and not to use strong drinks, are binding on all,
while not to take repasts at improper times, not to witness dances and
plays, not to have costly raiments and perfumes, not to have a large bed
or quilt, and not to receive gold or silver, are meant for priests only.

Similarly, the virtues of charity, purity, patience, courage,
contemplation, and silence have to be cultivated by all, but there are
twelve observances binding on recluses only.

They have to use clothes made of rags picked up from burning grounds, to
have only three such suits all sewn by the wearer's own hand, to have a
cloak of yellow wool prepared in the same manner, to live only on food
given in charity, to take only one meal daily, never to eat or drink
after midday, to live in forests, to have no roof but the foliage of
trees, to sit with the back supported by the trunk of a tree, to sleep
sitting and not lying, never to change the position of the carpet when
it has once been spread, and to go once a month to burning grounds to
meditate on the vanity of life on the earth.

Thus, there is a complete distinction between the religion for the
masses and the discipline for priesthood. The former is quite human
while the latter is cold‑hearted and unnatural. Ultimate release from
transmigration can be attained, in the opinion of Buddha, only after one
becomes a monk. The religion of the masses is good for human
relationship, but not for the liberation of the soul from the cycle of
births and deaths.

For Buddha a Brahmin is one who cares not for others, who has no
relations, who controls himself, who is firmly fixed in the heart of
truth, in whom the fundamental evils are ex­tinguished, and who has
thrown hatred away from him. No doubt, one finds here an emphasis on the
cultivation of ethical virtues but renunciation and condemnation of
worldly ties are also evident. Buddha wants men to be occupied with
their own redemption and not with that of their fellow‑beings.

Buddha attaches no importance to such knowledge as entangles a man in
the net of life. There are no doubt practical and theoretical systems of
know­ledge which enable people to acquire skills and crafts, but
ultimately they have no value. Says Buddha, “Such knowledge and
opinions, if thoroughly mastered, will lead inevitably to certain ends
and produce certain results in one's life.

The enlightened one is aware of all these consequences and also of what
lies behind them. But he does not attach much importance to this
know­ledge. For within himself he fosters another knowledge, the
knowledge of cessation, of the discontinuance of worldly existence, of
utter repose by eman­cipation.

He has perfect insight into the manner of the springing into existence
of our sensations and feelings and their vanishing again with all their
sweet­ness and bitterness, into the way of escape from them altogether,
and into the manner in which by non‑attachment to them through right
knowledge of their character he has himself won the release.”[^45]

#### The Philosophical Schools of Buddhism

Religiously, Buddhism is divided into two great schools, the orthodox,
known as the Hinayana, and the progres­sive, known as the Mahayana. The
former, representing Buddhism, faithfully believes in the relentless
working of the law of karma and refuses to assign any place to God in
the scheme of things. The individual has to win his libera­tion through
his own efforts by treading the path of rightness as delineated by
Buddha.

The responsibility of achieving salvation falls squarely on the
shoul­ders of the individual. Before Buddha breathed his last, he
advised his followers to work out their salvation with diligence.
Philosophically, the Hinayana Buddhism advocates pure phenomenalism,
maintaining the non‑existence of substances or individuals. What exists
is merely passing entities, there being feelings but no feeler, thoughts
but no thinker.

The Hinayana school could not satisfy the masses because of its
abstract, dry, and arid approach to the problems of life and also
because of its denial of God. Its ethics smacked of egoism, since the
Hinayana Buddhist was exclu­sively concerned with his own emancipation,
having nothing to do with the moral needs of others. The Mahayana school
sought to rectify these mistakes by taking a more realistic view of
religion.

Instead of the ideal of personal liberation it recommended the
“liberation of all sentient beings” as the summun bonum of human life.
It also rehabilitated God, by identifying Buddha with a transcendental
reality behind the world of phenomena, Gautama being an incarnation of
the Buddha.

The Hinayana school denied reality to the Self: but the Mahayana school
resuscitated the Self too, by holding that it was the little individual
self that was false and not the Self of all beings, the one
transcendental Self (Mahatman).

Though Buddha had abhor­rence for metaphysical jargon, his religion
being an ethical system with no supernaturalism yet his followers failed
to keep themselves away from ontological and epistemological questions
of abstruse nature. Consequently, there emerged four schools, two under
the Hinayana and two under the Alahavana sect, on the basis of their
metaphysical predilections.

**1. The Madhyamika School of Sunyavada** - According to this school,
every­thing is void and the universe is totally devoid of reality. In
support of their contention they argue that the knower, the known, and
knowledge are interdependent and if any one in the series is proved
false it will entail the falsity of the other two.

It is maintained by the proponents of this theory that cases of illusion
demonstrate the falsity of knowledge; consequently, the truth of the
other two factors in this epistemological trinity cannot be guaranteed.

**2. The Yogacara School of Subjective Idealism** ‑ This school was one
with the Madhyamika in dismissing all external reality as illusion, but
could not see eye to eye with it in respect of mind. It was urged that
if mind was pronounced unreal along with matter, then all reasoning and
thinking would be false. It would be as impossible to establish your own
position as to demolish the position of your adversary, once mind is
dismissed as maya.

To this school, mind is the only reality; the external objects exist
simply as ideas. No object can be known without consciousness of it;
hence the objects cannot be proved to have an existence independent of
consciousness.

**3. The Sautrantika School of Representationism ‑** This school
believes in the existence of mind and also of the external world. The
Sautrantikas maintain that illusions cannot be explained in the absence
of external objects. Moreover the objects do not exist as ideas; rather
our ideas are copies of objects which exist by their own nature.

**4. The Vaibhasika School ‑** This school recognizes the reality of
mind as well as of matter and further holds like the neo‑realists of the
West that unless the object is perceived, there is no means of
certifying that the so‑called copy is a faithful representation of the
original. The only plausible position in that case would be subjective
idealism of the Yogacara School; and if for some reason the theory of
subjective idealism is untenable, then it should be conceded that
objects are capable of being perceived directly.

### Systems of Indian Philosophy

There are six systems which are recognized as orthodox. Each is called a
darsana or a view because it embodies a way of looking at the world.
They are generally treated together, in pairs. The first pair includes
the Nyaya or the school of Logic founded by Gautama and the Atomic
school founded by Kanada.

There are, however, reasons to believe that the two systems were
organized into one in the fourth/tenth century long after the Muslims
had settled down in India and had made their mark on Indian thought and
culture. The analysis of the ideas incorporated into the systems after
their unification will amply bear this out.

Accordingly, these two systems will receive separate treatment after the
other systems. The remaining four systems were organized into two pairs
before the advent of the Muslims and will be discussed together.

While discussing these systems we shall have to ignore such thinkers as
were born after the second/eighth century and whose contributions show
unmistakable signs of Muslim influence. Their thinking is not purely
Indian; it is at least not on conservative lines. There are radical
departures both in the understanding of problems and their solutions,
and these departures can be accounted for on no other hypothesis than
the impact of Muslim thought on the Indian mind.

The first pair to be mentioned will include the Sankhya or Numeral
system said to be founded by Kapila and the Yoga or the Mystic system
founded by Patanjali; the second pair will include the Purva‑Mimamsa,
the original decider, founded by Jaimini, and the Uttara‑Mimamsa, the
second decider, said to be founded by Vyasa.

The authors of the various schools as given above are generally accepted
by the Hindus as real, but there is a great deal of doubt about their
authen­ticity. Rene Guenon writing about Gautama, the author of Nyaya,
says:

“This name should not be taken as referring to any single individual and
it is not accompanied in this case by any biographical details of the
vaguest kind . . . the name denotes what is really an \`intellectual
aggregate' made up of all those who over a period . . . devoted
themselves to one and the same study .... The same could be said of the
proper names that we find associated in a similar way with each of the
other darsanas.”[^46]

**1 & 2. Sankhya and Yoga** **‑** These two systems are the outer and
the inner aspects of a single discipline. In the Bhagavad‑Gita there is
written, “Puerile and unlearned people speak of \`enumerating knowledge'
(Sankhya) and the \`practice of introvert concentration' (Yoga) as
distinct from each other, yet anyone firmly established in either gains
the fruit of both.

The state attained by the followers of the path of enumerating knowledge
is attained also through the exercises of introvert concentration. He
truly sees who regards as one the intellectual attitude of enumerating
knowledge and the practice of concen­tration.”[^47] Sankhya is a
theoretical system describing the elements of human nature, its bondage
and release, while Yoga is a practical discipline to gain the same end
through the practice of yogic exercises.

According to Zimmer, “The main conceptions of this dual system are (i)
that the universe is founded on an irresoluble, dichotomy of
\`life‑monads' (purusa) and lifeless matter (prakrti), (ii) that
\`matter,' though fundamentally simple and uncompounded, nevertheless
exfoliates, or manifests itself, under three distinctly differentiated
aspects (the so‑called gunas) which are compar­able to the three strands
of a rope, and (iii) that each one of the \`life‑monads' (purusa)
associated with matter is involved in the bondage of an endless \`round
of transmigration' (samsara).”[^48]

Prakrti is a primal entity, out of which the physical universe with all
its infinite diversity has evolved. It is all‑pervasive and complex. Its
complexity is due to the fact that it is constituted of three gunas,
namely, sattya, rajas, and tamas, which, though different, nevertheless
work harmoniously to produce an ordered world. Sattya means what is
pure, rajas signifies what is active, while tamas stands for what offers
resistance.

These three gunas are present in every object since the effect cannot be
other than its material cause. This doctrine, according to which nothing
new can originate and the effects should be entirely determined. By
their antecedent factors, goes by the name of “the doctrine of
pre‑existent effect.” The gunas do not combine in the same ratio in
every object and that accounts for the multiplicity and the infinite
diversity of things.

The first thing to evolve from the prakrti was the intellect, which in
turn produced egoism or individuality. From the sattya aspect of egoism
there preceded five sense‑organs, while from the tamers aspect there
emerged five motor organs.

Thus, the first to emerge in the course of evolution were those objects
which parusa needed. Out of the simple and subtle elements arose gross
elements, e.g., space emerged from elemental sound, air from space and
elemental tough, fire from these two and elemental colour, so on and so
forth.

So far we have naturalism in its most aggressive form, but it is diluted
by its recognition of purusa alongside prakrti as an equally important
principle in the constitution of the world. Purusa is manifold and
simple in contradistinc­tion to prakrti which is single and complex. How
can two principles of contra­dictory attributes come to work together,
is a difficult point in this theory.

Purusa is often defined as a pure spirit by virtue of the fact that it
is non matter, and yet it has no spirituality about itself. It can be
defined only negatively: it is without attributes, without motion
“imperishable, inactive, and impassive.” After a person acquires full
knowledge of the purusa, he becomes indifferent to both the subtle and
the gross elements of his material existence.

When death comes finally, the subtle and the gross elements dissolve,
but the purusa continues to exist having now been released once for all
from the clutches of the gunas. This is “final aloofness,” or isolation,
the summum bonum of yogic practices.

“Yoga consists in the (intentional) stoppage of the spontaneous
activities of the life‑staff.”[^49] As the mind is in constant
commotion, it assumes the shapes of the objects it cognizes. In order to
understand its true nature all impulses from within and without have to
be stopped.

The life‑monad is so to say in the bondage of life and consciousness; it
has to reveal all the processes of the subtle and gross body. In its own
nature it is propertyless, without beginning and end, infinite, and
all‑pervading.

The only problem with man is to realize his actual freedom by separating
the life‑monad from all distraction and turbulent conditions. To achieve
this objective the Sankhya‑Yoga philosophy prescribes the suppression of
right notions arising from correct perceptions, and wrong notions due to
misapprehensions, fantasy, sleep, and memory.

When this is accomplished, the mind is stilled. The goal is isolation
which becomes possible when the purity of contemplation equals the
purity of the life‑monad.

This is explained by a commentator of Patanjali in the words, “When the
contemplative power (sattya) of the thinking substance is freed from the
defilement of the active power (rajas) and the force of inertia (tamas)
and has no further task than that involved in transcending the presented
idea of difference between itself (sattya) and the life‑monad (purusa)
and when the interior seeds of hindrances (klesa) have all been burnt,
then the contemplative power (sattya) enters into a state of purity
equal to that of the life‑monad.

This purity is neither more nor less than the cessation of the false
attribution of experience to the life‑monad. That is the life‑monad's
isolation. Then the purusa having its light within itself becomes
undefiled and isolated.”[^50]

According to the Yoga philosophy, hindrances to the manifestation of the
true nature of the purusa are ignorance; I am I, attachment or sympathy,
repugnance or hatred, and the will to live. Moreover, the interplay of
the gunas is a source of confusion. All these can be eradicated through
asceticism, learning, and devotion, or complete surrender to the will of
God.

Asceticism rids a yogi of passions and spiritual inertia; recitation of
holy prayers initiates him in the art of religious detachment; while
complete surrender to the will of God develops him spiritually, by
making him regard God as the real cause of his achievements. Through
this programme, the klesa, i. e., hindrances and impediments, are
reduced to nothingness, the rajas and tamas are destroyed, and sattya
alone remains to recognize the life‑monad in its pristine glory.

The yogic exercises of starving and torturing the body are calculated to
eradicate not only the conscious but also the unconscious tendencies of
our biological existence and so to attune the personality to a
supersensible type of experience.

Through meditation and self‑torturing practices one reaches knowledge of
the Truth, “Neither I am, nor is aught mine, nor do I exist.” Having
gained this knowledge the purusa in peace and inaction contemplates
nature which is of no interest to him, and at death attains its true
life of isolation.

**3 & 4. Mimamsa‑Purva and Uttara** **‑** The object of the
Purva-Mimasa, also called the Karama‑Mimamsa, i.e, Action‑Investigation,
is to reach certainty on the subject of dharma or the religious duty of
the Hindus, chiefly about the sacrifices and the methods of offering
them. In course of time there came into vogue variant opinions and
customs for the performance of every kind of ceremony.

The Brahmins had laid down very detailed instructions with regard to
sacrificial duties but alongside them there had emerged local and family
customs and conventions. These two were often hard to reconcile. Hence
the problem was to bring the Brahmanic instructions intro harmony with
one another and also with the existing family and local customs. A
further problem was to discover in these customs a meaning that should
satisfy every new generation.

The Purva‑Mimamsa consists of twelve books, all full of positive and
negative injunctions about principal and subordinate rites concerning
sacrifices. A cursory perusal of the Mimamsa clearly shows that the work
is principally concerned with the interpretation of those Vedic texts as
are required for sacrificial purposes and that it raises only
incidentally, if at all, genuine meta­physical questions.

It does raise the question of the absolute authority of the Vedas
together with the doctrine of their eternity, and discusses in this
con­nection the problem of the eternity of sound and the relation
between the sound of a word and its meaning.

The Purva‑Mimamsa is not a treatise on philosophy. Nevertheless, certain
metaphysical ideas are implied, or find incidental expression in it. A
charge of atheism is often brought against this system. The advocates of
the Purva­ Mimamsa say, “There is no God, or Maker of the world; nor has
the world any sustainer or destroyer, for every man obtains a recompense
in conformity with his own work.

Nor indeed is there any maker of the Vedas, for their words are eternal.
Their authoritativeness is self‑demonstrated; since it has been
established from all eternity, how can it be dependent upon anything but
itself?[^51] “ “

But in Max Muller's view this charge is based upon a misconcep­tion. The
system does not attribute the fruit of sacrificial acts to any divine
agency, nor does it make God responsible for the injustice that seems to
prevail in the world.

Further, it gives evidence of a firm faith in the operation of the law
of cause and effect and, consequently, ascribes the inequalities of the
world to the working of good and bad deeds. But all this would not make
the system atheistic. It simply proves that the Mimamsa has an
unorthodox conception of God. Max Muller's contention seems to conflict
with the Mimamsa itself, for the latter says, “Wherefore God? The world
itself suffices for itself.”[^52]

Uttara‑Mimamsa or Vedanta ‑ the term Vedanta literally means the end of
the Vedas or the doctrines set forth in the closing chapters of the
Vedas which are the Upanisads. The Uttara‑Mimamsa or Later
Investigations as against Purva‑Mimamsa which are Prior Investigations
is usually called Vedanta‑sutras or Brahma‑sutras.

The latter name is given to indicate that Brahman is the spirit embodied
in the universe. The work is attributed to Badarayana, but in reality
many writers of different times appear to have made their contributions
towards its compilation. In five hundred and five sutras which consist
mostly of two or three words each, the whole system is developed. The
sutras are, however, unintelligible by themselves and leave everything
to the interpreters.

The Vedanta‑sutras discuss the whole theory of the Brahman in four
chapters. The first chapter deals with the nature of the Brahman and his
relation to the world and the individual souls; the second is polemical;
the third deals with the ways and means of attaining Brahman‑vidya; and
the fourth treats of the fruit of Brahman‑vidya and after‑life.

Badarayana believes both in the eternity and infallibility of the Vedas.
He recognizes two sources of knowledge: sruti and smrti or perception
and inference, and maintains that sruti is the basis for smrti.
Similarly, he draws a hard and fast line between two realms: one
amenable to reason and the other lying beyond it.

The area where reason is competent is that of prakrti together with its
manifestations, while the realm of Brahman lies beyond the reach of
discursive reasoning. Reason can flourish among properties, relations,
and characteristics, while Brahman is devoid of all these things and,
therefore, cannot be reached through inferential knowledge.

The only way to reach the Brahman is to cultivate intuition through
meditation and devotion. It will reveal that the Brahman is the basis of
reality: the material as well as the final cause of the universe. In
creating the world God had no purpose to fulfil; what seems to be His
activity is nothing but sport. God is omniscient, formless, and one, in
whom the prakrti and the purusaof the Sankhya system combine, both being
manifestations or modes of the same Ultimate Reality.

After creating the elements, Brahman entered into them and determined
the characteristic manner of their development and production of other
things. The Brahman, as it were, transforms Himself into everything that
is caused by Him since cause and effect must have similar natures. Two
illustrations are given to prove the identity of cause and effect; one
is drawn from an inanimate object and the other from an animate object.
It is said that when a piece of cloth is rolled up its real nature
remains hidden, but when it is spread out it can be known truly.

Likewise a person is paralyzed if his breath is held but becomes active
the moment his breath is released. In both these cases the qualities of
the antecedent are different from those of the consequent although the
object is the same, which shows that despite differences the cause and
the effect remain identical. Brahman and the world are not disparate in
spite of differences.

The wooden table is not different from the wood in its essential nature;
similarly, Brahman is not different from the multiform objects of the
universe.

The world is a sport or lila of the Brahman, which means that it is
without purpose and without significance. It is hard to assign any
meaning to the universe, since Vedantism declares, “Brahman is true, the
world is false, the soul is Brahman and nothing else.” And again, “There
is nothing worth gaining there is nothing worth enjoying, there is
nothing worth knowing but Brahma alone, for he who knows Brahman is
Brahman.”[^53]

In calling the world a sport there is however no implication that God
created sufferings for mankind to take pleasure out of them. This would
be a very uncharitable view and altogether cynical. Sufferings, woes,
and ills of men as well as of other objects, both animate and inanimate,
are the result of their own karma ‑ a law of moral causation which works
inexorably and leaves no scope for the interference of divine or
non‑divine agencies. Likewise all evils and sins are due to karma; they
are not caused by Brahman.

The self is concealed within five sheaths, that is to say, five
superimposed psycho‑somatic layers which should be torn away through
ethical discipline and self‑denial. Avidya (nescience) is lack of
insight into the nature of reality and is a major hindrance in the path
of moksa or release. It is an article of faith with Vedantism that
liberation can be obtained through knowledge.

Since the Self is with us, though concealed and hidden behind five
sheaths, when true knowledge is gained it will be seen that one realizes
one's own true nature. This realization can be effected through yogic
practices, critical thought, or any other orthodox way. Ethical
discipline is also directed to the same end. Its object is to cleanse
the soul through rigorous self‑discipline and impeccable conduct, in a
spirit of non‑attachment.

The highest knowledge is Brahman‑vidya or vision of God which is
attained through the realization of the Self. After an individual soul
has reached Brahman there is no return for the liberated soul. This goal
is expressed through the oft‑quoted verse from the Upanisads; “He who
realizes Brahman through knowing becomes Brahman.”[^54]

**5. The Nyaya System** **‑** As already observed, because of the
singular ab­sence or deficiency of historical data, little is known of
Gautama, the author of Nyaya. He is as much a subject of fanciful legend
as Kapila, the author of the Sankhya system.

The word nyaya means “propriety” or “fitness.” The system undertakes to
declare the method of arriving at that knowledge of truth the fruit of
which, it promises, is the chief end of man. The name is also used in a
more limited application to denominate the proper method of setting
forth an argument.

This has led to the practice of calling the Nyaya the Hindu logic, which
by the way does not adequately describe the scope of the system.
According to the author of the system, “Supreme felicity is attained
through knowledge about the true nature of the sixteen categories
(Padarthas).”[^55]

The first work of the Nyaya system consists of sixty aphorisms, and the
first sutra gives a list of the subjects to be discussed. These are
sixteen in number:

(1) pramana or the means by which right knowledge may be gained; (2)
prameya or the object of thought; (3) doubt; (4) motive; (5) instance or
example; (6) dogma or determinate truth; (7) argument or syllogism; (8)
con­futation; (9) ascertainment; (10) controversy; (11) jangling; (12)
objection or cavilling; (13) fallacy; (14) perversion, (15) futility;
(16) conclusion or the confounding of an adversary.

Of the sixteen categories the first two are important; others are only
subsidiary indicating the course which a discussion may take from the
start to the finish, i.e., from the enunciation of the doubt to the
confounding of the doubter.

The first category by the name of pramana signifies proof or evidence,
and denotes the legitimate means of knowledge within the rational order.
It enumerates four kinds of proofs, namely, perception by the senses
(pratyaksa); inference (anumana) ; comparison (upamana) ; and verbal
authority (sabda)including revelation and tradition. Inference, it says,
is of three kinds: from cause to effect, from effect to cause, and by
analogy.

The argument which is also called nyaya consists of five constituent
members. These are: (1) the proposition to be proved (pratijnia), (2)
the reason justifying this proposition (hetu), (3) the example cited in
support of the reason (udah­rana), (4) the application of the first
proposition to the particular case in question (upanaya), and (5) the
result (nigamana), which is a statement of the fact that the proposition
has been proved.

A typical Indian syllogism would be as follows:

1. Yonder mountain has fire.

2. For it has smoke.

3. Whatever has smoke has fire.

4. Yonder mountain has smoke such as is invariably accompanied by fire.

5. Therefore, yonder mountain has fire.

The linguistic form is not considered necessary to syllogism. This is
common to all forms of Indian logic.

According to the Nyaya, a notion or a concept can be either right or
wrong. In the first case it is obtained through perception or inference
or comparison or revelation. A wrong notion is one which is not derived
from proof and originates either from doubt or from false premises or
from error. A wise man avoids these as well as passions and aversions
and is profoundly indifferent to all action.

Blessedness is deliverance from pain. The primary evil is pain. There
are twenty‑one varieties of evil which spring from the organs of sense,
from the objects of sense, from mental apprehensions, and even from
pleasure. “The soul attains to this deliverance by knowledge, by
meditation on itself, by not earning fresh merit or demerit through
actions sprung from desire, and by becoming free from passions through
knowledge of the evil inherent in objects. It is knowledge . . . and not
virtue which obtains final deliverance from the body.”[^56]

The Nyaya is predominantly intellectual and analytical. Its value lies
in its methodology or the theory of knowledge on which it builds its
philosophy. This theory it applies not only to one system but to all
systems with modifi­cations here and there. Chatterjee and Datta observe
that “the Nyaya theory of pluralistic realism is not so satisfying as
its logic. Here we have a common sense view of the world as a system of
independent realities .... It does not give us a systematic philosophy
of the world in the light of one universal absolute principle.[^57]

The Indian syllogism bears a close resemblance to Aristotelian syllogism
especially when it is simplified or abridged, consisting either of the
last three or the first three terms only. It is, therefore, suggested by
a good many histo­rians that either Aristotle or the builders of the
Nyaya system drew inspiration from the other. It is also possible that
the obligation is mutual.

**6. The Vaisesika System** ‑ Vaisesika is derived from visesa which
means difference, signifying thereby that multiplicity and not unity
lies at the basis of the universe. It is expounded by Kanada in the
Vaisesika‑Sutra which contains about five hundred and fifty aphorisms.
Book 1 discusses the five categories‑substance, quality, action,
community or genus, and particularity; Book 2 deals with the substances
earth, water, air, ether, space, and time.

Book 3 is concerned with the problems of mind and self and also touches
the theory of inference; Book 4 is about the atomic theory and discusses
the nature of body and the visibility of quality; Book 5 deals with
motion; Book 6 contains duties of the four stages of life; Book 7 treats
of quality, the atomic theory, the self, and inherence together; Books 8
and 9 deal with perception and infer­ence; while Book 10 is concerned
with causality and other related questions.

A fundamental assumption of this system is that objects are independent
of the perceiving mind and also of one another. Philosophically, the
doctrine may be called pluralistic realism. The entire world of
experience can be divided into nine dravya or substances together with
their properties and relations: These substances are earth, water, fire,
air, akasa, time, space, self, and manas.  
 Besides substances which simply provide a framework for the whole
universe there are padartha, or categories, seven in number, namely,
guna, karma, visesa, samavaya, samanya, abhava, and dravya, which can be
translated as quality, action, individuality, necessary relation,
universals, negation, and substance.

Qualities depend upon substances, but they can be independently
conceived and so exist by their own nature. No distinction is recognized
between mental and material qualities or between the primary and
secondary qualities. Quite consistent with its pluralistic standpoint,
the doc­trine holds that the substances reveal their nature through the
qualities in which they differ and not in which they agree.

In regarding earth, air, water, and fire as substances, what is implied
is that the entire structure of the universe can be interpreted in terms
of material causes which are supersensible. The ultimate stuff of which
this universe is made is the mass of atoms that are round, extremely
minute, invisible, incap­able of division, eternal in themselves but not
in their aggregate form.

Even mind (manas) is regarded as an atom extremely small, because of
which only one sensation can be conveyed to the soul at one time.

Vaisesika is basically a dualistic philosophy inasmuch as it recognizes
the eternality both of atoms and souls. In fact every Hindu system
regards matter as eternal. The only exception is the school of the
Vedantists which takes matter as the illusive manifestation of the one
Supreme Brahman who is Himself the all.

According to Kanada, the summum bonum for man is nothing but deliverance
from pain, which can be achieved through knowledge, resulting in the
soul getting into a state of a tranquil, unconscious passivity.

The Influence of Islam on Hinduism
----------------------------------

From the account of the six systems of Indian philosophy given above,
such writers as were born after the advent of Islam in India have been
excluded; not that they were in any way less important than those who
saw the light of the day before the first /seventh century, but because
their thinking shows unmistakable signs, implicit as well as explicit,
of Muslim impact.

Details of this impact have been provided in a separate chapter of this
volume. Here it will suffice to say that the impact was very deep, firm,
and abiding, and left no aspect of Indian thought untouched.

The contact of the Muslims with the Indians began as early as the end of
the first/seventh century, and still continues to the advantage of both.
Islam was introduced into the Indian sub‑continent by Arab traders; it
was propa­gated by mystics and saints; and it was established by Muslim
rulers of various dynasties who made India their home like several other
Muslim immigrants.

The Muslims brought with them their ideology, their philosophy and
religion, their beliefs and practices, and, above all, an unconquerable
passion to share this wisdom with others. The Sufis who were thinkers of
no mean order suc­ceeded by their example and precept in imparting to
the natives that ideology and philosophy which the Muslims had expounded
from their understanding of the Qur'an, the hadith, and the Sunnah.

Muhammad bin Qasim is ranked as the first Muslim who entered India as a
conqueror in 94/712. His example was followed by a long line of Muslim
rulers who wielded the sceptre of authority over the Indian
sub‑continent till 1274/1857, when Indian “mutiny” took place and the
Britishers found a splendid excuse to wipe off the last vestige of the
Muslim Empire.

During a period of one thousand years when the Indian sub‑continent lay
prostrate at the feet of the Muslim emperors, many of whom enjoyed full
autocratic powers, it is very unlikely that the culture and philosophy
which they cherished and treasured should have left no imprint on the
thoughts and beliefs of the native population.

There was, however, no imposition of one culture over another. Culture
can never be introduced by the sword, no matter how long and sharp. What
happened on the Indian soil was not the replacement of one culture by
another but an amalgamation of the two. It was a case of the willing
acceptance of the salient features of Muslim culture and making them a
part and parcel of the culture of India.

What Sankara and Ramanuja did in the sphere of philosophy was done by
others in the fields of religion; ethics, and social polity. The result
was a great upheaval in the world of Hindu thought. A re‑evaluation and
a re‑appraisal of old values and thoughts took place on a gigantic
scale.

Mono­theism was stressed and so was universal brotherhood of mankind and
a positive approach to life. Casteless society became the goal of social
reforms and the Sudras, the accursed and the condemned, were accorded
the right to live like others. All this was the product of the impact of
Islam on Hinduism.

There is evidence to show that the Nyaya and the Vaiseska were organized
into one system after Islam had firmly entrenched itself in India. Not
only were the two systems welded into one, they also became monotheistic
and advanced for the first time in the history of Hindu thought what are
known as the Hindu proofs for the existence of God.

Bibliography
------------

Albert Schwertzer, Indian Thought and Its Development, Black, London,
1936; Arthur Berriedale Keith, The Religion and Philosophy of the Veda
and Upanisads, Harvard University Press, 1925;

Indian Logic and Atomism: An Exposition of the Nyaya and Vaisesika
Systems;

Anthony Macdonell, Vedic Mythology, Verlag von Karl J. Trubner,
Strassburg, 1897;

The Samkhya System; Annie Besant, An Introduction to Yoga, Theosophical
Publishing House, Madras, 1927;

Benimadhab Barua, Prolegomena to a History of Buddhist Philosophy,
University of Calcutta, 1921;

Bhikan Lal Atreya, The Elements o f Indian Logic; Charles A. Moore,
Essays in East‑West Philosophy: An Attempt at World Philosophical
Synthesis, University of Hawaii Press, 1951;

Dakshinaranjan Shastri, A Short History o f Indian Material­ism,
Sensationalism and Hedonism;

Edward Hamilton Johnston, Early Samkhya: An Essay on Its Historical
Development according to the Texts, Royal Asiatic Society, London, 1937;

Freiderich Max Muller, The Six Systems of Indian Philo­sophy, 1903;

Edgerton Franklin, The Bhagavad Gita, Translated and Interpreted; The
Mimamsa Nyaya Prakassa of Apadeva: A Treatise on the Mimamsa System by
Apadeva;

Geoffrey Theodore Garrett, Ed., The Legacy of India, Oxford Uni­versity
Press, 1951; Heinrich Zimmer, Philosophies of India, ed. Joseph
Campbell, Bollingen Series, 1951;

John Nicol Farquhar, An Outline of the Religious Literature of India;
James Houghton Woods, Tr., The Yoga System of Pataniali, or the Ancient
Hindu Doctrine of Concentration of Mind, Harvard University Press, 1914;
K. C. Bhattacharya, Studies in Vedantism, University of Calcutta, 1909;
Kokileswar Bhattacharya, An Introduction to Adwaita Philosophy;
Hiriyanna, Outlines of Indian Philosophy, 1932; The Essentials of Indian
Philosophy, Allen &. Unwin, London, 1949; Moritz Winternitz, A History
of Indian Literature, tr. from original German by Mrs. S. Ketkar,
1927‑33;

Mohan Lal Mehta, Outlines of Jaina Philosophy; Nicol McNicol, Indian
Theism from the Vedic to the Mohammaden Period, 1915; Maurice
Bloomfield, The Religion of the Veda, the Ancient Religion of India
(from Rg-Veda to Upanisads), Cambridge University Press, 1908; Nathmal
Tatia, Studies in Jaina Philosophy; Paul Masson‑Oursel, Comparative
Philosophy, 1926; Pandit Mohan Lal Sandal, The Philosophical Teachings
in the Upanisads; Paul Dahlke, Buddhism and Its Place in the Mental Life
of Mankind;

Pandurang Vaman Kane,\`A Brief Sketch. of the Purva‑Mimdasa System,
1924; Rene Guenon, Introduc­tion to the Study of Hindu Doctrines, Luzac,
London, 1945; Richard Garbe, Samkhya and Yoga, Verlag von Karl J.
Trubner, Strassburg, 1896; Surendranath Dasgupta, A History of Indian
Philosophy, 5 Vols., Cambridge University Press, 1957; S. Radhakrishnan,
Indian. Philosophy, 2 Vols., Allen & Unwin, London, 1951 ;

The Philosophy of the Upanisads, 1924; et al. (Eds.); History of
Philosophy, Eastern and Western, 2 Vols., Allen & Unwin, London, 1952;
S.C.Chakravarti, The Philo­sophy of the Upanisads, University of
Calcutta, 1935; Sir Edwin Arnold, Tr., The. Song Celestial or Bhagavad
Gita. Trubner. London, 1885; Sadananda Bhaduri. Studies in Nyaya
Vaiseska Metaphysics; Satish Chandra Vidyabhusna, A History of Indian
Logic, 1921;

Sarat Chandra Bannerji, Tr., The Samkhya Philosophy: Samkhyakarika with
Gaudapada's Scholia and Narayana's Gloss; Swami Abheda­nanda, Vedantic
Philosophy; T. R. Srinivasa Aiyangar, Tr., Siva Upanisads; T.R.V. Murti,
The Central Philosophy of Buddhism, Alien. & Unwin, London, 1960;
Vishuskekhara Bhattacharya, The Basic Conceptions of Buddhism, 1934;
William Montgomery McGovern, Introduction of Mahayana Buddhism;
WilliamSpence Urquhart, The Veddnta and Modern Thought, Oxford
University Press, 1928

[^1]: Maurice Bloomfield, The Religion of the Rig‑Veda, Putnam, N.Y.,
1908, p. 19.

[^2]: Manu, I. 23.

[^3]: Satapatha Brahmanas, IV: 6, 7.

[^4]: Manunhai C. Pandya, Intelligent Man's Guide to Indian Philosophy,
Bombay, 1935; p. 21.

[^5]: Farqtihar, An Outline of the Religious Literature of India, Oxford
University Press, 1920, p. 13.

[^6]: Rg Veda, i:159, 2; iii: 3, 11.

[^7]: Ibid., ix: 85, 12; x:35, 3.

[^8]: Ibid., i : 89, 4.

[^9]: Ibid., i: 160, 2.

[^10]: Ibid., i: :34, II.

[^11]: Ibid., i: 45, 2.

[^12]: Ibid., iii: 39.

[^13]: Ibid., iv: 17, 4, 12.

[^14]: Ibid., iv: 17, 4.

[^15]: Ibid., vii: 20, 5.

[^16]: Sir Gokal Chand Narang, Message of the Vedas, New Book Society,
Lahore, 1946, pp. 42‑56.

[^17]: Rg‑Veda, i: 164. 46.

[^18]: Ibid., x:135, 1

[^19]: Atharva Veda, v:37, 11 f

[^20]: M. Muller. Ed. Rg Veda

[^21]: Radhakrishnan, The Philosophy of the Upanisads, Allen & Unwin
London, 1924, p: 25.

[^22]: Albert Schweitzer, Indian Thought and Its Development, Adam &
Charles Black, London, 1951, p. 32.

[^23]: Brhd‑aranyaka Upanisad, iv: 4.

[^24]: Katha‑Upanisad, 2: 1‑5.

[^25]: Ibid., I:ii 7.

[^26]: Katha Upanisad, 2:1-5

[^27]: Albert Schweitzer, op. tit., p. 51.

[^28]: P. Thomas, Epic Myths and Legends of India, Bombay, p. 14.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 17.

[^30]: Zimmer, Philosophies of India, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London,
1952, p. 378.

[^31]: Hopkins, quoted by Desai in the Gita according to Gandhi,
Ahmedabad, p. 13.

[^32]: Gita, xviii: 48.

[^33]: Ibid., iv: 36.

[^34]: Albert Schweitzer, op. cit., p. 191.

[^35]: Ibid., p. 195.

[^36]: S. Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore, A Source Book in Indian
Philosophy, Oxford University Press, London, 1957, p. 228.

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Ibid., p. 235.

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: Hiriyanna, Outlines of Indian Philosophy, Allen & Unwin, London,
1932, p. 195.

[^41]: Tomlin, The Great Philosophies: The Eastern World, Skeffington,
London, 1952, p. 170.

[^42]: Wilson, Essays and Lectures on the Religion of the Hindus,
London, 1862, vol. I, p. 297.

[^43]: Winternitz, A History of Indian. Literature, Calcutta University,
Calcutta ii, p. 436.

[^44]: Schweitzer, op. cit p. 84.

[^45]: Digha Nikaya

[^46]: Introduction to the Study of the Hindu Doctrines, Luzac, London,
1945 pp.239‑40.

[^47]: Gita, 5: 4‑5.

[^48]: Zimmer, op. cit., p. 281.

[^49]: Pantanjali. Yoga-Sutras, I. 1-2.

[^50]: Zimmer. op. cit., p. 293.

[^51]: Ibid., p. 278.

[^52]: Hiriyanna, op. cit., p. 135.

[^53]: Max Muller op. cit., p. 160.

[^54]: Mundaka‑Upanisad, 3. 2. 9.

[^55]: Nyaya‑Sutra, Book I, Chapter IV, Sutra I

[^56]: John Davies, Hindu Philosophy, Kegan Paul, London. 1884, p. 124.

[^57]: An Introduction to Indian Philosophy, Calcutta University,
Calcutta, 1944, p. 247


