Chapter 2: Pre-Islamic Chinese Thought
======================================

*Pre-Islamic Chinese Thought by Howard F. Didsbury, Jr., M.A., Ph.D.,
Associate Professor of History, Newark State College, Union, New Jersey
and Adjunct Professor at the American University, Washington D.C
(U.S.A)*

In the present chapter we shall attempt to survey some of the salient
features of Chinese philosophy avoiding any specialized or detailed
discussion of the individual schools or of the philosophical
technicalities involved. Our purpose is to present, in brief compass, an
account of Chinese philosophical thought indicating a number of its
peculiar characteristics and its apparent major limitations. This, then,
will be a summary of the outstanding peculiari­ties of Chinese
philosophy prior to the arrival of any significant foreign influence.

First, a few words with respect to the period of Chinese philosophy we
are covering, that of the Chou Dynasty (1122 ‑256 B.C.). The last
centuries of the Chou were marked by political and social turmoil
associated with the disintegration of feudalism. The Chinese world was
torn by internecine warfare, old political powers were overturned and
old values challenged or discarded.

During this “time of troubles,” to use Toynbee's term China produced a
great variety of original schools of philosophical thought, such as
Confucianism, Taoism, Mohism, and Legalism as well as a Chinese version
of Epicureanism, the so‑called Logicians, and the Yin Yang school.

Because of the creative freshness and richness of the later Chou, it may
be regarded as the classical period of Chinese philosophy. Our
discussion is, perforce limited to these classical philosophies and
their spirit; Chinese medieval and modern philo­sophies are not
delineated, nor are Buddhism in China, nor Chinese Buddhism.

The primary reason for this concentration on the Chou philosophies is
that they represent the indigenous Chinese schools of philosophy before
they were affected by the advent of other philosophical or religious
idea, for example, Buddhism and its attendant Indian metaphysics.

Moreover, though some of these schools did not exercise a lasting
influence on subsequent Chinese intellectual life, as was the case with
Legalism which passed into oblivion with the collapse of the shortlived
Ch'in Dynasty (221‑207 B.C.), and with Mohism which died out a few
centuries after the death of Mo Tzu, its founder, other schools, such as
Confucianism, Taoism, and elements of the Yin Yang school, persisted
throughout the history of Chinese philosophy.

Confucianism, though eclipsed at times, slowly gained a predominant
position and became a powerful force in the moulding and direction of
Chinese civilization.

While these latter schools survived, the others passed into
insignificance. For instance, the school of the Logicians never
exercised any great influence on the development of later Chinese
philosophy.

Also, Yang Chu's thought, somewhat similar to the philosophy of
Epicurus, was never a threat to the other schools since it consisted
more of an attitude toward life than a philosophy of existence. It was
too individualistic, too self‑centred for wide acceptance by the
Chinese.

To appreciate adequately the peculiar features of Chinese philosophical
thought, it is important that one be cognizant of certain facts of
Chinese geography, economics, and sociology with regard to its emergence
and develop­ment. The distinguished contemporary Chinese philosopher and
historian of Chinese philosophy, Fung Yu‑lan, discusses all three topics
at considerable length.[^1]

From the earliest times the Chinese considered the world and their land,
t'ien hsia (all under heaven), to be one and the same. Because of its
unique geographical position‑a vast continental land mass bounded by a
great mountain range, desert, and the ocean‑the early culture of China
appears to have developed in comparative isolation from that of other
great centres of civilization.

At any rate, it seems fairly certain that the Chinese thinkers of the
later Chou were not in a position comparable to that of their Greek
philosophical contemporaries vis a vis the intellectual, philosophical,
religious, and scientific thought of the Egyptian and Mesopotamian
civilizations In developing their philosophies, the Greeks were
undoubtedly stimulated by other highly civilized peoples.

An ancient Greek historian once noted that the Greeks were children
compared to the Egyptians. In contrast, in the development of ancient
Chinese philosophical thought, there does not seem to have been any
significant cross‑fertilization from other centres of civilization
outside the Chou world.

The Greeks and the Chinese differed considerably in their respective
economic conditions. The Greeks were a commercial people to a great
extent and were, therefore, brought into contact with a wide variety of
ideas, customs, lands and peoples. Their conception of the world
recognized the existence of other great civilizations. The Chinese,
however, were mainly an agricultural people. None of the Chinese
philosophers ventured beyond Chou China.

There was, in consequence, a definite insularity attached to Chinese
philosophical thought. In addition to this insularity of thought, there
was close affinity between the Chinese thinker and the Chinese peasant;
both were attached to the land. The Chinese scholar‑philosopher was
usually a landowner, while the peasant cultivated the land. “Hence,
throughout Chinese history, social and economic thinking and policy have
centred around the utilization and distribution of land.”[^2]

In a sense, ancient Chinese philosophy may be said to have had an
intimate association with, if not absolutely conditioned by, the peasant
mentality. The Chinese thinkers' “reactions to the universe and their
outlook on life were essentially those of the farmer.”[^3] With the aid
of their learning and genius, the Chinese sages were able “to express
what an actual farmer felt but was incapable of expressing himself.”[^4]
Realization of this fact may go long way towards explaining the
predominantly practical tone of Chinese philosophical thought. The
peculiar problems connected with Chinese economic life tended to limit
the spectrum of values in philosophy.

Though Confucianism and Taoism are “poles apart from one another, yet
they are also the two poles of one and the same axis. They both express,
in one way or another, the aspirations and inspirations of the
farmer.”[^5] Confucianism stressed family obligations, while Taoism
emphasized the power, beauty, and mystery of nature.

Just as geographical conditions and agricultural life have exerted an
influ­ence on the formation and character of Chinese philosophy, so also
has done the Chinese social system, particularly the family. A striking
feature of Chinese philosophical thought is its preoccupation with
problems relating to the ethics of the family and the Chinese social
system.

The most outstanding example of this preoccupation is to be found in
Confucianism. “A great deal of Con­fucianism,” Fung Yu‑lan asserts, “is
the rational justification or theoretical expression of this social
system.”[^6]

The mental outlook of the Chinese farmer as well as his values tended to
limit the range of philosophical speculation. “The way of life of the
farmers is to follow nature. They admire nature and condemn the
artificial, and in their primitivity and innocence, they are easily made
content. They desire no change, nor can they conceive of any
change.”[^7]

Here one may discern the source of strength of much of Chinese classical
philosophy as well as its weakness. It reflected the attitudes,
interests, pre­judices, and values of the Chinese peasant.

A study of classical Chinese philosophy discloses that it possesses at
least four highly distinctive features which may be a reflection of the
dominance of this peasant mentality: lack of metaphysics, dearth of
logical sophistication, preoccupation with ethics, and a regressive
theory of history.

We shall comment on the last feature first. The traditional Chinese
theory of history is regressive. According to the Chinese, the Golden
Age of mankind was in the dim remoteness of the past and all subsequent
history has been a tragic degeneration from the ancient ideal age.

The Chinese sages sought to find the proper path which would enable
mankind to recapture the peace, justice, and harmony of that Golden Age.
Associated with this regressive conception of history was the tendency
of many of the classical schools to antedate the founder of a rival
school of thought.

Apparently, in order to make a school or a point of view more attractive
and authoritative, it was felt necessary to increase its antiquity. The
Confucianists, for example, referred to the mythological rulers, Yao and
Shun; the Mohists, in support of their philosophical position, went back
beyond Yao and Shun to the legendary Yu; and the Taoists, for their
part, went beyond Yu to the mythical Yellow Emperor. The more ancient
the beginning of a school, the more was it to be trusted.

The classical Chinese philosophers, for the most part, manifested an
aversion to metaphysical speculation. The Confucianists, Confucius
(551‑479 B.C.), Mencius (371‑289 B.C.), and Hsun Tzu (298‑c. 238 B.C.),
showed little interest in or even awareness of metaphysical questions.
Confucius was not concerned with understanding the character of Ultimate
Reality nor with epistemological problems; his concern was with social
and political philosophy. Mencius lacks an interest in metaphysics as
such, as does Hsun Tzu.

At the risk of over‑simplification, one could say that Confucianism was
primarily an educational philosophy. Though Confucius was silent on
whether or not human nature was good or evil, and, though Mencius and
Hsun Tzu differ greatly on this point‑the former maintaining that human
nature is good, and the latter, that it is evil‑all three agree on the
need and efficacy of education for inculcating or developing ethical
conduct. Subtle metaphysical disquisitions are lacking in all three.

Taoism, as set forth in the Tao Te Chingand the works of Chuang Tzu
(399‑c. 295 B.C.), frequently approaches a metaphysical analysis of
reality, but, more characteristically, ends in a hazy mysticism or
appears to be fascinated with the enunciation of paradoxes. The Taoist
saying that he who knows cannot say and that he who says does not know
the Tao (the Way, or Ultimate Reality) is not particularly conducive to
metaphysical discourse.

Mo Tzu (c. 479‑c. 438 B.C.), founder of Mohism, does not show any
interest in metaphysical matters as such. His philosophy stressed an
“all-­embracing love” based upon utility. He condemned aggressive war
and urged altruism based upon mutual self‑interest because the results
were more pleasant and useful to society. His reasons were practical and
devoid of any metaphysical justification.

As for the Logicians, for example, Hui Shih (c. 380‑305 B. C.) and
Kung‑sun Lung (380‑250 B.C.?), their interest comes nearer to being
metaphysical than any other school with the possible exception of the
Yin Yang.

The Logicians, frequently referred to as the School of Names (Ming
Chia), were chiefly concerned with problems relating to the relativity
and changeableness of all phenomena, as was Hui Shih, or with the
concept of universals‑the “names” of things‑which, according to Kung‑sun
Lung, were absolute and unchangeable. Hui Shih contended that concrete
things were undergoing constant change and were, therefore, different
from one instant to the next. Kung‑sun Lung insisted that the “names” of
things, similar to Platonic ideas, were absolute and unchangeable. In
order to substantiate his position, he employed epistemological
arguments. One of his most famous arguments is contained in his
discussion concerning “a white horse is not a horse.”

Many of the Logicians arguments posed paradoxes and logical conundrums
and, for this reason, were disparaged by the Confucianists. For example,
the great Chinese historian of the Han, Ssu‑ma T'an, himself a
Confucianist described the work of the Logicians as “minute examinations
of trifling points in complicated and elaborate statements, which made
it impossible for others to refute their ideas.”[^8]

Because of the lack of interest in metaphysical questions peculiar to
Chinese classical philosophers in general, the influence of the
Logicians was not especially significant in the development of later
Chinese thought.

The Legalists, whose most important representative is Han Fei Tzu (died
233 B. C.), were not concerned with problems of metaphysics, logic, or
episte­mology. Their fundamental concern was political: What happens
when a ruler is weak, wicked, or incompetent? How is a State to be
unified and governed?

For the Legalists, the answer was impersonal law in the place of
personal ethics or moral principles. The Legalists, though at odds with
the Confucianists, show a similarly overriding interest in the practical
aspects of political and social philosophy. Metaphysical speculation is
a pastime which neither of these classical schools pursued.

Tsou Yen (305‑240 B.C.) of the Yin Yang school probably represents the
extent to which the Chinese were willing to pursue metaphysical
speculation without the pressure of foreign ideas. Certainly the Taoist
and Yin Yang represent indigenous Chinese metaphysical thinking prior to
the advent of Buddhism.

The Yin Yang school, however, lacks genuine metaphysical profundity and,
in essence, appears to be based on a dualistic theory of the interaction
of the female and male principles of the universe, the Yin and the Yang
respectively.

Neither the Yin Yang school nor Taoism possesses a meta‑physical
presentation approaching the works of Plato or Aristotle. One has the
feeling that the thinkers of these two schools educed one or two ideas
and then used them uncritically and mechanically to explain various
phenomena.

In general, Chinese philosophers either ignored metaphysics or showed
only a spasmodic interest in understanding, logically and
systematically, the nature and character of the Ultimate Reality. Only
after the introduction of Buddhism did the Chinese philosophers concern
themselves seriously with metaphysics.

“Even the basic metaphysical problems, such as God, universals, space
and time, matter and spirit, were either not discussed, except in
Buddhism, or discussed only occasionally, and then always for the sake
of ethics.”[^9] Chinese thinkers confined themselves to social and
political thought; they had always in mind the capability of their
respective philosophies for practical implemen­tation. As metaphysics
was, in the main, slighted or ignored, so were episte­mological
problems.

An examination of the history of Chinese philosophy illustrates
plentifully that Chinese philosophers occupied themselves with questions
of human adjustment to nature or the individual's adjustment to society.
The Taoists stressed the former, the Confucianists the latter. The
Taoists regarded society as unnatural and unnecessary for Good Life. In
this respect it resembles Romanticism.

Confucianism maintains that society is natural and necessary for the
life of a human being. Society permits a man to satisfy his ethical
obligations and also affords him an opportunity to enrich his life with
learning, art, music, and moral example. Society is not only a structure
of ethical and social relationships but also a product of man's cultural
heritage.

Man as a member of society is able to appreciate tradition, literature,
ceremonies‑all those things which are not absolutely necessary for
physical survival but which are nevertheless the very essence of
civilized, cultured existence. As Taoism lauds the state of nature, it
is akin to Romanticism; Confucianism is allied to Classicism.

In addition to a lack of metaphysical interest or regard for
epistemological problems, Chinese philosophical thought, both classical
and medieval, is distin­guished by its patent deficiency of logical
refinement. Chinese philosophical discourses are usually unsystematic
and infrequently based upon rigid logical argumentation.

The classical philosopher's approach was simple; his use of an elaborate
philosophical method was almost non‑existent. The Chinese philoso­pher
was primarily engrossed in questions of ethics and with practical
matters relating to the ordering of society according to proper moral
principles or, as in the case of Taoism, with the way of nature and
naturalness.

The arguments employed by the philosophers were eminently practical in
the sense that they made no appeal to complicated logical analysis,
theory, or hypothesis, but appealed to man's common sense. It would be
helpful to illustrate the type of “logical” argumentation frequently
encountered in the works of Chinese classical philosophers.

The ancients, who wished to illustrate illustrious virtue throughout the
kingdom, first ordered well their own states. Wishing to order well
their states, they first regulated their families. Wishing to regulate
their families, they first cultivated their persons. Wishing to
cultivate their persons, they first rectified their hearts.

Wishing to rectify their hearts they first sought to be sincere in their
thoughts. Wishing to be sincere in their thoughts, they first extended
to the utmost their knowledge. Such extension of knowledge lay in the
investigation of things.

“Things being investigated, knowledge became complete. Their know­ledge
being complete, their thoughts were sincere. Their thoughts being
sincere, their hearts were then rectified. Their hearts being rectified,
their persons were cultivated. Their persons being cultivated, their
families were regulated. Their families being regulated, their states
were rightly governed. Their states being rightly governed, the whole
kingdom was made tranquil and happy.”[^10]

That an over‑emphasis upon logical analysis may inhibit novel ideas and
conceptions of reality, few will deny. Too great a reliance upon logical
clarity precision and consistency may lead to sterile thought. The later
medieval period in Europe, which was dominated by Scholastic logic,
illustrates suffi­ciently the perils involved in an over‑estimation of
the power and validity of logical analysis. The Scholastics appear to
have regrettably misunderstood the value of logic.

The medieval Schoolmen erred in the direction of too much emphasis upon
logical acuteness whereas, in contradistinction, the Chinese appear to
have been blind to the importance of logical refinement. Whether through
disinterest or because of the intrinsic difficulties involved in their
own written language (pictographs and ideographs), Chinese philosophers
do not seem to have understood the proper role of logic in the
acquisition of new knowledge.

In one of his works, Alfred North Whitehead states succinctly the
crucial part logic may play in the advancement of the frontiers of human
knowledge. “Logic, properly used,” he writes, “does not shackle thought.
It gives freedom, and above all, boldness. Illogical thought hesitates
to draw conclusions, because it never knows either what it means, or
what it assumes, or how far it trusts its own assumptions or what will
be the effect of any modification of assumptions.”

Continuing, he remarks, “Also the mind un­trained in that part of
constructive logic which is relevant to the subject in hand will be
ignorant of the sort of conclusions which follow from various sorts of
assumptions, and will be correspondingly dull in divining the inductive
laws”.[^11] One can hardly fail to agree with Whitehead's observation
when studying Chinese classical philosophy as well as much of the
philosophy of the later schools in China.

By confining their attention to the world of everyday affairs and common
sense, the Chinese savants felt no need to engage in metaphysical
speculation in a systematic manner, nor did they feel any desire to
indulge in the luxury of logical subtlety.

“Therefore,” a well‑known Japanese philosopher comments, “when their
philosophy did not vanish in the mist of vague mysticism, as in the ease
of Taoism, it tenaciously clung to the agnosticism of everyday
experience . . . .”[^12] As we study the Taoist classssic, Tao Te Ching,
we can readily understand what is meant by a philosophy losing itself
“in the mist of vague mysticism,” for example:

The Tao that can be told of is not the Absolute Tao. The Names that can
be given are not Absolute Names. The Nameless is the origin of Heaven
and Earth; the Named is the Mother of All Things. Therefore oftentimes,
one strips oneself of passion in order to see the Secret of Life;
oftentimes, one regards life with passion, in order to see its manifest
results.

These two (the Secret and its manifestations) are (in their nature) the
same; they are given different names when they become manifest. They may
both be called the Cosmic Mystery:  
 Reaching from the Mystery into the Deeper Mystery Is the Gate to the
Secret of All Life.[^13]

This may be an example of “pure speculation” on the part of a Chinese
philosopher. If so, one is inclined again to agree with Whitehead who
also observed: “Pure speculation, undisciplined by the scholarship of
detailed fact or the scholarship of exact logic, is on the whole more
useless than pure scholar­ship, unrelieved by speculation.”[^14]

The Taoists seem to have engaged in “pure speculation” fairly
consistently. For their part, the Confucianists emphasized learning and
traditional scholarship and the “business” of social existence and its
obligations.

Unfortunately, the excessive engrossment in the realm of the
common­place was as detrimental as the marked tendency to mysticism.
Both of these extremes tended to stultify the adventure of thought
toward new possibilities of achievement. When Chinese thought did not
float away in the clouds, it remained earth‑bound.

Granted that the confluence of the regressive theory of history, the
lack of metaphysical speculation, and a pronounced deficiency of logical
refinement are distinctive features of classical Chinese philosophy, in
general, probably the most significant characteristic the one which may
help explain why metaphysics and logic languished‑is the dominant
concern with ethics, for, indeed, there is little doubt that ethics was
the main concern of Chinese philosophers.

There were but few exceptions during the classical period and even
thereafter. Ethics played a major role in Chinese philosophy. “The moral
life,” Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki writes, “can be said to have been the only
philosophical subject which . . . has seriously interested the Chinese,
and which has been considered worthy of their earnest speculation.”[^15]

By focusing their attention on ethical problems‑man and his life in
society or in harmony with nature‑the Chinese seriously restricted the
content of philosophy in their culture. The special facts of geography,
economics, and sociology exercised a strong influence on the Chinese
climate of philosophical opinion and may account, as we have noted, for
their almost exclusive concentration on ethic.

In the final analysis, the classical Chinese philosopher's ideal was the
attain­ment of the Good Life here and now on earth. Most classical
thinkers assented to Confucius observation:

“While you do not know life, how can you know about death?” The world of
the present requires man's full attention, courage, and ingenuity. To
the great majority of Chinese philosophers, righteousness, family,
economic security, and a stable social order were the main objects of
study. During the later periods of Chinese philosophy, though there were
occasional lapses from these objectives, they remained permanent
features in the Chinese philosophical tradition.

Tang Chung‑shu (c. 179‑104 B. C.) was the thinker who contributed most
to the ultimate triumph of Confucianism over all the other schools of
the Chou in the Han Dynasty (206 B. C.‑200 A. D.).

Later, it is true that Confucianism was overshadowed by Buddhism during
the period of Division (221‑589 A.D.) following the break‑up of the Han
Empire, but, to survive in China as an effective, popular force,
Buddhism had to accommodate itself to the peculiarities of the Chinese
philosophical temper which we have endeavoured to sketch in the
preceding pages.

Those schools of Buddhism which tried to preserve their original
philosophical purity failed to achieve currency in China and, hence,
remained ineffectual in Chinese intellectual life. Chinese Buddhism
enjoyed immense support because it was Buddhism a la chinoise.

In short, the cardinal limitation of Chinese philosophy stems from its
inordinate attention to what Whitehead calls “practical reason.”[^16]

Chinese thought was too closely associated with practical matters, with
social adjust­ment. It was blinded, so to speak, by the affairs of the
present. In concentrating on the “practical reason,” it neglected
“speculative reason” which is allied with logic and systematic
discourse.

Here we must stress that flights of fancy or sheer contemplation are not
to be construed as speculative reason or specu­lative philosophy.
Speculative philosophy seeks a comprehensive understand­ing of the
nature of reality, of God, of man, and of the universe; it strives for a
synoptic vision; while, in contrast, practical reason of practical
philosophy is concerned with the empirical approach to concrete problems
of living and action.

The speculative philosopher, as here described, often regards his
opposite as a victim of spurious knowledge, lost in the hustle and
bustle of the market­place. Though the speculative philosopher may
frequently be at odds with the practical philosopher, each needs the
other. Unfortunately, the practical thinker may be oblivious of what his
counterpart is about and may regard his pursuits as quite extraneous to
the business of living.

The speculative thinker does not deny the importance of practical
reason; he presupposes it and moves along on a plane above the details
of the everyday world. It should be noted that the practical activities
of the mind produce data which the speculative thinker may utilize in
the formulation of new theoretical possibilities, and these in turn may
stimulate the activities of the practical philosopher in his desire to
implement them in new social programmes and in new technologies.

This interplay between these two types of reason or philosophical
endeavour constitutes a kind of creative cultural symbiosis. If a
civilization neglects either the practical or the speculative type of
reason, it will be affected adversely.

China, until the impact of the modern world was felt, was an example of
the harmful effects of a pragmatic, utilitarian philosophical
orientation. Though authorities differ on the precise amount of weight
to be given to its philosophical orientation as a cause of the
somnolence of Chinese society, there appears to be agreement that the
stress on practicality and social ethics, especially of Con­fucianism,
played a most important role.

Science and technology were retarded; there was no speculative thought
to challenge the mind towards new heights of achievement; the scholar
class, reared on mundane philosophy, was dominant.

This is not to say that Confucian civilization was not a creative and
remarkable civilization in many areas; it is merely an endeavour to
point out why a certain type of mind did not flourish. Philosophies
which concentrate too completely on social adjustment and utility
paralyze, if they do not actually destroy, individual creativity and
spontaneity in other avenues of human development.

Just as civilizations have cramped the individual by a preponderant
religious or materialistic orientation, so the same cramping may occur
when social utility is made the absolute measure of value.

The case of pre‑modern Chinese civilization may furnish an example of
the great danger attached to continually stressing the “social” or
“practical” value of thought. The continued vigour of a culture depends
upon how well it is replenished with new insights and challenged by new
visions of possibility.

General Works
-------------

Lily Abegg, The Mind of East Asia Thames & Hudson, London, 1952; Che‑yu
Chong, Oriental and Occidental Cultures Contrasted: An Introduction to
“Culturology,” The Gillack Press, Berkeley, 1943;Yu‑lan Fung, A Short
History of Chinese Philosophy, ed. Derk Bodde, The Macmillan Company,
New York, 1948; E.R. Hughes, Chinese Philosophy in Classical Times,
Dent, London, 1942; The Great Learning and the Mean‑In‑Action, E. P.
Dutton Company, Ins., New York, 1943;Wu‑chi Liu, A Short History of
Confucian Philosophy, Penguin Books Ltd., London, 1955;Harley Farnsworth
MacNair, Ed., China, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los
Angeles, 1946;Charles A. Moore, Ed., Essays in East‑West Philo­sophy,
University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu, 1951;Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, A
Brief History of Early Chinese Philosophy, Second Edition, Probsthain &
Co., London, 1914 ; Arthur Waley, Three Ways of Thought in Ancient
China, Allen & Unwin, London, 1939; Max Weber, The Religion of China,
Confucianism and Taoism, tr. and ed. Hans H. Gerth, The Free Press,
Glencoe, Illinois, 1951; Arthur F. Wright, Ed., Studies in Chinese
Thought, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1953.

### Primary Sources

Fung Yu‑lan, A History of Chinese Philosophy: Vol. I, The Period of the
Philo­sophers (From the Beginnings to circa. 100 B.C.); Vol. II, The
Period of Classical Learning (From the Second Century B.C. to the
Twentieth Century A.D.), tr. Derk Bodde, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1952‑53. These volumes contain lengthy passages from all of
the philosophers discussed in this chapter. Excellent source for
materials on Hui Shih, Kung‑sun Lung, and the Yin Yang school.

#### Confucianism

James Legge, Tr., The Chinese Classics: Vol. I, The Confucian Analects,
The Great Learning, and Doctrine of the Mean; Vol. II, Mencius,
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1893‑95; The Works of Hsuntze, tr. H. H. Dubs,
Probsthain & Co., London, 1928.

#### Taoism

The Way and Its Power, tr. Arthur Waley, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1935;
Chuang Tzu, Mystic, Moralist, and Social Reformer, tr. Herbert A. Giles,
Second Edition revised, Kelly & Walsh, Shanghai, 1926.

#### Mohism

The Ethical and Political Works of Motse, tr. Y. P. Mei, Probsthain &
Co., London, 1929.

Chinese Epicureanism

Yang Chu's Garden of Pleasure, tr. Anton Forke, John Murray, London,
1912.

#### Legalism

The Book of Lord Shang, a Classic of the Chinese School of Law, tr. J.
J. L. Duyvendak, Probsthain & Co., London, 1928; The Complete Works of
Han Fei Tzu, a Classic of Chinese Legalism, tr. W. Liao, Probsthain &
Co., London, 1939.

[^1]: Derk Bodde, Ed., A Short History of Chinese Philosophy, The
Macmillan Company, New York, 1948, Chap. 2.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 17.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 18.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 19.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 21.

[^7]: Ibid., p. 26.

[^8]: Quoted in Fung Yu‑lan's A Short History of Chinese Philosophy, p.
81.

[^9]: Wing‑tsit Chan, “Synthesis in Chinese Metaphysics,” Essays in
East‑West Philosophy, ed. with an Introduction by Charles A. Moore,
University of Hawaii Press; Honolulo, 1951, p. 163.

[^10]: James Legge, Tr., Great Learning (Ta Hsueh), Verses 4 and 5.

[^11]: Alfred North Whitehead, The Aims of Education, The New American
Library, New York, 1955, p. 122.

[^12]: Daisetz Teitaro, A Brief History of Early Chinese Philosophy,
Second Edition. Probsthain & Co., London, 1914, pp. 11‑12.

[^13]: Laotse, the Book of Tao, tr. Lin Yutang in Wisdom of China and
India, ed. idem, The Modern Library, New York, 1956, p. 583.

[^14]: Alfred North 'Whitehead, Adventures of Ideas, The New American
Library, New York, 1955, pp. 112‑13.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 47.

[^16]: Idem, The Function of Reason, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1929.


