Chapter 3: Pre-Islamic Iranian Thought
======================================

*Pre-Islamic Iranian Thought by Alessandro Bausani, Ph.D, Professor of
Persian Language and Literature, University of Naples (Italy)*

A summary sketch of the philosophical thought of pre‑Islamic Iran is
both a difficult and an easy task difficult in the sense that the texts
on which this study must be based are not philosophical in the proper
sense of the word, but rather theological or sometimes even
mythological, and we have to abstract from them their philosophical
gist, translating their ideas into modern philosophical terminology,
through a rather personal work of interpretation; easy in the sense
that, in this work of reinterpretation, we have to renounce completely a
solution of the extremely complicated historical problems put by Iranic
philology.

An attempt at a philosophical reinter­pretation of the Mazdaic outlook
can be based, in our opinion, exclusively on the only concrete and
systematic form of Mazdaism we know: the late Mazdaism of the Pahlavi
books of the Sassanian period and the early times of Islam.

The almost insoluble problems raised by the pre‑Islamic religion (or,
accord­ing to others, religions) of Iran depend chiefly on the extreme
confusion of different types of religiosity‑local religion, religion of
the elite, etc.

Concerning the sources of Mazdaism the only comparatively sure points
are (a) that the Gathas of the Avesta are very old and probably date
back to Zarathustra himself (e. 700‑600 B.C.); and (b) that the most
systematic and the richest Pahlavi texts were written in the third/ninth
century, i.e., two centuries after the Islamic conquest of Iran.

An accurate dating of the materials between these two chronological
limits (the seventh century B.C. and the ninth century A.D.) seems still
impossible and all the learned conclusions of the scholars (who often
change their minds from year to year) appear to be no more than
conjectures.

Moreover, the materials chronologically placed between these two dates
are sometimes typologically so incongruous that it is very easy to
abstract from them a certain type of religion and attribute it to the
founder, making of him, e.g., either on idealistic philosopher or a
shaman, and then explain the development of Mazdaism that followed
either as the decay or a repaganization of a highly philosophical
religion, or as a successive theologization of originally mystical
perceptions.

It would be no exaggeration to say that the only comprehensive approach
to the enormous and extremely varied religio‑philosophical materials
contained in the corpus of Mazdaic texts is to consider them
synchronistically as a whole. Though one may not agree with many details
of Professor Corbin's theories, one cannot but agree with him when he
writes:

“A spiritual morphology that attempts a reconstruction and revaluation
of the actually living devotion impels us to consider the canonical
Avesta, or at least what we possess of it, its ritual, as preserving at
its centre the Psalms (Gathas) of Zarathustra and the middle‑Iranic
(Pahlavi) and Parsi translations and commentaries as a whole.

Also in this case, it seems that when the believer recites his Bible or
when the Liturgy is celebrated, all objections taking historical
stratification as a pretext fail to reach their aim. If we always ask:
\`Whence does it come?' we practically do nothing more than wander here
and there, formulating hypotheses vainly following one another. We
should rather ask: \`At what does it aim?' Then the soul would answer,
accounting for what has been its purpose.”[^1]

We shall, therefore, make as the basis of the present chapter the latest
form of pre‑Islamic Iranian religiosity, the form represented by the
whole corpus of the Avestic and Pahlavi Scriptures possessed and
venerated by the Parsecs (not in the sense, of course, that we shall
follow necessarily their interpretation of them). For it is safer for a
philosopher to interpret an actual and concrete corpus of religious
scriptures, than to interpret the ever‑changing reinter­pretation of
them made by the historians.

It will be useful, however, to reproduce, as an introduction; the most
widely accepted diachronical explanation of the numerous so‑called
“contradictions” of the present Mazdaic corpus, even though it does not
seem to be completely satisfactory. The difficulty is that much of the
materials generally considered being very old are much later or at least
they “function” in a much later theological organism.

The branch of the Aryans who in about the eleventh century B. C.
detached themselves from their brethren, penetrating afterwards into the
jungles of India (a natural place for magic and richest mytho‑poetical
phantasy) and made the yellow and dry plateau of Iran their country, had
obviously brought with them their naturalistic religion, clearly
delineated in the Vedas and rather similar to that of old Rome and
Greece.

The sacrifices of animals (e. g., the ox) and the ceremonial libation of
the fermented juice of a plant, haoma (Skr. soma), were frequent and
taken as sacred rites.

At a certain moment, not yet determined with sufficient clearness,
though the majority of scholars seem now to fix it at the sixth century
B.C., the remarkable personality of a religious reformer, Zarathustra,
appeared in the oriental zone of the Iranian plateau.

His name still resists all attempts at etymological interpretation. “The
man with the old camels” seems to be the most accepted one. Zarathustra,
possibly utilizing a pre‑existing naturalistic sky‑god (Varuna), created
a new monotheism, so strong that the name of the old gods (devas) came
to signify “demons.”

This was, up to some time ago, a “classical” theory of the historians of
Mazdaism, but now it seems to cede to new hypotheses maintaining that
the demonization of the devas was prior to Zarathustra. Henning even
asserted that Zarathustra's reform was a “protest against monotheism.”
The seventeen hymns (Gathas), written in a rather archaic language and
forming the central part of the Avesta are generally considered to be
the work of Zarathustra himself.

The Gathas uphold veneration for a single supreme God, Ahura Mazdah, the
“Wise Lord” (according to some like Pagliaro, “the Thinking Lord”). He
is accompanied by a cortege of abstract quasi‑personified powers or
attributes, the six Amesha Spentas (Holy Immortals): Asha (the Cosmic
Law or Righteousness), Vohu Manah (Good Thought or Benevolence),
Khshathra (Sovereignty), Armaiti (Piety, Docility), Haurvatat
(Integrity), Ameretat (Immortality).

The Gathas reject rites and sacrifices, especially the ritual killing of
cattle and the Haoma cult, preach a very high personal ethic, and
enforce wise social laws, foremost of which is the fostering of
agriculture against nomadism.

In order to explain evil in the world, the idea of the influence of the
Evil Spirit (Angra Mainyu) is introduced; in front of it stands Spenta
Mainyu (the Holy Spirit), not identical (at least in this oldest stage)
with the Wise Lord (Ahura Mazdah). This monotheism, tendentiously
dualistic but, in any case, clearly prophetic and anti‑naturalistic,
“crossed the spiritual sky of Iran as a meteor” (Duchensne­ Guillemin).

The religion which will be now called Mazdaic‑mazdayasna means “one who
worships the Wise (Lord)” reabsorbed in course of time some of the older
“heathen” rites and cults, e. g., Haoma's cult, and also accepted the
natu­ralistic gods of the ancient pantheon, some of them like Mithra,
the god of sunlight and, then, of the Covenant and Oath being just
adopted, while others being inescapably transformed into deva's.
According to some scholars, how­ever, the religion of Mithra existed as
a distinct creed in old Iran.

At the same time dualism, not so strong and systematized in the
beginning, was becoming deeper: it became a cosmologico‑metaphysical
contrast between a good God, Ahura Mazdah, and an evil God, Angra
Mainyu, both having their own “creations,” the former being accompanied
by his Amesha Spentas (ever more clearly personified in course of time)
and Yazatas (Venerable Beings, “gods,” like Mithra, the goddess Anahita
probably introduced from Babylon, etc.), and the latter by the band of
the devils and drujs (literally “lies”). Lying seems to have been the
worst sin for Zarathustra.

This religion was at a certain moment monopolized by the Magi. Who the
Magi were, is another crux of the historians of Mazdaism. Herodotus
speaks of the Magi as a tribe of Media and attributes to them a religion
rather different from that of the old Persians. Father G. Messina tried
to demonstrate that they formed a closed caste with such characteristic
features as those of a “tribe.” According to him, their name (magavan)
means “bearers of the gift” of Zarathustra's doctrine.

Their power increased rapidly and it seems that already during the
Achaemenid period (558‑330 B.C.) the education of the future kings was
entrusted to them. They succeeded in spreading among the people certain
ethical principles and rites of their founder's religion.

But this success was not complete, and this is one of the many possible
explanations of the discrepancies between the visible and popular
religion of the Persians and the quasi‑esoteric religion of the Magi.
According to the same view, the Magi became afterwards the
“philosophers” of their doctrine, and tried to develop it especially to
explain its dualism.

Christian sources of the fourth century A.D. (Theodore of Mopsuestia)
speak of the birth, in the milieu of the Magi, of the doctrine or heresy
called Zurvanism that explained away dualism through the acceptance of a
supreme god Zurvan (time) as father of both Ahura Mazdah and Angra
Mainyu. But some scholars now speak of Zurvanism as an actually
autonomous religion; and others, turning the preceding theory upside
down, consider the Magi to be the bearers of the less philosophical,
most magical, and punctiliously ritualistic aspect of Zoroastrianism.

In the meanwhile ritual and cult, with complicated precepts of legal
purity, were gradually prevailing and when, after a dark period of
incubation under the Arsacid Dynasty (250 B. C. 224 A. D.) the caste of
the Magi obtained unparal­leled power, with the advent of the Sassanians
(224‑651 A.D.), Mazdaism, now a State religion, became an intolerant
faith, persecutor of every form of heresy.

Heresy (as it happened first with Manichaeism supported at its
begin­nings by King Shahpur, 241‑272 A. D., and then with communistic
Mazdakism, favoured by King Kawat, 488‑531) was sometimes a useful
pretext for the warrior caste of the kings‑a caste that seemed to
possess its own religious tradition different from that of the priestly
caste‑to escape the excessive power of the Magi.

The discontentment hidden under the outwardly uniform orthodoxy, the
unbearable poverty of the peasants, never totally imbued with the
religion of the elite, and no doubt possessing their own religious
customs and traditions practically unknown to us, and the struggle
between Throne and Altar, were some of the causes that rendered the
conquest of Iran by the Arabs so astonishingly easy.

The Mazdaic religion is commonly defined as “the religion of dualism.” A
deeper analysis shows that dualism is not the only basic feature of
Mazdaism.

The account of Mazdaic philosophy that follows is divided in a rather
unorthodox way, necessitated by the fact that Mazdaism is not a
philosophy, into the following four sections: (1) The Concept of Myth,
(2) Mazdaic Angelism, (3) the Double Dualism, (4) the Idea of Time.

1. The Concept of Myth
----------------------

One of the most interesting features of Mazdaic thought is its being at
the same time mythical and theologico‑philosophical. The Mazdaic texts
are very rich in myths, but these are never narrated ex professo; they
are rather hinted at in the texts the chief purpose of which is not that
of telling myths. Sufficient attention has not been paid to this “style”
of Mazdaic Scriptures.

This is true not only of the later Pahlavi books but also of Avesta
itself. In it myths are inlaid in liturgical hymns or legal and
canonical texts in the form of explana­tions and comments. Avesta shows
thus a rather “recent” type of myth­telling. The myth has never in
Avesta‑even in the case of myths having a naturalistic origin‑the
freshness of the Vedic myth; it is always in a phase of rational or
theological explanation, and is used as a hint or example in texts that
remain fundamentally theological.

We have just mentioned “myths having an ancient naturalistic origin.” A
sufficiently clear instance of a Mazdaic myth of this type is that of
the killed dragon. In the Aban Yasht[^2] a hymn to the angel of Waters,
Ardvi Sura Anahita, containing a list of all those who in ancient times
made sacrifices to that angel‑goddess, we read among other stories this
passage, clearly explain­ing and confirming the efficacy of prayer and
sacrifice to that angel:

“To her did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan, offer up a
sacrifice in the four‑cornered Varena, with a hundred male horses, a
thousand oxen, and ten thousand lambs.

He begged of her a boon; saying: \`Grant me this, O Good, most
beneficent Ardvi Sura Anahita! that I may overcome Azhi Dahaka, the
three‑mouthed, the three‑headed, the six‑eyed one who has a thousand
senses, that most powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon, baleful to the
world, the strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against the material
world, to destroy the world of the good principle; and that I may
deliver his two wives, Savanghavach and Erenavach, who are the fairest
of body amongst women, and the most wonderful creatures in the world.'
Ardi Sura Anahita granted him that boon, as he was offering libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.”

Comparison with other cultures allows us to reconstruct an ancient myth
originally connected with the New Year Feast and with the rites aiming
at defeating drought. A divine, Thraetaona (the Faridun of Firdausi's
Shahnameh), conquers the fortress of the Dragon and defeats and kills
him. The Waters that were prisoners in his castle are now freed and so
are the women held by the monster as slaves in his harem.

Now rain falls fertilizing the earth and the young hero‑liberator
celebrates the hieres gamos with the liberated women. But this is simply
a reconstruction and the readers or hearers of the Avesta probably had
no idea of the original, authentically mythico‑ritual, meaning of this
tale; it probably sounded to them simply as a nice example of pietas
towards the angel and of national heroism by Thraetaona.

But there are also other myths, utilized exactly like this and in
similar contexts, of a purely theologico‑symbolical origin. For
instance, there is the myth of Vishtaspa who frees the enchained Daena,
told always with the same emblematical conciseness in the Farvardin
Yasht.[^3]  
 This Yasht is chiefly a list of fravashis (see below) or holy men, to
whom the believer offers sacrifices. The enterprises of some of these
holy men are narrated here in order to encourage the worshipper to offer
sacrifice to their respective fravashi. Concerning the fravashi of
Vishtaspa, the king who protected Zarathustra, accepted his religion
(Daena), and spread it, the hymn says:

“We worship the fravashi of the holy king Vishtaspa; the gallant one,
who was the incarnate Word, the mighty‑speared and lordly one; who,
driving the Druj before him, sought wide room for the holy Daena . . . ;
who made himself the arm and support of this law of Ahura, the law of
Zarathustra. We took her (i. e., the Daena, or Religion) standing bound
from the hands of the Hunus, and established her to sit in the middle
(of the world), high ruling, never falling back, holy, nourished with
plenty of cattle and pastures, blessed with plenty of cattle and
pastures.”

Here we see, contrary to the former instance, a myth germinating from
history. The process of mythicization has reached a very advanced stage,
but not so advanced as to render it impossible to recognize the
historical materials that lie at the basis of a myth. First of all, a
Daena means “Religion,” in a quasi‑personified sense; secondly, the
fact‑myth is connected with the work of the Prophet Zarathustra and that
of the holy King Vishtaspa.

But it is highly interesting to note that the attributes attached to his
name are the same as those of the angel Saraosha[^4] of which Vishtaspa
is, in a sense, the terrestrial emblem; in the same way as Zarathustra
is the terrestrial symbol of Ahura Mazdah. We notice here an important
moment of the passage from history to myth in Mazdaism and also, at the
same time, an important aspect of the Mazdaic approach to myth and
reality.

Mazdaic thought, while denaturalizing and ethicizing naturalistic myths,
embodies historical events, in semi‑mythical persons, and in so doing
“angelizes” history. We are in the presence of a “visionary”
theology‑philosophy, in which intellectual entities assume personal
forms, moving in an intermediate world of vision (probably a heritage of
the mystical experiences of the Founder) so organized as to give a
characteristic Unitarian savour to the whole Mazdaic thought.

2. Angelism
-----------

Once the mythical logic of Mazdaism has been understood, we can proceed
to the study of some of the most significant details of the Mazdaic
Welt­anschauung. The first key to open its shrines is that, in Mazdaic
thought, the Absolute is a personal God, the Wise Lord Ahura Mazdah, a
God that reminds us of the Biblical and Qur'anic God.

But His attributes are not (be they eternal or created) intelligible
concepts; rather they are themselves “persons” or angels.” Professor
Corbin[^5] rightly remarks that the Mazdean, instead of putting to
himself the questions: “What is Time? What is Earth? What is Water?”,
asks: “Who is Time? Who is Earth? Who is Water?”

And so we find in Mazdaic texts that Time is a Youth of fifteen, Earth
is the Archangel Spenta Armaiti (the Holy Piety), Water is the beautiful
goddess‑angel Ardvi Sura Anahita. The problem lies in rightly
interpreting the verb is: in which sense are these images of vision what
they represent? Certainly they are not angels in the Biblical and the
Qur'anic sense of mere messengers or servants of God; Corbin compares
them rightly with the dii‑angeli of Proclus.

The Zamyad Yasht, speaking of the six Amesha Spentas, sings thus:[^6]
“..the Amesha Spentas, the bright ones, whose looks perform their wish,
tall, quickly coming to do, strong, and lordly, who are undecaying and
holy; who are all seven (their seventh is Ahura Mazdah himself) of one
thought; who are all seven of one speech, who are all seven of one deed;
whose thought is the same, whose speech is the same, whose father and
commander is the same, namely the Maker, Ahura Mazdah; who see one
another's soul thinking of good thoughts, thinking of good words,
thinking of good deeds, thinking of Garonmana (the supreme paradise,
\`house of the hymns'), and whose ways are shining as they go down to
the libations; who are the makers and governors, the shapers and
overseers, the keepers and preservers of these creations of Ahura
Mazdah.

It is they who shall restore the world, which will thenceforth never
grow old and never die, will become never decaying, never rotting, ever
living, eves increasing, and master of its wish, when the dead will
rise, when life and immortality will come, and the world will be
restored at its wish . . . .”

Here it seems that the Amesha Spentas play a role not very dissimilar to
that of the “persons” of the Christian Trinity. It is remarkable that
they are six, but are called seven, Ahura Mazdah himself being the
seventh. This concept of Ahura Mazdah adding himself as the last to
every hierarchical series of beings is often found in Mazdaic books. In
order to understand it we must remember a sentence in the first chapter
of Bundahishn:[^7]

“For Ohrmazd is both spiritual and material,” or, according to other
translations: “For Ohrmazd both creations are celestial”; in other
words, everything is, for him, in trans­cendent, celestial stage. God
can descend into all the stages of Being, eternally First and Last of
every embodied or disembodied hierarchy, because, sub specie Dei,
everything is transcendent and celestial and this descent can in no way
“contaminate” Him.

But these six Amesha Spentas are also the archangelic
emblem‑personifica­tion of the primordial elements: Earth (Spenta
Armaiti), Cattle (Vohu Manah), Fire (Asha), Metals (Khshathra), Water
(Haurvatat), Plants (Ameretat).

They are the elements not as allegories of them, but as living personal
symbols, as “Lords of the Species.” The concept of Ratu, Lord of the
Species, is present everywhere in Mazdaic books. The Lord of the Species
“Woman” is, for instance, the mythico‑historical Daena, “'religion”; the
Lord of the Species “Bird” is the mythical bird Saena meregha, or in
modern Persian simurgh.

The theological abstractions that presented themselves to the
philosophico‑ecstatic mind of the Prophet Zarathustra in a period in
which a transformation of the mythico‑theological concepts into pure
philosophy was premature, assumed the plastic life of the gods of the
former naturalistic pantheon.

Holy Piousness, for example, came to be the Earth instead of remaining
an abstractly pure intellectual form. Or, better, it did not come to be
in the historical sense of the expression, but was probably already so
double‑faced in the mind of the Prophet, the historical Zarathustra or
some other prophet, whose personal mystical experience is fundamental to
the understanding of this as of all other concepts.

The connection of the Amesha Spentas with their natural kingdoms is
already retraceable in the Gathas. In Yt. 31.9Armaiti is seen as
specially favouring the earth's tiller. A verse after, the thrifty
toiler in the fields is called one “who nourisheth Vohu Manah (“the Good
Thought” the Cattle), while in v. 21 Ahura Mazdah will give “the fat of
Good Thought (Cattle)” to him who is His friend.

But in the same Gathas we often hear that Ahura Mazdah created the world
through Good Thought, which in these contexts seems to have nothing to
do with cattle. Whatever the historical origins of these
angelico‑symbolical identifica­tions may have been, the fact remains
that they had the highly important function of transfiguring the
elements of nature into ethical values.

Or, to put it better, there is an exchange of functions: natural
elements are coloured with ethos, and ethical values live a cosmic life.
This is one of the most typical features of Mazdaism.

The Supreme God of Mazdaism has further interesting aspects that make
him rather different from the God of classical monotheisms. He is, for
instance, situated in a sort of transcendent Time and Space,[^8]
Boundless Time and Space‑Light, or Uncreated Light (but the word for
Space, gas, could be also mythologic­ally interpreted as “throne”).

There is, in other words, a time‑tension in God. But the student of
Mazdaism becomes even more astonished when he comes to know that Ahura
Mazdah has got a soul, or better a fravashi. As the idea of soul is a
specially interesting aspect of Mazdaic thought, we shall treat it here
as a particular case of Mazdaic “angelism.”

In Mazdaic anthropology, according to Bundahishn,[^9] man was “fashioned
in five parts‑body (tan), soul (jan), spirit (ruvan), prototype
(adhvenak) and fravashi.

Body is the material part; soul, that which is connected with the
wind‑the inhaling and exhaling of breath; spirit, that which with
consciousness in the body hears, sees, speaks and knows; the prototype
is that which is situated in the station of the Sun; the fravashi is
that which is in the presence of Ohrmazd, the Lord.

He was created in this fashion because, during the period of the assault
of the Aggressor, men die, their bodies rejoin the earth, their souls
the wind, their prototypes the Sun, their spirits the fravashi, so that
the demons could not destroy the spirit.”

This is what happens during the period of the “Assault”' or of the
Mixture (gumechishn) of the good and evil creations. At the end of this
world, however, a real resurrection of the body will take place: the
dead will be “reconstructed” (rist virast). The Saviour (born from
Zarathustra's miraculously preserved sperm) will perform a sacrifice
(yazishn) in which the bull Hatayosh will be killed, and from his fat
and the white Haoma the ambrosia (anosh) will be prepared. All men will
drink it and become immortal.

A pure concept of the “immortality of the soul,” in the Greek sense of
the term, seems extraneous to Mazdaic thought. Every (good) man is
already an angel, fravashi, eternally in the presense of Ahura Mazdah;
resurrection of the body too is not exactly identical with the same idea
in Christian and Muslim tradition, for it happens in a moment which is
not, properly speaking, a historical moment; but the epoch of
frasho‑kereti (Phl. frashkart) which is no more in Finite Time but in
Boundless Time.

The metaphysical peculiarity of this epoch is also clearly shown by the
immolation of the Bull, otherwise in “normal time, a horrible sin for
Mazdaism.”

While the first three parts of the human compound do not need any
explana­tion, we have to consider here the two concepts of prototype
(adhvenak) and fravashi. The former‑is the heritage of an older
astro‑biological idea, common also in India, according to which the
prototypical soul of the different categories of beings is preserved in
the heavenly bodies. The race‑type of Cattle is pre­served, for
instance, in the moon (gaochithra, “having the form of Kine,” is an
Avestic name for the moon), and that of Plants in the stars.[^10]

Deeper and more easily interpretable in an ethical and philosophical way
is the concept of fravashi. This term does not appear in the Gathas
(which also ignore adhvenak, Mazdaicized afterwards), but in the
so‑called “more recent” parts of the Avesta it has already become the
aspect that will remain fixed in the Pahlavi tradition. It is clearly
kept distinct from “soul” in passages like Yt. 26. 7, and it seems that,
at least in the beginning, only heroes had been considered to be having
a fravashi.

Bailey's researches have demonstrated that the idea of fravashi is
associated with “the defensive power emanating from a hero, even after
his death.” This originally aristocratic idea suffered a process of
democratization in the course of time: every (righteous) man thus got
his fravashi, whose protective and defensive force is exerted not only
in his favour, but in favour of all those who invoke her.

The “fravashis of the Righteous” are seen as protectors of specially
sacred places, of the mythical lake or sea (Vouru‑kasha, of the white
Haoma, which we saw as an important ingredient of future ambrosia, of
Zarathustra's semen from which the future Saviours will be born, etc. In
their function as welcomers of the righteous souls after death they
remind us of the Germanic Valkyrs.

But the fravashis are also something more. In a passage of Avesta[^11]
we read: “And these we present hereby to the fravashi of Zarathustra
Spitama, the saint, for sacrifice, propitiation, and praise, and to
those of the people who love Righteousness, with all the holy fravashis
of the saints who are dead and who are living, and to those of men who
are as yet unborn, and to those of the prophets who will serve us, and
will labour to complete the progress and renovation of the world.”

Fravashis are, already now, real angelic doublets of the pious and good
men, past, present, and future. Also the living seem to have already a
fravashi in a sense slightly similar to but not at all identical with
the “Guardian Angel” of the Christian tradition. But there is even more:
we saw that Zarathustra, the Prophet, the “terrestrial God” as he is
called in some parts of Avesta, has his fravashi, and this is obvious.
However, it may seem strange to a rationalistic mind that the Archangels
and even Ahura Mazdah Himself have their fravashis.

In Vendidad 19, 46‑48 Zarathustra is invited to invoke the fravashi of
Ahura Mazdah. This fascinating idea seems to assume a doublet of God
Himself in a further hyper‑transcendent dimension of Being; but, as is
often the case with many original and highly interesting Mazdaic terms
and concepts, this idea is mentioned as if by chance and is soon
dropped, without any inter­pretation or comment.

These angelic doublets of the Good are also symbols of Free Choice (see
also below). According to a typically Mazdaic myth‑theologoumenon
preserved in Bundahishn,[^12] at the beginning of the millennia of the
period of “Mixture” (gumechishn), Ahura Mazdah asked the fravashis
whether they preferred to remain untouched by and protected from every
danger in the invisible, trans­cendent world or whether they were ready
to descend and incarnate themselves in the visible material world in
order to struggle with Evil.

The fravashis accepted the second alternative. In this way a sort of
de‑doubling happened: now, in this material world the real man is his
fravashi, his angelic ego, that is at the same time his destiny and his
true transcendental self; the moral responsibility of man is, in a
sense, “transcendentalized.”

Sin becomes equivalent to the treason of an angel. Metaphysically, every
discussion on the existence of soul, etc., is rendered useless by this
acceptance of the experienced fact of apriority of angel over man.

We said that the Gathas do not mention the term fravashi. But they
contain another idea that certainly contributed to give a new and
ethical meaning to the (probably pre‑Zarathustrian) heroical myth of the
Valkyr‑fravashi.

We mean the idea of Daena (Phl. den). This term has been etymologically
analyzed in the most discordant ways by philologists, looking for a
semantic explanation which may give reason for the double meaning of the
word: “religion” and “deep soul,” or better angelic personification of
human deeds. Here are some interesting Gathic passages containing the
term Daena:

“He who renders the Saint deceived, for him shall later be destruction:
long life shall be his lot in the darkness; foul shall be his foods his
speech shall be of the lowest. This is the life, O ye vile! to which
your deeds and your Daena will bring you!”[^13]

“Yea, I will declare the world's two first spirits, of whom the more
bountiful thus spake to the harmful: Neither our thoughts, nor our
commands, nor our understandings, nor our beliefs, nor our deeds, nor
our Da6nas, nor our souls are at one.”[^14]

“But their (of the Evil ones) souls and their daenas will groan when
they will approach the Chinvat Bridge …. .”[^15]

“Declare to me, O Ahura, that path of the Good Thought where the Daena
of the Saviours, i. e., their good works (ya hukereta), will taste the
joys of Righteousness ... .”[^16]

A later text of Avesta, the Hadekht Nask[^17] tells of the righteous
soul meeting, after death, his Daena in the form of a beautiful girl of
fifteen; here we see again the mytho‑poetic tendency of Mazdaic thought,
making of every intelligible entity an angel.

If we examine the above‑quoted passages we shall see that in all of them
we could freely translate Daena as “religious works,” ethical acts
metaphysically considered. The fact that these acts “groan”[^18] is not
at all astonishing, if we remember the easiness with which Mazdeans
personify ideas. This explains also how a fravashi has been attributed
to Ahura Mazdah himself. Ahura Mazdah has indeed a Daena in the Gathas;
in Bundahishun[^19] “omniscience and goodness,” i. e., supreme religious
actions, are called. Ahura Mazdah’s den (Daena, “religion”).

The primary sense of Daena seems to be ethico‑religious. It is
“religious acting” that (as is the case in quite a different mental
environ­ment with the Hindu karma) creates a body, is representable
visibly, and for Ahura Mazdah is His light[^20] and for man his angel of
light. As pointed out by Pagliano, it was this Zarathustric Daena that
modified the warrior fravashis (Dumezil) into ethical angels.  
 And it is in our opinion especially the myth of choice that gave also
Ahura Mazdah a fravashi. In which sense is Ahura Mazdah so similar to
the righteous man as to have Himself a fravashi? Chiefly in the sense
that Ahura Mazdah also made a choice of the two primordial Spirits‑say
the Gathas-”the most holy Spirit chose the Truth.”[^21]

This sense of angelic ethos has thus produced one of the deepest ideas
of Mazdaism, the image of the “soul‑angel‑valkyr‑religious work.”

3. The Double Dualism
---------------------

Choice, the central ethical concept of Mazdaism, is a choice between
two. This leads us to examine the radical dualism that, according to
many, is the basic idea of this religious philosophy. According to a
Gathic passage,[^22] “the two primordial Spirits that, in deep sleep,
were heard as Twins, are the Excel­lent and the Evil, in thoughts,
words, and deeds; and between these two the wise, not the foolish, have
made their choice ....

And when these two Spirits met, they first established Life and Non‑Life
and (they decided) that, at the end, the worst existence would be that
of the followers of Lie, and the best spiritual force (Manah) would be
that of the followers of Truth. Between these two Spirits the followers
of the Druj chose the acting of the Worst One, but the Most Holy Spirit,
who covers himself with the firm stones of heaven as his robes, chose
the Truth, and those who desired to satisfy Ahura Mazdah through
righteous actions did the same.”

Good and evil are thus connected with an ethical choice, even if it
seems that in the most ancient parts of Avesta, the Holy Spirit is not
exactly iden­tical with Ahura Mazdah but is probably Ahura Mazdah in His
choosing, “acting” aspect. Another point that shows the typical ethicism
of Zarathustrian dualism is the name, “Lie,” attributed to the evil
principle. But in Gathic thought the evil beings and the Evil Spirit are
not “fallen creatures” of God, as in the classical monotheism.

They are beings of a purely negative and destructive nature, which it
would be absurd to think of as having been created by a good God and the
final destiny of which seems to be that of being reduced to nothing.
Ahriman, in a later Pahlavi catechism (Pandnamak‑i Zartusht), is‑if the
translation is correct‑“a being who does not exist, who received nothing
in himself,” and the same is endowed in Bundahishn with the strange
quality pas-bavishnih (“post‑existence,” as opposed to the positive
“pre‑existence” of Ahura Mazdah).

This ethos is, however‑and here is again the typical feature of Mazdaic
thought‑strongly “cosmicized”: Goodness means, above all, promotion of
Being, Life, and agriculture. It means “growth” (a word often used in
the Mazdaic texts) of good material existence too. “Righteousness, the
Bunduhishn says openly, obeys the same rules as (cosmic) Creation.”[^23]
Ethos means also material positivity. The evil people (we often hear, in
Mazdaic texts, curses against the nomads, the non‑producers, and the
killers of cattle) are, above at the destroyers of existence.

We can now better understand the second type of dualism, a dualism now
not of choice but of transcendence between the invisible (or celestial)
menok, and the visible (or terrestrial) getik; for God creates the
terrestrial world to protect, foster, or help (adhyarih) the celestial
world, which is, in a way, its prototype, its root (bun).

This dualism is, however, radically different from the Platonic dualism.
A very instructive passage of one of the most philo­sophical treatises
of Mazdaism, the Shikand Gumanik Vichar written in the third/ninth
century,[^24] will show this difference in a very clear way.

“The getik is the fruit (bar) of menok; menok is its root (bun) .... The
fact that getik is the fruit and menok its root becomes clear when one
thinks that every visible and tangible thing passes from invisibility to
visibility.

It is already well known that man and the other visible and tangible
creatures come from the invisible and intangible menok; in the same way,
the form, the species, and the height and the breadth of a being are the
same as those of the being that generated it; the body of man and other
creatures, which is now mani­fested, was hidden and invisible in the
semen that came from his parents; the semen itself, that was in the
loins of the parents, passed to the stage of manifestation, visibility,
and tangibility.

We can therefore know by certainty that this visible and tangible getik
has been created from an invisible and intangible menok, and there is no
doubt that it will come back from visibility and tangibility to the
invisibility and intangibility of the same menok”.

W e see from this passage that this Mazdaic dualism differs from the
Platonic and Gnostic dualism chiefly in the sense that for it matter and
the world are in no way an “inferior” stage of Being. On the contrary,
Matter is, in a sense, the most mature and perfect aspect (the fruit) of
Spirit. It differs, however, also from the views implied by too simple a
creationistic monotheism inasmuch as it seems to admit not only “one”
personal God and His immediate creation, but various stages of Being.

Regarding the first point we refer the reader to a text[^25] in which it
is clearly stated that the terrestrial world (getik) is higher in
dignity than paradise (vahisht), because it is in this terrestrial,
embodied, visible, and tangible world only that the battle against the
powers of Evil can be fought and won‑a struggle that makes it possible
for the soul “to strive with his thought (ahang‑menishn) towards
Beatitude.”

One of the most important miraculous deeds accomplished by the Prophet
Zarathustra was that of breaking the bodily forms (shikastan‑i kalput)
of the Devils. Without their bodies the Devils are less perfect and less
dangerous in their struggle. And here we find again the fundamentally
ethical or rather cosmo‑ethical function of the getik-menok dualism.
Matter is useful in the struggle against Evil.

Regarding the second point, let us remember that in the first chapter of
Bundahishn, which contains one of the most detailed accounts of the
double creation of the world, the Mazdaic vision seems to involve
various stages of creation, the highest of which are prototypical,
emblematical. Even from some passages of the Gathas it may appear that
God created first the prototypes of things, the Primordial Ox, the
Protoanthropos, the Plant, etc.

Coming back to the last sentence of the above‑quoted passages of Shikand
­Gumanik Vichar, we see how this life of positive struggle in the
material world blossomed forth from the celestial world in a cycle that
is at the end destined to be reabsorbed into the celestial and invisible
stage, once its ethical task has been fulfilled. Thus it seems that even
the first dualism, that between Good and Evil, will become a monism
again at the consummation of Time. Here we come to the idea of Time and
Cycle as the instrument of a victorious struggle.

4. Time and Cycle
-----------------

With regard to the question of Time also the Mazdaic thought shows an
originality of conception that distinguishes it both from the Indian
outlook assuming “flight from Time” as supreme salvation and beatitude,
and from the classical Semitic forms of monotheism by which Time seems
to be conceived as an irreversible “line.”

In order never to forget the peculiar “angelical” character of Mazdaism,
the reader is reminded that in Bundahisn[^26] Time is an angelic person,
a youth of fifteen, “bright, with white eyes, tall and mighty, whose
might is from valour, not from robbery and violence.”

In other words, the Mazdean, in order to understand Time, did not
intellectually “discuss” it as we do (that is why European scholars
rather anachronistically find so many “contradictions” in the Mazdaic
texts referring to Time) but rather experi­mented with it in vision. And
this vision shows them what is told in the first chapter of the same
theological book.[^27]

“Thus it is revealed in the Good Religion. Ohrmazd was on high in
omni­science and goodness: for Infinite Time He was ever in the Light.
Omniscience and Light are the robes of Ohrmazd: some call them
“religion” (den, see above) ....

The Time of the robes is infinite like Ohrmazd, and Goodness and
Religion, during all the time of Ohrmazd, were, are and will be‑Ahriman,
slow in knowledge, whose will is to smite, was deep down in the
darkness: (he was) and is, yet will not be. The will to smite is his
robe, and darkness is his place: some call it the Endless Darkness.”

The cosmic drama unfolds itself in a Time and in a Space, but Ahrimanic
time is composed of only two moments, past and present. Time and Space
have also a transcendent aspect. Transcendent Time is the so‑called
“Boundless Time” (zaman‑i akanarak) or “Time of the Long Dominion”
(zaman‑i derang ­khvatai). Time (not of course our “serial” time) exists
even in the heart of the Absolute. There is not, in Mazdaic thought, too
simple a contrast between Time and Eternity. But let us continue our
reading and see the “aim” of our serial time.

Ohrmazd creates first a purely transcendent prototypical creation.
Ahriman rises from the depths, sees it, and rushes forward to smite and
destroy it. When Ohrmazd sees that struggle is unavoidable, He says to
Himself: “If I do not fix a time for battle against him, then Ahriman
could do to my creation even as he threatened, and the struggle and the
mixture will be ever­ lasting; and Ahriman could settle in the mixed
state of creation and take it to himself. And “Ohrmazd said to the
Destructive Spirit: \`Fix a time, so that by this pace we may extend the
battle for nine thousand years.'

For He knows that by fixing a time in this way the Destructive Spirit
would be made powerless.

Then the Destructive Spirit, not seeing the end, agreed to that treaty,
just as two men who fight a duel fix a term saying: \`Let us on such a
day do battle till night falls.' This too did Ohrmazd know in His
omniscience that within these nine thousand years, three thousand would
pass entirely according to the will of Ohrmazd, three thousand years in
mixture would pass according to the will of both Ohrmazd and Ahriman,
and that in the last battle the Destructive Spirit would be made
powerless and that He Himself would save creation from aggression.”

Limited time, i. e., serial time (during 9,000 years), is then conceived
in an ethical light, just like the material world in which it is
manifested. Serial time is something like a great detour, an ample
digression from Infinite Time, but a substantially positive detour,
because its aim is to render the battle against Evil possible and
successful. Hence come some important consequences.

(a) Destiny ‑ If Time is a “youth” and if, as it is said in another
text,[^28] “the creator Ohrmazd dyed Time with colour,” Time cannot be
an a priori form in the Kantian sense. Time is objectively coloured; it
can be practically iden­tified with “destiny” (bakht, assigned lot).
Some Mazdaic texts as, for example, the beautiful myth of the choice of
the fravashis already mentioned, seem favourable to free‑will, some
others[^29] seem in favour of predestination. Apart from the problems
connected with the historical formation of these ideas, we must say that
Mazdaic theology solves the problem in a rather consequential way.

Pahlavi Vendidad (5. 9. 33) maintains that “in the material world every­
thing happens according to destiny (pat bakht), whereas in the celestial
world everything is according to free action (pat kunishn). This
solution of the problem of time is indeed a consequence of the angelic,
emblematical outlook of Mazdaism.

Destiny is no more than the visible, terrestrial, getik aspect of its
truer transcendent, invisible, naenok prototype, which is freedom. More­
over, in all this a part is also played by the Ohrmazd‑Ahriman dualism,
in the sense that Ahriman, through the creation of the seven accursed
planets (these are for Mazdaism evil entities, while the fixed stars,
and especially the Zodiacal signs are good, and called “the generals of
Ohrmazd”), inserts himself into the play, trying to change the temporal
destinies of men and of the world.

In this he succeeds, however, only temporarily. And there is still
an­other interesting concept, that of bagho‑bakht or portion allotted by
the gods (divine destiny),[^30] a “supplement,” as it were, of destiny,
added to that initially established (or, to put it better, added to the
terrestrial emblem of transcendent human freedom) in order to recompense
specially meritorious actions. “But the gods, we read in the
above‑mentioned texts, rarely concede that supplement of destiny, and
they manifest it only in the celestial world,” in order to avoid a
possible destruction of it by Ahrimanic forces, if it is manifested
visibly in the getik.

We must never forget that transcendent entities can struggle, and win
and lose, only through their incarnation in the visible world.

It is, however, obvious that such an approach to the problem of destiny
and free‑will results in a fatalism even more radical than that
reproached by some in the classical monotheistic religions.

This is true especially when we think that some theological schools of
Mazdaism, e. g., Zurvanism, maintain that both gods, Ohrmazd and
Ahriman, are subject to Time's power of destiny. Time (Zurvan) is
regarded as supreme God; and even Ohrmazd[^31] is taken to have created
the world “with the approval of Infinite Time” (pat afrin-i zaman-i
akanark).

(b) The Apocatastasis ‑ When we consider limited Time to be a detour, a
digression from transcendent Infinite Time, we are able to understand
better the idea of the “cosmic cycle” typical of Mazdaism. Reading
theological Mazdaic texts one is impressed by a tendency to connect the
facts and happenings of the proto‑history with those of the end of the
world.

The Heroes who will contribute to the creation of the “Future Body”
(tan‑i pasen) are the same Heroes as, at the dawn of existence, were the
protagonists of the myth of the Beginning.

The Saviour, or, better, the three eschatological Saviours are sons of
the first Revealer of the Faith, Zarathustra. They are practically
Zara­thustra himself. To justify the enormous distance in time, there is
the myth of Zarathustra's sperm miraculously preserved in a lake,
protected by the fravashis.

The beginning is the end. There is, in the limited, serial time, a
circle leading it fatally towards Infinite Time. Gayomart, the first
Man, the Protoanthrope, will also be the first Resurrected man; the
ancient hero Yam­shet (Mod. Pers. Jamshid) has already prepared, at the
beginnings of history, the mythical Ark (var) to save men from the
terrible trials of the End.

Past and Future seem united in an eternal Present, if seen sub specie
menok. The Apocatastasis is, transcendentally (menokiha), happening
already (and some­times, we find in these theological texts future
events told‑ by verbs in the past).

Serial time is like an immense “delay” from metaphysical Time, but there
is in it a positive curving towards the Origin. All events of this
period of “delay” are eschatologically justified. The ancient victory of
Sahm, the Hero, on certain demonic monsters is explained as necessary,
because, without it, “it would have been impossible to fulfil
Resurrection and Future Life.”[^32]

It is, however, interesting to remark that the tan‑i pasen, the “Future
Body” or Future Life, is, though in a transcendent form, a real body
and‑at least judging by some texts‑the renewed world will not be a mere
re‑identi­fication with the first stage of the prototypical menok
creation, when it was “without thought, without touch, without movement
in a moist stage like semen.”[^33]

On the contrary, the idea of the positivity of time, and that of the
presence of an “Infinite Time” even in Eternity, seems to confer a
colour of novelty and true Life to the new world, prepared by the
struggling experience of the embodied creatures.

It would be, however, too risky to proceed in these considerations
further; for, as mentioned before, the Mazdaic texts too often leave the
reader in the expectation of something that never comes. A really
theological and philosophical development of their highly suggestive and
inter­esting intuitions is absent.

(c) Ethics - We have not to fix our ideas on the chivalrous ethics of
the struggle situated in Time. This struggle, like that of “two men who
fight a duel,” is a free one, one in which man can always succumb; but
just because Time is also an angel, the struggle is coloured with a
metaphysical, supreme, “engagement.” It transcends everyday's secular
ethics. The metaphysico - ­ethical responsibility of the Mazdean is such
that he can pray in the words of the Gatha: “May we be such as those who
will bring about the Transfiguration of the World.”[^34]

At the same time, however, and for the same reasons, Maz­daic ethics,
rooted as it is in an objective Time, is a heavily heteronomous one.
This causes it to be different not only from our modern autonomous
ethics; but also from the purely theo-nomous ethics of the classical
forms of mono­theism. Mazdaic ethics is still strictly connected with
semi‑mythical realities and with a moral dualism always in danger of
transforming itself into a cosmological dualism.

In other words, Good and Evil mean to the Mazdean something more than
what they mean to us. There is an entire series of situations and
objects (Time is dyed with colour) intrinsically evil, Ahrimanic. We
deduce from various passages in Mazdaic Scriptures that not only the
nomad is naturally evil, but also the non‑Iranian (aneran) is something
objectively evil in comparison with the Iranian; insects and snakes are
evil and so on.

The idea that the natural essence (gohr) of certain given beings is
radically and metaphysically diabolical is very clear from the texts,
and even some characters of history,[^35] such as Alexander the Greek
and Frasiyak the Turanian are no more than devilish creatures of
Ahriman. The problem of how much did Evil permeate the creation of Ahura
Mazdah during the period of “Mixture” has been solved by Mazdeans in a
rather heavy, objective, classificatory way.

There have been, however, acute minds that started to meditate on the
origin of that Evil which the traditional Mazdaic texts gave as an
unexplained presupposition, or rather considered it a fact not needing
any explanation. So was born Zurvanism, a theologico‑philosophical
school, that is considered by some European Orientalists to be a real
autonomous religion.

To solve the problem of the origin of Evil, Mazdaic mind again created a
myth: that of the primordial “doubt” of the Time‑God (Zurvan), a doubt
from which Ahriman was born, as a wicked “twin” of Ohrmazd. This school
seems also to have shown a tendency, at least according to recent
studies, to unify and sym­metrize the two dualisms already mentioned, in
the sense that the material world, the realm of the flesh, begins to be
identified with the Ahrimanic creation.

This remained only a very vague tendency in Zurvanism, but the
identification, quite in the spirit of Gnosticism, was totally
accomplished by Manichaeism, in the Iranian texts in which Zurvan is the
name of the Supreme God, while Ohrmazd passes to the stage of
Protoanthropos. But such identi­fication completely breaks the frame and
organism of Mazdaic thought, that has always considered Manichaeism to
be the most dangerous and most Ahrimanic heresy.

5. Conclusion
-------------

We have studied in too rapid and perhaps too unphilosophical a way, the
mythical logic, the dualistic and angelical metaphysics, the chivalrous
and fatalistic ethics of Mazdaism. It is now necessary to say a word on
the impor­tance of this thought for the development of the subsequent
phases of the philo­sophical history of Iran and Islam.

Those who know the strange and highly interesting world of Muslim
“heresies” cannot deny that some features of their theological systems
strongly remind us of the Mazdaic Weltanschauung. We mean, above all,
their curious angelical approach to metaphysics, their tend­ency to
recreate a purely “mental” mythology, identifying, e. g., the first
intellect or Logos with this or that historical person, or telling, as
the Nusairis do, that \`Ali is the Ma'na (Supreme Meaning) and Muhammad
is the Ism (Transcendent Name), etc.

Professor Corbin demonstrated in his remarkable essays the influence of
pre‑Islamic Iranian thought on Muslim thinkers like Suhrawardi Maqtul
and on Isma'ilism, but his contempt of history and historical method
seems rather exaggerated.

It is indeed very difficult to identify the historical channels through
which these influences may have penetrated Islam. Many seem, how­ever,
to forget that the most important Pahlavi theological texts were written
in Muslim Persia in the most flourishing period of Islam and that
discussions among Muslims, Christians, Manichaeans, and Mazdeans are
documented in the third/ninth century at the Court of the Caliph
al‑Mamun.

The influences seem to have been mutual, for it has been shown that some
Pahlavi texts constant quotations from the Qur'an and mention
contemporary Muslim cur­rents of thought such as that of the
Mu'tazilah.[^36]

But apart from this direct influence, we could more surely admit another
kind of indirect convergence. The late systematic Mazdaic thought was no
doubt influenced by late Hellenism and Gnosticism, in the same way as
the first Islamic thought was influenced by Hellenism, Sabaeanism, and
Gnosti­cism during the second and third/eighth and ninth centuries.

Hence there resulted, in both the spiritual worlds, a similar
functioning that can give the illusion of direct influence, especially
when similar languages, Pahlavi and modern Persian, are used.

If these considerations may seem to discourage the exaggerated
enthusiasm of some pan‑Iranianists (it is sufficiently known that even
ancient Iran had been rather strongly “semitized” by Babylonian and old
Syrian influences) they also point to the fact that the organic thought
of Mazdaism assumed its truer and deeper historical value just because
it did not remain the heritage of a single race or a single people, but,
being in itself historically a composite product, synthesized itself
with the seeds of the extremely original and rich
philosophico‑theological value, Islam, that was destined in its turn to
spread them in their most mature form throughout the entire civilized
world.

Note ‑ The quotations from Avesta and Pahlavic texts are given,
modifying here and there some rather contradictory European versions,
after comparing them with the original texts. The writer is fully aware
of the fact that some of them remain personal and rather conjectural
interpretations.

It would be useless to reproduce here a more or less complete
bibliography of studies and essays related to Mazdaism. A sufficiently
large and recent list of reference works is contained in J.
Duchesne‑Guillemin, The Western Response to Zoroaster (Ratanbai Katrak
Lectures, 1956), Oxford, 1958.

Bibliography
------------

W. Geiger and E. Kuhn, Grundris der iranisehen Philologie, 3 Vols.,
Strassburg, 1895‑1904; J. Darmesteter, Le Zend Avesta, Traduction
Nouvelle Avec commentaire historique et philologique, Paris, 1892‑93
(Annales du Musee Guimet, Vols. XXI, XXII, XXIV); L. C. Casartelli, The
Philosophy of the Mazdayasnian Religion under the Sasanids, Bombay,
1889; A. V. W. Jackson, Zoroaster, the Prophet of Ancient Iran, New
York, 1899;

Zoroastrian Studies, New York, 1928; V. Henri. Le Paraisme, Paris, 1905;
J. H. Moulton, Early Zoroastrianism, London, 1926; The Teachings of
Zarathuahtra, London, 1917; M. N. Dhalla, Zoroastrian Theology, New
York, 1914; History of Zoroastrianism, New York, 1938; R. Pettazzono, La
Religione di Zarathushtra nella storia religiosa dell' Iran, Bologna,
1920;

C. Bartho­lomae, Zarathushtra, Leben und Lehre, Heidelberg, 1924; A.
Christensen, Etudes sur le zoroastrisme de la Perse antique, Copenhagen,
1928; L'Iran sous lea Sassanides, Copenhagen, 2nd edition, 1944; A.
Meillet, Trois Conferences sur les Gathas de L'Avesta, Paris, 1925; H.
Lommel, Die Religion Zarathustras, Tubingen, 1930; E. Benveniste, The
Persian Religion, Paris, 1929;

G. Messina, Der Ursprung der Magier und die zarathustriche Religion,
Rome, 1930; O. G. von Wesendonk, Das Wesen der Lehre der Zarathuetros,
Leipzig, 1927; Das Weltbild der Iranier, Munchen, 1933; H. S. Nyberg,
Die Religion des alten Irans, Leipzig, 1938; F. Cumont, Lea Mages
hellenises, Paris, 1938; H. W . Bailey, Zoroastrian Problems in the
Ninth Century Books, Oxford, 1943; G. Wildengren, Hoehgottglaube im
alten Iran, Uppsala, 1938; The Great Vohu Manah and the Apostle of God,
Uppsala, 1945;

Stand und Aufgaben der Iranischen Religionsgeschichte, Leiden, 1955; J.
Duchesne ­Guillemin, Zorastre: Etude critique avec une traduction
commentee des Gathas, Paris, 1948, Ohrmazd et Ahriman, Paris, 1953; The
Western Response to Zoroaster, Oxford, 1958; R. C. Zaehner, Zurvan
Oxford, 1955; A. Pagliaro, “L'idealismo gathico,” Samjnavyakaranam:
Studia Indologic Internationalia, Vol. I, Poona and Paris, 1954.

[^1]: Corbin, “Terre Celeste et Corps de Resurrection,” Eranos
Jahrbuch,Vol. XXII, p. 99.

[^2]: Yt., 5. 33 ff.

[^3]: Ibid., 13. 99‑100.

[^4]: Ibid., 11. 23.

[^5]: Corbin, op. cit., p. 99.

[^6]: Yt., 19. 15=20.

[^7]: Bundahishn; I. 32.

[^8]: Cf. Bundahishn, I. 2.

[^9]: Ibid., III. 11.

[^10]: Cf. Yz., 12.

[^11]: Ibid., 24. 5.

[^12]: Bund.. III. 21‑22.

[^13]: Yt., 31. 20.

[^14]: Ibid, 45. 2.

[^15]: Ibid., 46. 11.

[^16]: Ibid., 34. 13

[^17]: Ibid., 229.

[^18]: Ibid., 46.

[^19]: Bund.. 1. 2

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Yt., 30. 5.

[^22]: Ibid., 30. 3 ff

[^23]: Bund., I. 22.

[^24]: P.J de Menasce, Ed., p. 92‑94.

[^25]: Madan, Ed., Denkart, p. 271.

[^26]: Bund., III. 3.

[^27]: Ibid., I. 2 ff.

[^28]: Denkart, quoted in Zaehner, Zurvan, p. 381.

[^29]: For instance, Menok‑i Khrat, Ch. VIII.

[^30]: Cf. ibid., Ch. XXIV.

[^31]: Ibid.. Ch. VIII.

[^32]: Ibid., Ch. XXVII.

[^33]: Bund., I.

[^34]: Ft., 30. 9.

[^35]: History, as it is obvious from the Mazdean's point of view,
becomes the emblematical prelude to Apocatastasis and at the same time
the symbol of a transcendent pugilistic prototype.

[^36]: Their name and their idea of the aslah are mentioned and
criticized in Shikand ­Gumdnak Vichar, ed. Menasce, pp. 146‑47.


