Chapter 5: Alexandrio Syriac Thought
====================================

*Alexandrio Syriac Thought by C.A Qadir*

The Neo ‑Pythagoreans
---------------------

The great conquering sweep of Alexander the Great eastwards not only
destroyed the old, intense and narrow life of the self‑contained Greek
City­ States but also marked a decisive change in the intellectual and
spiritual life of Greece.

With the spread of Greek civilisation over the Near East, the hori­zons
of the individual Greeks were greatly enlarged; but the break‑up of the
old City‑States engendered a sense of isolation and rootlessness which
made people look inward for stability and security, rather than outward
as hitherto done.

Another and a more potent reason for this shift in Greek thinking can be
discovered in widespread scepticism after the death of Aristotle. True,
scepticism also prevailed when Socrates was born, but the metaphysical
speculations of pre‑Socratic thinkers led them into the inextricable
confusion of doubt.

Socrates asked people to look at man instead of nature, for in the
domain of human problems the competence of reason could be demonstrated
more easily than in that of the physical or the metaphysical. But the
protest which scepticism made after Aristotle was more devastating. It
was declared by the sceptics that the entire philosophical venture of
their predecessors was hopelessly wrong and also that their error was
without a remedy.

This was indeed very saddening. It amounted to the confession that not
only were the solutions of the so‑called perennial problems of
philosophy nonsensical but also that no satisfactory solution was
possible, at least with the techniques and methods hitherto pursued.

Reason thus assailed could find refuge only in faith. In the period that
follows we find philosophy renouncing its independence and becoming
merely an instrument of theology.

Ritter says, “The feeling of alienation and the yearning after a higher
revelation are characteristics of the last centuries of the ancient
world; this yearning was, in the first place, but an expression of
consciousness of the decline of the classical nations and their
cultures, the presentiment of the approach of a new era, and it called
into life not only Christianity but also before it pagan and Jewish
Alexandrianism and other related developments.”[^1]

No longer finding Greece a cordial home for philosophy, the philosophers
went over to Egypt and Rome, carrying their doctrines with them. They
delivered courses of lectures which were attended with great zeal and
enthu­siasm by the populace. But the venture did not succeed so well in
Rome as it did in Alexandria. In Rome philosophy could lend its weight
to poetry, oratory, jurisprudence, and some topics of conversation, but
it was in Alex­andria that it produced men who gave it originality,
vigour, and drive.

Alex­andria was not simply a centre of Greek culture and scholarship,
but also and more significantly a meeting‑place for Greek and Eastern
thought. It took a cosmopolitan character and showed a marked leaning
towards Oriental thought. The result of this interpretation of Greek and
Semitic cultures was the syn­thetic civilization known as Hellenism in
contradistinction to the Hellenic or purely Greek civilization.
Hellenism rose to supremacy not only in Alexandria and Syria but
throughout Western Asia.

It would be incorrect to identify the present geographical boundaries of
Syria with its old ones. In Roman days, at the beginning of the
Christian era Syria denoted the country west of the Euphrates and north
of the Arabian Desert, including Palestine and Palmyra and extending
north to the Taurus. The usual language of Syria was Aramaic, a language
akin to Hebrew.

The Hebrew word “Aram” is rendered as “Syria” and originally the words
Aramaean and Syrian were synonymous. After the Hellenization of the
country, the Greek language was used by the ruling class and the
officials with very little influence on the masses who continued using
their dialect. This state of affairs con­tinued till the first/seventh
century when after the Muslim conquest Syriac gradually gave way
vernacularly and to some extent liturgically to Arabic, though it had
great influence on the vocabulary, pronunciation, and even the
grammatical forms of Arabic which supplanted it.

For purposes of studying Alexandrian and Syriac philosophy, for the two
run together and interpenetrate, we can divide our subject into:

(1) Neo‑Pythagoreanism,

(2) The Jewish‑Alexandrian Philosophy,

(3) Neo‑Platonism, and

(4) Early Christianity.

To all these speculations what is common is the dualistic opposition of
the divine and the earthly; an abstract conception of God excluding all
knowledge of the divine nature; contempt for the world of sense, on the
ground of the Platonic doctrines of matter and the descent of the soul
of man from a superior world into the body; the theory of intermediate
potencies or beings through whom God acts upon the world of phenomena;
the requirements of an ascetic self‑emancipation from the bondage of
sense; and faith in a higher revelation to man when in a state called
Enthusiasm.”[^2]

Both Neo‑Pythagoreanism and the Judaic‑Alexandrian philosophy are found
together in the beginning of the Christian era. The Neo‑Pythagoreans who
were fundamentally religious in their outlook and practices were
represented by P. Nigidus Figulus, Sotion, and particularly Apollonius
of Tyana, Modera­tus of Gades, and, in later times, Nicomachus of Gerasa
and Numenius of Apamea.

The Neo‑Pythagoreans were highly eclectic in character. They were
greatly influenced by Plato, Aristotle, and the Stoics, not to speak of
ancient Pytha­goreans whose doctrines they attempted to revive.

Neo‑Pythagorean doctrines could not flourish in Rome, where, Seneca says
they could not find a professor to teach them, but gained a stronghold
in Alexandria. The Neo‑Pythagoreans combined monotheism with the
fatalistic cult of gods and demons but transformed it at the same time
with the help of Platonic‑Aristotelian teachings into a reverence for
God as a pure spirit who is to be served not by outward sacrifices but
by silent prayers and with wisdom and virtue.

Like Plato and Aristotle, the Neo‑Pythagoreans distinguished between
unity and plurality and also between the divine and the earthly. Several
attempts were made to get rid of this dualism. There arose consequently
a great diversity of opinion with regard to the nature of God and the
relation He bears to the world. Some identified God with the world‑soul
of Plato.

Others thought of Him as an ineffable “Monad” from which flowed both
unity and plurality. Still others considered Him immanent but free from
all contacts with matter which might pollute Him. It was, therefore,
imperative for the Neo‑Pythagoreans, especially the last ones, to
introduce a Demiurge as a mediator between God and matter.

The metaphysics of the Neo‑Pythagorean school required four principles.
viz., God, the world‑reason, the world‑soul, and matter, out of which
the first three helped in formulating the Christian conception of triune
God, while the fourth one paved the way for the doctrine of emanation.

The Neo‑Pythagoreans gave a deeper metaphysical meaning to Number. The
ultimate ground of all good as well as the order of the universe was
provided by the Monad while the Dyad was held responsible for all
disorder and imperfection. The Monad became the symbol for Godhead and
the Dyad for matter. The gulf between the two, viz., the Monad and the
Dyad, was bridged by the introduction of the idea of a world‑soul which
was built upon the Stoic, Aristotelean, and Platonic conceptions.

Certain numerological conceptions of the Neo‑Pythagoreans appear
gro­tesque to the modern mind It was held by them that the movements of
the heavenly bodies were harmoniously adjusted by number‑an idea of
Egyptian origin‑and so certain numbers were regarded as having a sacred
character, particularly number 10 which represents the sum of a pyramid
of four stages, 4‑3‑2‑1=10.

In such conceptions, their imagination ran riot to such an extent that
one can gain the impression that Neo‑Pythagoreanism is nothing more than
astrology, occultism, and twaddle about the mysterious properties of
numbers.

In epistemology they closely followed Plato, classifying knowledge into
spiritual perception, discursive reason, opinion, and sensuous
perception. Science, we owe to discursive reason; inference, to opinion;
and beatific vision, to spiritual perception.

Nicomachus of Gerasa who lived about 140 A.D. was one with Plato in
holding that ideas were temporally prior to the formation of the world
and also in holding that ideas were numbers. But, whereas Plato had
accorded an independent existence to ideas, Nicomachus was content with
giving them dependent role. He conceived of ideas as existing in the
divine mind and so acting as patterns according to which the things of
this world are fashioned.

Another thinker who attempted a synthesis of Plato and Pythagoras was
Maximus of Tyre who taught in the first half of the second century. He
was a Sophist and a rhetorician besides being an eclectic. Like other
Platonists he opposed God to matter and made demons play an intermediary
role between God and man.

A long hierarchy of demons and angels was instituted by him which served
as ministers to God and guardian‑angels to man. He identified God with
pure reason and considered matter to be a source of imperfection of the
universe. Sins were due to the misuse of free‑will by man and were not
the result of any evil agency acting from without. Maximus did not
believe in any evil world‑soul, to whom human lapses could be
attributed.

Maximus thought, very much like Rumi and other Muslim mystics that the
soul is temporarily imprisoned in the human body and is ever yearning
for release and reunion with the Divine Source.

Still another eclectic thinker from Syria by the name of Numenius of
Apamea, who lived in the second half of the second century, is by many
regarded as the real founder of Neo‑Platonism. Hitti says

“Plotinus the Greek philosopher of Egypt, credited with that
distinction, was popularly accused of basing his teachings on those of
this Apamean and of strutting around m his feathers.”[^3]

In his writings, Numerous combined Pythagorean and Platonic opinions in
such a manner that while granting Pythagoras the highest authority and
even accusing Plato of borrowing from him, he yet gave a predominant
place to Platonic ideas. He traced the philosophy of the Greeks back to
the Orientals and called Plato an “Attic‑speaking Moses.”

Numenius, however, was not simply a camp follower of Plato. He differed
from him too, since he distinguished the world‑builder as a second god
from the highest Deity. The basis of this distinction is to be found in
his metaphysics where God who is identified sometimes with the Reason of
Aristotle, some­times with the Monad of Pythagoras, and sometimes with
both, stands against the creation which because of its imperfections is
far inferior to Him.

The universe is created by a second god, the Demiurge, who is good by
participation in the essence of the first. He acquires knowledge by
gazing at the super­sensible archetypes and brings the world into being.
The universe which is created by the second god is regarded as the third
god by Numenius. Thus considered, God becomes a cosmic triunity
comprising three divinities: Father, Creator, and Creature, which
Numenius termed father, son, and grandson.

The psychology of Numenius is as dualistic as his metaphysics. Man,
being both spiritual and corporeal, participates in both the
world‑souls. Numenius was wise enough not to condemn body outright. It
had to be condemned only when it stood in the way of reason and served
as a cat's‑paw in the hands of the evil world‑soul.

But in spite of his better thinking Numenius could not completely shake
off the influence of the prevailing mode of thinking. He held that the
encasement of the rational part of the soul in the human body did
indicate a fall for the soul and that the liberation of the soul could
be effected through a long series of reincarnations:

Hence the present life should be one of self‑denial and renunciation,
that is to say, a life of reason devoid of pas­sions. In his stress upon
transmigration as a means of liberation, Numenius betrays, like his
teacher, Pythagoras, the influence of Hindu thought.

A passing reference may be made to P. Nigidius Figulus for his interest
in the Pythagorean philosophy and also to Apollonius of Tyana who
distinguished the one God from other gods. The First being ineffable and
absolutely pure could not come in contact with earthly things on account
of their material constitution.

Apollonius did not like offerings to be made to the one God these he
reserved for the lesser gods. We may also briefly mention Moderatus of
Gades who incorporated Platonism and non‑theological doctrines into
Pythagoreanism. Number one he regarded as the symbol of unity and two as
that of difference and inequality.

The Jewish‑Alexandrian Philosophy
---------------------------------

Among the precursors of Neo‑Platonism are to be counted
Neo‑Pythagorean­ism and Jewish‑Alexandrian philosophy in addition to a
host of other tendencies which cannot be discussed here for want of
space. Even out of the Jewish thinkers we shall pick out Philo, leaving
other luminaries altogether, again for want of space.

Philo, a Jew, was born at Alexandria a few years before Christ. His
philo­sophy is an attempt to find an adjustment between the traditions
of Israel and those of the Greeks. Philo felt that the aesthetic
elements in Greek culture were repugnant to some of the elements
involved in Jewish religion. To smooth out differences and to show the
concordance between the two systems of thought and practice, Philo
adopted the allegorical method of interpreting the Scriptures already in
use among the Alexandrian Jews.

On this interpre­tation, circumcision, for example, would signify and
hence serve as a symbol for the cutting off of passions and ungodly
opinions. Philo often criticized the literalists for their word‑picking
habits. But Philo was not a thoroughgoing symbolist. He knew that if
once you defend an external practice on the ground that it is useful as
a symbol, it is very hard to assert that it is obligatory for all times
to come.

Philo, therefore, recognized that the literal sense is often accompanied
by a more profound sense and that both the senses have to be accepted
since both go together. “Although circumcision properly symbolizes the
removal of all passions and sensibility and impious thoughts, yet we may
not, therefore, set aside the practice enjoined, for in that case, we
should be obliged to give up the public worship of God in the temple and
a thousand other solemnities,” says he in De Migratione Abrahami.[^4]

Philo was primarily a religious preacher rather than a philosopher. He
had no desire to propound a theory of the universe which could stand the
scrutiny of logical reason. He was essentially concerned with the life
of soul and its attaining the beatific vision. Keeping this objective in
view he demarcated the mystical experience from all other psychical
experiences on the ground that while the former lifts you out of the
ordinary plane of life and brings you in direct contact with some
tremendous reality, the latter keeps you earth­bound and sense‑bound.

In this Philo was following in the footsteps of Plato who exhibits a
religio‑mystic vein in the Symposium and the Phaedrus, with the
difference that Philo being a Jew first and last could not identify God
with the impersonal divine reason of Plato. However, in suggesting
methods for “soul‑cultivation,” he again turned his attention to the
Greeks, borrowed their psychology, and on its basis framed rules for the
systematic training of the soul to receive the vision of God.

The theology of Philo is a blending of Platonism and Judaism. The Jewish
doctrine shows God as intimately concerned with the world; the Platonic,
though insisting upon the divine governance and divine formation of the
world, does not hold that the relation which God has to the world‑is
neces­sary or automatic. The Middle Platonism recognized a hierarchy of
divine beings, insisted upon the transcendence of God, and regarded the
visible world as being governed and made by lower intermediary divine
powers. Philo had to reconcile these two conceptions.

Philo believed in one God, eternal, unchanging, passionless, far removed
above the world of phenomena as the First Cause of all that exists.
Causation, however, implies change and so God could not be regarded as
directly creating the universe. Intermediary powers are, therefore,
needed to explain the gover­nance and formation of the world and what it
contains. These powers Philo described very confusedly. Sometimes he
talked of powers, sometimes of two powers, sometimes of one.

The problem before Philo was that of the development of multiplicity
from absolute unity. The solution was sought in the inability of the
contemplating mind to reproduce the absolute unity in itself. Philo
gives an account of the “multiple” apparition of God to human intellect
in the De Migratione Abrahuami.When the soul is illumined by God, it
sees Him triple, one with a double shadow; but at the highest point, the
shadow vanishes and God is seen as One.

In the Quaestiones in Genesim, Philo says that the mind “sees God
triple” due to the weakness of its vision. “Just as the bodily eye sees
a double appear­ance from one light, so the eye of the soul, since it
cannot apprehend the one as one, makes a triple perception, according to
the appearance of the chief serving powers which stand beside the
One.”[^5]

The highest of all the divine forces is the Logos (Word). Sometimes
Philo, in common with Aristobulus and other earlier commentators gave to
it the name of Sophia, but the more commonly used word by him is the
Logos.

In some of his writings he gives to Sophia the highest of the parts into
which the Logos is divided. Logos has a dual nature. In man it is reason
and also the spoken word. In the All it divides itself into the
incorporeal and arche­typal ideas of which the intelligible world
consists, and the copies of these incorporeal ideas constitute the world
of perception.

In other, passages Philo has called Sophia the mother of the
Logos­-ordinarily he calls it divine Logos without qualification or
distinction‑the mediator between God and man. It is so to say the
instrument by which God makes the world and the intermediary by which
the human intelligence after being purified ascends to heaven.

Philo is not clear on the independent existence of the Logos: On all
accounts it seems that in Philo's mind the powers had little or no
existence apart from their function. “His conception of them is affected
by contemporary Greek ideas, but perhaps they really belong to that
mysterious class of instrumental and subordinate quasi‑beings which
accompany the Divinity in Semitic and Persian thought, the Angel, the
Wisdom, the Breath of God in the Jewish Scriptures, the Uncreated Law of
the Rabbis and the quasi‑personified Divine Virtues or the attributes of
Persian (Zoroastrian) theology, the Amesha Spentas.”[^6]

Anyhow Philo was not clear on this subject. As Ueberweg says in his
History of Philosophy, Philo wavered between, the attributive and the
substantive conception of the Logos. He both hypostatized the Logos into
a person and reduced it to a mere attribute or function of the first
person.[^7] What is, how­ever, important for subsequent thinking is not
the nature of the Logos as such but the identification of the Logos with
the Platonic world of forms and the use of this conception in explaining
the creation of this world.

This led to a very great development in the thought of the medieval
theologians. Philosophically speaking, the Philonian Logos is nothing
but the principle of unity in diversity, of the separating and uniting
of contraries in the material world. But perhaps Philo would not like to
be judged philosophically.

The idea of Logos was not a metaphysical necessity for him; it was
psychologically needed for coming in contact with God.

Philo's doctrines of “pneuma” and mystical union are equally important.
The former is a free creative in‑breathing by God, becoming the image of
God in man and constituting thereby the highest part of man's soul,
superior to the “psyche.”

Other schools outside Jewish circles were also emphasizing one God,
eternal and invariable, as the Source and the First Cause of the
universe. The Gnostic sects which were of philosophic origin accepted
God as the First Cause, above the imperfections and variations of the
mundane world and, therefore, re­quiring an intermediary or an emanation
to explain the production of an imperfect and variable world.

Neo‑Platonism
-------------

### Plotinus

The ancestry of Neo‑Platonism can be traced to Neo‑Pythago­reanism,
Jewish Gnosticism, and other tendencies including Christianity, which so
to say had become the Weltanschauung of most of those who had any living
religion in the world of Greek culture: cruder and more superstitious
forms of it in the lower strata of society, more refined and Hellenized
forms among the educated.

The founder of Neo‑Platonism was Ammonius Saccas, the teacher of
Plo­tinus. Saccas means the sack‑bearer and as a surname indicates the
occupation by which Ammonius earned his living. Nothing definite can be
asserted with regard to his philosophic convictions. Some have asserted
that he proclaimed the identity of Aristotelian and Platonic doctrines
and also the immortality of the soul.

But there is no historical evidence to decide one way or the other. Nor
is there any justification for holding that Ammonius was the first to
formulate the doctrine that the One is exterior to the world of ideas‑a
doc­trine of fundamental importance in the system of Plotinus.

Plotinus was an Egyptian of Greek speech and culture, born probably in
205 A. D. About his race and parentage nothing is certain, for he was,
as Por­phyry says,“like a man ashamed of being in the body.”

At the age of twenty‑eight he went to Alexandria to receive
philosophical training. He was surely disappointed till at last he came
to Ammonius whose teachings satisfied him completely. With Ammonius he
remained for eleven long years and left him only to accompany the
Emperor Gordian in the hope of studying Persian and Indian philosophy.

The mission proved unsuccessful and Plotinus had to flee for his life to
Antioch. At the age of forty, he went to Rome where he succeeded in
winning the king and queen over to his doctrines. With the approval of
the king he wanted to found a Philosopher's City, where the inhabitants
should live according to the teachings of Plato.

The timely intervention of the nobles dissuaded the king from accepting
such a silly proposal. In Rome he established his own school and taught
there for the rest of his life. A painful death, probably cancer of the
throat, marked in 270 A. D. the end of his illustrious career.

It is certain that Plotinus was conversant with the principal doctrines
of all the philosophical schools of the Greeks, particularly
Aristotelian and Platonic. He had read very assiduously the works of
Numenius and came under his influence. This probably accounts for the
complexities and tensions that one finds in his writings. It was not an
easy task to synthesize the extremely complicated traditions that
Plotinus had inherited.

There is a double purpose in his philosophy, the cosmic and the
religious. He purports to give a complete account of reality which
should also serve as a guide to spiritual life. These two strains go
together and can be kept apart for theoretical purposes only. However,
there is no denying the fact that the double task put a great strain on
Plotinus' philosophical endeavour and led him to say much that sounds
bizarre to the modern ear.

Reality, for Plotinus, is an ordered hierarchical whole comprising two
move­ments, one of descent and the other of ascent. The first is an
automatic creati­vity by which the higher generates the lower, while the
second is a movement of return by which the soul attains reabsorption in
the Divine Source.

The first is a movement from unity to multiplicity, the second is a
reverse movement, that is to say, from multiplicity to unity. Plotinus
sometimes emphasizes the one and sometimes the other and says things
which are hard to reconcile. It is evident from his writings that he
imposed upon himself a task which by its very nature was impossible to
accomplish.

At the head of his system stands a transcendent First Principle, the One
which is ineffable and incomprehensible to the discursive as well as the
intuitive reason. Below the One lie the two hypostases which are the
universal correla­tives of the whole range of human life, physical and
intellectual.

These are Nous, Aristotle's active intellect, and the world‑soul whose
function is to contemplate as well as to direct the material world. The
hypostases are united with each other and with the One, first, by
emanation which is the radiation of the lower from the higher and,
second, by return in contemplation by the lower upon the higher.

Plotinus conception of the One is very complicated and has been
variously interpreted. The One may be regarded as the Neo‑Pythagorean
Absolute Unity from which all plurality proceeds. The One cannot be said
to have a being, for this way of thinking introduces a duality between
subject and object and there can be no duality in Pure Unity. In the
absolute state, in its first and highest hypostasis, the One is neither
existence nor thought, neither moved, nor movable; it is simple unity
or, as Hegel would say, the Absolute Nothing, the Immanent Negative.

There is a tendency in Plotinus derived from the Platonists and Middle
Stoics to deny all predications to the One for fear of compromising Its
unity. This tendency is, however, corrected by another much more
positive approach. If the One is called God, then God is God not because
He is nothing but because He embraces everything. He is, however, better
than the reality of which He is the source.

The ideas no doubt form the content of His mind but they are
nevertheless imperfect images as compared to the one Good, and receive
radiance, “a grace playing upon their beauty” from the Primal Source.
The positive aspect of the One is stressed so much at places that it
seems to contradict Plotinus basic assumptions.

The One, he says, is pure will, loves Itself and is the cause of Itself.
This characteri­zation conflicts with his earlier stand and justifies
the use of human language for the basic reality.

In Plotinus, the negative and positive aspects go together. The positive
aspect is, however, more pronounced The One may be transcendental, but
if It is a reality, It should not simply be a Great Denial about which
nothing positive can be asserted.

This point can receive further clarification from an examination of the
reli­gious life of Plotinus. There is no doubt that he had a genuine
mystical ex­perience. Porphyry bears testimony to it and the whole
spirit and the tenor of the Enneads lends weight to it. But what is the
nature of this experience and what is its goal? Some make Plotinus a
pantheist and an anti‑rationalist, for whom the goal is dissolution of
the self into nothingness.

Some think that he was trying to realize his pre‑existing identity with
the One through his own efforts, while others think that his experience
was genuinely mystical, akin to that of the great Christian and Muslim
mystics. The first interpretation is absurd, the second is partially
true. It is, however, the third one which truly explains his viewpoint.

Plotinus was torn so to say by the conflicting traditions he had
inherited.

The One was both transcendental and the Unity‑Absolute. Again, the One
was both inaccessible and also the goal of our own self‑realization.
Plotinus contradictions and tensions are the product of these
irreconcilable strains in his Weltanschauung. In both cases the positive
aspect predominates. But it should not be ignored that the tension is
real and fundamental.

How did the world originate from the One? Thinkers before Plotinus had
assumed dualism; they had distinguished the world from its creator. But
dualism was no answer to the problem. If the creator and the created
differ in essence the question whence came the world remains as unsolved
as ever Plotinus answered the question by saying that the world is
distinct from God in act rather than in essence. The world is God but
God is not the world. To explain it Plotinus had the theory of
emanation.

Plotinus found it very hard to explain emanation except through
metaphors. Both Nous and soul are produced by a spontaneous and
necessary efflux of life from the One. They leave their source
undiminished. The relation between the One and the other hypostases is
described as being like that of the sun and its light or “in similes
from the radiative effect of fire, snow or perfumes.

Can any philosophical meaning be given to this conception? It is
difficult to see what meaning can be attached to emanation or radiation
when attached to spiritual beings. Again, why, if the process is
eternal, can one emanation be inferior to another? These are points
which pass comprehension.

Plotinus has another way to explain his theory of emanation. He
represents the One as a root or seed, the potentiality from which all
things evolve into actuality. This comparison is used to describe the
relation of the lower hypostases to the higher. About the soul, he says,
it has potentialities which can only be actualized in the material
world. Plotinus writes, “If then it is necessary that not only the One
should exist . . . in the same way it is also necessary that not only
souls should exist in the absence of those things which come into being
through them; that is supposing that every nature has this inherent
quality of making that which comes after it and of unrolling itself as
if proceeding from a sort of partless seed as a beginning to the
perceptible end.

The prior being remains always in its proper place and that which comes
after is as it were generated from an ineffable power (or potency).”[^8]
This will show that the comparison to a seed is applied to all the
hypostases including the One Itself. But it will be evident to every
student of Plotinus that the comparison sets up an impossible
contradiction to the rest of the Enneads.

The One may be the beginning of everything, but it cannot be the
spermatic beginning. The system of Plotinus is teleological rather than
evolutionary: the main thrust of the universal forces is upwards and not
downwards.

The second hypostasis, the first emanation of the One, the Nous, is a
very complicated notion. It is an image of the former and turns towards
It to grasp and comprehend It. Through turning, it becomes Nous
(reason)‑sensory per­ception when the object of comprehension is
sensible, and rational apprehen­sion when the object of comprehension is
supersensible. The Noun includes in itself the world of ideas.
Consequently, the ideas are immanent in the Nous and do not exist as
external to it.

It is clear that Plotinus needed an emanation in order that the First
Cause should remain unchanged. It is the Nous which is the reality
behind the world of phenomena; the things perceived are only the shadows
of the real ones.

From the Nous proceeds the third hypostasis, viz., Psyche, the principle
of life and motion, the world‑soul, which is in the universe and is
shared by every living creature. The whole world is alive, he held, and
seems to par­ticipate in a life similar to our own. Further, life
requires a cause which must be found in intelligence, for everywhere one
finds intelligent activities. Plotinus maintains that the intelligent
activity is nothing but a soul.

### Porphyry

The most important of the disciples of Plotinus was Porphyry, born in
232 A.D., probably at Batanaea in Syria. He was altogether a lesser man
but all the same a very loyal disciple and a devout follower, who by his
pleasing diction brought within the range of understanding of all men
the doctrines of Plotinus, which in the language of its author had
seemed difficult and obscure. Porphyry was more practical and religious
than his master.

He declared the end of philosophizing to be the salvation of the soul.
The cause of evil is the desire for the low and the base, and the means
of deliverance are self‑purification, asceticism, and philosophic
cognition of God. While in Sicily, he wrote a book in which he
criticized the doctrines of Christianity, especially the divinity of
Christ.

He is the first among the successors of Plotinus to defend Hellenic
paganism against Christianity. His interest in demons as intermediaries
between God and man is very much pronounced and he has a great deal to
say about them.

### Iamblichus

Iamblichus was a native of Chalcis in Coelesyria and a pupil of
Porphyry. Like his master he taught at Rome after the death of Plotinus
but retired in later life to Syria where he died in 330 A. D.

The philosophy of Iamblichus is marked by an inrush of Syrian theology
with its grosser conceptions, its wild and nonsensical trick of playing
with numbers, and its craving for the baser forms of the supernatural.
Iamblichus put faith above history and revelation, renounced the later
Greek philosophy, and asserted that God could do everything.

After Plotinus, the Neo‑Platonists were up against the mighty surge of
Christianity. To stem it, they worked to bring about a complete and
thorough theology based on the Dialogues of Plato, Chaldaean oracles,
and the ancient myths: Greek, Egyptian, or Near Eastern. They were also
concerned with elaborating the system of Plotinus and making it
absolutely complete.

Iamblichus assumes still another absolutely ineffable and indeterminate
first One above the One of Plotinus. The latter has produced the
intelligible world, out of which the intellectual world has emanated.
The objects of thought belong to the intelligible world while thinking
belongs to the intellectual world. Then there is further splitting up,
sub‑division, or classification which makes the whole system
nonsensically abstract and hopelessly unreal. Plotinus had distinguished
Being, Life, and Intelligence, but had never gone so far as to break the
complex unity into three hypostases. This was done by Iambli­chus and
his followers.

Hence complications arose not because their philo­sophical principles
were fantastic‑which indeed they were‑but because they tried to
accommodate every god, demon, and hero of the pagan mythology into their
system. The motive behind this attempt was a genuine desire to explain
the emergence of multiplicity from unity which was accomplished by the
interpolation of the intermediate terms.

It was, however, forgotten that no such attempt was destined to succeed
as there can be nothing intermediate between the Absolute and other
things. Increase in the number of deities, demons, and spirits cannot,
philosophically speaking, solve the old riddle of the One and the many.

In the hands of Iamblichus and his followers philosophy became a
conglo­meration of mythical beings, an amazing metaphysical museum with
entities labelled and classified, leaving no room for any free
intellectual and spiritual quest.

The philosophy of Iamblichus and his followers was the last Neo‑Platonic
attempt to provide an alternative scheme of thought and life to
Christianity which was forging ahead among the masses and the
intellectuals. After a brief success Neo‑Platonism failed to capture the
imagination of the common man, with the result that the centres of its
teaching in Syria, Alexandria, and Athens were closed by a royal edict
in 529 A. D.

Early Christianity
------------------

A great part of the Christian belief was formed of notions current in
the Hellenic world. When the early preachers of Christianity explained
the posi­tion of Jesus in the totality of things, they did so in terms
which bore a close resemblance to conceptions already current in the
pagan and the Jewish worlds. Christianity had to assimilate elements
from its Hellenistic environ­ment. Its theology was influenced by
gnosticism, which has been aptly termed as Hellenistic theology.

It was common to all forms of Hellenistic theology that the material
world accessible to senses is evil and consequently very much inferior
to the trans­cendental world; further, that the soul which has divine
origin could win its way back through self‑denial and purification.

While talking of evil the gnos­tics primarily thought of the material
world and evils connected with sensual passions and not the injustice of
the actual state of things or the inequality in the distribution of
economic goods or the pains of poverty, disease, and oppression which
are ordinarily associated with evil by the modern man.

With regard to the person of Jesus, there is a difference of opinion in
the Hellenistic theology. It is argued that in Jesus a pre‑existing
heavenly being was present upon earth, but as to the manner of his
corporeal manifestation, there is a variety of speculations. All alike
regard Jesus Christ as a compound; they differ, however, with regard to
the nature and mode of the combination of the human and divine elements
in his person.

All these beliefs and controversies were taken over to the Christian
Church and formed a basis for their understanding of the Testament. The
Christians had their own philosophers too who endeavoured to reconcile
philosophy and Christian theology. The prominent among them at
Alexandria were Clement and Origen.

The former was a Platonist of the older type who shows in his Stromateis
how the general body of the Christian doctrine is adapted to the
theories of Platonic philosophy. The latter also undertook a defence of
the Christian faith against the objections of a Platonist. He was first
among the Christian theologians to set forth the doctrines of the
Christian faith in a systematic form.

Both Clement and Origen founded the Christian school of philosophical
theology. But the attempt did not find favour with the people. The same
Justinian who closed the school of the Neo‑Platonists in 529 A. D.
condemned Origenism in nine anathemas in about 540 A. D.

Having been made to quit Alexandria, Origen returned to Palestine and
founded a school at Caesarea, on the model of that in Alexandria. It did
not succeed like the original one but nevertheless exercised a potent
influence on the Syrian Church. A rival school was set up at Antioch by
Malchion. Fifty years later another school was established at Nisibis,
right in the heart of the Syriac‑speaking community. It was here that
the text‑books studied at Antioch were rendered into Syriac.

The Church had no philosophy of its own. It had to adapt itself to the
Alex­andrian philosophy, particularly to Neo‑Platonism and Aristotelian
meta­physics and psychology. This led to senseless controversies as the
Arian doc­trine shows. Both the Alexandrian and the Syrian Churches
agreed that Christ was an emanation, eternal like God, but differed in
their interpretation of eternity.

The school of Antioch thought that God being the cause, there was a time
when God existed but not the Son. This was denied by the Alex­andrians
who maintained that eternity does not admit of before and after. If God
is Father He is so from eternity and the Son should for ever be issuing
from the Father as the source.

The Arian controversy died by the fifth century A. D. giving place to
an­other which concerned the person of the incarnate Christ. It was
largely a question of psychology. In De Anima Aristotle had defined soul
as the first actuality of a natural body having in it the capacity of
life “and described its four faculties as the nutritive, the sensible,
the locomotive, and the intellectual.

The first three are common to men and animals, being concerned with the
intake of food and with knowledge through sense and desire. The fourth
one which is the intellect, Nous, or the rational soul is peculiar to
man. It is inde­pendent of the body and the presumption is that it has
its source not in the body.”

Man is therefore a compound of psyche and the rational soul, the first
signi­fying the first three functions of the soul, the second, the
fourth one which later philosophy regarded as the emanation of Logos or
the Agent Intellect. Difficulty arose about the co‑presence of these
elements in the personality of Christ. What would be the relationship
between the Logos and psyche, its own emanation, when they come together
in the same person? The question was discussed by the gnostics too.

They regarded human nature, that is, the psyche of Jesus Christ, either
as a mere illusion or so detached from the divine that we have really
two persons. On the second view the man Jesus is regarded as having been
originally distinct from the heavenly Christ. The latter des­cended into
him at his baptism and the compound Jesus Christ came to be. Some people
put the coalescence of the two at an early date.

Both these positions were taken by the Church. The Alexandrians thought
that the psyche and Logos fused in the person of Christ, while the
school of Antioch headed by Nestorius rejected the hypothesis outright.
Nestorius con­ceived of Christ as uniting in himself two persons, the
Logos and a man although the two persons were so united that they might
in a sense be deemed one.

As the controversy became acute a council was held at Ephesus in 431 A.
D. where the Alexandrians succeeded in getting Nestorius and his
followers con­demned as heretics. They were persecuted and forced to
migrate from Egypt. Accordingly, they founded a school in Edessa, a
Syriac‑speaking district. The school became the resort of the Nestorians
and centre of the vernacular ­speaking Syriac Church. This school was
also banned and the scholars had to take refuge in Persia.

The Nestorians had to support their theories by the prevailing
philosophy and so every Nestorian missionary was to some extent a
propagandist of Greek philosophy. They translated into Syriac the works
of Aristotle and his commentators, and also the works of the
theologians.

The Nestorians had no sympathy with the government which had persecuted
them. Consequently they spurned its language and celebrated the
sacrament only in Syriac. They promoted a distinctly native theology and
philosophy by means of translated material and Syriac commentaries.

The advocates of the fusion theory, the Monophysites or Jacobites as
they were called, the rivals of the Nestorians, fared no better at the
hands of the government. They were also persecuted and expelled.
Consequently, they too bycotted the Greek language and began using
Coptic and Syriac. In philosophy they were inclined more towards
Neo‑Platonism and mysticism than the Nestorians.

Ibas who led the Nestorian migration to Persia translated Porphyry's
Isagoge, a manual of logic, into Syriac, while Probus produced
commentaries on this book as well as on Aristotle's Hermeneutica, De
Sophisticis Elenchis, and Analytica Priora. Sergius, a Jacobite, wrote
about the Isagoge, the “Table of Porphyry,” Aristotle's “Categories” and
De Mundo. He also wrote treatises on logic in seven volumes.

Ahudemmeh composed treatises on the definition of logic, on free‑will,
on the soul, on man considered to be a microcosm, and on man as a
composition of soul and body. Paul the Persian produced a treatise on
logic which he dedicated to a Persian king.

The Jacobites produced works no less than the Nestorians. Their
productions are enormous no doubt but, all the same, they lack
originality. For the most part they are only the transmission of
received texts with their translations, commentaries, and explanatory
treatises. But it cannot be denied that they fulfilled a genuine need
and became a means of spreading Greek philosophy and culture far beyond
its original home.

References
----------

F. Ueberweg, A History of Philosophy, tr. G. S. Morris and N. Porter, 2
Vols., ?odder & Stoughton, London, 1872; E. Zeller, The Philosophy of
the Greeks, 2 Vols., Longmans Green, London, 1897 ; A. H. Armstrong An
Introduction to Ancient Philosophy Methuen, London, 1947; The Works of
Philo, tr. F. H. Colson and C. H. Whitaker, Loeb Classical Library,
Heineman, New York, 1929; H. Lewy, Selections from Philo, 1947 ; H. A. W
Wolfson, Philo, 2 Vols.,1947 ; E. R. Goodenough, An Introduc­tion to
Philo, 1940; T. Whittaker, The Neoplatonists, 2nd ed., 1901; P.
Klibanaky, The Continuity of the Platonic Tradition, Aedibus Instituti
Warburgiani, London, 1940; Plotinus, Enneads, tr. S. MaeKenna, 1883‑84;
W. R. Inge, The Philosophy of Plotinus, 2 Vols., 3rd ed., Longmans
Green, London, 1948; A. E. Taylor, Platonisrn and Its Influence, Harrap,
London; Paul Elomer, Platonism; E. Brehier, La philosophie de Plotin,
Paris, 1928; E. R. Dodds, Select Passages Illustrating Neo­platonism, S.
P. C. K., London, 1923; F. Heinemann, Plotin, Leipzig, 1921; C. Bigg,
The Christian Platonists of Alexandria, Oxford, 1913; Life of Porphyry,
tr. T. Taylor, 3rd ed., 1918; Iambliehus, Theurgia or the Egyptian
Mysteries, tr. A. Wilder, Rieder, London, 1911.

[^1]: C. Ritter, History of Philosophy, p. 330.

[^2]: Zeller, Phil. der Grichen Istesitum, Vol. III. p. 566.

[^3]: P. K. Hitti, History of Syria, Macmillan, London, 1351, p. 324

[^4]: Philo, De Migratione Abrahami, ed. T. Mangey, Vol. I, p. 450.

[^5]: Idem, Questions in Genesim,quoted by A. H. Armstrong, The
Architecture of the Intelligible Universe in the Philosophy of Plotinus,
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, 1940, pp. 70‑71.

[^6]: A. H. Armstrong, An Introduction, to Ancient Philosophy, Methuen,
London, 1947, p. 162.

[^7]: Ueberweg, A History of Philosophy, Vol. I, tr. Morris and Porter,
Hodder & Stoughton, London, 1872, p. 231.

[^8]: R A. H. Armstrong; The Architecture of the Intelligible Universe
in the Philosophy of Plotinus, p. 61.


