Chapter 6: Pre Islamic Arabian Thought
======================================

*Pre Islamic Arabian Thought by Shaikh Inayatullah , M.A Ph.D.,
Formerly, Professor of Arabic, University of the Panjab, Lahore
(Pakistan)*

In the present chapter, we are concerned only with the people of Arabia
who lived in the age immediately preceding the rise of Islam. The
ancient civilized inhabitants of southern Arabia, the Sabaeans and
Himyarites, have been left out of account, not only because the relevant
materials at our disposal are scanty and fragmentary, but also because
they are far removed from the Islamic times, with which the present
volume is primarily and directly con­cerned.

We cannot hope to understand properly the religious or philosophical
ideas of a people without comprehending their economic and social
background. A few words about the social structure of pre‑Islamic Arabs
should, therefore Form a suitable and helpful prelude to a description
of their religious outlook.

The land of Arabia is mainly a sandy plain, which is partly steppe‑land
and partly desert. Except in the oases which are few and far between,
the land is bare and monotonous, unfit for cultivation and unable to
support settled communities. From times immemorial, its inhabitants have
been of necessity nomadic, living on the produce of their camels and
sheep.

The majority of the ancient Arabs were, therefore, pastoralists who were
constantly on the move in search of grass and water for their herds and
flocks. Restless and rootless, with no permanent habitations, they stood
at a low level of culture and were innocent of those arts and sciences
which are associated in our minds with civilized life.

The art of reading and writing was confined only to a few indivi­duals
in certain commercial centres, while illiteracy was almost universal
among the sons of the desert. Their mental horizon was narrow, and the
struggle for existence in their inhospitable environment was so severe
that their energies were exhausted in satisfying the practical and
material needs of daily life, and they had little time or inclination
for religious or philosophic speculation.

Their religion was a vague polytheism and their philosophy was summed up
in a number of pithy sayings.

Although the ancient Arabs had no written literature, they possessed a
language which was distinguished for its extraordinary rich vocabulary.
In the absence of painting and sculpture, they had cultivated their
language as a fine art and were justly proud of its enormous power of
expression. Accordingly, the poets and orators who could make an
effective and aesthetic use of its wonderful resources were held in
especially high esteem among them.

Judging by the evidence furnished by the pre‑Islamic poets, polemical
pas­sages in the Qur'an and the later Islamic literature, idolatry based
on poly­theism prevailed throughout ancient Arabia. Almost every tribe
had its own god, which were the centre of its religious life and the
immediate object of its devotion. The ancient Arabs, however, at the
same time believed in the existence of a Supreme God, whom they called
Allah.

But this belief was rather vague and their faith in Him was
correspondingly weak. They might invoke Allah in time of danger, but as
soon as the danger was over they forgot all about Him. They also
recognized and worshipped a large number of other subordinate gods along
with Him, or at least thought that they would inter­cede for them with
Him.

Three deities in particular, viz., al‑\`Uzza, al‑Manat, and al‑Lat, were
accorded special veneration as the daughters of Allah. It was this
association of subordinate deities with Allah which is technically known
as shirk (association of gods with Allah) and which was condemned by the
Prophet as an unpardonable sin. Shirk was held in special abhorrence, as
it obscured belief in the oneness of God.

The innumerable deities, which the pagan Arabs worshipped, form a long
series and are the subject of a monograph, written by ibn al‑Kalbi, who
flourished in the second century of the Islamic era and is counted among
the leading authorities on Arabian antiquity.[^1] A few of them have
been incidentally mentioned in the Qur'an also.

These Arabian deities, which were of diverse nature, fell into different
Cate­gories. Some of them were personifications of abstract ideas, such
as jadd (luck), sa'd (fortunate, auspicious), rida' (good‑will, favour),
wadd (friendship, affection), and manaf (height, high place). Though
originally abstract in character, they were conceived in a thoroughly
concrete fashion. Some deities derived their names from the places where
they were venerated. Dhu al­-Khalasah and Dhu al‑Shara may be cited as
examples of this kind.

The heavenly bodies and other powers of nature, venerated as deities,
oc­cupied an important place in the Arabian pantheon. The sun (shams,
regarded as feminine) was worshipped by several Arab tribes, and was
honoured with a sanctuary and an idol. The name \`Abd Shams, “Servant of
the Sun,” was found in many parts of the country. The sun was referred
to by descriptive titles also, such as shariq, “the brilliant one.”

The constellation of the Pleiades (al‑Thurayya), which was believed to
bestow rain, also appears as a deity in the name \`Abd al‑Thurayya. The
planet Venus, which shines with remark­able brilliance in the clear
skies of Arabia, was revered as a great goddess under the name of
al‑\`Uzza, which may be translated as “the Most Mighty.”

It had a sanctuary at Nakhlah near Mecca. The name \`Abd al‑\`Uzza was
very common among the pre‑Islamic Arabs. The Arabian cult of the planet
Venus has been mentioned by several classical and Syriac authors.

There were certain Arabian deities whose titles in themselves indicate
that they occupied a position of supreme importance in the eyes of their
votaries. Such deities were: al‑Malik, “the King” (compare the personal
name, \`Abd al‑Malik); and Ba'1 or Ba'al, “the Lord” which was very
common among the northern Semites.

The deities of heathen Arabia were represented by idols, sacred stones,
and other objects of worship. Sacred stones served at the same time as
altars; the blood of the victims was poured over them or smeared over
them. At the period with which we are dealing, the Arabs sacrificed
camels, sheep, goats, and, less often, kine.

The flesh of the sacrifice was usually eaten by the wor­shippers, the
god contenting himself with the blood alone. Originally, every sacrifice
was regarded as food to be consumed by the god concerned or at least as
a means of pacifying him. The sacrifice was, thus, believed to bring the
worshipper into close connection with the deity. Hence the Arabic terms,
qurba and qurban (derived from the root, QRB, to be near), which are
used for a sacrifice.

The Arabs, like the Hebrews, were in the habit of sacrificing the
firstlings of their flocks and herds (fara'). Soon after the birth of an
infant, his head a shaven and a sheep was sacrificed on his behalf. This
practice has survived among the Arabs and other Muslim peoples to the
present day under the name of \`aqiqah. Perhaps, this was originally a
ransom, offered as a substitute for the child himself.

The gods of heathen Arabia were represented not only by rude blocks of
stone (nusub, pl. ansab), but also by statues, made with more or less
skill. The usual word for a divine statue, whether of stone or wood, was
sanam. The other word used for this purpose was wathan, which seems
primarily to mean nothing more than a stone.

Examples of tree‑worship are also found among the ancient Arabs. The
tree known as dhat al‑anwat “that on which things are hung,” received
divine honours; weapons and other objects were suspended from it. At
Nakhlah, the goddess \`Uzza is said to have been worshipped in the form
of three trees.

The gods of the heathen Arabs were mostly represented by idols, which
were placed in temples. These temples served as places of worship, where
offerings and sacrifices were made by their votaries. The temples were
by no means imposing buildings like those of the Egyptians or the
Greeks.

They were simple structures, sometimes mere walls or enclosures marked
by stones. Not only the temples were venerated as holy places, but
sometimes the surrounding areas were also treated as sacred and
inviolable (hima), and were supposed to be under the special protection
of their respective gods.

In connection with several temples, we read of priests who served as
their custodians (sadin, pl. sadana). They received the worshippers and
gave them admission to the shrine. The office was generally hereditary,
since we read of priestly families which were attached to particular
temples.

Another word used for a priest was kahin, a term which was employed for
a soothsayer as well. The priests were believed to be under the
influence of the gods and to possess the power of foretelling future
events and of performing other super­human feats.

In this way, their pronouncements resembled the ancient Greek oracles
and were likewise vague and equivocal. In course of time, the priest who
was in the beginning simply the custodian of the temple developed the
character of a soothsayer as well, and thus the term kahin came to
acquire the sense of a soothsayer and seer.

There were female soothsayers as well. Arabic literature has preserved
many stories about kahin and many utter­ances are attributed to them.
These utterances were usually made in rhymed prose, and are interesting
not only in respect of their content but also with regard to their
style. Their pronouncements consisted of a few concise sentences, which
ended in words having the same rhyme. This mode of expression was known
as saj\`.

The same style is found in the earliest revelations received by the
Prophet which now constitute the last chapters of the Qur'an. It is,
therefore, not surprising that the contemporaries of the Prophet called
him a kahin, a position which he firmly repudiated.

While in the beginning, the Qur'an adopted the style peculiar to saj\`,
it raised the conception to a level far beyond the imagination of the
soothsayers. There is another point of similarity which should be noted
here.

The utterances of the kahins were pref­aced by oaths, swearing by the
earth and sky, the sun, moon, and stars, light and darkness, and plants
and animals of all kinds. These oaths offer an interest­ing point of
comparison with the oaths used in the Qur'an.

The temples of the heathen Arabs were for them not only places of
worship but also places of pilgrimage. They assembled there periodically
at certain times of the year, when these assemblies assumed the
character of fairs and festivals.

An important sanctuary of this kind was located at Mecca, a town in
western Arabia, which was situated at a distance of about fifty miles
inland from the Red Sea. The town lay on the trade‑route which led along
the sea from the Yemen to Syria, and its situation may have been partly
determined by the presence of a well, called Zamzam, which has a
considerable and fairly constant supply of water. The sanctuary
consisted of a simple stone structure of cube‑like appearance, which was
called the Ka'bah by the Arabs.

One of the walls contained a black stone (al‑hajar al‑aswad). Inside the
Ka'bah was the statue of the god, Hubal. At its feet, there was a small
pit in which offerings to the temple were deposited. Besides Hubal,
al‑Lat, al‑\`Uzza, and al‑Manat were also worshipped at Mecca and are
mentioned in the Qur'an. At the rise of Islam, the temple is said to
have contained as many as three hundred and sixty idols.

It seems that in course of time the various Arab tribes had brought in
their gods and placed them in the Ka'bah, which had consequently
acquired the character of the national pantheon for the whole of Arabia.

From times immemorial, the Ka'bah at Mecca had been the centre of a
great pilgrimage, in which the most diverse tribes from all over Arabia
took part. But this was possible only when peace reigned in the land.

For this purpose, the month of Dhu al‑Hijjah in which the rites and
ceremonies con­nected with the pilgrimage were performed and the
preceding and succeeding months of Dhu al‑Qa'dah and Muharram altogether
three consecutive months were regarded as sacred months, during which
tribal warfare was prohibited.

This period was sufficiently long to enable the tribes from the remotest
corners of Arabia to visit the Ka'bah and return to their homes in
peace. The territory around Mecca was also treated as sacred (haram);
and the pilgrims laid aside their weapons when they reached this holy
territory. The pilgrimage was called hajj.

During the pilgrimage, the pilgrims had to perform a number of rites and
ceremonies, which lasted for several days and which can be described
here only with the utmost brevity.

As soon as the pilgrims entered the sacred territory, the haram, they
had to practise self‑denial by observing a number of prohibitions: they
had to abstain from hunting, fighting, sexual intercourse, and certain
other things.

They cir­cumambulated the Ka'bah, and also kissed the Black Stone which
was fixed in one of its walls. An essential rite of the hajj was a visit
to the hill of \`Arafat on the ninth of Dhu al‑Hijjah, when the pilgrims
assembled in the adjoining plain and stayed there till sunset for the
prescribed wuquf (the stays or halts). The hill of 'Arafat is said to
have borne another name, Ilal, which may have been the name of the
shrine or rather of the deity worshipped there in ancient times.[^2]

The pilgrims then went to Muzdalifah, which was consecrated to Quzah,
the thunder god. Here they spent the night, when a fire was kindled on
the sacred hill. At sunrise the pilgrims left for Mina, an open plain,
where they sacrificed the animals, camels, goats, and sheep, which they
had brought with them for the purpose.

The animals meant for sacrifice were distinguished by special coverings
or other marks. During their stay at Mina, the pilgrims also used to
throw stones at three prescribed sites as a part of the pilgrimage
ceremonial. After staying at Mina for three days, the pilgrims left for
their homes. Women took part in the pilgrimage along with men.

The hajj as described above was retained by the Prophet as a major
religious institution of Islam, with certain modifications of its
ceremonials which were intended to break the link with their pagan
associations. While the position of the Ka'bah was emphasized as the
house built by the Patriarch Abraham for the service of Allah, the halts
(wuquf)at 'Arafat (along with the one at Muzdalifah) was retained as an
essential feature of the Islamic hajj.

In addition to the innumerable gods, the heathen Arabs also believed in
the existence of demons, shadowy beings, which they called the jinn
(variant: jann). The word probably means covered or hidden. Hence the
jinn meant beings invisible to the eye. They were regarded as crafty and
mischievous, almost malevolent, and were consequently held in fear.

They were supposed to haunt places dreaded either for their loneliness
or for their unhealthy cli­mate. The fear of the jinn, therefore, gave
rise to various stories, in which they are said to have killed or
carried off human beings. Like many other primitive peoples, the heathen
Arabs believed in demoniacal possession.

The jinn were supposed to enter human beings and even animals, rendering
them “possessed” or mad. According to the testimony of the Qur'an, the
Meccans believed that there was a kinship between Allah and the jinn,
and that they were His partners. Accordingly they made offerings to them
and sought aid from them.

In spite of the bewildering multiplicity of the subordinate gods whom
the pre‑Islamic Arabs venerated, they believed in the existence of a
Supreme God whom they called Allah. The word Allah is found in the
inscriptions of northern Arabia and also enters into the composition of
the numerous personal names among them.

There are a large number of passages in the poetry of the heathen Arabs
in which Allah is mentioned as a great deity. Allah also occurs in many
idiomatic phrases which ere in constant use among them.

The Qur'an itself testifies that the heathens themselves regarded Allah
as the Supreme Being. Their sin, however, consisted in the fact that
they worshipped other gods besides Him. It was against this shirk that
the Prophet waged an unrelenting war. In any case, it is important to
note that the Qur'anic monotheism did not find it necessary to introduce
an altogether new name for the Supreme Being and, therefore, adopted
Allah, the name already in use.

Even before the advent of Islam, old polytheism was losing its force in
Arabia, since the Arabs notion of their gods had always been vague. With
the decline of old paganism, a number of men had appeared in various
parts of the country who had become convinced of the folly of idolatry,
and were seeking another more satisfying faith.

They were fairly numerous and were called Hanifs. The Qur'an uses this
term in the sense of a monotheist, and describes Abraham the Patriarch
as the first Hanif. But none of these Hanifs had the vision and force of
conviction and the proselytizing zeal which distin­guished the mission
of Muhammad.

The ancient Arabs believed that the human soul was an ethereal or
air‑like substance quite distinct from the human body. As such, they
considered it identical with breath. This identification was so complete
in their view that the word for breath, nafs, came to mean human
personality itself.

They were confirmed in this belief by their experience that death
resulted when a human being ceased to breathe. At the time of death,
breath along with life itself escaped through its natural passage, the
mouth or the nostrils. When a person passed away on his death‑bed, his
soul was said to escape through his nostrils (mata hatfa anfihi), and in
the case of a violent death, e. g., on a battle‑field, through the
gaping wound.

When a person was murdered, he was supposed to long for vengeance and to
thirst for the blood of the murderer. If the vengeance was not taken,
the soul of the murdered man was believed to appear above his grave in
the shape of an owl continually crying out, “Give me to drink” (isquni),
until the murder was avenged.

The restless soul in the form of a screeching owl was supposed to escape
from the skull, the skull being the most characteristic part of the dead
body. Certain rites of burial, prevalent among the pre‑Islamic Arabs,
show that they believed in some sort of future existence of the soul.

In order to show honour to a dead chief, for instance, a camel which had
been pre­viously hamstrung was tethered near the grave and was left to
starve. This usage can be explained only on the hypothesis that the
animal was to be at the service of the dead man. The custom of
slaughtering animals at the graves of elders has been kept up in Arabia
to the present day.

Ancient poets often express the wish that the graves of those whom they
love may be refreshed with abundant rain. Similarly, their sometimes
address greetings to the dead. It may be that expressions of this kind
are not merely rhetorical figures of speech; they probably indicate
their belief in the survival of those who have departed from this world.

Although there are indications that the ancient Arabs hard some notion,
however hazy, of the survival of the human soul after death, they had no
clear notion of life after death. As stated in the Qur'an, they could
not understand how a human being, after his bones had been reduced to
dust, could be called to life once again. Since life after death was
something beyond their comprehension, the question of retribution for
human deeds did not arise in their minds.

The Qur'an uses the word ruh (spirit) as well as nafs for the human
soul. Accordingly, the Muslim theologians do not make any distinction
between the two terms in designating the soul. The ancient Arabs were
generally fatalists. They believed that events in the lives of human
beings were preordained by fate, and, therefore, inevitable. However
hard they might try, they could not escape the destiny that was in store
for them.

The course of events was believed to be determined by dahr or time, so
that suruf al‑dahr (the changes wrought by time) was a most frequent
expression used by the Arabs and their poets for the vicissitudes of
human life. The same feeling is expressed in several of their proverbs
and maxims. This view was probably born of their practical experience of
life.

In no part of the world is human life quite secure against the sudden
changes of fortune, but in the peculiar milieu of Arabia man seems to be
a helpless victim to the caprice of nature to an unusual degree. The
sudden attack of a hostile neighbouring tribe or a murrain in his herds
and flocks may reduce a rich man to dire poverty almost overnight; or in
the case of a prolonged drought, he may be brought face to face with
fearful famine and death.

The peculiar circumstances of desert life, thus, seem to have encouraged
the growth of fatalistic tendencies among the Arabs. Bearing in mind the
existence of these tendencies among the ancient Arabs, it is not
surprising to find that similar views prevailed in the first centuries
of Islam and that the dogma of predestination was almost universally
accepted among the Muslim masses. Predetermination was, however,
divorced from dahr.

The feeling of utter helplessness in the face of inexorable fate has
probably given rise to another idea among the Arabs; the idea of
resignation as a com­mendable virtue. Possibly, it has a survival value
for those who adopt a sub­missive attitude towards the hardships and
adversities of human life.

Instead of fretting and fuming and hurling oneself in violent revolt
against the decree of fate and thus running the risk of complete
disintegration, there seem comparative safety and the possibility of
ultimate survival in accepting calmly and patiently the dictates of
fate. The inculcation of resignation as a virtue, thus, seems to be a
natural corollary to the dogma of predestination.

Although religion had little influence on the lives of pre‑Islamic
Arabs, we must not suppose them to be an all together lawless people.
The pagan society of ancient Arabia was built on certain moral ideas,
which may be briefly described here.

They had no written code, religious or legal, except the com­pelling
force of traditional custom which was enforced by public opinion; but
their moral and social ideals have been faithfully preserved in their
poetry, which is the only form of literature which has come down to us
from those old days.

The virtues most highly prized by the ancient Arabs were bravery in
battle, patience in misfortune, loyalty to one's fellow‑tribesmen,
generosity to the needy and the poor, hospitality to the guest and the
wayfarer, and persistence in revenge. Courage in battle and fortitude in
warfare were particularly required in a land where might was generally
right and tribes were constantly engaged in attacking one another.

It is, therefore, not a mere chance that in the famous anthology of
Arabian verse, called the Hamasah, poems relating to inter‑tribal
warfare occupy more than half of the book. These poems applaud the
virtues most highly prized by the Arabs‑bravery in battle, patience in
hardship, defiance of the strong, and persistence in revenge.

The tribal organization of the Arabs was then, as now, based on the
prin­ciple of kinship or common blood, which served as the bond of union
and social solidarity. To defend the family and the tribe, individually
and collec­tively, was, therefore, regarded as a sacred duty; and honour
required that a man should stand by his people through thick and thin.

If kinsmen sought help, it was to be given promptly, without considering
the merits of the case. Chivalrous devotion and disinterested
self-sacrifice on behalf of their kinsmen and friends were, therefore,
held up as a high ideal of life.

Generosity and hospitality were other virtues which were greatly
extolled by the Arab poets. They were personified in Hatim of the tribe
of Tayy, of whom many anecdotes are told to this day. Generosity was
specialty called into play in the frequent famines, with which Arabia.
is often afflicted through lack of rain.

The Arabian sense of honour also called blood for blood. Vengeance for
the slain was an obligation which lay heavy on the conscience of the
pagan Arabs. It was taken upon the murderer or upon one of his
fellow‑tribesmen.

Usually this ended the matter, but sometimes it led to a regular
blood‑feud, which lasted for a long period and in which many persons
lost their lives. The fear of retribution had a salutary effect in
restraining the lawless instincts of the Bedouin; but the vendetta in
some cases was carried to extreme limits and involved a great loss of
human life.

In the century before Muhammad, Arabia was not wholly abandoned to
paganism. Both Judaism and Christianity claimed a considerable following
among its inhabitants. Almost every calamity that befell the land of
Palestine sent a fresh wave of Jewish refugees into Arabia, sometimes as
far as the Yemen.

They had probably taken refuge there after the conquest of Palestine by
Titus in 70 A. D. Jewish colonists flourished in Medina and several
other towns of northern Hijaz. In the time of the Prophet, three large
Jewish tribes, viz., Nadir, Quraizah, and Qainuqa, dwelt in the
outskirts of Medina, and the fact that the Prophet made an offensive and
defensive alliance with them for the safety of the town shows that they
were an important factor in the political life of those times.

These colonies had their own teachers and centres of religious study.
Judging by the few extant specimens of their poetry, these refugees,
through contact with a people nearly akin to themselves, had become
fully Arabicized both in language and sentiment. They, however, remained
Jews in the most vital particular, religion, and it is probable that
they exerted a strong influence over the Arabs in favour of monotheism.

Another religious factor which was strongly opposed to Arabian paganism
was the Christian faith. How early and from what direction Christianity
first entered Arabia is a question which it is difficult to answer with
certainty; but there is no doubt that Christianity was widely diffused
in the southern and nothern parts of Arabia at the time of the Prophet.

Christianity is said to have been introduced in the valley of Najran in
northern Yemen from Syria, and it remained entrenched in spite of the
terrible persecution it suffered at the hands of the Himyarite king, Dhu
Nawas, who had adopted the Jewish faith.

The Prophet received at Medina a deputation of the Christians of Najran
and held discussions with them on religious questions. Christianity in
the south‑west of Arabia received a fresh stimulus by the invasion of
the Chris­tian Abyssinians, who put an end to the rule of Dhu Nawas.
There were Christians in Mecca itself; Waraqah ibn Naufal, a cousin of
Khadijah, the first wife of the Prophet, was one of them. Christianity
was also found among certain tribes of the Euphrates and the Ghassan who
lived on the borders of Syria.

Their conversion was due to their contact with the Christian population
of the Byzantine Empire. The Ghassanids, who were Monophysites, not only
defended their Church against its rivals but also fought against the
Muslims as the allies of the Byzantine emperors.

The Christians were also found at Hirah, a town in the north‑east of
Arabia, where Arab princes of the house of Lakhm ruled under the
suzerainty of the Persian kings. These Christians, who were called
\`Ibad or the “Servants of the Lord,” belonged to the Nestorian Church,
and contributed to the diffusion of Christian ideas among the Arabs of
the Peninsula.

By the sixth century, Judaism and Christianity had made considerable
head way in Arabia, and were extending their sphere of influence,
leavening the pagan masses, and thus gradually preparing the way for
Islam.

References
----------

Al‑Qur'an; ibn al‑Kalbi, Kitab al‑Asnnam, ed. Ahmed Zaki Pasha, Cairo,
1914; Mahmud Shukri al‑Alusi, Bulugh al‑\`Arab fi Ahwal al‑\`Arab, 3
Vols., Baghdad, 1314/1896; Jawad 'Ali, Tarikh al‑'Arab qabl al‑Islam,
Vols. V & VI, Baghdad, 1955‑56; J. Wellhausen Reste Arabischen
Heidentums 2nd ed., Berlin, 1897;Th. Noldeke “Ancient Arabs,” in
Encyclopaedia of Religion, and Ethics, Vol. I, Edinburgh, 1908; W.
Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, 2nd ed., London, 1894; Ign.
Guidi, L'Arabie Anteislamique, Paris, 1921; De Lacy O'Leary, Arabia
Before Muhammad, London 1927; G. Levi Della Vida, “Pre‑Islamic Arabia,”
in The Arab Heritage, ed. N.A. Faris, Princeton,. 1944.

[^1]: Ibn al‑Kalbi, Kitab al‑Asnam, ed. Ahmad Zaki Pasha, Cairo, 1914.

[^2]: Wellhausen, Reste Arabischen Heidentums, 2nd ed., Berlin, 1897, p.
83.


