Chapter 11 : Imams of "ahl Al-sunnah Wal Jama`a"
================================================

"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" have followed the four Imams after whom
their sects are known, namely Abu Hanifah, Malik, al-Shafi\`i, and Ahmad
ibn Hanbal.

These four Imams were never among the sahaba of the Messenger of Allah,
nor did they know him, nor did he see them, nor did they ever see him.
Their senior in age is Abu Hanifah whose time is separated from that of
the Prophet by more than a hundred years: he was born in 80 A.H./699
A.D. and died in 160 A.H./777 A.D. Their youngest is Ahmad ibn Hanbal:
he was born in 165 and died in 241 A.H. (782 - 855 A.D.). All this is in
reference to the religion's branches (furoo\` al-deen).

As for the roots of the creed (usool al-deen), "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" refer to Imam Abul-Hasan Ali ibn Isma\`eel al-Ash\`ari who was
born in 270 A.H. and died in 335 A.H. (883 - 946 A.D.)

These are the Imams of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" to whom the latter
refer with regard to the roots and branches of their creed. Do you find
any of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt among them? Or do you find among them
anyone who was a companion of the Messenger of Allah, or about whom the
Messenger of Allah said that he is the most wise person to lead the
nation? Of course not! There is nothing like that at all.

If "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" claim that they uphold the Prophet's
Sunnah, why did these sects appear so late in time after the Prophet's
demise, and where were "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" before the existence
of these sects, and what religion were they following, and to whom were
they referring?!

Having asked these questions, let us add this one: "How can they be so
dedicated to men who were neither contemporary to the Prophet nor did
they ever know him but who were born after the dissension had already
taken place, and after the companions fought and killed one another,
charging one another with apostacy, and after the caliphs treated the
Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah according to their own ijtihad, their own
personal views?"

Having taken control of the reins of government, Yazid violated the
sanctity of sacred Medina, giving his army permission to wreak whatever
havoc it desired in it, so the said army inflicted death and destruction
in it, killing the best among the sahaba who refused to swear the oath
of allegiance to him, raping chaste women to the extent that there were
many who were born thus illegitimately.

How can any wise person place his trust in these imams who belong to
such type of human beings who waded in the mud of dissension, who were
colored by its various hues, who grew up mastering its cunning and
cunniving, vesting upon themselves the false medals of knowledge and
scholarship? Indeed, no scholar ever rose to distinction except one with
whom the government was pleased and who was pleased with the
government.[^57]

How can anyone who claims to adhere to the Sunnah forsake Imam Ali, the
gate of knowledge, or Imams al-Hasan and al-Husayn, masters of the
youths of Paradise, or other purified Imams from the progeny of the
Prophet who had inherited the knowledge of the Messenger of Allah, and
prefer to follow "Imams" who were not knowledgeable of the Prophetic
Sunnah but were the product of Umayyad politics?

How can "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" claim that they follow the
Prophetic Sunnah while neglecting those who safeguard it? How can they
abandon the recommendations and explicit orders of the Prophet to uphold
the Purified Progeny then claim to be the ones who follow the Sunnah?!

Can any Muslim individual who is familiar with the Islamic history, the
Holy Qur'an, and the Sunnah, doubt the fact that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" are followers of the Umayyads and Abbasides?

And can any Muslim who is familiar with the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, and
who has come to know the Islamic history, deny the fact that the Shi\`as
who emulate and pay homage to the Progeny of the Prophet are, indeed,
followers of the Prophetic Sunnah, whereas nobody else can claim to do
so?

Have you seen, dear reader, how politics turns matters upside down,
making right look wrong and vice versa?! Those who remained loyal to the
Prophet and his Progeny came to be called Rafidis and people of
innovations, while those who excelled in inventing innovations and
renounced the Sunnah of the Prophet and his Progeny, following the
ijtihad of their oppressive rulers, came to be called "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a"?! This is truly strange.

As for me, I firmly believe that Quraysh was behind this label, and it
is one of its secrets and riddles.

We have already come to know that Quraysh was the one that prohibited
Abdullah ibn Umar from writing the Prophetic Sunnah down in the pretext
that the Prophet was not infallible. Quraysh, in fact, is comprised of
specific individuals who weilded a great deal of influence, and who were
known for their fanaticism and powerful influence over Arab tribes. Some
historians call them "the most shrewd Arabs" due to their reputation in
cunning and conniving and superiority in managing the affairs, whereas
others call them "the people who tie and untie."

Among them are: Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Abu Sufyan and his son
Mu\`awiyah, Amr ibn al-As, al-Mugheerah ibn Shu\`bah, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam, Talhah ibn Ubaydullah, Abdul-Rahman ibn Awf, Abu Ubaydah Amir
ibn al-Jarrah, and many others.[^58]

These "shrewd men" used to meet to discuss and decide something upon
which they would eventually agree, then they would make up their mind to
propagate it among the people so that it might become thereafter a
matter of fact and a followed reality, without most people kowing how it
came to be. One such scheme, which they plotted, was their claim that
Muhammad was not infallible, and that he was as human as anyone else: he
could err, they claimed, so they would belittle him and argue with him
about the truth while fully knowing it. And among such schemes was their
cursing Ali ibn Abu Talib and using a misnomer for him, calling him "Abu
Turab" (father of dust), portraying him to people as the enemy of Allah
and His Messenger.

Another is their taunting and cursing the highly respected sahabi Ammar
ibn Yasir, using for him a borrowed name: "Abdullah ibn Saba'" simply
because Ammar opposed the caliphs and was calling people to the Imamate
of Ali ibn Abu Talib.[^59]

Another was their calling the Shi\`as who were loyal to Ali "Rafidis"
in order to mislead the public by giving them the impression that the
latter had rejected Muhammad and followed Ali.

Another is calling themselves "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" in order to
mislead sincere believers into thinking that only they are the ones who
uphold the Prophet's Sunnah versus the Rafidis who reject it. They, in
fact, mean by their "Sunnah" the infamous innovation which they
invented: the custom of cursing and condemning the Commander of the
Faithful and the Prophet's Progeny from the pulpits in every mosque
throughout the Muslim world and in all other lands, cities, and villages
where Muslims lived. This innovation lasted for eighty years. Whenever
one of their preachers descended from the pulpit before leading the
prayers, he would curse Ali ibn Abu Talib, and if he did not, everyone
at the mosque would yell at him: Tarakatal Sunnah! Tarakatal Sunnah!
("You left out the Sunnah!).

When caliph Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz wanted to change that "Sunnah" with
the Qur'anic verse saying, "Surely Allah enjoins the effecting of equity
and of goodness (to others) and the giving (in charity) to the kindred"
(Holy Quran, 16:90), they plotted against him and killed him for killing
their "Sunnah" and taking lightly the statements of his predecessors who
had brought him to caliphate. They poisoned him when he was only
thirty-eight years old, having ruled no more than two years. He became
the victim of his reform because his cousins, the Umayyads, did not
agree to his laying their "Sunnah" to rest and thus raising the status
of "Abu Turab" and the Imams among his offspring.

After the fall of the Umayyad government, the Abbasides came and
persecuted the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt and their followers till the reign
of Ja\`far son of al-Mu\`tasim, who was titled "al-Mutawakkil," came,
and he proved to be the most bitter enemy of Ali and his offspring. His
hatred and animosity caused him to desecrate the grave of Imam Husayn in
Karbala. He prohibited people from visiting it[^60], and he never gave
anything nor was he generous to anyone except to those who cursed Ali
and his offspring.

The incident involving al-Mutawakkil and the famous scholar of
linguistics \`allama Ibn al-Sikkeet is well known; he killed him in the
very worst manner, cutting his tongue off when he discovered that he was
a follower of Ali and his Ahl al-Bayt, although he was the tutor of both
of his [al-Mutawakkil's] sons.

Al-Mutawakkil's animosity towards Ali and his adherence to Nasibism
went as far as killing any new born named "Ali" because it was the most
hateful name to him. When Ali ibn al-Jahm, the poet, met al-Mutawakkil,
he said, "O commander of the faithful! My parents have done me a great
deal of injustice." Al-Mutawakkil asked him, "How so?" He said, "They
named me Ali although I hate this name and anyone named by it."
Al-Mutawakkil laughed and ordered him to be richly rewarded.

One man used to live inside al-Mutawakkil's meeting house. He was an
etertaining buffoon who used to mimick Ali ibn Abu Talib and thus make
fun of him. Upon seeing him, people would laugh and say, "Here comes the
bald man, the man with the big stomach!" So he would be ridiculed by
everyone meeting there to the delight and amusement of the caliph.

We must not forget in this regard to point out to the fact that this
al-Mutawakkil, whose animosity towards Ali revealed his hypocrisy and
promiscuity, was very much loved by the scholars of hadith who vested
upon him the title of "Muhyyi al-Sunnah," the one who revived the
Sunnah. And since those scholars of hadith were themselves "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," it is proven by the evidence which has no room
for any doubt that what they meant by the "Sunnah" was simply hating Ali
ibn Abu Talib and cursing him and dissociating themselves from him; it
is, in a word, Nasibism.

What makes this matter more clear is that al-Khawarizmi says the
following on p. 135 of his book: "Even Haroun ibn al-Khayzaran and
Ja\`far al-Mutawakkil alal-shaitan (the one who relies on Satan), rather
than on al-Rahman (the Merciful One), used not to give any money or
wealth except to those who cursed the family of Abu Talib and who
supported the sect of the Nasibis."

Ibn Hajar has quoted Abdullah ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal saying, "When Nasr
ibn Ali ibn Sahban narrated a tradition saying that the Messenger of
Allah took the hand of al-Hasan and al-Husayn and said, \`Whoever loves
me and loves both of these men and their parents will be in my level on
the Day of Judgment,' al-Mutawakkil ordered him to be whipped one
thousand lashes. He almost died had Ja\`far ibn Abd al-Wahid not kept
interceding on his behalf with al-Mutawakkil, saying to him, \`O
commander of the faithful! He is one of Ahl al-Sunnah,' and he persisted
in doing so till he (Nasr) was left alone."[^61]

Any wise person will understand the statement made by Ja\`far ibn Abd
al-Wahid to al-Mutawakkil that Nasr was among "Ahl al-Sunnah," in order
to save his life, to be an additional testimony to the fact that "Ahl
al-Sunnah" are the enemies of Ahl al-Bayt who are hated by
al-Mutawakkil. The latter used to kill anyone who mentioned even one of
their merits even if he was not a Shi\`a.

Ibn Hajar indicates in the same book that Abdullah ibn Idris al-Azdi
was a man of "al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," that he was very strict in
upholding the "Sunnah," pleasing others, and that he sympathized with
Uthman.[^62]

About Abdullah ibn Awn al-Basri, the [same Sunni] author says: "He is
held as reliable, and he used to be consistent in his worship, very firm
in upholding the Sunnah, and in being tough against the people who
invent innovations; Ibn Sa\`d says that he was a supporter of
Uthman."[^63] He has also indicated that Ibrahim ibn Ya\`qub al-Jawzjani
used to follow the Hareezi sect (i.e. the sect founded by Hareez ibn
Uthman al-Dimashqi), who was well known for adhering to the beliefs of
the Nasibis, and Ibn Hayyan has said, "He was very zealous in adhering
to the Sunnah."[^64]

All this makes us draw the conclusion that Nasibism and hatred towards
Ali and his offspring, the cursing of the descendants of Abu Talib, the
condemning of Ahl al-Bayt..., is regarded by them as "zeal in adhering
to the Sunnah." We have also come to know so far that the supporters of
Uthman are the ones who promoted Nasibism and hatred towards Ahl
al-Bayt, and they are the ones who were very tough with anyone who was
loyal to Ali and his offspring.

The label of "innovators" was attached by them to the Shi\`as who
called for the Imamate of Ali because, to them, that was an innovation,
since it disagreed with the policies of the "righteous caliphs" and the
"good predecessors," the policy of expelling the Imam and not
recognizing his Imamate and Wisayat. Historical facts supporting this
statement are quite abundant, but what we have already stated here
should suffice those who wish to research this issue further and
investigate it on their own. We have, as has always been our habit,
tried to be brief, and researchers have to keep in mind that they can
find many times this much if they wish.

(As for) those who struggle hard for Us, We will most certainly guide
them in Our ways, and Allah is most surely with the doers of good. (Holy
Qur'an, 29:69)

[^57] In the coming researches, you will Insha-Allah come to find out
that Umayyad and \`Abbaside rulers were the very people who brought
those sects to existence and forced people to follow them.

[^58] We have excluded from this list Imam Ali because he distinguished
between shrewd judgment and good management, between the shrewdness of
cunning, deception and hypocrisy. He has said more than once, "Had it
not been for deception and hypocrisy, I would have been ranked the most
shrewd person among the Arabs," as stated in the Holy Qur'an: "They
plan, and Allah plans, and surely Allah is the best of planners."
Allah's plans mean wisdom and good management. As for the polytheists'
plans, they are nothing but deception, hypocrisy, swindling, forgery,
and falsehood.

[^59] For more details, refer to Al-Sila bayn al-Tasawwuf wal Tashayyu\`
by Dr. Mustafa Kamil al-Shibeebi, an Egyptian author. By bringing ten
strong arguments, al-Shibeebi proves that Abdullah ibn Saba', the Jew,
or "Ibn al-Sawdaa'" (son of the black woman) was a pseydonym and title
maliciously given to Ammar ibn Yasir because he was a follower of Imam
Ali.

[^60] If the caliph went that far in meanness and lowliness to the
extent that he dug up the graves of the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt ,
especially that of the master of the youths of Paradise, do not ask
beyond that what they did to the Shi\`as who used to seek Allah's
blessings by visiting that grave. The Shi\`as suffered the ultimate pain
and tribulation.

[^61] This is quoted in Ibn Hajar's Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, in his biography
of Nasr ibn Ali ibn Sahban.

[^62] Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, Vo. 5, p. 145. It is a well known
fact that those who sympathized with Uthman used to curse Ali and accuse
him of killing Uthman ibn Affan.

[^63] Ibn Hajar, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, Vol. 8, p. 348.

[^64] Ibid., Vol. 1, p. 82.


