Chapter 12 :the Prophet Appointed the Imams of the Shi`as
=========================================================

No researcher who has studied the biography of the Prophet, and who
become familiar with the Islamic history, doubts the fact that the
Prophet was the one who appointed the Twelve Imams, clearly stating so
in order that they might succeed him and take charge of his nation.

Their number is mentioned in the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah"
together with the fact that they were twelve in number, and that all of
them descended from Quraysh; this is what al-Bukhari and Muslim, as well
as many others, have confirmed. Some Sunni references indicate that the
Prophet named all of them, saying that the first of them was Ali ibn Abu
Talib, followed by his son al-Hasan then al-Hasan's brother al-Husayn,
followed by nine from the offspring of al-Husayn the last of whom is
al-Mahdi.

The [Sunni] author of Yanabee\` al-Mawaddah[^65] narrates the following
incident in his book:

A Jew named al-A\`tal came to the Prophet and said, "Muhammad! I wish
to ask you about certain things which I have been keeping to myself; so,
if you answer them, I shall declare my acceptance of Islam before you."
The Prophet said, "Ask me, O father of Imarah!" So he asked him about
many things till he was satisfied and admitted that the Prophet was
right. Then he said, "Tell me about your wasi (successor): who is he? No
prophet can ever be without a wasi; our prophet Moses had appointed
Yusha\` [Joshua] son of Noon as his successor." He said, "My wasi is Ali
ibn Abu Talib followed by my grandsons al-Hasan and al-Husayn followed
by nine men from the loins of al-Husayn." He said, "Then name them for
me, O Muhammad!" The Prophet said, "Once al-Husayn departs, he will be
succeeded by his son Ali; when Ali departs, his son Muhammad will
succeed him. When Muhammad departs, his son Ja\`far will succeed him.
When Ja\`far departs, he will be succeeded by his son Musa. When Musa
departs, his son Ali will succeed him. When Ali departs, his son
Muhammad will succeed him. When Muhammad departs, his son Ali will
succeed him. When Ali departs, his son al-Hasan will succeed him, and
when al-Hasan departs, al-Hujjah Muhammad al-Mahdi will succeed him.
These are the twelve ones." That Jew, therefore, embraced Islam and
praised Allah for having guided him.[^66]

If we wish to turn the pages of Shi\`a books and discern the facts they
contain with regard to this subject, we will surely find many times as
many ahadith as this one, but this suffices to prove that the scholars
of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" admit that the number of the Imams is
twelve, and there are no such Imams besides Ali and his purified
offspring.

What strengthens our conviction that the Twelve Imams from Ahl al-Bayt
were never tutored by any of the Ummah's scholars is the fact that no
historian, nor traditionist, nor biographer, has ever narrated saying
that one of the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt learned what he knew from some
sahaba or tabi\`een as is the case with all the Ummah's scholars and
Imams.

Abu Hanifah, for example, was a student of Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq; Malik
was a student of Abu Hanifah; al-Shafi\`i learned from Malik and so did
Ahmad ibn Hanbal. As for the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt, their knowledge is
gifted by Allah, Glory and Exaltation to Him, and they inherit such
knowledge son from father, for they are the ones to whom the Almighty
specifically refers when He says, "Then We gave the Book for an
inheritance to those whom We chose from Our servants" (Holy Qur'an,
35:32).

Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq has expressed this fact once when he said, "How
strange some people are! They say that they derived all their knowledge
from the Messenger of Allah, so they acted upon it and were guided! And
they narrate saying that we, Ahl al-Bayt, did not learn any knowledge,
nor were we thereby guided, while we are his family and offspring: in
our homes did the revelation descend; from us was knowledge imparted to
people! Have they really learned and were guided while we remained in
ignorance and misguidance?!" How can Imam al-Sadiq not wonder at those
who claimed to have learned from the Messenger of Allah while they bear
grudge and animosity to his Ahl al-Bayt and the gates of his knowledge
which lead to such knowledge?! How can he help expressing such amazement
at calling themselves "Ahl al-Sunnah" while they do the opposite of what
this Sunnah contains?!

If the Shi\`as, as history testifies, have chosen Ali to support and
defend against his enemies, fighting with him, concluding peace whenever
he concluded it, learning all what they knew from him, "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`a," contrariwise, were never his supporters, followers, or
helpers. Rather, they fought him and desired to put an end to him.
Having killed him, they pursued his sons in order to kill, jail, or
expel them. They oppose him in most ahkam (religious rulings) by
following those who held views different from his, and who followed
their own ijtihad with regard to Allah's commandments, changing them
according to their wishes and to serve their own interests.

How can we nowadays help wondering about those who claim to adhere to
the Prophet's Sunnah while they testify against themselves that they,
indeed, abandoned the Prophet's Sunnah because it became the
identification mark of the Shi\`as?![^67] Is this not strange?!

How can we help wondering about those who claim to be "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`a" (people who follow the path of the Prophet [P] and who
follow the consensus) while there are many Maliki, Hanafi, Shafi\`i, and
Hanbali groups, each opposing the other with regard to the jurisdic
injunctions, claiming that such differences are mercy to them? Is it
merc to change Allah's religion to fit certain people's wishes, views,
and desires...?!

Yes, they are various groups who disagreed among themselves in
interpreting the commandments of Allah and His Messenger, yet they are
united in endorsing the injustice that took place at the saqeefa of Banu
Sa\`ida, and in abandoning and isolating the Purified Progeny of the
Prophet.

How can we help wondering about those who boast of being "Ahl
al-Sunnah" while they have abandoned the order of the Messenger of Allah
to uphold the Two Weighty Things: the Book of Allah and his Progeny,
despite their documentation of this particular tradition and their
admission of its authenticity?! They, indeed, upheld neither the Holy
Qur'an nor the Progeny because by forsaking the Purified Progeny, they
forsook the Holy Qur'an, too, since the sacred tradition indicates that
the Holy Qur'an and the Progeny shall never part from one another, as
the Messenger of Allah clearly stated: "And the most Benevolent and
Knowing has informed me that they (the Holy Qur'an and the Progeny)
shall never part till they join me at the Pool."?![^68]

How can we help wondering about people who claim to be the custodians
of the Sunnah while their conduct, in fact, is contrary to what their
own books classify as "authentic" Sunnah of the Prophet, of what he had
done, ordered, or prohibited?[^69]

But if we do believe in this tradition and in its authenticity, that
is, the hadith saying, "I have left among you the Book of Allah and my
Sunnah: so long as you uphold them (both), you shall never stray after
me at all," as some "Ahl al-Sunnah" like to word it nowadays, our
amazement will be even greater, and the scandal will be even more
obvious:

It is so due to the fact that their own dignitaries and imams are the
ones who burnt the Sunnah which the Messenger of Allah had left behind
for them, prohibiting everyone from copying it or transporting its
texts, as we have already indicated above. The said statement by Umar
ibn al-Khattab is included in all Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah,"
including al-Bukhari and Muslim. [On his death bed] the Prophet said, "I
have left among you the Book of Allah and my Sunnah," whereupon Umar
said to him, "The Book of Allah suffices us, and we have no need for
your Sunnah." If Umar said so in the presence of the Prophet, Abu Bakr
emphatically acted upon the view of his friend. And when he became
caliph, Abu Bakr said, "Do not narrate any hadith of the Messenger of
Allah, for whoever asks you, say to him, \`Between us and you is the
Book of Allah, so act upon what it permits and abstain from what it
prohibits.'"[^70]

How can we help wondering about people who abandoned the Sunnah of
their Prophet and left it behind their backs, substituting it with
innovations for which Allah never sent any proof, then they call
themselves and their followers "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"?!

But our amazement disappears when we come to know that Abu Bakr, Umar
and Uthman never heard such a label at all; Abu Bakr said once, "If you
require me to implement the Sunnah of your Prophet, I cannot withstand
it."[^71] How is it possible that Abu Bakr could not withstand the Sunnah
of the Prophet?! Was the Prophet's Sunnah something impossible so Abu
Bakr could not withstand it?! And how can "Ahl al-Sunnah" claim that
they uphold it if their first imam and the founder of their sect could
not withstand it?!

Allah has said in its regard the following verses:

You surely have in the Messenger of Allah a good example. (Holy Qur'an,
33:21)

Allah never places a burden on a soul more than what it can bear. (Holy
Qur'an, 65:7)

He has not laid down upon you any hardship in religion." (Holy Qur'an,
22:78)

Did Abu Bakr and his friend Umar think that the Messenger of Allah
invented a creed other than what Allah had revealed, so he ordered the
Muslims to do what they could not, thus over-burdening them? Far from
him is such an allegation, for he used to quite often say, "Disseminate
glad tidings; make things easy, and do not make them hard. Allah has
granted you an ease, so do not make things hard for yourselves." But Abu
Bakr's admission that he could not tolerate the Prophet's Sunnah
underlines our conclusion that he invented an innovation which he could
"withstand" or "tolerate" according to his own wishes, one which agreed
with the policies of the state he headed.

As for Mu\`awiyah, he always opposed the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah and
challenged them. For example, while the Prophet said, "Ali is of me and
I am of Ali; whoever curses Ali cruses me, and whoever curses me curses
Allah,"[^72] you find Mu\`awiyah going to extremes in cursing and
condemning Ali. He was not satisfied with doing all of that, so he
ordered all his governors and officials to curse and condemn him, and he
dismissed from office then killed all those who refused. It was this
Mu\`awiyah who called himself and his followers "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" in order to distinguish themselves from those who were referred
to as the Shi\`as, claiming thus to be the ones on the right track.

Some historians indicate that the year in which Mu\`awiyah took control
of the Islamic caliphate, after having concluded a peace treaty with
Imam al-Hasan ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib, was called \`aam al-jama\`ah, the
year of the Jama\`ah. Amazement is dispelled when we understand that the
word "Sunnah" according to the thinking of Mu\`awiyah and his jama\`ah,
his group, was none other than the custom of cursing Ali ibn Abu Talib
from the Muslims' pulpits during Fridays and Eid days. If such "Sunnah"
was an invention of Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan, we plead to the most
Glorified One to permit us to die following the bid\`a, innovation, of
Rafidism founded by Ali ibn Abu Talib and Ahl al-Bayt!

Do not be surprised, dear reader, when you see how those who were
expert in innovations and misguidnce call themselves "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" while the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt are charged with
innovations.

Here is the great mentor Ibn Khaldun, one of the most famous scholars
of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," insolently says, after having counted
the sects of the majority, "And Ahl al-Bayt became the exception to the
rule through sects which they invented and fiqh which is totally their
own, one which they built on their sect, a sect which criticizes a
number of the sahaba."[^73]

[^65] Abul-Qasim Mahmud ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Khawarizmi
al-Zamakhshari was a senior mentor and instructor in exegesis, hadith,
Arabic grammar, and logic. He was born on a Wednesday in the month of
Rajab, 367 A.H./978 A.D. in the village of Zamakhshar in the area of
Khawarizm. He died in Jurjan on the eve of Arafat, Thul Hijjah 9, 538
A.H./June 20, 1144 A.D. He was a Mu\`tazilite who followed the Hanafi
sect. He wrote more than a hundred excellent books some of which are
still in manuscript form waiting to be published. He was characterized
by his love for justice and equity and renunciation of any type of
fanaticism. Though Hanfani in his beliefs, he wrote an excellent book in
which he compiled numerous statements made by Imam al-Shafi\`i titled
Shafi al-\`Ay (healer of mental blocks). May Allah have mercy on the
soul of this great man and on the souls of all great men, Allahomma
Aameen. \_\_ Tr.

[^66] This is recorded on p. 440 of Yanabee\` al-Mawaddah by the Hanafi
author al-Qandoozi. It is also recorded by al-Hamawayni [another Sunni
scholar] who quotes Mujahid quoting Ibn Abbas.

[^67] For more details on this matter, refer to pp. 159-160 of my book
With the Truthful where you will come to know that Ibn Taymiyya calls
for abandoning the Prophet's Sunnah because it became the banner of the
Shi\`as. Yet they call him mujaddid al-Sunnah, the one who revived the
Sunnah!

[^68] Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 189, and also al-Hakim,
Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 148. Al-Hakim comments thus: "This is an authentic
tradition which both Shaykhs [al-Bukhari and Muslim] had verified and
did not exclude (from their own books). Al-Dhahabi, too, has classified
it as authentic in his book Al-Talkhees, admitting its authenticity,
relying in doing so on both Shaykhs' endorsement."

[^69] In his Sahih, al-Bukhari states that the Prophet prohibited
congregatinal taraweeh prayers during the month of Ramadan, saying,
"Offer prayers, O people, at your own homes, for the best prayers one
can offer are the ones which he offers at home with the exception of
obligatory prayers." But "Ahl al-Sunnah" ignored the Prophet's
prohibition and followed the innovation started by Umar ibn
al-Khattab.

[^70] Al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, Vol. 1, p. 3.
[^71] Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 1, p. 4, and also on p. 126,
Vol. 3, of Kanz al-Ummal.
[^72] Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 121; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
Vol. 6, p. 323, Vol. 6; and al-Nasa'i, Khasais, p. 17.
[^73] This is stated on p. 494, in the part dealing with the science of
fiqh and the injunctions upon which they are based, of Ibn Khaldun's
Muqaddimah (Introduction).

