Chapter 19 :hadith Al-thaqalayn According To "ahl Al-sunnah"
============================================================

As we have indicated above, the tradition we quoted in the previous
chapter is in the wording of the scholars of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
who admitted its authenticity in more than twenty of their famous
classic reference books. Since they have admitted the authenticity of
this tradition, they, in fact, have testified against their own selves
that they, by implication, are misguided because they did not uphold the
Pure \`Itrat, embracing shaky sects for which Allah never revealed any
proof, nor is there any reference to them anywhere in the Prophet's
Sunnah.

What is strange in as far as the scholars of "Ahl al-Sunnah" these days
are concerned, after the extinction and annihilation of Banu Umayyah,
when means of direct communications are abundant, when scientific
research methods are available, why do they not repent and return to
Allah when they can, so that they may be included among those to whom
the Almighty refers when He says, "And most surely I am most Forgiving
to whoever repents and believes and does good then continues to follow
the right guidance" (Holy Qur'an, 20:82)? If people during past
generations, during the time of caliphate, were forced by intimidation
and oppression to follow their rulers, what is their excuse now
especially since the ruler of any country is not concerned about
anything related to the religion so long as his throne is secure and he
gives "democracy" and "human rights," which include the freedom of
thought and creed, his lip-service?

There are few among the scholars of "Ahl al-Sunnah" who voice their
objection to the said tradition of Two Weighty Things, wording it
differently to read, "I have left among you the Book of Allah and my
Sunnah."[^92] The least we can say about them is that they are further
from scholarly criteria and from the bases upon which research and
knowledge stand, and they are distant from any ability to prove their
claim by sound argument and evidence.

[^92] We have already stated, while discussing hadith, that the
tradition worded "... the Book of Allah and my Sunnah" is transmitted
without any bases, and it was not included in such wording by any of the
Sahih books. Contrariwise, the same tradition worded "... the Book of
Allah and my \`Itrat" is an authentic tradition consecutively
transmitted and which all authors of Sahih books, be they Sunnis or
Shi\`as, record.

