Chapter 22 :the Sources of Shari`a According To "ahl Al-sunnah Wal Jama`ah"
===========================================================================

If we trace the sources of the legislative system (Shari\`a) of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," we will find them to be beyond the limits of
the Book of Allah and the Sunnah which Allah and His Messenger had
outlined. These sources, according to them, in addition to the Book of
Allah and the Sunnah, are: the "Sunnah" of the "righteous caliphs," the
"Sunnah" of the sahaba, the "Sunnah" of the tabi\`in (the scholars who
learned from the sahaba), the "Sunnah" of the rulers which they call
sawafi al-umara (the "Sunnah" of the elite rulers), then comes qiyas,
analogy, then istihsan (highly recommending something), then ijma\`
(consensus), and finally sadd bab al-tharai\`, closing the door of
pretexts.

As you can see, they are ten all in all according to them, all playing
havoc with Allah's creed. And so that we may not say anything without a
proof, or speak arbitrarily, or so that some people may not accuse us of
exaggerating, we have to provide proofs from their own statements and
books so that the kind reader will clearly see everything.

We do not argue with "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" about the first two
references, namely the Book of Allah and the Sunnah, for this is
something which accepts no argument; rather, it is what has to be
followed as dictated by narration, reason, and consensus, and it
conforms with these verses: "Whatever the Messenger gives you, take it,
and whatever he prohibit you from, abstain therefrom" (Holy Qur'an,
59:7), "Obey Allah and obey the Messenger" (Holy Qur'an, 5:92), and
"When Allah and His Messenger decree..." (Holy Qur'an, 33:36), and many
other such clear verses. They all mandate that rulings should conform
ONLY to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger. But we argue
with them about the other sources which they added.

**1. The "Sunnah" of the "Righteous Caliphs"**

They have sought (in order to justify this addition) the argument one
hadith contains; it says, "Uphold my Sunnah and the Sunnah of the guided
and wise caliphs; uphold it and stubbornly cling thereto."[^107]

In my book Ma\`al Sadiqeen (with the truthful), I proved that these
guided caliphs referred to in this tradition are the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, and I would like to add the following for the benefit of those
who did not have a chance to read that book:

Al-Bukhari and Muslim, as well as all scholars who came after them,
have recorded saying that the Messenger of Allah confined his successors
to twelve, saying, "The caliphs after me shall be twelve: all of them
are to be from Quraysh." This tradition proves that they are meant to be
the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt, peace be upon them, not the "caliphs," i.e.
rulers, who usurped the caliphate.

One may say, "Whether those implied is meant (by this tradition) are
the twelve Imams from Ahl al-Bayt, as the Shi\`as claim, or the four
righteous caliphs as "Ahl al-Sunnah" claim, the sources of the
legislative system remain three: the Qur'an, the [Prophet's] Sunnah, and
the caliphs' Sunnah." This statement is accurate only according to "Ahl
al-Sunnah;" it is inaccurate according to the views of the Shi\`as
because the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt, as we have already stated, never
derived any ruling according to their own views or opinions; rather,
everything they said was the Sunnah of their grandfather the Messenger
of Allah from whom they learned it and kept it in order to refer to it
whenever they needed.

As for "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," their books are full of rulings
based on the "Sunnah" of Abu Bakr and Umar which they treated as a
source of their legislative system, even when in contradiction with the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet.

What increases our conviction that Abu Bakr and Umar were not implied
in this hadith is the fact that Ali refused to rule according to their
"Sunnah" when such ruling was presented to him by the sahaba as a
prerequisite. Had the Messenger of Allah meant by these guided caliphs
Abu Bakr and Umar, it would not have been appropriate for Ali to reject
their "Sunnah;" therefore, this proves that this hadith excludes Abu
Bakr and Umar from such guided or "righteous" caliphs.

But "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" have always considered by the
"righteous caliphs" to be Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman, and nobody else,
because Ali was not counted by them among such caliphs. His name was
added to the list at a later time as we have pointed out, and also
because he used to be cursed from the pulpits; so, how could they follow
his Sunnah?!

If we read what is narrated by Jalalud-Din al-Suyuti in his book Tarikh
al-Khulafa, we will see all this to be the truth. Quoting the caliph's
chamberlain, al-Suyuti says, "I saw Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz once delivering
a sermon in which he said, \`What the Messenger of Allah and both his
companions [Abu Bakr and Umar] brought is the religion which we follow
and to which we refer, and we defer anything besides that."[^108]

The truth of the matter is that most companions as well as Umayyad and
Abbaside rulers were of the view that what Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman
had regulated was a creed from which they could derive their beliefs and
to which they would always refer. Since all these three caliphs
deliberately obstructed the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah, as we have
come to know from the previous chapters, what remain of the Sunnah are
injunctions they have regulated in addition to whatever the said rulers
decreed.

**2. The "Sunnah" of the Sahaba En Masse**

We find quite a few proofs and testimonials regarding "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`ah" following the "Sunnah" of the general masses of the sahaba
without any exception.

They derive their argument from a false tradition with which we dealt
in detail in our book Ma\`a al-Sadiqin. That "tradition" states: "My
sahaba are like the stars: whoever you follow, you shall be guided."
This "tradition" is used by Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah to prove that it
is alright to accept the view of any companion of the Prophet.[^109] This
fact is also admitted by Shaykh Abu Zuhrah who says, "We have found all
of them (meaning Sunni jurists) to be of the view that a companion's
verdict is always accepted." He adds the following in another place:

Deriving arguments from what the companions had said, or from the
verdicts which they had themselves issued, is the general trend of the
mass of jurists, but the Shi\`as[^110] hold a contrary view. Ibn Abu
al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, however, has supported the view of the general
public by citing about forty-six texts, all being strong arguments...

We say to Shaykh Abu Zuhrah: How can these texts which contradict the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger be labelled as "strong"?!
In fact, all the texts produced by Ibn al-Qayyim are as weak as spider's
cobweb, and you yourself, Shaykh, undermined them when you said:

But we found al-Shawkani saying, "In truth, what a companion says
cannot be used as a proof because Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He,
did not send this nation anyone besides Prophet Muhammad, and we have
only one single Prophet, and the companions and all those who came after
them are equally obligated to follow his Shari\`a in as far as the Book
of Allah and the Sunnah are concerned. Anyone who argues that a
religious ruling can be derived from any source other than these two,
is, in fact, making a claim regarding the religion of Allah which he
cannot prove, establishing a "Shari\`a" which Allah never
enjoined.[^111]

So salutations to al-Shawkani who said the truth and was not influenced
by the sect. His statement, then, is in full agreement with the stand
taken by the Imams of guidance from the pure Progeny of the Prophet. May
Allah be pleased with him, and may He please him if his actions agreed
with his statements.

**3. The "Sunnah" of the Tabi\`in or "Ulema al-Athar"**

Likewise, we find "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" deriving their arguments
from the views expressed by the tabi\`in whom they call "ulema
al-athar," scholars who followed in the footsteps of the sahaba, such as
al-Awza\`i, Sufyan al-Thawri, Hasan al-Basri, Ibn Ayeenah, and many
others. And they all agree about deriving rulings from and following the
ijtihad of the Imams of the four sects despite the latter being among
those who followed the tabi\`in.

This is so despite the fact that the companions themselves admit having
committed quite a few errors, and that they do not do according to what
they know. For example, here is Abu Bakr giving the following answer
upon being asked a question, "I shall give you my answer; if I am right,
it is by the Grace of Allah, but if I err, it is either my fault or that
of Satan." Umar once said to his fellows, "I may enjoin you to do
something which may not be good for you, and I may prohibit you from
doing the things that may be good for you."[^112]

If such is the extent of their knowledge, and since they follow only
conjecture while "... surely conjecture will not avail anything against
the truth; surely Allah is cognizant of what they do" (Holy Qur'an,
10:36), how can any Muslim who knows what Islam is all about consider
their actions and statements a "Sunnah" to be followed and a source of
Shari\`a? After having quoted their own statements, let me ask you the
following: Does the "tradition" saying "My sahaba are like the stars:
whoever you follow, you shall be guided" still hold any water?!

If such is the case of the sahaba who had attended meetings where the
Prophet was present, and who learned from him, make such statements,
what is the status quo of those who came after them, who learned from
them, and who actively participated in the dissension?

If the Imams who invented the four sects express their own personal
views with regard to Allah's creed, declaring and admitting that there
is always a possibility of error in what they rule, while one of them
says, "This is what I think to be correct, yet someone else's view may
actually be correct," why did they require the Muslims to emulate
them?!

**4. The "Sunnah" of the Rulers**

This is referred to by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" as "sawafi
al-umaraa," the "Sunnah" of the elite among the rulers. They rely in
their argument on the Qur'anic verse saying, "Obey Allah and obey the
Messenger and those in authority from you" (Holy Qur'an, 4:59).[^113]
"Those in authority," according to them, are the rulers even if they
rule by sheer brutal force, even if they are oppressors. They think that
their rulers were brought to authority by Allah in order to fare with
the lives of His servants as they pleased; so, obedience to them is
obligatory, and so is following their "Sunnah."

Ibn Hazm al-Zahiri responded to "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" with a
strong rebuttal in which he said, "Based on what you say, rulers have
the right to discard any parts of the Shari\`a which Allah and His
Messenger enjoined, and they also have the right to add to it, for there
is no difference between adding or deleting therefrom. All this is
apostasy committed by anyone who permits it without any
contention."[^114]

Al-Dhahabi responded to Ibn Hazm by saying, "This is a faulty statement
and a terrible mistake, for the nation, with the exception of Dawood ibn
Ali and those who followed him, is of the consensus that the rulers have
the right to resort to their own views, and to the principle of ijtihad
only in the absence of a revealed text. They say that they are not
permitted to express their views or to resort to ijtihad, when they are
aware of the existence of a revealed text. This shows that they have the
right to add to the Shari\`a an addition which the Shari\`a itself
commends while they are not permitted to discard whatever they desire of
its injunctions."

We say to al-Dhahabi: How can you talk about the nation's "consensus"
while excluding Dawood ibn Ali and whoever follows him? And why don't
you identify those who follow him? And why did you not also exclude the
Shi\`as and the Imams from Ahl al-Bayt ? Do you regard the latter as
being outside the folds of the Islamic nation?! Or is your habit of
flattering the rulers lets you permit them to add to the Shari\`a so
that they may add more to the amounts of money they pay you, and to
enhance your fame?! And did the rulers who ruled the Muslims in the name
of Islam know the Qur'anic texts and the Prophet's ahadith well enough
so that they may not go beyond them? If both caliphs, namely Abu Bakr
and Umar, deliberately contradicted the Qur'anic texts and the hadith,
as proven above, how can anyone who succeeded them obligate himself to
follow such texts which were altered, adulterated, bypassed, and
regarded as a thing of the past?

When the jurists from "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" issue verdicts
permitting the rulers to express whatever views they like about Allah's
creed, it is not strange to find al-Dhahabi following their example. In
Tabaqat al-Fuqaha, Sa\`id ibn Jubayr is quoted saying, "I asked Abdullah
ibn Umar about supplicating loudly; he said, \`Do you want to say that
Ibn Umar says that Ibn Umar says such-and-such [i.e. that he quotes
himself]?!' I said, \`Yes, and we accept what you say and will be
satisfied with it.' Ibn Umar then said, \`This is what the rulers say
[that it is alright to raise the voice while supplicating]; rather,
Allah and His Messenger and those who quote them say so.'"

Sa\`id ibn Jubayr has said, "Raja ibn Haywah used to be regarded as the
most knowledgeable faqih in Syria, but if you provoke him, you will find
him Syrian in his views quoting Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan saying
such-and-such."[^115]

Also in Ibn Sa\`d's Tabaqat, al-Musayyab ibn Rafi\` is quoted saying,
"Whenever something related to jurisdiction, which was not supported
either by the Book of Allah or the Sunnah, is mentioned, it will be
labelled sawafi al-umara (what elite rulers have determined), so it will
be discussed by the scholars, and whatever they agree about by way of
consensus is regarded as accurate."[^116]

All we can say is to quote the following verse:

Had the truth followed their own desires, surely the heavens and the
earth and all those therein would have perished. Nay! We have brought
them the Reminder (Qur'an), but from their Reminder do they turn aside.
(Holy Qur'an, 23:71) 5. The Rest of Sources of Legislation According to
"Ahl al-Sunnah"

Among these we would like to mention qiyas (analogy), istihsan (deeming
something as good or appealing), istishab (emulating or legislating
something said or done by a sahabi), and the closing of the door of
pretexts; as for ijma\` (consensus), it is very famous among them and
very well known.

Abu Hanifah in particular gained a reputation for following analogy and
rejecting ahadith. Malik gained a reputation for referring to what the
people of Medina did, and for closing the door of pretexts. Imam
al-Shafi\`i gained a reputation for referring to the verdicts issued by
the companions whom he categorizes into different levels and degrees,
putting on top of their list the ten sahabis who were given (by the
Prophet) the glad tidings of going to Paradise, followed by the early
immigrants (Muhajirun), then by the supporters (Ansar), then by those
who accepted Islam after the conquest of Mecca, namely the free men
among them.[^117] Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal gained a reputation for rejecting
ijtihad and distancing himself from issuing verdicts (fatwas) and
accepting any companion whosoever he might have been.

Al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi has narrated about him saying that a man once
asked him about something whether it is permitted or prohibited. Ahmad
said to him, "Ask, may Allah grant you good health, someone else." The
man said, "But I wish to know your own view, O Father of Abdullah!"
Ahmad said, "Ask, may Allah grant you good health, someone else. Ask Abu
Thawr."[^118] Al-Maroozi quoted him saying, "As for hadith, we have
relieved ourselves from its headache. As for queries, I have made up my
mind not to answer anyone who asks me about anything."[^119]

There is no doubt that Ahmad ibn Hanbal is the one who inspired the
idea that all sahaba, barring none, are just; hence, his sect greatly
influenced "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah." Al-Khateeb, for example, has
mentioned in Vol. 2 of his book Tarikh Baghdad, relying on the authority
of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Rahman, the money changer, saying, "I said to
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, \`If the companions of the Messenger of Allah disputed
among themselves about a particular issue, should we look into what each
one of them says so that we may know which view is right and follow it?'
He said to me, \`No companion of the Prophet should be preferred over
another.' I said, \`Then what is the solution?' He said, \`You may
follow whoever among them you like.'"

We say: Is it permissible to follow someone who cannot distinguish
truth from falsehood? It is very strange to see Ahmad, who avoids
issuing verdicts, issuing a verdict permitting the following of whoever
companion you like and without even looking into their statements to
know the truth!

Having thus briefly surveyed the sources of Islamic legislative system
(Shari\`a) according to both the Shi\`as and "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`ah," it becomes quite clear for us without any confusion that the
Shi\`as are the ones who truly uphold the Sunnah of the Prophet and who
do not accept any alternative for it, so much so that the Prophet's
Sunnah became their motto according to the testimony of their opponents.
As for "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," they follow the "Sunnah" of any
companion or tabi\`i (a follower of a companion who was contemporary to
the Prophet) and any ruler. Their books and statements testify against
them, and they suffice for a testimony, and we will, Insha-Allah,
discuss in a following chapter their deeds so that you may come to know
that such deeds have nothing to do with the Sunnah of the Prophet.

I would like to leave the reader to himself to deduct the conclusion as
to who the followers of the Sunnah really are, and who the innovators
are.

[^107] This tradition is recorded by al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah, al-Bayhaqi,
and Ahmad ibn Hanbal.

[^108] Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p. 160.

[^109] Ibid.

[^110] This is another proof provided by Shaykh Abu Zuhrah testifying to
the fact which we have already stated: Shi\`as do not accept to add to
the Shari\`a to include anything besides what the Glorious Book of Allah
and the Prophet's Sunnah contain.

[^111] This is stated on p. 102 of Shaykh Abu Zuhrah's book.

[^112] Tarikh Baghdad. Vol. 14, p. 81. We say to these folks: If such is
the extent of your knowledge, then why did you put yourselves ahead of
the person who has with him the knowledge of the early generations and
that of the last ones, depriving the nation of his guidance and light
and leaving it groping in dissension, ignorance, and misguidance?!

[^113] In our book Ma\`a al-Sadiqin, we proved, through convincing
arguments, that "those in authority from among you" are the Imams of
guidance from among the pure Progeny and not meant to be the rulers who
usurp power by force. It is impossible that Allah, Glory to Him, orders
us to obey the oppressors, the promiscuous, or the apostates.

[^114] This is stated on p. 17 of Ibn Hazm's summary of Ibtal al-Qiyas
(falsification of analogy).

[^115] Tabaqat al-Fuqaha, in the biography of Sa\`id ibn Jubayr.

[^116] See Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 6, p. 179.

[^117] Imam al-Shafi\`i, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 1, p. 443.

[^118] Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. 2, p. 66.

[^119] This is recorded on p. 57 of Manaqib Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal.


