Chapter 26 :the Righteous Caliphs According To the Shi`as
=========================================================

These are the Twelve Imams from the pure progeny of the Prophet
arranged chronologically as follows:

\* The first is the Commander of the Faithful and the Imam of the
pious, the leader of the elite, the master of Muslims and the religion's
drone, Allah's victorious lion, Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him,
the gate of knowledge who challenged the minds, dazzled the hearts, and
enlightened the intellect, the man without whom the Messenger of Allah
could not have been able to set the foundations of the creed.

\* Second is Imam Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn Ali, peace be upon him,
Master of the Youths of Paradise, the fragrant flower of the Prophet in
this nation, the ascetic worshipper of Allah, the faithful adviser.

\* Third is Imam Abu Abdullah al-Husayn ibn Ali, peace be upon him, the
Master of the Youths of Paradise and the fragrant flower of the Prophet
in this nation, the master of martyrs and the one who was slaughtered on
Karbala and who sacrificed his all seeking to reform the nation of his
grandfather.

\* Fourth is Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn Zaynul-Abidin, peace be upon him,
the master of all those who prostrated to their Lord.

\* Fifth is Imam Muhammad ibn Ali al-Baqir, peace be upon him, who
penetrated the knowledge of the early generations and the last.

\* Sixth is Imam Ja\`far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, the
like of whom no eyes had ever seen nor anyone had ever heard nor any
mind had ever realized with regard to the knowledge of fiqh; none was
more learned, or better in deeds, than him.

\* Seventh is Imam Musa ibn Ja\`far al-Kazim, peace be upon him, the
descendant of the prophet, the substance of knowledge.

\* Eighth is Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Rida, peace be upon him, who was
granted wisdom even as a child.

\* Ninth is Imam Muhammad ibn Ali al-Jawad, peace be upon him, the Imam
of generosity and giving, the Imam of excellent conduct.

\* Tenth is Imam Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi, peace be upon him, the one
who received Allah's favors, who was the lighthouse of guidance.

\* Eleventh is Imam al-Hasan ibn Ali al-Askari, peace be upon him, the
Imam of asceticism and piety.

\* Twelfth is Imam Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdi, peace be upon him,
who will fill the world with justice and equity after being filled with
inequity and oppression, and the son of Maryam, peace be upon him, will
pray behind him, and Allah will complete through him His Light, and
through him will the believers be very pleased.

These are the Imams of the Shi\`as, all twelve of them; so, if one says
"Imamite Shi\`as" or "Ithna-Asheri Shi\`as" or "Ja\`fari Shi\`as," it is
all the same, and they will be the ones identified as such. None among
all Islamic groups accepted their Imamate besides the Shi\`as.

If we study the Qur'anic verses revealed in their honor and which
explain their merits, lofty status, goodness of substance, purity of the
soul, and true greatness, we will come across verses such as the one
enjoining us to be good to the Prophet's kin, or the one referring to
Allah purifying them, or the verse of Mubahala (a challenge to make
ibtihal\_\_supplication\_\_invoking the curse of Allah on the liars), or
the verse identifying them as the ones obedient to their Lord, or the
verse of blessing and praising them..., etc.

If we study the sacred hadith, we will find it enumerating their merits
and elevating their status above all the rest among the nation, pointing
out to their superiority of knowledge and infallibility. If we do all of
that, we will most surely surrender to their Imamate and regard them as
the nation's security against misguidance and its only means to
guidance. We will also find it quite clear that the Shi\`as are the
winners because they upheld the strong rope of Allah which is: loyalty
to these Imams and upheld the niche which cannot be untied, which is
loving them. They will have then boarded the ark of salvation. They
achieved security against drowning, and safety from perdition.

It is for these reasons that we decide, being fully convinced and
aware, that Imamite Shi\`as are the true followers of the Sunnah of
Muhammad.

Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed your veil,
so your sight today is sharp indeed. (Holy Qur'an, 50:22) Surely Allah,
the Great, has said the truth.

