Chapter 28 :the Prophet Rejects the Legislation of "ahl Al-sunnah Wal Jama`ah"
==============================================================================

We have already come to know that the Shi\`as, following in the
footsteps of the Imams among Ahl al-Bayt, peace be upon them, never
followed their own views nor analogy, nor did they prohibit anyone from
doing so. This is due to the fact that the Prophet's statements had the
final word and the conclusive verdict in as far as they are concerned;
they have inherited such written statements sons from fathers, and we
have already referred to al-saheefa al-jami\`a, the length of which is
seventy yards, and which contains all what Muslims need till the Hour.

We have also come to know that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" felt forced
to follow their own views as well as the principle of qiyas (analogy)
due to the absence of the Prophet's texts with them and their need for
the same simply because their prominent men and masters rejected them,
burned them, and prohibited anyone from recording them.

The supporters of ijtihad resorted to the suggestion that they needed
to coin hadith in the wording of the Messenger of Allah in order to
support their sect and make wrong look right. They, hence, claimed that
the Messenger of Allah dispatched Ma\`ath ibn Jabal to Yemen and asked
him, "What if you do not find it [i.e. the answer to a problem] in the
Book of Allah?" He said, "Then I will judge according to the Sunnah of
the Messenger of Allah." He then asked him, "What if you do not find it
in the Sunnah of His Messenger?" Ma\`ath ibn Jabal, they claim, said,
"If I do not find it, I will then follow my own ijtihad." The Prophet,
the story goes on, then said, "All Praise is due to Allah Who has
enabled the messenger of the Messenger of Allah to please Allah and His
Messenger."

This "tradition" is false, and it can never be attributed to the
Messenger of Allah, for how can the Prophet say to Ma\`ath, "What if you
do not find it in the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger?"
while Allah Himself says the following to His Messenger, "And We
revealed unto you the Book explaining everything" (Holy Qur'an, 16:89),
and also, "We have not neglected anything in the Book" (Holy Qur'an,
6:38), and also, "Whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from
whatever he forbids you, stay away therefrom" (Holy Qur'an, 59:7)?


