Chapter 29 :a Necessary Post Script
===================================

When we discuss "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" in the coming chapters, we
mean by them our contemporaries. We have indicated in several previous
chapters that these are innocent people who do not have a hand in what
their predecessors had committed, or any sin or transgression. We have
already indicated that they are the victims of plots and the
misrepresentation of history which the Umayyads and Abbasides and their
henchmen had coined in order to obliterate the Prophet's Sunnah and
bring things to the way they used to be during the pre-Islamic period.

We used to be among them,[^125] following in their footsteps, being
guided by them, then Allah blessed us and guided us to the Ark of
Salvation. We plead to Him, the most Glorified, to likewise guide all
the Muslim nation so that nothing remains except the truth.

One may ask the following: "Thus criticizing and undermining the
integrity of the sahaba hurts the feelings of the majority of Muslims
who believe that they were all just and equitable; they regard them the
best of all people after the Prophet." We say: Muslims are required to
believe in Allah and His Messenger and to carry out their Will and abide
by the limits which they outlined. The salvation of the Muslims,
including the sahaba, depends on it, for the destiny of whoever strays
from this line will be hell even if he were an uncle or a son of the
Prophet. Our criticism of some companions is dictated by the historical
events with which they interacted, by the dissension among them, and by
their causing the nation to be divided upon itself, thus afflicting it
with the greatest of calamities.

[^125] The author used to follow the Hanbali sect before embracing the
Shi\`a creed. \_\_ Tr.

