Chapter 32 :allegations Refuted By Facts
========================================

In this chapter, we would like to make clear for every wise person who
is free from bias, who abandons fanaticism, and who removes the curtain
from both his vision and insight in order to pursue the right guidance
and the truth. We would like to tell him that all pillars of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," as well as their Imams, have acted against the
clear Sunnah of the Prophet, leaving it behind their backs, deliberately
and willingly forsaking it.

No Muslim should be deceived by what he hears here or there of false
praise based on neither a clear evidence nor a good argument. While
unveiling these facts, we do not charge them with anything, nor do we
add anything to what they themselves have stated in their Sahih, Musnad,
and Tarikh books. We have already indicated some of these facts in our
previous books, and we graciously passed by them, yet there is no harm
in mentioning them here in detail so that the sun of guidance may shine,
the clouds of misguidance may be dispelled, and the light may replace
the darkness.

In the following chapter, we will discuss the Imams and the pillars
relied upon by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," the ones whom the latter
regard as the zenith of scholarship and jurisprudence. They prefer them
over the pure Imams from the offspring of the Prophet, deliberately
ignoring a number of certain sahaba who were known to the elite as well
as to the commoners\_\_be they scholars or illiterate\_\_as being
immoral, remote from the spirit and ethics of Islam. Among the latter
are: Mu\`awiyah and his son Yazid[^142], Ibn al-As, Ibn Marwan, Ibn
Shu\`bah, and their likes. Despite all of this, we do not waste our time
by writing about these men to unveil their faults; some unbiased men
among the historians and thinkers have already spared us this task.

Instead, we will discuss in this research those Imams who gained fame
as being righteous, fair, ascetic, and God-fearing; in short, those
regarded by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" as the pillars, so that we may
closely become familiar with their distortion of the Sunnah of the
Prophet. They invented in this nation innovations which caused
dissension and misguidance, thus causing the collapse of the lofty
structure erected by the Messenger of Allah who spent his entire life
struggling to safeguard and firm its foundations.

I have chosen twelve of the pillars of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who
played a very significant role in influencing the events, in changing
the characteristics of the creed, and in dividing and fragmenting the
nation.

[^142] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol. 5, p. 47, where Abdullah,
who was bathed by the angels, is quoted saying, "By Allah! We did not
disobey Yazid till we feared lest we should be hurled with stones from
the skies, (for he is) a man who sleeps with his mothers, daughters, and
sisters, who drinks wine and forsakes the prayers. By Allah! Had I had
none to assist me, I would have done my best to fight him, seeking
nearness to Allah." Yes; such is Yazid, the man well known for his wines
and sins, the man who killed the fragrant flower of the Messenger of
Allah as he was accompanied by all the Prophet's Progeny, permitting his
soldiers to violate the sanctity of the Medina of the Prophet . Despite
all of this, you can still find an "Islamic" state writing a book titled
Facts about Ameer al-Momineen Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah!

