Chapter 33 :imams and Pillars of "ahl Al-sunnah Wal Jama`a"
===========================================================

These are:

1. Abu Bakr ibn Abu Quhafa, the first caliph
2. Umar ibn al-Khattab, the second caliph
3. Uthman ibn Affan, the third caliph
4. Talhah ibn Ubaydullah
5. al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam
6. Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas
7. Abdul-Rahman ibn Awf
8. Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr, Mother of the Faithful
9. Khalid ibn al-Waleed
10. Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi
11. Abdullah ibn Umar
12. Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr

These are twelve personalities whom I have selected from many pillars
of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" due to the fact that they are quite often
referred to and praised, or to the abundance of their narrations and the
proliferation of their knowledge, as they claim.

We will briefly discuss each one of them and highlight how they
violated the Prophet's Sunnah either deliberately or due to ignorance,
so that it will become evident to the researcher that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" claim what is not theirs, following their own inclinations,
alleging that they are right whereas all others are wrong.

**1. Abu Bakr "al-Siddeeq" ibn Abu Quhafa**

In some of our previously published researches, we proved how he
collected five hundred ahadith of the Prophet, burnt them, then
delivered a sermon in which he said, "Do not quote any hadith of the
Messenger of Allah; whoever asks you, say: \`Between us and you is the
Book of Allah; so, act upon what it permits and stay away from what it
prohibits.'" We also indicated that he violated the Sunnah of the
Prophet in recording the Book, supporting Umar in his statement in which
he said, "The Messenger of Allah is hallucinating, and the Book of Allah
suffices us."

He also discarded all the ahadith mandating the caliphate of Ali, thus
usurping the caliphate for himself.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet with regard to the
appointment of Usamah as his [military] leader, refusing to participate
in his campaign.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by hurting the feelings of
the Prophet's daughter al-Zahra, earning her anger.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by fighting and killing the
Muslims who refused to pay him their zakat.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet by using burning to death as
a form of cold blooded execution even though the Prophet prohibited such
an action.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet when he stopped giving money
to those whose hearts could have been won and inclined to Islam,
following Umar's view in their regard.

And he abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet when he appointed Umar as
the caliph over the Muslims without even consulting with them.

Yes; all these and other actions are violations of the Sunnah of the
Prophet recorded by the authors of the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" and by their historians. They are violations filling their
biography books.

So, if the Prophet's Sunnah is what the scholars have defined as "every
statement or action of or endorsement by the Messenger of Allah," Abu
Bakr has violated the Sunnah through his statements, actions, or
decisions.

Among the Prophet's statements which he violated is this one: "Fatima
is part of me; whoever angers her angers me." Fatima died angry with Abu
Bakr according to al-Bukhari. Another is the Prophet's statement saying:
"The curse of Allah be upon anyone who lags behind Usamah's army." He
said so when they challenged his appointment of Usamah over them and
refused to go to war with him and under his military command. Abu Bakr,
despite such admonition, lagged behind Usamah's army under the pretext
of taking care of the issue of caliphate.

Among his actions in violation of the Sunnah is what the Messenger of
Allah used to do with those whose hearts could be won towards Islam; he
was very kind to them and even gave them a portion of the zakat as
commanded by Allah, the Most Exalted One. But Abu Bakr deprived them of
that right which the Holy Qur'an had already mandated, and which was
carried out by the Prophet, only to please Umar ibn al-Khattab who said
to them, "We have no need for you."

Among the decisions whereby he violated the Sunnah was a decree made by
the Prophet to write his ahadith down and to disseminate them among the
public: Abu Bakr burnt them instead and prohibited everyone from
disseminating or quoting them.

Add to all the above the fact that he was ignorant about many Qur'anic
injunctions. He was, for instance, asked once about the rule with regard
to one who dies leaving some wealth but neither a will nor dependents.
He answered by saying, "I shall state my own view in its regard; if it
is correct, it is by the Grace of Allah; but if it is wrong, it is my
own error and that of Satan."[^143]

How can you help being amazed about the caliph of the Muslims who is
asked about an injunction which Allah explains in His Book and which the
Messenger of Allah has clarified in his Sunnah, so he sets aside both
the Book and the Sunnah to state his own personal view, then he admits
that Satan may over-power his mind?!

All this comes in the light of the fact that Muslim scholars had
already decided that anyone who expresses his own view with regard to
the Book of Allah commits apostasy. We have also come to know that the
Prophet never stated his own personal view, nor did he ever employ
qiyas. Add to all this the fact that Abu Bakr used to say, "Do not force
me to act upon the Sunnah of your Prophet, for I can not bear it." If
Abu Bakr could not bear the Sunnah of the Prophet, how can his followers
and supporters claim to be the followers of the same Sunnah?

He may be unable to tolerate it because it reminds him of his own
deviation therefrom and his distance from the Messenger; otherwise, how
can you interpret the verses saying, "He (Allah) has not laid upon you
any hardship in the religion" (Holy Qur'an, 22:78), "Allah desires ease
for you, and He does not desire for you any hardship" (Holy Qur'an,
2:185), "Allah does not overburden any soul with more than what it can
bear" (Holy Qur'an, 2:286), and "Whatever the Messenger brings you,
accept it, and keep back from whatever he forbids you" (Holy Qur'an,
59:7)?

Abu Bakr's statement that he cannot bear the Prophet's Sunnah is his
response to the above verses. If Abu Bakr, the first caliph after the
Prophet, was unable to bear his Sunnah, during that time and age, how
can Muslims of our time be asked to uphold Allah's injunctions as
embedded in His Book and act upon the Sunnah of His Messenger?! But we
have found Abu Bakr violating the Prophet's Sunnah even in easy matters
which can be undertaken by poor and ignorant people:

Abu Bakr abandoned the offering of sacrifices which the Messenger of
Allah used to do and stress, and all Muslims came to know that to offer
such sacrifices was a highly recommended and emphasized Sunnah; so, how
could the caliph of Muslims abandon them?!

In his chapter on the mother, al-Shafi\`i, as well as others, has
said:

Abu Bakr and Umar, may Allah be pleased with them, never offered
sacrifices because they hated others to follow their example and
consider doing so as being obligatory.

This is an erroneous and a groundless justification; all the sahaba had
by then come to know that offering sacrifices was a Sunnah, a
commendable act, not an obligation. Even if we suppose that people
thought that they were obligatory, what harm could have resulted
especially after having seen how Umar invented the Taraweeh prayers
which were neither a Sunnah nor an obligation; rather, the Prophet had
prohibited them, yet most "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" nowadays think
that they are obligatory?

By abandoning the Prophet's Sunnah with regard to offering sacrifices,
Abu Bakr and Umar may have desired to mislead the people into thinking
that not all what the Messenger of Allah had done was obligatory, and
that it could be abandoned and ignored. This may explain their
statement: "The Book of Allah suffices us," and so will the statement
made by Abu Bakr wherein he said, "Do not quote any of the Prophet's
ahadith and say: \`Between us and you is the Book of Allah; so, act upon
what it permits and stay away from what it prohibits.'" Thereupon, had
someone argued with Abu Bakr about the Prophet's Sunnah relevant, for
example, to offering sacrifices, Abu Bakr would probably have answered
him by saying, "Do not talk to me about anything relevant to the
Prophet, and show me where the Book of Allah refers to offering
sacrifices."

Thus can a researcher understand why the Prophet's Sunnah remained
unknown to them, forsaken, and why they altered the injunctions of Allah
and His Messenger to fit their own views and qiyas and whatever they
liked of matters agreeing with their own inclinations.

The examples which we have put forth here are only a drop in the bucket
compared to what Abu Bakr had done to the revered Sunnah of the Prophet
and to the insults, burning, negligence with which he meted it. If we
wished, we could write a separate book discussing them.

How can any Muslim feel comfortable about a person the extent of whose
knowledge is this much, whose relationship to the revered Sunnah of the
Prophet is like that, and how can his followers call themselves "Ahl
al-Sunnah"?! Followers of the Sunnah do not forsake the Sunnah, nor do
they burn it. Nay! "Ahl al-Sunnah" are those who follow and revere it.
Say: If you love Allah, follow me so that Allah may love you and forgive
your sins, and Allah is oft-Forgiving, Merciful. Say: Obey Allah and the
Messenger, but if they turn away, Allah does not love those who
disbelieve. (Holy Qur'an, 3:31-32) 2. Umar ibn al-Khattab "al-Farooq"

We have come to know from our previously published researches that he
was the hero of the opposition to the honored Sunnah of the Prophet and
the one who defied the Prophet's last order, saying: "The Messenger of
Allah is hallucinating, and the Book of Allah suffices us." According to
the statements of the Messenger who never uttered anything out of his
own inclination, Umar is behind the misguidance of those who strayed in
this nation.[^144]

We also came to know that he insulted, hurt the feelings of and
terrorized Fatima al-Zahar, frightening her and her children when he
assaulted her house and threatened to burn it.

We also came to know that he collected the books recording the
Prophet's Sunnah then burnt them, forbidding people from quoting the
Prophet.

Umar violated the Prophet's Sunnah as long as he lived, even when the
Prophet was still alive, and he violated the Sunnah of the Prophet who
required him to be among those recruited for Usamah's army. But he did
not go with Usamah on the pretext of assisting Abu Bakr with the matters
relevant to the caliphate.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he stopped the
distribution of the share of zakat due to those whose hearts could be
won for Islam.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to mut\`at
al-hajj and also to mut\`at al-nisaa.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which required the
pronouncement of the divorce statement thrice, making such a requirement
only once.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to the obligation
of tayammum, invalidating the prayers in the absence of water.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which prohibited people from
spying on one another, inventing espionage.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he eliminated a part of
the athan and substituted it with something from his own.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he failed to penalize
Khalid ibn al-Waleed whom he used to threaten of penalizing.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah which prohibit the nafl
prayers being prayed in congregation, inventing the Taraweeh.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah with regard to the
distribution of public money, inventing discrimination and creating
class distinction in Islam.

And he violated the Qur'an and the Sunnah when he set up majlis
al-shura, entrusting Ibn Awf to be in charge of it.

Is not all of this indicative of Banu Umayyah's ridicule and mockery of
Islam and Muslims when they attribute such "merits" to a man who was
very well known of being rough and heavy handed and continuously
opposing the Prophet?[^145] It is as though those Umayyads were saying to
the Muslims, "Muhammad's time and whatever it contained has passed away,
while our own time has come to issue whatever religious rules we like
and prefer. Now you have become our slaves even against your wish and
against the will of the Prophet in whom you believe."

Is this not a sort of reaction and an attempt to seek revenge so that
Quraysh's leadership would be rendered back to Banu Umayyah who fought
Islam and the Prophet of Islam?

If Umar ibn al-Khattab tried very hard to obliterate the Prophet's
ahadith, ridiculing them and acting to their contrary them even during
the lifetime of the Prophet himself, it is no wonder that Quraysh handed
the reins of its leadership to him, making him its supreme leader. This
is so due to the fact that after the dawn of Islam, Umar became its
articulate spokesman and the hero of its opposition. After the demise of
the Prophet, he became the symbol of its wielding might and great hope
in realizing its dreams and ambitions to ascend to authority.

It is not a mere coincident to find Umar ibn al-Khattab acting in
contradiction to the Prophet's Sunnah and trying to relocate Ibrahim's
standing place at the House of Allah and place it where it used to be
during the days of ignorance (Jahiliyya). Ibn Sa\`d has said the
following in his Tabaqat just as other historians have:

When the Prophet conquered Mecca, he attached Ibrahim's standing place
(maqam) to the House just as it used to be during the time of Ibrahim
and Isma\`eel, peace be upon them, because the Arabs during the period
of Jahiliyya had separated it and relocated it where it is now. During
the lifetime of the Prophet and that of Abu Bakr, it used to be attached
to the House.[^146] Can you, by your Lord, find a justification for Umar
ibn al-Khattab deliberately killing a Sunnah of the Prophet who did what
both Ibrahim and Isma\`eel had done. He revived the traditions of
jahiliyya by rebuilding the maqam as it used to be during that time?

How could Quraysh not have preferred him over others and narrate in his
praise what goes beyond one's imagination, so much so that even his
friend Abu Bakr, who had preceded him in being the caliph, never
acquired such a praise? According to al-Bukhari, "Abu Bakr's temper was
tainted with some weakness, but Umar took it (caliphate) from him, and
no genius could have ever committed such a calumny."

This is only a small portion of the innovations which he introduced in
Islam. They all contradict the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger. If we wish to compile all the innovations and injunctions
wherein he followed his own personal views and which he forced people to
adopt, a separate book will be needed, but we only desired here to be
brief.

One may say, "How could Umar ibn al-Khattab have contradicted the Book
of Allah and the Sunnah of His Prophet while Allah, the Exalted One,
says, \`It does not behove any believing man or woman to make any choice
in their matter once Allah and His Apostle have decided it, and whoever
disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely strays off a manifest straying'
(Holy Qur'an, 33:36)"?

Actually, this question is often repeated by most people nowadays as
though they are in disbelief, not accepting the fact that Umar ibn
al-Khattab did any such things.

To these folks we would like to say: "This is confirmed by his own
friends and followers from \`Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a' who unknowingly
prefer him over the Prophet." If what is said about him (above) is
falsehood, then their Sahih books would be rendered unworthy of any
consideration, and they will have no argument beyond that to support
their own beliefs! Yet most historical events were recorded during the
government of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" whose love, respect, and
regard for the son of al-Khattab can never be doubted.

But if they are authentic, which is the unavoidable truth, then the
Muslims nowadays are bound to rethink their stands and reconsider all
their beliefs if they truly are followers of the Sunnah and the
consensus.

You can find most researchers these days, having been too dumbfounded
to refute these narratives and historical events which are recorded by
all scholars and traditionists, being unable to disprove them. You can
find them interpreting and seeking weak pretexts which cannot be based
on any scholarly argument. Some of them took to enumerating his (Umar's)
innovations, turning them into merits to his credit for which he should
be thanked! It is as though Allah and His Messenger did not know what
the best interest of the Muslims is, so they overlooked such
innovations\_\_we seek Allah's forgiveness\_\_so Umar discovered them
and enacted the rules for them following the demise of the Messenger of
Allah!

Since Umar is the leader and Imam of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," then
I clear myself before Allah from such Sunnah and Jama\`a, pleading to
Him, the Most Glorified One, to take my soul away at the moment of death
as a follower of the Sunnah of the last of His Prophets and the master
of all Messengers, our master Muhammad, and a follower of the path of
his good Progeny, the purified ones.

**3. Uthman ibn Affan "Dhul-Noorayn"**

He is the third caliph who reached caliphate through the schemes of
Umar ibn al-Khattab and Abdullah ibn Awf who made him swear to rule the
Muslims according to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of both caliphs
(who had preceded him). I personally doubt his having acted upon the
second condition, that is, to follow (by implication) the Sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah.

It is so because Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf knew, more than anyone else,
that both caliphs, Abu Bakr and Umar, did not rule according to the
Sunnah of the Prophet, that they, instead, ruled according to their own
ijtihad and personal views, and that the Prophet's Sunnah would have
been rendered completely non-existent during the reign of both Shaykhs
had not Imam Ali stood to revive it whenever the circumstances permitted
him to do so.

Most likely, he preconditioned the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn
Abu Talib to rule among them according to the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of both Shaykhs, but Ali refused this condition saying, "I do not
rule except according to the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger." Ali, therefore, lost his chance then to become the caliph
because he wanted to revive the Sunnah of the Prophet, whereas Uthman
won it because he agreed to continue the march in the footsteps of Abu
Bakr and Umar who had stated more than once that, "We have no need for
the Prophet's Sunnah; rather, the Qur'an suffices us; so, let them act
according to what it permits and stay away from what it prohibits."

What increases our conviction with regard to this assumption is that
Uthman ibn Affan understood this condition as implying following his own
views in as far as the [Islamic] injunctions are concerned, as did both
of his friends; such is the "Sunnah" enacted by both Shaykhs following
the demise of the Prophet.

This is why we find out that Uthman gave way to his own views and
followed ijtihad more than his predecessors had ever done, so much so
that the sahaba resented it and went to Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf to blame
him saying, "This is the doing of your own self!" When opposition to and
resentment towards Uthman intensified, the latter stood to deliver a
sermon to the sahaba in which he said, "Why did you not express your
resentment to Umar ibn al-Khattab who (too) followed his own views? Was
it so because he used to scare you with his cane?!"

Ibn Qutaybah narrates the following:

Uthman stood on the pulpit to deliver a sermon when people expressed
their resentment to him. He said: "By Allah, O fellow Muhajirs and
Ansars! You have found fault with many things I have done and condemned
many others though you had endorsed similar actions done by the son of
al-Khattab, but he shut your mouths and subdued you, and none of you
dared to look him in the eyes nor point a finger at him. By Allah! My
kinsfolk number more than those of the son of al-Khattab, and they are
more ready to come to my aid."[^147]

I personally think that the sahaba who belonged to the Muhajirun and
Ansar did not oppose Uthman's ijtihad, for they had by then become used
to it and even blessed it from day one, but they resented his deposing
them from their government posts to replace them with the promiscuous
ones from his cousins and relatives who had only recently been fighting
Islam and Muslims. The Muhajirs and the Ansars did not voice their
objection to Abu Bakr or to Umar simply because they did share authority
with both of them. Both caliphs gave the Ansars and the Muhajirun the
posts which paid very well and which made them powerful. As for Uthman,
he deposed most of them and doled out huge sums of money to Banu Umayyah
without a measure. It was then that they denounced him, cast doubts
about his authority, till in the end they killed him. This is the truth
which the Messenger of Allah had predicted when he said to them, "I do
not fear lest you should commit shirk after me, but I do fear lest you
should fiercely compete with one another (to obtain wealth and political
power)."

Imam Ali had said, "It is as though they had never heard the verse of
the Most Exalted One saying, \`Such is the last abode: We assign it for
those who have no desire to exalt themselves on earth, nor to cause
mischief, and the good end is for the righteous' (Holy Qur'an,
28:83)."

Yes, by Allah, they had heard and comprehended that verse, but the life
of this world appeared very sweet in their eyes, and they liked its
glitter.

This is the truth. If we presume that they condemned his distortion of
the Sunnah of the Prophet, this cannot be proven. Since they had not
condemned the same when done by Abu Bakr and Umar, how can they condemn
his (Uthman's) doing it? The assumption is that Uthman ibn Affan had
indeed a larger number of relatives and supporters than Abu Bakr and
Umar, as he himself had stated, because he was the chief of Banu
Umayyah, and Banu Umayyah were closer in kinship to the Prophet than
Taym or Adiyy, the tribes to which Abu Bakr and Umar belonged
respectively, more powerful, more influential, more prestigious, and
more distinguished in descent. Because the sahaba did not denounce what
Abu Bakr and Umar did, rather they emulated these men's Sunnah and
knowingly abandoned the Sunnah of the Prophet, they could not have
denounced something which Uthman did and which they had already endorsed
when done by someone else.

The proof testifying to this fact is that they were present on many
occasions during which Uthman altered the Sunnah of the Prophet such as
performing the complete prayers when he was travelling, his prohibition
of talbiya, his leaving out the takbir from the prayers, his prohibition
of mut\`at al-hajj..., etc., without anyone expressing his objection
other than Ali ibn Abu Talib, as we will come to clarify by the will of
Allah.

The sahaba knew the Prophet's Sunnah very well, yet they deliberately
contradicted it for the sake of pleasing caliph Uthman.

In his book Al-Sunan al-Kubra, al-Bayhaqi quotes Abd al-Rahman ibn
Yazid saying, "We were in the company of Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud once when
he entered Mina's mosque. \`How many rek\`as did the commander of the
faithful (meaning Uthman) pray?' asked he. He was told that he had
prayed four rek\`as. We, therefore, asked him, \`Did you not narrate one
hadith to us telling us that the Prophet had prayed only two rek\`as,
and so did Abu Bakr?' He answered by saying, \`Yes, I did. And I can now
repeat the same, but Uthman is now the Imam, and I shall not dissent
from anything he does, since dissension is evil.'"[^148]

So read such a statement and wonder about this sahabi, Abdullah ibn
Mas\`ud, who was one of the most distinguished sahaba, labelling
dissenting with Uthman as evil while contradicting the Messenger of
Allah as goodness all of it! Can anyone say beyond this that they
resented his forsaking the Prophet's Sunnah?!

Sufyan ibn Ayeenah has quoted Ja\`far ibn Muhammad saying:

While staying at Mina, Uthman fell sick, whereupon Ali came. Ali was
asked by people to lead the prayers. Ali, therefore, said, "If you wish,
but I shall perform the prayers according to the way the Messenger of
Allah used to pray, I mean two rek\`as." They said: "No, we insist on
four rek\`as prayers performed by commander of the faithful Uthman." Ali
refused to lead their prayers.[^149]

So read and wonder about these companions, who were thousands in
number, and who were at Mina during the hajj season, how they openly
refused to follow the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah and did not
accept anything other than the bid\`a invented by Uthman! If Abdullah
ibn Mas\`ud regarded dissenting from Uthman as evil, so he performed
four rek\`as despite the fact that he narrated about the Prophet praying
only two, he might have done so out of his fear of those who were
counted in the thousands, and who accepted nothing other than what
Uthman used to do, discarding the Prophet's Sunnah.

Do not forget, having come to know this much, to salute and greet the
Prophet and the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib who refused
to lead their prayers in any way other than that performed by the
Messenger of Allah, desiring to revive the Sunnah which those folks had
violated, fearing nobody's blame, showing no apprehension of their
multitudes or schemes.

It is noteworthy in this regard to point out to the fact that Abdullah
ibn Umar had said, "Prayers of a traveller are in two rek\`as; whoever
violates the Sunnah commits kufr (apostasy)."[^150] Thus, Abdullah ibn
Umar [implicitly] labels as kafir caliph Uthman ibn Affan and all the
sahaba who followed his bid\`a by performing a complete prayer while
travelling. Despite all of this, we shall return to this faqih, namely
Abdullah ibn Umar [ibn al-Khattab] in order to judge him according to
what he himself had judged others.

Al-Bukhari has stated the following in his Sahih:

I heard Uthman and Ali, may Allah be pleased with both of them, when
they were in the area between Mecca and Medina, while Uthman was banning
the mut\`a and the combination of both hajj and \`umra. When Ali saw
that, he [contradicted him and] said, after shouting "Allahu Akbar,"
Labbayka \`umratan wa hajjan ma\`a! ("At your service, O Lord, do I
perform both the \`umra and the hajj together"). Uthman, therefore,
said, "You see me forbidding people from doing something, yet you do it
yourself?!" Ali said, "Never shall I abandon the Sunnah of the Messenger
of Allah because of what someone else says."[^151] Can you help being
amazed at seeing the caliph of the Muslims openly violating the Sunnah
and going beyond that to forbid people from following it, yet none
opposes him except Ali ibn Abu Talib who would never abandon the Sunnah
of the Messenger of Allah even if he were to pay for his life for it?

Tell me, by your Lord, do you find among the companions of Muhammad
anyone other than the father of al-Husayn truly acting upon the
Prophet's Sunnah?

Despite the ruler's might and toughness, and despite the support meted
to him by the sahaba, Ali never abandoned the Sunnah, and here are their
books and Sahihs testifying to the truth of our conclusion that he,
greeting from Allah be upon him, tried his best to revive the Prophet's
Sunnah and bring people back to it, but "No value is there for the view
of anyone who is not obeyed," as he himself had said. In that time and
age, none was there to obey him and follow his instructions except the
Shi\`as who accepted him as their leader, who followed in his footsteps,
and who referred to him in every regard.

Thus does it becomes very clear to us that the sahaba did not find
anything wrong with Uthman altering the Prophet's Sunnah. We have come
to know from reviewing their Sahih books how they contradict the Sunnah
of the Prophet, but they do not contradict Uthman in his innovation.
They, nevertheless, revolted against him out of their pursuit of the
good things in this insignificant life, running after wealth, power, and
authority. They are the ones who were unrelenting in their fight against
Ali because he did not give them government posts but demanded their
returning the money which they had wrongfully amassed to bayt al-mal of
the Muslims so that the indigent might benefit from it.

May Allah support you, O father of al-Hasan ! O you who safeguarded the
Book of your Lord and the Sunnah of your cousin the Messenger of Allah
and were an Imam for the righteous, the supporter of the downtrodden!
Your Shi\`as are the ones who shall attain victory, for they upheld the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger by rallying around you and
referring to you.

Can you believe, dear reader and discreet researcher, after all the
researches which you have come across, that the followers of Uthman ibn
Affan can be regarded as the followers of the Sunnah while the followers
of Ali are the "rejectionists" and the inventors of bid\`as?! So pass
your judgment in the light of what Allah has shown you if your are
fair.

Surely Allah commands you to return the trusts to their rightful
owners, and that when you judge among the people, you should judge
justly; surely Allah admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah
is hears and sees. (Holy Qur'an, 4:58)

