4. Talhah Ibn Ubaydullah
========================

He is one of the most prominent and renowned companions of the Prophet
and one of the six persons recommended by Umar ibn al-Khattab to be
caliphs. About him, Umar had said that "He is a believer when pleased,
an apostate when angry; one day he acts as a human being, another as a
devil," and he is one of the ten men who received the glad tidings of
going to Paradise as "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" claim.

When we research the books of history trying to define his personality,
it becomes obvious to us that he was one of those who loved this world,
who were deceived and dragged by it, who sold their creed for its sake,
thus losing their souls; their trade was in vain, and on the Day of
Judgment, they will be among those who will deeply regret.

He is Talhah who, whenever he used to say, "Once the Messenger of Allah
dies, I shall marry Ayesha, for she is my cousin," he hurt the feelings
of the Messenger of Allah. When the Messenger of Allah heard this
statement, he felt deeply hurt. And when the verse referring to the veil
and to the Prophet's women being required to be veiled from the public,
Talhah said, "Is Muhammad prohibiting us from seeing our cousins and
preferring to marry them himself? Should anything happen to him, I shall
most certainly marry his wives after that."[^152] When the feelings of
the Messenger of Allah were hurt, this verse was revealed:

It does not behove you to hurt [the feelings of] the Messenger of
Allah, nor should you marry his wives after him at all; this surely is
grievous in the sight of Allah. (Holy Qur'an, 33:53)

This is the same Talhah who came to see Abu Bakr before the latter's
demise and after his putting his promise of caliphate to Umar ibn
al-Khattab in writing and said to him, "What will you say to your Lord
after having installed over us a ruler who is rough and heavy handed?"
Abu Bakr then taunted him with profane language.[^153]

Yet we find him taking to silence and endorsing the new caliph, even
becoming one of his supporters, working hard to amass wealth and buy
slaves especially after having coveted the post of caliph following his
being recommended by Umar to be the caliph after him.

Talhah is the same man who betrayed Imam Ali and joined the ranks of
Uthman ibn Affan due to his prior knowledge that were the caliphate to
be vested upon Ali, he would have no reason after that to be hopeful of
attaining it himself. In this regard, Ali said, "So one of their men
listened to his grudge, while another supported his son-in-law, despite
weakness in this and in that..."

Shaykh Muhammad Abdoh says the following in his Sharh:

Talhah was inclined towards Uthman due to the kinship between them
according to what is recorded by the biographers. His mere inclination
towards Uthman rather than Ali may be rendered to his being a man of
Taym, for both Banu Hashim and Banu Taym had objected to the appointment
of Abu Bakr to the caliphate.[^154]

Undoubtedly, Talhah is one of those who attended the swearing of
allegiance to Ali at Ghadeer Khumm and who had heard the Prophet saying,
"To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master." And
there is no doubt that he heard the Messenger of Allah saying, "Ali is
with the truth and the truth is with Ali." He was present on Khaybar day
when he gave the standard to Ali saying that Ali loved Allah and His
Messenger and they both loved him. He also knew that Ali was to the
Prophet like Aaron to Moses. And he knew more and more...

But deeply rooted grudge and spite had filled his heart, so much so
that he could see nothing except fanaticism to his tribe and bias to his
cousin Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr whom he aspired to marry after the
demise of the Prophet, but the Qur'an made it impossible.

Yes, Talhah joined Uthman and swore to be loyal to him because Uthman
used to give him many grants and gifts. When Uthman ascended the seat of
caliphate, he showered Talhah without a measure with the wealth which
belonged to the Muslims.[^155] His wealth, therefore, and his cattle and
slaves increased till his income from his property in Iraq alone reached
one thousand dinars a day. In his Tabaqat, Ibn Sa\`d says, "At the time
of his death, Talhah had left thirty million dirhams. The cash was two
hundred thousand dinars, two million and two hundred thousand dirhams,
and the rest was in the form of hamlets and real estate."[^156] This is
why Talhah was turned into an oppressor. He became arrogant and started
instigating people against his close friend Uthman in order to depose
him and take his place.

Mother of the faithful Ayesha may have tempted him with the promise of
caliphate because she, too, tried her best to undermine Uthman, and she
had no doubt that caliphate would be the lot of her cousin Talhah. When
the news of Uthman's murder reached her, and when she was told that
people had sworn the oath of allegiance to Talhah, she was very
delighted and said, "Away with Na\`thal[^157] and may he be crushed!
Congratulations to you, man of the finger, father of lion cubs!
Congratulations to you, cousin! Allah bless your father! By Allah, they
have found Talhah worthy of it!"

Yes, such was the way how Talhah rewarded Uthman, the man who made him
wealthy. He betrayed him because of his own desire to succeed him as the
caliph. He instigated people to revolt against him and was the most
zealous in encouraging them to kill him, so much so that he even
prohibited drinking water from reaching Uthman when the latter's house
was under siege.

Ibn Abul-Hadid quotes Uthman saying the following when his house was
besieged: "Woe unto me from the son of the woman of Hadramaut (meaning
Talhah)! I gave him such-and-such in pure gold, and now he is seeking to
shed my blood, encouraging others to kill me! O Allah! Do not permit him
to enjoy it (caliphate), and let him face the evil ends of his
mischief!"

Yes; such is Talhah who [first] sided with Uthman and selected him for
the caliphate in order to distance Ali from it, and because Uthman had
given him gold and silver, he now is instigating people against him,
ordering them to kill him, prohibiting drinking water from reaching his
house! And when they brought Uthman's corpse to be buried, he forbade
them from burying it at the Muslims' cemetery, so Uthman had to be
buried at Hish Kawkab where the Jews used to bury their dead![^158]

Yet after all of that, we see Talhah as the very first person to swear
the oath of allegiance to Imam Ali following Uthman's assassination,
then he reneged from his oath and joined his cousin Ayesha at Mecca and
suddenly started seeking revenge for Uthman! Praise be to Allah! Is
there any calumny greater than this?! Some historians justify this
conduct by saying that Ali had refused to appoint him as the governor of
Kufa and surrounding areas, so he reneged from his oath of allegiance to
him and went out to fight the same Imam to whom he only yesterday had
sworn to follow! Such is the nature of those who sink in their love for
this world up to their summit, those who sell their hereafter and whose
concern is nothing more than authority, power, and wealth.

Taha Husayn writes the following:

Talhah, then, used to represent a special type of opposition: He
accepted whatever was secured for him of wealth and prestige, but when
he coveted more, he joined the opposition till he caused many people to
perish before he, too, finally perished.[^159] Such is Talhah who only
yesterday swore the oath of allegiance to Imam Ali: He comes out only a
few days later dragging the wife of the Messenger of Allah Ayesha to
Basra, killing innocent people, plundering their wealth, and terrorizing
them in order to force them to disobey Ali. Then he shamelessly stood to
fight the Imam of his time to whom he had willingly and out of his own
choice promised to obey and support. Despite all of that, Imam Ali
sought him shortly before the battle started, found him in the midst of
the ranks of dissidents, and asked him, "Did you not swear the oath of
allegiance to me? What caused you to dissent, O Talhah?" He said,
"Seeking revenge for Uthman's murder." Ali said, "May Allah kill the
foremost person responsible for Uthman's murder."

According to Ibn Asakir's narration, Imam Ali asked Talhah, "I ask you
in the Name of Allah, O Talhah, did you hear the Messenger of Allah
saying, \`To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master;
O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever
antagonizes him!'?" Talhah said, "Yes." Ali then asked him, "Why do you
then fight me?" His answer was, "To seek revenge for Uthman's murder."
Ali's answer was, "May Allah kill the foremost person responsible for
Uthman's murder."

Allah did, indeed, favorably respond to Ali's supplication: Talhah was
killed on that same day at the hands of Marwan ibn al-Hakam whom Talhah
had brought there to fight Ali !

He is the Talhah of dissension, falsehood, and the turning of facts
upside down without any regard for the call of conscience or for a sworn
oath or for a promise made. Nor did he hear the call for justice. Imam
Ali reminded him of his oath, thus driving his argument against him
home, but he persisted, became puffed up with pride, and went to
extremes in his misguidance, straying from the right path and causing
others to stray with him. Because of him, a great multitude of innocent
people were killed, people who did not have anything to do with Uthman's
assassination, nor did they even know him as long as they lived, nor did
they even leave Basra...

Ibn Abul-Hadid has transmitted saying that when Talhah reached Basra,
Abdullah ibn al-Hakeem al-Tameemi came to him to ask him about letters
which he had received from him. He asked him, "Ya Abu Muhammad! (O
father of Muhammad)! Are these the letters which you had sent us?" He
answered in the affirmative. "But you had written us only yesterday,"
Abdullah went on, "urging us to depose Uthman and kill him; now you have
killed him, you come to us seeking revenge for him! By my life! This is
not what you have in mind; you only seek this world. Wait for a moment!
If this is your view, why did you agree when Ali invited you to swear
the oath of allegiance to him, so you willingly and obediently swore the
oath of allegiance to him, then you reneged from your oath of
allegiance, then you came to us to get us to join you in your
dissension?!"[^160]

Yes; this is the naked truth about Talhah ibn Ubaydullah as narrated by
the authors of the books of Sunnah and by the historians belonging to
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." Yet they say that he is one of the ten men
who received the glad tidings of going to Paradise...!

Does every man among them covet to enter Paradise? (Holy Qur'an,
70:38)

Or shall We make those who belief and do good deeds like those who
cause corruption in the land, or shall We make the righteous like the
debauchees? (Holy Qur'an, 38:28)

Is one who believes like one who disbelieves? Surely they are not
equal. (Holy Qur'an, 32:18)

As for those who believe and do good deeds, for them are the gardens of
refuge as their homes because of what they did. As for those who
disbelieved, their abode is the fire: whenever they want to get out of
it, they are returned into it, and it is said to them: Taste the torture
of the fire in which you disbelieved. (Surat al-Sajda, verses 19-20)

**5. Al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam**

He, too, is among the most distinguished sahaba and one of the foremost
in migrating to Medina. He enjoyed kinship with the Messenger of Allah:
Safiyya daughter of Abd al-Muttalib, the Prophet's aunt, was his mother.
He was also husband of Asmaa daughter of Abu Bakr and sister of Ayesha.
He is also one of the six men recommended by Umar ibn al-Khattab to
become caliphs.[^161]

He is also one of those who received "the glad tidings of going to
Paradise," according to "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." No wonder, then,
when we find him always in the company of his like Talhah: whenever
Talha's name is mentioned, it is always followed by al-Zubayr's and vice
versa. He is also one of those who competed with others for the riches
of this world, filling their stomachs therewith. According to al-Tabari,
his heritage amounted to fifty thousand dinars, one thousand horses, one
thousand slaves, and many hamlets in Basra, Kufa, Egypt, and
elsewhere.

In this regard, Taha Husayn says, "People vary with regard to the
distribution of al-Zubayr's legacy. Those who mention the least say that
his heirs divided thirty-five million [dinars] among them, whereas those
who provide the maximum figure say that they divided fifty-two million.
Moderates say that they divided forty million among them.

This should not surprise us. Al-Zubayr used to own real estate in Basra
and Kufa, eleven houses in Medina, and property and real estate
elsewhere.[^162] Yet al-Bukhari narrates saying that al-Zubayr had left
fifty million two hundred dinars.[^163]

We do not intend by stating this expose to audit the sahaba with regard
to their earnings of goods, or to the wealth they amassed, which may all
be halal, but when we see how both Talhah and al-Zubayr expressed so
much interest in worldly gains and come to know that they reneged from
their oath of allegiance to the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu
Talib simply because he decided to retrieve the money which Uthman had
given away in order to return it to the Muslims' bayt al-mal, it is then
that we entertain doubts about these men. Add to the above the fact that
upon becoming caliph, Imam Ali immediately took to bringing people back
to the Sunnah of the Prophet which he started by the distribution of the
wealth in bayt al-mal, giving each and every Muslim three dinars, be he
an Arab or a non-Arab, and this is exactly what the Prophet used to do
as long as he lived. Thus, Ali put an end to the bid\`a invented by Umar
ibn al-Khattab who favored the Arabs over the non-Arabs, giving each
Arab twice the share he gave the non-Arab.

Ali's efforts to bring people back to the Sunnah of the Prophet was
sufficient reason for the sahaba to revolt against him since they liked
what Umar had invented. This is something which we overlooked while
analyzing Quraysh who loved and sanctified Umar. He had favored Quraysh
over all other Muslims, thus encouraging nationalistic Arab fanaticism,
Qurayshi tribalism, and bourgeois class distinction.

How could Ali come a quarter of a century after the demise of the
Prophet to bring Quraysh back to the way they used to be during the time
of the Prophet who gave everyone the same, giving Bilal the Ethiopian as
much as he gave his uncle al-Abbas? Quraysh, indeed, had resented the
Messenger of Allah establishing such equality, and by sifting the
biography of the Prophet, we can find how Qurayshites used to oppose him
most of the time only for this reason.

It is also for this reason that Talhah and al-Zubayr were angry with
the Commander of the Faithful Ali who gave all of them equally, and who
deprived them of ruling the Muslims then decided to hold them
accountable for the wealth which they had amassed in order to return
stolen money to the indigent.

What is important, however, is that we should bear in mind that when he
lost all hope of Ali appointing him as the governor of Basra and
preferring him over others and fearing lest the new caliph should hold
him accountable for amassing his legendary wealth, al-Zubayr came
accompanied by his friend Talhah to seek Ali's permission to perform the
\`umra. It is then that Ali realized these men's hidden evil intentions.
He then said about them, "By Allah! They do not seek to perform the
\`umra! Rather, they seek to carry out their treacherous scheme!"

Al-Zubayr joined his sister-in-law Ayesha daughter of Abu Bakr, took
her and Talhah out heading in the direction of Basra. When the dogs at
Hawba barked at her, Ayesha wanted to go back; therefore, they brought
her fifty persons who were introduced to her as men of truth and
integrity to swear falsely in order the mother of the faithful might
continue disobeying her Lord and husband and keep marching to Basra.
They knew, the shrewd men that they were, that her influence over people
was greater than theirs. For quarter of a century, they publicized for
her and misled people into thinking that was the one whom the Messenger
of Allah loved most, describing her as the "humayraa"[^164] daughter of
al-Siddeeq who had half the creed with her. What is really odd with
regard to al-Zubayr is that he, too, had sought revenge for Uthman, as
he claimed, whereas the righteous among the sahaba accused him of being
the very same person who worked hard to kill Uthman. For example, Imam
Ali said the following to him when he met him on the battle-field: "Are
you holding me responsible for Uthman's blood and seeking revenge
against me while you yourself had killed him?"[^165]

In his Mustadrak, al-Hakim writes the following: "Talhah and al-Zubayr
came to Basra where people asked them: \`What brought you here?'
\`Seeking revenge for Uthman's murder,' they answered. Al-Husayn said,
\`Glory to Allah! Do you think that people are brainless so they will
not say that nobody killed Uthman other than you yourselves?!'"

Al-Zubayr, like his friend Talhah, had done likewise: he betrayed
Uthman and instigated people to kill him, then he willingly swore the
oath of allegiance to Imam Ali, then he violated his oath and came to
Basra seeking revenge for Uthman! Having entered Basra, he took part in
many crimes, killing seventy of the city's guards and stealing
everything its bayt al-mal had contained. Historians say that they
signed a truce with Uthman ibn Haneef, Basra's governor, pledging to
treat him respectfully till Ali's arrival. Then they violated their
truce agreement and pledge and attacked Uthman ibn Haneef as he was
leading the evening prayers. They tied a number of people then killed
them, and they even attempted to kill Uthman ibn Haneef whom Ali had
appointed as the governor of Basra, but they were afraid his brother
Sahl ibn Haneef, governor of Medina, might hear about it and seek to
avenge his murder from their own people; so, they beat him severely,
shaved his beard and moustaches, then attacked bayt al-mal, killing
forty of its guards. They jailed Uthman and subjected him to severe
torture.

Commenting on this treachery, Taha Husayn writes the following about
Talhah and al-Zubayr:

These folks were not satisfied with violating their oath of allegiance
to Ali but added to it their violation of the truce which they had
signed with Uthman ibn Haneef, killing a number of the people of Basra
who voiced their denunciation of such violation of the truce, the
jailing of the amir, the robbing of all what bayt al-mal had contained,
and the killing of a number of its guards.[^166]

When Ali reached Basra, he did not fight the rebels; rather, he invited
them to accept the arbitration of the Book of Allah, which they refused.
They went as far as killing those who had carried the Holy Qur'an to
them. Despite all of this, the Imam called him, too, and did as he had
done with Talhah, saying:

O Zubayr! Do you remember when you, while in the company of the
Messenger of Allah, passed by Banu Ghanam and smiled in the face of the
Prophet immediately after he had looked at me, smiled, then said, "The
son of Abu Talib never abandons his vanity," whereupon the Messenger of
Allah said to you, "Hold your tongue; there is no vanity in him, and you
will fight him while you yourself will be the unjust one"?[^167]

Ibn Abul-Hadid quotes in his book a sermon delivered by the Commander
of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib in which the Imam says: Lord!
Al-Zubayr had severed my ties of kinship, reneged from his oath of
allegiance to me, and supported my foe against me! O Lord! I implore You
to spare me his evil with whatever means You will.[^168]

In Nahjul-Balagha of Imam Ali, the Imam writes the following about
Talhah and al-Zubayr:

Lord! They both boycotted and were unjust to me, then they reneged from
their oath of obedience to me and instigated people against me; so, I
implore You to untie what they had tied, to foil the scheme which they
plotted, and to make them see the evil of what they aspired to do and
for which they strove hard! I sought their repentance before the battle,
and I solicited their patience before the clamor, but they despised Your
bounty and rejected my offer to spare their lives.[^169]

In a letter he sent them before the fighting had begun, he said, "Go, O
shaykhs, back to your senses, for now the greatest of your affair is
shame, before shame is combined with the fire of hell, and peace be with
you."[^170]

This is the painful truth, and this is how al-Zubayr was finished. No
matter how hard some historians try to convince us that he (al-Zubayr)
had, indeed, recalled to memory the hadith of the Prophet of which Ali
reminded him, so he repented and retired from fighting and went to the
lions' ravine where he was killed by Ibn Jarmooz..., all this does not
hold water when compared with the prophecy of the Messenger of Allah who
had predicted that, "You will fight him (Ali) while you yourself will be
the unjust one."

Some historians say that he wanted to retire when Imam Ali reminded him
of the said hadith, but his son Abdullah taunted him of being a coward,
so he was overwhelmed with zeal and returned to fight till he was
killed.

This is closer to the truth and to the sacred tradition containing some
knowledge of the unknown provided by one who never speaks out of his own
inclination.

Had he truly regretted, repented, and renounced his error and
injustice, why did he not act upon the statement of the Messenger of
Allah saying: "To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his
master; O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of
whoever antagonizes him; support whoever supports him, and betray
whoever betrays him"? Why did he not support, accept the authority of,
and seek to please, Ali ? Suppose he cannot do any of that, why did he
not address the people whom he had brought for the battle to tell them
that he saw the light of the truth and recalled to memory what he had
forgotten and ask them to stop the war in order to safeguard the lives
of innocent Muslims?

But none of this ever took place. We, hence, get to know that the myth
of his repentance and retirement is the brainchild of the imagination of
fabricators who were dazzled by Ali's light and al-Zubay'r falsehood.
Since his friend Talhah was killed by Marwan ibn al-Hakam, they selected
Ibn Jarmooz to assassinate al-Zubayr in order to be able to provide
their own interpretation of the fate of Talhah and al-Zubayr so that
they may not deprive them of entering Paradise, especially since
Paradise is one of their possessions: they permit into it whoever they
like and prohibit whoever they wish.

Suffices us to prove the fallacy of their tale what is stated in Imam
Ali's letter where he invited them to renounce the war: "Now the
greatest of your affair is shame..., before shame is combined with the
fire of hell." Nobody narrates saying that they responded to his
invitation, or submitted to his order, or even answered his letter. Add
to this the fact that before the war had started, the Imam invited them
to accept the arbitration of the Book of Allah, as we indicated above,
but they refused and even killed the young messenger who had carried the
Qur'an to them. It was then that Ali made fighting them permissible.

You may read some ludicrous accounts of historians which tell you that
some of them are not familiar with the truth, nor do they comprehend it.
One account says that when al-Zubayr came to know that Ammar ibn Yasir
came in the company of Ali ibn Abu Talib, he said, "Oh! May my nose be
cut off! May my spine be split!" Then he snatched a weapon which shook
in his hand. Having seen all of this, one of his companions said, "May
my mother lose me! Is this the same al-Zubayr with whom I wanted to die
or live?! By the One Who holds my life, whatever afflicted this man must
be something which he had seen or heard from the Messenger of
Allah!"[^171]

By fabricating such stories, they intend to claim that al-Zubayr
remembered the Prophet's hadith saying, "Ammar shall be killed by the
oppressive gang," so he became afraid, and he was shaken for fear of
being among such gangsters!

Those who despise our power of reason wish to ridicule us, but we have
sound minds, praise to Allah, and what they tell us is unacceptable. How
can al-Zubayr become afraid and shake upon remembering the tradition
saying, "Ammar shall be killed by the oppressive gang," and not fear nor
shake on account of numerous statements made by the Prophet in praise of
Ali ibn Abu Talib ? Was Ammar according to al-Zubayr better and greater
than Ali?! Did not al-Zubayr hear these traditions:

-- "O Ali! Nobody loves you except a true believer, and nobody hates
you except a hypocrite."

-- "Ali is with the truth, and the truth is with Ali, revolving with
him wherever he revolves."

-- "To whomsoever I have been the master, this Ali is his master; O
Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him, and be the enemy of whoever
antagonizes him! Support whoever supports him, and betray whoever
betrays him."

-- "O Ali! I fight whoever fights you and am peaceful unto whoever
seeks peace with you."

-- "I shall give the standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His Messenger."

-- "I fight them with regard to the revelation of the Qur'an, whereas
you (Ali) will fight them with regard to its interpretation."

-- "O Ali! I promise you that you will fight the renegades, the unjust,
and the apostates."

... in addition to many, many such traditions? The last of such
traditions is a statement made by the Prophet to al-Zubayr himself: "You
will fight him (Ali) while you yourself will be the unjust one." Where
does al-Zubayr stand with regard to these facts which are know to
people, those directly concerned as well as the outsiders, the son of
the Prophet's aunt, and the son of Ali's aunt, that he is?! Blockheads
which could not confront historical events and the facts they contain in
vain try, with all their might and means, to find some feeble pretexts
in order to mislead the people and deceive them into believing that
Talhah and al-Zubayr are among the residents of Paradise.

Such are their hopes. Say: Bring your proof, if you are truthful. (Holy
Qur'an, 2:111)

Those who disbelieve in Our Signs, haughtily rejecting them, the gates
of the heaves shall not be opened for them, nor shall they enter
Paradise till the camel passes through the needle's hole, and thus do We
reward the criminals. (Holy Qur'an, 7:40)

