6. Sa`d Ibn Abu Waqqas
======================

He, too, is one of the most distinguished companions of the Prophet and
among the foremost to embrace Islam. He was one of the earliest to
migrate with the Prophet to Medina. He was among those who participated
in the Battle of Badr. He was one of the six men recommended by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to be caliphs, and one of the ten men who, as "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`a" claim, received the glad tidings of going to Paradise.

He is also the hero of the Battle of al-Qadisiyya which took place
during the caliphate of Umar ibn al-Khattab. It is said that some sahaba
cast doubts about and questioned his descent, thus hurting his feelings,
yet they narrate saying that the Prophet confirmed his descent, tracing
it to Banu Zuhra.

In his book Al-Imama wal-Siyasa, Ibn Qutaybah transmits saying that
following the demise of the Prophet, Banu Zuhra gathered to meet with
Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas and Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf at the sacred mosque
(Masjid al-Nabi). When Abu Bakr and Abu Ubaydah came to them, Umar said
to them, "Why do I see you thus forming circles? Stand up and swear the
oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr, for I and the Ansar have already done
so." Sa\`d and Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, as well as all those who were then
present with them from Banu Zuhra, stood and swore.[^172]

It is narrated that Umar ibn al-Khattab deposed him from his post as
governor, but he recommended the caliph who would succeed him to
reinstall him, since he had not deposed him due to any treachery. Uthman
ibn Affan, therefore, carried out Umar's recommendation and appointed
him as governor of Kufa.

It is noteworthy that Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas did not leave a huge wealth
behind him compared to his friends. His legacy, as narrators tell us,
amounted to three hundred thousand dinars. Also, he neither participated
nor encouraged the assassination of Uthman as did Talhah and al-Zubayr.
Ibn Qutaybah, in his history book (quoted above), narrates saying that
Amr ibn al-As wrote Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas asking him about who had killed
Uthman. In his answer, Sa\`d wrote saying, You asked me about who killed
Uthman. I am telling you that he was killed by a sword unsheathed by
Ayesha, polished by Talhah, and poisoned by Abu Tali's son. Al-Zubayr
remained silent and made a hand signal, whereas we did nothing. Had we
willed, we would have defended him, but Uthman made many changes, and he
himself changed, doing good and bad things. If what we did was good,
then that was good indeed, but if what we did was wrong, we seek Allah's
forgiveness. I also am telling you that al-Zubayr is subdued by the
overwhelming number of his kinsfolk, and by his sin. Had Talhah wished
to rend his stomach, due to his love for authority, he would have rent
it.[^173] But what is strange in as far as Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas is
concerned is that he did not swear the oath of allegiance to the
Commander of the Faithful Ali, nor did he support him while he knew the
Imam fully well and realized his merits. He himself narrated several of
Ali's merits which both Imam al-Nasa'i and Imam Muslim record in their
respective Sahih books. Here are a couple of examples:

Sa\`d has said, "I heard the Messenger of Allah stating three of Ali's
merits; had I had one of them, it would have been better for me than red
camels. I heard him saying, \`He (Ali) to me is like Aaron to Moses
except there will be no prophet after me.' And I heard him saying, \`I
shall give the standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger and who is loved by Allah and His Messenger.' And I heard him
saying, \`O people! Who is your master?' They thrice said that Allah and
His Messenger were their master, whereupon he took Ali's hand, made him
stand up, then said, \`Whoever has accepted Allah and His Messenger as
his master, this Ali is his master; O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends
him, and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes him.'"[^174]

In Muslim's Sahih, Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas is quoted as having said, "I
heard the Messenger of Allah saying to Ali, \`Are you not pleased to be
to me what Aaron used to be to Moses, except there will be no prophet
after me?' During the Battle of Khaybar, I heard him saying, \`I shall
give the standard tomorrow to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger
and who is loved by Allah and His Messenger,' so we were very anxious
and hopeful about it. He said, \`Bring Ali here.' And when the verse
saying \`... say: Come: let us call our sons and your sons, and our
women and your women, and our near people and your near people, then let
us be earnest in prayer and pray for the curse of Allah on the liars
(Holy Qur'an, 3:61),' the Messenger of Allah brought Ali, Fatima, Hasan
and Husayn and said, \`O Allah! These are my Ahl al-Bayt'."[^175]

How could Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas know all these facts yet refuse to swear
the oath of allegiance to Ali ? How could Sa\`d hear the Messenger of
Allah saying, "Whoever has accepted Allah and His Messenger to be his
master, this Ali is his master; O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends him,
and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes him," which he himself narrates,
then refuse to accept his mastership or to support him? How could Sa\`d
have been ignorant of the hadith of the Messenger of Allah in which he
said, "One who dies without having sworn the oath of allegiance dies the
death of jahiliyya," a tradition which was narrated by Abdullah ibn
Umar, so Sa\`d would die the death of jahiliyya on account of his
reluctance to swear the oath of allegiance to the Commander of the
Faithful, the master of all wasis, the leader of the peerless men of
virtue?

Historians indicate that Sa\`d came to Imam Ali to apologize and said,
"O Commander of the Faithful! There is no doubt in my mind that you are
the most worthy among people of the caliphate, and that you are the
custodian of the creed as well as of worldly affairs, but some people
will dispute with you in this regard; so, if you desire my oath of
allegiance, give me a sword whose tongue tells me to take this and leave
that." Ali said to him, "Have you seen anyone who has contradicted the
Qur'an in word or in deed [because of swearing the oath of allegiance to
me]? The Muhajirun and the Ansar have sworn the oath of allegiance to me
on the condition that I deal with them according to the Book of Allah
and the Sunnah of His Prophet; so, if you yourself wish, you may swear;
otherwise, you may stay at home, for I am not going to force you to do
it."[^176]

Is not such a stand by Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas odd?! While he testifies
that no doubts entertain him about Ali, that he is the most worthy
person of being the caliph, that he is the custodian over religious as
well secular affairs, yet despite all of that he demands a sword with a
tongue as a condition for swearing the oath of allegiance so that he
would thus be able to distinguish truth from falsehood?! Is this not a
contradiction rejected by rational people? Is this not demanding the
impossible, a demand put forth by a haughty person who had already come
to know the truth from the bearer of the message embedded in traditions
five of which he himself used to narrate?!

Was not Sa\`d present when Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman received the oath
of allegiance, an occasion from which anyone who lagged behind was
killed for fear of dissension?

Yet Sa\`d did swear the oath of allegiance to Uthman, unconditionally
giving his support to him. He also heard Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf
threatening Ali with a sword which he raised over his head, saying, "So
do not harm your own self, for it will then be the sword and nothing
else." He was also present when Ali refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr, invoking a threat against him by Umar ibn
al-Khattab who then said to him, "Swear...; otherwise, by Allah Who is
the One and Only God, we shall strike your neck with the sword."[^177]

Did anything embolden those who did not swear the oath of allegiance to
Ali, and who dared to behave arrogantly towards the successor of the
Prophet such as Umar, Usamah ibn Zayd, and Muhammad ibn Maslamah, other
than the reluctance of Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas to swear it?

You can easily notice how the five men who were appointed by Umar ibn
al-Khattab to compete with Ali in becoming caliphs played the exact role
outlined for them by Umar ibn al-Khattab, namely prohibiting Ali from
becoming caliph. Abd al-Rahman, for example, chose his son-in-law Uthman
and threatened to kill Ali if he refused to swear the oath of allegiance
to him. This is all due to the fact that Umar gave Abd al-Rahman the
upper hand over the rest. After the death of Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf and
the assassination of Uthman ibn Affan, the only remaining contenders for
Ali's caliphate were three: Talhah, al-Zubayr, and Sa\`d. When these men
saw that al-Muhajirun and the Ansar rushed to Imam Ali and swore the
oath of allegiance to him and did not pay attention to anyone among
them, they then entertained evil thoughts against him and sought to kill
him. Talhah and al-Zubayr fought him, whereas Sa\`d betrayed him.
