8. Ayesha Daughter of Abu Bakr "mother of the Faithful"
=======================================================

She is wife of the Prophet and the mother of the faithful. The Prophet
married her in the second or third year after the Hijra and, according
to the most famous accounts, she was eighteen years old when the Prophet
died.

Allah prohibited the believers to marry the Prophet's wives after his
demise; He says, "It does not behove you to hurt [the feelings of] the
Messenger of Allah, nor should you marry his wives after him at all;
this surely is grievous in the sight of Allah. (Holy Qur'an, 33:53), and
also, "The Prophet has a greater authority over the faithful than they
have over their own selves, and his wives are (like) their mothers"
(Holy Qur'an, 33:6).

We have already pointed out to the fact that the Prophet was annoyed
when he heard that Talhah had said, "When Muhammad dies, I shall marry
my cousin Ayesha." Allah, Glory to Him, wanted to tell the faithful that
they were prohibited from marrying the Prophet's wives just as they are
prohibited from marrying their own mothers. Ayesha did not bear any
children. She was one of the greatest personalities known to Muslims,
for she played a major role in bringing certain people closer to the
post of caliph while distancing others therefrom. She endorsed some
people while ignoring others. She participated in the wars, leading the
battles and the men in war, sending letters to the heads of tribes,
ordering them to do or not to do, appointing or deposing military
leaders. She led the Battle of the Camel, and both Talhah and al-Zubayr
served under her military command.

We do not wish to go into detail in narrating the role she had played
during her lifetime, for we have discussed her extensively in our book
Ask Those Who Know; so, researchers may review it if they want to know
the same. What concerns us in this research, however, is her own
ijtihad, her altering the Sunnah of the Prophet. A few examples have to
be highlighted so that we may understand from discussing those "great"
personalities of whom the people of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" are
proud and whom they regard as their role models, preferring them over
the pure Imams from the Progeny of the Prophet.

This, in fact, is nothing but a tribal fanaticism which effaced the
Prophet's Sunnah, buried its saline features, and put its light out. Had
it not been for Ali and the Imams from his offspring, we would not have
found today anything left of the Sunnah of the Prophet.

We have also come to know that Ayesha did not act upon the Sunnah of
the Messenger of Allah, nor did she have the least regard for it.
Although she had heard numerous ahadith in praise of Ali, she denied
them and acted to their contrary. She defied the command of Allah, as
well as the order of His Messenger which he had directed personally to
her, so she came out to lead the infamous Battle of the Camel wherein
sanctities were violated and innocent people were killed. She betrayed
her written pledge to Uthman ibn Haneef, and when they brought her his
men tied up, she ordered them to be beheaded.[^187]

Leave aside the fires of war and dissension which the mother of the
faithful ignited, causing the land and those on it to be burned thereby,
and let us discuss her own interpretations, and the following of her own
views, in as far as Allah's creed is concerned. If the view of the
sahabi is taken for granted and his statement is held as an argument,
what would you say about one from whom half the creed is supposedly
derived?!

Al-Bukhari in his Sahih, in a chapter on praying qasr prayers, al-Zuhri
quotes Urwah quoting Ayesha, may Allah be pleased with her, saying, "The
first obligatory of the prayers are two rek\`as, so the traveller's
prayers were thus fixed, then the prayers of one who is not on a journey
were to be prayed in full." Al-Zuhri said, "I asked Urwah, "Why is
Ayesha then saying her prayers [while travelling] in full?" He said,
"She is following the same interpretation as that made by
Uthman."[^188]

Are you not surprised how the mother of the faithful and wife of the
Prophet abandoned the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah, which she
herself had narrated and to whose authenticity she testified, just to
follow the bid\`a of Uthman ibn Affan, whom she was encouraging people
to kill, claiming that he altered the Sunnah of the Prophet and who wore
it out before his own shirt was worn out?!

Yes, this is exactly what happened during Uthman's caliphate, but she
changed her mind again during the reign of Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan.
She urged people to kill Uthman, but once she came to know that they did
kill him, and that they swore the oath of allegiance to Ali, she changed
her mind and came out demanding revenge for him!

We deduct from the narrative stated above is that she prayed, while
travelling, the full number of rek\`as, four in number, instead of two.
She did so during the reign of Mu\`awiyah who took pains to revive all
the innovations of his cousin and benefactor Uthman ibn Affan.

People follow the creed of their rulers. Ayesha was among those who
reconciled with Mu\`awiyah after their hostility; he is the one who had
killed her brother Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr and mutilated his corpse in the
worst manner. Despite all of that, mutual worldly interests bring
enemies together and create brotherhood among antagonists; so,
Mu\`awiyah sought to please her, and she sought to please him, and he
started sending her presents and huge sums of money.

Historians say that when Mu\`awiyah reached Medina, he went to visit
Ayesha. Having sat down, she said to him, "O Mu\`awiyah! Do you feel
secure against my hiding someone to kill you in revenge for your killing
my brother Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr?" Mu\`awiyah said, "Rather, I have
entered a house of security." "Did you fear Allah," she continued, "when
you killed Hujr b. \`Adi and his followers?" He said, "Rather, those who
testified against them killed them."[^189]

They also narrate saying that Mu\`awiyah used to send her gifts,
clothes, and other encased items, and that he sent her once one hundred
thousand dinars in one lump sum.[^190] He also sent her once when she was
in Mecca a necklace worth one hundred thousand dinars and paid all her
debts which amounted to eighteen thousand dinars in addition to whatever
she used to give to others.[^191]

In my book titled Ask Those Who Know, I indicated that in one single
day, she set free forty-one slaves as atonement for breaking her
oath.[^192]

Rulers and governors belonging to Banu Umayyah used also to seek her
pleasure and send her presents and money.[^193]

Remember that Abu Bakr is the one who shared the authority with
Mu\`awiyah whom he appointed as wali of Syria after the death of his
brother, and Mu\`awiyah used to always appreciate Abu Bakr's favors on
him; without Abu Bakr, Mu\`awiyah would never have even dreamed of
becoming caliph.

Mu\`awiyah, moreover, used to meet with the group when they were
plotting their great plot to obliterate the Sunnah and annihilate the
Progeny of the Prophet. There was no enmity between Mu\`awiyah and
Ayesha. Even her asking him, "Do you feel secure against my hiding
someone to kill you in revenge for your killing my brother Muhammad ibn
Abu Bakr?" was no more than teasing him; she never loved the son of the
woman from the tribe of Khath\`am, namely Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, who
fought her after having sided with Ali and who regarded killing her as
halal. She also shares Mu\`awiyah's hatred towards "Abu Turab" to the
extreme limit and with more animosity than anyone can imagine. In all of
this, I do not know which one of them earned higher marks: Was it not he
who fought, cursed, and condemned him [Imam Ali] and put out his light
for good? Or was it she who worked hard to exclude him from the
caliphate, fought him and tried her best to obliterate his name from
existence and went out riding a mule urging Banu Umayyah to fight him,
seeking their assistance against Banu Hashim saying, "Do not permit
anyone I do not like to enter my house"? She even tried to wage another
war, so much so that some of her relatives asked her, "Is not sufficient
[shame] for us what you did on the \`Day of the red Camel' so that
people may have another \`Day of the Gray Mule'?!"

She undoubtedly was contemporary to an extended period of Banu
Umayyah's reign and had heard them cursing Ali and Ahl al-Bayt from the
pulpits without expressing her resentment of it, nor did she prohibit
it; she may even have indirectly encouraged it.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, for example, writes the following in his
Musnad:

A man came to Ayesha and spoke ill of both of Ali ibn Abu Talib and
Ammar ibn Yasir. Ayesha said, "As for Ammar, I have heard the Prophet
saying that whenever he [Ammar] had to opt between one of two matters,
he always opted for the most rational one."[^194] We are not surprised,
then, to see Ayesha laying the Sunnah of the Prophet to rest while
reviving Uthman's bid\`a with regard to praying the full number of
rek\`as while on a journey in order to please Mu\`awiyah and other
Umayyad rulers who followed her wherever she went, glorifying her and
deriving their creed from her.

It becomes clear to us that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" worship Allah
in the light of texts which Allah never revealed, without thoroughly
examining or verifying them. Had they verified such bid\`as, they would
surely have found them repugnant, and they would have willingly
abandoned them. This is what I personally experienced with some
open-minded Sunni scholars. When they came across the tradition relevant
to grown-ups suckling, they were very surprised and dumbfounded, and
they assured me that they had never heard it before. This is a common
phenomenon among "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." A great number of ahadith
which the Shi\`as cite to argue with them are recorded in Sunni Sahihs
while the Sunnis are unaware of them and regard anyone who narrates them
as an apostate.

Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah
and the wife of Lot; they were under two of Our righteous servants, but
they betrayed them, so they (their husbands) could not protect them
against Allah in the least, and it was said to them: Enter both into the
fire with those who enter. (Holy Qur'an, 66:10)

**9. Khalid ibn al-Waleed**

Khalid ibn al-Waleed ibn al-Mugheerah belonged to Banu Makhzum, and he
is given by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" the title of "The Sword of
Allah."

His father was one of the wealthiest men whose wealth was immeasurable.
Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad says, "He was the wealthiest man alive according
to their commonly known wealth criteria: gold, silver, orchards,
vineyards, merchandise, real estate, servants, concubines, slaves, etc.
This is why he was called the peerless."[^195] His father is none other
than al-Waleed ibn al-Mugheerah who was forewarned of being burned in
the fire of hell and of a very mean resort by the Holy Qur'an in the
following verses:

Leave Me and him whom I created alone and gave him vast riches, and
sons dwelling in his presence, and I adjusted his affairs for him most
appropriately, yet he desires that I should add even more! By no means!
Surely he opposes Our Signs. I will make a distressing punishment
overtake him. Surely he reflected and guessed, but may he be cursed how
he guessed! Again may he be cursed how he guessed; then he looked, then
he frowned and scowled, then he turned back and was big with pride, then
he said: This is naught but an enchantment narrated (by others); this is
naught but the word of a mortal. I will cast him into hell. And what
will make you realize what hell is? It leaves naught nor does it spare
aught. It scorches the mortal. Over it are nineteen. (Holy Qur'an,
74:11-30)

It is said that al-Waleed came to see the Prophet once to lure him with
wealth so that he might abandon the religion he was preaching, whereupon
Allah revealed these verses in that regard:

And do not yield to any mean one who swears, defames, going about with
slander, forbidding goodness, out-stepping the limits, sinful, ignoble,
(and) besides all that, base-born, (only) because he possesses wealth
and sons. When Our Signs are recited to him, he says: Tales of those of
yore. We shall brand him on the nose... (Holy Qur'an, 68: 10-16)

Al-Waleed thought that he deserved to be prophet more than Muhammad; he
used to say, "Should the Qur'an and Prophethood be revealed unto
Muhammad the indigent while I, the master of and the greatest among
Quraysh, be left out?"

On such a doctrine did Khalid ibn al-Waleed grow up bearing animosity
towards Islam and the Prophet of Islam who ridiculed his father's dreams
and undermined his power base. Khalid, therefore, participated in all
the wars waged against the Messenger of Allah.

Khalid undoubtedly used to share his father's belief that the latter
was more worthy of Prophethood than Muhammad, the indigent orphan. Since
Khalid, like his father, was one of the most prominent figures in
Quraysh, if not the very most prominent one, he felt he should have had
the lion's share of the Qur'an and prophethood had they only been his
father's lot, and he would have inherited prophethood and authority just
as Solomon had inherited David. It is to refer to such belief that
Allah, Glory to Him, says, hen the truth came to them, they said: This
is sorcery, and in it are we disbelievers. And they said: Why was this
Qur'an not revealed to a man of importance in both towns? (Holy Qur'an,
43:30-31) No wonder, then, to see how he tried all he could to put an
end to Muhammad and his mission. We find him raising a huge army
financed from his wealth during the Battle of Uhud, lying in ambush for
the Prophet in an attempt to put an end to him. During the year of the
Hudaybiya treaty, he also tried to assassinate the Prophet, but Allah,
Glory to Him, foiled all his schemes, rendering them a failure, while
supporting His Prophet on all occasions.

When Khalid came to know, as did other prominent members of Quraysh,
that the Messenger of Allah was invincible, seeing how people were
accepting the religion of Allah in large numbers, it was then that he
surrendered to reality while suppressing his sighs. His acceptance of
Islam, therefore, came as late as the eighth year after the Hijra, only
four months before the conquest of Mecca.

Khalid inaugurated his acceptance of Islam by behaving contrarily to
the orders issued by the Messenger of Allah not to kill anyone. Khalid
entered Mecca on the conquest day after having killed more than thirty
men who belonged mostly to Quraysh although the Prophet had clearly
instructed them not to kill anyone.

No matter how many excuses some people may find for Khalid by saying,
for example, that he was banned from entering Mecca, and that they faced
him with their weapons, he was not justified in killing anyone after
having been prohibited by the Prophet from doing so; he could have gone
to another gate to enter the city without a fight as others did, or to
send a message to the Prophet seeking his advice with regard to those
who were prohibiting him from entering. But none of that happened.
Rather, Khalid followed his own opinion, challenging what he had clearly
heard from the Messenger of Allah.

Since we are talking about those who follow their own opinions at the
expense of contradicting the available text, something which gained many
supporters and enthusiasts, or say it acquired a school of its own from
which many great sahaba and legislators graduated, a school which was
later called the school of the caliphs, we cannot avoid pointing out
here to the fact that ijtihad in such sense is nothing other than
disobedience to Allah and His Messenger. We have become accustomed to
seeing references made to ijtihad versus the available texts, so much so
that it appears as though it is perfectly legitimate. In fact, we have
to say that Khalid disobeyed the Prophet's order instead of saying that
he followed his own view in the face of an existing text. This is what
the Qur'an teaches us to do; Allah says, "Adam disobeyed his Lord, so
his life became evil to him.... (Holy Qur'an, 20:121). This is so
because Allah had prohibited him from eating of the forbidden tree.
Since Adam did eat of it, we must not say: "Adam followed his own
ijtihad as opposed to the available text."

Each and every Muslim has to keep himself at his limit rather than
transgress and voice his own view in an issue regarding which an order
permitting or prohibiting it had already been issued by Allah or His
Messenger, for that will be obvious apostasy. Allah said to the angels,
"Prostrate to Adam." This is an order. "So they prostrated" (Holy
Qur'an, 20:116); this is a positive response, an act of submission, an
expression of obedience. The exception was Eblis: he followed his own
view, so he said, "I am better than him; why, then, should I prostrate
to him?" Here we encounter a rebellion, a mutiny, regardless of who is
better than who: Adam or Eblis. This is why the most Glorified One says,
"It does not behove any believing man or woman to make any choice in
their matter once Allah and His Apostle have decided it, and whoever
disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely strays off a manifest straying"
(Holy Qur'an, 33:36).

It is to this fact that Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq referred when he said
once to Abu Hanifah, "Do not apply qiyas (analogy), for if it is applied
to the Shari\`a, it will be obliterated, and the first person to apply
qiyas was Eblis when he said, \`I am better than him; You created me of
fire while creating him of dust'(Holy Qur'an, 7:12 and 38:76)."

His statement that "... if it is applied to the Shari\`a, it will be
obliterated" is the best expression of the invalidity of qiyas. If
people follow their own diverse views in the face of available texts,
there will be no Shari\`a at all. "Had the truth followed their own
(low) desires, the heavens and the earth and all those therein would
then have perished" (Holy Qur'an, 23:71).

Having made this brief expose of the principle of ijtihad, let us see
how Khalid ibn al-Waleed disobeyed the order issued by the Messenger of
Allah on another occasion when he was sent by the Prophet to Banu
Juthaymah to invite them to Islam. The Prophet did not order Khalid to
fight anyone. Yet Khalid went there and afflicted them with treachery
even after their declaration of acceptance of Islam, killing some of
them in cold blood, so much so that Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, who was an
eye witness to that incident, said that Khalid had killed them only out
of his desire to seek revenge for both of his uncles whom Banu Juthaymah
had killed.[^196] When the Messenger of Allah heard about that shameful
treachery, he thrice dissociated himself before Allah from what Khalid
ibn al-Waleed had done. Then he sent them Ali ibn Abu Talib bearing a
great deal of wealth to them to pay their blood money, the blood spilled
by Khalid.

No matter how many excuses "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" may find for
Khalid ibn al-Waleed, the pages of history are full of the tragedies
which he inflicted and of his violating the Book of Allah and the Sunnah
of His Messenger. Suffices the researcher to read his biography and what
he did in the Yamama during the time of Abu Bakr, how he betrayed Malik
ibn Nuwayrah and executed his men in cold blood although they were
Muslims then married Malik's wife and cohabited with her on the same
night of her husband's murder, discarding Islam's Shari\`a and the
Arabs' principles of valor.

Even Umar ibn al-Khattab, despite his being laxing in enforcing Islam's
injunctions, exposed him and called him the enemy of Allah, promising to
stone him to death.

Researchers are obligated to review history with keen eyes and from the
stand of constructive criticism which leads them to the truth without
any abstraction or bias. Nor should they be overtaken by sectarian
fanaticism so they evaluate the individuals basing their evaluation on
fabricated ahadith of the Prophet. "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," who, in
fact, are Banu Umayyah, wipe out all historical events with one single
tradition which they themselves fabricate in order to thus stop the
researchers short of reaching the truth. How easy it is for one of them
to say, "The Messenger of Allah said to Khalid ibn al-Waleed, \`Welcome,
O Sword of Allah!'" so this false tradition takes control of the hearts
of innocent Muslims who think well of others and who do not know what
others hide and what schemes the Umayyads plot. Based on this fabricated
tradition, they, therefore, interpret everything said about Khalid of
facts and find excuses for him. This is called the psychological effect
on people, and it is the acute ailment obstructing one from reaching the
truth, turning the facts upside down.

Let me give you an example:

Abu Talib, uncle of the Prophet is said to have died as an apostate,
and that the Prophet said about him, "Abu Talib is inside a lake of fire
from which his brains boil." Because of this fabricated "tradition,"
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" believe that Abu Talib is an apostate, and
that he is in the fire. They, therefore, do not accept any rational
analysis which leads them to the truth. Through this "tradition," the
biography of Abu Talib, his struggle in defense of Islam because of
which his own people became antagonistic towards him, and he towards
them, so much so that he accepted to endure the boycott at Mecca's
ravine for three years for the sake of his nephew, a boycott during
which he had to eat leaves to survive, and his heroic stands as well as
doctrinal poetry in defense of the Prophet's call..., all this is
undermined. Because of it, they ignore all what the Prophet had done in
praise of his uncle, how he washed his corpse and shrouded it in his own
shirt and personally laid it to rest in his grave, naming the year when
he lost him as \`aam al-huzn, the year of grief, saying, "By Allah!
Quraysh was unable to harm me except after the death of Abu Talib. Allah
sent me the wahi saying: \`Get out of it [Mecca], for your supporter has
died,'" whereupon he migrated from Mecca instantly.

Take another example:

Sufyan ibn Harb, Mu\`awiyah's father, is said to have accepted Islam
after the conquest of Mecca, and that the Prophet said about him,
"Whoever entered Abu Sufyan's house will be safe." Based on this
tradition which contains no virtue whatsoever nor any merit for him,
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" believe that Abu Sufyan became Muslim, that
his acceptance of Islam was very good, and that he is in Paradise
because Islam cancels his past deeds.

They do not accept, beyond this, the rational analysis which enables
them to reach the truth. And it is through this "hadith" that all what
Abu Sufyan had done towards the Messenger and his Message is forgiven,
and forgotten are all the wars which he had led and financed in order to
put an end to Muhammad. And his animosity and grudge towards the Prophet
is forgotten. When they came to him and said, "Accept Islam or else we
should strike your neck with the sword," he said, "I testify that there
is no god but Allah." They said to him, "Testify that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah." He responded by saying, "As for this one, I have
within myself something against it."

Whenever he met the Prophet after having accepted Islam, he would
silently say to himself, "By what did this person overcome me?" It is
then that the Prophet would audibly respond to him by saying, "Through
Allah have I overcome you, O father of Sufyan!"

These are only two examples I have brought from our Islamic history so
that the researchers may clearly observe some people's psychological
effect on others, and how such an effect veils them from the truth. Thus
do we come to understand that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" surrounded the
sahaba with a halo of false traditions which provided them with immunity
and sanctity in the hearts of simple-minded people who can no longer
accept any criticism or blame.

If a Muslim is convinced that these men had been given by the Messenger
of Allah the glad tidings of going to Paradise, he will never accept any
criticism of them, and everything they did will then be underestimated;
he will find excuses and interpretations for them provided the door is
closed in his face from the very beginning.

This is why they attached for each of their chief men a title which
they claimed to have been given by the Messenger of Allah: This person
is "al-Siddeeq," whereas this one is "al-Farooq;" this was the beloved
one of the Messenger of Allah, and those are his huris, while this
particular woman is his beloved wife. This man is the "nation's trust,"
while that is the "narrator of Islam." This one is the "wahi's
recorder," whereas this man is the one with the two sandals; this is the
cupper of the Prophet, while that is "The Sword of Allah," and this is
this, and that is that... All these titles, in fact, neither fatten nor
satisfy when it comes to the balance of truth with Allah; "... names
which you yourselves, and your fathers, named; Allah has not sent down
any authority for them" (Holy Qur'an, 12:40). What counts with Allah is
one's own good needs.

History is the best witness of deeds through which we evaluate anyone;
we do not hold in high esteem anyone about whom falsehood is uttered.
This, in fact, is exactly what Imam Ali has said: "If you get to know
the truth, you will get to know who follows it." Since we have studied
history and come to know what Khalid ibn al-Waleed had done and come to
distinguish the truth from falsehood, we cannot call him "The Sword of
Allah." We have also the right to ask when the Messenger of Allah ever
named him so. Did he name him Allah's sword when he killed the people of
Mecca on the conquest day, having come to know that he had prohibited
him from fighting anyone? Or was it when he sent him with the army
commanded by Zayd ibn al-Haritha and dispatched to Mu'ta, saying, "If
Zayd is killed, then Ja\`far ibn Abu Talib (should take the command),
and if Ja\`far is killed, then Abdullah ibn Ruwahah [should lead],"
without nominating him except in the fourth position to lead the army,
yet after all these three men were killed, Khalid fled from the battle
field accompanied by the remnant of that army...? Or did he give him
that title when he accompanied him to attack Hunayn in twelve thousand
warriors. There, too, he fled, leaving behind him on the battle grounds
the Messenger of Allah who had no more than twelve men who stood
steadfastly with him?

Since Allah says, "And whoever turns his back to them that day, neither
maneuvering nor supporting one company, he will then incur the wrath of
Allah, and his abode will be hell, and what an evil abode it is" (Holy
Qur'an, 8:16), how could he permit himself to flee? It truly is
amazing!

I personally think that Khalid, in the first place, never knew this
title as long as the Prophet lived, nor did the Messenger of Allah ever
call him so. Rather, Abu Bakr was the one who bestowed this badge of
courage on him when he sent him to silence those who revolted against
him and opposed his caliphate, so he did to them what he did, so much so
that Umar ibn al-Khattab (because of what Khalid had done) said to Abu
Bakr, "Khalid's sword is quite excessive," and he surely knew him best.
It was then that Abu Bakr responded to Umar by saying, "Khalid is one of
the swords of Allah which He unsheathed against His foes," which is a
totally erroneous way of looking at things\_\_hence the title.

In his book Al-Riyad al-Nadira, al-Tabari indicates that Banu Saleem
had reneged, whereupon Abu Bakr sent them Khalid ibn al-Waleed who
gathered some of their men inside animal sheds then set them to fire.
When Umar ibn al-Khattab came to know about this incident, he went to
see Abu Bakr and said, "Why do you let a man employ the same method of
torture employed by Allah, the Most Exalted One, the Great?" Abu Bakr
answered him by saying, "By Allah! I shall not shame a sword which Allah
unsheathed against His foes till He Himself shames it," then he ordered
him to leave, whereupon he instantly went out to see Musaylamah.[^197]
This is how "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" came to call Khalid "The Sword
of Allah" even though he had disobeyed the order of the Messenger of
Allah and burnt people with the fire, thus totally discarding the
Sunnah.

In his Sahih, al-Bukhari indicates that the Messenger of Allah had
said, "Nobody employs the fire for torture except Allah," and also,
"None torments with the fire except the fire's God."[^198] And we have
already indicated how Abu Bakr used to say before his death, "I wish I
never burnt al-Salami!"

We say: We wish there had been someone to ask Umar ibn al-Khattab,
"Since you already knew that none torments with the fire except Allah,
why did you swear after the death of the Prophet to burn the house of
Fatima al-Zahra and everyone inside it if they refused to swear the oath
of allegiance [to Abu Bakr]? Had Ali not surrendered and ordered
everyone to go out to swear it, you would certainly have carried your
threat out."

Sometimes I doubt whether Umar opposed Abu Bakr and whether the latter
did not heed his opposition, for this would be quite unusual. We have
already seen how Abu Bakr did not stand in the face of Umar, nor did he
maintain his stand in the face of his opposition. More than once did he
say to him, "I had already told you that you are stronger than me in
handling this matter, but you subdued me." On another occasion, when he
complained to him about those whose hearts could be won towards Islam
and what Umar did to the covenant which he had written for them, how he
spitted on it and tore it to pieces, he was asked, "Are you the caliph
or is it Umar?" He answered by saying, "He, Allah willing, is." For this
reason, I say that the one who opposed Khalid's ugly deeds may have been
none other than Ali ibn Abu Talib, but the early historians and
narrators used to quite often avoid mentioning his name, so they
substituted it with that of Umar as testified by several narrations
traced back to "Zaynab's father"[^199] or to "a man," meaning thereby Ali
but not openly revealing his name.

Actually, this is not a mere probability, or we may accept what is
stated by some historians who write saying that Umar ibn al-Khattab used
to hate Khalid and could not stand looking at him in the face because he
was jealous of him: Khalid had won people's hearts because of his
victories. It is also said that Khalid had wrestled with Umar during the
days of jahiliyya, winning the match and breaking Umar's leg.

What is important is that once he became caliph, Umar deposed Khalid
but did not carry out his threat of stoning him as he had threatened.
The result: Khalid and Umar ibn al-Khattab vied with one another in
their toughness and arrogance; each one of them was stone-hearted, and
each deliberately violated the Prophet's Sunnah and disobeyed the
Prophet during his life and after his death. Moreover, both hated the
Prophet's wasi and tried very hard to distance him from public life.
Khalid plotted with both Umar and Abu Bakr to assassinate Ali shortly
after the death of the Prophet[^200] but Allah, Glorified and Exalted is
He, saved him from their mischief so that he might carry out something
which He had decreed.

Once again it becomes clear to us, having briefly studied the
personality of Khalid ibn al-Waleed whose praise is sung by "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," that the latter are quite distant from the
Prophet's Sunnah, and that they emulate those who acted to its contrary
and abandoned it behind their backs and had no respect at all for it nor
for the Book of Allah.

**10. Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi**

One of the sahaba of the latter period of Islam's dawn and, according
to the sequence employed by Ibn Sa\`d in his Tabaqat, Abu Hurayra ranks
in the ninth or tenth class.

He came to the Messenger of Allah near the end of the seventh Hijri
year. Hence, historians say that he accompanied the Prophet no more than
three years[^201] according to the best estimates, while other historians
say it was no more than two years if we take into consideration the fact
that the Prophet sent him to accompany Ibn al-Hadrami to Bahrain, then
the Messenger of Allah died while he was still in Bahrain.

Abu Hurayra was not known for his jihad or valor, nor was he among
those who were regarded as brilliant thinkers, nor among the jurists who
knew the Qur'an by heart, nor did he even know how to read and write. He
came to the Messenger of Allah in order to satisfy his hunger as he
himself said, and as the Prophet came to understand from him, so he
lodged him among the people of the Saffa to whom the Prophet used to
send some food.

Yet he became famous for the abundance of ahadith which he used to
narrate about the Messenger of Allah. The number of these ahadith
reached almost six thousand. This fact attracted the attention of
verifiers of hadith especially since he had not remained in the company
of the Prophet for any length of time and to the fact that he narrated
traditions regarding battles which he had never attended.

Some verifiers of hadith gathered all what was narrated by the
"righteous caliphs" as well as by the ten men given the glad tidings of
going to Paradise in addition to what the mothers of the faithful and
the purified Ahl al-Bayt, and they did not total one tenth of what Abu
Hurayra had narrated all alone. This came despite the fact that among
the latter was Ali ibn Abu Talib who remained in the company of the
Prophet for thirty years.

Then fingers were pointed to Abu Hurayra charging him with telling lies
and with fabricating and forging hadith. Some went as far as labelling
him as the first narrator in the history of Islam thus charged. Yet "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" bestow upon him the title of "Islam's narrator,"
surrounding him with a great deal of respect, totally relying on him.
Some of them may even regard him as being more knowledgeable than Ali
due to one particular tradition which he narrates about himself and in
which he says, "I said, \`O Messenger of Allah! I hear a great deal of
your hadith which I have been forgetting!' He said, \`Stretch your
mantle,' so I stretched it, whereupon he made a handful then said,
\`Close upon it,' whereupon I closed upon it and never forgot of it a
thing ever since."[^202]

Abu Hurayra kept narrating so many ahadith that Umar ibn al-Khattab
beat him with his cane and said to him, "You have quoted too many
ahadith, and it seems that you have been telling lies about the
Messenger of Allah." This was due to one particular narration which he
reported in which he quoted the Prophet saying that Allah had created
the heavens, the earth, and all creation in seven days. When Umar heard
about it, he called him in and asked him to repeat that hadith. Having
heard him repeating it, Umar struck him and said to him, "How so when
Allah Himself says it was done in six days, while you yourself now say
it was done in seven?" Abu Hurayra said, "Maybe I heard it from Ka\`b
al-Ahbar..." Umar said, "Since you cannot distinguish between the
Prophet's ahadith and what Ka\`b al-Ahbar says, you must not narrate
anything at all."[^203]

It is also narrated that Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib has said, "Among all
the living, the person who has told the most lies about the Messenger of
Allah is Abu Hurayra al-Dawsi."[^204] Mother of the faithful Ayesha, too,
testified to his being a liar several times in reference to many ahadith
which he used to attribute to the Messenger of Allah. For example, she
resented something which he had once said so she asked him, "When did
you hear the Messenger of Allah say so?" He said to her, "The mirror,
the kohl, and the dyestuff have all diverted you from the hadith of the
Messenger of Allah," but when she insisted that he was lying and
scandalized him, Marwan ibn al-Hakam interfered and took upon himself to
verify the authenticity of the hadith in question. It was then that Abu
Hurayra admitted, "I did not hear it from the Messenger of Allah;
rather, I heard it from al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas."[^205] It is because of
this particular narration that Ibn Qutaybah charged him with lying
saying, "Abu Hurayra claimed that al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas, who had by then
died, testified to the authenticity of that tradition which he
attributed to him in order to mislead people into thinking that he had
heard it from him."[^206] In his book Ta'weel al-Ahadith, Ibn Qutaybah
says, "Abu Hurayra used to say: \`The Messenger of Allah said
such-and-such, but I heard it from someone else." In his book A\`lam
al-Nubala, al-Dhahabi says that Yazid ibn Ibrahim once cited Shu\`bah
ibn al-Hajjaj saying that Abu Hurayra used to commit forgery.

In his book [Siyar] A\`lam al-Nubala, Ibn Kathir [Ed. this should be
al-Dhahabi] indicates that Yazid ibn Ibrahim heard Ibn al-Hajjaj saying
that Abu Hurayra used to forge hadith.

In his book Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Ibn Kathir states that Yazid ibn
Haroun heard Shu\`bah ibn al-Hajjaj accusing him of the same, that his,
that he forges hadith, and that he used to narrate what he used to hear
from Ka\`b al-Ahbar as well as from the Messenger of Allah without
distinguishing one from the other.

Ja\`far al-Iskafi has said, "Abu Hurayra is doubted by our mentors; his
narrations are not acceptable."[^207]

During his lifetime, Abu Hurayra was famous among the sahaba of lying
and forgery and of narrating too many fabricated ahadith to the extent
that some of the sahaba used to deride him and ask him to fabricate
ahadith agreeable with their own taste.

For example, a man belonging to Quraysh put on once a new jubbah (a
long outer garment) and started showing off. He passed by Abu Hurayra
and [sarcastically] said to him, "O Abu Hurayra! You narrate quite a few
traditions about the Messenger of Allah; so, did you hear him say
anything about my jubbah?!" Abu Hurayra said, "I have heard the father
of al-Qasim saying, \`A man before your time was showing off his outfit
when Allah caused the earth to cave in over him; so he has been rattling
in it and will continue to do so till the Hour.' By Allah! I do not know
whether he was one of your people or not."[^208]

How can people help doubting Abu Hurayra's traditions since they are so
self-contradictory? He narrates one "hadith" then he narrates its
antithesis, and if he is opposed or his previously narrated traditions
are used against him, he becomes angry or starts babbling in the
Ethiopian language.[^209]

How could they help accusing him of telling lies and of forgery after
he himself had admitted that he got traditions out of his own pouch then
attributed them to the Prophet ?

Al-Bukhari, in his Sahih, states the following:

Abu Hurayra said once, "The Prophet said, \`The best charity is
willingly given; the higher hand is better than the lower one, and start
with your own dependents. A woman says: \`Either feed me or divorce me.'
A slave says, \`Feed me and use me.' A son says, \`Feed me for the woman
who will forsake me.'" He was asked, "O Abu Hurayra! Did you really hear
the Messenger of Allah say so?" He said, "No, this one is from Abu
Hurayra's pouch."[^210]

Notice how he starts this "tradition" by saying, "The Prophet said,"
then when they refuse to believe what he tells them, he admits by
saying, "... this one is from Abu Hurayra's pouch"! So congratulations
for Abu Hurayra for possessing this pouch which is full of lies and
myths, and for which Mu\`awiyah and Banu Umayyah provided a great deal
of publicity, and because of which he acquired position, authority,
wealth, and mansions. Mu\`awiyah made him the governor of Medina and
built him the Aqeeq mansion then married him off to a woman of honorable
descent for whom he used to work as a servant...

Since Abu Hurayra was the close vizier of Mu\`awiyah, it is not due to
his own merits, honor, or knowledge; rather, it is because Abu Hurayra
used to provide him with whatever traditions he needed to circulate. If
some sahaba used to hesitate in cursing "Abu Turab," finding doing that
as embarrassing, Abu Hurayra cursed Ali in his own house and as his
Shi\`as heard:

Ibn Abul-Hadid says, When Abu Hurayra came to Iraq in the company of
Mu\`awiyah in the Year of the Jama\`a, he came to Kufa's mosque. Having
seen the huge number of those who welcomed him, he knelt down then beat
his bald head and said, "O people of Iraq! Do you claim that I tell lies
about the Messenger of Allah and thus burn myself in the fire?! By
Allah! I heard the Messenger of Allah saying, \`Each prophet has a
sanctuary, and my sanctuary is in Medina from Eer to [the mountain of]
Thawr; so, anyone who makes it unclean will be cursed by Allah, the
angels, and all people, and I bear witness that Ali had done so." When
Mu\`awiyah came to hear this statement, he gave him a present, showered
him with his generosity, and made him the governor of Medina.[^211]
Suffices us to prove the above the fact that he was created governor of
Medina by none other than Mu\`awiyah. There is no doubt that verifiers
and researchers who are free from prejudice will doubt anyone who
befriended the enemy of Allah and His Messenger and who was antagonistic
towards the friend of Allah and His Messenger...

There is no doubt that Abu Hurayra did not reach that lofty position of
authority, namely the governor of Medina, the then capital of the
Islamic domains, except by virtue of the services which he had rendered
to Mu\`awiyah and other authoritative Umayyads. Praise to the One Who
changes the conditions! Abu Hurayra had come to Medina with nothing to
cover his private parts other than a tiny striped piece of cloth,
begging passers-by to feed him. Then he suddenly became ruler of the
sacred precincts of Medina, residing in the Aqeeq mansion, enjoying
wealth, servants and slaves, and nobody could say a word without his
permission. All of this was from the blessings of his pouch!

Do not forget, nor should you be amazed, that nowadays we see the same
plays being repeatedly enacted, and history certainly repeats itself.
How many ignorant indigent persons sought nearness to a ruler and joined
his party till they became feared masters who do and undo, issuing
orders as they please, having a direct access to wealth without being
accounted for it, riding in automobiles without being watched, eating
foods not sold on the market...? One such person may not even know how
to speak his own language, nor does he know a meaning for life except
satisfying his stomach and sexual appetite. The whole matter is simply
his having a pouch like the one Abu Hurayra used to have with some
exception, of course, yet the aim is one and the same: pleasing the
ruler and publicizing for him in order to strengthen his authority, firm
his throne, and finish his foes.

Abu Hurayra loved the Umayyads and they loved him since the days of
Uthman ibn Affan, their leader. His view with regard to Uthman was
contrary to that of all the sahaba who belonged to the Muhajirun and the
Ansar; he regarded all the sahaba who participated in or encouraged the
killing of Uthman as apostates.

Undoubtedly, Abu Hurayra used to accuse Ali ibn Abu Talib of killing
Uthman. We can derive this conclusion from the statement he made at
Kufa's mosque and his saying that Ali made Medina unclean and that he,
therefore, was cursed by the Prophet, the angels, and everyone else. For
this reason, Ibn Sa\`d indicates in his Tabaqat that when Abu Hurayra
died in 59 A.H./679 A.D., Uthman's descendants carried his coffin and
brought it to the Baqee\` to bury it as an expression of their
appreciation of his having had high regards for Uthman.[^212]

Surely Allah has his own wisdom in faring with His creation. Uthman ibn
Affan, the master of Quraysh and their greatest, was killed although he
was the Muslims' caliph bearing the title of "Dhul-Noorayn" and of whom,
according to their claim, the angels feel shy. His corpse did not
receive the ceremonial burial bath nor was it shrouded; moreover, it was
not buried for full three days after which it was buried at the Jewish
cemetery. Yet Abu Hurayra died after having enjoyed pomp and power. He
was an indigent man whose lineage and tribal origins were not known to
anybody. He had no kinship to Quraysh. Despite all of this, the caliph's
sons, who were in charge of running the affairs during Mu\`awiyah's
reign, took to bearing his corpse and to bury it at the Baqee\` where
the Messenger of Allah was buried...! But let us go back to Abu Hurayra
to examine his attitude towards the Prophet's Sunnah.

In his Sahih, al-Bukhari quotes Abu Hurayra saying, "I learned the fill
of two receptacles [of ahadith] from the Messenger of Allah: I have
disseminated only one of them; as for the other, if I disseminate it,
this throat will be slit."[^213]

Since we indicated in our previous researches that Abu Bakr and Umar
had burnt the recorded Prophet's Sunnah and prohibited traditionists
from conveying it to others, here is Abu Hurayra revealing what
erstwhile is hidden, testifying to our own conclusion, admitting that
the only traditions he quoted were the ones that pleased the ruling
authorities. Building upon this premise, Abu Hurayra used to have two
pouches, or two receptacles, as he called them. He used to disseminate
the contents of one of them, the one which we have discussed here that
contains whatever the rulers desired. As for the other, which Abu
Hurayra kept to himself and whose ahadith he did not narrate for fear
his throat would be slit, it is the one containing the authentic
traditions of the Prophet. Had Abu Hurayra been a reliable authority, he
would have never hidden true ahadith while disseminating illusions and
lies only to support the oppressor, knowing that Allah curses whoever
hides the clear evidence. Al-Bukhari quotes him saying once, "People say
that Abu Hurayra narrates too many ahadith. Had it not been for two
[particular] verses in the Book of Allah, I would not have narrated a
single hadith: \`Those who conceal what We have revealed of clear proofs
and the guidance, after Our having clarified [everything] for people in
the Book, these it is whom Allah shall curse, and those who curse shall
curse them, too' (Holy Qur'an, 2:159). Our brethren from the Muhajirun
used to be busy consigning transactions at the market-place, while our
brethren from the Ansar used to be busy doing business with their own
money, while Abu Hurayra kept in the shadow of the Prophet in order to
satisfy his hunger, attending what they did not attend, learning what
they did not learn."[^214]

How can Abu Hurayra say that had it not been for a couple of verses in
the Book of Allah, he would not have narrated a single hadith, then he
says, "I learned two receptacles [of ahadith] from the Messenger of
Allah: I have disseminated one of them; as for the other, if I
disseminate it, this throat will be slit"?! Is this not his admission of
having concealed the truth despite both verses in the Book of Allah?!

Had the Prophet not said to his companions, "Go back to your people and
teach them"?[^215] Had he not also said, "One who conveys is more aware
than one who hears"? Al-Bukhari states that the Prophet urged the
deputation of Abd Qays to learn belief and scholarship "... then convey
what you learn to those whom you have left behind."[^216] Can we help
wondering why should the throat of a sahabi be slit if he quotes the
Prophet ?! There must be a secret here which the caliphs do not wish
others to know. We actually pointed out to this very secret in our past
researches embedded in our book Ask Those Who Know. Here, we would like
to briefly say that "the people of the remembrance" was [a phrase in] a
Qur'anic verse revealed to refer to Ali's successorship of the
Prophet.

Abu Hurayra is not to blame; he knew his own worth and testified
against his own soul that Allah cursed him, and so did those who curse,
for having hidden the Prophet's hadith. But the blame is on "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who call Abu Hurayra the narrator of the Sunnah
while he himself testifies that he hid it then testifies that he
fabricated it and told lies in its regard, then he further goes on to
testify that it became confused for him, so he could not tell which one
was the statement of the Prophet and which one was made by others. All
of these ahadith and correct admissions are recorded in al-Bukhari's
Sahih and in other authentic books of hadith of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a".

How can "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" feel comfortable about a man whose
justice was doubted by the Commander of the Faithful Ali ibn Abu Talib
who charged him with lying, saying that among the living, nobody told
more lies about the Prophet than Abu Hurayra. Umar ibn al-Khattab, too,
charged him of the same, beat him and threatened to expel him. Ayesha
doubted his integrity and many times called him a liar, and many other
sahaba cast doubts about his accuracy and rejected his contradictory
ahadith, so he would once admit his error and would sometimes prattle in
Ethiopian.[^217] A large number of Muslim scholars refuted his traditions
and charged him with lying, fabricating, and throwing himself at
Mu\`awiyah's dinner tables, at his coffers of gold and silver.

Is it right, then, for Abu Hurayra to become "Islam's narrator" from
whom the religion's injunctions are learned?

Judaica and Jewish doctrines have filled the books of hadith. Ka\`b
al-Ahbar, a Jew, may have succeeded in getting such doctrines and
beliefs included into the books of hadith, hence we find traditions
likening or personifying Allah, as well as the theory of incarnation, in
addition to many abominable statements about the prophets and messengers
of Allah: all of these are cited through Abu Hurayra.

So, are "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" now going to repent and go back to
their senses in order to know who they should learn the true Sunnah
from? If they ask us, we would say, "Come to the Gate of Knowledge and
the Imams from his offspring, for they are the custodians of the Sunnah,
the security of the nation, the ark of salvation, the Imams of guidance,
the lanterns that shatter the dark, the mighty niche, and the strong
Rope of Allah."

