Chapter 37 :muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr's Letter To Mu`awiyah
=======================================================

From Muhammad son of Abu Bakr to the sinner Mu\`awiyah son of Sakhr:

Peace of Allah unto those who obey Him from one who is peaceful to
whoever accepts only Allah as his Master.

In His Omnipotence, Greatness, Power and Might, Allah did not create
the creation in vain, nor due to a weakness in Him, nor to a need to
what He creates. Rather, He created His beings so that they may worship
him. He let some of them sin while keeping others on the right guidance.
Some of them He left to suffer, and to some He granted happiness. Then
He knowingly chose from them Muhammad to be the sole bearer of His
Message. He selected him to receive His revelation and entrusted him to
carry out His commandments. He sent him as His Messenger, bearer of glad
tidings, and warner, to testify to the divine Books which were revealed
before his time, and to guide people to uphold His injunctions. So he
invited people to accept his mission through wisdom and beautiful
exhortation. The first to respond positively to his call, to obey him,
to believe in him, to put his all at his disposal, and to be a Muslim,
was his brother and cousin Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be upon him). He
believed him with regard to the knowledge of the unknown; he preferred
him over everyone else he loved; he protected him with his own life; he
solaced him in every precarious situation; he fought those whom he had
fought and sought peace with those to whom he was peaceful. He never
fled when death seemed imminent out of his love for his life; he came
out as one unmatched in prowess; nobody could ever come close to what he
undertook.

I saw how you tried to reach his lofty status, though you are what you
are, while he is the one who stood out above the rest as the foremost in
the doing of anything good and in embracing Islam. His conviction was
most sincere, his offspring the best among all people, his wife the best
of all women, whose cousin was the very best, whose brother traded his
life on the Day of Mu'ta for the Pleasure of Allah, whose uncle is the
master of martyrs on the Day of Uhud, whose father defended the
Messenger of Allah and his mission, whereas you are the accursed and the
son of the accursed. You and your father have never ceased plotting to
undermine the religion of Allah, trying, both of you, to put out the
light of Allah, rallying others behind you, spending your wealth and
seeking the support of other tribes.

Thus did your father die, and in his footsteps are you now following.
Those who testify against you are the very ones whom you seek to please,
while those who resort to you are the pariahs from the remnants of
parties, the leaders of hypocrisy, those who are the foremost in
dissenting from the Messenger of Allah. Those who testify for Ali,
though his virtues are quite obvious and merits eternal, are his
supporters whom Allah, the Most Exalted One, mentioned and praised in
the Qur'an over all others from the Muhajirs and the Ansars: they are
with him battalions and valiant defenders, protecting him with their
words, always ready to spill their blood to protect his, finding the
truth in following him and perdition in opposing him.

Woe unto you! How dare you set yourself as an equal to Ali while he is
the heir of the Messenger of Allah, his wasi, the father of his
offspring, the first among the people to follow him, the very closest to
him? He shares with him his secrets; he unfolds his affairs before him,
while you are his enemy and the son of his enemy!

So enjoy your life as long as you can through the means of your
falsehood, and let the son of al-As support your sinning, for your end
seems to have come close, and your mischief seems to be waning: soon you
will come to know who is to receive the lofty rewards!

And be informed that you are plotting against your own Lord Whose Might
you do not fear, from achieving Whose Mercy you have despaired, and He
will soon take you by surprise while you remain in the deluge of your
conceit. And peace be with whoever follows the right guidance.[^270]

The above quoted letter written by Muhammad son of [first caliph] Abu
Bakr contains irrefutable facts of interest to all seekers of the truth.
It describes Mu\`awiyah as a misguided and misguiding person, as an
accursed and the son of an accursed man, and that he tries by all might
and means to put Allah's light out, spending wealth to distort the
creed, plotting against Allah's religion, and that he is the enemy of
Allah and His Messenger who deals with falsehood assisted by Amr ibn
al-As.

This letter also unveils the virtues and merits of Ali (peace be upon
him) which nobody else could claim in the past nor can anyone achieve in
the future. In fact, Ali ibn Abu Talib (peace be upon him) has more
virtues and merits than what Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr has counted here, but
what concerns us most in this chapter is the answer he received from
Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan. Such an answer will acquaint the seeker of
the truth with what is hidden and plotted in history. We will uncover,
once we read it, the threads of the plot that kept the caliphate out of
the reach of its legitimate owner and that caused the nation to deviate;
so, let us provide you with his answer.

[^270] Jamharat Rasaail al-Arab, Vol. 1, p. 475. Al-Mas\`udi, Muruj
al-Dhahab, Vol. 2, p. 59. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 1,
p. 283.

