Chapter 41 :the Final Word in Evaluating the Sahaba
===================================================

The sahaba are undoubtedly fallible human beings. Like all other
humans, they have obligations and rights. Surely they are honored with
being the companions of the Prophet so long as they respect and
safeguard such companionship; otherwise, their penalty will be doubled
because Allah's justice mandates that someone distant [from the Prophet]
is not to be tormented as one who is near. One who has heard the Prophet
directly, saw the light of Prophethood, witnessed the miracles with
conviction and was fortunate to be taught by the Prophet himself is not
like one who lives in the post-Prophet period and who neither saw nor
directly heard him.

Reason and conscience prefer a man who lives in our time and who
respects the Book of Allah and the Sunnah and carries out their
instructions over a sahabi who was contemporary to the Messenger of
Allah, who kept him company, yet conviction did not penetrate his heart;
he accepted Islam only to yield to the dictates of the time. He did not
keep the Prophet company in righteousness and piety as long as the
Prophet lived. Once the Prophet died, such a sahabi reneged and
reverted.

This is what the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger
sanction, in addition to what is sanctioned by reason and conscience,
and by anyone who has some knowledge of the Holy Qur'an and the sacred
Sunnah of the Prophet. Such a person does not doubt this fact, nor does
he find any alternative for it.

One proof for this argument is the verse saying, "O wives of the
Prophet! Whoever of you commits an open indecency, its punishment will
be increased doubly, and this is easy for Allah" (Holy Qur'an, 33:30).

The Prophet's companions included believers who perfected their
conviction as well as those whose conviction was quite feeble. Among
them were those whose hearts did not surrender to conviction. Among them
were pious ascetics as well as reckless individuals who sought only
their self-interests. Among them were gracious and equitable persons as
well as mean oppressors. Some of them were the believers who upheld
righteousness as well as sinning transgressors. They included scholars
who implemented what they learned as well as ignorant ones who invented
bid\`as. Among them were sincere companions as well as hypocrites. Among
them were those who violated their oaths, who strayed from the path, and
who reneged.

Since the Holy Qur'an, the sacred Sunnah of the Prophet, and history
stated all these facts and clearly explained them, the claim put forth
by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" that all the sahaba were fair and just
becomes nonsense which has no face value whatsoever because it
contradicts the Holy Qur'an and the Sunnah. It contradicts history,
reason, and conscience. It is nothing but fanaticism and a claim which
cannot be proven, an illogical statement.

One who researches these matters may wonder about the mentality of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," one which contradicts reason, facts, and
history. But when he reads about the roles the Umayyads played, and the
methods the Abbasides employed, to firmly fix the foundations of this
doctrine, I mean respecting all the sahaba and avoiding criticizing them
or doubting their integrity, his amazement will then disappear. He will
no longer have the least doubt that the latter deliberately prohibited
anyone from criticizing the sahaba so that those Umayyads would not be
criticized or discredited, and so that the horrible actions they
committed against Islam, the Prophet of Islam, and the nation of Islam,
would not be revealed.

Abu Sufyan, Mu\`awiyah, Yazid, Amr ibn al-As, Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
al-Mughirah ibn Shu\`bah, and Bisr ibn Arta'ah were all sahabis who
ruled the Muslims. How could they, then, not prohibit any criticism of
the sahaba? How could they not fabricate about them false traditions
that label each and every one of them as just and fair so that such
virtues would include them, too, and so that nobody would dare to
criticize them or discuss their actions?

They label anyone among the Muslims who does so as kafir, apostate,
sinner, issuing religious verdicts permitting his murder. They prohibit
the washing and shrouding of his corpse which should be pushed with
wooden pieces into the grave, as we have said above. Whenever they
wanted to kill the Shi\`as, they would accuse them of verbally abusing
the sahaba. What they mean by that is criticizing them and discrediting
some of their actions, a reason which they deem suffices to kill and
annihilate them.

They even went beyond that. Suffices one to ask about the meaning of
hadith to be killed, and here is the proof:

In his Tarikh, the Baghdadi khateeb (orator) states the following:

One hadith narrated by Abu Hurayra was once mentioned in the presence
of Haroun al-Rasheed. It said, "Moses met Adam once whereupon he asked
him, \`Are you the one who had us dismissed from Paradise?'" A man from
Quraysh who was present then asked, "When did Adam meet Moses?!"
Al-Rasheed became very angry and said, "Saying too much and the sword go
hand in hand; kill this atheist who doubts the hadith of the Messenger
of Allah."[^284]

When a man such as this one, who must have been a highly respected
dignitary because he attended the meetings set up by al-Rasheed, was
beheaded simply because he inquired about the place where Adam met
Moses, do not ask me about a Shi\`a who charges Abu Hurayra of being a
liar based on the fact that the sahaba, headed by Umar ibn al-Khattab,
falsify his hadith. Thus does the researcher understand the
contradictions that crept into many ahadith as well as the many
abominable and impossible matters and the obvious blasphemy.

All this happened because criticism or discrediting were taboo: they
would lead one to perdition. Even if someone asked for an explanation so
that he could reach the truth, and who is detected as inquisitive and
researching, was undoubtedly put to death in order to serve as a lesson
for others, so that nobody after him would dare to speak his mind.

They fooled people into thinking that anyone who raised doubt about the
hadith narrated by Abu Hurayra or any other sahabi, be he a commoner
among them, would be regarded as having discredited the Messenger of
Allah. Thus did they place a halo on fabricated ahadith which a number
of the sahaba invented after the death of the Prophet, so they became
accepted facts.

Quite often, I used to argue with some of our scholars[^285] that the
sahaba did not adopt such sanctifying; rather, they themselves used to
doubt each other's hadith whenever there is a contradiction with the
Qur'an, and that Umar ibn al-Khattab had beaten Abu Hurayra with his
cane, prohibited him from narrating hadith, and even accused him of
lying. These scholars used to always answer me by saying: "The sahaba
had the right to say to one another whatever they pleased; as far as we
are concerned, we are not on their level to respond to them or criticize
them." I would say: "But, O servants of Allah! They [the said sahaba]
fought one another, called each other kafir, and killed one another!"
They would respond by saying: "They all are mujtahids: if one of them is
right in his ijtihad, he receives two blessings, whereas if he errs, he
receives only one. It does not befit us to discuss their affairs."

Certainly these scholars must have inherited such a doctrine from their
fathers and forefathers, one generation from the other, so they were
repeating it like parrots without contemplation or scrutiny.

Their Imam, al-Ghazali, had adopted such a view, one which he
propagated among people, making himself the ultimate authority for Islam
and Muslims. In his books Al-Mustafa, he says, "What is accepted by the
ancestors and the posterity is that the justice of the sahaba is well
known due to the fact that Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Great,
has called them just and has praised them in His Book, and this is our
conviction in their regard."

I wonder about al-Ghazali in particular and about "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`ah" in general when I read about their seeking from the Qur'an
testimonies regarding the sahaba being fair and just, knowing that there
is not a single verse in the Holy Qur'an which backs this claim. On the
contrary, there are many Qur'anic verses which deny the justice of the
sahaba, which reveal their secrets, and which expose their hypocrisy. We
have dedicated an entire chapter to discuss this topic in our book Ask
Those Who Know from pp. 113 - 172; so, whoever wishes to research this
subject further in order to become familiar with such facts should refer
to this book. He will know what Allah and the Messenger say about
them.

So that the researcher may come to know that the sahaba never dreamt
one day of the status invented for them by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah,"
he has only to read modern books as well as history books which overflow
with their horrible deeds. They tell tales of how they called each other
kafir, and how so many of them used to wonder whether they were among
the munafiqoon, hypocrites.

Al-Bukhari, for example, states in his Sahih that Ibn Maleeka met
thirty of the companions of the Prophet who all dreaded being counted
among the hypocrites, and none of them ever said that his conviction was
to be compared with that of [arch-angel] Gabriel.[^286] Al-Ghazali
himself indicates in his book that Umar ibn al-Khattab used to ask
Huthayfah of Yemen whether the Messenger of Allah mentioned his [Umar's]
own name among the hypocrites of whose names he informed him.[^287]

The statement of those who claim that there are no hypocrites among the
sahaba is completely worthless when we come to know that the definition
of a sahabi is the one we have already discussed above, that is, anyone
who saw and believed in the Messenger of Allah, whether he met him or
not.

Their phrase "and believed in" the Prophet, too, contains an
exaggeration simply because all those who kept the Prophet company had
articulated the shahada, and the Prophet accepted their superficial
admission of faith, saying, "I have been ordered to judge what is
apparent, and Allah will deal with one's innermost." As long as he
lived, he never said to any of them, "You are a hypocrite, so I shall
not accept your declaration of faith!"

This is why we find the Prophet calling the hypocrites "my companions"
even while knowing their hypocrisy! Here is the proof:

Al-Bukhari states that Umar ibn al-Khattab asked the Prophet to have
Abdullah ibn Ubayy, the hypocrite, beheaded. He said to him, "O
Messenger of Allah! Let me strike the neck of this hypocrite with the
sword!" The Prophet said, "Leave him alone; I do not want people to say
that Muhammad kills his own companions."[^288]

Some scholars among "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" may try to convince us
that the hypocrites used to be well known; so, we should not confuse
them with the sahaba. This is impossible. Contrariwise, the hypocrites
are among the sahaba with whose secrets only Allah, Glory to Him, is
familiar. They may perform their prayers and they may fast, worship
Allah and seek nearness to the Prophet through all means. Let us provide
you with the proof:

In his Sahih, al-Bukhari indicates that Umar ibn al-Khattab on another
occasion asked the Messenger of Allah to permit him to kill Thul
Khuwaysara when the latter said to the Prophet: "Be fair!" But the
Prophet said to Umar, "Leave him alone, for he has companions if one of
you were to compare his prayers with that of theirs, he would find it
inferior and would find his fast as well inferior to theirs; they recite
the Qur'an which does not go beyond their throats. They leave the creed
as swiftly as the arrow leaves the bow."[^289]

I do not exaggerate if I say that most companions were not far from
hypocrisy according to what is determined by many verses of the Holy
Qur'an and according to the decisions of the Messenger of Allah embedded
in many of his ahadith. In the Book of Allah, we come across verses such
as these:

He has brought them the truth, yet most of them are averse from the
truth. (Holy Qur'an, 23:70)

The dwellers of the desert are more [fierce] in disbelief and
hypocrisy. (Holy Qur'an, 9:97)

And from those who are round about you of the dwellers of the desert
there are hypocrites, and from the people of Medina (too); they are
stubborn in hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know them. (Holy Qur'an,
9:101)

It is noteworthy here that some scholars among "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`ah" try very hard to cover the truth. They interpret "dwellers of
the desert" to mean that they were not among the sahaba but are meant to
be the residents of the desert and the outskirts of the Arabian
peninsula. Yet we have found how Umar ibn al-Khattab, shortly before
drawing his last breath, left his will to the caliph who would succeed
him saying: "I urge you to be good to the dwellers of the desert, for
they are the origins of the Arabs and the substance of Islam."[^290] So,
if the Arabs' kinsfolk and the substance of Islam are the worst in
disbelief and hypocrisy and it is best that they should not know the
limits of what Allah revealed to His Messenger, then there is no value
attached to the statement made by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" claiming
that the sahaba were all just and fair.

In order to shed more light, and so that the researcher may be
convinced that the phrase referring to the dwellers of the desert, that
is, bedouin Arabs, was meant to refer to the sahaba in general, the Holy
Qur'an, after describing the bedouin Arabs as the worst in disbelief and
hypocrisy, goes on to say: "And of the dwellers of the desert are those
who believe in Allah and the latter day and take what they spend to be
(means of) nearness to Allah and the Prophet's prayers; surely it shall
be for them means of nearness (to Allah); Allah will permit them to
enter into His mercy; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful" (Holy Qur'an,
9:99).

As for what the Messenger of Allah had decided in the Prophet's sacred
Sunnah, it is his following statement:
My sahaba will be taken to the fire [of hell], whereupon I shall plead:
"O Lord! But these are my sahaba!" It will be said to me, "You do not
know what they brought forth after you." I will say, "Then perdition
should be the lot of all those who altered after me."[^291]

Traditions like this one are numerous, and we have avoided quoting them
seeking to be brief. Our objective, after all, is not to research the
biographies of the Prophet's companions in order to cast doubts about
their justice, for history has spared us such an undertaking. It
testifies against some of them as having committed adultery, drunk wine,
made a false oath, reneged from the creed, committed crimes against
innocent people and betrayed the nation. We only wish to bring into
focus the fact that to say that each and every sahabi was fair and just
is a legendary myth invented by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" in order to
cover the faults of their masters and heads from the sahaba who made
many alterations to the religion of Allah, changing its injunctions with
innovations which they themselves had invented. We also wish again to
prove that by embracing the doctrine of the sahaba being all just and
fair, "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" unveiled their real identity, the
identity of seeking to please the hypocrites and to follow the bid\`as
they had invented in order to bring people back to the period of
jahiliyya.

Since "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" banned their followers from
criticizing or discrediting the sahaba, closing the doors of ijtihad in
their faces since the time of the Umayyad rulers and the period of
inventing sects, the said followers inherited such a doctrine which they
passed down to their offspring, one generation after another. Hence,
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" remained till this day prohibiting any
discussion of the sahaba for whom they seek Allah's Pleasure, labelling
as kafir whoever criticizes any of them.

The summary of this chapter is that the Shi\`as, followers of the creed
of Ahl al-Bayt, place the sahaba in perspective; they pray Allah to be
pleased with the righteous among them, and they dissociate themselves
from the hypocrites and the sinners, the enemies of Allah and His
Messenger, from them. They, hence, are the only ones who follow the true
Sunnah because they loved those whom Allah love and the sahaba who are
loved by the Messenger of Allah. They dissociate themselves from the
enemies of Allah and of His Messenger who were the primary cause of the
misguidance of the vast majority of Muslims.

[^284] Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. 14, p. 7.
[^285] The author here is referred to Sunni scholars with whom he used
to argue before accepting Shi\`a Islam. \_\_ Tr.
[^286] Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 17.
[^287] Al-Ghazali, Ihyaa \`Uloom al-Din, Vol. 1, p. 129. Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummal, Vol. 7, p. 24.
[^288] Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 6, p. 65, where the merits of the Qur'an
and Surat al-Munafiqoon are discussed. Ibn Asakir, Tarikh, Vol. 4, p.
97.
[^289] Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 179.
[^290] Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 4, p. 206.
[^291] Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 7, p. 209, in a chapter dealing with the
Pool [of al-Kawthar].

