Chapter 42 :how Ahl Al-sunnah Wal-jama`a Contradict the Prophet's Sunnah
========================================================================

In this chapter, we have to unveil to the researcher, in general terms,
how "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" practically contradict most of the
Prophet's traditions. In contrast, we will explain how only the Shi\`as
are the ones who uphold the Sunnah of the Prophet. This is why we
justify our use of the title of this book as The Shi\`as are Ahl
al-Sunnah.

In this chapter, we wish to discuss the main issues which clarify for
the researchers, more convincingly, the fact that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`ah" violated the teachings of Islam with regard to all what the
Qur'an decrees and what the Messenger decided in his sacred Sunnah. This
caused the misguidance of those of this nation and the setback that
befell the Muslims leading, in the end, to their backwardness and
suffering.

In my belief, the reason for the misguidance is rendered to one major
factor: love for this world. Did not the Messenger of Allah say, "Loving
this world tops every sin"? Loving this world is characterized by loving
power and authority: for the sake of achieving political power, nations
have been ruined, countries and lands have been reduced to rubble,
rendering man more dangerous than wild beasts. It is the same meaning to
which the Prophet refers when he said to his companions, "I do not fear
for you that you will associate someone with Allah; rather, I fear for
you that you dispute with one another."

This is why there is a need to study the subjects of caliphate and
Imamate, or what we call nowadays the Islamic government system. It led
to the worst calamity and catastrophe for Islam and its followers,
bringing them peril and agony, misguidance and annihilation.

**1) Islam's Government System**

"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" are of the view that the Messenger of Allah
did not specify who to succeed him, leaving this issue subject to mutual
consultation among people to choose whoever they wanted. This is their
belief with regard to the issue of caliphate. They have insisted upon it
since the day the Prophet died till our time.

"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" supposedly act upon this principle in which
they believe and which they defend with all their might. But the
research will reveal to us the fact that they did exactly the opposite.
Regardless of the allegiance to Abu Bakr, which they themselves called a
mistake the evil of which Allah spared them, it was Abu Bakr who
invented the notion of the succession to the post of caliph, appointing,
prior to his death, his friend Umar ibn al-Khattab as his successor.

At the time of his death, Umar ibn al-Khattab appointed Abd al-Rahman
ibn Awf to choose one of five persons whom he recommended for the post
of caliph, and to kill anyone who refused to accept the selected one.

When Mu\`awiyah secured the post of caliph for himself, he put this
principle of succession into practice, appointing his son Yazid ibn
Mu\`awiyah. Thus, the caliphate remained since that time being handed
over from one promiscuous person to another, from one generation to
another, each caliph appointing his son, brother, or relative, to
succeed him. So did the caliph since the inception of the Abbaside
government till its dissolution. And so did the Ottoman caliphs from the
time it was established till the period when the caliphate weakened and
waned during the time of Kemal Ataturk in the present century.

"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" represent such caliphate, or, say, those
successive governments represented "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" in all
parts of the world, and throughout the Islamic history. This is why you
can now see in Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Jordan, and all Gulf states rulers
who act upon the theory of succession which they inherited from their
"good posterity" who all belong to "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." Even if
we suppose that the theory they uphold, the one saying that the Prophet
left the issue for mutual consultation, and that the Qur'an endorses the
concept of consultation, were accurate, they still opposed the Qur'an
and the Sunnah. They turned the system of "democratic" consultation into
a dictatorial monarchic hereditary system of succession.

But if we suppose that the Prophet had appointed Ali ibn Abu Talib to
succeed him, as the Shi\`as argue, "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" would
then be in clear violation of many texts of the Sunnah and contradict
the Qur'an. This is so because the Messenger of Allah never did anything
without the permission of his Lord. For this reason, you find them aware
of the fact that this issue of mutual consultation is erroneous because
the early caliphs did not implement it, nor did they act upon it. They
also feel the inaccuracy of the theory of succession to the caliphate,
so you find them justifying it through ahadith such as the one saying,
"Caliphate after me shall last for thirty years followed by a government
of oppression," as if they want to convince others of their own
conviction that government is for Allah to grant it to whomsoever He
pleases, and that the kings and sultans were appointed by Allah, the
most Exalted One, to rule people; so, obedience to them is obligatory.

This is a lengthy topic which drags us to the issue of destiny and
predestination which we discussed in our book So Let us be with the
Truthful, a topic we do not wish now to return to. Suffices us here to
bear in mind that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" are also called "Qadaris,"
believers in destiny, as they espouse.

The end result is that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" believe in the
system of succession which they regard as conducive with the Shari\`a
not because the Messenger of Allah mandated it, or because he appointed
his own successor, for they very strongly deny any such things, but only
because Abu Bakr appointed Umar, and Umar appointed six persons, then
Mu\`awiyah appointed Yazid, and so on. None of their scholars or Imams
of the four sects ever claimed that the Umayyad or the Abbaside or the
Ottoman government was in agreement with the Shari\`a. Yet we find them
rushing to swear their oath of allegiance, to support and brand their
caliphs as "legitimate." Even most of them went as far as claiming that
caliphate is legitimate for anyone who attains it by force or
oppression, and they are not concerned whether he is righteous, a
sinner, or a promiscuous, or whether he is an Arab, a member of Quraysh,
a Turk, or a Kurd.

Dr. Ahmad Mahmud Subhi says the following in this regard, "The stand
adopted by Ahl al-Sunnah with regard to the issue of caliphate is to
accept the status quo without endorsing or opposing it."[^292] In
reality, however, "Ahl al-Sunnah" do support it. Abu Ya\`li al-Farraa
quotes Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal saying, "The caliphate is fixed by winning,
or by force, and it does not lack a contract."

According to Abdoos ibn Malik al-Attar, "If one wins by the sword and
becomes caliph and is referred to as Commander of the Faithful, it is
not legal for anyone who believes in Allah and the Last Day to spend his
night without recognizing him as the Imam, be he a righteous man or a
sinner." He builds this view on a statement made by Abdullah ibn Umar
saying, "We are with whoever wins." Thus, "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
become a pawn to this bid\`a, the innovation of the issue of succession.
They swear their allegiance to the winner and the oppressor regardless
of the extent of his fear of Allah, piety, or knowledge, be he righteous
or a sinner. This is proven by the fact that most sahaba who fought on
the side of the Prophet against Mu\`awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan in many
battles ended up swearing allegiance to Mu\`awiyah as the "commander of
the faithful" after the Prophet's demise. They also accepted the
caliphate of Marwan ibn al-Hakam whom the Messenger of Allah called
al-wazgh (the shiner), and whom he banished from Medina saying, "He
shall not reside where I reside, whether alive or dead."

They even accepted the caliphate of Yazid son of Mu\`awiyah to whom
they swore the oath of allegiance and whom they called "commander of the
faithful." When al-Husayn, grandson of the Prophet, revolted against
him, they killed al-Husayn and his Ahl al-Bayt in order to solidify the
foundations of Yazid's government and to label it as legal. Their
scholars went as far as saying that al-Husayn was killed by the sword of
his grandfather. Some of them write, even in this time and age, books
dealing with the "facts" relevant to "the commander of the faithful
Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah." All of this is done out of their support for
Yazid's caliphate and as an indictment of al-Husayn who revolted against
him.

If we know all of this, we have no choice except to admit that "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" contradicted the Sunnah which they attributed to
the Prophet and which they say mandated leaving the issue [of caliphate]
for discussion and consultation among the Muslims.

As for the Shi\`as, these upheld the concept of Imamate with one single
view which is: "Allah and His Messenger appoint the caliph." Imamate
according to them cannot be legitimate except through a text, and it
cannot be legitimate except for one who is infallible, whose knowledge
is the highest, who is the most pious, and who is the best. They do not
prefer one who is good over another who is better. This is why we find
them first rejecting the caliphate of the sahaba, then rejecting the
concept of the caliphate as envisioned by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

Since the texts which the Shi\`as produce with regard to the issue of
caliphate enjoy a practical presence and a true authenticity even in the
Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," we have no choice except to
admit that the Shi\`as are the ones who actually upheld the authentic
Sunnah of the Prophet.

Whether we say that the issue is to be resolved by mutual consultation
(shura) or through texts referring to the issue of caliphate, only the
Shi\`as are right because the only person who stands out as the one who
was appointed by such texts as well as by the shura is Ali ibn Abu
Talib. Nobody among the Muslims, be he a Shi\`a or a Sunni, claims that
the Messenger of Allah made any reference, even remotely, to the issue
of hereditary succession. Nor does any Muslim, be he Sunni or Shi\`a,
claims that the Messenger of Allah said to his companions, "I have left
your affair for shura; so, choose whoever you wish to succeed me."

We call upon them to produce even one single such hadith. So if they
cannot do so, and they most surely cannot, they must go back to the
confirmed Sunnah of the Prophet and to accurate Islamic history to
derive guidance therefrom. Or do they claim that the Messenger of Allah
neglected to deal with this very important issue and did not clarify its
features so that his nation might enter into a never-ending struggle and
a blind dissension that all tear its unity apart and disunite it and
cause it to deviate from Allah's Straight Path? We see in our times how
corrupt and oppressive rulers take into very serious consideration the
fate of their peoples after their own authority is over, so they appoint
their successors whenever there is a vacancy; what, then, would you say
about the one whom Allah sent as mercy for the whole world?!

**2) To Call the "Sahaba" Equitable is to Contradict the Clear
Sunnah**

If we take a look at the way the Prophet dealt with his companion and
what he said about them, we will find him giving credit where credit is
due. He is angered when Allah is angered and is pleased when He is
pleased. The Prophet dissociated himself from any companion who went
against the commandments of Allah, Glory to Him, as was the case when
Khalid ibn al-Waleed killed Banu Juthaymah. He also became angry with
Usamah when the latter came to him seeking favor on behalf of a high
class lady who stole something. It was then when he made his famous
statement, "Woe unto you! Do you intercede regarding the trespassing
over one of the boundaries set by Allah? By Allah! Had Fatima daughter
of Muhammad stolen, I would have cut off her hand. Nations before you
were annihilated because whenever a dignitary among them stole, they
left him alone, but when a simple person stole, they would carry out the
appropriate penalty."

We also find him sometimes blessing and seeking the Pleasure of Allah
for some of his sincere companions, supplicating for them, seeking
Allah's forgiveness for them. And we also find him cursing some of them,
those who insisted not to carry out his orders or simply took them
lightly. For example, he said once, "The curse of Allah be on all those
who lag behind Usamah's army" when they cast doubts about his nomination
of Usamah to be their leader and who refused to join his army because he
was too young.

We also find him explaining to people and not leaving them to be
dazzled by some of the fake sahaba, saying about one of them, "He has
companions if one of you were to compare his prayers with theirs, he
would find it inferior, and he would find his fast as well to be
inferior to theirs; they recite the Qur'an which does not go beyond
their throats. They leave the creed as swiftly as the arrow leaves the
bow." He may even stop short of performing the funeral prayers for one
of the sahaba who was martyred during the campaign of Khaybar on the
side of the Muslims, revealing the truth about him and saying, "He fell
short of discharging his responsibility in the cause of Allah." When
they searched the belongings of that person, [stolen] Jewish beads were
found among his items.

Al-Maroodi narrates to us saying that the Prophet felt very thirsty
once during the campaign of Tabuk, whereupon the hypocrites said,
"Muhammad tells the news of the heavens but does not know the way to
water!" It was then that Gabriel descended to tell him the names of
those who said so. The Prophet named them to Sa\`d ibn Abadah who said
to him, "If you wish, you can have them killed." The Prophet said, "I do
not wish people to say that Muhammad kills his own companions. Rather,
we will deal with them beautifully as long as they are in our
company."[^293]

The Messenger of Allah dealt with them just as the Holy Qur'an tells
us. Allah was pleased with the truthful among them and wrathful with the
hypocrites, renegades, and those who violated their oaths. And the
Almighty cursed them in many sacred verses. We have dealt with this
subject in full detail in our book Ask Those Who Know in a chapter
titled "The Holy Qur'an Reveals Facts about some of the Sahaba." If
anyone wishes to research this subject further, he should refer to the
said book.

We will be satisfied by producing one example of what some hypocritical
companions had done and which was exposed by Allah Who shamed those
involved. They were twelve sahabis who sought to be excused [from
meeting with the Prophet] due to their living far away, saying that they
had no time to meet with the Prophet. They, therefore, built a mosque so
that they could perform the prayers on time. Can you see sincerity and
loyalty greater than that? A servant of Allah spends huge sums of money
to build a mosque out of his concern for performing the prayers on time,
and a group of brethren united together under the roof of one mosque?
But Allah, Glory to Him, from Whom nothing is hidden in the earth or in
the heavens, and Who knows where the eyes trespass and what the chests
conceal, knew their innermost thoughts and what they were hiding, so He
inspired to His Messenger about them and acquainted him with their
hypocrisy saying, And those who built a mosque (only) to cause mischief,
to promote unbelief, to cause dissension among the believers, and to lie
in wait for whoever made war against Allah and His Prophet before; they
will certainly swear: We did not desire aught but good, while Allah
testifies that most surely they are liars. (Holy Qur'an, 9:107) Since
Allah is not shy about the truth, nor is His Messenger who used to
frankly tell his companions that they would fight one another for the
attainment of the good things in this life. He told them that they would
follow in their misguidance the customs of the Jews and the Christians,
one span at a time, one yard at a time, and that they would go back on
their heels and renege. He also told them that on the Day of Judgment,
they would enter the fire of hell; none of them except a few would be
spared, those the Prophet described to be "as few as lost camels."

So how can "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" convince us that all the sahaba
were just and fair and that they all are in Paradise, that their
injunctions are binding upon us, that their views and innovations have
to be followed, and that anyone who discredits any of them abandons the
creed and should be killed?!

It is a statement which even insane people reject, let alone the wise.
It is a false statement, a calumny, something said to please the rulers,
monarchs, by the evil and intruding scholars who follow them suit. As
for us, we cannot accept such a statement at all so long as we have
reason because that would be going against what Allah and His Messenger
tell us. Anyone who does the opposite of what Allah and His Messenger
decree is an apostate. It also clashes with reason and conscience.

We do not force "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" to abandon or reject it,
for they are free in believing whatever they want to believe, and they
are the only ones who will be held responsible for the results and
terrible outcomes of so doing. But they must not label as kafir those
who follow the Qur'an and the Sunnah in as far as the justice of the
sahaba is concerned. They should say to the sahaba who do good: "You
have done well," and to the ones who fell into error, "You committed
something wrong and made a mistake." They ought to befriend the friends
of Allah and His Messenger and dissociate themselves from the enemies of
Allah and His Messenger.

Thus does it become clear that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" violated
clear Qur'anic texts as well as clear texts of the Sunnah and followed
the dictates of the Umayyad and Abbaside governments, discarding all
juristic and rational criteria.

**3) The Prophet Orders the Muslims to Emulate His \`Itrat While Sunnis
Oppose Him**

In our past researches, we proved the authenticity of the Prophet's
hadith known as hadith al-thaqalain, that is, hadith of the two weighty
things. It states the following:

I am leaving with you al-thaqalain: so long as you uphold them, you
shall never stray after me. They are: the Book of Allah and my \`itrat,
my Ahl al-Bayt. The Most Munificent, the most Knowing, informed me that
they shall never part from one another till they reach me at the Pool.

We proved that this hadith is authentic and is consecutively reported
by the Shi\`as as well as by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who record it
in their sahih and musnad books. It is well known that "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`a" left Ahl al-Bayt behind their backs and turned their faces
towards the Imams of the four sects whose authority was forced on the
public by oppressive governments, the governments which, in turn, were
supported by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who swore to them their oath of
allegiance.

If we wish to elaborate on this topic, we can say that "Ahl al-Sunnah
wal Jama\`a" are the ones who, led by Umayyad and Abbaside rulers,
fought the household of Prophethood. If you, therefore, sift through
their beliefs and books of hadith, you will find no traces whatsoever
for the fiqh of Ahl al-Bayt. You will find all their fiqh and ahadith
attributed to the Nasibis who were the enemies of Ahl al-Bayt and who
fought them, such as Abdullah ibn Umar, Ayesha, Abu Hurayra, and
others.

They derive half of their creed from Ayesha, the lady with the reddish
complexion[^294], while the major Sunni faqih is Abdullah son of Umar
[ibn al-Khattab]. Islam's narrator, according to them, is Abu Hurayra,
mentor of al-Mudeera, while the taleeqs[^295] and their sons constituted
their judges and the legislators of Allah's creed.

What proves this fact is that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" were not
identified as such but were, as a whole, opponents of Ahl al-Bayt since
the day of the Saqeefa, and they are the ones who conspired to usurp the
caliphate from Ahl al-Bayt and did their best to distance them from the
nation's political stage.

The party known as "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" was then formed to
counter the Shi\`as who rallied behind, supported, and followed the
Imamate of Ahl al-Bayt in obedience to the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

It is only natural that those who opposed the truth were the vast
majority of the nation especially in the aftermath of dissensions and
wars. Moreover, Ahl al-Bayt could not rule the Muslims except for only
four years, the period of Imam Ali's caliphate during which they
distracted him with bloody wars.

As for "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who opposed Ahl al-Bayt, they ruled
for hundreds of years, and their government and authority spread far and
wide to the east and the west. They had their say, their gold and
silver. "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," hence, are the "winners" because
they are the rulers. The Shi\`as, led by Ahl al-Bayt, became the
vanquished because they are the subjects, the oppressed, the displaced,
the murdered.

We do not wish to prolong the discussion of this subject beyond our
desire to reveal the secrets of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who opposed
the Prophet's will and legacy which guaranteed guidance and protected
against straying, whereas the Shi\`as upheld the will of the Prophet,
followed in the footsteps of his pure Progeny and tolerated in so doing
a great deal of hardship and pain.

The fact is that such dissension and rebellion from the part of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" with regard to al-thaqalain, versus the
acceptance of the Shi\`as of the same and their adherence thereto,
surfaced from that particular Thursday which came to be known as the Day
of Infamy when the Messenger of Allah asked them to bring him some
writing material to write them something that would protect them against
misguidance. It was then that Umar took his most serious stand and
refused the Prophet's request claiming that the Book of Allah sufficed
them, and that they had no need for his \`itrat. It was as though the
Prophet was saying, "Uphold both thaqalain: the Qur'an and the \`Itrat,"
whereas Umar answered him with, "We are satisfied with only one of them:
the Qur'an, and we have no need for the other." This is exactly the
meaning of Umar's statement: "The Book of Allah suffices us."

Umar's statement represented the stand adopted by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" because prominent Qurayshi heads, represented by Abu Bakr,
Uthman, Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Abu Ubaydah, Khalid ibn al-Waleed, Talhah
ibn Ubaydullah, all stood up to support Umar's stand. Ibn Abbas said,
"Some of them kept repeating what Umar said, while some others said,
\`Bring writing material to the Prophet so that he may write you
something."

It was only natural that Ali and his followers, since that day, upheld
the Prophet's will even though it was not written down, acting upon both
the Qur'an and the Sunnah simultaneously. Their enemies, on the other
hand, did not act even upon the Qur'an which they agreed to do in the
beginning and whose injunctions they idled when they attained power and
authority, following their own views, leaving the Book of Allah and the
Sunnah of His Messenger behind their backs.

**4) "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" and Love for Ahl al-Bayt**

No Muslim doubts that Allah, Glory and Exaltation to Him, has imposed
love for Ahl al-Bayt, peace be upon them, as a the dues the Muslims have
to pay in return for granting them Muhammad's Message and the blessings
such Message contains for them. He has said, "Say: I do not ask you for
any reward for it except love for my kinsfolk" (Holy Qur'an, 42:23).
This sacred verse was revealed to require the Muslims to love the
purified \`Itrat of the Prophet who are: Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, according to the testimony of more than thirty references all
of which are authored by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a,"[^296] so much so
that Imam al-Shafi\`i composed the following in this regard:

O household of Allah's Messenger! Loving you is an obligation

Which Allah enjoined in the Qur'an, His Revelation.
Loving them is mandated by the Holy Qur'an; it is an obligation on all
followers of Islam, as Imam al-Shafi\`i admits. Loving them is the price
we have to pay for receiving Muhammad's Message, as the text clearly
indicates. Loving them is a form of worship whereby nearness to Allah,
the Most Exalted One, is sought. Since the case is as such, why do not
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" have any regard for Ahl al-Bayt ? Why do
they respect them less than they respect the sahaba?[^297]

We have the right to ask "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" this question.
Rather, we challenge them to bring about one Qur'anic verse, or one
hadith, making it compulsory on the Muslims to love Abu Bakr or Umar or
Uthman or any other sahabi! No, they will never be able to do that.
Never! On the contrary; the Qur'an contains numerous verses which point
out to the lofty status preserved for Ahl al-Bayt, thus preferring them
over all other servants of Allah. And the Prophet's Sunnah contains many
ahadith favoring Ahl al-Bayt and placing them ahead of all other Muslims
just as the leading Imam is preferred over those whom he leads, and just
as a scholar is preferred over an ignorant person.

The Qur'an suffices us with this verse, the one mandating love for Ahl
al-Bayt discussed here, in addition to the Mubahala verse, the verse
mandating the invoking of Allah's blessings unto the Prophet and his
Progeny, the verse referring to the removal of all abomination from and
the purification of Ahl al-Bayt, the verse mandating their wilayat
(mastership), the verse referring to their being chosen by Allah to
receive His favors and to inherit the knowledge of the Book.

From the Prophet's Sunnah, we content ourselves with hadith
al-thaqalain (tradition of the two weighty things), the hadith comparing
Ahl al-Bayt to the ark of salvation, the status hadith, the hadith
referring to the complete prayers unto them, the hadith of the guiding
stars, the hadith describing Imam Ali as the gate of knowledge, and the
hadith numbering the Imams after the Prophet as twelve.

We do not wish to say that one third of the Qur'an was revealed in
praise and counting the merits of Ahl al-Bayt, as some companions, such
as Ibn Abbas, say, nor do we claim that one third of the Prophet's
Sunnah praises and lauds Ahl al-Bayt and attracts the attention of
people to their virtues and merits as Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal points
out.

Suffices us from the Qur'an and the Sunnah what we have quoted from the
Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" to prove the preference of
Ahl al-Bayt over all other people.

After casting a quick look at the beliefs of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a," at their books and behavior towards Ahl al-Bayt throughout
history, we will realize without any doubt that Sunnis opposed and
antagonized Ahl al-Bayt, that they unsheathed their swords to fight
them, utilized their pens to belittle and abuse them. They have been
doing so in order to raise the status of the enemies of Ahl al-Bayt and
of those who fought them.

One evidence should suffice to give us the convincing proof. As we have
indicated above, "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" were not identified by this
name except during the second Hijri century. That was their reaction to
the Shi\`as who became loyal to and who followed the line of Ahl
al-Bayt. There is no trace or clue whatsoever in Sunni fiqh or rituals
or beliefs indicating that they make any reference at all to the
Prophet's Sunnah as narrated by Ahl al-Bayt.[^298]

This happens despite the fact that the people of the house know best
what their house contains, for they are the offspring and the progeny of
the Prophet. Nobody could ever surpass them in their knowledge or deeds.
For three centuries, they were present among the people. They held the
reins of spiritual and religious leadership through their Twelve Imams
who never differed in any issue with one another. Despite all of that,
we find "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" adhering to the four sects which
were not created except in the third Hijri century, the sects wherein
each Imam contradicts that of the other. Despite that, they left Ahl
al-Bayt behind their backs, antagonized them and fought all those who
followed them. And they are still fighting them even in our day and
time...

If we need another proof, we only have to analyze the stand of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" vis-a-vis the commemoration of the Day of Ashura,
the ominous day when a corner of Islam was demolished, when the master
of the youths of Paradise [and all the residents of Paradise are youths]
and of the purified Progeny, offspring of the Prophet, and of the
selected band of righteous from his believing companions were
martyred:

FIRST: We will find them pleased with and supportive of those who
killed al-Husayn. This must not surprise us, for all those who killed
al-Husayn belonged to "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." It is sufficient for
us to know that the leader of the army appointed by Ibn Ziyad to kill
Imam al-Husayn was none other than Umar ibn Sa\`d ibn Abu Waqqas. "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," therefore, invoke Allah to be pleased with all
the sahaba, including those who killed and who were accomplices in the
killing of Imam al-Husayn. They accept their ahadith which they label as
"authentic." Nay! Some of them even consider Imam Husayn as a Kharijite
because he revolted against the authority of "the commander of the
faithful Yazid ibn Mu\`awiyah"!

We have already indicated that the faqih of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
Abdullah ibn Umar had sworn his oath of allegiance to Yazid ibn
Mu\`awiyah and decreed disobedience to Yazid as haram. He said, "We are
with whoever wins."

SECOND: We find "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" throughout history, from
the Day of Ashura till our time, celebrating the Day of Ashura and
considering it as an Eid when they take out the zakat of their wealth to
distribute to their children, regarding it as a day for blessings and
mercy.

As if all this does not satisfy them, they now scandalize the Shi\`as
and criticize them for mourning al-Husayn. In some Muslim countries,
they prohibit them from conducting the commemorative ceremonies of this
tragic epic and attack them with their weapons, beating or killing some
of them in the pretext of fighting innovations.

In reality, they do not fight innovations as much as they re-enact the
roles played by Umayyad and Abbaside rulers who tried their best to
obliterate the memory of Ashura and who went as far as desecrating and
defacing the grave of Imam al-Husayn, prohibiting people from visiting
it. They still want to put an end to that memory for fear people would
come to know, and so would those who are ignorant, of the truth about
Ahl al-Bayt. These would come to know what really happened, and the
faults of these folks as well as of those of their masters and leaders
would then be unveiled. People will then come to know the difference
between right and wrong, between a believer and a sinner.

Thus do we once again come to know that the Shi\`as are, indeed, the
ones who actually adhere to the Prophet's Sunnah because they have
followed the Sunnah of the Prophet even with regard to grieving for and
mourning the father of Abdullah, Imam Husayn. Confirmed traditions
testify that the Prophet of Islam himself wept over the martyrdom of his
grandson al-Husayn before it happened when Gabriel told him of
al-Husayn's future martyrdom at Karbala. That was exactly fifty years
before its occurrence.

We also clearly come to know that "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" celebrate
the Day of Ashura because they followed the "sunnah" of Yazid ibn
Mu\`awiyah and of Banu Umayyah who used to celebrate that day as the day
when they achieved "victory" over al-Husayn. They celebrate putting out
Imam al-Husayn's revolution which threatened their very existence. They
regarded their "victory" as putting an end to anarchy, as they claim.

History tells us that Yazid and Banu Umayyah celebrated that day with a
great deal of festivities when the severed head of al-Husayn and those
of Ahl al-Bayt who were taken captives reached them. They rejoiced and
cursed the family of the Messenger of Allah and composed poetry.

The evil scholars among "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" sought to please
them, so they fabricated for them a number of "traditions" praising that
Day. They told them that Ashura was the day when Allah accepted Adam's
repentance, when the ark of Noah landed on the Jodi mountain, when the
fire turned cool and peaceful unto Abraham, when Joseph was released
from prison and when Jacob recovered his vision, when Moses obtained
victory over Pharaoh, when a table of viands descended upon Jesus...,
etc.!!!

All these are fabricated "traditions" which "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
and their scholars and Imams have been repeating from the pulpits even
in our day and time on the occasion of Ashura. All these are
"traditions" which were manufactured by swindlers who put on the garb of
scholars and tried to please their rulers by all means, selling their
hereafter for the price of this short life, so their trade did not earn
them any profit, and they shall be in the hereafter among the losers.

They went to extremes in telling lies, claiming that the Prophet
migrated to Medina, and it so happened that the day when he reached it
was the tenth of Muharram (Ashura). He found the Jews of Medina fasting,
so he asked them why. They said, "This is the day when Moses won victory
over Pharaoh," whereupon the Prophet, according to this fabrication,
said, "We are more worthy of Moses than you." Then he supposedly ordered
the Muslims to fast the ninth and the tenth of Muharram. This is nothing
but a flagrant lie. The Jews live among us[^299] and we never heard that
they have an Eid during which they fast and which they call Ashura!

We may even wonder why our Lord made that day a blessed Eid for all His
prophets and messengers, from Adam to Moses, with the exception of
Muhammad for whom it was a day of tragedy, a day of mourning, a day of
bad omen, a day when his offspring, his Progeny, were slaughtered as
animals are slaughtered, when his daughters were taken captive... The
answer is: "He is not asked about what He does, while they shall be
asked" (Holy Qur'an, 21:23).

But whoever disputes with you in this matter, after the knowledge that
has come to you, say: Come: let us call our sons and your sons, our
women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, then let us
earnestly pray, invoking Allah to curse the liars. (Holy Qur'an, 3:61)

