5) "ahl Al-sunnah Wal Jama`a" and the Curtailed Prayer
======================================================

In a previous chapter, we quoted a verse referring to invoking Allah's
prayers unto the Prophet and his progeny, and we also quoted its
explanation as provided by the Prophet himself and how he taught people
how to make a complete invocation, prohibiting them from using the
curtailed one which Allah, the most Exalted One, rejects. Yet we find a
great deal of stubbornness from the side of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
who insist on eliminating any reference to Muhammad's Progeny from such
an invocation. If they do reluctantly mention them, they include with
them (in the invocation) the sahaba all of them. If you say before any
of them: Salla Allahu alaihi wa aalih (Allah blesses him and his
progeny), he will immediately understand that you are a Shi\`a. This is
so due to the fact that the complete invocation unto Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad has become the identifying mark of only the
Shi\`as.

This is a fact which cannot be refuted. I employed it at the inception
of my research, identifying each writer as a Shi\`a whenever I find him
saying Salla Allahu alaihi wa alihi wa sallam (Allah blesses him and his
progeny and greets them all) after making a reference to Muhammad. In
its absence, I conclude that the writer is a Sunni. I also conclude that
a certain writer is a Shi\`a when he says: Ali alaihis-salam "Ali, peace
be upon him," rather than Ali karrama Allahu wajhah, as is the case with
Sunni writers.

From the complete invocation, I see how the Shi\`as have followed the
sacred Prophet's Sunnah versus "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who disobeyed
the orders of the Prophet and did not honor them in the least. You find
them all uttering the curtailed invocation, and when they feel obligated
to add to it the reference to Muhammad's Progeny, they add to them the
companions all of them without any exception so that they do not leave
any merit or exclusive feat for Ahl al-Bayt whatsoever.

All this has resulted from the stand adopted by the Umayyads versus Ahl
al-Bayt and to the enmity which they had against them, the one that in
the end caused them to substitute the invocation to Allah to bless Ahl
al-Bayt with one invoking Him to curse them. They kept doing so even
from the pulpits, forcing people to do so by all means.

But "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" did not follow the Umayyads' custom of
cursing Ahl al-Bayt. Had they done so, the truth about them would have
been revealed to the Muslims, and they would have been known as they
are, and people would have dissociated themselves from them. So they
abandoned the custom of cursing and abusing Ahl al-Bayt, keeping to
themselves the animosity and hatred towards Ahl al-Bayt. They tried
their best to put their light out by raising the status of their enemies
from the sahaba. For the latter they invented imaginary feats which have
no relevance at all to the truth.

What proves this fact is that you can find "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a,"
even in our time, refraining from saying anything against Mu\`awiyah and
the sahaba who cursed Ahl al-Bayt for eighty years. Rather, they invoke
Allah to be pleased with all of them. At the same time, they label as
kafir any Muslim who discredits any of the sahaba, issuing fatawa
permitting his murder...

Some fabricators tried to add something else to the complete
invocation, the one which the Messenger of Allah taught to his
companions, another part, thinking that it would further undermine the
status of Ahl al-Bayt. One narrator quoted the Prophet saying, "Say: O
Allah! Bless Muhammad, the Progeny of Muhammad, his wives and
offspring." The researcher is of the view that this part was added in
order to include Ayesha among Ahl al-Bayt.

We say to them: If we, for the sake of argument, suppose that this
"tradition" is authentic and that it implies the inclusion of the
mothers of the faithful, the sahaba still have nothing to do with Ahl
al-Bayt! I personally challenge any Muslim to produce one proof from the
Qur'an or from the Sunnah backing his view, for surely the heaven are
more within his reach than that.

Both the Qur'an and the Sunnah have mandated all the companions as well
as all other Muslims who follow those sahaba till the Day of Judgment to
send blessings unto Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad. This by itself
is a great status compared to which any other status falls short, and
compared to which nothing else comes close.

Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and all the companions of the Prophet, as well
as all the Muslims of the world who are counted by the billions, do,
indeed, invoke Allah to bless Muhammad and his Progeny whenever they
make their tashahhud; otherwise, their prayers will be rejected by
Allah, Glory to Him.

This is exactly the meaning of a verse of poetry Imam al-Shafi\`i
composed and the rough translation of which is as follows: Suffices you
(O Ahl al-Bayt!) of a great import,Whoever does not bless you, his
prayer is void.

Al-Shafi\`i was accused of the "crime" of being a Shi\`a because of
having said so. Henchmen of the Umayyads and the Abbasides accuse anyone
of being a Shi\`a if he blesses Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad or
who praises them in a verse of poetry or points out to one of their
feats.

At any rate, researching this subject is quite exhaustive, and it may
be dealt with repeatedly in many books. There is no harm in repetition
so long as it benefits the reader.

What is important is that we have come to know from this chapter that
the Shi\`as are the ones who follow the Prophet's Sunnah and that their
prayers are complete and accepted even according to the views of those
who oppose them. "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a," on the other hand, have
violated in this regard the clear Sunnah of the Prophet, and their
prayers are curtailed and are not accepted even according to the views
of their own Imams and scholars.

Or do they envy the people for what Allah has granted them of His
grace? Indeed We have given Abraham's children the Book and wisdom, and
We have given them a great kingdom. (Holy Qur'an, 4:54)

[^292] He says so on p. 23 of his book Al-Imama.

[^293] His statement , "I do not wish people to say that Muhammad kills
his companions. Rather, we will deal with them beautifully, etc."
contains an evident proof that the hypocrites were, indeed, among the
sahaba. The claim put forth by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah" that the
hypocrites were not among the sahaba is rejected because this claim is
contradicted by the statement of the Messenger of Allah who refers to
them as his companions.

[^294] In Arabic, she is called al-humayraa which means: the woman the
color of whose complexion is slightly red. \_\_ Tr.

[^295] These were the Meccans who remained heathen till the conquest of
Mecca.

[^296] Refer to the book Ma\`a al-Sadiqeen (With the Truthful) by the
same author.

[^297] This is so because all "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" favor Abu
Bakr, Umar, and Uthman over Ali ibn Abu Talib . Since the latter is the
master of the \`Itrat and the best of Ahl al-Bayt after the Prophet ,
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" place Ahl al-Bayt in the second place in
their esteem. They prefer over them the first sahaba to whom they refer
as the "righteous caliphs."

[^298] Nowadays, they claim saying, "We are more worthy of Ali and Ahl
al-Bayt from the Shi\`as." If so, why did their scholars and the Imams
of their sects abandon the fiqh of Ahl al-Bayt and forgot it completely?
They, instead, followed sects which they invented and for which Allah
sent no proof. The Most Exalted One has said, "The most worthy among
people of Ibrahim are those who followed him." As for those who did not
follow him, they clearly are not worthy of him.

[^299] The author is from Tunisia where a good number of Jews have been
living for centuries. \_\_ Tr.

