Chapter 3 :the First Incident That Led To Dividing the Muslim Ummah Into Shi`as and Sunnis Chapter 4 : an Event That Led To Their Divergence From the Prophet's Sunnah
======================================================================================================================================================================

That was their refusal to join Usamah's army which was personally
raised by the Messenger of Allah who ordered them, two days before his
demise, to enlist under Usamah's leadership. They went as far as casting
doubt about the wisdom of the Messenger of Allah and criticizing him for
having appointed a 17-year old young man, who did not even grow a beard,
as the army's leader. Abu Bakr and Umar, as well as many other sahaba,
refused to join the army in the pretext of taking care of the issue of
caliphate despite the Prophet's curse upon all those who would not join
Usamah.[^14]

As for Ali and his followers, they were not assigned by the Messenger
of Allah to join Usamah's army in order to circumvent dissension, and in
order to thus remove the obstacle of the presence of the stubborn ones
who opposed Allah's Commandment, so that they might not come back from
Mu'ta before Ali was in full control of the reins of government, as
Allah and His Messenger wanted him to, as a successor to the Prophet.

But the shrewd Arabs among Quraysh anticipated the Prophet's plan and
refused to get out of Medina. They waited till the Messenger went back
to his Lord. It was then that they carried out their own scheme as they
had planned, going against what Allah and the Messenger of Allah had
willed; in other words, they rejected the Prophet's Sunnah.

Thus does it become obvious to us, and to all researchers, that Abu
Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, and Abu Ubaydah Amir
al-Jarrah always refused to be bound by the Prophet's Sunnah, preferring
to follow their own views. They always pursued their worldly interests
and desired to attain political dominance even if the price of doing so
was transgression against Allah and His Messenger.

As for Ali and the sahaba who followed him, they always upheld the
Prophet's Sunnah and acted upon implementing it to the letter as much as
they could. We have seen how Ali during that crisis carried out the
Prophet's will to give him his funeral bath, prepare the coffin, perform
the funeral prayers for him, and to lay him to rest in his grave. Ali
carried out all these orders without being diverted by anything even
though he knew that the others were racing to Banu Sa\`ida's saqeefa
(shed) in order to promote one of them as the caliph. He could do the
same and sabotage their plan, but his respect for the Prophet's Sunnah,
and his implementation thereof, dictated thae he remain by the side of
the Prophet.

Here we have to pause, though for a short while, to observe such great
manners which Ali had learned from the Prophet. While sacrificing his
position as the caliph in order to carry out the injunctions of the
Sunnah, he witnessed the others rejecting the Sunnah as they sought the
caliphate.

[^14] Read on p. 29, Vol. 1, of al-Shahristani's book Kitab al-milal wal
nihal the Prophet's statement: "Allah curses whoever lags behind
Usamah's army."

