Chapter 44 :with Dr. Al-mousawi and His "authentication"
========================================================

I met a group of educated youths at the house of a Brother in Islam to
whom I was linked with ties of kinship and childhood memories. The
meeting took place at a Paris suburb during a banquet he held on the
occasion of a long awaited birth of a son, a newborn with whom Allah
blessed him after an extended period of hopeful anticipation. Our
discussion revolved around the Shi\`as and the Sunnis. Most of those
present were Algerians who were very enthusiastically in support of the
Islamic revolution [in Iran]. They were criticizing the Shi\`as,
repeating well known age-old myths. They differed among themselves. Some
of them were fair minded persons who said that the Shi\`as were their
brethren, whereas there were others who charged the Shi\`as with every
misguidance, even preferring Christians over them.

When we dealt in depth with the discussion and deduction, some of them
kept making fun of me, saying that I was one of those persons who were
deceived by the glitter of the Iranian revolution. My friend tried to
convince them that I was a well known researcher and author of many
books dealing with this same subject.

One of them, however, said that he had the proof which could never be
repudiated. Suddenly everyone stopped speaking. I asked him what that
proof was. He asked me to wait for a few minutes. Then he quickly went
to his adjacent house and came back carrying a book titled Al-Shi\`a
wal-Tasheeh (Shi\`as and authentication) by Dr. Musa al-Musawi. I
laughed when I saw the book and said, "Is this the proof which cannot be
repudiated?!" He turned to those present and said:

The author of this book is the greatest Shi\`a scholar, one of the
highest Shi\`a authorities. He has a certificate in ijtihad; his father
and grandfather are also scholars. Yet he recognized the truth and
renounced Shi\`ism, becoming one of Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a. And I am
confident that had this Brother (meaning myself) read this book, he
would not have defended the Shi\`as at all, and he would have come to
know about what they hide and about their deviation.

Again I laughed and said to him, "So that you may know that I did,
indeed, read it as a scrutinizing researcher, I will provide you, before
everyone present here, the proof which cannot be repudiated from the
book itself and which you have just brought!" He and everyone else
present eagerly said, "Let us hear it from you."

I said, "I do not remember the exact page number, but I do remember the
title very well which is \`What Shi\`a Imams say about the Righteous
Caliphs.'" He asked me, "And what is wrong with it?" I said, "Look for
it and read it before everybody, then I will explain to you the
irrevocable proof it contains."

He found the chapter and read it to those present. Its summary is that
Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, peace be upon him, used to express pride at being
a relative of Abu Bakr "al-Siddeeq," saying, "Abu Bakr begot me twice."
Those who quote this statement narrate saying that Imam al-Sadiq, on the
other hand, used to discredit Abu Bakr.

Dr. al-Musawi comments by saying, "Is it rational for Imam al-Sadiq to
brag about his grandfather [Abu Bakr] on one hand then discredits him on
the other? Such talk is not coming from an ordinary ignorant person but
from an Imam."

Everyone asked, "Where is the proof in all of this?! It sounds
reasonable and logical." I said, "Dr. al-Musawi concluded from Imam
al-Sadiq's statement that Abu Bakr begot him twice that he used to be
very proud of his grandfather, but such a statement does not indicate at
all that it contains any praise of Abu Bakr. Add to this the fact that
Imam al-Sadiq was not a direct grandson of Abu Bakr but only his
mother's grandfather was Abu Bakr. Keep in mind that Imam al-Sadiq was
born seventy years after the death of Abu Bakr; so, he never saw him."

They said, "We do not understand what you mean by that." I said, "What
would you say about someone who brags about his immediate grandfather,
the father of his father, saying that he is the most knowledgeable man
of his time, and that history never knew a match for him, then he says
that he studied and learned from him: is it reasonable for us to expect
him to discredit him after having thus praised him? Can a rational
person brag about someone on one hand then call him kafir on the
other?!" They all said, "No, this is not reasonable, and it cannot
be."

I then said, "Read what is written on the first page of the book in
your hand. You will see that Dr. al-Musawi is that same person!" He read
the following:

I was born and raised at the home of the greatest leader of the Shi\`a
sect, and I studied and learned at the hands of the greatest scholar and
religious authority the history of Shi\`ism has ever known from the time
of the Great Occultation till our time: He is the greatest Imam Sayyid
Abul-Hasan al-Musawi about whom it is said, "He made people forget those
before him and eclipsed those who came after him."

I said, "All Praise is due to Allah Who has manifested the truth
through the words of al-Musawi himself! He personally indicted himself
when he wondered: \`Is it rational for someone to brag about his
grandfather on one hand then discredit him on the other? Such talk comes
only from an ordinary ignorant person...' One who describes his
grandfather with such great merits which did not combine in anyone else
among genius scholars, claiming that he learned at his hands and derived
his knowledge from him, then he turns to discredit him and his creed,
cannot be anyone but an ordinary ignorant person."

Everyone lowered his head, whereas my friend and host felt excited and
said, "Did I not tell you that Brother al-Tijani is an objective and
logical researcher?!"

The person who had the book with him, and who was making the most
noise, contemplated for some time then said, "Listen, Brother! Maybe Dr.
al-Musawi came to know the truth after growing up and learning. Glory to
Allah! Seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave!" I answered him by
saying, "Had the case been as you say, Dr. al-Musawi should have
disowned his grandfather and mentor who granted him his certificate of
ijtihad, rather than his bragging about them and builing an argument
based on their testimony while, at the same time, unknowingly calling
them kafirs. If I discuss all the topics he wrote about, I will show you
wonders."

That meeting terminated after explanations and details provided about
the nature of the confusion. Its results, by the Praise of Allah, were
very positive: three persons saw the light of truth after reading my
books.

Now I seize the opportunity to briefly present my kind readers with
some of what I have written about this topic because the book titled
Al-Shi\`a wal-Tasheeh is effective wherever there are Wahhabis. The
latter have the wealth and the influence in some areas; therefore, they
may be able to influence some Muslim youths who are not familiar with
the Shi\`as and deceive them with this book. They may stop them from
arriving at useful researches and may thus install a barrier between
them and the truth they seek.

These opponents have used the book titled Al-Shi\`a wal-Tasheeh by Dr.
Musa al-Musawi as their argument against the Shi\`as, printing millions
of its copies and distributing them free of charge among educated youths
through the efforts of authorities whose goals and objectives are very
well known to the elite as well as to the commoners.

These naive people thought that they refuted the beliefs of Imamite
Shi\`as by publishing and distributing a book simply because its author
is Ayatullah al-Musawi, a Shi\`a, so that their argument would be built
on citing someone from the Shi\`a folks themselves. But these poor souls
have overlooked many issues which they did not calculate and whose
negative results they could not assess. The result: a great deal of
self-inflicted harm.

Personally, I do not waste my time in rebutting Dr. Musa al-Musawi's
lies with which he filled his book. I think that my book Ma\`a
al-Sadiqeen (With The Truthful) contains convincing responses to his
lies although it was written shortly before his own book and its context
was simply to prove that Shi\`a beliefs are all based on the Holy Qur'an
and the authentic Sunnah of the Prophet, as well as the consensus of the
Muslims, including "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." We did not discuss any
of their beliefs without proving it from the Sahih books of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

It is thus proven that what Dr. Musa al-Musawi says is nothing but
nonsense and allegations which are not based on any scientific proof or
Islamic logic, and it discredits "Ahl al-Sunnah" before all others.

It also is quite clear that those who promoted his book do not know
much about Islamic facts, thus unveiling their own faults and
ignorance.

All Shi\`a beliefs the author of this book criticizes and which he uses
to slander the Shi\`as, are all, by the Grace of Allah, backed by the
authentic books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a." The shame is not on the
Shi\`as but on Musa al-Musawi and "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" who do not
know what their Sahih and Musnad books contain. Consider the
following:

Reference to the subject of Imamate and to the ahadith saying that the
successors to the Prophet are twelve and are all from Quraysh is not an
invention of the Shi\`as; it exists in Sunni Sahih and Musnad books;The
belief in Imam al-Mahdi, that he belongs to the purified Progeny of the
Prophet, who will fill the earth with justice and equity after its being
filled with injustice and oppression, is not a Shi\`a invention but
exists in the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

Saying that Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib is the wasi of the Messenger of
Allah is not a Shi\`a invention but exists in the Sahih books of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

The belief in and the practice of the concept of taqiyya is not a
Shi\`a invention; rather, it exists in the Holy Qur'an and is fixed in
the Prophet's Sunnah, and all of this is backed by the Sahih books of
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

The belief in the legality of temporary marriage (mut\`a) is not a
Shi\`a invention; rather, Allah and His Messenger permitted it whereas
Umar prohibited it. This is proven by the authentic books of "Ahl
al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

The belief in the payment of the khums levied from profit earnings is
not a Shi\`a invention; rather, the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger mandate it as the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
testify.

As for visiting the shrines of the Imams, this is not done by the
Shi\`as alone; "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" visit the shrines of
righteous walis and other good people, holding in their honor annual
festivals and celebrations.

The belief in the badaa and that Allah obliterates or confirms whatever
He pleases is not the product of the Shi\`as' imagination; rather, it is
confirmed in Bukhari's Sahih.

To combine the prayers in exceptional situations is not an invention of
the Shi\`as; it exists in the Holy Qur'an; it was practiced by the great
Prophet, and it is confirmed by the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a."

To believe in the obligation of prostrating on the dust and on the
ground is not a Shi\`a invention; rather, it was done by the Master of
Messengers and the Seal of Prophets as testified by the Sahih books of
"Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a."

Besides these issues which Dr. Musa al-Musawi mentions in order to blow
things out of proportions and to make a fuss, such as the rumor of the
distortion of the Qur'an, "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" deserve to be
charged with it rather than the Shi\`as, as we explained in our book
With the Truthful.

To sum up, the book written by Dr. al-Musawi entirely contradicts the
Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger. It contradicts the
Muslims' consensus as well as the dictates of sound reason. A great deal
of what al-Musawi resents constitutes religious obligations mandated by
the Holy Qur'an and ordered by the great Messenger of Allah. These
obligations, moreover, are agreed upon by all Muslims. One who denies
them is an apostate according to the consensus of the Muslims.

If he means by "authentication" the altering of such beliefs and
injunctions, he will then have committed kufr and abandoned Islam
altogether, and all Muslims are required to denounce him.

He probably means by it the altering of his own personal beliefs from
whose complexes he suffers. Such complexes clearly demonstrate that he
really does not know anything about Shi\`ism. Or he may have had a
personal grudge against the Shi\`as whom he considers to be responsible
for the murder of his father who, as he says on p. 5 of his book, was
slaughtered by a criminal in religious garbs as a ram is slaughtered. So
he grew up since his childhood suffering from that complex, bearing
grudge against the Shi\`as without their having committed any sin. He,
therefore, directed his attention towards "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a"
and shared their grudge and animosity towards the followers of Ahl
al-Bayt. He, in fact, never in reality belonged either to this party or
to that. He did not know anything about the Shi\`as except the lies
circulated by their enemies. Nor did he know about "Ahl al-Sunnah wal
Jama\`a" except their Friday and congregational prayers, that is to say,
if he ever attended them. If his objective is as such, then he ought to
correct his corrupt beliefs whereby he differed from the consensus of
the nation.

As he claims on p. 5 of his book, Dr. al-Musawi grew up and learned at
the hands of the greatest leader and theologian known in the history of
Shi\`ism since the Major Occultation, namely his grandfather the
greatest Imam Sayyid Abul-Hasan about whom it is said that "he made
people forget those before him and eclipsed those who succeeded him." If
such is the case, why did he not learn from him and adorn himself with
his manners? Why did he not follow his guidance and nourish his mind
with his knowledge? Rather, we find him in his book deriding and
ridiculing the beliefs of his grandfather, the Imam and the leading
religious authority of his time for whom the history of the Shi\`as
never saw a match. All this proves that the al-Musawi was disobedient to
his parents. Actually, his disobedience went beyond that to include
calling his grandfather as well as parents kafir. Had the Shi\`as been
kafir, as al-Musawi sees them, then their authority and greatest leader
who led them to kufr was none other than his own grandfather (who is
surely clear of this accusation).

It is a shame beyond which there is no other shame that the grandson
Musa al-Musawi should be ignorant of what his grandfather Abul-Hasan
al-Musawi, may Allah have mercy on his soul, wrote in his book Waseelat
al-Najat (the means to salvation). Yet the grandson claims that he
learned and was tutored by grandfather!

And it is a great shame that a young Tunisian man who lives thousands
of kilometers away from Najaf[^300] should be more familiar with the book
titled Waseelat al-Najat: he finds through it guidance to the facts
relevant to Ahl al-Bayt. In contrast, the grandson of the author of this
book, who was born and who grew up in his house and was tutored by him
[as he claims], never did.

What the greatest Imam Sayyid Abul-Hasan al-Musawi al-Isfahani (may
Allah sanctify his soul) wrote in Waseelat al-Najat is contradicted and
ridiculed by his grandson Dr. Musa al-Musawi. The latter regarded it as
deviation from the path of Islam.

Yet logic says that if the doctrine of the greatest Imam and the
religious authority, for whom the history of the Shi\`as never found a
match (as his grandson thinks), is sound and accurate, the doctrine of
the grandson is apostasy and misguidance. And had the doctrine upheld by
Dr. Musa al-Musawi been sound and accurate, the doctrine of his
grandfather should have been apostasy and misguidance. In the latter
case, he has to disown him rather than brag about him and make such
glowing reference to his being raised by him as he states in the
Introduction to his book.

Through this argument and logic can the highly coveted certificate
earned by Musa al-Musawi from Al Kashif al-Ghita be thrown out for the
following reasons:

FIRST: The photograph he included in his book of a statement testifying
to his having earned a high degree of Islamic fiqh, namely the degree of
ijtihad, is no more than a license relevant to the traditions the
student had learned from his teacher; it is given by mentors to most of
their students. I personally have two such certificates: one from [the
late] Grand Ayatullah Imam Abul-Qasim al-Khu'i of Najaf, and the other
from [the late] Grand Ayatullah al-Mar\`ashi al-Najafi of Qum. So, a
certificate in narrating hadith is not an advanced degree in Islamic
fiqh as Dr. Musa al-Musawi claims in order to fool the commoners among
his readers who do not know the system and the stages relevant to the
studies conducted at scholarly hawzas.

SECOND: The grandson of one of the greatest scholars, who feigns the
ability to correct others, has betrayed the trust with which he was
entrusted by his teacher and mentor who, al-Musawi claims, granted him
the degree of ijtihad. The late supreme religious authority and head of
the scholarly hawza of al-Najaf al-Ashraf Muhammad al-Husayn Al Kashif
al-Ghita has said the following with regard to the certificate a photo
of which is published in al-Musawi's book: "I [hereby] grant him
permission to quote the authentic traditions which I had myself learned
from my great mentors and revered professors [and which I taught
him]."

We have seen how al-Musawi rebuts and ridicules everything narrated by
Al Kashif al-Ghita, the supreme religious authority and the head of the
scholarly hawza who cites his great mentors and revered professors in
his [al-Ghita's] book Asl al-Shi\`a wa Usuliha (roots and principles of
the Shi\`as). In that book, the author states all the beliefs and
injunctions to which the Shi\`as adhere. So how can anyone compare the
book titled Al-Shi\`a wal-Tasheeh which his betraying student wrote with
the book titled Asl al-Shi\`a wa Usuliha which the supreme religious
authority Kashif al-Ghita wrote?

Since Kashif al-Ghita is the supreme religious authority and the head
of the scholarly hawza at al-Najaf al-Ashraf, as al-Musawi admits on p.
158 of his book, and since al-Musawi brags about the lofty certificate
he earned from him thirty years ago, why does not the junior student
al-Musawi ridicule the beliefs of his great professor who taught him
and, as he claims, granted him a lofty certificate?!

If the supreme religious authority and the head of the scholarly hawza
Shaykh Muhammad al-Husayn Al Kashif al-Ghita is right and his beliefs
are accurate, al-Musawi is then wrong and all his beliefs are false. Had
the supreme religious authority been wrong and his beliefs inaccurate,
so al-Musawi ridicules and rebuts them, then the latter should not have
told lies to people and deceived them into thinking that he had earned
his high certificate in Islamic fiqh, that is, the degree of ijtihad,
from his holiness.

The beliefs of Musa al-Musawi are labelled as accurate only by the
author himself who says so in his book. He lauds his grandfather Abu
al-Hasan al-Musawi al-Isfahani as the greatest leader and theologian
known in the history of Shi\`ism since the Major Occultation. He brags
of being the student of Kashif al-Ghita whom he describes as the man who
granted him his "high degree." And he labels millions of Shi\`as from
the day of the Saqeefa till our time as "kafir."

I had promised my Lord to examine every issue before judging it. I,
therefore, read Musa al-Musawi's book Al-Shi\`a wal-Tasheeh with all my
faculties in the hope I might find in it what I had missed and complete
what was lacking in my knowledge. But I found nothing in it except lies
and contradictions and the denial of what is already confirmed by the
text of the Holy Qur'an. I even found it ridiculing the Sunnah of the
Prophet and violating the consensus of the Muslims. I then realized that
al-Musawi did not exert any effort to even read al-Bukhari's Sahih which
is held by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" as the most authentic of all
books. Al-Musawi, according to his book, wants the Shi\`as to join the
ranks of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" and thus forsake the commandments
of Allah and His Messenger. This "brilliant scholar" earned a "high
certificate" in Islamic jurisprudence, namely that of ijtihad, at the
age of twenty (Praise to Allah Who grants wisdom to whomsoever He
pleases!) followed by a Ph.D. in Islamic Legislative System (Shari\`a)
from Tehran University in 1955. Do not forget that he was born in
al-Najaf al-Ashraf in 1930. He also earned his Doctorate of Philosophy
from Paris University (the Sorbonne) in 1959.

I say: Had he taken time to read only al-Bukhari's Sahih, a book
regarded by "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`a" as quite reliable, he would not
have fallen in such a dilemma from which he will never find any exit
except by sincerely repenting, and by returning to Allah. Otherwise,
high degrees, attractive titles, and money spent to divide the Muslims
will not avail him in the least. Allah, the most Exalted One, has
said,Surely those who disbelieve spend their wealth (only) to hinder
(people) from the way of Allah; so they shall spend it, then it shall be
to them (the cause of) an intense regret, then they shall be overtaken;
and those who disbelieve shall all be driven to hell so that Allah might
separate the impure from the pure and put the impure upon one another
and pile it up together then cast it into hell: These are the losers.
(Holy Qur'an, 8:36-37)

His book, anyway, is full of self-contradictions in which any
researcher stumbles. If al-Musawi finds himself qualified to correct the
beliefs and ahkam of those who adhere to Shi\`ism, I invite him to a
televised interview and to a scholarly debate attended by any researcher
or verifier who wishes to attend so that people may come to know after
it who really needs to be corrected. This is what the Holy Qur'an calls
for and what free thinking in the most civilized societies encourages so
that the Muslims will see their affairs clearly and will cease charging
some people, out of sheer ignorance, of being kafir then repent
thereafter. Say: Bring your proof if you are truthful. (Holy Qur'an,
2:111)

One thing remains to state so that we may be fair to Dr. al-Musawi. It
is the reference he makes in his book to these subjects for which he
provides three major headings:

**1. self-flagellation during Ashura**

**2. the third portion of Shehada (that Ali is a servant of Allah)**

**3. terrorism**

As for self-flagellation, it is not one of the doctrines of the
Shi\`as, nor is it a part of their creed. Rather, it is what some
commoners do, and Shi\`as are not the only ones who practice it. There
are some Sunnis, particularly those who follow the [sufi] Aysawi
tareeqa, which is well known throughout all of north Africa, who
practice rituals more damaging to Islam's image than what some Shi\`as
do. Yet by practicing them they do not express their grief for the
tragedy that befell Imam al-Husayn, nor for the suffering of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be upon them.

We agree with the author's statement in his book in this regard, and we
would like to work with him to remove this phenomenon from all Muslim
lands. There are many sincere Shi\`a scholars who prohibit such an
abomination and try hard to put an end to it, as al-Musawi himself
admits.

As for the third portion of the declaration of faith, that is, that Ali
is a friend of Allah, al-Musawi himself knows very well that Shi\`a
scholars always say that it is not a part of the athan. If one says it
with the intention of its being obligatory, or with the intention of its
being part of the athan or the iqama, both his athan and iqama will be
void. Al-Musawi knows this fact very well, but he only wishes to make a
fuss about anything that serves his suspicious objective.

Regarding terrorism, we categorically reject it just as Dr. al-Musawi
rejects it. Yet it was not appropriate for Dr. al-Musawi to attach this
horrible charge to the Shi\`as, for the wave of terrorism which has
stamped the past decade with its seal is an inevitable result of the
ongoing struggle between the East and the West, the North and the South,
the arrogant ones and the downtrodden, the usurpers and those whose
lands and everything else were usurped.

Why does Dr. al-Musawi link drug traffickers to the Shi\`as? History
testifies that the Shi\`as have been targeted throughout history by
followers of all other sects, by various governments, and by the
colonizers, yet they have always rejected terrorism in all its forms and
shapes.

Why does al-Musawi not talk about the terrorism of Mu\`awiyah and the
assassinations which he staged to eliminate many Muslims and which
culminated with poisoning Imam al-Hasan ? He used to always assassinate
his opponents from truthful believers with poison then says, "Surely
Allah has hosts made of honey."

Are promoters of world Islamic movements, who have been described [by
the enemies of Islam, including governments of Muslim countries] as
"terrorists," in Palestine, Egypt, the Sudan, Tunisia, Algeria,
Afghanistan, and even in Western countries, in the Pacific, in Ireland,
and elsewhere, adhere to the Shi\`a faith?!

If Dr. al-Musawi defines "terrorism" as the kidnapping of hostages or
the rerouting then blowing up of airplanes, freedom fighters from the
Palestinian people, who have been displaced and expelled by Israel after
being forced out of their homes, are the ones who kidnapped hostages at
the Munich stadium at the beginning of the 1972 Olympic sports and
killed a number of Israeli participants in them. They are the ones who
rerouted some airplanes then blew them up. They did all of this in order
to wake up the world's conscience and to introduce their case to the
world and make them aware of the oppression inflicted upon them and the
like of which humanity never saw throughout its entire history.

Al-Musawi bears witness that these are not Shi\`as. If Dr. al-Musawi
permits himself to be influenced by those who run the foreign news media
and who try their best to attach this horrible accusation to the Shi\`as
because of the political stand and the extreme animosity of such media
to the Islamic Revolution (of Iran), the same media apparatuses include
on the top of their list of international terrorists Libya, Syria, and
Iraq, and these are not necessarily Shi\`a countries. So why does Dr.
al-Musawi specifically singles out the Shi\`as when he discusses
terrorism in his book? He himself says on p. 122 that the Shi\`a
government of Iran does not represent all the Shi\`as of the world or
even of Iran. If the case is as such, then Dr. al-Musawi has to correct
his own concepts.

Thus do we do justice to Dr. al-Musawi and distinguish the truth from
falsehood, the good from the bad.

We have proven to the kind readers the fact that all the beliefs upheld
by Imamite Shi\`as are accurate and sound because they are all derived
from the Holy Qur'an and the Prophet's Sunnah. The attempts of those who
have special interests, the trouble makers, the enemies of Allah, of His
Messenger, and of Islam, to level false charges and to circulate false
rumors in order to discredit the beliefs of those who uphold the
Purified Progeny will fail and bear no fruit whatsoever. Allah, the Most
Exalted One, has said,As for the scum, it passes away as a worthless
thing; as for that which benefits people, it tarries in the earth; thus
does Allah set parables. (Holy Qur'an, 13:17)

We plead to Him, the Glorified One, the most Exalted, to guide all of
us and to enable us to achieve what He loves for us to achieve, to
inspire to us the means of guidance, to remove His wrath from us, to
dispel our agony with the presence of the Awaited One, and to hasten for
us his reappearance. They see it distant, while we see it nigh.

And the last of our supplication is: "All Praise is due only to Allah,
the Lord of the Worlds, and the best of prayers and the purest of
salutations are unto the man who was sent as a mercy for all the worlds,
our master and leader Muhammad and unto his righteous and purified
Progeny.

[^300] Here, the author is referring to himself. \_\_ Tr.

