Chapter 5 : Another Incident Juxtaposed the Shi`as Versus the Sunnis
====================================================================

This was the very serious stand taken by most of the sahaba at Banu
Sa\`ida's shed which clearly contradicted the Prophet's statements
appointing Ali as the caliph and which they all witnessed on the Day of
the Ghadeer following Hijjatul Wada\`. Despite the differences of views
among the Muhajirs (Meccan immigrants) and the Ansars (Medenite helpers)
with regard to the issue of caliphate, they all impudently raced with
one another to forsake the Prophet's binding statements by advancing Abu
Bakr to the caliphate even if it cost them perdition, thus demonstrating
their readiness to kill anyone who even remotely considered opposing
them, and even if he were the closest person to the Prophet.[^15]

This incident also underscored the fact that the vast majority of the
sahaba assisted Abu Bakr and Umar in rejecting the Sunnah of their
Prophet and replacing it with their own ijtihad, personal viewpoints,
for they surely were in favor of ijtihad. It also distinguished from the
rest of the community a Muslim minority that upheld the Prophet's
statements and boycotted the allegiance to Abu Bakr, namely Ali and his
Shi\`as, supporters and followers.

Yes; the distinct identity of each of these two groups, or parties,
became apparent in the Muslim society immediately following the
incidents stated before. One party attempted to respect and implement
the Prophet's Sunnah, whereas the other attempted to defeat it,
obliterate it, and replace it with ijtihad, a concept which attracted
the majority, tempting it to be hopeful of reaching the seat of
government or at least participating in it. The first Sunni party was
headed by Ali ibn Abu Talib and his Shi\`as, whereas the other party
which advocated ijtihad was headed by Abu Bakr and Umar and most of the
sahaba. The second party, led by Abu Bakr and Umar, took upon itself to
crush the first one, and many measures were planned to wipe out the
other opposition party such as the following:

**1) Isolation of the Opposition and its Economic Paralyzation**

The first attempt undertaken by the ruling party was to exclude its
opponents from having a free access to the sources of livelihood and
finance. Abu Bakr and Umar dismissed the farmers who had been hired by
Fatima to cultivate the land of Fadak[^16], considering it a Muslim
commonwealth rather than the sole property of Fatima as her father had
stated. They also deprived her of all the rest of her father's
inheritance, claiming that prophets left no inheritance. They terminated
her share of the khums which the Messenger of Allah had assigned for
himself and his family because they were prohibited from receiving
charity.

Thus did Ali become paralyzed economically: the land tract of Fadak,
which used to yield excellent profits for him, was confiscated from him;
he was deprived of his cousin's inheritance which, at the same time, was
also the legitimate right of his wife; moreover, his share of khums was
also cut off. Ali and his wife and children suddenly found themselves in
need of those who could feed and clothe them, and this is exactly what
Abu Bakr meant when he said to Fatima al-Zahra once: "Yes; you have the
right to receive the khums, but I will fare with it just as the
Messenger of Allah had fared, so that I do not let you be without food
or without clothes."

As we have already indicated, the companions who sided with Ali were
mostly slaves who had no wealth; so, the ruling party did not fear them
or their influence, for people incline to the rich and despise the
poor.

**2) Isolating the Opposition and Paralyzing it Socially**

In order to discard the opposition party headed by Ali ibn Abu Talib,
the ruling party also isolated it socially. The first thing which Abu
Bakr and Umar did was the removal of the psychological and emotional
barrier which obligated all Muslims to respect and revere the relatives
of the Greatest Messenger of Allah.

Since Ali is the cousin of the Prophet and the master of the Purified
Progeny, there were some among the sahaba who hated him and envied him
for the favors which Allah had bestowed upon him, not to mention the
hypocrites who were waiting in ambush for him. Fatima was the only
offspring of the Prophet who survived him. She was, as the Messenger of
Allah said, the leader of all the ladies of the world; therefore, all
Muslims respected and revered her due to the status which she had earned
with her father and because of the traditions which he stated about her
virtues, honor, and purity. But Abu Bakr and Umar deliberately tried to
remove such respect and regard from the hearts of the public. Umar ibn
al-Khattab once approached Fatima's house bearing a torch of fire and
threatened to burn the house and everyone inside it if its residents
refused to come out to swear the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. In his
Al-\`Iqd al-Fareed, Ibn Abd Rabbih says,

As regarding Ali, al-Abbas, and al-Zubayr, these stayed at Fatima's
house till Abu Bakr sent them Umar ibn al-Khattab to get them out of
Fatima's house. He said to him: "If they refuse, fight them." So he came
bearing a torch of fire in order to burn the house on them. Fatima met
him and asked him, "O son of al-Khattab! Have you come to burn our
house?" "Yes," said he, "unless you accept that regarding which the
Ummah has agreed."[^17]

If Fatima al-Zahra is the Leader of the women of all the world, as
indicated in the Sahih books of "Ahl al-Sunnah wal Jama\`ah," and if her
sons al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the masters of the youths of Paradise
and the Prophet's fragrant flower in this nation are thus humiliated and
demeaned to the extent that Umar swears in front of everyone to burn
them and their house if they refused to swear the oath of allegiance to
Abu Bakr, can anyone expect others to retain any respect for Ali ibn Abu
Talib when most of them hated and envied him? After the Prophet's
demise, Ali became the leader of the opposition, yet he did not have any
wealth to attract people to him.

Al-Bukhari indicates in his Sahih how Fatima demanded that Abu Bakr
return what she had inherited from the Messenger of Allah, whatever
Allah had allocated for him in Medina in addition to Fadak and the
spoils of Khaybar, but Abu Bakr refused to give anything to her. Fatima,
therefore, became very angry with Abu Bakr whom she boycotted and to
whom she did not say a word after such unfair confiscation till she died
only six months after the death of her father the Prophet. When she
died, her husband Ali buried her at night. Abu Bakr did not perform the
funeral prayers for her.

And Ali used to be held in high esteem by the public so long as Fatima
was alive, so when she died, Ali saw how people turned away from him;
therefore, he sought reconciliation with Abu Bakr and allegiance to him,
whereas he never did so during all those months.[^18]

Thus did the ruling party score a big success in isolating Ali ibn Abu
Talib economically and socially, and in removing the respect people used
to have for him, for they did not maintain any respect or regard for him
especially following the death of Fatima al-Zahra, so much so that he
was surprised to see how people's attitude towards him had changed. He,
therefore, felt forced to reconcile with Abu Bakr and give his
allegiance to him according to the narration of al-Bukhari and Muslim.
In other words, the phrase "Ali was surprised to see how people's
attitude towards him had changed," borrowing al-Bukhari's own words,
provides us with a clear indication of the extent of grudge and
animosity the father of al-Hasan had to face after the death of his
cousin then of his wife. Some sahaba may have even taunted and ridiculed
him upon seeing him in public places; this is why he was surprised and
resented such an abomination.

This chapter is not meant to narrate history or detail the injustices
inflicted upon Ali in as much as we would like to demonstrate the bitter
and painful fact: The standard-bearer of the Prophet's Sunnah, and the
gate of the Prophet's knowledge, became a pariah. Ironically, those who
supported the concept of deriving their own personal religious views,
from those who rejected the Prophet's Sunnah, became the rulers whom the
vast majority of the sahaba supported.

**3) Isolating the Opposition Politically**

Despite enforcing a severe blockade, the confiscation of the monetary
rights, and the isolation of Ali ibn Abu Talib from the society, which
turned people's attention away from him as we have explained, the ruling
party was not satisfied with all these measures, so it resorted to
isolating Ali politically, excluding him from all apparatuses of the
state and not permitting him to participate in any official position or
any responsibility. Although they appointed permissive Umayyads who
fought Islam during the life-time of the Prophet, such rulers kept Imam
Ali away from the stage of political activity for one quarter of a
century during the life-time of Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman. While some
sahaba who were appointed governors were hoarding wealth and treasuring
gold and silver at the Muslims' expense, Ali ibn Abu Talib was watering
the palm trees owned by the Jews in order to earn his livelihood with
the sweat of his brow.

Thus did the gate of knowledge, the nation's scholar, and the
standard-bearer of the Sunnah remain confined inside his house not
appreciated except by a handful of the downtrodden who remained loyal to
him, receiving guidance from him, and upholding his rope.

During his own caliphate, Imam Ali tried in vain to bring people back
to the Qur'an and the Prophetic Sunnah because they became fanatical in
their support of the ijtihad which Umar ibn al-Khattab had invented, and
some of them even publicly cried out: Waa Sunnata Umarah! ("O what a
great Sunnah Umar has brought us!).

This is not an allegation but the fact agreed upon by the consensus of
all Muslims and which they recorded in their Sahih books and with which
every researcher and man of fairness is familiar. Imam Ali used to know
the entire text of the Holy Qur'an by heart and was familiar with all
its injunctions. He was the first person to compile it as al-Bukhari
himself testifies, whereas neither Abu Bakr nor Umar nor Uthman knew it
by heart, nor did they know its injunctions.[^19] Historians went as far
as counting as many as seventy instances when Umar said: Lawla Ali la
halaka Umar (Had it not been for Ali, Umar would have surely perished),
and his own telling Abu Bakr: "May I not live in any period of time
without al-Hasan's father."

[^15] The most glaring testimonial is Umar ibn al-Khattab's threat to
burn the house of Fatima and everyone inside it. This incident is quite
famous in history chronicles.

[^16] Fadak's story is well known in history books and so is al-Zahra's
dispute with Abu Bakr. She died angry with him. This is a famous
incident recorded by both Bukhari and Muslim.

[^17] This is stated in Volume Four of Al-\`Iqd al-Fareed where the
author discusses those who refused to swear the oath of allegiance to
Abu Bakr.

[^18] Al-Bukhari, Sahih (original Arabic text), Vol. 5, p. 82 in the
discussion of the Battle of Khaybar, and it is also recorded in the
"Book of Itjihad" in Muslim's Sahih.

[^19] Umar's ignorance regarding the distribution of the legacy of a man
who leaves neither parents nor offspring behind, and who has no will, is
quite famous in the books of Sunnah. The same is true about his
ignorance of the injunctions relevant to tayammum; these are all known
to everyone as al-Bukhari indicates on p. 90, Vol. 1, of his Sahih.

