Imam Al-Hasan’s Reign
=====================

On the second day, Imam al-Hasan, surrounded by his brothers and the
Hashemite youths, directed towards Kufa Masjid and delivered a funeral
oration in which he used words as eloquently as his father. He showed
that his father had been such a unique personality that none from the
past and coming generations can be his like.

In the field of justice, Imam al-Hasan (a) declared the following fact
about his father:

“He (i.e. Imam Ali) has not left behind him a single yellow (golden) nor
white (silver) piece except seven hundred dirhams with which he had
intended to have a bondmaid for his family. Yet, he ordered me to return
them to the public treasury.”

As Imam al-Hasan (a) finished his speech, the public hurried to swear
allegiance to him, even though the majority of them were not honest.

At any rate, Muawiyah realized the reality of Imam al-Hasan’s army whose
individuals were controlled by weakness, loose morale, and inclination
to rebel; he therefore challenged him to fight. Moreover, he led his
army whose individuals were quite the opposite. They were completely
obedient and submissive. They set camp in al-Madain.

Once they heard of this news, the hearts of Imam al-Hasan’s soldiers
were filled up with horror and panic. Thus, they refused the Imam’s call
to fight against Muawiyah. The Imam (a) still did not stop; he exerted
all efforts for urging people to fight. Finally, a medley of men with
different tendencies and thoughts responded to him and camped in
al-Madain.

The commander in chief of the Imam’s army, namely Ubaydullah ibn Abbas,
joined Muawiyah’s camp after he received a seductive bribe. As a
consequence, disorder and sedition took over the Imam’s army and many
reputed individuals, as well as eight thousand soldiers and the tribes
of Rabiah, insinuated themselves into Muawiyah’s camp.[^1]

The matter reached its climax when a gang headed to rob Imam al-Hasan’s
baggage. The bribes were offered to attempt to assassinate him more than
once and finally, a party in his army, most likely the Kharijites,
accused him of atheism.

In view of this situation, Imam al-Hasan (a) had to make peace with
Muawiyah, though unwillingly, so as to save his party from
extinction.[^2]

After the truce, Imam al-Hasan (a) had to leave Kufa, the city whose
people disappointed his father and him. He left for Medina where people
received him with such delight because he was one of the branches of
that pure origin, the Holy Prophet (S).

As the rightful government faded and the wrongful one came to power, the
life of Lady Zaynab entered a new phase that would bring new and yet
more grievous adversities.

[^1]: See Ansab al-Ashraf; 1:223 (part I).

[^2]: See Shaykh Murtezha Al-Yasin’s Sulh al-Hasan and Baqir Sharif
al-Qarashi’s Hayat al-Imam al-Hasan.


