Muawiyah’s Reign
================

By Muawiyah’s coming to power, the pre-Islamic idol ruling force
replaced the democratic rule of Islam. Vices, indecency, and violation
of good manners found place to expand in Islamic nation with the consent
of these individuals from Umayyad.[^1]

Muawiyah had inherited enmity against the Holy Prophet (S) from his
father who was the bitterest enemy of Islam, and from his mother Hind
who, out of her malice against Islam, had eaten the liver of Hamzah
during the Battle of Uhud. Furthermore, the son exceeded his parents in
malice; he could not hide his real feelings especially because
announcement of name of the Holy Prophet (a) during the azan - five-time
per day declaration of prayer - was annoying him.[^2]

In consequence, he hated the Prophet’s Household and offsprings in the
extreme. He therefore issued the most malicious decision to conceal
their virtues and merits.

Muhammad ibn Idris al-Shafii; the founder of the Shafiite Islamic school
of law, answered those who asked him to say his opinion about Imam Ali
Amir al-Muminin:

“What can we say about a person whose partisans have had to hide his
merits because of fear, and enemies have hidden his merits out of envy?
But between these two, his merits that have become widely known are too
numerous to be counted.”[^3]

During the reign of Muawiyah, the partisans of Imam Ali and the Ahl
al-Bayt had to suffer various sorts of persecution. For instance, the
criminal Bisr ibn Artaah killed and burnt more than thirty thousand
individuals. Samarah ibn Jundab killed eight thousand individuals from
Basra, and Ziyad ibn Abih, who exceeded everyone else in criminality,
cut the limbs of the Imam’s partisans.

Even the women who showed loyalty to Imam Ali (a) and the Ahl al-Bayt
were not spared of the inhuman procedures of Muawiyah’s criminal
authorities. Furthermore, Muawiyah gave the orders to destroy the houses
of the Imam’s partisans and leave them homeless. He also deprived them
of their shares from the public treasure[^4] and refused their
testimonies in the official courts. Eventually, Muawiyah exiled more
than fifty thousand of them to Khurasan, northeast of Persia.

By the way, those exiles propagandized Shiism in that province whose
people, later on, changed into a strong front of opposition against the
Umayyad ruling until they under the leadership of Abu Muslim
al-Khurasani, were able to overthrow their oppressive state.

Assassination of Imam al-Hasan
------------------------------

Anyhow, the gravest crime of Muawiyah was assassination of Imam al-Hasan
(a) after he had pledged, through a famous truce with the Imam, to hand
the position of leadership to the Imam. Thus, he could establish an
Umayyad royal state.

As he looked in the long list of the criminals who could do this mission
so completely, he could not find anyone more qualified than Jadah
daughter of al-Ashath, even though she was the Imam’s wife. This lady
was brought up on betrayal and perfidy.

Muawiyah sent a lethal poison to Marwan ibn al-Hakam and asked him to
seduce Jadah to poison her husband under promise of marriage to Yazid,
Muawiyah’s son.

Due to her nature, Jadah did not hesitate; she poisoned the Imam’s food.

The Imam (a) began to suffer the pains of poison and vomit pieces of
blood in a washtub. When Lady Zaynab visited him, he ordered to take
away that washtub so that she would not see that hurting view. Yet, she
became very sad as she realized that her brother would depart from her
forever very soon.

The Imam (a) then advised his brothers and companions to adhere to the
nobilities of character, good deeds, and fear of Allah. While he was
reciting Verses of the Holy Quran, his soul exalted to the Heavens to
join the endless world there.

Imam al-Husayn (a) undertook his brother’s funeral ceremonies and
intended to bury him next to his grandfather, Prophet Muhammad (S). But
Aishah, owing to incitement of the Umayyads, rode a mule and shouted,
“Do not take to my house those whom I do not like,” and created a big
seditious matter due to which the blood of huge numbers of Muslims was
about to be shed. Evading such a matter, Imam al-Husayn (a) had to
change his mind and bury his brother in another place.

Assigning Yazid as the coming caliph
------------------------------------

Muawiyah sealed his criminal reign with imposing his son, Yazid, as his
successor. Like his father and grandfather, Yazid was known of his
hypocrisy, treachery, and enmity against Islam. He, publicly, slighted
all human values and principles. He used to drink wine in every moment
of his life and some historians have specified dipsomania as cause of
his death. He was also fond of breeding animals, especially monkeys.

In summary, Yazid represented all vices and offenses that had nothing to
do with Islam or leadership of the Islamic ummah.

[^1]: See Sayyid Amir Ali’s Ruh al-Islam; 296

[^2]: See Ibn Abil-Hadid’s Sharh(u) Nahj al-Balaghah; 2:297, and 10:101.

[^3]: See al-Muhaddith al-Qummi’s al-Anwar al-Bahiyyah.

[^4]: See Ibn Abil-Hadid’s Sharh(u) Nahj al-Balaghah; 11:44.


