The Black Reign
===============

After the perdition of Muawiyah, the Islamic ummah was pervaded by a
violent, terrorist reign, which did not submit to a tradition or law or
respond to any humane emotion. Finally, it betook oppression and
despotism as its slogan.

This is the very depiction of Yazid ibn Muawiyah’s reign, which
persecuted Muslims so harshly.

During this reign, Lady Zaynab suffered the most difficult misfortunes
and adversities, and the Prophet’s family had to encounter extreme
eradication. They were slain, and the Umayyad soldiers cut their limbs
and violated their dead bodies so inhumanely. Lady Zaynab saw these
excruciating scenes with her own eyes; therefore, sadness and sorrow cut
through her heart and she could not stop her tears and cries of
mourning. That was not all. She, together with the Prophet’s harem, then
was taken as captive and shown around the provinces of the Umayyad
State. They were taken to Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, son of the ill-famed
Marjanah, and then to Yazid, grandson of the ill-famed Hind.[^1]

In any case, Lady Zaynab suffered the cruelest adversities during the
black reign of Yazid, the sinful tyrant who was an inexperienced,
lecherous youth and had known nothing about leadership, policy, or
management. He could not even manage or control himself; he submitted
completely to his whims and his one and only lust was bloodshed.

When his cursed father died in Damascus, Yazid was away on a
journey.[^2] When he received a message informing about his father’s
perdition and his becoming the caliph of the Islamic ummah, he hurried
to the capital accompanied by his immoral faction. From that moment
itself people began to criticize him for his irresponsible
behaviors.[^3]

The first thing he did in Damascus was that he declared his
determination to wage a destructive war against people of Iraq. People
of Syria, however, welcomed this determination and declared their
readiness to plunge themselves into such a war.[^4]

Yazid’s most malicious opposition was in Medina; they were Imam
al-Husayn (a) and Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr. He therefore issued the
emphatic decision that al-Walid, the governor of Medina, must coerce
these two to pledge themselves as submissive to the leadership of Yazid,
but if they or any other individual, refused to pay homage to the new
caliph, the governor must behead them.[^5]

When he received these resounding instructions, al-Walid panicked
because it was not easy to behead such personalities.[^6] Even Muawiyah
who enjoyed terrible diplomatic capabilities could not dare assassinate
Imam al-Husayn (S). How was it then possible for an ordinary governor
like al-Walid to do it?

Al-Walid then sought the opinion of Marwan ibn al-Hakam, the chief of
the Umayyad family, who suggested that these two personalities be
compulsorily summoned at that very moment and asked to show compliance
with the new leadership of Yazid, otherwise they would be beheaded.[^7]

This opinion did not appeal to al-Walid, but he had to respond to
Marwan.[^8]

Refusal of Yazid’s Leadership
-----------------------------

It was midnight when al-Walid ordered Abdullah ibn Amr ibn Uthman to
summon Imam al-Husayn (a) and Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr. The messenger
found them both in the Prophet’s Masjid and asked them to attend at the
governor’s palace. They answered affirmatively. Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr
turned his face to Imam al-Husayn (a) and wondered, “What do you think
is the matter for which he has summoned us at this time?[^9]”

The Imam (a) answered, “I think that their tyrant ruler – i.e. Muawiyah
– has died, and they have summoned us to pay homage to the new one
before the news spread.”[^10]

The Imam (a) then gathered his companions and directed towards the
governor’s center. He first asked why he was summoned in such time. He
was told that he should pay homage to the leadership of Yazid.

Asking for postponement, the Imam (a) said, “I do not pay homage
secretly. You may ask me to do so when you ask all the people to pay
homage, then people and I will share the same situation.”

This meant that the Imam (a) intended to declare his refusal of swearing
allegiance to the leadership of Yazid openly, but Marwan understood it.
He therefore shouted at al-Walid, “If he leaves you at this instant
without paying homage, you will never be able to oblige him to pay it at
any other time unless numerous victims from both sides will fall. Detain
him now. He must pay homage or be beheaded.”

The Imam (a) turned to Marwan and raised his voice to say, “Son of
al-Zarqa, is it you or he who will kill me? By Allah I swear, you have
meanly lied.”[^11]

The Imam (a) then turned to al-Walid to declare his determination to
reject the matter completely:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا الأَمِيرُ، إِنَّا أَهْلُ بَيْتِ النُّبُوَّةِ وَمَعْدِنُ
الرِّسَالَةِ وَمُخْتَلَفُ المَلاَئِكَةِ وَمَحِلُّ الرَّحمَةِ. بِنَا
فَتَحَ اللهُ وَبِنَا خَتَمَ. وَيَزِيدُ رَجُلٌ أَيُّهَا الأَمِيرُ،
إِنَّا أَهْلُ بَيْتِ النُّبُوَّةِ وَمَعْدِنُ الرِّسَالَةِ وَمُخْتَلَفُ
المَلاَئِكَةِ وَمَحِلُّ الرَّحمَةِ. بِنَا فَتَحَ اللهُ وَبِنَا خَتَمَ.
وَيَزِيدُ رَجُلٌ فَاسِقٌ شَارِبٌ لِلخَمْرِ وَقَاتِلُ النَّفْسِ
المحُتَرَمَةِ مُعْلِنٌ بِالفِسْقِ. وَمِثْلِي لاَ يُبَايِعُ مِثْلَهُ.
وَلكِنْ نُصْبِحُ وَتُصْبِحُونَ وَنَنْظُرُ وَتَنْظُرُونَ أَيُّنَا
أَحَقُّ بِالخِلافَةِ وَالبَيْعَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Governor, we are the household of prophecy, the core of the (divine)
message, frequently visited by the angels, and (we are) the center of
mercy. Allah has commenced with us and shall seal with us. Yazid is a
lecherous, intoxicated man who kills the respectful soul and promulgates
his acts of immorality. My like should never pay homage to him or his
likes. Wait for us until next morning and you will see who is the
worthiest of leadership (of the Islamic ummah) and being paid
homage.”[^12]

That was the first declaration of Imam al-Husayn’s refusal of Yazid’s
illegal leadership.

Marwan blamed al-Walid for not acting on his advice. Al-Walid, however,
reproached Marwan and declared that he would never kill Imam al-Husayn
(a), because his killer would certainly serve as the fuel of Hell.[^13]

The next morning, Imam al-Husayn (a) decided to leave Medina for Mecca.
Before so, he visited the tomb of his grandfather, Prophet Muhammad (S),
and complained to Almighty Allah against the adversities that surrounded
him, saying:

O Allah, this is the tomb of Your prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him
and his family, and I am the son of Your Prophet Muhammad’s daughter. I
have been inflicted with the matter that You know of. O Allah, I do like
all that which is good and I forbid all that which is evil. Hence, I now
beseech to You, O Lord of Majesty and Honor, to choose for me that which
draws Your pleasure and the pleasure of Your Prophet.[^14]

In the darkest hour of night, Imam al-Husayn (a) directed towards the
hidden tomb of his mother, Fatimah al-Zahra (a), and then turned to the
tomb of his brother, Imam al-Hasan (a), where he revived the happy
moments he spent with them.

In Mecca
--------

When Imam al-Husayn (a) decided to leave for Mecca, he summoned his
sister, Lady Zaynab, informed her about what he had decided to do, and
asked her to take part in his ordeal. In view of her deep-rooted faith,
she did not hesitate to respond to her brother’s call. Moreover, she was
determined to participate and complete his revolution. Like Lady Zaynab,
Imam al-Husayn’s wives, sons, brothers, and cousins agreed to join his
revolution against the oppressors.

The next mornings, everybody was ready to begin the journey. Lady Zaynab
was so upset though her brother, al-Abbas, was beside her; taking care
of her and regarding her attentively. People of Medina, too, were so
dismayed because they watched the Prophet’s family leaving them,
perhaps, forever. Throughout the journey, Imam al-Husayn (a) was
reciting repeatedly Almighty Allah’s saying:

“My Lord! Deliver me from the unjust people.”

By reciting this Holy Verse, Imam al-Husayn (a) likened his journey to
that of Prophet Moses (a) who revolted against the tyrant of his
time.[^15]

He took the public way to Mecca declaring his challenge to the ruling
authorities and making little of death, which, inevitably, shall inflict
man in any land and at any moment.[^16] He had full confidence in
Almighty Allah Who dominates everything thoroughly completely.

This journey away from Medina was the second one for Lady Zaynab; the
first was with her father when he left Medina to settle in Kufa when he
betook it as the capital of his state. On that journey, she was in a
great caravan that contained her father, her brothers, her husband, and
her honorable cousins. The journey back to Medina after Imam al-Hasan’s
truce with Muawiyah was also comfortable and surrounded with honor and
dignity. Yet, the third journey would be so sorrowful and dreary, since
it was the enemies who led the caravan.

On Tuesday night,[^17] Imam al-Husayn (a) arrived in Mecca and resided
in the house of Al-Abbas ibn Abd-al-Muttalib.[^18] People of Mecca
visited him so frequently and used to ask him questions about the
Islamic laws and others about his opinion of the ruling regime. When the
season of the Hajj occurred, Hajjis and Mutamirs surrounded the Imam (a)
and listened to his opinions and instructions. From that moment, he
began to promulgate his revolution, and the publics began to understand
the aim of his being in Mecca.

Due to such activities, the ruling authorities there in Mecca panicked
and anticipated that he would betake Mecca as the center of his
revolution against the oppressive regime of Yazid. The governor of Mecca
came to the Imam (a) and asked the reason beyond his residence there.
The Imam answered that he had come for seeking the refuge of Almighty
Allah and the Holy House. As a result, the governor sent a missive to
Yazid informing him about Imam al-Husayn’s arrival and the public
surrounding him, attending his sessions, and listening to him.

This news confused Yazid who, immediately, sent a missive to Abdullah
ibn Abbas asking him that he would pardon the Imam (a) provided he paid
homage to him – Yazid – otherwise he would be punished. Answering to
Yazid’s missive, Abdullah ibn Abbas asked the Imam (a) to leave Medina
because the ruling authorities were bothering him. He also promised that
he would meet the Imam (a) and see the matter.

At the same time in Iraq, there was a general rebel and refusal of
paying homage to Yazid, because they regarded him as the inheritor of
mortal enemies of Islam. The Shiite chiefs in Kufa held a meeting in the
house of Sulayman ibn Sard al-Khuzai during which they delivered
speeches showing the sins of the Umayyad individuals and calling to
swear allegiance to Imam al-Husayn (a) as the true leader of the Islamic
ummah.[^19]

All the attendees shouted that they would certainly support and defend
the Imam and would send him messages asking him to lead their revolution
against the Umayyad rulers. So, many delegations met him and thousands
of messages were sent to him by ordinary people and chiefs, such as
Shibth ibn Rabi, Hajjar ibn Abjur al-Ujali, and Amr ibn al-Hajjaj[^20].
As a result, Imam al-Husayn (a) decided to respond to them and send his
cousin, Muslim ibn Aqil, to assess the real situation.[^21]

Muslim ibn Aqil in al-Kufah
---------------------------

Muslim left for Kufa and resided there in the house of al-Mukhtar
al-Thaqafi, one of the most celebrated faithful personalities[^22] - who
called everybody to visit Muslim; therefore, everybody came to listen to
the message of Imam al-Husayn (a) that Muslim carried. At least, forty
thousand individuals from Kufa acknowledged Imam al-Husayn (a) as their
leader whom they must defend and support.[^23]

Muslim’s confidence and trust in the success of Imam al-Husayn’s
revolution increased because of this huge number of supporters. He
therefore sent a message to the Imam (a) asking him to hurry his coming
to Kufa,[^24] and as a result, the Imam (a) prepared to leave.

Yazid’s agents in Kufa reported this news to him, and he, out of fear,
sought the advice of Sirjawn, the Roman, who was his father’s best
secretary. This cunning man had thought for quite a while before he
suggested to Yazid to assign Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad as the new governor of
Kufa.[^25]

Although Yazid was angry with Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, he had to appoint
him as the new governor of Kufa besides Basra.[^26] Thus, ibn Ziyad
became the ruler of the entire Iraq. In addition, Yazid sent him a
message asking him to capture, exile, or even kill Muslim ibn Aqil,[^27]
and then followed it with another order to ask him to hurry - to even
fly over to Kufa if he was able to.[^28]

Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad in Kufa
----------------------------

Throughout his way from Basra to Kufa, Ubaydullah, accompanied by
five-hundred men, did not stop for fear that Imam al-Husayn (a) would
precede him. He disguised himself with black clothe over his face so
that people would take him for the Imam. He entered the city and hurried
towards the Qasr al-Imarah - Governorate Mansion - in fear and
resentment because people welcomed him warmly as they really took him
for Imam al-Husayn (a).[^29]

As he reached there and knocked the door, the governor of Kufa, al-Numan
ibn Bashir who also thought of him as the Imam (a) shouted from the
balcony, “Son of Allah’s Messenger, I will not fulfill my pledge to you
and I do not want to fight you…”[^30]

“Open the door,” shouted Ubaydullah, “Or you will suffer a long
nighttime!”[^31]

Some of the crowded people who walked behind him came to know his
reality; they therefore shouted, “This is indeed son of Marjanah.”

Thus, they ran away with their hearts filled with terror. Ubaydullah
went towards the mansion and seized the weapons and fortune. He was
gathered around by the agents of the Umayyad dynasty, such as Umar ibn
Sad, Shimr ibn Dhil-Jawshan, Muhammad ibn al-Ashath, and other famous
names among the hypocrites of Kufa. They began discussing the matters of
the expected revolution and its chiefs, and went on plotting to
eradicate it.[^32]

Next morning, Ubaydullah gathered the people in the Grand Masjid of Kufa
to declare his being the new governor. He promised the obedient with big
prizes and threatened the disobedient with persecution and the mutineers
with harsh punishment.[^33] He then showed items of horror by putting to
death some individuals before he had interrogated them.[^34] He also
filled the prisons with innocent people. All these means were aimed to
control the country completely.

Once he knew about Ubaydullah’s arrival, Muslim changed his residential
place. He moved to the house of Hani ibn Urwah, one of the most
celebrated personalities of Kufa, who welcomed him hospitably and
received his partisans to plan for the revolution.

The success that Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad achieved in the political fields
is ascribed to the series of plans that he made. The introductory step
was spying on the movements of Muslim to circulate his activities and
realize his points of power and weakness. Ubaydullah chose his servant,
Miqal, for this mission. He gave him some money and ordered him to make
contact with the significant members of the revolution by claiming that
he showed loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (a) and that he had come to Kufa
because he heard the call of Imam al-Husayn (a).

Miqal could first reach Muslim ibn Awsajah and show him false loyalty
and, unfortunately, the latter was deceived; he therefore showed Miqal
the residential place of Muslim ibn Aqil. Thus, Miqal frequented about
the place and could comprehend everything about the expected revolt and
report to his master, son of Marjanah.[^35]

The second and most dangerous process was arresting Hani ibn Urwah who
was chief of the tribes of Midhhaj—the great majority of the inhabitants
of Kufa. This procedure spread a big wave of horror among people and
sent a destructive strike to the expected revolution.

Before Ubaydullah, Hani denied the accusation; hence, they summoned
Miqal, the spy, to testify the truth. However, Hani refused to give up
his guest to the authorities.[^36] But the tyrant ordered his servants
to draw Hani near him and went on beating him on the face with a bar he
had in the hand. He then ordered to detain him in one of the rooms of
the mansion.

This procedure shook the feelings of his kinsmen who, under the
leadership of the traitors, Amr ibn al-Hajjaj, pushed themselves towards
the mansion. Amr shouted, so as to make Ubaydullah hear him, “I am Amr,
and these are the celebrities and chiefs of Midhhaj. Yet, we are not
denouncing our loyalty to you nor are we mutinying against you.”

Furthermore, Amr said words of surrender and humility for which
Ubaydullah did not care. He then asked Shurayh, the judge, to see Hani
and then tell his tribe about his state. The judge entered the cell of
Hani who shouted: “How strange this is! Have my people all died? If only
ten persons from my tribe come to me they will certainly save me.”

When Shurayh left him, he said to his kinsmen, “I have seen your chief.
He is alive. He has ordered you to go home.” Amr shouted, “Well, he has
not been killed. Thanks to Allah!”

As if they have been granted the one and only opportunity to escape a
dark prison, people of Midhhaj turned their faces back and ran away. It
seems that there had been a secret agreement between the chiefs of
Midhhaj and Ubaydullah on killing Hani, otherwise they would have
attacked the mansion and saved their chief.

Muslim ibn Aqil knew about the situation of Hani who was an important
member of the expected revolution; therefore, he openly declared the
revolution against Ubaydullah. Thus, about four or forty thousand
warriors joined him.[^37]

Ubaydullah was delivering a speech when he heard the noise of the
rebellion whose numbers were increasing and were directing towards the
Governorate Mansion. Like a dirty dog, Ubaydullah hurried towards the
mansion.[^38] He had only thirty policemen; he therefore used the
meanest means that would save him — war of nerves.

Because he knew people of Kufa very well, he ordered their traitorous
chiefs to slip among the troops of Muslim and spread the rumors that the
armies of Syria would soon punish those who joined Muslim’s army, the
government would deprive them of their salaries, and that martial laws
would be applied against them. These rumors acted as bombs on the heads
of the people most of who declared, “We should not engage ourselves in
questions of policy!”[^39]

Before long, most of them left Muslim who led the rest to the Masjid for
prayer. Even during the prayer, the others left, and Muslim, as he
finished the prayer, found himself alone![^40] That night, he could not
find a house to settle in. He therefore had to wander alone in the
streets of Kufa.

Only a noble lady called Tawah had the courage to let Muslim in. As she
served him food, Muslim refused to eat or drink because he was thinking
about the fate that Imam al-Husayn (a) would face after the betrayal of
those people. Son of Tawah came to know the whole story and with the
first break of light next morning, he hurried to inform the ruling
authorities about the matter, even though he had given his mother a
binding oath that he would not tell anybody.

Three hundred horsemen, led by Muhammad ibn al-Ashath, attacked the
house of Tawah, but Muslim faced them with such an unprecedented courage
that he had inherited from his fathers.[^41] He alone could defeat those
horsemen and kill a great number of them. The mean ones however began to
throw stones and fireballs on him, and he was overcome.[^42]

When Muhammad ibn al-Ashath returned to Ubaydullah and asked for more
troops and weapons, the latter said with astonishment, “I have sent you
to capture one man! But he did this to your troops!” He answered, “Do
you think you have sent me to bring an ordinary man from Kufa or the
neighboring cities? You have sent me to capture a courageous lion and a
hero from the family of the best men in whose hands cutting swords are
held fast.”[^43]

Ubaydullah supplied him with more troops and weapons, but Muslim, the
hero, kept on fighting against them so bravely. This facing took a long
time during which Muslim suffered thirst and the troops of the ruling
authorities were increasing around him, though they were too terrified
to attack him. Finally, they stabbed him with their lances until they
could capture him. After they had let him down, people of Kufa crowded
to see how he was taken to the Mansion.

Muslim courageously refused submitting to the tyrant who, as a result,
ordered Bukayr ibn Hamran to take him to the surface of the mansion and
behead him. He also ordered Hani to be killed before the individuals of
his tribe.

The dead bodies of Muslim and Hani were dragged on the ground in the
streets of Kufa to demonstrate overturning rebellion in order to scorn
its supporters.[^44]

Leaving for Iraq
----------------

Before she left for Iraq in the company of her brother, Lady Zaynab had
asked permission of her husband. And before Imam al-Husayn (a) left for
Iraq, Abdullah ibn Abbas, his cousin, had tried to change his mind, but
the Imam (a) refused. Hence, ibn Abbas asked him not to accompany his
harem and family members, but the Imam (a) answered, “These are the
trusts of the Messenger of Allah, and I cannot trust anyone with them.”

Then, Lady Zaynab said to ibn Abbas with tearful eyes, “Son of Abbas, do
you suggest to our leader to leave us here and go alone? No, by Allah,
we either live with him or die with him. We have nothing left except
him.”[^45]

Abdullah ibn Abbas could not control himself when he broke into tears
and said, “It is truly difficult for me to leave you, cousin.”

One of the most excellent plans of Imam al-Husayn’s revolution was that
his harem and family members were with him, especially Lady Zaynab who
had the leading role in the process of the revolution’s perpetuity,
accompanied him. As he anticipated the coming events, he planned for his
sister an honorable role in perfecting his uprising, showing his
sacrifice so that the Umayyad tyrants attempted to cover up were foiled
and his own principles and aims were circulated.

As a matter of fact, the Imam’s harem contributed actively in the
renaissance of the Muslim society and the overthrowing of the Umayyad
regime’s false prestige. Through their enthusiastic speeches, the Imam’s
harem commenced the revolutions against the regime that shook the entity
of their illegal state.

In this regard, Muhammad Husayn Kashif al-Ghita says:

“Does anyone doubt the fact that if those ladies – of the Prophet’s
family - had not challenged the ruling regime through their situations
and addresses, the blood of Imam al-Husayn (a) and his sons would have
gone for nothing and none would have demanded with the punishment of
those killers and, accordingly, his revolution would have been useless?

On this account, Imam al-Husayn (a) had already planned for this step.
He had full knowledge that none would be able to accomplish this mission
so perfectly except for those ladies. As a result, he asked them to
accompany him for adding another item to the oppression that they would
encounter – when these ladies would be taken as captives.

In addition, the Imam’s purpose behind accompanying them was deep and
political. He wanted them to accomplish his revolution and overthrow the
illegal regime of the Umayyad rulers before they would eradicate Islam
and take people back to the pre-Islamic customs and traditions.”[^46]

Dr. Ahmad Mahmud Subhi says:

“Al-Husayn insisted on accompanying his harem and family members with
him in order that people would testify of the inexcusable and inhumane
crimes that their enemies would do to them. Thanks to this decision, the
issue for which al-Husayn fought and revolted has not been lost in the
desert with his blood. Without the existence of his family members and
harem, all the incidents that occurred with al-Husayn and his enemies
would have been completely forged and distorted, and all true
testimonies would have been unavailable.”

Dr. Aishah Bint al-Shati says:

“Zaynab, al-Husayn’s sister, caused Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad and the Umayyad
dynasty to lose the elation of victory as she poured drops of deadly
poison in their cups. All the events that took place after that, such as
the rebellion of al-Mukhtar and the revolution of Abdullah ibn
al-Zubayr, resulted in the decline of the Umayyad regime, the Abbasid
dynasty’s coming to power and the inveteracy of Shiism - all these
events were the result of Zaynab’s formation.”[^47]

To sum it up, without Lady Zaynab, the tragic story of Karbala would
have been recorded from the viewpoint of Imam al-Husayn’s enemies only,
and the pure blood of the Imam, his relatives, and his companions, which
was shed wrongly there, would have been lost in the desert.

At any rate, before he left Mecca, Imam al-Husayn (a) called for a
general meeting during which he delivered an address:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَمْدُ للهِ، وَمَا شَاءَ اللهُ، وَلا قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِاللهِ،
وَصَلَّىٰ اللهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ وَسَلَّمَ. خُطَّ المَوْتُ عَلَىٰ
وُلْدِ آدَمَ مَخَطَّ القِلاَدَةِ عَلَىٰ جِيدِ الفَتاةِ، وَمَا
أَولهَنِي إلىٰ أسْلافي إشْتِياقَ يَعْقُوبَ إلىٰ يُوسُفَ. وَخُيِّرَ لي
مَصْرَعٌ أنَا لاَقِيهِ: كَأَنِّي بِأَوْصَالي تُقَطِّعُها عُسْلانُ
الفَلَواتِ بَينَ النَّوَاوِيسِ وَكَربَلاءَ، فَيَمْلأَنَّ مِنِّي
أَكْراشاً جُوَّفاً وَأَجْرِبَةُ سُغُباً. لاَ محِيصَ عَنْ يَوْمٍ خُطَّ
بالقَلَمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِضَا اللهِ رِضَانَا أَهْلَ البَيْتِ، نَصْبِرُ عَلىٰ بَلائِهِ
وَيُوَفِّينَا أَجْرَ الصَّابِرِينَ. لَنْ تَشُذَّ عَنْ رَسُولِ اللهِ
(صَلّىٰ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ) لحْمَتُهُ وَهِيَ مجَمُوعَةٌ لهُ في
حَضيرَةِ القُدْسِ، تَقَرُّ بهِمْ عَيْنُهُ وَيُنجِزُ بِهِمْ وَعْدَهُ.
مَنْ كَانَ باذِلاً فِينَا مُهْجَتَهُ وَمُوَطِّناً عَلىٰ لِقاءِ اللهِ
نَفْسَهُ فَلْيَرحَلْ مَعَنا، فَإنَّني راحِلٌ مُصْبِحاً إنْ شَاءَ اللهُ
تَعالىٰ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

All praise is due to Allah, only that which Allah wants will come to
pass, there is no strength save in Allah, and mercy and blessings of
Allah be upon His Messenger. Death is mapped out for every human being
in the same way as a necklace leaves a mark on a girl’s neck. For me, my
eagerness to join my late fathers, the martyrs, is as same as Prophet
Jacob’s eagerness to see (his absent son) Joseph.

I will unavoidably encounter the demise that has been chosen for me: I
foresee that my limbs and organs will be severed by the wolves of the
desert[^48] in a place between al-Nawawis and Karbala where they will
fill their hungry bellies with me. No one can escape that which has been
recorded with the Pen.[^49]

Only that which pleases Allah will please us—the Ahl al-Bayt; we behave
steadfastly against His tests (that He presents in forms of misfortunes)
and He shall certainly pay us the rewards of the steadfast ones in full.
The flesh of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his family,
shall not go astray from his way and shall join him in the Sacred
Position to delight him and fulfill the promise, which was made to him.

Hence, he who sacrifices his soul for us and determines to meet Allah
may accompany me in this journey. Tomorrow morning, I will leave, if
Allah, the Exalted, wills it.”[^50]

In his last moments in Mecca, Imam al-Husayn (a) went towards the Holy
House (Kaaba) and offered the Zuhr – noon - Prayer there. On the eighth
of Dhul-Hijjah, 60 A.H., he left Mecca whose people saw him off with
tearful eyes and depressed hearts. Throughout his journey, he used to
tell the story of the martyrdom of Prophet John.

In a place called al-Sifah, Imam al-Husayn (a) met al-Farazdaq, the
famous poet, and told him that the ruling authorities had plotted to
assassinate him in Mecca.[^51] The Imam (a) asked him about the reality
of people of Kufa that he had come from, and al-Farazdaq said, “Their
hearts are with you, but their swords are against you.”[^52] He agreed
with this opinion, but continued his journey in such a steadfast manner.

In a place called Dhat - Irq, the Imam (a) met Abu Hirrah who asked him
why he had left Mecca. The Imam (a) answered:

“Woe to you, Abu Hirrah! When the Umayyads usurped my properties, I
treated it patiently, when they insulted my honor, I also treated it
patiently, and when they attempted to shed my blood, I escaped. By Allah
I swear that because the oppressive party will kill me, Allah shall
dress them with comprehensive humiliation and shall cause cutting swords
to severe them. Allah shall also give a free hand to rulers who will
humiliate them to the degree that they will be more humble than people
of Sheba; a woman ruled them and had full hand on their properties and
souls.”

The Imam (a) then left this man who could not understand the meaning of
supporting the right and defending Islam.

In a place called al-Khuzaymiyyah, Lady Zaynab approached the Imam (a)
and asked about their fate. He answered that she would have to face
terrible difficulties and adversities. He said, “Sister, all that which
is going to be is going to be.”[^53]

In a place called Zarud, the caravan of the Imam (a) received a very bad
news; Muslim ibn Aqil had been martyred in Kufa. The caravan burst into
tears, and the Imam (a) turned towards the family of the martyr and
asked, “Muslim has been martyred. What do you now see?”

They answered so firmly, “We will not go back unless we revenge for him
or join him.” These words showed the determination of those heroes and
made the Imam (a) trust his issue more.

That noon, Imam al-Husayn (a) took a siesta and saw a horrible dream. He
woke up in terror, and his son, Ali al-Akbar, hurried and asked about
this. The Imam (a) told his son that he had seen in sleep a horseman
saying, “You are mending your paces while your deaths are taking you
hurriedly to Paradise.” Explaining this dream, the Imam (a) told that
they would be killed.

The son asked, “Are we not the right party?”

“Of course, we are. I swear it by Him to Whom all creatures shall
return,” answered the Imam (a) confidently.

The son concluded, “O father, we shall then never care about death.”

This statement relieved the Imam (a) who expressed his gratitude for
such faith.[^54]

As they reached a place called Shuraf, the Imam (a) gave the orders of
fetching as much water as possible from the springs there. A few steps
after these springs, one of the companions saw something like date-palm
trees and shouted to make the others notice. Some of those who had full
knowledge of that area realized that it was nothing but arrowheads and
ears of horses. Imam al-Husayn, too, realized that these were the
vanguards of the Umayyad army. He therefore asked his companions whether
they knew a near place to hide in. some referred to Mount Dhu-Husam to
the left.

As the Imam’s caravan directed towards that mountain, the massive troops
– of about more than one thousand horsemen as some historians have
confirmed - under the commandment of al-Hurr ibn Yazid al-Riyahi whom
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad commissioned to wander through the desert until he
would meet and capture the caravan of Imam al-Husayn (a), approached. It
was midday and al-Hurr’s troops were too thirsty to continue their
march. Seeing this, the Imam (a) felt pity for them and ordered his
companions to give them from the water they had with them. Even the
horses were given water.

After that, the Imam (a) delivered an articulate sermon to the troops of
that army:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، إِنهَّا مَعْذِرَةٌ إِلىٰ اللهِ وَإِلَيْكُمْ. إِنِّي
لم آتِكُم حَتَّى أَتَتْنِي كُتُبُكُمْ وَقَدِمَتْ عَلَيَّ رُسُلُكُمْ
أَنْ أَقْدِمْ عَلَيْنَا فَإِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَنا إِمَامٌ وَلَعَلَّ اللهَ
أَنْ يَجْمَعَنَا بِكَ عَلَىٰ الهُدىٰ. فَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ عَلَىٰ ذٰلِكَ
فَقَدْ جِئْتُكُمْ، فَأَعْطُونِي مَا أَطْمَئِنُّ بِهِ مِنْ عُهُودِكُمْ
وَمَوَاثِيقِكُمْ. وَإِنْ كُنْتُمْ لمَقْدَمِي كَارِهِينَ انْصَرَفْتُ
عَنْكُمْ إِلىٰ المَكَانِ الّذِي جِئْتُ مِنْهُ إِلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

People: This is only an argument intended to release me from the
responsibility that lies on me with regard to Allah and you. I came to
you only after I had received your missives and your messengers who
asked me to come to you since you had no leader and since you desired to
be guided to the right guidance through my leadership to you. If you are
still bearing this very tendency, then here I am. Show me pledges and
covenants due to which I will be sure of your intentions. But if you
dislike my coming to you, I will leave you and return to the place from
which I came.[^55]

Because most of the individuals in that army were among those who had
sent missives and asked the Imam (a) to come to them and paid homage to
him via his representative Muslim ibn Aqil, they could not answer him.

As time of the Zuhr Prayer fell, the Imam (a) ordered the muezzin[^56]
to declare it. He then turned his face to al-Hurr and asked whether he
would lead the collective prayer for his companions. “We will follow you
in prayer,” answered al-Hurr politely. When they performed the Asr –
afternoon - Prayer, the Imam (a) delivered another sermon:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ؛ إِنَّكُمْ إِنْ تَتَّقُوا اللهَ وَتَعْرِفُوا الحَقَّ
وَأَهْلَهُ يَكُنْ أَرْضَىٰ للهِ. وَنَحْنُ، أَهْلَ البَيْتِ، أَوْلىٰ
بهٰذَا الأَمْرِ مِنْ هٰؤُلاءِ المُدَّعِينَ مَا لَيْسَ لهُمْ
وَالسَّائِرِينَ فِيكُمْ بِالجَوْرِ والعُدْوانِ. فَإِنْ أَنتُمْ
كَرِهْتُمُونَا وَجَهِلْتُمْ حَقَّنَا وَكَانَ رَأيُكُمُ الآنَ عَلَىٰ
غَيْرِ مَا أَتَتْني بِهِ كُتُبُكُمُ، انْصَرَفْتُ عَنْكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

People: if you fear Allah and recognize the people of the right, this
will surely please Him more than anything else. We—the Ahl al-Bayt are
more worthy of holding the position of leadership than those who have
claimed it by falsehood and governed you by means of wrongdoing and
oppression. If you will dislike us and ignore our right and change your
minds that you had expressed in your missives you sent to me, I will
surely leave you…[^57]

As he knew nothing about these missives, al-Hurr asked the Imam (a),
“What are these missives you are mentioning?”

The Imam (a), thus, ordered one of his companions to fetch them and show
to al-Hurr who, as soon as saw them, was shocked. He then said, “We are
not among those who wrote these missives.”

Afterwards, the Imam (a) wanted to leave that place and return home, but
al-Hurr prevented him and said, “I will not leave you until I lead you
to Kufa to be present before Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad.”

“Death is nearer to you than doing so,” the Imam (a) answered and
ordered his companions to ride and direct towards Medina. But al-Hurr
prevented them. The Imam (a) said to him, “What do you want from us?”

“I want to lead you to Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad,” answered al-Hurr.

“I will not follow you,” said the Imam (a).

“And I will not leave you,” answered al-Hurr.

War was about to break out, but al-Hurr could save the situation by
saying, “I was not ordered to fight you. I was only ordered not to leave
you until I have led you to Kufa. If you refuse, you may take a way that
takes you neither to Kufa nor Medina so that I will write a report to
Ubaydullah and hope Allah will save me from fighting you.”

Hence, the Imam’s caravan took another way southward, between al-Udhayb
and al-Qadisiyyah[^58] and al-Hurr’s army watched them.

In a place called al-Bayda, the Imam (a) delivered a sermon:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّ رَسُولَ اللهِ صَلَّىٰ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
قَالَ: "مَنْ رَأىٰ سُلْطَاناً جَائِراً مُسْتَحِلاً لحُرَمِ اللهِ
نَاكِثاً لِعَهْدِ اللهِ مُخَالِفاً لِسُنَّةِ رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّىٰ
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَعْمَلُ في عِبَادِ اللهِ بِالإِثمِ
وَالعُدْوانِ فَلَمْ يُغَيِّرْ عَلَيْهِ بِفِعْلٍ وَلا قَوْلٍ كَانَ
حَقّاً عَلَى اللهِ أَنْ يُدْخِلَهُ مُدْخَلَهُ." أَلاَ وَإِنَّ هٰؤُلاءِ
قَدْ لَزِمُوا طَاعَةَ الشَّيْطَانِ، وَتَرَكُوا طَاعَةَ الرَّحْمٰنِ،
وَأَظْهَرُوا الفَسَادَ، وَعَطَّلُوا الحُدُودَ، وَاسْتَأْثَرُوا
بِالفَيءِ، وَأَحَلُّوا حَرَامَ اللهِ، وَحَرَّمُوا حَلاَلَهُ، وَأَنَا
أَحَقُّ مِمَّنْ غَيَّرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

People: the Messenger of Allah has said, “For anyone who knows an unjust
ruler that is violating Allah’s sanctities, breaking the pledge of
Allah, going against the Sunnah of the Prophet, and treating the
servants of Allah with means of sin and oppression, and avoids denying
so by a deed or a word, it will be incumbent upon Allah to take him to
the place he deserves (i.e. Hell).” Those individuals – the Umayyad
rulers - have adhered to the obedience to the Shaitan, deserted the
obedience to the All-beneficent (Lord), made sins publicly, defied the
doctrinal provisions, dedicated the treasuries to themselves, deemed
lawful the things that Allah has decided unlawful, and deemed unlawful
the things that Allah has decided lawful. I am more worthy of holding
this position than those who have distorted (the principles of Islam).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ أَتَتْني كُتُبُكُمْ وَقَدِمَتْ عَلَيَّ رُسُلُكُمْ
بِبَيْعَتِكُمْ أَنَّكُمْ لاَ تُسَلِّمُوني وَلاَ تَخْذِلُوني، فَإِنْ
أَقَمْتُمْ عَلَىٰ بَيْعَتِكُمْ تُصِيبُوا رُشْدَكُمْ. فَأَنَا الحُسَينُ
بْنُ عَلِيٍّ وَابْنُ فَاطِمَةَ بِنْتِ رَسُولِ اللهِ، صَلَّىٰ اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ وَسَلَّمَ، نَفْسِي مَعَ أَنْفُسِكُمْ وَأَهْلِي مَعَ
أَهْلِيكُمْ، فَلَكُمِ فِيَّ أُسْوَةٌ. وَإِنْ لَمْ تَفْعَلُوا
وَنَقَضْتُمْ عَهْدَكُمْ وَخَلَعْتُمْ بَيْعَتِي مِنْ أَعْنَاقِكُمْ
فَلَعَمْرِي مَا هِيَ لَكُمْ بِنُكْرٍ؛ لَقَدْ فَعَلْتُمُوهَا بِأَبِي
وَأَخِي وَابْنِ عَمِّي مُسْلِمٍ. وَالمَغْرُورُ مَنِ اغْتَرَّ بِكُمْ،
فَحَظَّكُمْ أَخْطَأْتُمْ وَنَصِيبَكُمْ ضَيَّعْتُمْ. وَمَنْ نَكَثَ
فَإِنَّمَا يَنْكُثُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ وَسَيُغْنِي اللهُ عَنْكُمْ.
وَالسَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكُمْ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have received your missives and your messengers who reported to me
that you paid homage to me and that you would neither let me down nor
disappoint me. If you keep your homage, you will certainly do the right
thing. I am al-Husayn son of Ali and Fatimah; daughter of the Messenger
of Allah. My soul will be with yours and my harem will be with yours.
(They will face the same fate that you will face.) I am the example that
should be followed.

However, if you break your homage and pledge, this is in fact not
strange from you. You have already done it with my father, brother, and
cousin Muslim (ibn Aqil). He who believes you is surely deceived.
Anyhow, you have only missed your opportunity of success and neglected
your chance of safety. He who breaches is only doing ill to himself.
Allah will surely find me a substitution. Peace, Allah’s mercy, and His
blessings be upon you.[^59]

After this sermon, al-Hurr said to the Imam (a), “I only want to advise
you. I am sure that you will be killed if you fight. I swear it.”

The Imam (a) answered, “Do you threaten me with death? Will misfortunes
depart you if you kill me? I really do not know what to say to you. But,
I will copy the saying of that man from the (tribe of) Aws whose cousin
was threatened with death while he was going to defend the Prophet (S).
He expressed in poetry:[^60]

*I will go on, and death is not shameful for a hero*

*Who intends good and fights for his Islam*

*And sacrifices his soul for the righteous men*

*And defies the perished ones and departs the wrong ones*

*If I live, I will not regret, and if I die, I will not be blamed*

*It is certainly sufficient humility to live in humbleness*.

As he heard these words, al-Hurr left the Imam and realized that he had
decided to sacrifice his soul for sake of saving the Muslims from the
oppression and wrong of the Umayyad rulers.

Lady Zaynab, too, recognized that her brother, by saying these words,
had decided to sacrifice himself and attain martyrdom. She therefore
felt very sad and supplicated to Almighty Allah to grant him victory.

Al-Tarimmah led the Imam’s caravan because he knew that area better. The
caravan however continued.[^61] The troops of al-Hurr were preventing it
from heading towards the desert and trying to push it towards Kufa.
Meanwhile, a rider appeared. It was a man carrying a message from
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad to al-Hurr: “As soon as you receive this message,
lead al-Husayn to a derelict place in the desert where there is no
shelter or water. I have also ordered this messenger to haunt you until
you carry out this order.”[^62]

[^1]: Hind, daughter of Utbah and wife of Abu-Sufyan, was the mortal
enemy of Islam in general and the Hashemites in particular. It was she
who tried to eat the liver of al-Hamzah ibn Abd-al-Muttalib after he had
been killed during the battle of Uhud. About her ill-fame, listen to the
following narration: After the conquest of Mecca, Hind, as well as her
family members, had to pretend they were Muslims so as to save
themselves from killing. She came to the Prophet (S) for declaring her
conversion to Islam. The Prophet (S), according to a divine instruction,
would listen to her pledge openly in the hearing of Muslims. He would
dictate some principles and she would agree, otherwise her being Muslim
would not be accepted. One of these principles was that the Prophet (S)
asked her to pledge herself that she would not commit prostitution. As
an answer, she said, “How come that a celebrated lady would commit
prostitution?” As soon as he heard this statement from her, Umar ibn
al-Khattab laughed to excess! This is because he knew her very well.
This incident is recorded in almost all the reference books of Islamic
history. See, for instance, Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol.
4 p. 365, Ibn Kuthayr, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 3 p. 603, al-Tabari,
Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, vol. 2 p.338, al-Qurtubi, al-Tafsir, vol. 18
p. 72, Ibn Abil-Hadid, Sharh(u) Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 18 p. 17, and
Shaykh al-Amini, al-Ghadir, vol. 10, p. 170.

[^2]: See Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8 p. 152

[^3]: See al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 267, and Ibn al-Athir,
al- Tarikh, vol. 3, p.266.

[^4]: See al-Baladhiri, Futuh al-Buldan, vol. 5, p. 6.

[^5]: See al-Yaqubi, al- Tarikh, vol. 2, p.241.

[^6]: See al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, vol. 4, p.25.

[^7]: See Abu-Mikhnaf al-Azdi, Maqtal al-Husayn, p.4.

[^8]: See al-Baladhiri, Futuh al-Buldan, vol. 5, p.12-3.

[^9]: See Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8 p. 160.

[^10]: See Ibn al-Athir, al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 264.

[^11]: See Ibn al-Athir, al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 264.

[^12]: See Sayyid Ibn Tawus al-Hasani, al-Lahuf fi Qatla al-Tufuf, p.
17, and Sayyid Murtada al-Askari, Maalim al- Madrasatayn, p.46

[^13]: See al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, vol. 5, p. 340.

[^14]: See Shaykh al-Shurayfi, Mawsuat Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 287
as quoted from al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn.

[^15]: See al-Numan al-Maghribi, Sharh al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 144.

[^16]: See al-Qanduzi al-Hanafi, Yanabi al-Mawaddah li Dhawi al-Qurba,
p. 402.

[^17]: See Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk, vol. 6, p.
190.

[^18]: See Ibn Asakir, Tarikh Madinat Dimashq, vol. 13, p. 68.

[^19]: Ibn Nama al-Hilli, Muthir al-Ahzan, p. 15

[^20]: See Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 95, and
Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 157.

[^21]: See Abu-Hanifah al-Daynuri, al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 210.

[^22]: See Hamid ibn Muhammad al-Mahilli, al-Hadaq al-Wardiyyah, vol. 1,
p. 125. Other historians have mentioned that Muslim ibn Aqil resided in
the house of Muslim ibn Awsajah or Hani ibn Urwah (see Ibn Hajar,
al-Isabah fi Marifat al-Sahabah, vol. 1, p. 332, and Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib.)

[^23]: See Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 337.

[^24]: See Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk; vol. 4, p,
224.

[^25]: See Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 268.

[^26]: See Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 152.

[^27]: See Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk; vol. 4, p,
265.

[^28]: See al-Dhahabi, Siyar(u) Alam al-Nubala, vol. 3, p. 299.

[^29]: See Muhammad ibn al-Fattal al-Nisapuri, Rawdat al-Waizhin, p.
174.

[^30]: See Abu-Mikhnaf al-Azdi, Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 28.

[^31]: See Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin al-Amili, Lawaij al-Ashjan, p. 44.

[^32]: See Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi, al-Abbas ibn Ali, p. 133.

[^33]: See al-Fadl ibn Hasan al-Tabarsi, Ilam al-Wara bi Alam al-Huda,
vol. 1, p. 438.

[^34]: See Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Maliki, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 197.

[^35]: See Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.269.

[^36]: See al-Masudi, Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 7.

[^37]: See Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 351.

[^38]: See Ibn Kuthayr, al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 154.

[^39]: See Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.269.

[^40]: See Abul-Fida, al-Mukhtasar fi Akhbar al-Bashar, vol. 1, p. 300.

[^41]: See Baha al-Din Ali ibn Abd al-karim, al-Durr al-Nadid fi Taazi
al-Imam al-Shahid, p 164

[^42]: See Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Bayhaqi, al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi,
vol. 1, p. 43.

[^43]: See Abdullah al-Bahrani, al-Awalim al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 203.

[^44]: See Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Baladhiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 83.

[^45]: See Sayyid Hashim al-Bahrani, Madinat al-Maajiz, vol. 3, p. 485.

[^46]: See Muhammad al-Husayn Kashif al-Ghita, al-Siyasah
al-Husayniyyah, p. 46-7.

[^47]: See Aishah Bint al-Shati, Zaynab; the Heroine of Karbala

[^48]: This means that those who will fight against me are as savage and
wild as wolves.

[^49]: This is an indication to the absolute knowledge of Almighty
Allah.

[^50]: See Ali ibn Abul-Fath al-Arbali, Kashf al-Ghummah fi Marifat
al-Aimmah, vol. 2, p. 239.

[^51]: See Khalifah ibn Khayyat al - Asfari, Tarikh Khalifah ibn
Khayyat, p. 176.

[^52]: See Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Nawadir al-Mujizat, p. 107.

[^53]: See Shaykh Ali al-Namazi al-Shahrudi, Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar,
vol. 5, p. 450.

[^54]: See Muhamamd ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk;
vol. 4 p. 308, and Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p.
111.

[^55]: See Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 376.

[^56]: Muezzin is the caller to prayer.

[^57]: See Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 79.

[^58]: See Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.280.

[^59]: See Ibn Shubah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-Uqul, p. 505.

[^60]: See Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk;
4:305.

[^61]: See Abul-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 111.

[^62]: See al-Baladhiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, p. 240.


