In Karbala
==========

Imam al-Husayn (a) wanted to reside in a place near a spring or a
shelter, but al-Hurr prevented him and recited Ubaydullah’s message. As
the situation reached its climax, Zuhayr ibn al-Qayn, one of the sincere
companions of the Imam, suggested that they fight against al-Hurr and
his troops, but the Imam (a) rejected this saying, “I will never begin
the fighting.”[^1]

Al-Hurr then obliged the Imam (a) to reside in a place, and the Imam (a)
had to respond.

“What is this place called,” asked the Imam (a).

“This is Karbala,” answered one of the companions.

“O Allah: I seek Your protection against agony and ordeal,” supplicated
the Imam (a) with tearful eyes.[^2]

He then turned towards his companions and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرْضُ كَرْبٍ وَبَلاءٍ. هَا هُنَا مُنَاخُ رِكَابِنَا ومَحَطُّ
رِحَالِنَا وَسَفْكُ دِمَائِنَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is the place of agony and ordeal. This is the place where we, as
well as our riding animals, will reside and our blood will be shed.

Al-Abbas, accompanied by the heroes of the Prophet’s household and the
Imam’s companions, hurried to pitch tents for the harem, headed by Lady
Zaynab, who were experiencing horror as they imagined the events that
were to come about on this land.

The Imam (a) then raised his hands upward for supplicating to Allah and
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ إِنّا عِتْرَةُ نَبِيِّكَ مُحَمَّدٍ، صَلّىٰ اللهُ عَلَيْهِ
وَآلِهِ، قَدْ أُخْرِجْنَا وَطُرِدْنَا وَأُزْعِجْنَا عَنْ حَرَمِ
جَدِّنَا، وَتَعَدَّتْ بَنُو أُمَيَّةَ عَلَيْنَا. اللَّهُمَّ فَخُذْ
لَنَا بِحَقِّنَا وَانْصُرْنَا عَلَىٰ القَوْمِ الظَّالِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah: We, the household of Your Prophet Muhammad, have been banished
away from the sanctum of our grandfather and have been aggressed by the
Umayyads. O Allah: Take vengeance upon those who oppressed us and
support us against the wrongdoers.[^3]

He then turned his face towards his household and companions and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هٰذِهِ الدُّنْيَا قَدْ تَغَيَّرَتْ وَتَنَكَّرَتْ وَأَدْبَرَ
مَعْرُوفُهَا، فَلَمْ يَبْقَ مِنْهَا إِلاَّ صَبَابَةٌ كَصَبَابَةِ
الإِنَاءِ وَخَسِيسُ عَيْشٍ كَالمَرْعَىٰ الوَبِيلِ. أَلا تَرَوْنَ أَنَّ
الحَقَّ لا يُعْمَلُ بِهِ وَأَنَّ البَاطِلَ لا يُتَنَاهَىٰ عَنْهُ؟
لِيَرْغَبِ المُؤْمِنُ في لِقَاءِ اللهِ مُحِقّاً. فَإِنّي لا أَرىٰ
المَوْتَ إلاّ سَعَادَةً ولا الحَياةَ مَعَ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلاّ بَرَماً.
إِنَّ النَّاسَ عَبِيدُ الدُّنْيَا وَالدِّينُ لَعِقٌ عَلَىٰ
أَلْسِنَتِهِمْ يَحُوطُونَهُ مَا دَرَّتْ مَعَائِشُهُمْ، فَإِذَا
مُحِّصُوا بِالبَلاءِ قَلَّ الدَّيّانُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This world has changed, snubbed, and its good has turned tail. Nothing
has remained from it except a thing that is as scanty as the leftover of
a cup and a mean life that is like a noxious grazing. Have you not
noticed that the right is ignored and the evil is not forbidden? This is
sufficient for making the believers desire for meeting Allah rightfully.
I do not see death but as happiness and do not consider life with the
wrongdoers but as boredom. People are certainly slaves of this world.
The religion is only a statement on their tongues. They change it
however their livelihood demands. If they are examined by misfortunes,
the religious will be very few.[^4]

By these words, Imam al-Husayn (a) informed his household and companions
about the coming ordeals they would face, and declared his readiness to
fight against the wrongful party to the last spark of his life. As they
heard his words, those unmatched individuals who paved the way of
freedom to humankind through their unparalleled situations spoke before
their leader to show him their readiness to participate and continue the
way whatever the sacrifices would be. The first companion to speak was
Zuhayr ibn al-Qayn:

“Son of Allah’s Messenger: We have understood your words. We may stop
supporting you if we understand that this world will perpetuate for us
for good… etc.”

Another hero, namely Burayr ibn Khudayr, said similar words. The other
heroes declared their situations of perseverance on their principles and
readiness to sacrifice their souls for their leader. The Imam (a)
thanked them for their feelings and blessed them.

In Kufa, Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad felt happy when he was informed that the
vanguards of his army seized Imam al-Husayn. He therefore began to plan
for the next step; whom should he choose for the commandment of the army
to kill the Prophet’s dearest one? As he reviewed the names of the
candidates, he could not realize any individual meaner and more vicious
than Umar ibn Saad.

At first, Umar refused to fight against the Imam (a), but Ubaydullah
threatened he would dismiss him from the governorship of Ray – currently
Tehran. Thus, he accepted and began his campaign towards Karbala with
four thousand horsemen who joined the army of al-Hurr there. Umar ibn
Saad was chosen for the most horrible crime, and he showed no blemish
when he led armies to fight against the divinely selected Imam. He
surrounded the Imam (a) from every side, laid siege for him, and blocked
all the ways in order to prevent anybody from joining or supporting him.

In Kufa again, Ubaydullah gathered people and spoke: “O People: As you
tried the descendants of Abu Sufyan, you have found them as exactly as
you like. You have also known your leader, Yazid, as good and
praiseworthy man. He treats his subjects kindly, gives everybody his
deserved share of the public treasury, and honors people out of his
wealth. He has ordered me to give each of you one hundred dirhams
monthly in addition to your fixed shares of the public treasury. He has
also ordered me to call you to participate in the campaign against his
enemy al-Husayn. Hence, you should listen to and obey him…”[^5]

Unfortunately, most of them carried out these orders and composed a huge
army against the Imam small group. Afterwards, they traveled to Karbala
and occupied the two banks, as well as all the branches, of the River
Euphrates.

Some historians, however, have mentioned that three days before the
encounter, Imam al-Husayn (a) was deprived of water.[^6] This in fact
was the most horrible misfortune he had to face. The strange thing is
that the band of the Umayyad army took pride in this criminal act that
challenged all humanitarian values. One of them, for instance, shouted
at Imam al-Husayn (a), “Husayn: you can see water flow like reptiles.
You will not taste it before you die…”[^7]

Expressing his joy at this situation, Amr ibn al-Hajjaj addressed,
“Husayn, this is the Euphrates. Dogs, donkeys, and even pigs are licking
its water. But we shall prevent you from having a single drop from
it…”[^8]

No single law or code on this earth allows any person, under any
circumstances, to deprive women and children of water except the laws of
the Umayyad dynasty whose individuals, from the first spark of Islam,
advised each other to prevent the Prophet’s household from holding any
position of leadership.

Facing this ordeal of the scarcity of water, Lady Zaynab undertook the
difficult mission of gathering the thirsty children and women and trying
to comfort them and promise with water. Her heart melted away as she saw
those children and babies cry out of thirst while she had nothing to
give.

Imam al-Husayn (a) then asked Umar ibn Saad to meet him individually.
The criminal came with his son and servant to the Imam (a) who asked his
brother al-Abbas and his son Ali al-Akbar to attend that meeting. The
Imam (a) then asked Umar to think about the matter more seriously and to
anticipate the inescapable misfortunes that he would certainly face in
this world and the world to come if he would fight against him. Umar
however tried to tender his excuses, but the Imam (a) proved all of them
worthless. Finally, the Imam (a) recognized that Umar would never change
his mind; therefore, he said to him, “What is the matter with you? May
Allah kill you on your bed! May Allah never forgive you on the day when
you will be resurrected! I foresee that you, if you do it, will not even
be able to satisfy your appetite from the wheat of Iraq.”

Mockingly, Umar answered, “It will be enough for me to have from its
barley!”[^9]

Indeed, Almighty Allah responded to the supplications of Imam al-Husayn
concerning Umar: the soldiers of al-Mukhtar slew him in his bed.

In the land of Karbala, Lady Zaynab faced the progression of calamities
with the weapon of patience and steadfastness. At the night of the ninth
of Muharram, the Umayyad armies advanced towards Imam al-Husayn’s small
group. The Imam (a) was about to take a nap when his sister, Lady
Zaynab, hurried to him with horror after she had heard the sounds of the
foes coming towards them. She woke him up to say, “Brother, the enemies
are approaching us.” He answered, “I have just seen the Messenger of
Allah, my father Ali, my mother Fatimah, and my brother al-Hasan in
sleep and they told that I will join them very soon.”

These words acted as a thunderbolt on Lady Zaynab and tore her
sensitive, tortured heart. She therefore had nothing to do but slapping
her face, shouting, “Alas for this!” The Imam (a) tried to relieve her
by saying, “Alas is not yours, sister. Please, be quiet. May the
All-beneficent have mercy upon you.”[^10]

Al-Abbas, who did not leave his brother for a single moment, turned his
face to him and said, “They have come for you.” The Imam (a) asked him
to verify their intents. He said to him, “May I sacrifice myself for
you, brother! Ride on and meet them to ask about their intentions.”

With twenty horsemen, al-Abbas hurried towards that army and asked what
they wanted.

“The governor has ordered us to call you to submit to his orders,
otherwise we will fight you,” they answered.[^11]

Al-Abbas turned back to tell his brother about their intention.
Meanwhile, Habib ibn Muzhahir delivered a sermon to that army; he
admonished and warned them against the divine punishment they would face
if they fought against the family of the Prophet (S). However, some of
them answered him impudently.

When he heard the words of his brother, Imam al-Husayn said to him, “Go
back to them and try your best to delay them until tomorrow morning so
that we, on this night, will have time to pray to our Lord Who knows
that I love praying to Him, reciting His Book, and supplicating to Him.”

Al-Abbas conveyed these words to the Umayyad army. Umar ibn Saad,
because he feared that others would report his situation to the
governor, offered the suggestion to Shimr who was his only competitor.
He did not say anything, but Amr ibn al-Hajjaj intruded, “How strange
this is! Even if they were from the non-Arabs, we would respond to their
demand!”

In fact, Amr did not want to confess that their adversary party was the
beloved grandson of the Prophet (S) and the Chief of the Youth of
Paradise. This is because he anticipated that others would report any
single word he would say to the ruling authorities.

As many others supported Amr’s opinion, Umar ibn Saad accepted to
postpone waging war against the camp of the Imam (a). He ordered one of
his soldiers to approach the camp of the Imam (a) and declare that the
fighting would be postponed to the next day.

Thus, the fighting was postponed for a night and Umar ibn Saad’s army
waited whether the Imam (a) would respond to them or fight.

The Imam gathered all his followers and gave a sermon:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُثْني عَلَىٰ اللهِ أَحْسَنَ الثَّنَاءِ وَأَحْمَدُهُ عَلَىٰ
السَّرَّاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ. اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَحْمَدُكَ عَلَىٰ أَنْ
أَكْرَمْتَنَا بِالنُّبُوَّةِ، وَعَلَّمْتَنَا القُرْآنَ، وَفَهَّمْتَنَا
فِي الدِّينِ، وَجَعَلْتَ لَنا أَسْمَاعاً وَأَفْئِدَةً، وَلَمْ
تَجْعَلْنَا مِنَ المُشْرِكِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا بَعْدُ: فَإِنِّي لاَ أَعْلَمُ أَصْحَاباً أَوْفَىٰ وَلاَ خَيْراً
مِنْ أَصْحَابي، وَلاَ أَهْلَ بَيْتٍ أَبَرَّ وَلا أَوْصَلَ مِنْ أَهْلِ
بَيْتي. فَجَزَاكُمُ اللهُ عَنِّي خَيْراً. أَلا وَإِنِّي لأَظُنُّ
أَنَّهُ آخِرُ يَوْمٍ لَنَا مِنْ هٰؤُلاءِِ. أَلا وَإِنِّي قَدْ أَذِنْتُ
لَكُمْ فَانْطَلِقُوا جَمِيعاً فِي حِلٍّ لَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِنِّي
ذِمَامٌ. هٰذَا اللَّيْلُ قَدْ غَشِيَكُمْ فَاتَّخِذُوهُ جَمَلاً.
وَلْيَأْخُذْ كُلُّ رَجُلٍ مِنْكُمْ بِيَدِ رَجُلٍ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي
وَتَفَرَّقُوا فِي سَوَادِ هٰذَا اللَّيْلِ وَذَرُونِي وَهٰؤُلاءِ
القَوْمَ فَإنَّهُمْ لا يُرِيدُونَ غَيْرِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I praise Allah with the best words of praise and thank Him for good
times and bad times. O Allah: I do praise You for You have honored us
with prophecy, have taught us the Quran, have given us understanding of
the religion, have conferred upon us with ears and hearts, and have not
made us idol‑worshippers.

Indeed, I do not know any followers better than my followers nor any
family better than my family. May Allah reward you all. Indeed, I think
tomorrow will be the decisive day with these people. I have allowed you
all to leave me alone and go on your own way. During this night, any one
of you may leave. Any of you may take one of my family and leave and you
may scatter in the murk of this night. Indeed, I am the one they want.
When they get me, they will not go after anyone else.[^12]

As soon as the Imam (a) finished his words, Abul-Fadl Al-Abbas,
representing the Ahl al-Bayt, said to his brother:

“Why should we do so? Is it for that we will live after you? No! We
supplicate to the Lord to forbid it.”[^13]

The same situation was shown from the sons of Aqil, and the other
companions who showed their readiness to sacrifice their souls for their
Imam (a). Hence, everybody spent that night with worship and acts of
obedience to Allah. They were waiting for the dawn of that day on which
they would obtain their highest goal in this life - martyrdom.

Lady Zaynab’s panic
-------------------

Imam Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-Abidin (a), the only survivor of the
tragedy of Karbala, later on reported:

My aunt Zaynab was nursing me on that night (the night before the tenth
of Muharram) when my father isolated himself in a tent. Only Juwayn, the
servant of Abu Dharr, was with him mending his sword. The Imam (a) then
cited (the following poetic verses):

*O days, fie upon you! How poor a mate you are!*

*Too many are those who, in morns and eves, are*

*Dead or alone in isolation*

*Yet days never change and never show alternation*

*Every mortal shall take a way to their termination*

*The inevitable shall imminently occur*

*All matters to the Most High recur.*

He repeated these words twice or thrice until I understood his purpose.
Hence, I could not control my tears. However, I tried my best to stop
weeping and keep silence. I understood that we would suffer horrifying
ordeals after him. My aunt Zaynab, like other women who are prevailed by
their tender hearts, could not control herself. She ran towards him with
uncovered head and shouted before him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاثُكْلاهُ! وَاحُزْنَاهُ! لَيْتَ المَوْتَ أَعْدَمَنِيَ الحَيَاةَ! يَا
حُسَيْنَاهُ! يَا سَيِّدَاهُ! يَا بَقِيَّةَ أَهْلِ بَيْتَاهُ!
أَسْتَسْلَمْتَ لِلْمَوْتِ وَيَئِسْتَ مِنَ الحَيَاةِ؟ اليَوْمَ مَاتَ
جَدِّي رَسُولُ اللهِ، اليَوْمَ مَاتَتْ أُمِّي فَاطِمَةُ الزَّهْراءُ
وَأَبي عَلِيُّ المُرْتَضَىٰ وَأَخِي الحَسَنُ الزَّكِيُّ. يَا خَلِيفَةَ
المَاضِينَ وَثِمَالَ البَاقِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Oh, for my losing you! Oh, for my grief for you! May demise deprive me
of life! Oh, for al-Husayn! Oh, for my master! Oh, for the only
remaining one of my family members! Is it true that you have submitted
to death and despaired of life? Only this day have my grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah, my mother, Fatimah al-Zahra, my father, Ali
al-Murtada (the Pleased One), and my brother, al-Hasan al-Zaki (the
Pure) died. You are the successor of the bygone ones and the last of
their survivors.”

Hearing these words from his beloved sister, Imam al-Husayn (a) looked
at her and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أُخْتَاهُ؛ لا يَذْهَبَنَّ بِحِلْمِكِ الشَّيْطَانُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O dear sister: do not let Shaitan seize your toleration.

The Imam’s eyes overflowed with tears and he added, “After they had made
me revolt, they wronged me.”

She then shouted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا وَيْلَتَاهُ! أَتَغْتَصِبُ نَفْسَكَ اغْتِصَاباً؟ فَذَاكَ أَقْرَحُ
لِقَلْبِي وَأَشَدُّ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Oh, woe! Do you take your soul by force? This is indeed more painful and
more difficult for me to tolerate.

She then slapped her face, tore her cloth, and fell to the ground losing
consciousness. The Imam (a) hurried to pour water on her face. When she
regained consciousness, he consoled her with the following words:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أُخْتَاهُ! إِتَّقِي اللهَ وَتَعَزَّيْ بِعَزاءِ اللهِ وَاعْلَمِي
أَنَّ أَهْلَ الأَرْضِ يَمُوتُونَ وَأَهْلَ السَّمَاءِ لا يَبْقَوْنَ،
وَأَنَّ كُلَّ شَيءٍ هَالِكٌ إِلا وَجْهَ اللهِ الَّذِي خَلَقَ الخَلْقَ
بِقُدْرَتِهِ وَإِلَيْهِ يَعُودُونَ، وَهُوَ فَرْدٌ وَاحِدٌ. وَإِنَّ
أَبِي خَيْرٌ مِنِّي، وَأَخِي خَيْرٌ مِنِّي، وَلِكُلِّ مُسْلِمٍ
بِرَسُولِ اللهِ أُسْوَةٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أُخْتَاهُ، إِنِّي أَقْسَمْتُ عَلَيْكِ فَأَبِرِّي قَسَمِي: لا
تَشُقِّي عَلَيَّ جَيْباً، وَلا تَخْمِشِي عَلَيَّ وَجْهاً، وَلا تَدْعِي
عَلَيَّ بِالوَيْلِ وَالثُّبُورِ إِذا أَنَا هَلَكْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O dear sister: Fear Allah, console yourself with the solace from Allah,
and know that inhabitants of this earth shall inexorably die and the
inhabitants of the heavens shall not survive forever. Also, be it known
to you that everything shall perish except Almighty Allah Who has
created all the creatures out of His omnipotence and they all shall
return to Him. He is Single and the Only One. My father is better than I
am and my brother is better than I am, and every Muslim must take an
example from the Messenger of Allah (S).

O dear sister: I put you under this oath and please do not break it:
never tear a piece of your cloth (as a sign of your sadness for me),
never slap your face (for mourning at my death), and never invoke woe
and perdition when I will be slain.

Imam al-Husayn (a), then, accompanied her to my tent.

To the companions of the Imam (a), that night was the brightest in their
lives; they could not wait for the dawn of the next day on which they
would join the heavens and settle in the endless bliss. Habib ibn
Muzhahir, for instance, was so cheerful, and when asked why, he
answered, “It is only a few hours and those tyrants will attack us with
their swords to make us embrace the women of Paradise. This time then is
most worthy of cheer.” The other companions who were filled with
deep-rooted and unshakable faith uttered similar words.[^14]

At that night, too, Imam al-Husayn (a) took a nap, and when he woke up,
he told his family members and companions about his dream:

“I dreamt that dogs attacked me so savagely that they bit me. The most
savage among them was a spotted one. As much as I understand from this
dream, I foresee that I will be slain by a leprous man. I then saw, in
dream too, my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S), with a group of
his companions addressing to me: You are the shahid of Muhammad’s
family. The inhabitants of the heavens, especially the elevated ones,
are glad because they anticipate that you will join them very soon.
Tonight, be my guest. Please, hurry up and do not be slow.[^15]

At that night, too, clouds of panic and terror covered the harem
totally. They did not see a single moment of ease as each one of them
imagined the horrifying future after the demise of their lord, Imam
al-Husayn (a), and their protector, Abul-Fadl al-Abbas, as well as their
family men. They had no weapon other than weeping and praying to
Almighty Allah.

The most grievous one among them was their chief, Lady Zaynab, who
watched all the events so attentively and already knew that all the
responsibility would be hers. She also anticipated that none of her
family men would survive after tomorrow; the black tomorrow.

Owing to her great concern about her brother, Lady Zaynab, on that
night, watched the tents of the companions and the Hashemites so that
she would be aware of their real situations and, hence, how would they
behave tomorrow. She first went slowly near the tent of her brother,
Abul-Fadl al-Abbas, to listen to him while he was delivering
instructions to the Hashemite warriors:

Al-Abbas asked, “Brothers, nephews, and cousins: what are you going to
do in the morning?”

“You decide, and we carry out,” they said.

Courageously, al-Abbas said, “Our companions and supporters are not our
relatives. And our own people must carry a heavy burden. Next morning,
we will be the first to fight and will precede our companions to death
so that people will not blame us.”

Before he finished, they all shouted in one voice, “We all agree to this
opinion.”

This conversation gave some hope to Lady Zaynab who, then, directed
towards the tent of the companions to listen to them. They were
gathering in the tent of their Head, Habib ibn Muzhahir, who asked them,
“O companions: what are you going to do in the morning?”

“You decide, and we carry out,” they said.

Habib spoke, “Next morning, we will be the first to fight and will
precede the Hashemites to death. We should never see a Hashemite person
stained with blood. Otherwise, people will blame us and say that we made
them fight before us so that we could save our souls.”

All the companions shouted in one voice, “We all agree to this opinion,
Habib.”

Lady Zaynab hence understood that the companions would never let Imam
al-Husayn (a) down and would defend him until the last spark of their
lives. She therefore directed towards the tent of the leader, Imam
al-Husayn (a), to report these news to him. The Imam (a) thanked Allah
for them and their sentiments and told his sister that these individuals
were the choice of the Almighty Allah.[^16]

[^1]: See al-Fadl ibn Hasan al-Tabarsi, Ilam al-Wara bi Alam al-Huda,
vol. 1, p. 451.

[^2]: The Arabic ‘karb’ means ‘agony’, and the Arabic ‘bala’’ means
‘ordeal’. Hence, the word ‘Karbala’’ is a combination of these two
words. In fact, ‘Karbala’’ is an ancient name of the region it refers
to. For more information about the origin of ‘Karbala’’, refer to Sayyid
Sami al-Badri, The Holy Quran and Archaeology, Translated by Badr
Shahin, Issue No. 1, Chapter: Karbala in the Ancient Oriental Linguistic
Heritage, First Edition, 1421.

[^3]: See Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 383.

[^4]: See Ibn Shubah al-Harrani, Tuhaf al-Uqul; 287

[^5]: See Abu-Hanifah al-Daynuri, al-Akhbar al-Tiwal, p. 253.

[^6]: See Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, Mirat al-Zaman fi Tawarikh al-Ayan, p. 89.

[^7]: See Shaykh al-Saduq, al-Amali, p. 221.

[^8]: See Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Baladhiri, Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 3, p. 181.

[^9]: See Ibn Shahrashub’s Manaqib Al Abi-Talib; 3:213.

[^10]: See Shaykh al-Shurayfi, Mawsuat Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 391
as quoted from Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 558.

[^11]: See Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Irshad, vol. 2, p. 90.

[^12]: See Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 285.

[^13]: See Abu-Mikhnaf al-Azdi, Maqtal al-Husayn, p. 177.

[^14]: See Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk;
6:241.

[^15]: See Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 3.

[^16]: See Shaykh al-Shurayfi, Mawsuat Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn, p.
409.


