To The Heaven
=============

The horrific scenes that Lady Zaynab had witnessed in her life did not
part from her for even a single moment; her eyes were always tearful and
her words uttered in wailing for her brother and the martyrs. She used
to call out the names of her brothers, sons and nephews, and then she
would be loose consciousness. In this state she was like a feeble body
without soul, awaiting death, which could be the only relief. She
awaited death so as to express grief to her grandfather and parents
about all that she had seen. Thus, she was affected by illnesses one
after another and she had to stay in bed for a long time while suffering
the agonies of her ailments.

Even in the last sparks of her life, the scenes of Karbala and Damascus
were alive before her eyes. However, death came to her while her tongue
was glorifying the Almighty Lord, Who will take revenge from those who
had wronged her. She departed on Sunday, the fifteenth of Rajab, 62 AH
at the age of fifty-seven.[^1]

### Her Burial Place

Historians have different opinions about the burial place of Lady
Zaynab. Some have defined it to be al-Baqi in Medina. This opinion is
not acceptable because if she were buried there, she would have a
special tomb just like the others who were buried there. It is probable
that she, like her mother, asked to be buried at night so that no one
would know about the location of her grave.

A good group of historians concur that she died in a small village in
Damascus and was buried there. They recorded that she immigrated to
Syria when Medina was affected by a disastrous famine, due to which
Abdullah ibn Jafar left for Syria.

It seems however that the story of this famine is baseless, since most
of the historians and narrators have never referred to any such incident
during that period. Besides, Abdullah ibn Jafar was so rich that he was
unlikely to be adversely influenced by such a famine, and that he was
too generous to leave his people in such a famine and immigrate to the
center of his enemies. At any rate, it is widespread that Lady Zaynab
was buried in Damascus and there is now a handsome shrine pilgrimaged by
thousands of people every day, seeking the blessings and mercy of
Almighty Allah, just like the holy shrine of Imam al-Husayn.

Another good number of historians have recorded that Lady Zaynab was
buried in Egypt.[^2] For all Egyptians, this is an unquestionable fact,
and her handsome shrine there is one of the most significant signs
Egypt. The historians have recorded the following about Lady Zaynab’s
immigration to Egypt:

In Medina, Lady Zaynab began to rally the public against the ruling
authorities and the unjust Umayyad State. As a result, people of Medina
rebelled and formed armed forces to face the ruling authorities. In
response, Yazid sent a heavy army commanded by the criminal Muslim ibn
Aqabah to kill the rebels and civilians harshly and mercilessly. He even
turned them into slaves for Yazid.

Fearing the activities of Lady Zaynab, the ruler of Medina wrote to
Yazid about danger perceived from her presence in Medina. The tyrant
wrote back that he should banish her to any country she would choose.
First of all, Lady Zaynab refused, but Zaynab daughter of Aqil, her
cousin, convinced her to leave for the good of religion. She then opted
for Egypt. Her nieces Fatimah and Sukaynah, daughters of Imam al-Husayn
(a), accompanied her in her (final) journey.

They arrived in Egypt on the last days of Dhu’l-Hijjah, and were
received hospitably by the ruler of Egypt, Maslamah ibn Mukhallad
al-Ansari, who offered Lady Zaynab to reside in his own house in
al-Tamra, and she lived there for eleven months and fifteen days. On
Sunday, 15th of Rajab, 62 A.H., Lady Zaynab departed from life and was
buried in that house. There is now a handsome shrine carrying her name
and teaching all generations the meanings of real humanity and defense
of freedom and belief.[^3]

In his book entitled *al-Tarikh*, Ibn Asakir records:

“Lady Zaynab resided in Egypt where she died and was buried. The lady
buried in Damascus is her sister, Zaynab al-Wusta.”

The Egyptians as well as the other Muslims throughout the globe
pilgrimage to the holy shrine everyday especially on the occasion of her
death. They, including scholars and religious people, crowd around the
shrine seeking the Lord’s blessings and mercy through the intercession
of Lady Zaynab. Rulers of Egypt, such as Kafur al-Akhshidi, Ahmad ibn
Tawlawn, and al-Dafir-bin-Nasrillah also had the honor to visit the holy
shrine.

When the month of Rajab begins, people from everywhere gather around the
holy shrine reciting the Holy Book of Allah and other Duas. Furthermore,
some of them reside there for half of the month.

Reconstructions and restorations to the holy shrine have been carried
out several times all through the course of history, at the hands of
virtuous kings and leaders of Egypt, such as, Fakhruddin Thalab
al-Jafari, Ali Pasha al-Wazir (in 956 AH), and Abdul-Rahman Katkhada (in
1174 AH). In 1212 AH, Uthman al-Muradi reconstructed the shrine, but he
had to stop when the French occupied the country. In 1326 AH, Yusuf
Pasha carried on with the reconstruction and his works were dated
through some poetic verses written on a tablet of marble. Anyhow, the
final touches took place at the hands of Muhammad Ali Pasha. In 1276 AH,
Said Pasha reconstructed some parts of the shrine, and in 1294 AH,
Khedive Muhammad Tawfiq Pasha reconstructed other parts. The operation
was completed in 1304 AH.

In any case, every country or place where Lady Zaynab resided has a
right to take pride in this Lady who has been the honor of Islam and all
Muslims. At any rate, Lady Zaynab’s place is in the heart of each and
every seeker of truth. She has been too great a personality to be
contained by any tomb, and fruit of one’s deed depends upon their
intent.

**Ziyarah of Lady Zaynab**

In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the Prophets.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ سَيِّدِ الأَنْبِياءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the owner of the (Heavenly) Pond and
the Standard.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ صَاحِبِ الحَوْضِ وَاللِّوَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who was taken to the skies and who
reached the position of the length of two arrows or even closer.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ عُرِجَ بِهِ إلى السَّمَاءِ
وَوَصَلَ إلى مَقَامِ قَابِ قَوْسَينِ أوْ أدْنى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Prophet of right guidance, the
master of (all) human beings, and the savior of the servants (of Allah)
from being destroyed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ نَبِيِّ الهُدَى وَسَيِّدِ الوَرَى
وَمُنْقِذِ العِبَادِ مِنَ الرَّدَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the one who has conformed (himself) to
sublime morality, enjoyed the broad honor, and owned the (Heavenly)
Signs and the Wise Remembrance of Allah (i.e. the Holy Quran).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ صَاحِبِ الخُلُقِ العَظِيمِ وَالشَّرَفِ
العَمِيمِ وَالآيَاتِ وَالذِّكْرِ الحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the owner of the Lofty Position, the
Pond from which people shall drink (on the Resurrection Day), and the
Standard, which shall be witnessed by everybody.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ صَاحِبِ المَقَامِ المحْمُودِ وَالحَوضِ
المَورُودِ وَاللِّوَاءِ المَشْهودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Path of Islam and the one given the
qiblah and the Quran, and the example of honesty, right, and
benevolence.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْهَجِ دِينِ الإسْلامِ وَصَاحِبِ
القِبْلَةِ وَالقُرْآنِ وَعَلَمِ الصِّدْقِ وَالحَقِّ وَالإحْسَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the
choice of the Prophets, the example of the pious ones, and the well
known in both the earth and the heavens.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ صَفْوَةِ الأَنْبِياءِ وَعَلَمِ
الأتْقِياءِ وَمَشْهورِ الذِّكْرِ في الأرْضِ وَالسَّماءِ، وَرَحْمَةُ
اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the
best of Allah's creation, the master of His creatures, the foremost
created individual before the existence of (Allah's) earth and heavens,
the last of the existent ones (who shall endure) after the extinction of
this world and its beings, and the one whose soul is a copy of the
Divinity and whose heart is the treasury of the Eternal, Subsistent God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ خَيْرِ خَلقِ اللهِ وَسَيِّدِ خَلْقِهِ
وَأَوَّلِ العَدَدِ قَبْلَ إيجَادِ أَرْضِهِ وَسَماوَاتِهِ وَآخِرِ
الأَبَدِ بَعْدَ فَناءِ الدُّنْيا وَأَهْلِهَا الَّذِي رُوحُهُ نُسْخَةُ
اللاَّهُوتِ وَصُورَتُهُ نُسْخَةُ المُلْكِ وَالمَلَكُوتِ وَقَلْبُهُ
خُزانَةُ الحَيِّ الَّذِي لا يمُوتُ، وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the one
who is shaded by clouds, is the master of the Two Worlds, is the chief
of the two beings (i.e. man and jinn), and is the Intercessor of the
ummah on the Resurrection Day.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ المُظَلَّلِ بِالغَمَامِ سَيِّدِ
الكَوْنَيْنِ وَمَوْلى الثَّقَلَينِ وَشَفِيعِ الأُمَّةِ يَومَ المحْشَرِ
وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the master of the Prophets' successors.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ سَيِّدِ الأَوْصِياءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the God-fearing ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ إمَامِ الأتْقِياءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the shelter of the saints.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ رُكْنِ الأوْلِيَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the support of the Choice ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ عِمَادِ الأصْفِيَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the Religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ يَعْسوبِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the commander of the faithful ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ أَمِيرِ المُؤمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Chief of the Prophets' successors.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ سَيِّدِ الوَصِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the leader of the pious ones.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ قَائِدِ البرَرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the preventer of the infidels and the
wantons.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ قَامِعِ الكَفَرَةِ وَالفجَرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the inheritor of the Prophets.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ وَارِثِ النَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the successor of the Chief of Apostles.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بنتَ خَلِيفَةِ سَيِّدِ المُرسَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of brightness of the Religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ ضِياءِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the Great News (as it is certainly
proved).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ النَّبَأِ العَظِيمِ عَلى اليَقِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the one
to whom the mission of settling accounts with people (on the
Resurrection Day) is given, between whose hands the Heavenly Pond (of
al-Kawthar) is put, and whom is intended by the (Prophet's) Statement of
the Ghadir Day.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ حِسابُ النَّاسِ عَلَيهِ
وَالكَوْثَرُ بَينَ يَدَيْهِ وَالنَّصُّ يَومَ الغَدِيرِ عَلَيهِ،
وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the lady whose she-camel was driven by
(Archangel) Gabriel, and whose misfortune (of Imam al-Husayn's being
slain in Karbala) was shared by (Archangel) Israfil, and due to whose
anger the All-exalted Lord was angry, and for whose misfortune of
Karbala, (the Prophets) Abraham the Friend of Allah, Noah, and Moses the
Spoken by Allah wept.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ قَادَ زِمَامَ نَاقَتِهَا
جِبرَائِيلُ وَشَارَكَها في مُصَابهَا إسْرافِيلُ، وَغَضِبَ بِسَبَبِها
الرَّبُّ الجَلِيلُ، وَبَكى لمُصَابهَا إبْراهِيمُ الخَلِيلُ وَنُوحٌ
وَمُوسَى الكَلِيمُ فِي كَرْبَلاءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the shining full moons.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ البُدُورِ السَّواطِعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O daughter of the
brilliant suns.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ الشُّمُوسِ الطَّوَالِعِ، وَرَحْمَةُ
اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Well Zamzam and Safa (of the landmarks
of Mecca)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ زَمْزَمَ وَالصَّفَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Mecca and Mina – a height in Mecca.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَكَّةَ وَمِنىَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him whom was carried by Buraq to the
heavens.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ حُمِلَ عَلى البُرَاقِ في الهَوَاء
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who carried the zakat (almsgiving)
by the margins of his dress to give it to the paupers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ حمَلَ الزَّكَاةَ بِأطْرافِ
الرِّدَاءِ وَبَذَلَهُ عَلى الفُقَراءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him whom was taken by night from the
Inviolable Masjid to the Farthest Masjid.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَنْ أُسْرِيَ بهِ مِن المَسْجِدِ
الحَرامِ إلى المسجِدِ الأقْصَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who fought with two swords.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَن ضَرَبَ بِالسَّيْفَين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of him who offered prayers to the two
qiblas.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مَن صَلَّى القِبْلَتَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Muhammad al-Mustafa (the Selected by
God)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ مُحَمَّدٍ المُصطَفَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Ali al-Murtada (the Pleased one)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ عَلِيٍّ المُرْتَضى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Fatimah al-Zahraa (the Resplendent).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ فَاطِمَةَ الزَّهْراءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of Khadijah al-Kubra (the Grand)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ خَديجَةَ الكُبرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon your grandfather, Muhammad al-Mukhtar (the
Chosen.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ وَعَلى جَدِّكِ مُحَمَّدٍ المُخْتَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon your father, Haydar al-Karrar (the Attacking
Lion.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ وعَلى أَبِيكِ حَيْدَر الكَرّار
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you and upon the pure, choice masters who are the
Arguments of Allah on lands, the chiefs of the earth and the heavens,
and love for whom is a prescription that is incumbent upon all
creatures.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ وَعَلى السَّادَاتِ الأطْهارِ الأخْيَارِ، وَهُمْ
حُجَجُ اللهِ عَلى الأقْطارِ وَسَاداتُ الأرضِ والسَّمَاءِ الَّذِينَ
حُبُّهُم فَرضٌ عَلى أَعْنَاقِ كُلِّ الخَلائِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O daughter of the glorified, holy servant of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا بِنْتَ وَليِّ اللهِ المُعَظَّمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O aunt of dignified, holy servant of Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يا عَمَّةَ وَليِّ اللهِ المُكَرَّمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O mother of
misfortunes; Zaynab.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا أُمَّ المَصائبِ يَا زَيْنَبُ وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ
وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—the virtuous, rightly guided one!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا الفَاضِلَةُ الرَّشِيدَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—the Woman of perfection, knowledge, doer of good.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا الكَامِلَةُ العَالمَةُ العَامِلةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—the noble gentlewoman.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا الكَريمَةُ النَّبيلَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—the pious, infallible one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا التَّقِيَّةُ النَّقِيَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—who showed her love for al-Husayn; the wronged, in
many situations and had to suffer awful heartbreaking misfortunes.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا مَن ظَهَرَتْ محَبَّتُها لِلحُسَينِ المَظْلومِ
في مَوارِدَ عَديدَةٍ وَتحَمِلُ المَصَائبَ المحُرِقَةَ لِلقُلوبِ مَعَ
تحَمُّلاتٍ شَديدَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—who guarded the Imam on the Day of Ashura when he was
killed, and sacrificed her soul for the salvation of Zayn al-Abidin at
the gathering of the most wretched one (i.e. Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad), and
addressed with a speech, just like that of (Imam) Ali, in the streets of
Kufa despite the presence of her enemies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا مَن حَفِظَتِ الإمَامَ في يَومِ عَاشُوراءَ في
القَتْلى وَبَذلَتْ نَفسَها في نجَاةِ زَينِ العَابِدينَ في مجَلِسِ
أشْقَى الأشْقِياءِ وَنَطَقَتْ كَنُطْقِ عَليٍّ عَليهِ السَّلاَمُ في
سِكَكِ الكُوفَةِ وَحَولهَا كَثيرٌ مِن الأعْدَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you—who thrust her forehead with the front part of the
howdah, when she saw the severed head of the Chief of Martyrs (i.e. Imam
al-Husayn), and caused blood to flow from beneath her veil and from the
howdah in the view of the enemies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يا مَنْ نَطَحَتْ جَبينَها بِمُقَدَّمِ المحْمَلِ
إذْ رَأتْ رَأسَ سَيّدِ الشُّهدَاءِ وَيخْرُجُ الدَّمُ مِن تحْتِ
قِناعِها وَمِن محْمَلِها بحَيثُ يرى مَن حَولهَا مِن الأعْداءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you, O the representative of the Infallible Imam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يا تالِيَةَ المَعْصومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be upon you, O you who were tested
through patience amidst misfortunes like al-Husayn the oppressed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يا ممُْتَحَنَةُ في تحَمُّلِ المَصائبِ كالحُسَينِ
المَظلُومِ، وَرَحْمَةُ اللهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you who are far away from you home.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا البَعيدَةُ عَن الأوْطانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you who were taken as captive through cities.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا الأَسِيرَةُ في البُلدانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you when you were bewildered in that ruined place in
Syria.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا المُتَحَيّرَةُ في خَرابَةِ الشَّامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you when you were bewildered as you stood by the (severed)
body of the Chief of Martyrs and called out for your grandfather - the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, saying: "Oh,
Muhammad! May the angels in the Heavens bless you! This is Husayn under
the open sky! His turban and his clothes have been stripped! His limbs
are severed! And your daughters are being taken captives! Complaining
(about this) is only to Allah."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ أَيَّتُهَا المُتَحَيّرَةُ في وُقُوفِكِ عَلى جَسَدِ
سَيِّد الشُّهَداءِ وخَاطَبْتِ جَدَّكِ رَسولَ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيه
وَآله بهَذا النِّدَاءِ: "صَلَّىٰ عَلَيْكَ مَلائِكَةُ السَّمَاءِ! هٰذَا
حُسَيْنٌ بِالعَراءِ مَسْلُوبُ العِمَامَةِ وَالرِّدَاءِ، مُقَطَّعُ
الأَعْضَاءِ، وَبَنَاتُكَ سَبَايَا! وَإلىٰ اللهِِ المُشْتَكَىٰ."
  </p>
</blockquote>

You also said, "O Muhammad! This is Husayn! Winds are blowing at his
body! His head is cut off from his back! Bastards have killed him! Oh,
for my grief for you, Abu Abdullah!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقَالَت: "يَا مُحَمَّدُ! هٰذَا حُسَيْنٌ تَسْفِي عَلَيْهِ رِيحُ
الصَّبَا، مجْذُوذَ الرَّأسِ مِن القَفا، قَتِيلَ أَوْلادِ البِغا.
وَاحُزْنَاهُ عَليْكَ يا أبَا عَبْدِ الله."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you whose heart cried out for al-Husayn; the oppressed,
the stripped, and the one who fell on dust, and you said in a sad tone,
"May my father be sacrificed for the one for whom I may sacrifice my
soul! Oh, for him who was depressed until he passed away! Oh, for him
who had been thirsty until he departed from life! Oh, for him whose
beard was dropping blood!"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يَا مَن تهَيَّجَ قَلبُها لِلحُسَينِ المَظلومِ
العُريَانِ المَطْروحِ عَلى الثَّرَى وقَالَت بِصَوتٍ حَزينٍ: "بِأبي مَن
نَفْسي لَهُ الفِداءُ، بِأبي المَهمُومُ حتَّى قَضى، بِأبي مَن شَيبَتُه
تَقطِرُ بِالدِّمَاء."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who wept for the (severed) body of her brother among
the killed ones so painfully that every one—whether friend or even
enemy, wept for her and it was reported through authenticated narrations
that people saw even horses shed tears, as they galloped past on their
legs.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن بَكَتْ عَلى جَسَدِ أخِيها بَينَ القَتلَى حَتّى
بَكى لبُكائِها كُلُّ صَدِيقٍ وَعَدُوٍّ، وَرَأى النَّاسُ دُموعَ الخَيلِ
تَنحَدِرُ عَلى حَوافِرِهَا عَلى التَّحْقِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who took the responsibility of gathering and guarding
the daughters of the Messenger of Allah and the children of al-Husayn on
the afternoon of the day of Ashura, and she stirred up the situation
when the two oppressed, strange children were martyred.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن تَكَفَّلَتْ وَجمَعَتْ في عَصْرِ عَاشُوراءَ بَناتِ
رَسولِ اللهِ وَأطفَالِ الحُسينِ وَقامَت لهَا القِيامَةُ في شَهادَةِ
الطِّفلَينِ الغَريبَين المَظلومَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her whose eyes did not sleep so as to guard the family of
the Messenger of Allah at Taff of Nineveh, and was taken as captive and
was humiliated at the hands of her enemies.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن لم تَنَمْ عَينُها لأجْلِ حِراسَةِ آل رَسولِ اللهِ
في طَف نِينَوَى وَصَارَت أَسيرَةً ذَليلَةً بِيَدِ الأعْداءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who had to ride a saddleless camel and then called on
her brother Abul-Fadhl (al-Abbas), saying, "O brother! O Abul-Fadhl! It
was you who helped me mount a camel when I left Medina."

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن رَكِبَتْ بَعيراً بِغَيرِ وِطاءٍ وَنَادَت أخَاها
أبَا الفَضْلِ بهَذا النِّدَاء: "أخِي أبَا الفَضْلِ، أنْتَ الَّذي
أرْكَبْتَني إذْ أرَدتُ الخُروجَ مِن المَدينَةِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who addressed a remarkably eloquent speech in the
center of Kufa so that all voices were silenced (to listen to her with
astonishment)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن خَطَبَتْ في مَيدانِ الكُوفَةِ بخِطْبَةٍ نافِعَةٍ
حَتّى سَكَنَتِ الأصْواتُ مِن كُلِّ ناحِيةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who said clear-cut arguments in the gathering of
(Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad who said to her, "How did you see that which
Allah had done to your brother?" Answering him, she said as honest
witness, "I saw nothing but good!"

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَن احْتَجَّتْ في مَجلِسِ ابْنِ زِيادٍ بِاحتْجَاجَاتٍ
وَاضِحَةٍ وَقالَت في جَوابِه بِبَيِّناتٍ صَادِقةٍ، إذْ قَالَ ابنُ
زِيادٍ لِزَينَبَ سَلامُ اللهِ عَلَيهَا: "كَيفَ رَأَيْتِ صُنْعَ اللهِ
بأخيكِ الحُسَينِ؟" قَالَت: "مَا رَأَيْتُ إِلاّ جَمِيلاً."
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon you who was imprisoned by the enemies under an open sky,
and had to see people of Syria celebrate (the martyrdom of her brother)
with pleasure, joy, and raised flags.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ عَلَيْكِ يا أَسيرَةً بِأيْدي الأعْداءِ في الفَلواتِ
وَرَأيْتِ أهْلِ الشّامِ في حَالَةِ العَيشِ والسُّرورِ وَنشْرِ
الرّاياتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Peace be upon her who was tied with a rope to the arm and the neck of
Imam Zayn al-Abidin, and she, along with sixteen persons from the family
of the Messenger of Allah, was forced to enter (the session of Yazid)
while they were enchained with iron fetters. Meanwhile, Ali ibn
al-Husayn (Imam Zayn al-Abidin) said to Yazid, “What if the Messenger of
Allah sees us in such a manner? What will be his impression?”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّلاَمُ على مَن شُدَّ الحَبلُ عَلى عَضُدِها وَعُنُقِ الإمامِ زَينِ
العَابِدينَ وَأَدخَلُوها مَعَ سِتَّةَ عَشرَ نَفَراً مِن آلِ رَسولِ
اللهِ وَهُم كَالأُسَرَاءِ مُقَرَّنينَ بِالحَديدِ مَظلومِينَ، وَقَالَ
عَلِيُّ بنُ الحُسَينِ عَلَيهِ السَّلاَمُ لِيَزيدَ: "يَا يَزيدُ ما
ظَنُّكَ بِرَسُولِ اللهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيهِ وَآلِهِ لَو رَآنا عَلى
هَذِه الحَالَةِ؟"
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, Lady Zaynab - mother of misfortunes - said to Yazid after he had
poetized, "(Had my forefathers who were killed at the Battle of Badr
witnessed this, they would have been very much delighted. Then they’d
have said, “May your hands, O Yazid, never be paralyzed)

How dare you hit the lips of Abu Abdullah (a), the Master of the Youths
of Paradise?"

She then said, "Although circumstances have made me to speak to you, I
see your power trivial in my eyes, find your talk big and your rebuke
excessive, but my eyes are tearful, and the chests filled with fire.
What can be stranger than all strange things that the Party of the
Shaitan is killing the honored Party of Allah.

If you regard us as your booty, you shall soon find us as your
opponents—that will be when you find nothing but what your hands had
committed,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your Lord never treats His servants unjustly (41:46)”***

To Allah is my complaint, and upon Him do I rely. So scheme however you
wish to scheme, and carry out your plots, and intensify your efforts,
for, by Allah, you shall never be able to obliterate our mention, nor
will you ever be able to kill the revelation (that was revealed to us),
nor will you ever exalt to our position, nor will your shame ever be
washed away. Your view shall be proven futile, your days limited in
number, and your wealth wasted on the Day when the caller calls out,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا لَعْنَةُ اللَّهِ عَلَى الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The curse of Allah be upon the oppressors.(11:18)”***

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, Who sealed the life of
our ancestors with honour and forgiveness, and that of our last ones
with martyrdom and mercy. We plead to Allah to complete His rewards for
them, grant them an increase, and recompense us pleasingly; He is the
most Merciful, the most Compassionate. Allah suffices us, and He is the
best Guardian.

May Allah bless Muhammad and his Pure, Immaculate Household.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قَالَت أُمُّ المَصائِبِ زَينَبُ لَهُ: "قَائلاً لَأَهَلُّوا
وَاسْتَهَلُّوا فَرَحاً ثُمَّ قَالُوا يَا يَزِيدُ لا تُشَلْ،
مُنْتَحِياً عَلَى ثَنَايَا أَبِي عَبْدِاللهِ، عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ،
سَيِّدِ شَبَابِ أَهْلِ الجَنَّةِ تَنْكُتُهَا بِمِخْصَرَتِكَ؟"
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ قالَت: "وَلَئِنْ جَرَتْ عَلَيَّ الدَّوَاهِي مُخَاطَبَتَكَ، إنِّي
لَأَسْتَصْغِرُ قَدْرَكَ وَأَسْتَعْظِمُ تَقْرِيعَكَ وَأَسْتَكْثِرُ
تَوْبِيخَكَ، لَكِنِ العُيُونُ عَبْرَى وَالصُّدُورُ حَرَّى. اَلا
فَالعَجَبُ كُلُّ الْعَجَبِ لِقَتْلِ حِزْبِ اللهِ النُّجَبَاءِ بِحِزْبِ
الشَّيْطَانِ الطُّلَقَاءِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنِ اتَّخَذْتَنَا مَغْنَماً لَتَجِدُنَا وَشِيكاً مُغْرَماً حِينَ
لا تَجِدُ اِلاّ مَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاكَ، ﴿وَمَا رَبُّكَ بِظَلَّامٍ
لِلْعَبِيدِ﴾ فَإلَى اللهِ المُشْتَكَى وَعَلَيْهِ المُعَوَّلُ في
الشِّدَّةِ والرَّخاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكِدْ كَيْدَكَ وَاسْعَ سَعْيَكَ وَنَاصِبْ جَهْدَكَ! فَوَاللهِ لا
تَمْحُوَنَّ ذِكْرَنَا وَلا تُمِيتُ وَحْيَنَا وَلا تُدْرِكُ أَمَدَنَا
وَلا تَرْخَصُ عَنْكَ عَارَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَلْ رَأْيُكَ إلاّ فَنَدٌ وَأيَّامُكَ إلاّ عَدَدٌ وَجَمْعُكَ إلاّ
بَدَدٌ. يا يزيد أما سمعت قول الله تعالى: ﴿وَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ
قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتًا بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ الَّذِي خَتَمَ لِأَوَّلِنَا
بِالسَّعَادَةِ وَالمَغْفِرَةِ وَلِآخِرِنَا بِالشَّهَادَةِ
وَالرَّحْمَةِ، وَنَسْأَلُ اللهَ أَنْ يُكْمِلَ لَهُمُ الثَّوَابَ
وَيُوجِبَ لَهُمُ المَزِيدَ وَيُحْسِنُ عَلَيْنَا الخِلافَةَ؛ إنَّهُ
رَحِيمٌ وَدُودٌ، وَحَسْبُنَا اللهُ وَنِعْمُ الوَكِيلُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَلَّى اللهُ عَلى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ الطَّيِّبِينَ الطَّاهِرِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: See al-Ubaydali, al-Sayyidah Zaynab wa Akhbar al-Zaynabiyyat, 9.

[^2]: This saying is agreed by the following scholars: Ibn Asakir in
al-Tarikh al-Kabir, Ibn Tawlawn in al-Risalah al-Zaynabiyyah, al-Sharani
in Lawaqih al-Anwar, Muhammad Sabban in Isaf al-Raghibin, al-Shabalnaji
in Nur al-Absar, al-Shabrawi in al-Ithaf, Hasan al-Adawi in Mashariq
al-Anwar, al-Mannawi in al-Tabaqat, Jalaluddin al-Sayuti in al-Risalah
al-Zaynabiyyah, al-Ajhuri in Musalsal Ashura, and many others.

[^3]: See Isaf al-Raghibin 196, al-Shamrani, Lawaqih al-Anwar 23,
al-Ithaf bi Hubb al-Ashraf 93, and Masahriq al-Anwar, 100.


