Publisher’s Word
================

All praise is due to Almighty Allah Who will reward those who have
sacrificed their lives for His sake and declared fearlessly their word
for the right so as to extend justice and honesty on this earth and
contribute towards achieving the purpose for which He has created this
Creation.

May Allah’s peace and all blessings be upon Muhammad and his infallible
Household who suffered troubles and encountered horrible adversities.
They did so for the sake of taking the humankind towards eternal
pleasure and service to Almighty Allah in the best possible way.

In the history of humankind, one can find names of many people whose
principles encouraged them to declare the word of right and justice
openly in the faces of the wrongdoers and the unjust. This book deals
with one such lady who entered the field of strife against the wrong
with remarkable strength and said what was right and just in the faces
of the wrongdoers and oppressors.

This lady’s words still echo and disturb every tyrant. They still remind
the history of her ordeals, which together with her brother’s revolution
gave new birth to Islam after it had been deformed and vanquished at the
hands of the illegitimate rulers who took over the leadership of the
Islamic nation after the Prophet’s demise. This Lady was Zaynab -
daughter of Imam Ali (a).

We must also yield to the fact that Imam al-Husayn (a) was accompanied
by his sister, Lady Zaynab on his journey to Karbala only after he had
found her to be the one who was most fit to take his giant revolution to
completion. And, she completed the revolution so perfectly after his
martyrdom.

Lady Zaynab was an individual who had attained perfection. She
understood the part she would be playing in the revolution led by her
brother even though the Islamic Shariah[^1] has ordered women to remain
in their houses and it is not obligatory upon them to participate in
jihad[^2]. Notwithstanding this, Lady Zaynab, who was the daughter of
the pure household of Prophet (S) where Islamic Shariah had been
revealed, understood more than anyone else that the two missions that
meant to be undertaken by her were advocacy for the rights of Ahlulbayt
(a) and strengthening the foundations of religion. Hence, she carried
out her religious duty with as much perfection as possible. She served
as a precious jewel stone set in a ring in the series of gems that
belonged to Islam.

From this we come to understand that the revolution of Lady Zaynab, the
granddaughter of the Prophet of Islam and the daughter of its protector
Imam Ali (a), was due to a divine directive. It is known to all that
Islam could see light only by virtue of the wealth of Khadijah (Prophet
Muhammad’s first wife) and the sword of Ali ibn Abu Talib (a). In the
same way, Islam has subsisted after the Prophet (S) only by virtue of
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (a) and the revolution led by Lady Zaynab.
It was only through the revolutionary speeches of Lady Zaynab, that the
public came to recognize the falsehood of Muawiyah and Yazid and their
enmity towards Islam.

The tragedy of Lady Zaynab forms the second half of the revolution of
Imam al-Husayn (a). She stood steadfast against those unbearable
misfortunes. She held full custody of the captives, orphans, and the
ailing Imam Ali ibn Husayn (a). She disputed with the wrongdoers through
her speeches and condemned the horrendous oppression and violation of
human rights and dignity. She then rallied the public against the
oppressive gang of the Umayyad rulers and their followers until they
chose to return her to Medina so as to save their state. Nevertheless,
the foundation of their state was completely smashed as a result of Lady
Zaynab’s efforts.

The material of this book has been compiled using the most reliable
reference books of history and biography. However, the books titled
‘*Al-Sayidah Zaynab’* authored by Sheikh Jafar al-Naqdi and
‘*Al-Sayyidah Zaynab*’ authored by Sheikh Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi have
been most relied upon in preparing the material of this book.

The Ansariyan Publications is thus pleased to introduce this work, which
focuses light, in a brief yet documented way, on the life account,
personality, and struggle of Lady Zaynab, to the gentle readers hoping
they will benefit from knowing the unparalleled life circumstances of
this great lady and derive benefit leading them to human perfection.

Finally, we pray to Almighty Allah to make the path of success paved for
us and make our intentions purely proposed to Him. He is most certainly
the source of success and good fortune.

**Ansariyan Publications, 2002**

[^1]: Shariah is the Islamic code of religious law, based on the
teachings of the Quran and the traditional sayings of Prophet Muhammad
(S).

[^2]: Jihad is religious warfare or a war for the propagation or defense
of Islam.


