The Ahl ul-Bayt in The Quran And Sunnah
=======================================

An Introduction to Ahl ul-Bayt
------------------------------

His Eminence Shaykh Musa Muhammad Ali states in his *al-Sayyidah
Zaynab*[^1]*:*

All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the worlds. Peace and blessings be
upon our master Muhammad, the most honorable of the prophets and the
chief of the Messengers of Allah, and upon his household, companions and
progeny.

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحْمَتُ اللَّهِ وَبَرَكَاتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ ۚ إِنَّهُ
حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The mercy of Allah and His blessings are on you, O people of the
house, surely He is Praised, Glorious. (11:73)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House and to purify you with a (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (42:23)***

In his book titled *al-Sahih*, Muslim records the following:

Zayd ibn Arqam narrated: In a place between Mecca and Medina called
‘Khumm’, the Messenger of Allah (S) once delivered a speech to us. After
statements of praising and thanking Almighty Allah, as well as
statements to preach and remind about Him, the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، فَإِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ يُوشِكُ أَنْ
يَأْتِيَنِي رَسُولُ رَبِّي فَأُجِيبُ، وَأَنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُم
ثَقَلَيْنِ: أَوَّلُهُمَا كِتَابُ اللهِ فِيهِ الهُدىٰ وَالنُّورُ؛
فَخُذُوا بِكِتابِ اللهِ وَاسْتَمْسِكوا بِهِ... وَأَهْلُ بَيْتِي؛
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O people, I am no more than an ordinary person, and the messenger of my
Lord (i.e. angel of death) will shortly come to me and then I will
respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first is the Book of
Allah that includes right guidance and illumination. Persevere with the
Book of Allah and hold fast on to it. Second is my household; remember
Allah concerning my household, remember Allah concerning my household,
remember Allah concerning my household.”

The first thing one can learn from this directive of the immaculate
Prophet (S) is that one who loves something must prefer it over himself,
otherwise such a love will be false and untrue. To attain something
after a serious effort is more pleasing and delightful than to get it
without sweat.

The true love for the Messenger of Allah (S) can be shown by following
his words and deeds, complying with his instructions, avoiding things
that he deemed as forbidden, practicing his ethics, and following him in
his love for his household (the Ahl al-Bayt), by showing love for them.

The Prophet’s household is of the real pure ones. It is they to whom
Almighty Allah has given His love, bestowed them with a variety of
miracles, purified them from the nature of soul, and saved them from
following their own desires. As a result, all their thoughts have become
completely connected to Almighty Allah.

Thus, love for the Prophet’s household has become the origin and the
first step in the way towards Allah. All manners and ranks are only
levels of love.

Out of His honoring them, Almighty Allah educated the ignorant through
the Prophet’s family, guided the lost ones, and strengthened the weak.
Therefore, to behave modestly before this pure household is a duty, to
seek justice for their wronged ones is obligatory, and to serve them as
much as possible is regarded as a way of seeking nearness to them.

It is Almighty Allah, the Creator, Who favored, awarded, purified,
chastened, and honored the Prophet’s household. This is clear in His
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you with a (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

Therefore, everyone must bear in his or her heart that such a divine
favor is a response to the Creator’s instruction and to carry out the
Prophet’s call.

Love for the Prophet’s household can only be achieved by respecting them
in their presence or absence; they hence should not be slandered or
disrespected. Finally, it is forbidden to backbite, especially about the
Prophet’s household and the sincere saints of Allah. So, Muslims should
be wary of such a vicious trait. However, no one who indulges in such a
thing will ever attain success, because the regard for the saints is as
same as for the prophets, and to make distinction between them is to
deprive them of their blessing and ingratitude for their grace.[^2]

Regrettably, the inattentive and the deceived look at the people having
honesty and loyalty, with despise. They issue misjudgments about them,
charge them with deviation, and regard them as ignorant.

The clear-sighted ones, on the other hand, are persistently calm; they
can see the unseen with eyes of discernment from beyond soft screens.
Accordingly, misfortunes cannot defeat them and attacks of time cannot
provoke them. In an instant, the flag of ease shall gleam for them, the
clouds of obscurity will clear away and Almighty Allah will eradicate
the interests of the conspirators.

On that account, men of perception, sagacity, decency, and observation
hold faithful devotion, perfect constancy, sincere honesty and abundant
esteem for the Prophet’s household out of their compliance to the
Creator’s instruction, their honoring of the Prophet and their acceding
to his commandment in the following Hadith:

Al-Tabarani, in his *al-Mujam al-Kabir*, Abu al-Shaykh, Ibn Habban, in
his *al-Sahih*, and al-Bayhaqi; all recorded the Prophet’s following
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُؤْمِنُ عَبْدٌ حَتَّى أَكُونَ أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ نَفْسِهِ،
وَتَكُونَ عِتْرَتِي أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ عِتْرَتِهِ، وَأَهْلِي
أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ أَهْلِهِ، وَذَاتِي أَحَبَّ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ
ذَاتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A servant of Allah shall not be faithful believer unless he loves me
more than he loves himself, loves my household more than he loves his
household, loves my family more than he loves his family, and loves my
soul more than he loves his soul.”[^3]

Al-Bayhaqi, Abu al-Shaykh, and Ibn Habban, in his *al-Sahih*, all
recorded the following hadith on the authority of Imam Ali (a):

The Messenger of Allah (S) was furious when he came out, sat on the
minbar, thanked and praised Allah, and then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَالُ رِجَالٍ يُؤْذُونَنِي فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي؟ وَالَّذِي نَفْسِي
بِيَدِهِ لاَ يُؤْمِنُ عَبْدٌ حَتَّى يُحِبَّنِي، وَلاَ يُحِبَّنِي
حَتَّى يُحِبَّ ذُرِّيَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What is the matter with those who hurt me concerning my household? I
swear by Him Who grasps my soul in His hand that a servant (of Allah)
shall not be faithful believer unless he loves me, and he shall not love
me truly unless he loves my progeny.”

For this reason, Abu Bakr said:

“I love to respect the Prophet’s kinship more than I respect mine.”

Out of his honesty and wisdom, the Master of the Creation, Prophet
Muhammad (S), who says nothing but truth, has said as reported by
al-Tirmidhi, in his *al-Sunan*, and al-Hakim, in *al-Mustadrak*, on the
authority of (Abdullah) Ibn Abbas:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحِبُّوا اللهَ لِمَا يَغْذُوكُمْ بِهِ مِنْ نِعَمِهِ، وَأَحِبُّونِي
لِحُبِّ اللهِ، وَأَحِبُّوا أَهْلَ بَيْتِي لِحُبِّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You should love Allah on account of the graces that He bestows upon you
ceaselessly, and you should love me on account of your love for Allah,
and you should love my household on account of your love for me.”[^4]

As a commentary of the Prophet’s saying, “You should love Allah on
account of the graces that He bestows upon you ceaselessly,” the author
of *Fayd al-Qadir* says:

“This means that you should love Allah for the various material and
tangible graces that He confers upon you, such as the facilitation of
food and drink – as an example of the material grace, and the leading to
success and right guidance, nomination of figures of knowledge, creation
of senses, and dispense of the illuminations of conviction upon hearts
are in addition to other tangible graces.”

Ibn Atta-Allah al-Iskandari says:

“In every moment, Almighty Allah confers upon you with graces for which
you should love Him and must thank Him at all times.”

Accordingly, it is impossible to settle the thanking when its time slips
away, since thanking must be renewed in every split second. In the same
way, seeking forgiveness and evasion of sins must be renewed in every
moment.

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ تَعُدُّوا نِعْمَةَ اللَّهِ لَا تُحْصُوهَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you would count Allah's favors, you will not be able to
number them; most surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.” (16:18)***

Hence, the Prophet (S) intended to say that one must love Almighty Allah
because He is conferring upon us with His endless graces.

Al-Zamakhshari says in this regard:

“Grace denotes every advantage intended for charity. On this account,
Allah the Exalted has created the whole world as grace. The world is in
fact either animate or inanimate. The inanimate is grace for the
animate, and the animate is a grace for liveliness, which in turn is a
grace for the spirited, because without liveliness, the spirited would
lose the ability to benefit by other graces. Thus, anything that can
benefit is grace.”

As a commentary on the previous notion, al-Fakhr al-Razi says:

“The graces of Allah the Exalted are countless, because everything that
He has given to us, such as advantages, pleasures, limbs and organs that
we use for getting benefits and evading harms, things that He has
created in this universe to reason out the existence of Him as the one
and only Maker, and things that He has brought about so as to restrain
from acts of disobedience; all these are graces. Furthermore, everything
that brings pleasure is grace, and everything that does not bring
pleasure but is used for evading harms is also grace, and everything
that does not bring pleasure and is not used for evading harms is also
grace since it can be used as evidence on the existence of the Maker and
thus, a means to the recognition of and the obedience to Him. As a
result, all creatures are His grace.”

It is now clear that a while a servant’s love for Allah does not need
interpretation, Allah’s love for a servant needs interpretation.

In this regard, Imam al-Ghazzali says:

“Love for Allah is factual, not figurative. It is so because love, as
linguists cite, denotes the soul’s tendency to something expedient and
agreeable, while the excessive tendency is the ardent love. Since Allah
the Exalted is All benevolent and pleasing, and tendency to benevolence
and pleasantness is naturally satisfying, love for Him has become real.
On the other side, Allah’s love for a servant is a figurative matter
that stems from the Lord’s unveiling the divine screen between a servant
and Him in order that the servant will see the Lord with his heart. It
also stems from the Lord’s enabling the servant to be close to Him.”

The following is excerpted from *Sharh al-Mawaqif*:[^5]

“Our love for Allah is a spiritual matter that depends on the conception
of His continual, limitless perfection, and it necessitates perfect
attention to His Sacred Presence without languor or whereabouts. While
our love for things other than Him is a manner that depends on the
imagination of perfection of pleasant, humane, or comparable things,
such as the love for one’s beloved or the father’s love for his son.
Moreover, love is satisfaction, an expression of will, and avoidance of
protest.

In abstract context, Allah’s love for others is not real, because the
reality of love denotes will, and will is associated with limited things
only, and Almighty Allah has no limits. In other words, a will to do
something denotes that this thing has not been done yet, and the will to
avoid something denotes that it can be avoided. On that account,
Almighty Allah is too exalted to will to do or avoid something, because
He is the Everlasting, the eternally sought by all.”

The Prophet’s saying, “you should love me on account of your love for
Allah,” means that because Allah the Exalted loves me, He specifies your
love for me as an instruction that you must carry out. This meaning is
stated in the following report narrated from authentic sources:

“When Allah loves a servant, Archangel Gabriel declares: Allah has loved
so-and-so, you therefore must love him.”

The Prophet’s saying, “You should love my household on account of your
love for me,” means that because I love my household for the sake of
Allah’s love for them, you should also then love them.

The Prophet’s saying may also denote an instruction, which must be
carried out, because love for the Prophet’s household is obligatory
because of a person’s love for the Prophet (S). Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ وَمَنْ يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَزِدْ لَهُ فِيهَا حُسْنًا ۚ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.” (42:23)***

Al-Fakhr al-Razi records that the Prophet (S) and his household are
equal in five things:

During the Tashahhud[^6] of the prayers, blessings should be said to the
Prophet and his household.

During the Taslim[^7] of the prayers, blessings should be said to the
Prophet and his household. In the Holy Quran, Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلَامٌ عَلَىٰ إِلْ يَاسِينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Peace be on the family of Yasin. (37:130)***

In context of purity; Almighty Allah addresses to Prophet Muhammad (S)
by saying, **“طه”,** which means ‘pure.’

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If you love Allah, then follow me, Allah will love you.
(3:31)***

Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْقُرْبَىٰ فِي الْمَوَدَّةَ إِلَّاأَجْرًا عَلَيْهِ أَسْأَلُكُمْ لَا
قُلْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

** **

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (42:23)***

The Holy Quran, authentic hadiths, and consensus of Muslim scholars from
different generations - all refer to the divine obligation of loving,
adoring, esteeming, respecting, and honoring the household of Allah’s
Messenger (S). Besides this, the reason also points towards this fact on
the basis of previous proofs about this obligation, which is due because
we owe gratitude for all the graces received from the All-benefactor
Lord. Our Prophet (S), being the prophet of mercy, the guide of the
ummah, and the savior of humankind, must be thanked, appreciated,
respected and honored. To honor and love the Prophet’s household is a
part of honoring and loving him.

On this basis, the four major guidelines of the Islamic Shariah, namely
the Holy Quran, the holy Sunnah, consensus of the different generations
of the Muslim scholars, and analogy, make it incumbent upon Muslims to
love the Prophet’s household. It is impossible to refer to all these
evidences within this brief essay, because it requires compilation of a
large volume of text. However, the submission to this fact is an
indisputable matter for both ordinary people and scholars. So, we have
referred only to some points of this topic in order to enlighten those
who love the Prophet’s household, for Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, Allah chose Adam and Noah and the descendants of Abraham and
the descendants of Imran above the nations. (3:33)***

Undoubtedly, Prophet Muhammad (S) belongs to the descendants of Abraham
and as a consequence, his household belongs to the descendants of
Abraham. To conclude then, the Prophet’s household has been chosen by
Allah.

Regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you with a (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

This is most surely clear-cut evidence on the special rank of the
Prophet’s household. There are numerous further verses from the Holy
Quran and hadith, which support each other in this regard. The best
example is Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives. (42:23)***

The authenticated frank hadiths regarding the Prophet’s household are
innumerable. Let us refer to some of them:

Al-Tirmidhi, in his *al-Sunan*, and Abu Hatam reported the following
hadith on the authority of Zayd ibn Arqam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا حَرْبٌ لِمَنْ حَارَبَهُمْ وَسِلْمٌ لِمَنْ سَالَمَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I am at war with him whoever is in war with them (the Prophet’s
household), and in peace with him whoever is in peace with them.

Al-Tirmidhi and Imam Ahmad recorded the following hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ آذَىٰ قَرَابَتِي فَقَدْ آذَانِي، وَمَنْ آذَانِي فَقَدْ آذَىٰ
اللهَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anyone who hurts my relatives will be hurting me, and whoever hurts me
is surely hurting Allah.

Imam al-Bukhari, in his *al-Sahih*, recorded the following on the
authority of Abd-al-Rahman ibn Abu Layla:

Kaab ibn Ajarah met me and said, “May I present to you a gift that I
have heard from the Messenger of Allah (S)?”

“Yes,” I answered, “give it to me.”

He spoke, “We asked the Prophet (S) how to send blessings on the Ahl
al-Bayt, and he answered – “You should say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُولُوا: اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَلَىٰ آلِ مُحَمَّدٍ
كَمَا صَلَّيْتَ عَلَىٰ إِبْراهِيمَ وَعَلَىٰ آلِ إِبْراهِيمَ، إِنَّكَ
حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ. اللَّهُمَّ بَارِكْ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَلَىٰ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ كَمَا بَارَكْتَ عَلَىٰ إِبْراهِيمَ وَعَلَىٰ آلِ إِبْراهِيمَ،
إِنَّكَ حَمِيدٌ مَجِيدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Say: O Allah, have mercy upon Muhammad and upon the family of Muhammad
in the same way as you had mercy upon Abraham and the family of Abraham.
You are surely the Praised ones and Glorious. O Allah, bless Muhammad
and the family of Muhammad in the same way as you blessed Abraham and
the family of Abraham. You are surely Praised and Glorious.”

Commenting on this hadith, our master Jabir says:

“I do not believe in my prayers where I have not send blessings upon
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad; I do not believe such prayers will
be accepted.”

Al-Tirmidhi, in his *al-Sunan*, records the following on the authority
of Umar ibn Abu Salamah, the Prophet’s stepson:

Regarding the following Verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a with (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

When this verse was revealed, the Prophet (S) was in the house of
Ummu-Salamah – the Prophet’s righteous wife. He summoned Fatimah,
al-Hasan, and al-Husayn and covered them with a cloak, which, covered
his back too, and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ هٰؤُلاَءِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي فَأَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ
وَطَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, these are my household; therefore, (I beseech You) to keep
away the uncleanness from them and purify them with a thorough
purifying.”

Seeing this, Ummu-Salamah asked, “Am I added to them, Allah’s
Messenger?”

The Prophet (S) answered, “You are in your own position, and you are on
the right.”[^8]

These are the Ahl al-Bayt from whom Almighty Allah keeps away the
uncleanness and whom He purified thoroughly. In the previous hadith, the
Messenger of Allah (S) showed that this honor (of thorough purification)
is dedicated to them individually and without the participation of
anyone else.

According to the narration, this exclusive position verifies that
Ummu-Salamah heard and saw the whole situation and asked the Prophet (S)
to include her to them. As she tried to lift up that cloak and go under
it, the Prophet (S) took the cloak’s edge from her hand and said, “You
are in your own position, and you are on the right.”

Because this exclusive position is dedicated to the Ahl al-Bayt alone,
nobody else should be added, not even Ummu-Salamah, the virtuous wife of
the Prophet (S) and mother of the faithful believers (may Allah please
all the mothers of the faithful believers) [^9].

If it were permissible or acceptable for anyone else to have a share
among this exclusive position of the Prophet’s household, it would be
permissible for Ummu-Salamah to be under that cloak at least, in
response to her desire, to sooth her, or to appreciate her faithfulness
and loyalty. This is especially so because her wish was made to the one
who “has a greater claim on the faithful –believers - than they have on
themselves” and is “to the believers full of pity and merciful,”[^10]
and he has been described as the kind, the sympathetic, the magnanimous,
the generous, and the honest. Thus, it has become evident that this
verse is dedicated only to those people who were within the cloak and
not anyone else. This fact has also been proven by authentic narrations.

Thus, it has been proved that this verse is dedicated to the Prophet’s
household who are distinguished by virtue of such honorable merits. In
addition, the holy Sunnah is filled to the brim in the Islamic world
with the narrations about virtues of the Prophet’s household:

In his (book entitled) *al-Sahih*, Muslim records the following on the
authority of Yazid ibn Hayyan al-Taymi:

Husayn ibn Sabarah, Muslim ibn Zayd, and I went to Zayd ibn Arqam. After
we had sat before him, Husayn asked, “Zayd, you have really attained
great benefaction because you saw the Prophet (S), listened to his
words, participated in his campaigns, and followed him in prayers. Now,
Zayd, please narrate to us what you have heard from the Messenger of
Allah (S).”

Zayd spoke: “O son of my brother, (I swear) by Allah I have become old
in age, my days have become old, and I have forgotten some of these
narrations that I used to memorize directly from the Messenger of Allah
(S). You therefore should accept what I will tell you and should not ask
me anything over and above my ability.”

He then added, “One day, in a place between Mecca and Medina called
‘Khumm’, the Messenger of Allah (S) delivered a speech to us.

After statements of praising and thanking Almighty Allah, as well as
statements of preach and reminding of Him, the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، فَإِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ يُوشِكُ أَنْ
يَأْتِيَنِي رَسُولُ رَبِّي فَأُجِيبُ، وَأَنَا تَارِكٌ فِيكُم
ثَقَلَيْنِ: أَوَّلُهُمَا كِتَابُ اللهِ فِيهِ الهُدىٰ وَالنُّورُ؛
فَخُذُوا بِكِتابِ اللهِ وَاسْتَمْسِكوا بِهِ... وَأَهْلُ بَيْتِي؛
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O people, I am no more than an ordinary person and the messenger of my
Lord - the Angel of Death will shortly come to me and then I will
respond. Among you, I have left two weighty things: first, the Book of
Allah that includes right guidance and illumination. Persevere with the
Book of Allah and hold fast on it. Second, my household; remember Allah
concerning my household, remember Allah concerning my household,
remember Allah concerning my household.”

Husayn asked again, “Zayd, who are the Prophet’s household? Are his
wives included within his household?”

He – Zayd - answered: “His wives are included within his household, but
his Household are those who are forbidden to receive alms after him.”

Husayn asked, “Who are they, then?”

Zayd answered, “They are the family of Ali, the family of Aqil, the
family of Jafar, and the family of Abbas.”

(Abdullah) ibn Abbas has narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) had
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي عَبْدِ ٱلمُطَّلِبِ؛ إِنِّي قَدْ سَأَلْتُ اللهَ أَنْ
يُثَبِّتَ قَائِمَكُمْ وَأَنْ يَهْدِيَ ضَالَّكُمْ وَأَنْ يُعَلِّمَ
جَاهِلَكُمْ وَأَنْ يَجْعَلَكُمْ جُوَدَاءَ نُجَدَاءَ رُحَمَاءَ. فَلَوْ
أَنَّ رَجُلاً صَفَنَ بَيْنَ ٱلرُّكْنِ وَالمَقَامِ فَصَلَّىٰ وَصَامَ،
ثُمَّ لَقِيَ اللهَ مُبْغِضاً لأَهْلِ بَيْتِ مُحَمَّدٍ دَخَلَ النَّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O sons of Abd-al-Muttalib, I have beseeched Allah to make the chief
among you stable (on the right course), guide the ones who are straying
among you, teach the ignorant ones among you, and make you generous,
noble and merciful. A man who lines up to stand between the *Rukn* and
*Maqam*[^11] for praying (there) and observes fasting (there) shall most
surely be entered into the fire of Hell if he meets Allah (on the Day of
Resurrection) if he bears malice against the household of Muhammad.”

This hadith is recorded by al-Hakim (in his book titled *al-Mustadrak*)
using the criterion of Muslim[^12].

The Prophet’s household is the most worthy of the Divine Care and love
for the Messenger of Allah (S), because they are regarded as security
for people on this earth.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in his *al-Musnad*, and Abu Amr al-Ghifari have
reported on the authority of Ali that the Messenger of Allah (S) had
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النُّجُومُ أَمَانٌ لأَهْلِ السَّمَاءِ، فَإِذَا ذَهَبَتِ النُّجُومُ
ذَهَبَ أَهْلُ السَّمَاءِ. وَأَهْلُ بَيْتِي أَمَانٌ لأَهْلِ الأَرْضِ،
فَإِذَا ذَهَبَ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي ذَهَبَ أَمَانُ أَهْلِ الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Stars act as a security for the inhabitants of the heavens. If stars
vanish, the inhabitants of the heavens will vanish, too. Likewise, my
Household is acting as a security for the inhabitants of the earth. If
they disappear, the inhabitants of the earth will disappear, too.

Nasr ibn Ali al-Jahdumi relates the following narration to Ali ibn Abu
Talib:

The Prophet (S) took al-Hasan and al-Husayn from the hands and declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَحَبَّنِي وَأَحَبَّ هٰذَيْنِ وَأَبَاهُمَا وَأُمَّهُمَا كَانَ
مَعِي فِي دَرَجَتِي يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Anyone who loves these two, their father, their mother, shall certainly
be with me in the same position on the Day of Resurrection.

Sufyan ibn Waki and Abd ibn Hamid reported that Khalid ibn Mukhallad
narrated the following to them on the authority of Usamah ibn Zayd:

One night, I visited the Prophet (S) who went out embracing two things
that I could not see under a cloak. After I had asked him about the
matter for which I visited him, I asked about the things that he was
embracing. He (S) uncovered the cloak and they were al-Hasan and
al-Husayn on his hips. He then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٰذَانِ ابْنَايَ وَابْنَا ابْنَتِي. اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أُحِبُّهُمَا
فَأَحِبَّهُمَا وَأَحِبَّ مَنْ يُحِبُّهُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

These two are my sons and my daughter’s. O Allah, I do love them and I
beseech to You to love them and to love those who love them.

Al-Husayn ibn Hurayth has related that Abu Buraydah said:

Whilst the Prophet (S) was on the minbar delivering a speech to us,
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, who were dressing red shirts, came towards him
in stumbling steps. Immediately, the Messenger of Allah (S) descended
from the minbar, carried them both, and put them before him. He then
commented:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَدَقَ اللهُ: "انَّمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَأَوْلاَدُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ"
نَظَرْتُ إِلَىٰ هٰذَيْنِ الصَّبِيَّيْنِ يَمْشِيَانِ وَيَعْثُرَانِ
فَلَمْ أَصْبِرْ حَتَّىٰ قَطَعْتُ حَدِيثِي وَرَفَعْتُهُمَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Truthful are the words of Allah (Who says):

***“Your possessions and your children are only a trial.”***
***(64:15)***

As I saw these two boys walk stumblingly, I could not avoid interrupting
my speech so as to lift them up from the ground.

Almighty Allah too has urged to respect the Prophet’s Household. In this
regard, al-Bukhari, in his *al-Sahih*, records that Abu Bakr narrated
the following saying of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، أُرْقُبُوا مُحَمَّداً فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O people, regard Muhammad through honoring his household.

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in his *al-Sahih* - records on the authority of
Ali that the Prophet (S) said to Fatimah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي وَإِيَّاكِ وَهٰذَيْنِ (يعني حسناً وحسيناً) وَهٰذَا الرَّاقِدَ
(يعني علياً) فِي مَكَانٍ وَاحِدٍ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

You, these two (i.e. al-Hasan and al-Husayn), this sleeping one (i.e.
Ali), and I shall certainly be in the same position on the Day of
Resurrection.

Al-Tabarani records on the authority of Ali that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَّلُ مَنْ يَرِدُ عَلَيَّ الحَوْضِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي وَمَنْ أَحَبَّنِي
مِنْ أُمَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

My household and those who love me among the individuals of my ummah
shall be the first to join me on the Divine Pool.

Al- Tabarani, in his *al-Mujam al-Saghir*, records on the authority of
Abdullah ibn Jafar that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي هَاشِمَ، إِنِّي قَدْ سَأَلْتُ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ أَنْ
يَجْعَلَكُمْ جُوَدَاءَ نُجَدَاءَ رُحَمَاءَ. وَسَأَلْتُهُ أَنْ يَهْدِيَ
ضَالَّكُمْ وَيُؤْمِنَ خَائِفَكُمْ وَيُشْبِعَ جَائِعَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O sons of Hashim, I have implored to Allah the Exalted to make you
generous, noble, and merciful. I have also asked Him to guide the
straying ones among you, secure the fearful ones among you, and to
supply the hungry ones among you.

In his *al-Mustadrak*, al-Hakim records the following Hadith on the
authority of Anas ibn Malik and decides it as authentically reported:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رشدني ربي في أهل بيتي من أقر منهم بالتوحيد ولي بالبلاغ ألا يعذبهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Concerning my household, my Lord has promised me that He shall not
punish anyone of them who believes in Allah’s oneness and my (divine)
message.

Al-Tabarani, in his *al-Mujam al-Kabir*, records on the authority of
(Abdullah) Ibn Abbas the following hadith whose reporters are decided as
trustworthy:
The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Fatimah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ غَيْرُ مُعَذِّبِكِ وَلاَ وُلْدِكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Most surely, Allah shall not punish your sons and you.

Ahmad, al-Hakim, and al-Bayhaqi record on the authority of Abu Said
(al-Khidri) that the Messenger of Allah (S) said while he was on the
minbar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا بَالُ رِجَالٍ يَقُولُونَ أَنَّ رَحِمَ رَسُولِ اللهِ لاَ تَنْفَعُ
قَوْمَهُ يَوْمَ القِيَامَةِ؟ بَلَىٰ وَاللهِ، إِنَّ رَحِمِي مُوصِلَةٌ
فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ، وَإِنِّي، أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، فَرْطٌ لَكُمْ
عَلَىٰ الحَوْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is the wrong with some individuals who claim that the kinship of
Allah’s Messenger (S) shall not be helpful on the Day of Resurrection?
This is definitely not correct. By Allah, I swear that my kinship is
helpful in this world as well as the world to come. O people, I will
precede you to the Divine Pool.

Al-Bukhari, in his *al-Sahih*, records the following on the authority of
Abu Bakr:

While the Prophet (S) was delivering a sermon, al-Hasan came; therefore,
the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِبْنِي هٰذَا سَيِّدٌ، وَلَعَلَّ اللهَ يُصْلِحُ بِهِ فِئَتَيْنِ مِنَ
المُسْلِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is my son. He is a chief. Perhaps, Allah will reconcile two Muslim
parties through him.

Ibn Hajar, in *Fath al-Bari* (Commentary and explanations of
al-Bukhari’s *al-Sahih*), records the following saying of al-Muhallab:

In the previous hadith, the Prophet (S) relates leadership to
conciliation; therefore, this indicates that none deserve leadership
except those through who people benefit.

Imam Ahmad and al-Tabarani, in his *al-Mujam al-Kabir*, records that Ali
(a) has reported:

As the Messenger of Allah (S) assigned me as the judge of the Yemen, I
said: “Messenger of Allah (S), you have chosen me while I am still young
and many elderly men are there. Besides, I do not have full acquaintance
with judiciary.”

The Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْطَلِقْ فَإِنَّ اللهَ سَيَهْدِي قَلْبَكَ وَيُثَبِّتُ لِسَانَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Go ahead, for it is Allah Who shall guide your heart and strengthen your
tongue.

Ali then said: “After this statement, I have never failed.”

In fact, the authentic hadiths in this regard are innumerable, for the
six most reliable reference books of hadith, as well as many others, are
filled up with such narrations about honoring and esteeming the
Prophet’s household’s exalted rank and unanimous elevated standing.
Besides, this fact is known for everybody, and it is impossible to find
a single faithful believer ignoring the esteem of the family of Allah’s
Messenger (S).

Abu Bakr al-Bayhaqi, the grand scholar, says:

“All these reports appertained to the virtues of the Prophet’s household
are mentioned in the famous books of hadith in authenticated series of
narration. Refer to these books for the intended topic.”

The Prophet’s household is Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn, and
their descendants and offspring are attached to them. The hadith of
Mubahalah – invocation of Allah’s curse - is the evidence on the fact
that only the aforementioned five individuals enjoy the special rank
given to the Prophet’s household.

Exegetes of the Holy Quran have confirmed the following incident:

Regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ حَاجَّكَ فِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْا نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءَنَا وَأَبْنَاءَكُمْ وَنِسَاءَنَا
وَنِسَاءَكُمْ وَأَنْفُسَنَا وَأَنْفُسَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَلْ لَعْنَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِين. ثُمَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***If any one disputes in this matter with thee, now after (full)
knowledge Hath come to thee, say: “Come! Let us gather together, - our
sons and your sons, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves:
Then let us earnestly pray, and invoke the curse of Allah on those who
lie! (3:61)***

When this Verse was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (S) embraced
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, Fatimah walked after them, and Ali walked after
them. He then asked them to say ‘Amen’ when he would invoke Allah…
etc.[^13]

On this incident, Jarallah comments:

“This verse is the strongest evidence on the virtue of the ‘Ashab
al-Kisa’ (companions in the Cloak - the Prophet’s household)[^14].

The following Quranic Verse proves that their descendants follow them in
virtue:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَاتَّبَعَتْهُمْ ذُرِّيَّتُهُمْ بِإِيمَانٍ
أَلْحَقْنَا بِهِمْ ذُرِّيَّتَهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And (as for) those who believe and their offspring follow them in
faith, We will unite with them their offspring (52:21)***

Scholars have confirmed that ‘offspring’ includes the descendants of the
original Household up to the Day of Resurrection. On that account, the
Prophet’s household includes his offspring and descendants up to the Day
of Resurrection. From this point, scholars of Islamic laws have decided
many verdicts, especially in questions of waqfs[^15] and the like. In
this respect too, the question of the belonging to the Prophet’s
daughter’s descendants and therefore to his lineage is very famous, and
our great Imam Abu Hanifah al-Numan ibn Thabit has his clear opinion in
this question.

Commenting on the previous Quranic Verse, the author of *Mahasin
al-Tawil* says:

“The verse refers to those who imitate their ascendants in relation to
faith and righteous deeds. The verse also shows that those descendants
will be joined to their ascendants in Paradise and (eternal) bliss.
Because the addressees in the verse are the Prophet’s companions who are
sure of Allah’s promise, they receive the good tidings that their
descendants who imitate them righteously will be added to them.”

The other Hashemites who are forbidden to receive anything from the alms
enjoy a rank of honor higher than that of others, but they cannot attain
the characteristics of the ‘Ashab al-Kisa’ and the Prophet’s progeny
with regards to the obligation of loving, respecting, reverencing, and
honoring them.

Scholars have had different opinions regarding Almighty Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you with a (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

Some scholars have decided that this verse is dedicated only to the
descendants of Ali and Fatimah, while others have included the families
of al-Abbas, Jafar, and Aqil with them.

In his *al-Risalah al-Zaynabiyyah*, Jalaluddin al-Suyuti has recorded
precious words concerning the identification of the Sharifs. He says:

“In the first age of Islam, the epithet of ‘Sharif’ was said to anyone
who belonged to the Prophet’s household, whether through al-Hasan or
al-Husayn, belonged to Ali whether through Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah or
any other son, or belonged to Jafar, Aqil or al-Abbas.”

Thus, in the biographies mentioned in al-Dhahabi’s book of history, you
can find many names such as, ‘Sharif of al-Abbas’, ‘Sharif of Aqil,’
Sharif of Jafar,’ or ‘Sharif of Zaynab.’

But, when the Fatimid dynasty ruled Egypt, they dedicated the epithet to
the descendants of our masters al-Hasan and al-usayn. This matter has
been followed in Egypt up to now.

Lady Zaynab married my master Abdullah ibn Jafar, her cousin. The first
of her excellent, pure descendants were Sayyid Ali - the namesake of his
grandfather, Sayyid Awn al-Akbar, Sayyid Abbas, Sayyid Muhammad, and
Lady Ummu-Kulthum respectively. Lady Zaynab’s descendants are now
numerous. They are, according to al-Sabban - the scholar, added to the
Prophet’s family and household.

This fact is unanimously decided upon because the Prophet’s family is
the faithful believers from the Hashemites, son of Abd-al-Muttalib, his
progeny, and his descendants. Sons (and descendants) of one’s daughter
are regarded as his progeny and descendants, and when such a man records
something in his will for his descendants, the descendants of his
daughter must have a share in it. This meaning however is more specific
than the previous. As it is unanimously agreed then, it is forbidden for
the descendants of Jafar to have from the alms, because they belong to
the Prophet’s household.

Even though it is now dedicated to the descendants of al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, the epithet of ‘Sharif’ must be said to all the individuals
who belong to the Prophet’s household, according to the old concept of
this epithet.

The author of *al-Mawahib* says that the Messenger of Allah (S) had no
descendants except those who came through his daughter Lady Fatimah
al-Zahra. Hence, the Prophet’s noble progeny came through the two
grandsons, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn. Those who belong to the
descendants of the two Imams are called ‘Hasani’ and ‘Husayni.’ Besides,
the name ‘Ishaqi’ is added to those who belong to Ishaq son of Jafar
al-Sadiq son of Muhammad al-Baqir son of Imam Zayn al-Abidin son of Imam
al-Husayn. He – Ishaq- was the husband of Lady Nafisah daughter of
al-Hasan ibn Zayd ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan ibn Ali.

Al-Sabban says that ‘sharifship’ is of various classes; a general one
includes all the Prophet’s household, a special one is dedicated to the
Prophet’s progeny and, hence, includes the descendants of Lady Zaynab
and all of the Prophet’s daughter’s descendants, and a third class is
restricted to al-Hasan and al-Husayn and called ‘sharifship of kinship.’

The evidence for those who claim that the name of Ahl al-Bayt is
restricted to definite individuals is the following hadith, which is
related from many authenticated ways of narration:

The Prophet (S), accompanied by Ali and Fatimah, holding the hands of
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, entered. He asked Ali and Fatimah to come close
and sit before him. He seated al-Hasan and al-Husayn on his thighs,
covered them with a cloak, and recited (Allah’s saying):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the House! and to purify you a (thorough) purifying. (33:33)***

According to another narration, the Prophet (S) then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ هٰؤُلاءِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي فَأَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ
وَطَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, these are my household; (So, I beseech to You) Keep away the
uncleanness from them, and purify them a with a thorough purifying.”

According to a third narration, the Prophet (S) then said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ هٰؤُلاءِ أَهْلُ بَيْتِي فَأَذْهِبْ عَنْهُمُ الرِّجْسَ
وَطَهِّرْهُمْ تَطْهِيراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, these are the family of Muhammad; (So, I beseech to You) make
Your mercy and blessings on the family of Muhammad in the same way as
You have made it on Abraham. You are certainly Praised, Glorious.”

Supporting those who claim generality of the expression of Ahl al-Bayt,
al-Baydawi states that particularizing the expression to the five
individuals only does not suit the verses that precede and antecede the
intended verse (i.e. Verse of Purification). In addition, the hadith has
mentioned those individuals particularly so as to refer to the Prophet’s
household, not anyone else.

On the other hand, the particularization is mentioned for adding the
particular progeny to them, for their special rank. As a result, this
does not oppose the generality of the expression.

It is also credible that the particularization of these four individuals
is intended for a divine commandment. This fact is proven by the hadith
narrated by Ummu-Salamah:

Seeing the situation, Ummu-Salamah lifted an edge of the cloak and tried
to be with them under it. But the Prophet (S) took the cloak’s edge from
her hand. She then asked, “Am I one of them, O Allah’s Messenger?”

The Prophet (S) answered, “You are in your own position, and you are on
the right.”

In *al-Musnad*, Ahmad (ibn Hanbal) and al-Tabarani narrate the following
hadith on the authority of Abu Said al-Khidrii:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَزَلَتْ هٰذِهِ الآيَةُ في خَمْسَةٍ: فِيَّ، وَفِي عَلِيٍّ، وَحَسَنٍ،
وَحُسَيْنٍ، وَفَاطِمَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This Verse (of Purification) has been intended for five individuals;
they are Ali, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Fatimah, and I.”

Ibn Abu Shaybah, Ahmad, al-Tirmidhi, al-Tabarani, and al-Hakim (who
decided the Hadith as authentic) all narrate the following on the
authority of Anas:

Whenever he went out for the Fajr – dawn prayer (in the Masjid), the
Prophet (S) used to pass by the house of Fatimah and declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّلاَةَ أَهْلَ البَيْتِ. إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ
عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hurry for the prayer, O people of the House (i.e. the Ahl al-Bayt.)

“***Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people
of the House,*** ***and to purify you a thorough purifying.***”
***(33:33)***

At any rate, some narrations assert the generality of the expression.
Muslim and al-Nassai narrate the following on the authority of Zayd ibn
Arqam:

The Messenger of Allah (S) delivered a speech to us in which he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ
بَيْتِي، أُذَكِّرُكُمُ اللهَ فِي أَهْلِ بَيْتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Remember Allah concerning my household, remember Allah concerning my
household, remember Allah concerning my household.”

He then was asked, “Who are the Prophet’s household?

Zayd answered, “His household are those who are forbidden to receive
alms after him.”

He was asked, “Who are they, then?”

Zayd answered, “They are the family of Ali, the family of Aqil, the
family of Jafar, and the family of Abbas.”

To sum it up, the individuals of the Prophet’s pure progeny have been
granted a high level of honor exclusively because of the great virtue
received through Lady Fatimah. They are dressed with the garb of honor
and tribute, and are granted more respect and reverence.

[^1]: This introduction has been chosen here in order to prove that the
love for the Ahl al-Bayt is not a claim or myth of the Shia. The author
of this introduction belongs to the Hanafite Islamic School of
Jurisprudence.

[^2]: This is an indication to Almighty Allah’s saying: يَا أَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ إِنَّ بَعْضَ
الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ ۖ وَلَا تَجَسَّسُوا وَلَا يَغْتَبْ بَعْضُكُمْ بَعْضًا ۚ
أَيُحِبُّ أَحَدُكُمْ أَنْ يَأْكُلَ لَحْمَ أَخِيهِ مَيْتًا
فَكَرِهْتُمُوهُ ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ تَوَّابٌ رَحِيمٌ. O
you who believe! Avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in some
cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite others. Does
one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor it;
and be careful of your duty to Allah; surely, Allah is oft-returning to
mercy, Merciful. (49:12)

[^3]: Al-Hafiz al-Dhahabi decided this Hadith as authentic.

[^4]: Al-Hafiz al-Dhahabi decided this Hadith as authentic.

[^5]: Sharh al-Mawaqif has been authored by al-Sharif al-Jurjani.

[^6]: Tashahhud is the last obligatory part of the prayer, in which
performers (of prayer) send blessings to Prophet Muhammad and his
household, by saying: اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ.

[^7]: Taslim is the last obligatory pillar of a prayer referring to
salutation.

[^8]: After recording this hadith, al-Bayhaqi commented: According to
Abu-Abdullah al-Tirmidhi, this hadith is authentic and its narrators are
trustworthy.

[^9]: In the Holy Quran (33:6), Almighty Allah says: النَّبِيُّ أَوْلَىٰ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ مِنْ أَنْفُسِهِمْ ۖ وَأَزْوَاجُهُ أُمَّهَاتُهُمْ “The
Prophet has a greater claim on the faithful than they have on
themselves, and his wives are as their mothers.” Accordingly, the
Prophet’s wives were called ‘mothers of the believers.’

[^10]: This is an indication to Almighty Allah’s saying in the Holy
Quran (9:128)  لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ
عَلَيْهِ مَا عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ
رَحِيم. Certainly an Apostle has come to you from among yourselves;
grievous to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous
respecting you; to the believers (he is) full of pity and merciful.

[^11]: The Rukn is the corner of the Holy Kaabah, and Maqam is the
standing-place of Prophet Abraham near the Holy Kaabah.

[^12]: The most reliable reference books of hadith for our Sunni
brethren are six each having independent criterion to decide a hadith’s
degree of authenticity. Muslim is the compiler of one of these books and
hence, he has his own criterion of a hadith’s degree of authenticity.

[^13]: The incident of Mubahalah – invocation of Allah’s curse - is very
well known, for it is mentioned in almost all the books dealing with the
Islamic history.

[^14]: The ‘Ashab al-Kisa’ (owners of the Cloak) is a name called on the
Prophet (S), Imam Ali (a), Fatimah al-Zahra (a), Imam al-Hasan (a), and
Imam al-Husayn (a), because the Prophet (S) covered these four
individuals under a cloak and supplicated to Almighty Allah to remove
uncleanness from them and purify them thoroughly. In this incident, the
Prophet (S) named them as ‘my household’ (i.e. the Ahl ul-Bayt).

[^15]: Waqf is the endowment or settlement of property under which the
proceeds are to be devoted to a religious or charitable purpose.


