The Life of Lady Zaynab
=======================

To throw light upon the fragrant memories and to work with perseverance
to obtain the details of such memories are the two things that cast good
manners, virtues, and acquaintance with the conduct of the past
personalities who were characterized by high merits, piety,
righteousness, and decency on the souls.

Thus, the noble, deep-rooted character of Lady Zaynab should not be
overlooked. She possessed all that points towards her immaculate
majestic, dignified, and distinguished origin. She also possesses
renowned bearings in the fields of perseverance upon principles,
courage, eloquence, and whole-heartedness besides asceticism, chastity,
piety, holiness, and magnanimity.

On that account, it is necessary for seekers of merits and fact-finders
to take from her precious life account and please their ears by
listening to her admirable memoirs so as to gain from the fragrance of
her personality, which is a model of self-discipline, knowledge, and
aspiration.

Let us now refer to a brief presentation of the life of Lady Zaynab.

Lineage
-------

Lady Zaynab enjoyed the most exalted lineage since she ramified from the
tree of prophecy and Imamate and combined all the elements of honor and
dignity. The family of Imam Ali (a) has been the most elevated one over
the entire history in the field of struggle against wrong and in
adapting the issues of human rights. The sons and descendants of Imam
Ali (a) have provided hundreds of martyrs for this sake of these issues.

Lady Zaynab’s grandfather, from the maternal side, was Prophet Muhammad
(S) exploded the springs of knowledge and wisdom on this earth, founded
the features of civilization and development, constructed a noble
society controlled by justice and law, smashed the customs, and
superstitions of pagans and the savage tribal society that prevailed in
the Arab Peninsula. He called for worshipping of the One Creator, and
brought to his nation abundant goodness. Indeed, Almighty Allah sent
Prophet Muhammad (S) as a mercy for humankind. From this great
personality, Lady Zaynab inherited the value for standing in defense of
the right and striving to elevate the Word of Allah.

Her grandmother, from the maternal side, was Khadijah who supported
Islam in its darkest days. She struggled for sake of Allah in the
best-ever way, and spent her entire fortune for the sake of her
religion. She therefore has been one of the two supports on which Islam
relied for its existence. The Prophet (S) used to appreciate his loyal
wife and her situation in her life and after her death.

From this great grandmother, Lady Zaynab inherited the highest moral
standards and perseverance on principles. Copying her grandmother, she
supported her brother, Imam al-Husayn (a), in his revolution and
supplied elements of eternity to his great uprising.

Lady Zaynab’s father is Imam Ali Amir al-Muminin (commander of the
faithful believers): chief of the prophets’ successors, leader of the
pious ones, and head of the worshippers. Ali was the representative,
successor, and heir of Prophet Muhammad (S). His merits are innumerable
and his striving for the sake of Allah are incomparable. He was the most
knowledgeable, the most self-possessed, the most magnanimous, the most
generous, the most ascetic, the most courageous, the most reputable, the
best worshipper, the most loyal, the most faithful, and the most pious
among Muslims.

Historians have recorded unanimously that Lady Zaynab followed her
father in behavior, knowledge and conduct. She, too, positively adopted
all of her father’s goals and efforts for the sake of supplying Islam
with sustenance. Hence, she, along with her brother Imam al-Husayn (a),
could thwart the infidel plots of the Umayyad that were aimed at wiping
out Islam and replacing it with the pre-Islamic customs.

Lady Zaynab’s mother was Lady Fatimah al-Zahra (a), the Veracious who
was a copy of her father in adoration of Allah, piety, self-discipline,
knowledge, virtue, clemency, veneration, and the other features of
perfection. Her father named her as the Chief of the Women of the
World[^1]. For these reasons, her father directed the best words of
laudation and respect to his daughter who was the ideal woman on this
earth. Such was the mother, educator, and instructor of Lady Zaynab who
had been nourished with all aspects of human perfection.

Let us also refer briefly to the grandfather and grandmother of Lady
Zaynab from the paternal side.

Abu Talib, father of Imam Ali (a), was a protector of Islam as he
defended Prophet Muhammad (S) so bravely and suffered unbearable
torments in this course. Only under the guardianship of Abu Talib could
Prophet Muhammad (S) propagate his divine mission and spread its
principles fearlessly. With the demise of his protector, the Prophet (S)
expressed his great loss and grief. He therefore called that year as
‘year of grief’. After the demise of Abu Talib, the enemies of the
Prophet (S) agreed on assassinating him, but Allah saved and ordered him
to flee to Yathrib and let his cousin, Ali, sleep on his bed to make the
plotters believe that he was still there.

From this great personality, Lady Zaynab drew the best lessons to act
for defending the principles.

Lady Zaynab’s grandmother was Fatimah bint Asad - an example of faith
and purity. On her hands, the Prophet (S) was brought up and treated so
kindly and tenderly since she used to take care of him rather than her
sons and bestow upon him with all colors of sympathy and love. Hence,
she was highly respected by him; when she departed life, he dressed her
in his own shirt and laid her down in the grave himself as an expression
of his great love for her. From this grand mother, Lady Zaynab received
the best lessons of love and support for the sake of religion and its
legal leaders.

We, also, should not neglect the fact that Imam al-Hasan and Imam
al-Husayn (a) participated in developing the unparalleled personality of
their sister, Lady Zaynab, since she spent a long part of her life in
their custody. The merits and virtues of the two Imams are too many to
be contained here. As a result, the Prophet (S) called them ‘Chiefs of
the Youth of Paradise.’[^2]

Lady Zaynab imitated the morals and ethics of Imam al-Hasan (a) who was
known for his composure and liberal approach in addition to his high
moral standards. As he had noticed that his grandfather and parents took
great care of Zaynab, Imam al-Hasan also encompassed her with much love
and compassion and preferred her to the other harem of the Prophet’s
household.

Imam al-Husayn’s relation with his sister Zaynab has been the melody of
seekers of human perfection. She could occupy his feelings and bring
emotions from the genuineness of her estimation, elevation of her
ethics, and high moral standards. She was the most dependable person in
the sight of Imam al-Husayn (a) who used to take her counsel in all of
his affairs. She accompanied him in all the stages of his revolution.

Without Lady Zaynab’s struggle, efforts, and honorable situations, the
revolution of Imam al-Husayn (a) would have been lost. As an example of
Lady Zaynab’s great standing in the sight of her brother Imam al-Husayn
(a) is that when he bade her the last farewell on the day of Ashura, he
asked her to mention him in her Night Prayer.[^3]

Through the second part of this book, we will refer to sections of the
unmatched relation between Imam al-Husayn (a) and his sister, Lady
Zaynab.

The Blessed Newborn
-------------------

The life of the Prophet’s family was flourishing with the existence of
the two Imams al-Hasan and al-Husayn (a) who occupied their
grandfather’s heart completely. Their patents, too, were highly
delighted when they saw their two sons and as they saw the Prophet’s
love for them. Once, he (S) expressed his love for these two sons by
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذانِ رَيْحَانَتَايَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“These two are my only basils that I take from this world.”[^4]

In the midst of this delightful atmosphere, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra became
pregnant for the third time. Everybody, including the Messenger of Allah
(S), was waiting for the new baby.[^5]

With further delight and pleasure, Lady Fatimah gave birth to a baby
girl who was to exceed all Muslim women in fields of faith, honor,
chastity, and perseverance to the principles. The Ahl al-Bayt and the
Prophet’s companions received the news of the birth of Lady Zaynab with
gladness.

Imam Ali (a) hurried to take his newborn, kissed her frequently, and
held the Shariite ceremonies of newborns. The Imam (a) recited azan[^6]
in his newborn’s right ear and iqamah[^7] in the left. Hence, the first
voice that penetrated the newborn’s hearing was her father stating:

Allahu Akbar —Allah is the Greatest…

La ilaha illa (a)llah —there is no god but Allah.

These great words found a strong ground in the inner self of Lady
Zaynab. They, later on, became the most significant elements of her
personality. In the future, she would adopt the calling to the true
application of these words for which she would encounter horrible
adversities.

As soon as he was informed about the news of the giving birth of this
newborn, the Prophet (S) hurried to his daughter’s house, embraced the
newborn to his chest warmly, and began to weep. It was a surprise for
the mother, Fatimah al-Zahra, to see her father’s tears drop on his
face, “What for are you weeping for, father?” she asked.

“Fatimah,” said the father (S) with sad tone, “you should know that this
daughter would have to suffer horrible misfortunes and tragedies after
your and my demise.”[^8]

At that time the Prophet (S) had perceived the horrifying hardships that
would afflict this granddaughter. Naturally, Fatimah al-Zahra (a)
participated in her father’s grieving at this time. Then when the close
friend of the Ahl al-Bayt, Salman, came to congratulate on the occasion,
he found the household immersed in grief and unhappiness. Hence, he also
participated in that ceremony of consolation[^9].

Choosing the name
-----------------

The blessed mother carried her newborn to the father and asked to choose
a name for her.

“I will not precede the Messenger of Allah in such a matter,” answered
the father modestly. He then took the newborn and asked him to choose a
name for her.

“I will not precede my Lord in such a matter,” answered the Messenger of
Allah modestly.

From the Heavens then ascended Archangel Gabriel to say to the Prophet,
“This newborn’s name is ‘Zaynab’[^10]. Almighty Allah has chosen this
name for her.”[^11] She was also given the nicknames - ‘Ummu-Kulthum’ or
‘Ummu-al-Hasan’[^12].

Epithets
--------

Epithet is a word or phrase expressing a quality or attribute regarded
as characteristic of the person or thing mentioned. Epithets, then,
depict one’s mental attitude and traits regardless of being good or
bad.[^13] Thus, Lady Zaynab had many epithets that expressed aspects of
her personality.

### Al-Aqilah

The Arabic Aqilah means a noble woman, who is honored among her people
and is venerated in her house, by virtue of her wisdom.

Lady Zaynab was such an honorable and virtuous lady that all her
descendants have been called Banu al-Aqilah—sons of the Noble and Wise
woman.

During the journey of Imam al-Husayn (a) from Medina to Karbala, Lady
Zaynab was the Chief Lady of the harem and was obeyed and respected by
everybody.

It is to add that she was also called ‘Aqilatu Bani Hashim - the Wise
woman of the Hashemites,’ and ‘Aqilat ut-Talibiyyin - the Wise woman of
the sons (and descendants) of Abu Talib.’

### Al-Alimah

For her supreme knowledge, Lady Zaynab was called al-Alimah – the Woman
of Knowledge. Historians have confirmed that she was an authority for
Muslim ladies who used to refer to her for their religious affairs. Of
course, she received such knowledge from her grandfather, parents and
brothers who were the sources of knowledge for the Islamic ummah.
Furthermore, Lady Zaynab has had similar epithets, such as ‘al-Arifah’ —
the Knower of Reality’, and ‘al-Muwathaqah - the Reliable one.’

### Abidatu Ali - Ali

Lady Zaynab was recognized also as being distinguished worshipper among
Muslim ladies. She committed herself to all the recommended rites of
Islam to the degree that even on the most horrible night of her life –
i.e. the night of the tenth of Muharram, 61 AH - she offered the
supererogatory prayers. Thus, she was called Abidatu Ali - Ali, The Most
Worshipping woman of Ali’s household’.

### Al-Kamilah

In all aspects of human perfection, Lady Zaynab preceded everybody and
occupied the leading position. She therefore is called ‘al-Kamilah - the
Perfect woman.’

### Al-Fadhilah

Because of her great jihad, her service to Islam, and steadfastness for
the sake of Allah, Lady Zaynab’s virtue has exceeded all limits and,
therefore, she was proudly conferred with the epithet of ‘al-Fadhilah
—the Virtuous Lady.’

### Al-Siddiqah al-Sughra

Just like her mother who is known as the Senior Veracious, Lady Zaynab
was so veracious that she gained worthily the epithet of ‘al-Siddiqah
al-Sughra - the Junior Veracious Lady’.

### Umm al-Masaib

As she had to suffer different and innumerable misfortunes all over her
lifetime, Lady Zaynab was called Umm al-Masaib – Mother of misfortunes.

Let us refer to some of these misfortunes that she saw in a period of
about a month:

- She saw al-Hurr ibn Yazid force Imam al-Husayn to stop and put down
camp in a desolate place.
• She saw the Imam’s with a few companions in comparison to the great
numbers in the enemy’s army.

• She saw most of the Imam’s so-called partisans abandon him and join
his enemies.

• She saw the women of the household fear and worry when they had to
camp in Karbala.

• She saw the enemies deprive her people and her of water.

• She had to take care of the children and women while they were crying
out of thirst.

• She had to witness her brother’s feelings of disappointment and
loneliness.

• She had to witness the martyrdom of her two sons, as well as the other
relatives and companions who were martyred one by one. The martyrdom of
al-Abbas however was the most disastrous for her.

• She saw how Imam al-Husayn (a) was without any supporter or helper,
while he was seeking help.

• She saw the head of Imam al-Husayn (a) cut off and then being raised
on spearheads.

• She saw the enemies attack her brother’s caravan and women, trying to
set fire to the tents.

• She had to gather the children and women who dispersed and fled to
everywhere in that desert.

• She had to pass by the dead and severed body of her brother while
gathering the women and children of the family.

• She had to ride on lean, unsaddled camels and to help the children and
women to mount on such animals.

• She had to exert all efforts for taking care of her ill nephew and
consoling him.

• She had to go through the scenes of being made captive, then being
driven from one town to another while people were looked at them as
rebels.

It is narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) once said, “To weep for the
misfortunes of Zaynab is as same as to weep for her brothers; al-Hasan
and al-Husayn.”[^14]

Year of Birth
-------------

Historians and narrators have had different opinions about the year of
Lady Zaynab’s birth. Some have referred to the fifth year after
Hijrah,[^15] others to the sixth, and a third party to the ninth. The
last opinion however is inaccurate,[^16] and the first is the most
acceptable.

Early Life
----------

Lady Zaynab was brought up at the hands of Prophet Muhammad, Imam Ali,
and Lady Fatimah the Veracious (a). In other words, she was brought up
in the lap of the divine prophesy, spent her early life in the house of
the divine mission, suckled the milk of the most perfect woman of all
ages, and was nourished at the hands of the Commander of the Faithful
Believers. Hence, she enjoyed a divine upbringing and spiritual
education. She was garbed in the garments of elevation, eminence,
chastity, and decency. After the demise of Prophet Muhammad (S) and his
daughter Fatimah (a), Imam Ali married Umamah[^17] who took care of Lady
Zaynab perfectly since this lady was known for her piety and submission
to the Lord.

Lady Zaynab, hence, was raised up with the most exalted colors of
education, honor, dignity, mercy, and compassion. She learnt many things
that composed her perfect personality, from the behaviors of her parents
and brothers.

For instance, whenever she visited her brother Imam al-Husayn, he would
stand up as a sign of reverence and respect for her. Whenever she wanted
to visit the holy tomb of her grandfather, her father and two brothers
used to accompany her. They used to extinguish any lights there so that
nobody could see her.[^18]

She was really the inheritor of Imam Ali’s values, moralities, and
ethics. To the scholars and narrators of Hadith,[^19] Lady Zaynab
enjoyed a high position. They, therefore, used to refer to Imam Ali,
during the Umayyad regime, which had banned any mention of the Imam’s
name, by saying ‘Father of Zaynab reported…’

Scholarly Capacities
--------------------

From early life, Lady Zaynab was marvelous in her intellect and wisdom.
She had learnt the holy Quran by heart as well as the Prophet’s sayings
regarding Islamic laws, rules of education, and principles of ethics.
She had also memorized the famous, confounding speech of her mother -
Lady Fatimah al-Zahra (a), which she delivered in the Prophet’s Masjid
protesting against Abu Bakr’s usurpation of the Islamic ummah’s
leadership, which was the right of Imam Ali according to the
instructions of Almighty Allah and Prophet Muhammad (S). She had
objected to the confiscation of Fadak as well because the Holy Prophet
(S) had given it to her as gift within earshot of all Muslims. She
narrated her mother’s speech in addition to many other narrations, when
the Muslim women visited her in her final times.

Her father, too, greatly admired her sharp wit. One day, she asked him,
“Father, do you love us?” He answered, “Of course I do, daughter. I do
love you because you are the fruit of my heart.” She replied politely,
“Father, love is exclusively for Almighty Allah, while it is compassion
which is for us.”[^20]

As he was teaching her the numbers, he asked, “ Say: one.” She said,
“one.” As he asked her to say “two,” she kept silent. “Why do you not
say: two?” asked her father. She answered, “A tongue which pronounces
‘one’ cannot say ‘two.’”[^21] When he heard this great answer, he kissed
and embraced her.[^22]

She also used to say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ لا يَكونَ الخَلْقُ شُفَعَاءَهُ إلى اللهِ
فَلْيَحْمِدْهُ. أَلَمْ تَسْمَعْ إلى قَولِهِ: سَمِعَ اللهُ لِمَنْ
حَمِدَهُ. فَخَفِ اللهَ لِقُدْرَتِهِ عَلَيْكَ، وَاسْتَحِ مِنْهُ
لِقُرْبِهِ مِنْكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Anyone who intends not to have any other intercede for him or her
before Allah should praise Him. Listen to His saying: ‘Allah listens to
anyone who praises Him.’ Hence, one should fear Allah for He has
authority over them, and should feel shy of Him for He is very close to
them.”[^23]

This statement in fact indicates that she was so virtuous and perfectly
connected to Allah.

Moreover, she represented her brother, Imam al-Husayn (a) whenever he
was absent. Hence, Muslims used to refer to her in the questions
concerning Islamic laws. It was because of her extensive knowledge that
Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a), Abdullah ibn Jafar, Lady Fatimah daughter of
Imam al-Husayn, Muhammad ibn Amr, and Ata ibn al-Saib used to quote her
sayings.[^24]

In Kufa and during her father’s regime, Lady Zaynab had special sessions
to which Muslim ladies came to listen to her precious lectures on Islam
and exegesis of the Holy Quran. She was thus the trustworthiest
reference from whom Muslim ladies took advice regarding questions about
Islam, moral instructions, and general ethics.

For her tremendous virtue too, Abdullah ibn Abbas[^25] frequently asked
her to answers the questions that he had ignored. He also proudly
reported, a good number of narrations on her authority. In this regard,
he would say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَدَّثَتْنَا عَقِيلَتُنَا زَيْنَبُ بِنْتُ عَلِيٍّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Our Aqilah[^26] (i.e. the Wise Lady), Zaynab daughter of Ali narrated
to us that… etc.”

One of the reports that he related on the authority of Lady Zaynab was
Lady Fatimah al-Zahra’s famous speech in the Prophet’s Masjid.

Lady Zaynab also represented Imam Zayn al-Abidin (a) during his illness.
About her, he (a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهَا عَالِمَةٌ غَيْرُ مُعَلَّمَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“She is so knowledgeable herself that she does not need to be taught by
somebody else.”[^27]

Finally, she was the most eloquent speaker in Islam; she could stir the
emotions of enemies, divide the public opinion, and provoke the public
against the ruling regime of Umayyads when she delivered her famous
speeches in Kufa and Damascus. In fact, these speeches hint at her
precious cultural and literate fortunes.

In addition, as a reason behind her peculiar scholarly capacity the
following may be mentioned as key points:

She was always pious and observant towards the Almighty Allah’s
commandments and instructions. By being God-fearing and pious one
achieves knowledge and notable learning. This is clear in Almighty
Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. عَلِيمٌ شَيْءٍ بِكُلِّ وَاللَّهُ ۗ اللَّهُ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ ۖ
اللَّهَ وَاتَّقُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be careful of (your duty) to Allah, Allah teaches you, and Allah
knows all things.” (2:282)***

Lady Zaynab was so God-fearing and pious that she dedicated a good time
of her daily activities to her Lord; she was immersed in praising and
glorifying Him during this time. At nights when sounds calm and eyes
sleep, she used to turn her face and heart towards her Lord with tearful
eyes, fearful heart, and hopeful mind to say confidently:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مَنْ لَبِسَ العِزَّ وَتَرَدَّى بهِ وَتَعَطَّفَ بالمجَدِ وَتحَلَّى
بهِ، أسْألُكَ بمِعَاقِدِ العِزِّ مِن عَرشِكَ وَمُنتَهى الرَّحمْةِ مِن
كِتابِكَ وَبِاسمْكَ الأعْظَم وَجَدَّكَ الأعْلى وَكَلِماتِكَ
التَّامَّاتِ الَّتي تمَّتْ صِدقاً وعَدلاً أنْ تُصَلّيَ عَلى محَمَّدٍ
وَآلِ محُمَّدٍ الطَّيّبين الطَّاهِرينَ وَأنْ تجَمعَ لي خَيرَيِ
الدُّنيَا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O You Who dresses and adorns Himself with valor! O You Who deigns and
dons Himself with glory! I implore to You by the seats of might in Your
Throne, by the utmost of mercy in Your Book, by Your Grandest Name, by
Your most High Majesty, and by Your Perfect Words that have been
accomplished truly and honestly, (I implore to You) to send blessings
upon Muhammad and the family of Muhammad and to arrange for me the good
of both this world and the world to come.

Lady Zaynab was well known for her unparalleled intelligence, apposite
opinion, and wisdom. Her words were carefully chosen and brought
together as beads in a necklace and her opinions were to the point. She
was the ideal of eloquence and expressiveness. Allah gifted her the
utmost of knowledge, morality, composure, religiousness, and ethics.
This is not strange since she was the granddaughter of the Holy Prophet,
the daughter of the model parents of Islam, and the sister of the two
Chiefs of the Youths of Paradise. In her grandfather, Lady Zaynab takes
pride saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومَن كَجَدّي النّبيَّ العَرَبيّ الهاشمِيّ القِرشِيّ الّذي اصطَفاهُ
اللهُ تَعالى وَاختَارَه لِيُبَينَ للنّاسِ طَريقَ الحيَاةِ مِن خَير
وشَرٍّ في أسْلوبِه العَذِب الجَميلِ وعِبارَتِه الطّلية المُمتِعَة
الّتي تَفيضُ رِقَّةً وَحناناً وعَطفاً وإشْفاقاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“None is like my grandfather; the Arab, the Hashemite, and the
Qurayshite Prophet who has been selected by Allah, the Elevated, for
guiding people about good and evil tracts in the path of life, and he
did it with such a handsome approach and pleasant, articulate statements
full of softness, tenderness, sympathy, and compassion.”[^28]

The couple that was most knowledgeable in Islam - her father and mother,
had taught her. So it was natural that a student of such personalities
will also be intelligent and knowledgeable.

About Lady Zaynab’s acumen and sagacity, let us listen to the following
narration recorded by Ibn Humayd in his book entitled *al-Musnad*, and
al-Yafii in *Mirat al-Zaman*:

One day, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn were discussing some of their
grandfather’s sayings, “The Halal is obvious and the Haram is also
obvious, but between these two there are many dubious matters most of
people ignore. To avoid such dubious matters is acquittal for the
religion and the honor, while to fall in such dubious matters is
plunging into the Haram. A shepherd who grazes about a shelter will
decisively pasture in it. There is a shelter to every kingdom, and the
shelter of Allah is in avoiding what He deems unlawful. There is also a
single part in each one’s body; when this is good, the whole body will
be so, and when this part is bad, the whole body will be so. This is the
heart.”[^29]

Commenting on this statement, Lady Zaynab said:

Listen to me, Hasan and Husayn! Your grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah, has acquired the ethics from the Lord. It is Almighty Allah Who
disciplined him so perfectly. In this regard, the Prophet says, ‘My Lord
has disciplined me, and He has done so perfectly.’

None is like my grandfather; the Arab, the Hashemite, and the Qurayshite
Prophet who was selected by Allah, the Highest, to guide people towards
their path of life with its good and evil branches, and he did this with
such a handsome approach and pleasant, articulate statements full of
softness, tenderness, sympathy, and compassion.

The Halal is obvious and the Haram is also obvious, but between these
two, there are many dubious matters. Accordingly, the religion is of
three degrees; Halal, Haram, and dubious matters. The Halal is what
Allah, the Exalted, has deemed lawful by way of a text in the Holy Quran
or through the explanations of the Prophet, such as the legality of
trade and rendition…

The Haram is whatever Allah has deemed unlawful in the Holy Quran. It is
also the contrary of the Halal.

The dubious matter is everything that is not known to be Halal or Haram.

A faithful believer who intends to achieve happiness in this world and
bliss in the world to come must perform all that which Allah has made
incumbent, follow the path drawn by the Holy Quran, take my grandfather,
the Prophet, as an example, and go away from the dubious as much as one
can.

To avoid the dubious matters is acquittal for the religion and the honor
and also purity for both. It also achieves sincere obedience to the
Lord.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَا لِلَّهِ الدِّينُ الْخَالِصُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Now, surely, sincere obedience is due to Allah alone. (Quran;
39:3)”***

For those who follow the lines of the dubious matters, it is not safe as
their feet can slip and, thus, they might commit an unlawful deed. There
is a shelter beside each that one possesses. However the refuge of the
King-of-All becomes available by avoiding what He deems as unlawful. The
Holy Prophet says, ‘Avoid the unlawful and you will be the most pious.’

Allah the Exalted has put in every human being a minute gem - a part of
his entirety; when it is good, the whole body is good, pure, and clear
from filth, impairments, and acts of disobedience towards the Lord of
the Worlds. This is the heart. If one’s heart is sound, he will be
attentive to the affairs of his religion and the principles of its law,
and will see real happiness in remaining steadfast with the lights of
the guidance of the Holy Quran and the Sunnah. Those who follow this
straight path and these divine instructions will be among the winners on
the Day of Resurrection.

Our life is in fact only a stage among many stages that lead either to
Paradise or to Hell. Death will be the end, and no blame can fall after
it. Nothing is after this world except Paradise or Hell.”

As she finished, Imam al-Husayn said to her, “How great are you! You are
surely from the tree of prophecy and in the core of the Divine Message.”

She once said:

“My grandfather has decided for us (i.e. women) rights that are
incumbent upon our husbands in the same way as he has decided rights for
our husbands that is incumbent upon us.” In this regard, the Holy Quran
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. حَكِيمٌ عَزِيزٌ وَاللَّهُ ۗ دَرَجَةٌ عَلَيْهِنَّ وَلِلرِّجَالِ
ۚبِالْمَعْرُوفِ عَلَيْهِنَّ الَّذِي مِثْلُ وَلَهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they have rights similar to those against them in a just manner,
and the men are a degree above them. (2:228)***

My noble Grandfather also said:

“A woman who offers the five obligatory prayers, observes fasting on the
month of fasting, guards her chastity, and obeys her husband shall have
the choice to enter Paradise from any gate she likes.”

Ibn Asakir, in his al-Tarikh, records the following:

After she arrived in Egypt, Lady Zaynab once was overcome with an
indisposition. The chiefs of Egypt decided to fetch her a physician, but
she refused saying:

“We are not among those who hope for this world or for perpetuation in
it. We belong to the Household of Prophecy and the most desirable
meeting for us is the meeting with our Lord. A physician, however,
cannot change one’s decided term of death.”

Ibn Humayd, Abu Asim, and Ibn Abu Shaybah narrated that Abdullah ibn
Abbas has said:

Once, Lady Zaynab recited Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ۚ مَعَكَ الَّذِينَ مِنَ وَطَائِفَةٌ…الْمُزَّمِّلُ أَيُّهَا يَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who are wrapped up in your garments… and (also) a party of
those with you. (73:1… 20)***

She then commented:

“Thanks to Allah, we are included with this party (of those who are with
the Prophet).”

The public addresses of Lady Zaynab, on more than one occasion, are
evidence for eloquence and rhetoric. These addresses changed the public
opinion against Yazid and the Umayyad State and showed the real purpose
of Imam al-Husayn’s revolution. Later on, these addresses will be
referred to in detail.

Lady Zaynab enjoyed a peculiar rank in the world of mysticism. In this
regard, Allamah al-Burghani says:

“Lady Zaynab’s spiritual rank is very nigh to that of the Immaculate
Imams…”

Al-Rawandi, in al-Tiraz al-Mudhahhab, says:

“In addition to her high spiritual rank, Lady Zaynab comes after her
mother in virtue, high merit, peculiarity, majesty, knowledge,
infallibility, chastity, illumination, light, honor, and splendor.”

Muhammad Rida al-Isfahani, in Jannat al-Khulud, records:

“Lady Zaynab was the one nearest to her parents in eloquence,
asceticism, management, and courage. After the martyrdom of Imam
al-Husayn, she was the custodian of her family members and, furthermore,
the Hashemites.

Ibn Anbah, in Ansab al-Talibiyyin, says:

“Lady Zaynab is distinguished by her innumerable merits, elevated
attributes, praiseworthy characters, admirable habits, remarkable
esteem, and manifest virtues.”

Marriage
--------

When Lady Zaynab attained maturity, famous celebrities competed with
each other for asking for her hand. Her father, however, refused all of
them.

Abdullah son of Jafar son of Abu Talib also asked for her hand. He was
one of the noblest men of the Hashemites and one of the most generous
men of the Arabs. Besides, Imam Ali (a) loved him very much. He
therefore responded to him and accepted to give him Lady Zaynab in
marriage.

Abdullah’s father was Jafar who is described as the most similar to the
Holy Prophet (S) in morality and nature.[^30] He was one of those who
preceded others in embracing and defending Islam. He emigrated twice —
once to Abyssinia and then to Medina, and was well known for his pity
and sympathy to the poor and paupers. Like his brother Imam Ali, Jafar
was very much respected by the Prophet of Allah (S) who housed him next
to his Masjid because he recognized Jafar’s strong faith and the will to
sacrifice himself for the sake of Islam.

In the eighth year after Hijrah, the Prophet (S) appointed Jafar as the
commander of the Muslim army in their campaign at Mutah. In this battle,
Jafar was martyred after his two arms were severed because he held fast
on the pennon. The Holy Prophet (S) had then said about him:

“Allah the Exalted shall give Jafar two wings with which he will fly in
Paradise everywhere he wishes, instead of his two severed hands.”

Jafar therefore is named ‘Dhul-Janahayn’ (the two-winged). The martyrdom
of Jafar was one of the most difficult misfortunes that the Prophet (S)
had to encounter. Hence, he (S) said:
“Weeping should be ceaseless for Jafar and his like.”[^31]

Abdullah’s mother was the great lady Asma bint Umays. She was among
those who embraced Islam early. Accompanying her husband, she migrated
to Abyssinia where she gave birth of Abdullah, Awn, and Muhammad. She
then immigrated to Medina. After Jafar’s martyrdom, Asma was married to
Abu Bakr and gave birth of Muhammad who is one of the most celebrated
men of Islam. When Abu Bakr died, Imam Ali Amir al-Muminin married her,
and she gave birth to a boy called Yahya.[^32]

Asma adhered sincerely with the Ahl al-Bayt (a) and had a strong
connection with Lady Fatimah al-Zahra (a). She reported about sixty
hadiths directly on the authority of the Holy Prophet (S).

She acted as a tender mother for Imam al-Hasan, Imam al-Husayn, and Lady
Zaynab as soon as she entered Imam Ali’s house as a wife. They therefore
appreciated her nice treatment, and tenderness. She was thus an example
of chastity, purity, and loyalty to the Ahl al-Bayt (a).

Abdullah ibn Jafar was such a person that none, including his enemies,
could hide admiration for his unparalleled personality. Muawiyah ibn Abu
Sufyan had said about him that, “Abdullah ibn Jafar is worthy of all
honor. He preceded everyone else to perform the noble deeds and
qualities.”[^33]

He was loyal to the Ahl al-Bayt in general and Imam al-Husayn in
particular, though he did not join the Imam’s caravan to Karbala.
Historians have recorded that Abdullah held the biggest obsequies for
the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn, though his two sons were also martyred
in the same time. During that ceremony, one of the slaves said to him,
“We have suffered long because of al-Husayn!”

As he heard this statement, Abdullah threw a sandal on that slave out of
his rage and said, “Son of the condemned one! How dare you say such a
thing about al-Husayn? By Allah I swear, had I been with him, I would
not have left him before I would be killed there. To me, he is
undoubtedly more favored than my two sons are. What makes my misfortune
easy is that they were killed with him without any complaint or
impatience. Thanks to Allah, if I could not support al-Husayn during his
battle, my two sons did.”[^34]

Abdullah ibn Jaffar was also well known for his generosity about which
narrators have reported many marvelous stories. It was because of the
Prophet’s supplication to Allah for him that he was among the richest
people of Medina. Besides, he was so virtuous. He reported many
narrations on the authority of his uncle, Imam Ali Amir al-Muminin (a),
and his two cousins, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn (a).

Lady Zaynab gave birth to four sons and a daughter: Awn, Ali al-Zaynabi,
Muhammad, Abbas, and Lady Ummu-Kulthum.

Awn was virtuous and well mannered. He accompanied his (maternal) uncle,
Imam al-Husayn (a), to Iraq. In the battle of Karbala, Awn fought very
bravely and brought pride to his father, Abdullah, and grandfather,
Jafar. After a brave round of fighting, Awn was attacked by the vicious
Abdullah al-Tai and killed by him.[^35]

Ummu-Kulthum, daughter of Lady Zaynab, was famous for her beauty,
chastity, and personality. She was highly respected by all people in
general and the Hashemites in particular. As an attempt to curry favor
with the Hashemites so as to find himself a respectful position in the
Muslims’ view, Muawiyah ibn Abu Sufyan sent a missive to his governor in
Medina, Marwan ibn al-Hakam, ordering him to ask the hand of
Ummu-Kulthum, daughter of Lady Zaynab, for his son, Yazid.

Marwan ibn al-Hakam knew that Imam al-Husayn (a) would surely refuse and
thwart the matter. He therefore postponed it as he looked for a proper
opportunity. He seized the opportunity of Imam al-Husayn’s travel and
hurried to Abdullah ibn Jafar who understood the whole matter. He said
to Marwan that he should wait until Imam al-Husayn (a) would come back
from his journey.

When the Imam was back, Abdullah rushed to him informing of the whole
story. The Imam became very angry; he rejected completely that his niece
would become the wife of the sinful, lewd grandson of Abu Sufyan. He
therefore hurried to his sister, Lady Zaynab, and asked her to bring her
daughter, Ummu-Kulthum, before him. When the daughter came, the Imam
told that her cousin al-Qasim, son of Muhammad ibn Jafar, would be the
worthiest of marrying her. The mother welcomed, the daughter accepted,
the father showed no rejection, and the Imam gave her away with
significant gift.

They kept the matter secret until the wedding night came. On that night,
the Imam invited many personalities including Marwan ibn al-Hakam who
thought that the invitation was held for announcing the Imam’s
acceptance of Yazid’s marriage to his niece, Ummu-Kulthum. Yet, he was
disappointed when the Imam declared the marriage of al-Qasim to
Ummu-Kulthum. Marwan reported the matter to Muawiyah who as a result,
harboured malice against the Imam.[^36]

[^1]: Fatimah al-Zahra (a), the Veracious was praised not only by
Prophet Muhammad (S) but also by everyone who lived in her time. Ibn
Hajar al-Asqalani, in his al-Isabah, records that Aishah, the Prophet’s
wife had said: “Nobody is preferred more than Fatimah except Prophet
Muhammad (S)”. Abdullah ibn Abbas has said, that it is recorded in the
previous reference book that - “The best women of Paradise are four:
Khadijah, Fatimah, Mary, and Asiyah - the Pharaoh’s wife.” Al-Bukhari in
his al-Sahih and Muslim in his al-Sahih, record the following:
Al-Musawwir ibn Makhramah has quoted the Prophet (S) to say, “Fatimah is
a part of me. Whatever hurts her is certainly hurtful to me and whatever
pleases her is certainly pleasing to me.” Ali (a) reported the Prophet’s
addressing to Fatimah: “Fatimah, most surely Allah is pleased when you
are pleased and enraged when you are enraged.” Finally, reference books
of Islamic history and narration are full of reports relating the
elevated standing of Fatimah al-Zahra, the Veracious (a).

[^2]: See Yanabi ul-Mawaddah; 196.

[^3]: See Zaynab al-Kubra, 60.

[^4]: See Kanz al-Ummal; 7/110, al-Bukhari’s al-Sahih; Chapter: Kitab
al-Adab, Majma al-Zawaid; 9/181, and Ibn Asakir’s at-Tarikh; 13/39.

[^5]: Although some historians say that the first female child of Lady
Fatimah al-Zahra was Ruqayyah, nicknamed Ummu Kulthum, most of
historians have proved Lady Zaynab was Lady Fatima’s first she-baby. As
evidence it is cited that during the reign of the Umayyad State when the
Ahl al-Bayt and their partisans were persecuted, anyone who wanted to
relate something to Imam Ali, he would say, “Father of Zaynab said
so-and-so.” This is because Zaynab was the elder daughter, and the
enemies did not recognise this nickname. See Ibn Abu al-Hadid, Sharh
Nahj al-Balaghah.

[^6]: Azan is the call to prayer.

[^7]: Iqamah is the prefatory statements of the ritual prayer.

[^8]: See At-Tiraz al-Mudhahhab, 38

[^9]: See Batalatu Karbala; 21.

[^10]: In Arabic, the word ‘Zaynab’ is a name of a handsome, fragrant
tree (see Ibn Manzhur’s Lisan al-Arab, vol. 6 p.88).

[^11]: See Zaynab al-Kubra, 16-7.

[^12]: See Zaynab al-Kubra, 17.

[^13]: Excerpted from the Oxford Talking Dictionary, copyright © 1998
The Learning Company, Inc.

[^14]: See Jafar al-Naqdi, Zaynab al-Kubra; 32.

[^15]: Hijrah is the migration of Prophet Muhammad (a) and his family
and companions from Mecca to Medina in 622 A.D; the Muslim era reckoned
from this history.

[^16]: Shaykh Jafar al-Nadir, in his Zaynab al-Kubra, p.18, refutes the
narrations that Lady Zaynab was born in the ninth year of the Hijrah. He
says: “Despite the variation in narrations, Lady Fatimah al-Zahra, the
Veracious (a) died in the tenth or eleventh year of the Hijrah. If Lady
Zaynab was born in the ninth year of the Hijrah, then when was
Ummu-Kulthum, her sister, born, and when was al-Muhsin, the third son of
Imam Ali, born? On this account, it is understandable that Lady Zaynab
was born in the fifth year of the Hijrah.” Besides, Shaykh al-Naqdi has
referred to other facts proving this opinion.

[^17]: Umamah is the daughter of Zaynab stepdaughter of Prophet Muhammad
(S). Implementing the will of Fatimah al-Zahra, Imam Ali married Umamah
after the demise of Lady Fatimah. It is also worth mentioning here that
Umamah was greatly respected by Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^18]: See at-Tabarani’s al-Mujam al-Kabir as related to Yahya al-Mazini

[^19]: Hadith is the body of traditions concerning the sayings and
doings of the Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^20]: see Zaynab al-Kubra; 53.

[^21]: This means that one who believes honestly in the oneness of
Almighty Allah must never betake another as god.

[^22]: See Rayahin al-Shariah, vol. 3 p.54, and Hajj Abd-ul-Hadi
al-Shehristani’s Yanabi al-Rahmah (3), p.8. Ibn Asakir, Ibn Mandah and
Ali Mullah al-Qari have also recorded this.

[^23]: See Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin al-Amili, Ayan al-Shiah; vol. 7, p.
140.

[^24]: See Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi’s al-Sayyidah Zaynab.

[^25]: Abdullah ibn Abbas is regarded as a grand authority of the
Islamic ummah for his knowledge of Hadith and Islamic laws.

[^26]: Abdullah ibn Abbas used to say ‘our Aqilah’ because he belonged
in kinship to Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^27]: See al-Tabirsi’s al-Ihtijaj, p. 166.

[^28]: See Musa Muhammad Ali, al-Sayyidah Zaynab, 69.

[^29]: This hadith is recorded by al-Bukhari in his al-Sahih.

[^30]: See Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, al-Istiab fi Marifat al-Ashab; vol. 1,
p. 242

[^31]: See Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Usd al-Ghabah fi Marifat al-Sahabah;
vol. 1, p. 289

[^32]: See Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Usd al-Ghabah fi Marifat al-Sahabah;
vol. 5, p. 271

[^33]: See Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Usd al-Ghabah fi Marifat al-Sahabah;
vol. 5, p. 171

[^34]: See Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk;
4:357.

[^35]: See Shaykh al-Mufid, al-Irshad, p. 268.

[^36]: See Zaynab Aqilatu Bani Hashim; 27


