Personality
===========

Lady Zaynab contained all elements of nobility and virtue that Almighty
Allah bestowed upon her grandfather, her father, her mother, and her two
brothers. She inherited their peculiarities and copied their high moral
standards.

By virtue of her ethical inheritance and unmatched characteristics, Lady
Zaynab is indeed the greatest lady in Islam as she symbolises its true
values and principles. Along with her mother, Lady Zaynab struggled in
the best way and stood firmly against the factional currencies that
tried, using all their possibilities and powers, to throw curtains on
the real leaders and guides of the Islamic ummah.

In the same way as Lady Fatimah al-Zahra stopped strongly with Imam Ali
(a) and opposed the illegal government of Abu Bakr through her splendid
speech as well as her honorable situations, Lady Zaynab stopped to the
last spark of life with her brother, Imam al-Husayn (a) and opposed the
black government of the Umayyad rulers who aimed, openly and frankly, at
uprooting Islam and erasing its existence by excluding the Ahl al-Bayt
(a) from the Muslims’ social and political lives.

Let us now refer to some of such peculiarities that made Lady Zaynab at
the head of Muslim women:

### Faith

In the center from where call to Almighty Allah was raised, and the
house where the revelation of Divine Message had descended, and the
pivot from which the word of monotheism advanced to spread its bright
rays to all the peoples on this earth – it was in this very house that
Lady Zaynab was brought up. She was fed with the core of true faith and
the reality of Islam. Hence, love for Almighty Allah was in her nature
and, later on, became a distinctive feature of her personality that led
her to stand up to all the misfortunes and adversities she had to
encounter from her early life.

Firm faith and exclusive devotion to Almighty Allah were the features
that Prophet Muhammad’s family enjoyed in a special way. Each member of
this exalted family expressed his/her firm faith distinctively. Lady
Zaynab, for instance, stopped at the severed body of her brother, Imam
al-Husayn (a), and expressed her firm faith by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ تَقَبَّلْ مِنَّا هَذا الْقُرْبَانَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O Allah, accept this offering from us.”

These words have been the best example on the sublimity of the prophetic
inheritance. They also showed the reality of Islam through the lesson
that each sacrifice must be purely offered for Almighty Allah’s sake.

Humanity, in all ages, must bow before such unparalleled faith, which
was the secret beyond the perpetuity of Lady Zaynab and her principles.

On the cruelest night in the life of Lady Zaynab, as well as the Islamic
ummah, she offered a Thanksgiving Prayer while she was completely
surrounded by horrific tragedies; the dead bodies of the Prophet’s
family and their pure companions were thrown before her eyes without
shrouds, fire leaped across the canopies of the Alawid ladies who lost
their shelter after the savage and merciless soldiers had usurped their
jewelries and properties, and the children had nothing to do other than
weeping and crying. In the midst of this apalling situation, Lady Zaynab
turned her face towards her Lord to thank Him for His grace.

Indeed, such faith is more perpetual than civilizations, fortunes, and
even perpetuity itself.

### Steadfastness

Since early life, Lady Zaynab had equipped herself with steadfastness
against misfortunes. She first was deprived of her grandfather, Prophet
Muhammad (S), who loved her very much and sympathized with her. She then
saw the horrible events that surprised her parents immediately after the
Prophet’s demise. Her father was taken away from the position that
Almighty Allah and Prophet Muhammad (S) chose for him. Her mother was
severely mistreated by the people until she departed life while she was
in the flush of her youth. She then saw people of Kufa cheat her
brother, Imam al-Hasan (a), and let him down to the degree that he had
to make a peace treaty with Muawiyah, the mortal enemy of Islam and the
Ahl al-Bayt (a). A few years later, this Imam was assassinated by
poison. She saw him vomit blood to death.

On the tenth of Muharram, 61 AH, she had to see the most bitter of
adversities; her brother, Imam al-Husayn (a), yielded to death after he
had lost all supporters and helpers; the swords of the wicked Umayyad
soldiers killed the Alawid youths, children, and even babies. Lady
Zaynab stood like an unshakable mountain in face of all these unbearable
misfortunes. She faced all these with the weapon of steadfastness and
resisted all the events with conviction. Thus, she is intended in
Almighty Allah’s saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَبَشِّرِ الصَّابِرِينَ. الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُمْ مُصِيبَةٌ
قَالُوا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ. أُولَٰئِكَ
عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتٌ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ وَرَحْمَةٌ ۖ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And give good news to the patient who, when a misfortune befalls
them, say: Surely we are Allah's and to Him we shall surely return.
Those are they on whom are blessings and mercy from their Lord.”
(2:155-7)***

Many poets have depicted Lady Zaynab’s steadfastness in a most beautiful
and expressive way. She being the Prophet’s granddaughter, showed
steadfastness and endurance before the enemies of Allah. Lady Zaynab
could withstand all adversities and misfortunes by virtue of her
determination and persistence.

### Dignity

Dignity was a prominent feature in the personality of Lady Zaynab.

After the killing of Imam al-Husayn (a), she as well as the other
granddaughters of the Prophet (S) were taken as captives from Karbala to
Kufa and all their personal properties were usurped. While the children
were harshly afflicted with hunger, she desisted from asking the
soldiers of the Umayyad army for some food. When the captives’ caravan
arrived in Kufa, and the women there knew that the captives belonged to
the Prophet’s family, they hurried to bring some food for the children.
Preventing this thing, Lady Zaynab spoke to the ladies of Kufa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَدَقَةُ مُحَرَّمَةٌ عَلَيْنَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“It is forbidden for us, the Ahl al-Bayt, to receive from the alms.”

When the children heard these words from their aunt, they threw away
from their hands and mouths all that they had accepted from these ladies
and preferred hunger to accepting alms that was forbidden for them. This
was the fruit of education by the choicest ones; the prophets, the
veracious, and their real followers.

All along the journey of the captives, from Kufa to Damascus, Lady
Zaynab did not ask for any aids for the children and women even though
they were in dire need for such, because of her disdain and sense of
honor.

Thus, Lady Zaynab did not succumb to any other than Almighty Allah. She
showed dignity, honor, and disdain inherited from her grandfather and
father in spite of her hardships.

### Courage

No one can ever doubt the courage of the Prophet’s family. The members
of this family gave the best examples of bravery and courage. For
instance, Imam Ali (a), the head of the Prophet’s family, said:

“Even if all the Arabs helped each other to fight with me, I will never
flee.”

He showed the best sort of courage during the battles and campaigns of
Islam. His son Imam al-Husayn (a) also gave the best example of bravery
and courage. On the day of Ashura, he amazed his enemies and could stop
so bravely and steadfastly before their great numbers. Despite the
horrifying misfortunes that he had to encounter on that day, he did not
show any surrender or weakness. On the contrary, his steadfastness
increased with the increase of his misfortunes. He alone attacked thirty
thousand soldiers and could oblige them to turn the backs just like
goats that run away from a lion. Even when he fell to the ground out of
his heavy wounds, they were too scared to approach him.

Following her family members pattern, Lady Zaynab behaved so
courageously before the criminals who killed her brother. When she had
to stop before Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, the governor of Kufa, while she was
considered as captive, she expressed despise and disrespect for him. He
therefore showed his gloating over her misfortunes by saying, “Thanks to
Allah Who unmasked, killed, and belied your revolution.”

In reply, she said courageously:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلحَمْدُ للهِ ﭐلَّذِي أَكْرَمَنَا بِنَبِيِّهِ، وَطَهَّرَنَا مِنَ
ﭐلرِّجْسِ تَطْهيراً. إِنَّمَا يُفْتَضَحُ ﭐلْفَاسِقُ وَيُكَذَّبُ
ﭐلْفَاجِرُ، وَهُوَ غَيْرُنَا، وَهُوَ غَيْرُنَا يَا بْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thanks to Allah Who honored us with His Prophet and purified us from
uncleanness thoroughly. It is only the lewd that has been unmasked, and
it is only the dissolute that has been belied. We are not any of these
two. Indeed, we are not any of these two, O son of Marjanah[^1]. [^2]

This statement in fact was more lethal than strike of weapons. She said
it while she, as well as other ladies of the Prophet’s family, were in
captivity and the heads of their protectors were resting on spearheads.

It was these words that also took the tyrant down from his throne into
his grave. To hear these words from her in presence of his servants and
officials, made him realize in fact it was he who was the real defeated
and the unmasked one, while the real triumph belonged to Imam al-Husayn
(a), the killed one and his companions.

When he heard these shocking words, Ubaydullah, son of Marjanah, had
nothing to say. He therefore spoke to inflict pain in his attempt to
cover failure and inability to answer. He addressed her and asked, “How
do you see that which Allah has done to your brother?”

Bravely and steadfastly, Lady Zaynab answered with words of triumph:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا رَأَيْتُ إِلاّ جَمِيلاً. هٰؤُلاَءِ قَوْمٌ كَتَبَ ﭐللهُ عَلَيْهِمُ
ﭐلْقَتْلَ فَبَرَزُوا إلىٰ مَضَاجِعِهِمْ، وَسَيَجْمَعُ ﭐللهُ بَيْنَكَ
وَبَيْنَهُمْ فَتُحَٰاجَّ وَتُخَاصَمَ. فَانْظُرْ لِمَنِ ﭐلْفَلَجُ
يَوْمَئِذٍ. ثَكَلَتْكَ أُمُّكَ يَا بْنَ مَرْجَانَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I see nothing but His Grace. These were those who were destined for
being martyred. They therefore came to the place where they would be
slain. Allah will gather you with them for judgment and sentence. You
will see then, who will be the triumphant on that day. Woe shall be you,
son of Marjanah, then.

These words were surely a source of gratification, not only for Lady
Zaynab, but also for Islam and Muslims. They are also regarded to
eternally glorify the Prophet’s family.

The circumstances that faced Lady Zaynab with the Syrian man, in the
royal place of Yazid and her everlasting revolutionary speech, shook the
Umayyad throne and revealed the baseless reality of Yazid and those who
had enabled him to come to power. In the coming chapters, these
situations will be discussed in details.

### Abstention from worldly pleasures

Following her father who had shunned the worldly pleasures
relentlessly[^3] and her mother who possessed nothing other than a rug
made of leaves of date-palm trees and a skin of an ewe, Lady Zaynab
abandoned all the worldly pleasures and stuck to Almighty Allah and
deeds of charity. She had never saved anything for tomorrow. [^4]

She left everything when accompanying her brother, Imam al-Husayn (a),
even though she was the wife of the wealthiest man of Medina; all this
was to support her religion and defend its principles and values.

### Firmness

Lady Zaynab confronted the tyrants so firmly that she represented the
strength of right and the justice perfectly. In all situations, she
replied the tyrants courageously and faced their falsity with words of
light that have perpetuated and acted as models of stopping against any
tyrant for sake of the right and justice.

While the soldiers and the courtiers whom Yazid had invited to witness
his false victory surrounded her, Lady Zaynab fearlessly countered each
and every single word that Yazid said until she completely unmasked him
and proved the genuineness of his brother’s issue. Moreover, she
threatened and showered the tyrant with severe words of rebuke as if she
was the governor and he was the captive. Referring to verses from the
Holy Quran and items of logic, she did not leave any argument to the
tyrant. Her words were like swords that struck Yazid and his likes to
death.

The same thing she did before the other tyrant, Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad who
tried to gloat at her about misfortunes, but all his attempts were
rebuffed by sharp words and a style that obliged him to become silent.
She ignored him completely and that was enough shame for him.

Her intrepidity was clear all through the journey with her brother and
afterwards when she took up various honorable roles in his undying
revolution. She managed the affairs of Imam with nonesuch activity
despite the enemies’ siege. A single look at the bright face of her
brother would remove any tiredness she might have felt.

She also took care of the children and harem after the Imam’s martyrdom,
and that was really a hard mission that ordinary women cannot manage.
The source of such power and firmness was that she understood Imam
al-Husayn’s revolution perfectly and exerted all efforts for giving
success to it.

These have been some features of the unmatched personality of Lady
Zaynab. As a matter of fact, this lady’s personality included all
features of moral highness and perfection. To refer to all these
features requires great efforts and very much time, though Lady Zaynab’s
features are timeless. This is the reason why only a few features of her
personality have been mentioned here.

Lady Zaynab in Traditions
-------------------------

For her high position, Lady Zaynab was mentioned in a number of
traditions ascribed to the Holy Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt (a). We have
already referred to the Prophet’s saying that weeping for her is the
same as weeping for her two brothers.

Shaykh Sulayman al-Hanafi in his famous book entitled *Yanabi
al-Mawaddah Section* *58*, records the following - we excerpt only the
point of discussion:

Rabiah al-Sadi reported: As I asked Hudhayfah about a number of matters,
he said, “Listen to this, understand it, and convey it to people. I have
seen the Messenger of Allah and heard him say with my own ears that when
al-Husayn ibn Ali came to him on the minbar and he seated him on his
shoulders and said:

O people! This is al-Husayn; his grandfather and grandmother are the
best of people. His grandfather is the Messenger of Allah and master of
Adam’s descendants… And this is al-Husayn whose father, mother, brother,
and sisters are the best of people… and his sisters are Zaynab and
Ruqayyah… and his two sisters shall be in Paradise…[^5]

This prophetic saying is a clear-cut proof on the exceptional position
of Lady Zaynab as she is added to the list of Prophet and the Imams and
is regarded as the best of people.

Shaykh al-Saduq in his *Ikmal al-Din wa Itmam al-Nimah*, reports the
following - we excerpt only the point of discussion:

Ali ibn Mahziyar said that Abu al-Husayn Muhammad ibn Jafar al-Asadi
said that Ahmad ibn Ibrahim said:

In the year 262, I visited (Lady) Hakimah daughter of Muhammad ibn Ali
and sister of Imam al-Hasan al-Askari, and asked her about the religion…
She then said, “This is what al-Husayn ibn Ali had done when he
appointed his sister Zaynab as his representative openly, and hence any
item of knowledge that was said by Ali ibn al-Husayn was ascribed to
Zaynab.”

This is another proof on the high position of Lady Zaynab in the sight
of Imam al-Husayn as he appointed her to carry the weighty inheritance
of Imamate.

Shaykh al-Mufid records the following narration:

During the Battle of the Camel, Aishah gathered children and bondmaids,
gave them drums, and ordered them to chant some poetic verses against
Imam Ali. When Ummu Salamah, the Prophet’s widow, was informed about
this, she decided to go there and reproach Aishah and the gathering
women. Lady Zaynab asked to do this instead of Ummu Salamah since she
knew these women very well. Hence, she disguised herself and her
bondmaids and left towards these children and women. When she reached
there, she noticed their vainness and futility. She then showed her
reality to Aishah and said, “It is not strange from you and your
companion (i.e. Hafsah) to help each other against Amir al-Muminin,
since it was both of you who helped each other against his brother, the
Messenger of Allah, until you were reproached by the Holy Quran.”[^6]
Aishah felt ashamed and excused that these women had done this out of
their ignorance.

This tradition gives a clear idea about the sagacity and wisdom of Lady
Zaynab who participated in the defense of Islam with her father and
brothers.

The following tradition is recorded in *al-Tiraz al-Mudhahhab* as quoted
from *Nasikh al-Tawarikh*:

One of the miracles of the Holy Prophet (S) was that he used to put his
tongue in the mouths of Fatimah’s suckling children and they were
satiated. Zaynab and Ummu Kulthum were also engaged in receiving this
blessing besides al-Hasan and al-Husayn.

This narration is in fact a sufficient honor for Lady Zaynab.

The following is recorded in *Bihar al-Anwar*, as quoted from *Maani
al-Akhbar*:

Muhammad ibn Imran asked Imam Jafar al-Sadiq (a) whether it is true that
the Holy Prophet (S) had said that because Fatimah guarded her chastity,
Allah would forbid Hell to take in her progeny. Imam al-Sadiq (a) said,
“Yes, it is true. Her progeny are al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Zaynab, and Ummu
Kulthum.”

The previous are only small excerpts of the traditions in which Lady
Zaynab is mentioned. It has been already mentioned that she herself was
a trustworthy narrator of prophetic traditions and incidents that she
lived or heard from her mother.

Traditions of Lady Zaynab
-------------------------

The most famous narration of Lady Zaynab was her mother’s address of
Fadak.

Ibn Abu al-Hadid, in *Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah*, reports this address from
a series of narrators, all of whom relate it to Lady Zaynab in more than
one way. Abdullah ibn Abbas also relates the address to Lady Zaynab.[^7]
She also narrated her father’s last words to her two brothers and his
instructions on how to wash his dead body and where to bury him. She
also narrated the story of Imam al-Husayn’s birth, as quoted from her
mother (a).[^8]

Lady Zaynab also narrated the story of the Heavenly Food that Lady
Fatimah al-Zahra prayed to the Lord to give her so as to serve it to her
father[^9]. She also narrated the famous story of her mother’s prayer to
the believers saying, “Neighbors should be preceded to the family
members.”[^10]

She also narrated to her nephew, Imam Zayn al-Abidin, the words of the
Holy Prophet about what they would face after him.[^11] In the same
manner, she narrated her father’s confirmation of Ummu Ayman’s narration
about the same matter.

[^1]: Marjanah - Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad’s mother, was a notorious
prostitute that everybody all over the Islamic State had heard of her
name.

[^2]: See Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari Tarikh al-Umam wa al-Muluk;
6:263.

[^3]: This is an indication to Imam Ali’s famous word: “O world. O
world! Get away from me. Why do you present yourself to me? Or are you
eager for me? You may not get that opportunity to impress me. Deceive
some other person. I have no concern with you. I have divorced you
thrice whereafter there is no restitution. Your life is short, your
importance is little, and your liking is humble. Alas! The provision is
little, the way is long, the journey is far and the goal is hard to
reach.”

[^4]: Imam Ali Zayn al-Abidin (a) narrated this feature about his aunt,
Lady Zaynab. See al-Timothy’s al-Sahih; 2:319, al-Hakim’s al-Mustadrak;
3:149, Ibn al-Athir’s Usd al-Ghabah; 5:523, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi’s
Tarikh Baghdad; 7:366, and others.

[^5]: This hadith is reported by Abu al-Shaykh Ibn Hayyan in al-Tanbih
al-Kabir and is also recorded by Jamaluddin Muhammad ibn Yusuf
al-Zarandi in Durar al-Simtayn.

[^6]: The story of Aishah and Hafsah’s having hatched plots against the
Holy Prophet (S) is very famous, since it is mentioned in the Holy Quran
in details. See all books of tafsir regarding the surah of al-Tahrim.

[^7]: See Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani, al-Aghani.

[^8]: See al-Khazzaz, Kifayat al-Athar.

[^9]: See Imaduddin Muhammad ibn Ali al-Tusi, Thaqib al-Manaqib.

[^10]: See Shaykh Ahmad Zaynuddin al-Ihsaie, al-Majami.

[^11]: See Ibn Qawlawayh, Kamil al-Ziyarah.


