Section 1: The Ultimate Triumph of the Unity of Allah
=====================================================

Prophecy about the Vanishment of the disbelievers. Allah's help in the
Battle of Badr -Unity, the basis of the faith in Allah - Islam, the only
True Religion.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verses 10-11
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَن تُغْنِيَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلاَ
أَوْلاَدُهُم مِّنَ اللّهِ شَيْئًا وَأُولَـئِكَ هُمْ وَقُودُ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَدَأْبِ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ كَذَّبُواْ
بِآيَاتِنَا فَأَخَذَهُمُ اللّهُ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَاللّهُ شَدِيدُ
الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**10. "*****Verily those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their
children shall avail them aught against Allah, and they themselves will
be fuel for the (Hell) Fire."***  
**11.** ***"Like the People of Pharaoh and those who were before them,
they denied Our Signs, so Allah caught them for their sins; and Allah is
severe in penalty."***

In this situation, those hearts that are deviated and are not on the
straight path are referred to. The verse says:

***"Verily those who disbelieve ..."***

These are those who disbelieved in the verses of *Allah* and His
Messengers; so:

***"... neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them aught
against Allah ..."***

Concerning the Qur'anic phrase /minallah/, Abu'ubaydah says that it
means 'with *Allah',* while Al-Mubarrad says that the Arabic word /min/
(from) is used with its own meaning here, which is 'beginning'.

Hence, the purpose of the whole phrase is that, from the beginning to
the end, there will be no avail for them out of their wealth and their
children. Some others say that the phrase /minallah/ metaphorically
means /min 'aŎabillah/ (from *Allah's* punishment), which has been
rendered that: nothing will avail them to be away from the punishment of
*Allah* [^1]

***"... and they themselves will be fuel for the (Hell) Fire."***

They themselves, i.e. their bodies, are the fuel of the fire. This very
meaning is also mentioned in another verse, saying that they are 'fuel'
for Hell. [^2]

There are different meanings cited upon the and the sense of the Arabic
term /da'b /in the Qur'anic phrase /ka da 'bi 'ali fir'aun/ ***"like the
people of Pharaoh",*** stated in the above mentioned second verse. They
are as follows:

1. The habit of these infidels in rejecting both you (**O'**
***Muhammad**)* and what has been revealed to you is like the habit of
Pharaoh's men in rejecting prophets and what *Allah* had revealed to
them. In this regard, Ibn-'Abbas has rendered the Arabic term /da'b/
into 'habit'.

2. The effort and endeavour of this group in obtaining victory and
overcoming you, in order to destroy your activities, is similar to the
effort of Pharaoh's men for defeating with Moses (as). In this regard,
the term /da'b/ is taken with the concept of 'effort'.

***"... and those who were before them ..."***

The people mentioned in this phrase are the disbelievers of the former
religious communities.

***"... they denied Our Signs, so Allah caught them for their
sins..."***

Here, for the concept of 'to punish', the term 'to catch' has been
applied, because, 'punishment' is taking the wrong doer for his sin.

***"... and Allah is severe in penalty."***

This Divine severe chastisement, in fact, is for those who deserve that
punishment.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ سَتُغْلَبُونَ وَتُحْشَرُونَ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ
وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**12.** ***"Say to those who disbelieve: ' You shall be vanquished, and
gathered, unto Hell and it is a terrible abode! "***

It is cited in some books, like: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Fakhr Razi, Maraqi,
and some other ones, that when the Muslims gained a considerable victory
in the Battle of Badr in the second year after Emigration, a group of
the Jews said that the victory was counted as a sign to the truthfulness
of the Prophet (S).

They reasoned that they had studied in the Torah that he (S) could win.
Another group of the Jews said that they would not haste, since haply
the Prophet (S) would fail in the battles thereafter.

In the third year when the Uhud Battle came forth, and Muslims were
defeated, this group of the Jews became happy. Then, the verse was sent
do telling them not to hurry in judgement so soon and they (the Jews
would be defeated in near future.

***"Say to those who disbelieve: ' You shall be vanquished, and gathered
unto Hell and it is a terrible abode!*** "

### Explanations

1. One of the miracles of the Qur'an is its true prophecies. In this
prediction, it happened that, after a short time, Muslims succeeded to
defeat two Jewish tribes: Bani Quraydah and Bani An-Nadir in Medina.
Also, in the conquest of Mecca, they vanished the pagans successfully.

2. Soothing the believers and threatening the disbelievers is a sign of
proper leadership and belief in the goal.

3. Prophets have taken care of both the worldly defeats and the damages
that may come forth in the next world together.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 13
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ آيَةٌ فِي فِئَتَيْنِ الْتَقَتَا فِئَةٌ تُقَاتِلُ فِي
سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَأُخْرَى كَافِرَةٌ يَرَوْنَهُم مِّثْلَيْهِمْ رَأْيَ
الْعَيْنِ وَاللّهُ يُؤَيِّدُ بِنَصْرِهِ مَن يَشَاء إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ
لَعِبْرَةً لَّأُوْلِي الأَبْصَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**13.** ***"Indeed there has been a sign for you in the two hosts that
encountered: one fighting in the path of Allah and the other
disbelieving; they (infidels) saw twice as many as they were with the
sight of the eye; and Allah confirms with His aid whom He pleases.
Surely*** ***there is a lesson herein for those who have insight."***

This fact has been recorded in books, including: Majma'-ul-Bayan,
Maraqi, Fakhr Razi and many other ones that this verse concerns Battle
of Badr. In that fighting, Muslims struggled against infidels. The
number of Muslims was 313 men, among whom 77 figures were from the
Emigrants and 236 men from the Helpers *(**Ansar***) for whom
Sa'd-ibn-'lbadah was the flagman.

As military equipment, Muslims had only seventy camels, two horses, six
armours, and eight swords; while the opposite army, the pagans, were one
thousand men with one hundred horses.

The Muslims won the battle wherein twenty two of them became martyrs: 14
martyrs from the Emigrants and 8 martyrs from the helpers, when hostile
pagans had to give seventy killed persons and 170 men as captives.

This incident is a lesson for those who have intellect and sight that
how a small group of Muslims with little equipment could defeat an
equipped army the number of whose fighters was three-fold of Muslims.
This shows that mere material possibilities are not the enough cause of
victory.

***"Indeed there has been a sign for you in the two hosts that
encountered: one fighting in the path of Allah and the other
disbelieving; they (infidels) saw twice as many as they were with the
sight of the eye..."***

### Explanations

1. The victory in the Battle of Badr, by a few persons against a larger
number of equipped fighters, is the prevalence of *Allah*'s Will over
people's will. It is the best example of prevalence of Truth over
untruth and Faith over disbelief.

***"... and Allah confirms with His aid whom He pleases..."***

2. Wherever *Allah* pleases, visions, recognitions, and thoughts vary:
with these very eyes, they see the same crowd twofold.

3. The worth of fight lies in fighting itself;

***"In the way of Allah"***

4. It is True that *Allah* helps anyone He wills, but the condition of
*Allah's* aid is mentioned in another occasion where it says that people
should assist the religion of *Allah:*

***"... if you help (the cause of Allah), He will help you and make firm
your feet."*** [^3]

5. All the Muslim fighters have one goal: ***"... one fighting in the
path of Allah ...",*** but the disbelieving fighters have various goals
and different ways:

***"... and the other disbelieving..."***

6. Signs are for all, but taking lesson from these sings needs a special
insight.

***"...surely there is a lesson herein for those who have insight."***

7. The Battle of Badr was not performed with formerly preparation. It
began with the purpose of confiscation of pagans' properties who had
confiscated the emigrant Muslims' properties in Mecca, but it ended with
military conflict.

***"... the two hosts that encountered...."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 14
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَاء وَالْبَنِينَ
وَالْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ
الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالأَنْعَامِ وَالْحَرْثِ ذَلِكَ مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاللّهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَآبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**14*****. "The love of desires (that come) from women, and of
offspring, and heaped-up hoards of gold and silver and well-bred branded
horses and cattle and tilth, is made to seem fair to mankind. This is
the provision of the life of this world, while Allah is He with Whom is
the good resort. "***

The Arabic term /qanatir/ is the plural form of /qintar/ which in the
Qur'anic Glossary means 'heap of talent' or, here, 'abundant wealth'.
The word /muqantarah /, from the same root, has been added after that
for additional, emphasis.

The term /xayl/, applied in this verse, means 'horse' and a 'riding
horse'. And the word /musawwamah/ means 'branded', Viz. the horses that
possessed special prominces. That speciality was because of the beauty
of their stature and or the kind of training they had gotten. Those
horses were called 'well-bred branded horses'.

***"The love of desires (that come) from women, and of offspring, and
heaped-up hoards of gold and silver and well-bred branded horses and
cattle and tilth, is made to seem fair to mankind...."***

Things being seemed fair to mankind may sometimes be done by the means
of imaginations, sometimes by Satan, and sometimes by flattering people
in around.

The attractive examples mentioned in the verse are those in regard of
the time of the revelation. They can have some new and different
examples in every period.

***"... This is the provision of the life of this world, while Allah is
He with Whom is the good resort. "***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 15
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَؤُنَبِّئُكُم بِخَيْرٍ مِّن ذَلِكُمْ لِلَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا عِندَ
رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا
وَأَزْوَاجٌ مُّطَهَّرَةٌ وَرِضْوَانٌ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ بَصِيرٌ
بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**15.** ***"Say: 'Shall I tell you of what is better than these? For
those who keep from evil are gardens with their Lord; beneath which
rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever, and pure spouses, and
Allah's pleasure; and Allah is well aware of the servants."***

In the previous verse, *Allah's* word was upon belittling the love of
this world and enjoining people to piety and good goal of life. In this
verse, it introduces the Hereafter, as grand and worthy, and encourages
people towards it.

***"Say: 'Shall I tell you of what is better than these? ..."***

It addresses the Prophet (S) commanding to 'say' a great information in
the form of a question. Some of commentators believe that the content of
the inquiry stretches up to the phrase 'with their Lord' in the verse.
They say what it informs which begins from the Qur'anic phrase 'gardens
beneath which rivers flow'.

Therefore, the consequence of the meaning of the verse is: 'Shall I
inform you of what is better than that which was formerly said about the
desires of this world and lusts and their attractions?'

***"... For those who keep from evil... "***

***"... are gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow..."***

Then it adds:

***"... where in they will abide forever ..."***

When enumerating the merits in Heaven, it refers to spouses therein who
are pure from any pollution, filthiness, indecent qualities, and
disgraceful manners:

***"…and pure spouses ..."***

Besides Heaven of this kind, the pleasure of *Allah* is theirs-

***"... and Allah's pleasure... "***

Finally, it adds:

***"... and Allah is well aware of the servants."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verses 16-17
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنَا إِنَّنَا آمَنَّا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا
ذُنُوبَنَا وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّابِرِينَ وَالصَّادِقِينَ وَالْقَانِتِينَ وَالْمُنفِقِينَ
وَالْمُسْتَغْفِرِينَ بِالأَسْحَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**16.** ***"Those who say: ' Our Lord! Verily we believe, so forgive us
our sin and save us from the torment of the Fire."***

***17. "The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient, and those who
spend (benevolently), and those who seek forgiveness before dawn
(times)."***

The characteristics of the pious ones, who were hinted out in the
previous verse, are stated here in this verse with more details.

At first it says about them:

***"Those who say: 'Our Lord! We believe..."***

That is: we believe in You and Your Apostle. Then, they continue saying:

***"...so forgive us our sin and save us from the torment of the
Fire."***

After that, the Qur'an has stated some other characteristics of the
pious ones where it has praised them. It says the pious are the same as:

***"The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient, and those who spend
(benevolently), and those who seek forgiveness before dawn (times)"***

Thus, the pious have the following qualities:

1. Patience in tolerating the difficulties, the prohibitions, and the
Divine services.

2. To be truthful in speech and manner.

3. Humility and submission without pride and self -admiration.

4. Giving in charity from what Allah has provided them as sustenance.

5. Supplications and seeking forgiveness from their Lord during the time
before dawn.

The term /munfiqin / (those who spend out), in the verse, refers to
those who spend out their wealth benevolently in righteous deeds, when
it consists of giving obligatory alms and recommended charity.

Opinions are divided as to the meaning of the Qur'anic phrase /wal
mustaqfirina bil ashar/ ***(and those who seek forgiveness before dawn
times).*** They are four varieties as follows:

1. To establish prayer at midnight, (said by Qattadah). This very
meaning has been cited by Imam Rida (as) who narrated from his father
(as) from Imam Ja'far Sadiq (as). [^4]

2. Those who seek forgiveness before dawn, (said by 'Anas).

3. Those who keep the morning prayer in congregation, (said by Ziyd-ibn
'Aslam).

4. Those who continue keeping prayers until before dawn and then ask
*Allah* to forgive them their sins, (said by Hassan).

It is narrated from Imam -Sadiq (as) who has said:

*"Whosoever, at midnight, seeks forgiveness seventy times is involved in
the people of this verse..."* [^5]

In a tradition it is narrated from the Prophet (S) who said:

*"Verily Allah, Almighty and Glorious, says: ' Whenever I will to punish
the people of the earth, I restrain it from them when I observe the
constructors of mosques, the performers of the night prayers, those who
make friends with each other in My way, and those who seek forgiveness
before dawn (times)..."* [^6]

In Islamic literature, it is cited that if a person continuously recites
/astaghfirullaha rabbi wa 'atiibu 'ilayh/ seventy times in his personal
prayer of odd prayer at midnight for one year, the one will be involved
of the people of this verse.[^7]

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 18
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهِدَ اللّهُ أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَالْمَلاَئِكَةُ
وَأُوْلُواْ الْعِلْمِ قَآئِمَاً بِالْقِسْطِ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**18*****. "Allah (Himself) bears witness that there is no god but He,
and (so do) the angels and the possessors of knowledge, standing firm
for justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise."***

By creating a single regularity over the world of existence, *Allah*
testifies upon the Oneness of His Own Essence. That is, the existing
harmony and order, in the whole creation, is an evidence to the
sovereignty of only One Power over existence.

In other worlds, *Allah* informs of His Oneness through the wonders of
creation and His wise Providence, which are like the examples of life.
*Allah* calls the creation of the creatures as a witness to His Own
Unity.

By the way, He causes to understand that the phenomena He brings into
existence are so that none is able to generate even one of them.

***"Allah (Himself) bears witness that there is no god but He..."***

By observing the wonders and greatness of power, angels bear witness to
the Oneness of *Allah.*  
 Those possessed of knowledge, /'ulul-'ilm/, who know, and it has been
proved to them, that none is able to bring the wonders of the world of
creation into existence but He, bear witness to the Oneness of His
Essence, too.

This fact must also be noticed that though the phrase: ***'the
possessors of knowledge'*** refers to all scientists and knowledgeable
ones in general, according to some Islamic narrations; the objective
meaning of it is prophets and the Imams of right guidance (as)*.* [^8]

***"...and (so do) the angels and the possessors of knowledge, standing
firm for justice..."***

And, angels testify that there is no god save the One, *Allah,* by Whom
justice is firm.

***"...there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise."***

It is He the One, and none else, Who gives sustenance, treats His
servants Justly, and there is no inequity in His affairs.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 19
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِندَ اللّهِ الإِسْلاَمُ وَمَا اخْتَلَفَ الَّذِينَ
أُوْتُواْ الْكِتَابَ إِلاَّ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيًا
بَيْنَهُمْ وَمَن يَكْفُرْ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ فَإِنَّ اللّهِ سَرِيعُ
الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**19.** ***"Verily the (true) religion with Allah is Islam, and those
whom (formerly) the Book had been given to did not differ but after the
knowledge (of the truth) had come to them, through envy of each other.
And whoever disbelieves in Allah's Signs, then, verily, Allah is quick
in reckoning."***

The spirit of religion is the very submission to *Allah.* Next to the
statement of the Unity of *Allah,* the Qur'an refers to the oneness of
religion, and says:

***"Verily the (true) religion with Allah is Islam..."***

Thus, the true religion with *Allah* is surrender or the submission of
the self of adherent to the Will or Command of *Allah.* The spirit of
religion, in fact, in any time and period, is not anything but
submission to Divine Will:

***"...and those whom (formerly) the Book had been given to did not
differ..."***

The objective purpose of the verse is the Jews and the Christians whose
discord was that they rejected Islam.

***"...but after the knowledge (of the truth) had come to them..."***

When they comprehended that the religion of Islam was rightful, the
followers of Jesus (as) believed in trinity (the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost), and the Jews said: **"*****Ezra is God's Son."***

Thus; both of them differed in the prophet hood of the Prophet (S)
although they had studied the epithets and specialities of the Prophet
(S) in their Books (the Torah and the Evangel) and recognized them
completely. They knew very well that Muhammad (S) was the Messenger of
*Allah* and was His Apostle.

***"... through envy of each other..."***

[^1]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Vol. 2, P. 412 (Arabic Version)

[^2]: Surah Al-Jinn, No.72, Verse 15.

[^3]: Surah Muhammad, No.47, verse 7.

[^4]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Vol. 2, P. 419 (Arabic version).

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Atyab-ul-Bayan, Vol. 3, P. 137

[^8]: Al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 273


