Section 2: Chastisement for those who slay the Apostles
=======================================================

Those who slay Apostles of Allah shall be punished.  
 To Allah alone belongs the kingdom and He alone bestows the kingdom
upon whoever He wills and takes away from whoever He wills.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 20
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنْ حَآجُّوكَ فَقُلْ أَسْلَمْتُ وَجْهِيَ لِلّهِ وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَنِ
وَقُل لِّلَّذِينَ أُوْتُواْ الْكِتَابَ وَالأُمِّيِّينَ أَأَسْلَمْتُمْ
فَإِنْ أَسْلَمُواْ فَقَدِ اهْتَدَواْ وَّإِن تَوَلَّوْاْ فَإِنَّمَا
عَلَيْكَ الْبَلاَغُ وَاللّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**20.** ***"So if they dispute with you, say: 'I have submitted myself
(totally) to Allah, and whoever follows me'. And say to those who have
been given the Book and the unlettered ones: 'Do you (also) submit
yourselves?' So if they submit then indeed they are rightly guided, and
if they turn back, then upon you is only the delivery of the message,
and Allah is well-aware of the servants."***

***"So if they dispute with you, say: 'I have submitted myself (totally)
to Allah, and whoever follows me'..."***

The Lord, addressing the Prophet (S), has commanded him that if the Jews
and the Christians disputed with him upon the religion, he would tell
them that he had surrendered his self wholly to *Allah,* the One, and
had taken no partner for Him with himself and had not worshipped another
god with Him.

The purpose is that the Prophet (S) tells them that his religion is
theism, and this creed is the same principle that all the responsible
persons are obliged to confess.

***"... And say to those who have been given the Book..."***

These people are the people of the Book, i.e. the Jews and the
Christians.

***"... and the unlettered ones..."***

These are those who had not Book, i.e. the pagan Arabs. **"...*****' Do
you (also) submit yourselves? '..."***

With reference to the evidences and signs which are with you, have you
embraced Islam, or you still resist on your own infidelity?

***"...So if they submit then indeed they are rightly guided..."***

If they embrace Islam it is useful for themselves, because they have
been delivered from aberration and guided to the right way.

***"... and if they turn back, then upon you is only the delivery of the
message, and Allah is well-aware of the servants."***

If they refrain and do not accept Islam, there will be no harm on you,
O' Muhammad! You are the Messenger of *Allah* and your duty is only to
convey the Message and to attract their attention to the way of right
and guidance.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verses 21-22
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ
النَّبِيِّينَ بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الِّذِينَ يَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْقِسْطِ مِنَ النَّاسِ فَبَشِّرْهُم بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَـئِكَ الَّذِينَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ
وَمَا لَهُم مِّن نَّاصِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**21. "*****Verily, those who disbelieve in the Signs of Allah and slay
the prophets unjustly and slay those, of people, who enjoin equity, give
tidings to them of a painful chastisement."***

**22.** ***"They are those whose works come to nothing in this world and
in the next, and they will have no helpers."***

***"Verily, those who disbelieve in the Signs of Allah ..."***

These people are the Jews, the people of the Book, the formers of whom
slew both the prophets and their followers, those who were among the
worshippers of the Children of Israel.

The reason why, at the time of the revelation of the Qur'an, *Allah*
gave the Jews the glad tidings of punishment was that they were pleased
and content with the deeds of their ancestors.

Besides that, they tried to slay and were in thought of killing the
Prophet (S) as well as the believers. If there were not the support of
*Allah,* they would accomplish their evil intention.

***"...and slay the prophets unjustly and slay those, of people, who
enjoin equity, give tidings to them of a painful chastisement."***

Here, the meaning of the term 'unjustly' is not that it is possible to
kill prophets justly, but the purpose is that the slaying of prophets
has always been done unjustly and oppressively."

***"They are those whose works come to nothing in this world and in the
next, ... "***

The purpose of the nullification of deeds that the verse says: ***'Their
works come to nothing in this world '*** is that, by following the
Torah, their blood and wealth would not remain safe and, they could not
succeed to be praised in this world.

And also their deeds will come to naught in the next world, since they
will deserve no reward. Therefore, it seems that they have had no good
deeds; and this is the very reality of the Qur’anic term /hubut/,
'unfruitfulness & destruction'.

***"... and they will have no helpers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 23
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ أُوْتُواْ نَصِيبًا مِّنَ الْكِتَابِ
يُدْعَوْنَ إِلَى كِتَابِ اللّهِ لِيَحْكُمَ بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ يَتَوَلَّى
فَرِيقٌ مِّنْهُمْ وَهُم مُّعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**23.** ***"Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of the
Book? They are invited to the book of Allah that it may judge between
them, then a group of them turn back, while they are opponent "***

In the books of both schools of Shi'ite and Sunnite, it is cited that:
it happened that a woman and a man from the Jews committed adultery
while they had spouses.

As the Torah had ordained, they should be pelted with stone, but since
those two were among the notables, they tried to flee from the execution
of the Torah's instruction. So, they came to the Prophet of Islam (S) in
order that he judged.

He (S) also commanded to stoning, and said that the law of Islam in this
regard is similar to that of the Torah. But they denied the Torah's
ordain. Ibn-Suriya, who was one the Jewish scholars, was summoned from
Fadak to Medina in order to recite the Torah concerning the matter.

Since he was aware of the subject, when reciting the verses of the
Torah, he put his hand on the phrases related to the subject of stoning
so that the verse of stoning could not be seen. 'Abdillah-ibn-Salam, who
was among the Jewish scholars at that time, was present in that meeting.
He recognized the situation and made the matter manifest.

### Explanations

1. Heedlessness of the followers of a religion to their own religious
Book, is the beginning of the calamity.

***"Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of the
Book?.."***

2. *Allah's* ordinances should be executed about all individuals for the
same matter with no difference.

***"... They are invited to the Book of Allah that it may judge between
them, then a group of them turn back, while they are opponent"***

3. Mere claim is not an indication of Faith.

4. This meaning is a warning to the Muslims that they should not treat
like the Jews when executing the laws of the Qur'an, and that they would
be careful not to turn away from the commandments of the Lord.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 24
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ قَالُواْ لَن تَمَسَّنَا النَّارُ إِلاَّ أَيَّامًا
مَّعْدُودَاتٍ وَغَرَّهُمْ فِي دِينِهِم مَّا كَانُواْ يَفْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The vain mottoes and wrong imaginations of the Jews have immensely been
mentioned in the Qur'an that they used to say some things with the sense
that: "We are the exalted and beloved nation with Allah, and we will not
be punished except for those forty days that our ancestors worshipped
the calf ". This very sort of imagination caused them their pride and
deviation.

***"This is because they said: The Fire shall not touch us but for a
number of days'. That which they were forging has deceived them in their
religion."***

Even today, the Israelites believe in their racial superiority, and they
refrain from no transgression to gain it.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 25
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ إِذَا جَمَعْنَاهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ لاَّ رَيْبَ فِيهِ وَوُفِّيَتْ
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**25.** ***"Then, how (will it be with them) when We shall gather them
together for the Day (of judgement) about which there is no doubt, when
everyone shall be paid in full what the one has earned, and they shall
not be dealt with unjustly? "***

By rejecting the vain imaginations of the Jews, this verse threatens
them and says that the divine court will be held up based upon justice
and no one will be treated unjustly.

***"Then, how (will it be with them) when We shall gather them together
for the Day (of judgement) about which there is no doubt, when everyone
shall be paid in full what the one has earned, and they shall not be
dealt with unjustly?"***

All people are equal before the Divine Justice, and rewards and
recompenses will be given due to Faith, good deed and piety, not because
of tribal relationships and, or, for a special group.

No action will be eliminated, for every deed will return to its
performer, who is its owner, too.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 26
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُمَّ مَالِكَ الْمُلْكِ تُؤْتِي الْمُلْكَ مَن تَشَاء
وَتَنزِعُ الْمُلْكَ مِمَّن تَشَاء وَتُعِزُّ مَن تَشَاء وَتُذِلُّ مَن
تَشَاء بِيَدِكَ الْخَيْرُ إِنَّكَ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**26.** ***"Say: ' O' Allah! Master of the Kingdom! You shower the
kingdom upon whom You please and take away the kingdom from whom You
please! and You honour whom You please and abase whom You please; all
goodness is in your hand. Verily You are All-Powerful over all
things."***

In some books, such as Majma'-ul-Bayan and Tafsir-ul-Kabir by
Fakhr-Razi, it is recorded that the Prophet of Islam (S), after
conquering Mecca, prophesied for the Muslims to be victorious in the
battles against Iran and Room. At that time some of the hypocrites
looked at each other perhaps mockingly. Then this verse was revealed.

Some other commentators have reported that the revelation of the verse
occurred at the time of digging a ditch, when the Prophet (S) sharply
struck with a pick on a stone and a few sparks appeared.

Then, he (S) said:

*"I received the conquest of the castles of Ctsiphon (an ancient city
near Baghdad) and Yemen from Gabriel in these sparks."*

Hearing this, the hypocrite smiled mockingly and then this verse was
revealed.

It is necessary to mention that whatever from endowment, honour, and
abasement have been referred to in this verse from the side of *Allah,*
are according to the law and way of treatment of *Allah.*

Otherwise, Allah does not give a person honour or does not abase another
one. For example, an Islamic narration says:

*"Whosoever humbles himself for Allah, He will make him honourable; and
whosoever be arrogant, He will despise him."*[^1].

Therefore, both honour and abasement belong to Allah, but paving their
way and preparing their causes depend to us.

This verse refers to the powers and governments which have been brought
into existence because of the competency of persons and attachment of
people. The verse does not mean those oppressive governments and powers
which have come into being by the application of force and terror,
furnished by making collusion with internal and external factors.

### Explanations

1. The real possessor of all governments is Allah. The ownership of
other than Allah is temporary and limited.

2. Allah gives the government to the one who is eligible, as He gave it
to Solomon, Joseph, Talul, and Zul-Qarnayn.

3. Unity in supplication and worship is a necessity. In
Munajat-ush-Sha'baniyyah, from the Immaculate Imams, we recite: "O'
Lord, my immensity and my deficiency are in Your hand (up to Your Will),
not in that of other than you." [^2]

4. Now that He is the Possessor, then others are not any things but
depositaries and should act according to the consent of the Essential
Possessor.

5. What He determines (for giving and taking) are all good, though we
may not know its philosophy and judge hurriedly.

6. Honour and abasement is up to the Lord, therefore, do not expect
honour from others.  
 The Qur'an has criticized severely those who seek for honour from other
than *Allah and* says:

***"...Do they seek honour from them?.."*** [^3]

7. When the mortals are not really the landlords of their properties,
why are they proud of having them in their possession or become despair
for losing them?

***"Say: 'O' Allah! Master of the Kingdom! You shower the kingdom upon
whom You please and take away the kingdom from whom You please!***

***and You honour whom You please and abase whom You please;***

***all goodness is in your hand. Verily You are All-Powerful over all
things."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 27
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُولِجُ اللَّيْلَ فِي الْنَّهَارِ وَتُولِجُ النَّهَارَ فِي اللَّيْلِ
وَتُخْرِجُ الْحَيَّ مِنَ الْمَيِّتِ وَتُخْرِجُ الَمَيَّتَ مِنَ
الْحَيِّ وَتَرْزُقُ مَن تَشَاء بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27.** ***"You cause the night to pass into the day and You cause the
day to pass into the night, and You bring forth the living from the dead
and You bring forth the dead from the living, and You provide with
sustenance for whom You will without measure."***

In this verse and the previous one the Power of *Allah* is mentioned for
twelve times to evoke the spirit of theism in man. At first, the verse
speaks about the decrease and increase of the length of the night and
the day in different seasons. (It may, of course, refer to the
graduality of sunset and sunrise, too, but the first meaning is
clearer).

Then, the verse points to the Power of the Providence, the Omnipotent,
about bringing forth the living from the dead and vice versa. The
example of this meaning is seen in the creation of living cells from
lifeless foodstuff and making dead from the living creatures.

In another point of view, it is recognized that He causes the pious
believing children to come into being from deadly-hearted unbelievers;
and He brings the disbelieving deadly-hearted children into existence
from the pious believing ones.

### Explanation

1. Besides creation, any modification and arrangement is due to His
Wisdom.

***"You cause the night to pass into the day and You cause the day to
pass into the night."*** [^4]

2. The 'Power of *Allah* is not finite. He, the Almighty, brings the
living out of the dead, and makes dead from the living.

***"... and You bring forth the living from the dead and You bring forth
the dead from the living...."***

3. The sustenance of all beings depends on His Will, the All-Wise.

***"… and You provide sustenance for whom You will without measure,"***

4. The changes of the night and the day and, consequently, the
appearance of seasons together with the arrangement in atmospheric
conditions are among the blessings and favours of Allah.

5. The purpose of ***'sustenance without measure'*** is 'bountiful
sustenance' and, therefore, it does not mean that its account is out of
His control.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 28
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ يَتَّخِذِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الْكَافِرِينَ أَوْلِيَاء مِن دُوْنِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَمَن يَفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ فَلَيْسَ مِنَ اللّهِ فِي شَيْءٍ
إِلاَّ أَن تَتَّقُواْ مِنْهُمْ تُقَاةً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللّهُ نَفْسَهُ
وَإِلَى اللّهِ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**28.** ***"The believers should not take the infidels as their friends,
rather than the believers, and whoever does that then nothing of Allah
is his, except when you guard yourselves against them, guarding
carefully; and Allah warns you to be cautious of ( disobeying) Him; and
toward Allah is the destination."***

In this holy verse, the feature of the foreign policy, encountering with
the unbelievers and that assuming the master ship of disbelievers is on
a par with losing the master ship of *Allah,* the necessary conditions
of concealing of faith /taqiyyah/ and prevention of abusing it, have
been stated.

### Explanations

1. It is prohibited that the believers assume the master ship of
disbelievers.

***"The believers should not take the infidels as their friends, rather
than the believers..."***

If the Muslims of the world had acted according to only this principle,
the status of the Islamic countries would not be in such a condition
that it is now.

2. Not only the acceptance of the master ship of disbelievers, but also
being content with infidelity and approving it, is unlawful for the
believers.

***"... and whoever does that then nothing of Allah is his..."***

3. The apparent connexion with disbelievers for reaching some higher
aims, in some circumstances, is permissible.

4. Political relationship should not result in accepting domination of,
or heartily connexion with, the infidels.

***"... except when you guard yourselves against them, guarding
carefully..."***

5. Concealing of Faith is only for the sake of protection of religion.
Beware not to be attracted by the infidels under the pretext of
concealment of Faith, and not to misuse this concept!

***"... Allah warns you to be cautious of (disobeying) Him..."***

6. In circumstances that the basis of religion is in danger, everything
must be devoted, and everybody should only be in awe of *Allah.*

***"... and to Allah is the destination."***

7. Connection or disconnection ought to be performed on the basis of
contemplation and belief, not upon the basis of racial, tribal and
family affections, or economical concerns, and so on.

8. In place of infidels, Muslims must make friends and communicate with
each other among themselves.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 29
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن تُخْفُواْ مَا فِي صُدُورِكُمْ أَوْ تُبْدُوهُ يَعْلَمْهُ
اللّهُ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأرْضِ وَاللّهُ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**29.** ***"Say: ' Whether you hide what is in your hearts, or manifest
it, Allah knows it, and (also) He knows whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is in the earth, and Allah is All-Powerful over all things
'."***

Next to the verse of concealment of Faith, the above mentioned holy
verse, maybe, refers to the idea that Muslims should never communicate
with disbelievers under the shelter of concealment of Faith, where the
Lord knows all decisions and intentions.

### Explanation

1. This verse is a warning to those who try to communicate with the
disbelievers under the excuse of concealment of Faith.

***"Say: ' Whether you hide what is in your hearts, or manifest it,
Allah knows it..."***

2. Allah is aware of whatever deed we do.

3. The Lord is aware even of our intentions.

4. Allah's knowledge encompasses the things hidden and the things
manifest similarly. He knows whatever is in the earth and whatever is in
the heavens.

***"... and (also) He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is
in the earth..."***

5. Allah is both knower of thoughts of human beings and is All-Powerful
over all things. That is, in a moment, He is able to make infamous all
those who do evil.

***"... and Allah is All-Powerful over all things"***

6. What can be concealed from the One Who is Omnipotent and knows all
the secrets of heavens?

***"...He knows whatever is in the heavens ..."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 30
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوَءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللّهُ نَفْسَهُ وَاللّهُ رَؤُوفُ بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**30.** ***" On the Day (of Judgement) when everyone shall find present
what he has done of good; but (as for) what he has done of evil, he will
wish there were a far distance between it and himself; and Allah warns
you to be cautious of ( disobeying) His Essence and Allah is full of
pity to the servants."***

This verse is similar to verse No.49 from Surah Al-Kahf, No.18, which
says:

***"... what they had done they shall find present (in the
Hereafter)..."***

It is cited in Al-Burhan, the , that every Friday when Imam Sajjad, the
fourth Imam (as), wanted to preach for people in Masjid-un-Nabi (S) he
recited this verse.

### Explanations

1. In the Hereafter, our today deeds will be incarnated in front of us.

***"On the Day (of Judgement) when everyone shall find present what he
has done of good..."***

2. On the Day of Judgement, the evildoers will be ashamed of their own
deeds that they have done in this world.

3. The warning of Allah is a sign of His kindness towards His servants
in order that they do not commit sins.

4. Many of those actions that people like to do in this fleeting world
will be hatred through them in the Hereafter.

***"... but (as for) what he has done of evil, he will wish there were a
far distance between it and himself..."***

5. On that Day, regret will be of no avail and wishes will not be
doable.

6. The origin of warnings is also His love and His kindness.

***"... and Allah warns you to be cautious of (disobeying) His Essence
..."***

7. The Lord loves all people.

***"... and Allah is Full of Pity to the servants."***

8. The Pity of Allah towards people is direct.

***"... and Allah is Full of Pity to the servants."***

[^1]: Bihar-al-Anwar. vol. 101, p. 109.

[^2]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 94, p. 97.

[^3]: Surah An-Nisa', No.4, Verse 139.

[^4]: Some more details upon night and day are mentions on pp. 39-40 in
the previous Volume of the current commentary.


