Section 9: Muslims raised for the welfare of mankind
====================================================

Muslims, as a whole, were raised for the welfare of human beings. They
might not afraid of the Jews. The strength of the Jews shall be a
failure. Muslims should not take the Jews as friends.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 110
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُنتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنَّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ وَلَوْ آمَنَ
أَهْلُ الْكِتَابِ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَّهُم مِّنْهُمُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
وَأَكْثَرُهُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**110.** ***"You are the best nations brought forth for (the benefit of)
mankind. You enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in
Allah; and if the People of the Book had believed, it would surely have
been better for them. Some of them are believers while most of them are
transgressors."***

### Again, an Invitation to Truth

In this holy verse, again it has returned to the proposition of
'enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong' and also 'belief in
Allah' when it says:

***"You are the best nations brought forth for (the benefit of) mankind.
You enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in
Allah..."***

It is interesting that the reason of being the best nations for Muslims
is stated the fulfilment of 'enjoining the right and forbidding the
wrong' and' belief in Allah'. This shows that the improvement of human
society, without belief in *Allah* and not being accompanied with
invitation to the Truth and struggling against corruption, is
impossible.

Besides that, the accomplishment of these two obligatory duties
guarantees the spread of belief and the execution of all personal and
social rules, while the surety of execution is verbally prior to the law
itself.

Then it points out that the benefits of a religion which is so clear and
the ordinances which are so magnificent are deniable for none.
Therefore, if the People of the Book (the Jews and the Christians) do
believe, it is of their own gain.

But, unfortunately, only a minority of them have recalcitrated the
foolish bigotries and have embraced Islam eagerly, when the majority of
the People of the Book have disobeyed the command of *Allah.*

***"... and if the People of the Book had believed, it would surely have
been better for them. Some of them are believers while most of them are
transgressors."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 111
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَن يَضُرُّوكُمْ إِلاَّ أَذًى وَإِن يُقَاتِلُوكُمْ يُوَلُّوكُمُ
الأَدُبَارَ ثُمَّ لاَ يُنصَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**111.** ***"They shall never harm you except for annoyance; and if they
fight with you, they shall turn their back to you, then they shall not
be helped."***

This verse is both a prediction and a glad tidings and consolation for
the Muslims. It tells them that under the shade of belief, union, and
enjoining the right, they are insured. Therefore, they would not be
afraid of the threats of the enemy, because the enemy is insignificant
and the victory is of the Muslims'.

### Explanations

1. The school of Islam and the Muslims themselves are insured in the
shade of Faith.

***"They shall never harm you ..."***

2. The opponents of Muslims may attain only a small part of their
molesting projects.

***"... except for annoyance ..."***

3. He who is faithless, is in lack of the spirit of perseverance.

***"... and if they fight with you, they shall turn their back to you,
then they shall not be helped."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 112
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُواْ إِلاَّ بِحَبْلٍ
مِّنْ اللّهِ وَحَبْلٍ مِّنَ النَّاسِ وَبَآؤُوا بِغَضَبٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ
وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَسْكَنَةُ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُواْ
يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الأَنبِيَاء بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ
ذَلِكَ بِمَا عَصَوا وَّكَانُواْ يَعْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**112.** ***"Abasement has been branded on them, wherever they are
found, unless (they cling to) the cord of Allah and the cord of men; so,
they have incurred wrath from Allah; and wretchedness has been stumped
upon them. That is because they went on rejecting Allah's Signs and
slaying the prophets unjustly. That was because they disobeyed, and went
on transgressing."***

The result of disbelief and slaying prophets is being encountered with
abasement and wretchedness in this world and the wrath of *Allah* in the
coming world. Sin and transgression is a preparation for greater sins,
like infidelity and slaying the prophets.

***"... That was because they disobeyed, and went on transgressing."***

It is worthy to note that what is worse than transgression and disbelief
is the continuation and persistence of the act of disbelief and
transgression.

***"... so, they have incurred wrath from Allah; and wretchedness has
been stumped upon them."***

The Jews are always abased, although sometimes they take the cord of
propagation, economics and policy, yet they are in the lowest position
from the point of honesty, honour, amiability and security. The example
of them is like the cruel persons who are armed and create alarm and
terror in order to obtain masses of wealth, but they can never attain a
high honourable rank. .

***"Abasement has been branded on them, wherever they are found ..."***

### Explanations

1. The secret of honour is two things: The inwardly Faith in the Power
of *Allah,* and outwardly communication with communities and nations.

***"... unless (they cling to) the cord of Allah and the cord of
men..."***

So, each of them singly is imperfect. When there is Faith but
accompanied with isolation and retreat with people, we can do nothing.
And, when we are in contact with all people, but there is not Faith from
inside, we are helpless, too.

2. Maybe, the repetition of the word ***'**cord'* is the key to the fact
that these two cords are not alike.

3. Islamic literatures denote that the Jews did not mostly slay the
prophets with swords themselves, but they reported the prophets'
mysteries and information to the enemies and, as a result of it, the
cruel forces could capture the prophets and slay them.

***"... That is because- they went on rejecting Allah's Signs and
slaying the prophets unjustly..."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 113
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسُواْ سَوَاء مِّنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ أُمَّةٌ قَآئِمَةٌ يَتْلُونَ
آيَاتِ اللّهِ آنَاء اللَّيْلِ وَهُمْ يَسْجُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**113*****. "Yet, they are not all alike: of the People of the Book is a
group upright (in faith). They recite the verses of Allah in the night
time while they prostrate themselves (in adoration)."***

### The Truth-seeking Soul in Islam

Following to the scorns and hard blames that the former verses had
against the Jews, in this verse, to observe the justice and respecting
the rights of eligible persons, and that all of them cannot be
considered alike, it says:

***"Yet, they are not all alike: of the People of the Book is a group
upright (in faith)..."***

Another quality that they have, is that they usually recite the
revelations of *Allah* during the night. It says:

***"... They recite the verses of Allah in the night time... "***

And, at the conclusion of the verse, it refers to their humbleness,
where it says:

***"... while they prostrate themselves (in adoration)."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 114
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ وَيَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ
وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَيُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْخَيْرَاتِ
وَأُوْلَـئِكَ مِنَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114.** ***"They believe in Allah and the last Day; and they enjoin
what is right and forbid the wrong, and hasten to do good deeds, and
these are of the righteous ones."***

In this verse, it adds that: some of the People of the Book, besides
recitation of the verses of *Allah* and prostration, believe in *Allah*
and in the Resurrection Day. It says:

***"They believe in Allah and the Last Day..."***

They furnish the proposition of enjoining the right and forbidding the
wrong as their duty-

***"…and they enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong..."***

Another quality of them is that, in doing good, they take precedence of
each other. It says:

***"…and hasten to do good deeds..."***

And, finally, they are such that it says:

***"…and these are of the righteous ones."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 115
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَفْعَلُواْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَلَن يُكْفَرُوْهُ وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ
بِالْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115.** ***"And whatever good they do, they will never be denied the
reward of it; and Allah knows the pious ones."***

In the insight of *Allah,* nothing will ever be wasted. It says:

***"And whatever good they do, they will never be denied the reward of
it…"***

In the Qur'an we recite***:***

***"…Allah only accepts from those who are pious."***[^1]

That is, the condition of the acceptance of deeds is Faith and piety. In
this regard, here the verse denotes and *Allah* says that We ourselves
know who the pious ones, whose deeds should be accepted, are:

***"…and Allah knows the pious ones."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 116
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ لَن تُغْنِيَ عَنْهُمْ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَلاَ
أَوْلاَدُهُم مِّنَ اللّهِ شَيْئًا وَأُوْلَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ
هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**116.** ***"(As for) those who disbelieve, surely neither their
possession nor their children shall avail them in the least against
Allah, and they are the inhabitants of the Five; wherein shall they
abide forever."***

The Qur'an has repeatedly announced that for the disbelievers neither
wealth, nor progeny, nor family members, nor spouse, nor apology, nor
friends, nor master, nor any thing else is of the slightest effectuality
for the wrath of *Allah (s.w.t.).*

***"(As for) those who disbelieve, surely neither their possession nor
their children shall avail them in the least against Allah, and they are
the inhabitants of the Five; wherein shall they abide forever."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 117
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَثَلُ مَا يُنفِقُونَ فِي هِـذِهِ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا كَمَثَلِ رِيحٍ
فِيهَا صِرٌّ أَصَابَتْ حَرْثَ قَوْمٍ ظَلَمُواْ أَنفُسَهُمْ
فَأَهْلَكَتْهُ وَمَا ظَلَمَهُمُ اللّهُ وَلَـكِنْ أَنفُسَهُمْ
يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**117.** ***" The likeness of what they (disbelievers) spend in this
life of the world is as the likeness of a wind wherein is intense cold
which strikes the tilth of a people, who have wronged themselves, and
destroys it. Allah has not been unjust to them, but they are unjust to
themselves."***

The Arabic term /sirr/ has been applied in the sense of: ***'excessive
cold that scorches plants'.*** The attractive point in this verse is
that in view of *Allah* mere opinion and stimulus are not effective in
affairs.

That is why the verse indicates that you may not be worried about the
money the disbelievers spend in a false way, because the fruit of it is
like a tilth that can easily be abolished by a cold wind.

***"The likeness of what they (disbelievers) spend in this life of the
world is as the likeness of a wind wherein is intense cold which strikes
the tilth of a people, who have wronged themselves, and destroys
it..."***

From the beginning of Islam up to now, there have been many plots,
accusations, invasions, wars, and evil propagations done against Islam
and Muslims, but every day the religion of *Allah* have developed more
than before.

When a nation faces with the wrath of *Allah,* it is not an injustice
from the side of *Allah,* but it is a reflection of their own deeds that
they themselves have performed.

***"... Allah has not been unjust to them, but they are unjust to
themselves."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 118
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَتَّخِذُواْ بِطَانَةً مِّن
دُونِكُمْ لاَ يَأْلُونَكُمْ خَبَالاً وَدُّواْ مَا عَنِتُّمْ قَدْ
بَدَتِ الْبَغْضَاء مِنْ أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَمَا تُخْفِي صُدُورُهُمْ
أَكْبَرُ قَدْ بَيَّنَّا لَكُمُ الآيَاتِ إِن كُنتُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**118.** ***"O' you who have Faith! Do not take intimate other than
yourselves. They do not fall short in corrupting you. They like what
distresses you. Hatred has already appeared from (the utterance of)
their mouths while what their breasts conceal is greater. We have made
the Signs clear for you if you ponder."***

Following to the verses stated the kind of relations the Muslims may
have with the disbelievers, this verse points at one of the most
sensitive subjects, and, in the form of a delicate resemblance, it warns
the believers. It says:

***"O' you who have Faith! Do not take intimate other than yourselves.
They do not fall short in corrupting you..."***

It is never such that their experience of friendship with you hinders
them to desire pain and loss for you because of difference in religion
and creed. In the contrary, they are interested in your distress and
suffering.

***"... They like what distresses you..."***

They are usually careful of their statements and behaviour in order that
you do not be cognizant of their interior mysteries and that their
secrets would not be uncovered. They speak carefully and cautiously, yet
the signs of enmity are manifest from among their speech.

***"... Hatred has already appeared from (the utterance of) their
mouth..."***

In short, by this means, *Allah* has shown the way of recognition of the
inward state of the enemies; and informs us from their hidden minds and
their interior mysteries. It says:

***"... while what their breasts conceal is greater..."***

Then, it adds:

***"... We have made the Signs dear for you if you ponder."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 119
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَاأَنتُمْ أُوْلاء تُحِبُّونَهُمْ وَلاَ يُحِبُّونَكُمْ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ
بِالْكِتَابِ كُلِّهِ وَإِذَا لَقُوكُمْ قَالُواْ آمَنَّا وَإِذَا
خَلَوْاْ عَضُّواْ عَلَيْكُمُ الأَنَامِلَ مِنَ الْغَيْظِ قُلْ مُوتُواْ
بِغَيْظِكُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**119.** ***"Here you are, loving them while they do not love you!
Though you believe in all Books and when they meet you, they say: 'We
believe', but when they are alone, they bite the ends of their fingers
in rage against you. Say: 'Die in your rage!' Surely Allah is aware of
what is in the breasts."***

In this verse it addresses the Muslims and says that you love them
because of relationship or neighbourliness, or for other reasons,
neglecting the fact that they do not like you. It is in the case that
you believe in all the Books that have been sent down by *Allah*
(irrespective of your own Book and the heavenly Book of theirs), but
they do not believe in the revealed Book you have.

***"Here you are, loving them while they do not love you! Though you
believe in all Books..."***

Then, the Qur'an introduces the real feature of this group of the People
of the Book, who are hypocrites, when it says:

***"... and when they meet you, they say: ' We believe', but when they
are alone, they bite the ends of their fingers in rage against
you..."***

It says to the Prophet to tell them that they would die with the rage
that they have and this grief will be with them until the day of their
death-

***"…Say: 'Die in your rage!'..."***

You were not aware of their condition, but *Allah* is, because:

***"... Surely Allah is aware of what is in the breasts."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 120
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تَمْسَسْكُمْ حَسَنَةٌ تَسُؤْهُمْ وَإِن تُصِبْكُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ
يَفْرَحُواْ بِهَا وَإِن تَصْبِرُواْ وَتَتَّقُواْ لاَ يَضُرُّكُمْ
كَيْدُهُمْ شَيْئًا إِنَّ اللّهَ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**120.** ***"If any good befalls you, it grieves them; and if an evil
afflicts you, they delight in it; but if you are patient and be pious,
their plotting will not harm you in any way; surely Allah encompasses
what they do."***

In this verse one of the signs of their grudge and enmity is stated. It
indicates that if a victory or a happy incident comes forth for you,
those groups of the People of the Book will become inconvenient, but if
an evil incident happens against you, they will become happy,

***"If any good befalls you, it grieves them; and if an evil afflicts
you, they delight in it;.."***

But if you persevere against their hostilities and, in the meantime, you
observe piety and patience, they cannot harm you by their treacherous
plans, because *Allah* quitely encompasses whatever they do.

***"…but if you are patient and be pious, their plotting will not harm
you in any way; surely Allah encompasses what they do."***

[^1]: Surah Al-Maidah, no 5, verse 27


