Section 10
==========

The Battle of 'Uhud, The readiness of some and cowardice of others – The
Muslims should only trust in Allah - The divine assistance at Badr - The
assistance through angels – Allah's pardon.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 121
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ غَدَوْتَ مِنْ أَهْلِكَ تُبَوِّئُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مَقَاعِدَ
لِلْقِتَالِ وَاللّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**121.** ***"And (remember) when you did set forth from your house folk
at daybreak to lodge the believers in encampments for the battle (of
'Uhud), and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing."***

From this verse on, the revelations are about an expansive important
Islamic happening known as the Battle of 'Uhud. At the beginning, the
verse has referred to the Prophet (S) and that he came out of Medina to
lodge the forces at the side of 'Uhud mount. It says:

***"And (remember) when you did set forth from your house folk at
daybreak to lodge the believers in encampments for the battle (of
'Uhud), and Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing."***

### Explanations

1. The Prophet himself (S) posted the believers at their stations for
battle. Thus, it shows that not every ordinary person can decide on the
site of the battle and defensive regions.

***"... to lodge the believers in encampments for the battle (of 'Uhud)
..."***

2. Technical, geographical, and natural planning of military operations
should be performed before initiating the concerning program and in a
quiet and calm circumstance.

***"... when you did set forth from your house folk at daybreak ..."***

3. Early morning is the best time for estimating the necessary battle
conditions.  
 4. At the threshold of fighting, we must detach our hearts from our own
house folk.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 122
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ هَمَّت طَّآئِفَتَانِ مِنكُمْ أَن تَفْشَلاَ وَاللّهُ وَلِيُّهُمَا
وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**122.** ***"When two parties of you had decided to flinch but Allah was
the protector of them both (and helped them to change their thought);
So, in Allah (alone) should the believers trust."***

Two groups of Muslims by the names of' Banu Salmah ' From 'Uss Tribe and
'Banu Harithah' from Khazraj tribe decided to shirk to participate in
fight. There are different reasons mentioned for the inactivity of these
two groups. Some of them are as follows.

1. Their own fear, when they saw that the number of enemy was large.

2. They were inconvenient for that their attitude was not attended to
and the troops did not shelter in the city in spite of the side of 'Uhud
mount.

3. Why did the Prophet (S) not let the confederate Jews help them? And
so on.

But, by His Mercy, the Lord protected those two groups from falling in
the trap of the sin of return and escape from the battlefield and He
kept them safe in His Master ship.

### Explanations

1. Those who are not under the master ship of *Allah* are inactive.

2. *Allah* does not leave the believers to themselves. He assists them
in sensitive moments.

3. *Allah* is aware of our intentions and He informs His Prophet of the
thoughts of people.

4. All those who go to fight, are not the same.

5. The only remedy of weakness is trust in *Allah.* This effective
remedy is in the hands of the believers.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 123
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَصَرَكُمُ اللّهُ بِبَدْرٍ وَأَنتُمْ أَذِلَّةٌ فَاتَّقُواْ
اللّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**123.** ***"And certainly Allah did assist you at Badr when you were
contemptibly scanty; so be in awe of Allah, in order that you might be
thankful."***

These verses are the revelations which were sent down in a critical
state for the strengthening on the defeated spirits of Muslims. At
first, the notable triumph of Muslims in the Battle of Badr is pointed
out, so that, by its remembrance, they become assured about their
future. Therefore, it says:

***"And certainly Allah did assist you at Badr when you were
contemptibly scanty..."***

The numbers of your members were 313 with a little preparation, while
the number of the disbelievers was more than one thousand, with many
equipments.

Now that the situation is like this, be in awe of *Allah,* and avoid
repeating disobedience from the command of your leader, viz, the Prophet
of Islam (S), in order to be thankful for His numerous blessings.

***"... so be in awe of Allah, in order that you might be thankful."***

### Explanations

1. Do not forget the unseen helps, especially in the battlefield.

2. The gratitude of the unseen helps is that you do not misuse them, be
not proud of them, and be careful of your duty to *Allah.*

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 124
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ تَقُولُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَلَن يَكْفِيكُمْ أَن يُمِدَّكُمْ
رَبُّكُم بِثَلاَثَةِ آلاَفٍ مِّنَ الْمَلآئِكَةِ مُنزَلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***124. "When you said to the believers: 'Will it never suffice you that
your Lord should reinforce you with three thousand of angels sent down?'
"***

1. By the leave of *Allah,* angels may be at the service of the
believers.

2. It is necessary for a fighting believer to be hopeful in the Grace of
*Allah.*

3. One of the duties of the leader in an Islamic society is to make
people hopeful and regardful to the unseen helps.

***"When you said to the believers: 'Will it never suffice you that your
Lord should reinforce you with three thousand of angels sent down?' "***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 125
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلَى إِن تَصْبِرُواْ وَتَتَّقُواْ وَيَأْتُوكُم مِّن فَوْرِهِمْ هَـذَا
يُمْدِدْكُمْ رَبُّكُم بِخَمْسَةِ آلافٍ مِّنَ الْمَلآئِكَةِ
مُسَوِّمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**125.** ***"Yes! If you be patiently steadfast and act aright even if
they (the enemy) rush on you in such a headlong manner, your Lord will
reinforce you with five thousand of angels distinguished."***

In the previous verse, the speech was upon three thousand assisting
angels, and in this verse, it speaks about five thousand angels. This
may be for the sake of military conditions, and the necessities, or
because of the spiritual circumstances and piety of the fighting
believers.

### Explanations

1. Perseverance and piety are the causes of the descent of the angels
and the unseen helps.

***"Yes, if you be patiently steadfast and act aright ..."***

2. The Laws of *Allah* do not change with the change of time and people.

***"... your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand of angels
distinguished."***

3. To be steadfast in affairs is worthy when it is accompanied with
piety; otherwise it is stubbornness and obstinacy.

4. Do not neglect the enemy because their attack is urgent and roaring.

***"... even if they (the enemy) rush on you in such a headlong
manner..."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 126
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلَهُ اللّهُ إِلاَّ بُشْرَى لَكُمْ وَلِتَطْمَئِنَّ قُلُوبُكُم
بِهِ وَمَا النَّصْرُ إِلاَّ مِنْ عِندِ اللّهِ الْعَزِيزِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**126.** ***"And Allah did not make it (the descending of angels) but as
good tidings for you, and to reassure your hearts thereby; and there is
no victory save from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise."***

1. In battlefield, peacefulness and good news are of the necessities of
the fighting believers.

***"And Allah did not make it (the descend of angels) but as good
tidings for you, and to reassure your hearts thereby..."***

2. The entire preparations of men including material, scientifical,
psychological, and invisible affairs, without the Will of *Allah
(s.w.t.),* are ineffective.

***"... and there is no victory, save from Allah, the Mighty, the
Wise."***

3. Glory and Power of *Allah* are accompanied with His Wisdom. (It is
possible, of course, that under some particular reasons Muslims also be
defeated in some instances. Yes, the helps of Allah depend on His
Wisdom.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 127
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَقْطَعَ طَرَفًا مِّنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَوْ يَكْبِتَهُمْ
فَيَنقَلِبُواْ خَآئِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**127.** ***"(The Divine help was for this) that He might cut off a part
of the disbelievers or abase them so that they turn back
disappointedly."***

As At- Tahqiq says, the Arabic word /taraf/ means the end of something
(not a corner of it). Thus, the verse says that the unseen helps come
forth to eradicate the disbelievers.

In the lexicon and books, it is cited that there are two kinds of
despair. If a person is hopeless from the beginning, in Arabic, the
state is called /ya's/. But, if the person becomes disappointed after
that he has been hopeful, the state, in Arabic, is called /xa'ib/*.*

### Explanations

1. Infidelity and infidels should either be cut off or be abased and
desperate.  
 (Be not happy with the weak, seasonal, partial, and humble acts that do
not hurt the root of infidelity).

***"(The Divine help was for this) that He might cut off a part of the
disbelievers or abase them..."***

2. Your union, power, policy and administrator ship must be in a form
that at any moment the enemy be drawn to disappointment.

***"... so that they turn back disappointedly."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 128
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ لَكَ مِنَ الأَمْرِ شَيْءٌ أَوْ يَتُوبَ عَلَيْهِمْ أَوْ
يُعَذَّبَهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ ظَالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**128.** ***"The affair is no concern at all of yours whether He turns
towards them (mercifully) or punishes them, for verily, they are
unjust."***

When the leader is completely truthful, he behaves like that. He even
faithfully and bravely recites the revelations that relieve him of a
responsibility. The Lord said:

***"The affair is no concern at all of yours..."***

We study in the books of both great sects of Islam that when the tooth
of the Prophet (S) was broken and it bled in the Battle of 'Uhud, he (S)
said:

*"How could these people be prosperous?"*

The verse was revealed that he was not responsible of people's
prosperity. They would be forgiven later that time, or they might be
left to themselves and be punished.

***"... whether He turns towards them (mercifully) or punishes them, for
verily, they are unjust."***

### Explanations

1. The way of repentance is not shut to even those who run away from the
godly battlefields, as well as to the disbelievers who have injured the
Muslims with the greatest damages.

2. Do not judge promptly.

3. Both forgiveness and punishment depend on *Allah.* (The merit of
intercession is a gift that Allah has endowed upon the Saints. Of
course, it cannot be performed without the leave of *Allah;* and never
have prophets any independence from their own before *Allah.* )

4. The chastisement of human beings is the fruit of their own injustice
and transgression.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 129
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ يَغْفِرُ لِمَن
يَشَاء وَيُعَذِّبُ مَن يَشَاء وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**129.** ***"And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is in the earth, He will forgive whom He wills, and will punish
whom He wills; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***

This verse, is an emphasis on the meaning of the previous verse, saying
that the punishments and torments are up to *Allah,* because the
creation and sovereignty of all existence is in His control.

***"And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in
the earth..."***

It is interesting that the persons who are involved with the wrath of
*Allah* or those who receive the mercy of *Allah* are not defined in the
verse. This case may be for the sake that everybody remains between fear
and hope, and neither pride nor despair falls upon them.

***"…He will forgive whom He wills, and will punish whom He wills..."***

It is clear, of course, that forgiveness and punishment depend on both
the Wisdom of *Allah* and the bases that the person produces in oneself
and in the society.

***"……and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful."***


