Section 13: Delinquency and Dread with some Muslims in the Battle of 'Uhud
==========================================================================

Dread and delinquency on the part some Muslims the causes of the
misfortunes in the Battle of 'Uhud -after the promised victory' -the
delinquents murmuring

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 149
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوَاْ إِن تُطِيعُواْ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ
يَرُدُّوكُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَابِكُمْ فَتَنقَلِبُواْ خَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**149.** ***"O' you who have Faith! If you obey those who disbelieve,
they will turn you back to your (faithless) ancestors, so you will turn
back losers."***

### The Repeated Warnings!

After the end of the Battle of 'Uhud the enemies of Islam, in the form
of advice and sympathy, scattered the seed of discord among the Muslims,
and made them distrustful unto Islam.

This verse warns the Muslims and awares them that they must avoid
following the enemies, because, after paving the honourable spiritual
development along the path of Islam, they may bring Muslims back to
corruption and disbelief.

***"O' you who have Faith! if you obey those who disbelieve, they will
turn you back to your (faithless) ancestors, so you will turn back
losers."***

What damage is worse than this that a believer changes Islam with
infidelity, prosperity with wickedness, and reality with falsehood.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 150
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ اللّهُ مَوْلاَكُمْ وَهُوَ خَيْرُ النَّاصِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**150.** ***"Nay! Allah is your Guardian and He is the best of the
helpers."***

In this verse, the Qur'an emphasizes that *Allah* is the helper Who will
never be defeated. No power can match His Power. But other helpers may
be involved with failure and be destroyed.

***"Nay! Allah is your Guardian and He is the best of the helpers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 151
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَنُلْقِي فِي قُلُوبِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ الرُّعْبَ بِمَا أَشْرَكُواْ
بِاللّهِ مَا لَمْ يُنَزِّلْ بِهِ سُلْطَانًا وَمَأْوَاهُمُ النَّارُ
وَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**151.** ***"We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who
disbelieve, for that they have associated with Allah for which He has
sent down no authority, and their abode in the Fire; and how bad is the
abode of the unjust!"***

In this verse, it points to the marvellous security of Muslims after the
Battle of 'Uhud. It says:

***"We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve..."***

That is, We do the same as you saw the example of it at the end of the
Battle of 'Uhud. In the second sentence of the verse, the reason of
casting fear into the hearts of the disbelievers is stated such:

***"….for that they have associated with Allah for which He has sent
down no authority,.."***

Finally, at the end of the verse, it has pointed out to the end of these
people. It indicates that such people have done injustice to themselves
and to their society; that is why:

***"…. and their abode is the Fire;***

***and how bad is the abode of the unjust! "***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 152
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ صَدَقَكُمُ اللّهُ وَعْدَهُ إِذْ تَحُسُّونَهُم بِإِذْنِهِ
حَتَّى إِذَا فَشِلْتُمْ وَتَنَازَعْتُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ وَعَصَيْتُم مِّن
بَعْدِ مَا أَرَاكُم مَّا تُحِبُّونَ مِنكُم مَّن يُرِيدُ الدُّنْيَا
وَمِنكُم مَّن يُرِيدُ الآخِرَةَ ثُمَّ صَرَفَكُمْ عَنْهُمْ
لِيَبْتَلِيَكُمْ وَلَقَدْ عَفَا عَنكُمْ وَاللّهُ ذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**152.** ***"And indeed Allah fulfilled His promise to you (in the first
stage) when, with His leave, you slew them until when you became
weak-hearted and disputed about the matter, and you disobeyed after that
He showed you that which you loved. Some of you desire the world and
some of you desire the Hereafter. Then He turned you away from them (the
disbelievers) so He might try you. And He has certainly forgiven you;
and Allah is gracious to the believers."***

### A Failure after Triumph

In the explanation of the Battle of 'Uhud, it was said that at the
beginning of the war, Muslims fought unitedly and with a special bravery
so that they won the battle.

But disobedience of a group of the strivers, who left their
entrenchments and went to gather spoils of war, caused the circumstances
to be changed and the troops of Islam bore a great failure.

When Muslim strivers, who had suffered to give many slain and a heavy
loss, were returning to Medina, they were murmuring questions with each
other as that: 'Had *Allah* not promised us the victory of the war?
Then, why we were defeated in this war?

So, in these verses, the Qur'an, answering them, explains the factors of
their failure. This verse indicates that the promise of *Allah* about
their triumph was completely right.

Therefore, at the beginning of fight they won the battle; and, by the
command of *Allah,* they killed the enemies. The Qur'an tells them that
this promise went on until the time they had not left the perseverance
and following the command of the Prophet (S)*.* The failure began from
the time weakness and disobedience came upon them.

***"And indeed Allah fulfilled His promise to you (in the first stage)
when, with His leave, you slew them until when you became weak-hearted
and disputed about the matter ..."***

That is, if you considered that the promise of victory had been without
any condition, you made a great mistake. All the promises of victory are
conditioned to the obedience from the command of *Allah.*

Then, the Qur'an says:

***"... and you disobeyed after that He showed you that which you
loved..."***

Then, it continues saying:

***"... Some of you desire the world and some of you desire the
Hereafter..."***

Here, the circumstances have changed and *Allah* has altered your
victory to failure in order to try you and punish you and train you.

***"... then He turned you away from them (the disbelievers) so that He
might try you..."***

Then the Lord forgave you all these disobediences and sins of yours,
while you deserved to be punished. This is because *Allah* does not
withhold any bounty to the believers.

***"... And He has certainly forgiven you; and Allah is gracious to the
believers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 153
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ تُصْعِدُونَ وَلاَ تَلْوُونَ عَلَى أحَدٍ وَالرَّسُولُ يَدْعُوكُمْ
فِي أُخْرَاكُمْ فَأَثَابَكُمْ غُمَّاً بِغَمٍّ لِّكَيْلاَ تَحْزَنُواْ
عَلَى مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَلاَ مَا أَصَابَكُمْ وَاللّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**153.** ***" (Remember) when you were climbing (the hillside) and paid
no heed to anyone, while the Messenger was calling you from your rear,
so He inflicted you with grief on grief that you might not be sorry for
what escaped you and neither for what befell you; and Allah iv well
aware of what you do."***

In this verse the Qur'an reminds Muslims the ending scene of the Battle
of 'Uhud and tells them to remember when they were scattered and they
were running away without paying any attention to their fellow strivers
at their backs to see in what condition they were, though the Prophet
(S) was calling them from their behind.

***"(Remember) when you were climbing (the hillside) and paid no heed to
any one, while the Messenger was calling you from your rear ..."***

The Prophet (S) was calling them, saying:

***"O' servants of Allah! return to me! return to me! I am the Messenger
of Allah."***

It tells them that at that time neither of them attended to his words:

***"... so He inflicted you with grief on grief…"***

The invasion of grief and sorrow to them was for that they would not be
sorry any more for losing the spoils of war, and that they would not be
worried about the wounds they suffered in the battlefield in the path of
victory; and surely *Allah* knows what they do.

***"... that you might not be sorry for what escaped you and neither for
what befell you; and Allah is well aware of what you do. "***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 154
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أَنزَلَ عَلَيْكُم مِّن بَعْدِ الْغَمِّ أَمَنَةً نُّعَاسًا
يَغْشَى طَآئِفَةً مِّنكُمْ وَطَآئِفَةٌ قَدْ أَهَمَّتْهُمْ أَنفُسُهُمْ
يَظُنُّونَ بِاللّهِ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ ظَنَّ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يَقُولُونَ
هَل لَّنَا مِنَ الأَمْرِ مِن شَيْءٍ قُلْ إِنَّ الأَمْرَ كُلَّهُ
لِلَّهِ يُخْفُونَ فِي أَنفُسِهِم مَّا لاَ يُبْدُونَ لَكَ يَقُولُونَ
لَوْ كَانَ لَنَا مِنَ الأَمْرِ شَيْءٌ مَّا قُتِلْنَا هَاهُنَا قُل
لَّوْ كُنتُمْ فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ لَبَرَزَ الَّذِينَ كُتِبَ عَلَيْهِمُ
الْقَتْلُ إِلَى مَضَاجِعِهِمْ وَلِيَبْتَلِيَ اللّهُ مَا فِي
صُدُورِكُمْ وَلِيُمَحَّصَ مَا فِي قُلُوبِكُمْ وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ بِذَاتِ
الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**154.** ***"Then, after that grief, He sent down security upon you (in
the form of) slumber coming upon a group of you, while another group
have cared only for their own selves, thinking about Allah unjustly, the
thought of ignorance. They say: ' Is there anything for us in the
authority? 'Say: 'Verily the authority belongs to Allah entirely '. They
hide within themselves what they show not to you, saying: ' Had we had a
part in the authority, we would not have been slain here '. Say: ' Even
if you were in your own homes, those for whom slaughter was ordained
would cel1ainly have gone forth to their deathbeds; and that Allah might
try what was in your breasts and that He might purge what was in your
hearts; and Allah is aware of what is in the breasts."***

The night following the Battle of 'Uhud was a dreadful night, full of
anxiety and fear. The Muslims anticipated that the victorious soldiers
of Quraysh would return to Medina again.

At this time the true strivers and the repentant who had regretted from
their escape in 'Uhud, trusted to the Grace of *Allah* and were assured
of the promises of the Prophet (S)*.* The verse under discussion
explains the event of that night.

It denotes that after those heavy grieves and sorrows of the day of
'Uhud, He sent down peace and security on them. It says:

***"Then, after that grief, He sent down security upon you ..."***

This peace was the very light sleep that fell on a group of them, but
there were some others who thought of their own selves and cared nothing
except their own rescue. That was why they lost the security given to
them totally. It says:

***"... (in the form of) slumber coming upon a group of you; while
another group have cared only for their own selves ..."***

Then it pays to the explanation of the talks and thoughts of hypocrites
and those whose faith was not so firm and who sat up that night. They
imagined something wrong about *Allah,* similar to the thoughts of the
Age of Ignorance which existed before Islam. They had in their minds
that the Prophet's promises were probably lies.

***"... Thinking about Allah unjustly, the thought of ignorance ..."***

They said to each other among themselves whether it was possible, with
that horrible circumstance they saw, that they overcame. It says:

***"... They say: 'Is there anything for us in the authority?'..."***

That is, it is quite impossible. But the Qur'an, in answer to them,
says: Yes, triumph is in the hand of *Allah* and if He wills, and finds
you eligible for it, He will grant it to you.

***"... Say: 'Verily the authority belongs to Allah entirely.'..."***

The verse indicates that they conceal some affairs in their hearts and
they do not make them manifest for you.

***"... They hide within themselves what they show not to you..."***

It seemed they thought the failure in 'Uhud was the sign that the
religion of Islam was not right. Therefore, they said if they had been
right and had a share of triumph, they would not have given so many
slain in that battle. It says:

***"... saying: ' Had we had a part in the authority, we would not have
been slain here.' "***

In answer to them, *Allah* points to two subjects. It says:

***"... Say: ' Even if you were in your own homes, those for whom
slaughter was ordained would certainly have gone forth to their
deathbeds..."***

Another subject is that these events should come forth in order that the
Lord tries what they had in their hearts and that the rows be
recognized. Moreover, in this course, individuals might be gradually
trained, and their intentions be purified, their faith be firmed, and
their hearts be purged from evils.

***"... and that Allah might try what was in your breasts and that He
might purge what was in your hearts..."***

At the end of the verse, it says:

***"... and Allah is aware of what is in the breasts."***

And it is for the very reason that *Allah* does not reckon only the
deeds of people, but He wants to try their hearts, too, and purify them
from dirt of polytheism, hypocrisy, and doubt.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 155
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَوَلَّوْاْ مِنكُمْ يَوْمَ الْتَقَى الْجَمْعَانِ
إِنَّمَا اسْتَزَلَّهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ بِبَعْضِ مَا كَسَبُواْ وَلَقَدْ
عَفَا اللّهُ عَنْهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**155*****. "Verily those of you who turned back on the day (of Uhud)
when both troops met, only Satan made them slip because of something
they earned; and certainly Allah has pardoned them; Surely Allah is
Forgiving, Forbearing."***

This verse is about the escape of the Muslims from the Battle of 'Uhud.
As most books denote, in the Battle of 'Uhud all strivers flew except
thirteen ones. Five people of them were from Emigrants (muhajirin) and
eight people from Helpers /ansar/. The opinions are divided as for he
names of these thirteen people that who they were, except
Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as).

However, in the Battle of 'Uhud, the Muslims were divided into four
groups: 1. Martyrs; 2. The Patients; 3. The Fugitives, who were
forgiven; 4. The hypocrites.

### Explanations

1. Sin clears the field for the temptations of Satan.

***"... only Satan made them slip because of something they
earned..."***

2. One of the reasons of escaping from fight is sin. Sin tears the
curtain of piety and weakens the spirit of man and, then, paves the way
for the influence of Satan.

3. Deeds effect on spiritualities. As a result of sins, some persons
become coward and ran away.

4. Strivers should set themselves in the course of repentance, seeking
forgiveness and self-improvement.


