Section 14: The Faithfuls and Hypocrites in the battle of 'Uhud
===============================================================

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 156
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَكُونُواْ كَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ
وَقَالُواْ لإِخْوَانِهِمْ إِذَا ضَرَبُواْ فِي الأَرْضِ أَوْ كَانُواْ
غُزًّى لَّوْ كَانُواْ عِندَنَا مَا مَاتُواْ وَمَا قُتِلُواْ لِيَجْعَلَ
اللّهُ ذَلِكَ حَسْرَةً فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ وَاللّهُ يُحْيِـي وَيُمِيتُ
وَاللّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**156.** ***"O' you who have Faith! be not like those who disbelieved
and said of their brethren when they travelled in the earth or engaged
in fighting: 'Had they been with us they would not have died and they
would not have been killed '; so that Allah may make this a regret in
their hearts. And, Allah gives life and causes to die; and Allah sees
what you do."***

We ought to stand firm against discouraging propagations and
inspirations, and gossips should not be retold. We must know that death
and life are from the determinations of *Allah* and are not concerned to
fight and journey. So, the enemy cast the evil propagation in the form
of sympathy and regret.

***"O' you who have Faith! be not like those who disbelieved and said of
their brethren when they travelled in the earth or engaged in fighting:
'Had they been with us they would not have died and they would not have
been killed '; so that Allah may make this a regret in their hearts.
And, Allah gives life and causes to die..."***

Thus, *Allah* is the Clear sighted and the Cognizant. So, be careful of
your conditions, thoughts, and deeds.

***"... and Allah sees what you do."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 157
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن قُتِلْتُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أَوْ مُتُّمْ لَمَغْفِرَةٌ مِّنَ
اللّهِ وَرَحْمَةٌ خَيْرٌ مِّمَّا يَجْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**157.** ***"And if you be killed in the way of Allah or you die, surely
forgiveness and mercy from Allah are far better than all that they
amass."***

In divine world-view and heavenly theology, the death in the way of
*Allah* (martyrdom) is better than the whole world and its belongings to
be compiled.

Mercy and forgiveness have an eternal result, but wealth and property
have some temporal effects. What is important is that the affairs be in
the way of *Allah,* whether martyrdom or death.

***"And if you be killed in the way of Allah or you die, surely
forgiveness and mercy from Allah are far better than all that they
amass."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 158
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن مُّتُّمْ أَوْ قُتِلْتُمْ لإِلَى الله تُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**158.** ***"And if you die or be killed, certainly to Allah shall you
be gathered together."***

There is no more than one way and it is going towards *Allah.* Then, why
do we not accept the best kind of passing away contently when we move to
that direction?

***"And if you die or be killed, certainly to Allah shall you be
gathered together."***

And, if death and martyrdom is returning to *Allah,* then why is there
anxiety in our mind?

Imam Hussayn (as) has said:

*"If bodies are prepared for death, then the death of a man in the way
of Allah with sword is the best death."*[^1]

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 159
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ لِنتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنتَ فَظًّا غَلِيظَ
الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّواْ مِنْ حَوْلِكَ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ
لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ فَإِذَا عَزَمْتَ فَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى
اللّهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَوَكِّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**159.** ***"Thus, it is due to the mercy from Allah that you have been
lenient with them, and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would
certainly have dispersed from around you. Therefore, pardon them and
seek forgiveness for them; and consult with them in the affair. So, when
you have decided, then trust in Allah; (for) verily Allah loves those
who trust (in Him)."***

The content of the verse works as some general instructions, but the
revelation of the verse is about the Battle of 'Uhud. The Muslims who
had ran away in the Battle of 'Uhud and were defeated, were burning in
the fire of regret, remorse and sorrow. They gathered around the Prophet
(S) and apologized. Then, the Lord issued the command of their general
pardon by this verse.

### Explanations

1. Lenience is a gift from *Allah.* Thus, those who have not lenience
are deprived from this bounty.

***"Thus, it is due to the mercy from Allah that you have been lenient
with them ..."***

2. The hard-hearted and strict people cannot have etiquette with people.

***"... and had you been rough, hard hearted, they would certainly have
dispersed from around you ..."***

3. A fruitful and proper leadership and administration ship is always
accompanied with attraction and affection.

4. Attract those defeated in war and modest sinners.

***"... Therefore, pardon them and seek forgiveness for them; and
consult with them in the affair"***

5. Inside consultation, there lie: sympathy, development of talents,
recognition of friends from enemies, selecting the best attitude,
creation of kindness and love, and a practical lesson for others.

6. You may pardon them for the injustice they treated to you, and for
the sin they committed with respect to *Allah,* seek forgiveness from
*Allah* for them and keep them in the scene by consulting with them in
the political, social affairs.

7. Beside contemplation and consultation, do not forget to trust in
*Allah.*

***"... so, when you have decided, then trust in Allah..."***

8. Consultation and reliance in *Allah* are beloved with Him, whether we
attain the aim or not.

***"... (for) verily Allah loves those who trust (in Him)."***

9. In administration ship once lenience is needed, like this verse:

***"... pardon them...",***

while in another occasion intensity and severity is necessary:

***"... and be hard against them ..."***[^2]

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 160
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن يَنصُرْكُمُ اللّهُ فَلاَ غَالِبَ لَكُمْ وَإِن يَخْذُلْكُمْ فَمَن
ذَا الَّذِي يَنصُرُكُم مِّن بَعْدِهِ وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكِّلِ
الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**160.** ***"If Allah helps you, none can overcome you. But, if He
forsakes you, who if there then that can help you after that? And on
Allah should the believers rely."***

In the previous verse, trust and reliance in *Allah* was recommended. In
this verse the reason of that reliance is expressed, saying that both
honour and abasement are with *Allah.*

It is narrated in a tradition that the Prophet *(S)* asked Gabriel:
*"What if trust in Allah?"*  
 Gabriel answered:

*"It if so that you know people do not give you profit nor loss, neither
they grant nor restrain; and that you be despair of all human kind.
Then, when a servant becomes like this, he will not act for anyone
except Allah; he will not be hopeful of or afraid of anyone but Allah;
he will not become desirous in anyone save Allah. And, this is the
reality of trust, / tawakku /l."*[^3]

### Explanations

1. Both overcoming against the enemy, or being defeated from the enemy,
are in the Will of *Allah.*

2. Natural victories are usually influenced by other factors, but the
divine helps and victories are not like that.

***"If Allah helps you, none can overcome you. But, if He forsakes you,
who if there then that can help you after that? And on Allah should the
believers rely."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 161
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِنَبِيٍّ أَن يَغُلَّ وَمَن يَغْلُلْ يَأْتِ بِمَا غَلَّ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثُمَّ تُوَفَّى كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ
لاَ يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**161.** ***"And it is not for any prophet to defraud and whoever
defrauds shall bring along what he has defrauded on the Day of
Resurrection. Then everyone will be repaid for whatever he has earned,
and they will not be dealt with unjustly."***

This verse, may be as an answer that refers to those who, for the sake
of gathering spoils of war, left the protective zone in 'Uhud. Imagining
that they would not be deprived from their booty shares, they ignored
the warnings of their commander who said that their share was preserved
and it would not be far from the view of the Messenger of *Allah* (S)*.*

### Explanations

1. Prophets have always been trustworthy. The one, who wants to train
some trustworthy persons, must not himself be treacherous.
(Unfortunately, today, there are many treacherous figures among the
non-heavenly leaders).

2. Not all the companions had enough Faith. Some of them were so that
who might prove treacherous actions unto the Messenger of *Allah* (S)*.*

3. None is safe from the suspicion of people.

4. Taking the property of others today (in this world) and returning
them on that Day (in the Hereafter) is a kind of punishment. And, what a
grievous state is that, that a person be brought with the wealth he had
proved treacherous in before Prophets, martyrs and all human beings on
the Day of Judgment.

***"... and whoever defrauds shall bring along what he has defrauded
..."***

Fraud; deceit, usurpation and treachery are from among the instances of
/qall/ 'defraud'.

At the time of the Prophet (S)*,* it happened that the man who was in
charge of collecting alms came to the Messenger of *Allah* (S) and said:

*"This quantity of wealth have collected is alms and belongs to you, and
this separate quantity is the gifts of people to myself."*

Then, the Prophet (S) went up the pulpit and asked the audience:

*'If this person remained at home, would any one give him a gift ? By
Allah he will be raised in Hereafter with these unlawful properties.'*

5. Remembrance of Hereafter restrains a person from treachery-

***"... then everyone will be repaid for whatever he has earned ..."***

6. *Allah* is just. (He both gives the reward completely and never goes
to extremes, even for a dot).

***"... and they will not be dealt with unjustly."***

7. Defend the rights of pure servants and the saints of *Allah.*

***"And it is not for any prophet to defraud ..."***

8. The weakness of faith, from one side, and the love of the world, from
another side, set men to suspect against the prophets.

9. Hereafter is a scene where the righteous will bring their good deeds
and the treacherous ones will bring their own treacheries:

***"... and whoever defrauds shall bring along what he has defrauded on
the Day of Resurrection"***

10. The rank of prophet hood never fits with treachery.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 162
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَ اللّهِ كَمَن بَاء بِسَخْطٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ
وَمَأْوَاهُ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**162.** ***"Is one who follows the pleasure of Allah like him who
incurs wrath from Allah, and whose abode will be Hell? And an evil
destination it is.! "***

Upon the occasion of revelation of this verse, it is cited in books from
both great sects of Islam that: When the Messenger of *Allah* issued the
command of setting to 'Uhud the hypocrites stayed in Medina under the
pretext that they were not sure of the occurrence of fight and conflict.

At the same time some Muslims whose faith was weak followed them and did
not attend at the battle. This verse illustrates the feature of this
group.

In a few former verses (verse 155) it said that *Allah* has pardoned
those who ran away from the battle and after that they regretted, But,
regarding to the occasion of revelation of the verse, He does not
forgive the wealthy ones and the hypocrites who seek excuses.

### Explanations

1. In an Islamic society, strivers and those who sit still at home
should not be treated the same, (regarding to the occasion of
revelation).

2. The aim of the true strivers is gaining the good pleasure of *Allah.*

***"Is one who follows the pleasure of Allah…"***

3. Returning face from battle-field is returning to the Wrath of
*Allah.*

***"…like him who incurs wrath from Allah…"***

***"… and whose abode will be Hell?..."***

***"…And it is an evil destination."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 163
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ دَرَجَاتٌ عِندَ اللّهِ واللّهُ بَصِيرٌ بِمَا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**163.** ***"They are of (varying) ranks with Allah; and Allah sees what
they do."***

Some verses of the Qur'an indicate that there are different degrees for
the people. For example, Surah Al-Anfal, No.8, verse 4 says:

***"... they shall have from their Lord exalted grades..."***

Or, Surah Taha, No 20, verse 75 says:

***"... these it is who shall have the high ranks."***

In this verse the persons themselves are rendered into 'ranks'. It is
similar to the meaning that a human being should act according to the
scale, but later he himself becomes a scale.

Or, another example is that: at first man is ***'praiser of Allah',***
/Ŏakir/, but later he himself becomes ***'reminder',*** /Ŏikr/, in a way
that his remembrance causes hearts to be in peace. At first, he turns
around the axis, but, later, he himself becomes the axis of the Truth.

***"They are of (varying) ranks with Allah; and Allah sees what they
do."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 164
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ مَنَّ اللّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولاً
مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ
وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِن كَانُواْ مِن قَبْلُ
لَفِي ضَلالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**164.** ***"Indeed Allah conferred a favour upon the believers when He
raised up among them a messenger of their own selves to recite His
verses unto them and purify them and to teach them the Book and the
Wisdom; although earlier they had surely been in manifest error."***

The Arabic term /minnah/ is derived from the root /manna/ with the sense
of a stone by which things may be weighed. Thus, every weighty and
valuable bounty is called /minnah/. But showing some slight bounties as
some heavy and magnificent ones is disagreeable. Therefore, donating a
great bounty is good, but representing an ordinary bounty in a great
shape is reprobated.

### Explanations

1. The appointment of Prophets to prophecy is the greatest heavenly gift
and the greatest bounty of *Allah.*

***"Indeed Allah conferred a favour..."***

2. Prophets were chosen from among people themselves.

***"…when He raised up among them a messenger from among
themselves..."***

(See also the following complementary explanation, No.1)

3. Purification is prior to teaching. (Purification and instruction have
been at the top of the training programs of prophets).

4. The mission of prophets envelops all human kind, yet only the
believers are gratitude unto this bounty and enjoy of the light of
guidance.

***"Indeed Allah conferred a favour upon the believers ..."***

5. Self-improvement and rectitude should be performed under the light of
the prophets' school of thought and the verses of *Allah.*

***"... to recite His verses unto them and to purify them ..."***

The austerities and monasticisms whose origin is not verses of *Allah*
and whose teachers are not divine prophets, themselves are deviation.

6. In order to recognize the bounty of appointment of prophets better,
we should refer to the history concerning before their times.

***"... although before this they had surely been in manifest error."***

7. In corruptive dark and very gloomy environments it is possible to
work, too.

8. In the manner of prophets, spiritual training and teaching both are
accompanied with wisdom.

***"... and to purify them and to teach them the Book and the
Wisdom..."***

### Complementary Explanations

1. The appointment of prophets from among people has some favours in
itself:

a) People know the background of such a prophet and trust in him.

b) People are Pioneers in executing the commands of *Allah.*

c) Prophets are acquainted with the pains of people and they
sympathetically have a share in their joys and sorrows.

d) Prophets are always available for people.

2. There is a popular proverb in the Arabic Language which says: Things
are known by their opposites.

As it is understood from the statements of Hadrat Ali (as) in
Nahjul-Balagha, in the Age of Ignorance, People had neither a sound
culture nor a good hygiene.[^4]

When Hadrat Ja'far Tayyar, Hadrat Ali's brother, was in Abyssinia, he
illustrated the situation of the Age of Ignorance for Najashi as such:

*"We were worshipping idols (but now we are worshippers of Allah). At
that time, we consumed corpses; we were of corruptives; we used to break
off connections with our kindred, we had ill treatments with our
neighbours, the strong members of us often devoured the rights of the
weak."*

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 165
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمَّا أَصَابَتْكُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَدْ أَصَبْتُم مِّثْلَيْهَا
قُلْتُمْ أَنَّى هَـذَا قُلْ هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ
عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**165.** ***"Yet, when a disaster befalls you while you have certainly
afflicted (the fow) with twice as much, you say: ' Whence is this?' Say:
'It if from your own selves'. Surely Allah is All-Powerful over all
things."***

When seventy persons from Muslim troop were killed in the Battle of
'Uhud and Muslims were defeated, they asked each other why they were
defeated. The Lord tells them they had afflicted the enemy with twice as
many in the Battle of Badr the previous year.

They killed seventy people of them and captured seventy men from them,
too. Besides that, the failure of that year was for their own disunity
and inactivity, and that they did not obey their commander.

### Explanations

1. When judging, consider both the bitter and sweet aspects. (Do not
think of the failure of 'Uhud alone and forget the triumph of Badr).

***"Yet, when a disaster befalls you while you have certainly afflicted
(the fow) with twice as much..."***

2. In searching for the factors of failure, begin with the innate,
spiritual and mental factors; and then go to follow other factors.

***"….you say: ' Whence is this?' Say: 'It if from your own
selves.'…"***

3. *Allah* is powerful over all things, but we must obtain the necessary
conditions and eligibilities of enjoying it.

***"... Surely Allah is All-Powerful over all things'."***

4. Do not imagine that to be only Muslim is enough for winning the
battle and, consequently, in every failure use the question of 'why' and
how, ***"Whence is this?",*** but beside Faith, it is necessary that the
military rules, and divine way be paid attention to.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 166
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَصَابَكُمْ يَوْمَ الْتَقَى الْجَمْعَانِ فَبِإِذْنِ اللّهِ
وَلِيَعْلَمَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**166.** ***"And what befell you on tie day when both troops met was by
Allah's leave and that He might distinguish the believers."***

*Allah* has set a cause or causes for any effect, and then either
failure or victory has some secrets. Your failure in the Battle of 'Uhud
related to the law of causation. It was you who relaxed your efforts in
the battle and did not come into agreement with other strivers, and were
greedy to gather the spoils of war. This is *Allah's* way of treatment
and the Divine Law is found in all fights.

***"And what befell you on the day when both troops met was by Allah's
leave..."***

### Explanations

1. Failures and triumphs take place under the Will of *Allah,* and His
leave is the same as *Allah's* way of treatment.

***"... by Allah's leave ..."***

2. Bitter and sweet happenings are the site of trial and recognition of
human beings.

***"... and that He might distinguish the believers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 167
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلْيَعْلَمَ الَّذِينَ نَافَقُواْ وَقِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْاْ
قَاتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أَوِ ادْفَعُواْ قَالُواْ لَوْ نَعْلَمُ
قِتَالاً لاَّتَّبَعْنَاكُمْ هُمْ لِلْكُفْرِ يَوْمَئِذٍ أَقْرَبُ
مِنْهُمْ لِلإِيمَانِ يَقُولُونَ بِأَفْوَاهِهِم مَّا لَيْسَ فِي
قُلُوبِهِمْ وَاللّهُ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا يَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**167.** ***"And that He might distinguish those who treated
hypocritically; and it was said to them; 'Come! Fight in the way of
Allah, or (at least) defend yourselves '. They said: ' lf we knew
fighting, we would certainly have followed you '. That time they were
much nearer to the infidelity than to Faith. They utter with their
mouths what is not in their hearts, and Allah knows best what they
conceal."***

In this holy verse, another fact is referred to. It says:

***"And that He might distinguish those who treated
hypocritically..."***

Then the Qur'an points to the debates that some Muslims and hypocrites
had before the battle as such that: One of the Muslims (by the name of'
Abdillah-ibn-' Amr-ibn-Hazzam, as Ibn-' Abbas has reported), observing
that 'Abdullah-ibn- 'Abi Salul and his friends separated from the troop
of Islam and decided to return to Medina, told them:

***"... and it was said to them: 'Come! Fight in the way of Allah; or
(at least) defend yourselves. '... "***

But they brought forth a vain excuse and said:

***"... they said: ' If we knew fighting, we would certainly have
followed you '."***

It was not more than a pretext. Both the occurrence of war was certain,
and Muslims were winning the war at the beginning. If a failure came
upon them, it was because of their own faults and offences *Allah* says
that they told a lie.

***"... that time they were much nearer to the infidelity than to Faith
"***

It is understood from the above statement that infidelity and Faith have
some degrees which depend on the notion and the way of treatment of the
individual.

***"… they utter with their mouths what is not in their hearts,.."***

They refrained from going to the battle-field as a result of their
obstinacy upon their suggestion that they would fight in Medina, and
because of fear from the hard blows of the enemy, or for the lack of
love in Islam, But:

***"…and Allah knows best what they conceal."***

It is in such a case that He both manifests their evil feature for
Muslims in this world, and will reckon their account in the Hereafter.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 168
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ لإِخْوَانِهِمْ وَقَعَدُواْ لَوْ أَطَاعُونَا مَا
قُتِلُوا قُلْ فَادْرَؤُوا عَنْ أَنفُسِكُمُ الْمَوْتَ إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**168.** ***"those who said about their brethren while themselves sat
(at home): 'Had they obeyed us, they would not have been killed '. Say:
' Avert death .from yourselves then, if you are truthful."***

Besides that the hypocrites themselves refrained from going to the
Battle of 'Uhud, when the strivers were returning back from fight, they
reproached them. The Qur'an answers their groundless speech in this
verse. It says:

***"those who said about their brethren while themselves sat (at home):
'Had they obeyed us, they would not have been killed '. Say: ' Avert
death from yourselves then, if you are truthful."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 169
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ أَمْوَاتًا
بَلْ أَحْيَاء عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**169.** ***"Do not think of those who were killed in the way of Allah
to be dead. Nay, they are alive, being provided sustenance with their
Lord."***

### The Alive in Eternal!

This verse and two verses next to it were revealed after the incident of
'Uhud. But its meaning and its content is general, so that it involves
all the martyrs of 'Uhud. The number of the martyrs there was fourteen
the high rank of whom, as well as all martyrs, is referred to in this
verse. It says:

***"Do not think of those who were killed in the way of Allah to be
dead..."***

Here, the addressee is only the Prophet *(S)* in order that others
reckon their account.

***"... Nay, they are alive, being provided sustenance with their
Lord."***

The purpose of life here is the very purgatorial life which souls have
in the world after death. This does not belong to only the martyrs. But,
in view of the fact that martyrs are so involved the merits of the
spiritual life that as if the life of other people in the intermediate
state is rather slight in comparison with it, so only they are named.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 170
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرِحِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ وَيَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
بِالَّذِينَ لَمْ يَلْحَقُواْ بِهِم مِّنْ خَلْفِهِمْ أَلاَّ خَوْفٌ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**170.** ***"They are happy with what Allah has given them out of His
Grace, and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them from behind
them. No fear shall be upon them nor shall they grieve."***

A part of the advantages and abundant bounties of the purgatory life of
martyrs are pointed out in this verse. It says:

***"They are happy with what Allah has given them out of His Grace
..."***

Their second happiness is for their brothers who are strivers, but they
have not joined them yet. The strivers, the future martyrs, are also
happy because they see the high rank of martyrs in the next world and
know that there will be no fear nor any grief upon them on the
Resurrection Day, and for its terrible happenings as well. It says:

***"... and rejoicing for those who have not yet joined them from behind
them. No fear shall be upon them nor shall they grieve."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 171
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ بِنِعْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَفَضْلٍ وَأَنَّ اللّهَ لاَ
يُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**171.** ***"They rejoice because of favour from Allah and (His) grace,
and that Allah does not waste the reward of the believers."***

This verse, in fact, is as an emphasis and as a more explanation upon
the glad tidings that martyrs receive after their slain. They will be
happy because of two matters. The first is for that they receive the
bounties of *Allah,* -not only His bounties but His Grace, too, (which
is the increase and repetition of His merits). It says:

***"They rejoice because of favour from Allah and (His) grace ..."***

Another matter is that they see that *Allah* does not waste the reward
of the believers, neither the reward of the martyrs nor the reward of
these true believing strivers who have not obtained the rank of
martyrdom yet. It says:

***"... and that Allah does not waste the reward of the believers"***

[^1]: Bihar-ul 'Anwar, vol. 44, p. 374

[^2]: Surah Al- Tahrim, No.66, verse 9

[^3]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 138

[^4]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 26


