Section 15: Uhud a loss to the Enemy
====================================

1. The misfortune of the Muslims at Uhud was no gain to the Enemy.

2. The disbelieve disabled to inflict any loss on the Muslims.

3. The Faithful were known from the Hypocrites.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 172
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُواْ لِلّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا أَصَابَهُمُ
الْقَرْحُ لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُواْ مِنْهُمْ وَاتَّقَواْ أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**172.** ***"Those who did respond to the call of Allah and the
Messenger (even) after some wound had afflicted them; for those among
them who did good and acted piously there will be a great reward. "***

### The Battle of Hamra'-ul-Asad

As it was mentioned before, at the end of the Battle of 'Uhud, the
victorious army of 'Abu-Sufyan, after winning the Battle, immediately
started to go toward Mecca.

When they reached the region of Ruha', they seriously regretted from
their action. They decided to return to Medina and destroy the rest of
Muslims totally.

Then, the Prophet (S) was informed of the matter. So, he ordered the
army of 'Uhud to be prepared for participating in another fight. This
news met the army of the Quraysh when they wondered and were frightened!

At this time, another subject weakened their courage more than before.
One of the pagans by the name of Ma'bad-ul-Khaza'i who saw the situation
of the Prophet (S) and his followers and was shaken by it, told him (S)
that observing their situation was very unpleasant and intolerable for
them (the pagans).

He said those words and went away. When he reached the army of
'Abu-Sufyan in Ruha', 'Abu-Sufyan asked him about the Prophet of Islam
(S)*.* In answer to him, Ma'bad said: "I saw Muhammad with a large army
who were pursuing you."

'Abu-Sufyan and his followers decided to retreat, but they asked a group
from the tribe of 'Abdul-Qays, who were passing by there, to inform the
Prophet of Islam (S) that 'Abu-Sufyan and the idolaters of the Quraysh,
with a large army, were going towards Medina in order to annihilate the
rest of the companions of the Prophet (S)*.*

When this message reached the Prophet (S) and Muslims, they said:

***"Allah is sufficient for us and how excellent is such a
Protector!"***[^1]

They waited and waited there, but no sign appeared from the enemy's
army. Then, after three days remaining there, they returned to Medina.
This verse, and two verses next to it, point to this incident.

It indicates that those who accepted the invitation of *Allah* and the
Messenger (S), and after having some wounds afflicted on the day of
'Uhud, they became ready to take part in another fight against the
enemy.

From among them, those who did good and were pious, viz. those who took
part in the war with pure intention and complete sincerity, will have a
great reward. It says:

***"Those who did respond to the call of Allah and the Messenger (even)
after some wound had afflicted them; for those among them who did good
and acted piously there will be a great reward. "***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 173
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ قَالَ لَهُمُ النَّاسُ إِنَّ النَّاسَ قَدْ جَمَعُواْ لَكُمْ
فَاخْشَوْهُمْ فَزَادَهُمْ إِيمَاناً وَقَالُواْ حَسْبُنَا اللّهُ
وَنِعْمَ الْوَكِيلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**173.** ***"Those to whom the people said: 'Verily the men have
gathered against you, therefore fear them '. Yet it increased them in
faith and they said: 'Allah is sufficient for us and how excellent is
such a Protector!' "***

The enemy, propagating agents, and some simple-minded and coward people
advisingly inspire that the group of enemy is strong and none can combat
them, so it is better not to entangle yourselves with fight. The true
believers, without any fear and, as they are qualified in the verse,
calmly answer them.

***"Those to whom the people said: 'Verily the men have gathered against
you, therefore fear them '. Yet it increased them in faith and they
said: 'Allah is sufficient for us and how excellent is such a Protector!
' "***

### Explanations

1. Be not frightened by the hollow propagations of the enemy.

2. In the fighting place and among the strivers, be careful of the
penetrating members of the enemy.

3. The strongest barrier against all the threats of the enemy is Faith
and trusting in *Allah.*

***"... Allah is sufficient for us and how excellent is such a
Protector!'"***

4. When a believer happens to be inflicted with disasters, he increases
his reliance and his connection with *Allah.*

***"... Yet it increased them in faith ..."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 174
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانقَلَبُواْ بِنِعْمَةٍ مِّنَ اللّهِ وَفَضْلٍ لَّمْ يَمْسَسْهُمْ
سُوءٌ وَاتَّبَعُواْ رِضْوَانَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ ذُو فَضْلٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**174.** ***"So they returned (home) with the favour from Allah and
(His) grace; no evil touched them and they followed the pleasure of
Allah; and Allah is the Lord of Mighty Grace."***

The wounded strivers of the Battle of 'Uhud were prepared again to
defend Islam by the command of the Messenger of *Allah*(S)*.* Then, they
pursued the enemy as far as the camping-place of Hamra'-ul-Asad.

So, the enemies, who were afraid of Muslims' preparation and courage,
dispensed with attacking again and returned home. This verse is upon the
praise of sincere wounded strivers of the Battle of 'Uhud.

### Explanations

1. There were many a man who adventured the danger and returned safely,
and there were many coward ones who flew from the danger but finally
encountered with misfortune.

***"So they returned (home) with the favour from Allah and (His) grace;
no evil touched them..."***

2. For the godly men, the principal is the pleasure of *Allah.* Neither
martyrdom, nor safety, nor injury, nor welfare is the principal for
them.

***"... and they followed the pleasure of Allah ..."***

3. The great grace of *Allah* is destined to only the strivers who have
participated in the Battle.

***"... And Allah is the Lord of Mighty Grace."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 175
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا ذَلِكُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ يُخَوِّفُ أَوْلِيَاءهُ فَلاَ
تَخَافُوهُمْ وَخَافُونِ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**175.** ***"It is only Satan that causes his friends to fear; but do
not fear them and fear Me if you are believers."***

A real believer does not fear of anyone other than *Allah.* Thus, Faith
is not aloof from bravery. So, strivers ought to be afraid of only
*Allah* and keep on being pious.

To impose horror and threat is the permanent policy of the powers.

***"It is only Satan that causes his friends to fear; but do not fear
them and fear Me if you are believers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 176
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَحْزُنكَ الَّذِينَ يُسَارِعُونَ فِي الْكُفْرِ إِنَّهُمْ لَن
يَضُرُّواْ اللّهَ شَيْئاً يُرِيدُ اللّهُ أَلاَّ يَجْعَلَ لَهُمْ حَظًّا
فِي الآخِرَةِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**176.** ***"And-let not those who hasten on to disbelief grieve you.
Verily they will never harm Allah at all, Allah intends to assign them
no fortune in the Hereafter and they will have a great Torment."***

It seemed that the people who were defeated in the Battle of 'Uhud were
afraid of each other. They thought what would happen then that they were
defeated and the infidels returned to Mecca Victoriously.

In answer to them, the verse says that they would not be worried,
because it was the respite of *Allah* in order that they could fill the
capacity of their infidelity and that they do not have any merit in the
coming world.

### Explanations

1. Keep your peace and calmness, because the effort of disbelievers is
ineffective in obliteration of Islam.

***"And let not those who hasten on to disbelief grieve you..."***

2. Wishful hastening in the field of infidelity deprives individuals,
from having eligibility of repentance and receiving the grace of
*Allah.*

3. The infidelity of people does no harm to His Pure Essence.

***"... Verily they will never harm Allah at all..."***

4. To give respite to disbelievers is the way of treatment of *Allah*,
not as a sign of unawareness or incapability unto it.

***"….Allah intends to assign them no fortune in the Hereafter..."***

5. Both the wrath of Allah and His Grace are great. (In the former
couple of verses, the Qur'an gave glad tidings to the grace of Allah for
those wounded strivers who got prepared for the second time to go to
fight by the command of the Prophet (S)*.* Here, it also refers to the
great punishment belonging to the stubborn infidels).

***"... and they will have a great torment."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 177
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُاْ الْكُفْرَ بِالإِيمَانِ لَن يَضُرُّواْ
اللّهَ شَيْئًا وَلهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**177.** ***"Verily those who have bought infidelity for faith, never
shall they harm Allah at all; and they will have a painful torment."***

The subjects of buying and selling, and also gaining and losing, have
frequently been repeated through different occurrences in the Qur'an.

In this process, the Qur'an is considered as a market, where people are
the sellers, the beliefs and thoughts are the goods, and sometimes
*Allah* and sometimes other than *Allah* are the customers. In this
market selling is compulsory, but electing the customers is up to the
choice of human beings.

That is, we cannot leave out what we have, including power, action, and
belief, but we can set our belief and action in a path to be gainful or
detrimental.

In the Qur'an, those who purchase with *Allah* and take Heaven and His
pleasure in return, are praised, while another group are criticized.
This group, for their perversion or for choosing gain, either do not
make profit:

***"Yields them no profit"***[^2]

or face with loss:

***"Surely man is in loss"***[^3],

***"That is a manifest loss."***

Surah Al-Hajj, No.22, verse 11 And, in some verses, of the Qur'an like
the above verse, those who sell their Faith in return with infidelity
are despised, and, on the other side, the believers are consoled that
the apostasy of that group has no harm to *Allah* or to the path of
*Allah.*

***"Verily those who have bought infidelity for faith, never shall they
harm Allah at all; and they will have a painful torment."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 178
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ خَيْرٌ
لِّأَنفُسِهِمْ إِنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ لِيَزْدَادُواْ إِثْمًا وَلَهْمُ
عَذَابٌ مُّهِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**178.** ***"And let not those who disbelieve think that Our giving them
respite is good for their selves; We give respite to them only that they
may increase in sin; and that they will have an abasing torment."***

The Qur'an has repeatedly applied the phrase / la yahsabanna/ (they do
not think) about infidels, hypocrites, and the persons whose Faith is
weak. This is because these persons are deprived from insight, proper
analysis, good intellect, and necessary clear mind.

They think that creation is vain, martyrdom is annihilation, the world
is permanent, and honour is a supreme good. The Qur'an has rejected all
these imaginations in different occurrences.

Sometimes, the disbelievers consider having possibilities, victories and
welfare as a sign of their own eligibility, while *Allah* respites them
upon their stubbornness towards His Essence and upon their being
polluted by infidelity and corruption in order that they dive deep in
their destruction.

The history details that when Yazid, the kalif of the time, had Imam
Hussayn (as) slain, the house-hold members of the Imam, including Hadrat
Zaynab Kubra (as)*,* were taken to Syria as captures. In his meeting,
Yazid proudly addressed Hadrat Zaynab (as) and said:

*"Did you see that Allah is with us?"*

In answer to him, Zaynab (as) recited this very verse, and added:

*"I know your rank low and little and it is deserving for any despising.
Do whatever you wish, but by Allah, beware that you cannot quench the
light of Allah', (our remembrance)."*

Yes, for such luxurious people, the abasing torment has been prepared in
order that their imaginary worldly honour be accompanied with abasement
and degradation in the Hereafter.

However, criminals are divided into two groups: One group are those who
are improvable, and *Allah* warns and awakens them by admonition, and by
pleasant and unpleasant events. The second group are those who are not
guidable.

*Allah* leaves them alone to themselves so that all their eligibilities
of corruption appear. That is why Imam Baqir (as) in explanation of this
verse said:

*"Death is a bounty for the infidels, because the longer they live, the
more sin they commit."*[^4]

### Explanations

1. Respites are not counted as a sign of being loved.

2. Bounties are useful when they are used alongside the path of right,
rectitude, and goodness.

3. The length of life is not important, gaining good advantages of life
is important.

***"And let not those who disbelieve think that Our giving them respite
is good for their selves..."***

In the supplication Makarim-ul-Akhlaq 'the Moral Characteristics' Imam
Sajjad (as) invokes:

*"O' Lord! If my life will be the pasture of Satan, shorten it! "*[^5]

4. Do not hasten in judgement; consider the conclusion and the coming
world, too.

***"... We give respite to them only that they may increase in sin and
that they will have an abasing torment."***

5. The welfare and authority of the tyrants is not the sign of their
rightfulness and the pleasure of *Allah* upon them. However, it is not a
reason for us to be silent before them, either.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 179
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا كَانَ اللّهُ لِيَذَرَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَى مَا أَنتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
حَتَّىَ يَمِيزَ الْخَبِيثَ مِنَ الطَّيِّبِ وَمَا كَانَ اللّهُ
لِيُطْلِعَكُمْ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ وَلَكِنَّ اللّهَ يَجْتَبِي مِن
رُّسُلِهِ مَن يَشَاء فَآمِنُواْ بِاللّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَإِن تُؤْمِنُواْ
وَتَتَّقُواْ فَلَكُمْ أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**179.** ***"Allah is not One to leave the believers in the state
wherein you are, until He sorts out the vicious from the good. And Allah
is not going to acquaint you with the unseen, but Allah chooses anyone
He pleases from His Messengers (to acquaint with unseen). Therefore,
believe in Allah and His Messengers, and if you believe and act piously,
then you will have a great reward."***

This is the last verse stated about the event of 'Uhud in this Surah.
The verse clearly announces that the world is a large laboratory. It is
not such that everybody who claims faith be left free to live in the
society ordinarily.

No, people are examined, and failures and victories are the means of
recognition of their inwards.

For instance, the very failure in the Battle of 'Uhud was a means for
that the hypocrites to be recognized *Allah* does not acquaint people
with 'the knowledge of hidden things', because if right and wrong be
recognized with that knowledge, the flame of hope will be quenched, the
social connections will be broken, and the life will be encountered with
confusion.

It is better that we do not know the supernatural secrets in order that
the life continues ordinarily, and the recognition of right and wrong be
performed through gradual examinations.

### Explanations

1. *Allah* leaves the disbelievers alone to themselves in order

***"That they Increase in sin",***

but He does not leave the believers alone, as It says:

***"Allah is not One to leave the believers in the state wherein you
are; .."***

2. The separation of pure from impure is one of the ways of treatment of
*Allah.*

***"... until He sorts out the vicious from the good..."***

3. Life should continue in its ordinary form. Knowing the secrets of
people through ***'the knowledge of hidden things'*** ordinarily
disturbs the common life.

***"... And Allah is not going to acquaint you with the unseen..."***

4. Life should continue in its normal way, yet *Allah* endows 'the
knowledge of hidden things' to some particular ones.

***"... but Allah chooses anyone He pleases from His Messengers (to
acquaint with unseen)..."***

5. *Allah* gives the knowledge of unseen to those who have the rank of
messenger ship from Him.

6. The ranks of all prophets are not equal to each other.

***"... Allah chooses anyone He pleases from His Messengers..."***

7. The knowledge of hidden things belongs to *Allah* alone, yet some of
the chosen Messengers of *Allah* enjoy of a part of it (not the whole of
it) only to know it.

***"... Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messengers, and if you
believe and act piously, then you will have a great reward."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 180
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ يَبْخَلُونَ بِمَا آتَاهُمُ اللّهُ مِن
فَضْلِهِ هُوَ خَيْرًا لَّهُمْ بَلْ هُوَ شَرٌّ لَّهُمْ سَيُطَوَّقُونَ
مَا بَخِلُواْ بِهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَلِلّهِ مِيرَاثُ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالأَرْضِ وَاللّهُ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**180.** ***"And as for those who are niggardly with what Allah has
granted out of His grace, let them not think it is better for them, nay
it is worse for them; that which they were niggardly of will be***
***clung to their neck on Resurrection Day; and to Allah belongs the
heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is aware of what you
do."***

### The Heavy Burden of Captivity!

This holy verse explains the destiny of the misers on the Day of
Resurrection. These are the very people who try to heap wealth and
protect it. They refrain to spend out money in charity along the path of
the servants of *Allah.*

In the above verse, there is not anything mentioned about alms and
incumbent payments, but according to the traditions by Ahlul-Bayt (as)
and the statements of commentators, this verse has been appropriated to
those who hinder paying alms. The Qur'an says:

***"And as for those who are niggardly with what Allah has granted out
of His grace, let them not think it is better for them ..."***

But, in spite of the imagination of these people, this manner will be
against them. It says:

***" .. nay it is worse for them…"***

Then, it explains their destiny in the Hereafter, like this:

***"... that which they were niggardly of will be clung to their neck on
Resurrection Day..."***

It is understood from this verse that the wealth whose incumbent rights
have not been paid and the society has enjoyed nothing of it, according
to the law of embodiment of deeds, will incarnate in the form of a
painful chastisement on Resurrection Day, similar to other evil deeds of
man.

Then, the verse points to another subject and indicates that these
properties, whether they be spent out in the way of *Allah* and in the
path of His servants, or not, will finally be separated from their
possessors; and:

***"... and to Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth
..."***

Now that the circumstance is like this, so much the better that before
separating from their wealth, instead of only having its responsibility
and regret they enjoy of its spiritual merits.

At the end of the verse, it says:

***"... and Allah is aware of what you do."***

Therefore, if you behave niggardly, He knows it; and if you apply your
wealth in the path of assisting the society, He knows it, too; and He
grants the reward of every one appropriately.

[^1]: Surah 'Ale-'Imran, No.3, verse 173

[^2]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 16

[^3]: Surah Al-'Asr, No.103, verse 2

[^4]: Nur -uth-Thaqalayn, vol. l, p. 413

[^5]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 61


