Section 16: Jewish carping at the Apostle
=========================================

Jewish carping at the Apostle's calling for subscriptions - the Jews
rejecting every prophet who did not follow the Mosaic Law - Muslims to
bear losses and hardships

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 181
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ سَمِعَ اللّهُ قَوْلَ الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ فَقِيرٌ
وَنَحْنُ أَغْنِيَاء سَنَكْتُبُ مَا قَالُواْ وَقَتْلَهُمُ الأَنبِيَاء
بِغَيْرِ حَقٍّ وَنَقُولُ ذُوقُواْ عَذَابَ الْحَرِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**181.** ***"Allah has certainly heard the statement of those who said:
'Verily Allah is poor and we are rich '. We shall record what they state
and their slaying the prophets unjustly; and We will say: 'Taste the
torment of burning'."***

### The Occasion of Revelation

This verse and the next one are revealed upon the reproach and blame of
the Jews. The Prophet (S) had a letter written to Bani Qinqa', the Jew,
in which he invited them to performing prayers; paying alms, and giving
loan to the Lord. (The purpose of the last part of this sentence is
spending out in the way of Allah that which is stated in this form in
order to move the feelings of men).

The agent of the Prophet (S) entered a house which was the center of
teaching the Jewish religious subjects and it was called
'Bayt-ul-Madaris'.

He handed the letter to Fanhas, a great Jewish learned man. After
reading the letter, he mockingly said: "If your statements are true, it
should be said that Allah is poor and we are rich, for if He were not
poor, He would not ask us for loan."

"In addition to that, Muhammad (S) believes Allah has prohibited you
(Muslims) from usury while he himself promises you interest and increase
of wealth for giving charity."

But, when these two verses were revealed, Fanhas denied confessing he
had said these words.

In this verse, it says:

***"Allah has certainly heard the statement of those who said: 'Verily
Allah is poor and we are rich '..."***

Therefore, their denial was useless. Then, the Lord says not only We
hear their words, but also.

***"... We shall record what they state and their slaying the prophets
unjustly; .."***

Recording and accounting their deeds is for that their total
accomplishments will be put before them on the Reckoning Day in order
that they see the fruit of their actions.

***".. and We will say: 'Taste the torment of burning'."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 182
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَأَنَّ اللّهَ لَيْسَ بِظَلاَّمٍ
لِّلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**182.** ***"This is for what your hands have sent on ahead and, of
course, Allah is not in the least unjust to the servants."***

In this verse, it says that the painful torment you are tasting its
bitterness now, is the fruit of your own deeds. It was you yourselves
who did wrong to your own souls, for never is *Allah* unjust to anyone.
It says:

***"This is for what your hands have sent on ahead and, of course, Allah
is not in the least unjust to the servants."***

In principle, if criminals, such as you, do not receive the punishment
of their evil deeds, and be counted in the row of good doers, it will be
the utmost injustice; and if *Allah* did not do like that, He would be
the most unjust.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 183
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ قَالُواْ إِنَّ اللّهَ عَهِدَ إِلَيْنَا أَلاَّ نُؤْمِنَ
لِرَسُولٍ حَتَّىَ يَأْتِيَنَا بِقُرْبَانٍ تَأْكُلُهُ النَّارُ قُلْ
قَدْ جَاءكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّن قَبْلِي بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَبِالَّذِي قُلْتُمْ
فَلِمَ قَتَلْتُمُوهُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**183.** ***"Those who said: ' Verily Allah has covenanted with us not
to believe in any messenger until he brings us an offering which fire
(from heaven) will consume '. Say: ' Indeed Messengers came unto you
before me (all) with miracles, and with that (very miracle) which you
spoke of; why then did you kill them, if you are so truthful?'"***

To fly from accepting Islam, some disbelievers sought a pretext and said
that *Allah* had covenanted with them that they would believe in only a
prophet who brought them an animal to offer, and a lightning from heaven
would burn that victim in front of the eyes of people. It was then that
they might be assure of his prophet hood.

This verse was revealed in order that the Prophet (S) would tell those
pertinacious seekers of pretext that: if they were right, why did they
not believe in the prophets before the Prophet of Islam? Those prophets,
in addition to different kinds of miracles, also brought them what they
said, i.e. bringing an offering.

### Explanations

1. The history of all groups and nations, as well as their background,
is the best reference to their claims.

***"... Say: 'Indeed Messengers came unto you before me (all) with
miracles, and with that (very miracle) which you spoke of..."***

2. Do not justify your escaping from Truth by religious subjects-

***"Those who said: 'Verily Allah has covenanted with us..."***

The subject of offering a ram is mentioned in the Torah, Leviticus,
Chapter 9, No.2, such:

***"And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering,
and a ram for a burt offering, without blemish, and offer them before
the Lord."***

3. The opponents' seeking pretext, throughout the history of human
beings, is alike.

***"... and with that (very miracle) which you spoke of ..."***

4. As soon as a person pertains with the spirit of arrogance, the one
neither avoids denigrating *Allah*

***"... Verily Allah has covenanted with us...",***

nor submits to any prophet:

***"... not to believe in any messenger..."***

 Such a person also expects that miracles adapt to his wishes and
desires.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 184
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن كَذَّبُوكَ فَقَدْ كُذِّبَ رُسُلٌ مِّن قَبْلِكَ جَآؤُوا
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَالزُّبُرِ وَالْكِتَابِ الْمُنِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**184.** ***"Then, if they reject you, messengers before you have
already been rejected while they came even with clear arguments; and the
Psalms and the Enlightening Book."***

In this verse, *Allah* consoles the Prophet (S) and tells him that if
these seekers of pretext reject you, it is not a new or an odd thing
because the messengers before you were rejected, too. It says:

***"Then, if they reject you, messengers before you have already been
rejected..."***

This is in a case that those messengers had both clear signs and clear
miracles with them.

***"... while they came even with clear arguments ..."***

Those messengers had not only clear arguments and miracles but they
brought also both firm, acceptable scriptures arid the Enlightening
Book. It says:

***"... and the Psalms and the Enlightening Book"***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 185
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَآئِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ وَإِنَّمَا تُوَفَّوْنَ أُجُورَكُمْ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَمَن زُحْزِحَ عَنِ النَّارِ وَأُدْخِلَ الْجَنَّةَ
فَقَدْ فَازَ وَما الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلاَّ مَتَاعُ الْغُرُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**185.** ***"Everyone tastes death. And verily you will be paid in full
your reward on the Resurrection Day, Then whoever is delivered from the
Fire and admitted into Paradise, he indeed is prosperous; and the life
of this world is not but a provision of deception."***

### Death, a General Destiny!

At first, this verse points to a law that involve of the world, it says:

***"Everyone tastes death…"***

In fact, most people are willing to forget their mortality but this is a
reality that even if we forget it, it (the death) will never forget us.

Then, it says that after the life of this world, the stage of receiving
the fruit of deeds (whether good reward or retribution) begins. It says:

***"…And verily you will be paid in full your reward on the Resurrection
Day,.."***

Then, it adds that those who remove from the effect of the absorption of
Hell Fire and enter Heaven, they are saved and have found their beloved
and demanded ideal. It says:

***"…Then whoever is delivered from the Fire and admitted into Paradise,
he indeed is prosperous…"***

As if, Hell absorbs human beings with all its power towards itself. Yes,
verily the factors which attract man towards it are some astonishing
attractions. Do the fleeting desires, unlawful sexual pleasures,
unlawful positions and properties not have attraction for every human
being?

In the next sentence, it completes the former discussion by saying:

***"….and the life of this world is not but a provision of
deception."***

The important thing is that the material world and its pleasures do not
become the ideal and the final goal of Man; otherwise, using the
material world and its merits, as a means for attaining the human
development, not only is not blameworthy, but also is necessary and
essential.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 186
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَتُبْلَوُنَّ فِي أَمْوَالِكُمْ وَأَنفُسِكُمْ وَلَتَسْمَعُنَّ مِنَ
الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ وَمِنَ الَّذِينَ
أَشْرَكُواْ أَذًى كَثِيراً وَإِن تَصْبِرُواْ وَتَتَّقُواْ فَإِنَّ
ذَلِكَ مِنْ عَزْمِ الأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**186.** ***"Certainly you will be tried in your wealth and your own
selves, and certainly you will bear much abuse from those who were given
the Book before you, and from those who are idolaters.*** ***And if you
preserve patiently, and act piously, then that is indeed of determining
factor in affairs."***

After emigrating Muslims from Mecca to Medina, pagans began to encroach
and to plunder their wealth and properties in Mecca. Whomever they could
find, they hurt and troubled. On the other hand, the Jews in Medina told
them words of sarcasm.

They even sang odes for Muslim women and girls with full impudence, or
they (the Jews) libelled them. The Jewish person who was leading these
things was called 'Ka'b-ibn-'Ashraf.

The Prophet (S) issued order that the person be killed, and thus he was
killed.

This verse, solacing the Muslims, recommends them to be patient and
pious, because a decision made under its shade is trustable.

### Explanations

1. Your trial is an earnest subject, so, make yourselves prepared for
it.

2. Hearing abuse and annoyance, and suffering much harms from the foe is
among the means of your trial.

***"...and certainly you will bear much abuse from those who were given
the Book before you, and from those who are idolaters. And if you
preserve patiently, and act piously, then that is indeed of determining
factor in affairs."***

3. The most applied means of trial are wealth and soul.

***"Certainly you will be tried in your wealth and your own
selves..."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 187
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَ أَخَذَ اللّهُ مِيثَاقَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُواْ الْكِتَابَ
لَتُبَيِّنُنَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ وَلاَ تَكْتُمُونَهُ فَنَبَذُوهُ وَرَاء
ظُهُورِهِمْ وَاشْتَرَوْاْ بِهِ ثَمَناً قَلِيلاً فَبِئْسَ مَا
يَشْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**187.** ***"And (remember) when Allah took a pledge from those who were
given the Book (saying): 'You shall certainly make it known to people
and you shall not hide it '. But they cast it behind their backs and
took a small price for it, then, how bad what they purchase."***

The reason that there are many millions of the Christians, the Jews, and
the Zoroastrians throughout the world is totally for the sake of
inopportune silence of their learned people.

According to the of Atyab-ul-Bayan, there are more than sixty
occurrences in the New Testament and Old Testament where the glad
tidings of Islam and the Prophet (S) is referred to, but the learned
persons of the People of the Book have left all of them away.

The sin of concealment is so important that *Allah* has used such a
meaning for its retribution that He has applied for no other sin. The
concerning verse says:

***"... They are those that Allah does curse them and (also) curse them
(all) those who curse (such ones)."***[^1]

### Explanations

1. Whatever concealment that causes people to remain in paganism,
infidelity, ignorance and corruption is a great sin, and the concealer
has a share in the sin of people.

2. The motive of the annihilating silences are usually obtaining wealth
or social rank and or protecting it.

***"... and took a small price for it, then, how bad what they
purchase."***

3. The learned persons are responsible for their people.

4. The statement and exhibition of facts must be done in a way that
nothing be concealed for people.

***"And (remember) when Allah took a pledge from those who were given
the Book (saying): 'You shall certainly make it known to people and you
shall not hide it '. But they cast it behind their backs ..."***

5. Mere knowledge is not enough for attaining prosperity and felicity.
Piety and appropriate heedlessness to the worldly wealth and social rank
is necessary, too.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 188
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ يَفْرَحُونَ بِمَا أَتَواْ وَّيُحِبُّونَ أَن
يُحْمَدُواْ بِمَا لَمْ يَفْعَلُواْ فَلاَ تَحْسَبَنَّهُمْ بِمَفَازَةٍ
مِّنَ الْعَذَابِ وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**188.** ***"Do not think those who rejoice in what they have done and
love to he praised for what they have not done, so do not think that
they would be safe from the punishment and they will have a painful
torment."***

There are always some hypocrites in the society who like to be treated,
in spite of their hypocrisy, as the believers. It is exactly similar to
the cowards who wish to be entitled with bravery, and the ignorant and
people with a little knowledge who are pleased to be called 'learned'.

Sometimes they appear in the society with a state to inspire people that
they have the best titles and ranks. But these persons are some
deceitful ones who never embrace prosperity.

Basically, people are divided into three groups:

1. Those who strive with effort and endeavour and intend that none know
it but *Allah.* The example of this group is those who say:

***"... no reward do we desire from you, nor thanks."***[^2]

2. Those who work with the motive that people know it and praise them.

3. Those who expect people to praise them without doing anything good.
Such persons are referred to in this verse.

**"*****Do not think those who rejoice in what they have done and love
to he praised for what they have not done, so do not think that they
would be safe from the punishment and they will have a painful
torment."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 189
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاللّهُ عَلَىَ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**189. "*****And to Allah belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth, and Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

In this verse, there are some glad tidings for the believers, and also
there is a threat for the disbelievers. It says:

***"And to Allah belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth,
and Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

That is, it is not necessary that the believers pave the unusual ways
for their development and progression. They can continue their way of
progression under the light of the Power of *Allah* through the lawful
and proper paths.

[^1]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 159

[^2]: Surah, Insan, No.76, verse 9


