Section 17:  The Triumph of the Faithfuls
=========================================

Prayer for the promised triumph -The predicated triumph

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 190
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ لآيَاتٍ لِّأُوْلِي الألْبَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**190.** ***"Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day, there are signs for the possessors
of intellects."***

It is cited in the books by Fakhr Razi, Qurtubi and Maraqi that once
*'Ayesha* was asked what the best memory was that she remembered from
the Prophet (S)*.*

She replied that all the affairs of the Prophet (S) were wonderful, but
the most important one of all was that one night the Prophet (S) was
relaxing in the house where Ayesha was living.

Before having a rest, he suddenly stood up and wore his clothing, made
ablution and began praying. He shed tears so much so that the front of
his clothes became wet. After that he bowed down for prostration. When
he fell prostrate he wept so much so that the ground became wet.

Next morning, when Bilal came and asked him about so much amount of
tear, the Prophet (S) said:

*"Last night some verses were revealed to me (verses 190 to 194, Surah
'Ale -'Imran)."*

And then he (S) added:

*"Woe to the one who recites these verses and does not contemplate."*

Again, in the book by Fakhr Razi, a tradition has been narrated from
Hadrat Ali (as) who said:

*"The Messenger of Allah (S) used to recite these verses before his
midnight prayers."*[^1]

In another tradition we have also been recommended to recite these holy
verses.

It is narrated from one of the companions of Imam Ali (as) by the name
of 'Nuf Bakkali' who said: One night he was at the presence of Hadrat
Ali (as). He (as) got up from his bed and recited these verses.

Then Imam asked him whether he was awake or asleep, and Bakkali answered
he was awake. Then Hadrat Ali (as) said:

*"Blessed are the persons who did not accept the taints of the
earth."*[^2]

### Explanations

1. The creation of the world follows an aim.

2. Knowing the existence is a primary stage for knowing *Allah.*

3. Those who are intelligent grasp the knowledge of *Allah* from
everything in the world.

4. The wiser a person is, the more signs he grasps.

***"Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day, there are signs for the possessors
of intellects."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 191
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىَ جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا
خَلَقْتَ هَذا بَاطِلاً سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**191.** ***"Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting and lying
on their sides, and mediate on the creation of the heavens and the
earth, (seriously saying) 'Our Lord! You have not created (all) this in
vain! Glory be to you! Save us then from the torment of the Fire'."***

The remembrance of *Allah* in all conditions of a person is the sign of
wisdom.

***"Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting and lying on their
sides..."***

And, 'the possessors of intellects' are those who remember Allah and
contemplate. The Qur'an introduces them such:

***"Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting and lying on their
sides, and mediate…,"***

Faith is worthy when it is based on intelligence and contemplation. It
says:

***"… and mediate on the creation of the heavens and the earth …"***

We should know this fact that the farther we keep aloof from the god
aims, the nearer we will approach to Hell and we must return that
distance again. The world of creation has not been done in vain even
though we do not realize all its secrets.

***"…' Our Lord! You have not created (all) this in vain! Glory be to
you! Save us then from the torment of the Fire '."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 192
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا إِنَّكَ مَن تُدْخِلِ النَّارَ فَقَدْ أَخْزَيْتَهُ وَمَا
لِلظَّالِمِينَ مِنْ أَنصَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**192.** ***"Our Lord! Anyone You cause to enter the (Hell) Fire, surely
You have put him to disgrace; and the unjust will have no helpers."***

Fire is important, but disgrace and notoriety is more important, and
more painful than the bodily punishment.

***"Our Lord! Anyone You cause to enter the (Hell) Fire, surely You have
put him to disgrace…"***

By the way, the transgressors will be deprived of intercession.

***"... and the unjust will have no helpers."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 193
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَّبَّنَا إِنَّنَا سَمِعْنَا مُنَادِيًا يُنَادِي لِلإِيمَانِ أَنْ
آمِنُواْ بِرَبِّكُمْ فَآمَنَّا رَبَّنَا فَاغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا
وَكَفِّرْ عَنَّا سَيِّئَاتِنَا وَتَوَفَّنَا مَعَ الأبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**193.** ***"Our Lord! Verily we have heard (the invitation of) a Crier
calling to the faith, saying: 'Believe in your Lord!' So we did believe.
'Our Lord! forgive us therefore our sins, and cover of us our evil
deeds, and make us die with the righteous'. "***

Perhaps, the purpose of the Arabic term /Ŏunub/ 'sins', occurred in this
verse, is 'the great sins', and the purpose of the term /sayyi'ah/ 'sin'
is a lesser sin '; as in the following holy verse, /sayyi'at/ ***(lesser
sins)*** has occurred in comparison with /kaba'ir/ (great sins):

*"lf you shun the great sins which you are forbidden, We will do away
with your small sins ..."*[^3]

And, maybe, the purpose of the Quranic term /sayyi'at / is the effects
of sins.

While in this world the wise say:

***"Verily we have heard (the invitation of)...",***

there are some persons who are heedless to this invitation. Certainly on
the Resurrection Day, they regretfully will say: ' We wish we would
hearken to the words of Allah and had obeyed His command', as the Qur'an
refers to them in Surah Al-'An'am, No.6, verse 31; and Surah Az-Zumar,
No.39, verse 56.

### Explanations

1. The wise are ready to accept the truth, and they, responding to the
call of their innate disposition, answer the call of prophets, the
invitation of the godly knowledgeable men, and the cry of martyrs.

2. Seeking forgiveness is the sign of wisdom.

3. Death with the righteous is a gift from *Allah.*

4. The far sighted intelligent ones wish the death with the righteous,
and think of the goodness of destiny.

***"Our Lord! Verily we have heard (the invitation of) a Crier calling
to the faith, saying: 'Believe in your Lord!' So we did believe. 'Our
Lord! forgive us therefore our sins, and cover of us our evil deeds, and
make us die with the righteous '."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 194
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا وَآتِنَا مَا وَعَدتَّنَا عَلَى رُسُلِكَ وَلاَ تُخْزِنَا
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ إِنَّكَ لاَ تُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**194.** ***"Our Lord! and grant us what You have promised us through
Your Messengers, and do not disgrace us on the Day of Resurrection.
Verily You do not break any promise."***

In these verses, *Allah* has illustrated the way and manner of 'the
wise' and 'the people of understanding', such that they are qualified
with these qualities: the remembrance of *Allah,* the thought of
attaining to 'wisdom', submitting to prophets, seeking *Allah's*
forgiveness, willing to die well, and expecting to reach the bounties of
*Allah* and saving from disgrace and notoriety.

In the previous verses, the Faith of the wise unto *Allah* and the
Resurrection was referred to. Now, in this verse, the belief in prophet
hood is also pointed out.

***"Our Lord! and grant us what You have promised by Your
Messengers..."***

### Explanations

1. The goal of the wise is reaching to divine graces, and saving from
the Hell Fire and notoriety in the Hereafter.

2. The wise believe in all prophets and all promises of *Allah.*

***"Our Lord! and grant us what You have promised us through Your
Messengers, and do not disgrace us on the Day of Resurrection. Verily
You do not break any promise."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 195
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَجَابَ لَهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ
مِّنكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى بَعْضُكُم مِّن بَعْضٍ فَالَّذِينَ
هَاجَرُواْ وَأُخْرِجُواْ مِن دِيَارِهِمْ وَأُوذُواْ فِي سَبِيلِي
وَقَاتَلُواْ وَقُتِلُواْ لأُكَفِّرَنَّ عَنْهُمْ سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ
وَلأُدْخِلَنَّهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ ثَوَابًا
مِّن عِندِ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الثَّوَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**195.** ***"So their Lord responded their prayer, (saying): 'I will not
waste the work of any worker among you, whether male or female, the one
of you being from the other. So, those who migrated and were driven out
of their homes and suffered hurt in My way, and who fought and were
killed, I will certainly cover their evil deeds, and I will certainly
make them enter into gardens beneath which rivers flow, as a reward from
Allah; and Allah! with Him (only) is the Fairest Reward."***

The content of this verse follows the subject of the previous verses. It
is about the people of understanding, the possessors of intellects, and
the result of their deeds.

Upon the occasion of the revelation of this verse, it is said that once
'Umm-us- Salamah' (one of the Prophet's wives) asked the Messenger of
*Allah* (S) that there are many statements mentioned in the Qur'an about
Holy war, immigration, and self-sacrifice of men, but do women have a
share in them, too ? The verse was revealed and their Lord answered this
question as such:

***"So their Lord responded their prayer, (saying): 'I will not waste
the work of any worker among you, whether male or female..."***

There are some unaware people among non-Muslims that sometimes accuse
Islam by saying that Islam is the religion of males, not females, Here,
this statement makes it clear that how far such people are from the
Truth.

Through the next words, the verse indicates that in the process of
creation all human beings relate to each other, because some of them
have been born from some others, i.e., women have been created from men
and men from women.

***"… the one of you from the other..."***

In the continuation of the verse, it concludes that:

***"…So, those who migrated and were driven out of their homes and
suffered hurt in My way, and who fought and were killed, I will
certainly cover their evil deeds..."***

Then, the Qur'an adds that besides forgiving their sins they will
certainly be placed in Heaven containing of various bounties. It says:

***"… and I will certainly make them enter into gardens beneath which
rivers flow..."***

This is a reward bestowed by *Allah* which is given to them, for their
self-sacrifice, and it is, of course, of the best rewards. It says:

***"…as a reward from Allah; and Allah! with Him (only) is the Fairest
Reward."***

This part of the verse is a hint to the fact that the godly rewards are
not fully and completely recognized by the people in this world, but
they ought to know that *Allah's* reward is higher and more significant
than any other rewards.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 196
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَغُرَّنَّكَ تَقَلُّبُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ فِي الْبِلاَدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**196.** ***"Let not the (prosperous) going about of those who
disbelieve deceive you in the cities."***

Because of their commercial travels, the pagans of Mecca and the Jews of
Medina lived in welfare. But the Muslims, as a result of leaving their
wealth and properties in Mecca and emigrating to Medina, and, on the
other hand, being involved with economical siege, were living in some
straitened circumstances. So, the revelation of this verse caused them
to console.

***"Let not the (prosperous) going about of those who disbelieve deceive
you in the cities."***

### Explanations

1. Sending political, economical, and martial missions, or holding
secret meetings and having equivocal interviews performed by the enemy,
should not deceive you.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 197
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَتَاعٌ قَلِيلٌ ثُمَّ مَأْوَاهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**197.** ***"(It is) a brief enjoyment! Thereafter their abode is Hell,
and how bad the resting place (it is)! "***

Imam Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) in a tradition has said: *"There is not
goodness in a pleasure after which is Fire (of Hell)."*[^4]

The fleeting pleasures and eternal torment is for the infidels, while
temporary hardships and the eternal peace and comfort belong to the
believers.

***"(It is) a brief enjoyment! Thereafter their abode is Hell, and how
bad the resting place (it is)!*** "

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 198
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكِنِ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْاْ رَبَّهُمْ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٌ تَجْرِي مِن
تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا نُزُلاً مِّنْ عِندِ اللّهِ
وَمَا عِندَ اللّهِ خَيْرٌ لِّلأَبْرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**198.** ***"But those who are in awe of their Lord, for them are
gardens beneath which rivers flow, therein they will abide for ever, a
reception from Allah, and whatever is with Allah is the best for the
righteous."***

In Arabic Language, the term /nuzul/ is called to the first thing which
the guest is usually received with, such as sweet drink, fruit and so
on.

From this point of view, it seems that the verse intends to say: beware
not to pervert from the path of piety and Faith when you see the
commercial going about of infidels, because the gardens of Heaven are
just the beginning of the reception for you, not its main one.

***"But those who are in awe of their Lord, for them are gardens beneath
which rivers flow; therein will they abide for ever, a reception from
Allah, and whatever is with Allah is the best for the righteous."***

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 199
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ لَمَن يُؤْمِنُ بِاللّهِ وَمَا أُنزِلَ
إِلَيْكُمْ وَمَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْهِمْ خَاشِعِينَ لِلّهِ لاَ يَشْتَرُونَ
بِآيَاتِ اللّهِ ثَمَنًا قَلِيلاً أُوْلَـئِكَ لَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ
رَبِّهِمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ سَرِيعُ الْحِسَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**199.** ***"And surely of the People of the Book are some who believe
in Allah and in what has been sent down to you and in what has been sent
down to them, being humble towards Allah. They do not sell the verses of
Allah for a small price. These are they that have their reward with
their Lord; verily Allah is quick in reckoning."***

Some commentators believe that this verse has been revealed about some
of the People of the Book who embraced Islam. They were included of
forty people from Najran, thirty two persons from Abyssinia, and eight
men from Byzantine.[^5]

Some other Books denote that the verse is revealed about Negus who died
in the ninth year after Immigration in the month Rajab.

When the Messenger of *Allah* (S) became aware of his death, he told
Muslims that one of their brethren had died somewhere out of Arabia and
they would prepare to pray his funeral prayer in compensation of his
services.

They asked who he was, and the Prophet (S) said it was Negus. After that
Muslims, accompanying the Messenger of *Allah* (S) went into the Baqi',
a graveyard in Medina, and prayed his funeral prayer.

Surah 'Ali-Imran, Verse 200
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اصْبِرُواْ وَصَابِرُواْ وَرَابِطُواْ
وَاتَّقُواْ اللّهَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**200.** ***"O' you who have faith! do persevere and outdo (all others)
in endurance, and be ready (to guard the bounds), and be in awe of Allah
that you may be prosperous."***

This verse recommends kinds of perseverance and patience when
confronting misfortunes, as follows: In the first stage be patient in
personal adversities and desires.

***"O' you who have Faith! do persevere…."***

In the second stage: persevere more against the pressure of the enemy.

***"… and out do (all others) in endurance..."***

In the third stage: try to protect the geographical bounds against the
invasions of the foreign enemies; try to protect the ideological and
theological bounds by means of scientific argumentations; and try to
protect the bounds of the heart ***(mind)*** from the attack of
temptations.

***"…and be ready (to guard the bounds),.."***

In Arabic language, tying something somewhere is called /rabat/ and that
is way this term is also used for an 'inn', because in old times
caravans used to stay there where they kept their goods, horses, and
camels.

Again, it is used for a heart which is firmly tied to the grace of
*Allah,* too. There are also some other derivations from the same root
which are applied in Arabic, like: /irtibat/ ***(relationship),***
/marbut/ ***(related),*** and /rabit / ***(communicator).***

n Islamic traditions, the phrase /rabitu / has been applied in the sense
of 'expectation for prayer'. It seems that Muslims tighten their own
hearts and souls by the link that they create in prayers.

[^1]: At-Tafsirul- Kabir, vol. 9, p. 134

[^2]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 276

[^3]: Surah An-Nisa, No.4, verse 31

[^4]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 41, p. 104

[^5]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Vol. 2, p. 561, & Tafsir-ul-Kabir, by Fakhr Razi


