Section 2: Law of Inheritance
=============================

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 11
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوصِيكُمُ اللّهُ فِي أَوْلاَدِكُمْ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ فَإِن كُنَّ نِسَاء فَوْقَ اثْنَتَيْنِ فَلَهُنَّ ثُلُثَا
مَا تَرَكَ وَإِن كَانَتْ وَاحِدَةً فَلَهَا النِّصْفُ وَلأَبَوَيْهِ
لِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا السُّدُسُ مِمَّا تَرَكَ إِن كَانَ لَهُ
وَلَدٌ فَإِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّهُ وَلَدٌ وَوَرِثَهُ أَبَوَاهُ فَلأُمِّهِ
الثُّلُثُ فَإِن كَانَ لَهُ إِخْوَةٌ فَلأُمِّهِ السُّدُسُ مِن بَعْدِ
وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصِي بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ آبَآؤُكُمْ وَأَبناؤُكُمْ لاَ
تَدْرُونَ أَيُّهُمْ أَقْرَبُ لَكُمْ نَفْعاً فَرِيضَةً مِّنَ اللّهِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيما حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**11.** ***"Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall
have the equal of the portion of two females; and if they are more than
two females, then they will have two-thirds of the inheritance; and if
there is (only) one, she will have the half; and as for his parents,
each of them shall have a sixth part of the inheritance if he has a
child, but if he has no child and his parents be his heirs, then his
mother shall have the third, and if he has brothers, then his mother
shall have the sixth after (the payment of) a bequest he may have
bequeathed or a debt. You do not know which of your parents and your
children is closer to you in usefulness. (This is) an ordinance from
Allah. Verily Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

There are ordinances of inheritance mentioned in some other religions,
too. For instance, in the Torah, the Book of Numbers, Chapter 27, verses
8 to 11 some laws of inheritance are referred to. They are as follows:

8. And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, if a man
die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto
his daughter.

9. And if he has no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto
his brethren.

10. And if he has no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto
his father's brethren.

11. And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his
inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he
shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute
of judgment, as the Lord commanded Moses.[^1]

It should also be noted that Jesus (as) has approved, in the Bible, the
same law of the Turah.

In Islam, the inheritance of a person, who has no inheritor, is given to
the Islamic judge and Imam.

The pre-Islamic Arab deprived women and small children from inheritance.

### The Portions of Inheritance

In this verse, the ordinance of the first class of inheritors (children,
fathers, and mothers) has been mentioned.

At first, it says:

***"Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females...."***

This meaning is a kind of emphasis on the portion of daughters taking
from the inheritance and challenging with the traditions of the people
in the Age of Ignorance who deprived women totally.

Then the verse denotes that if the heirs of the diseased are exclusively
two daughters or more than that, two-thirds of the inheritance belongs
to them. It says:

***"... and if they are more than two females, then they will have
two-thirds of the inheritance..."***

But if there remains only one daughter, she will have half of the whole
inheritance. The verse says:

***"... and if there is (only) one, she will have the half..."***

Now, the inheritance of fathers and mothers, who are also involved in
the first class of inheritors and are in the same row with the children,
is classified in three states:

The first state: is when the diseased person has an offspring or
offsprings; then there will be one sixths of the inheritance for the
father and again the same portion for mother. It says thus:

***"... and as for his parents, each of them shall have a sixth part of
the inheritance if he has a child..."***

The second state: is when there exists no child and the inheritors are
only the parents. In this case one thirds of the whole wealth belongs to
the mother and the rest of it belongs to the father, as the verse says:

***"... but if he has no child and his parents be his heirs, then his
mother shall have the third..."***

The third state: is when the inheritors are only parents and he has no
offspring but he has brother(S) from the side of his parents or only
from the side of his father.

Then, the portion of the mother decreases from one third to one-sixth
and the remaining five-sixth of the inheritance belong to the father. It
says:

***"... and if he has brothers, then his mother shall have the
sixth..."***

In fact, brothers, who do not inherit anything, prevent the additional
amount of the inheritance of the mother, and that is why, in Arabic
language, they are called /hajib/ ***'chamberlain'.***

Then, the Qur'an says that all of these things are after fulfilling the
bequest that the diseased has bequeathed, and paying his debts, saying
thus:

***"... after (the payment on a bequest he may have bequeathed or a
debt..."***

It should be noticed, of course, that only one third of the property can
be bequeathed on. Therefore, if a person bequeaths more than that, it is
not valid unless the heirs permit.

In the next sentence, it says:

***"... You do not know which of your parents and your children is
closer to you in usefulness..."***

Then, at the end of the verse, it remarks that:

***"... (This is) an ordinance from Allah. Verily Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise."***

This statement is considered as an emphasis upon the former subjects so
that there remains no place for people to bargain about the laws of the
portions of heritance.

### Why Is the Heritance of Man Equal of the Portion of Two Women?

With reference to the Islamic literature we realize that this question
has actively existed in the minds of people since the beginning of
Islam. They sometimes asked questions from the leaders of Islam on this
regard.

For example, it is narrated that Imam Ali-ibn-Musa-ar-Rida, in answer to
this question, said:

*"The fact that the portion of women from inheritance is equal to the
half of the portion of men is for the reason that when a lady marries
she takes something (dower) and man should give something.*

*In addition to that, the life expenses of the wife are upon the man
while a woman has no responsibility for the expenses of man as well as
that of herself."*[^2]

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 12
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَكُمْ نِصْفُ مَا تَرَكَ أَزْوَاجُكُمْ إِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّهُنَّ
وَلَدٌ فَإِن كَانَ لَهُنَّ وَلَدٌ فَلَكُمُ الرُّبُعُ مِمَّا تَرَكْنَ
مِن بَعْدِ وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصِينَ بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ وَلَهُنَّ الرُّبُعُ
مِمَّا تَرَكْتُمْ إِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّكُمْ وَلَدٌ فَإِن كَانَ لَكُمْ
وَلَدٌ فَلَهُنَّ الثُّمُنُ مِمَّا تَرَكْتُم مِّن بَعْدِ وَصِيَّةٍ
تُوصُونَ بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ وَإِن كَانَ رَجُلٌ يُورَثُ كَلاَلَةً أَو
امْرَأَةٌ وَلَهُ أَخٌ أَوْ أُخْتٌ فَلِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا
السُّدُسُ فَإِن كَانُوَاْ أَكْثَرَ مِن ذَلِكَ فَهُمْ شُرَكَاء فِي
الثُّلُثِ مِن بَعْدِ وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصَى بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ غَيْرَ
مُضَآرٍّ وَصِيَّةً مِّنَ اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**12. "*****And you will have half of what your wives leave, if they
have no child. But if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of
what they leave after (the payment of) any bequest they may have
bequeathed or a debt; and they shall have a fourth of what you leave if
you have no child, but if you have a child, then they shall have an
eighth of what you leave after (the payment of) a bequest you may have
bequeathed or a debt. And if a man or a woman leaves property to be
inherited by neither parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a
brother or a sister, then each of them two shall have a sixth, but if
they are more than that, they shall be sharers in a third after (the
payment of) any bequest that does not harm (others). (This is) an
ordinance from Allah and Allah is Knowing, Forbearing."***

### Inheritance of Spouses from Each Other

In this verse, the explanation of the heritance of spouses from each
other is stated. The verse, says:

***"And you will have half of what your wives leave, if they have no
child..."***

But if they have a child or children, even if they are from another
husband, only one fourth of her property belongs to you. It says:

***"... But if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of what
they leave..."***

This distribution is, of course, after paying the debts of the wife and
fulfilling her bequests upon financial affairs, as the verse says:

***"... after (the payment of) any bequest they may have bequeathed or a
debt..."***

And, if you have not any child, there will be a fourth of your heritance
for your wives. It says:

***"... and they shall have a fourth of what you leave if you have no
child..."***

Then, the portion of your wives will be one eighth of your property,
except for the land the explanation of which is stated in jurisprudent
books. It is in the case that you have a child, even though this child
is from another wife. It says:

***"... but if you have a child, then they shall have an eighth of what
you leave… "***

This division, similar to the previous division, is also done after the
fulfilment of the bequest you have bequeathed and paying the debts. The
verse continues saying:

***"... after (the payment of) a bequest you may have bequeathed or a
debt..."***

Then, it states the ordinance of the inheritance of sisters and
brothers, when it says:

***"... And if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by
neither parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a
sister, then each of them two shall have a sixth..."***

The Arabic term /kalalah/ is used for the maternal sisters and brothers
who have inheritance from the diseased person. This situation is in the
condition that there remains a maternal brother and sister from the
diseased person. But if they are more than one, they will have, on the
whole, one third. That is they must divide one third of the property
among themselves.

***"... but if they are more than that, they shall be sharers in a
third... "***

Then it adds that this is in the case that the bequest be. Performed
formerly and the debts be separated from the property.

***"... after (the payment of) any bequest ..."***

And, it is in the condition that it does not harm the inheritors through
the bequest or confessing a debt.

***"... that does not harm (others)..."***

So, at the end of the verse, for an emphasis; it says:

***"... (This is) an ordinance from Allah and Allah is Knowing,
Forbearing."***

That is, this is a divine order which you must respectedly observe and
He, Who has enjoined you these ordinances, is cognizant of your
interests and expedients, and He is also aware of the intentions of the
testators; yet, in the meantime, He is Forbearing and does not punish
promptly those who treat against His command.

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 13
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ حُدُودُ اللّهِ وَمَن يُطِعِ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ يُدْخِلْهُ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَذَلِكَ
الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**13.** ***"These are limits (set) by Allah; and whoso obeys Allah and
His Messenger, He will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow,
to abide therein forever; and this is the great success."***

Following the discussion of inheritance in the previous verse, here, in
this verse, the concerning laws are referred to as ***'the divine
limits',*** where it says:

***"These are limits (set) by Allah…"***

These are some limits which are forbidden to pass over or transgress.
Therefore, those who transgress and break the bounds of these laws are
known as sinners and criminals.

Then, it speaks about those who respect these limits by observing them,
saying:

***"…and whoso obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him into
gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever…"***

And, at the end of the verse, it adds:

***"… and this is the great success,"***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 14
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَعْصِ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَيَتَعَدَّ حُدُودَهُ يُدْخِلْهُ
نَارًا خَالِدًا فِيهَا وَلَهُ عَذَابٌ مُّهِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**14.** ***"And whoso disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses
His limits, He will admit him in Hell-Fire, to abide therein, and he
shall have an abasing torment."***

In this verse, other side of the coin is discussed about and those
groups, who are opposite to the people mentioned in the previous verse,
are referred to. It says:

***"And whoso disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses His
limits, He will admit him in Hell-Fire, to abide therein..."***

Then, at the end of the verse, the final fate of such people is pointed
out, where it says:

***"... and he shall have an abasing torment."***

In the former sentence, the bodily punishment of the Lord was referred
to, while in this concluding sentence, which speaks about abasing
torment, the spiritual aspect of that punishment is pointed out.

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 15
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللاَّتِي يَأْتِينَ الْفَاحِشَةَ مِن نِّسَآئِكُمْ فَاسْتَشْهِدُواْ
عَلَيْهِنَّ أَرْبَعةً مِّنكُمْ فَإِن شَهِدُواْ فَأَمْسِكُوهُنَّ فِي
الْبُيُوتِ حَتَّىَ يَتَوَفَّاهُنَّ الْمَوْتُ أَوْ يَجْعَلَ اللّهُ
لَهُنَّ سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**15.** ***"And as for those of your women who are guilty of lewdness,
call to witness four of you (Muslims) against them; then if they bear
witness (to the fact), confine them to the houses until death takes them
away or Allah makes some way for them."***

The punishment of filthy women who have husband and are polluted with
lewdness is pointed out in the above verse, where it says:

***"And as for those of your women who are guilty of lewdness, call to
witness four of you (Muslims) against them..."***

Then, the verse continues saying:

***"... then if they bear witness (to the fact), confine them to the
houses until death takes them away ..."***

Thus, the punishment of lewdness for the women who have husband has been
assigned ***'life imprisonment'*** in this verse.

But, immediately after that, it says:

***"... or Allah makes some way for them."***

From the above mentioned sense, it is understood that this ordinance had
been a temporary ordinance, because later the holy Prophet (S) issued
the divine ordinance of ***'stoning',*** the explanation of which is
found in Islamic literature and the books of jurisprudence where you may
refer to it.

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 16
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّذَانَ يَأْتِيَانِهَا مِنكُمْ فَآذُوهُمَا فَإِن تَابَا
وَأَصْلَحَا فَأَعْرِضُواْ عَنْهُمَا إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ تَوَّابًا
رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**16.** ***"And when two of you commit it (lewdness) punish them both,
but if they repent and amend, then turn aside from them. Verily Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful."***

In this verse the ordinance of fornication is stated. It indicates that
the man and woman, who have not spouses and commit this indecent action,
lewdness, both must be punished. It says:

***"And when two of you commit it (lewdness) punish them both..."***

The punishment mentioned in this verse is a general punishment, while
verse No.2 from Surah Nur, No.221, which assigns one hundred stripes for
each of the two parties, can be a and an explanation upon the above
verse.

At the bottom of the verse, it points to the matter of repentance and
forgiveness about these kinds of sinners, and says:

***"... but if they repent and amend, then turn aside from them. Verily
Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful."***

In the meantime, it is understood from this ordinance that the persons
who have repented of their faults should never be blamed for their
former sins.

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 17
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا التَّوْبَةُ عَلَى اللّهِ لِلَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ السُّوَءَ
بِجَهَالَةٍ ثُمَّ يَتُوبُونَ مِن قَرِيبٍ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ يَتُوبُ اللّهُ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَكَانَ اللّهُ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**17.** ***"Verily repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil
ignorantly and then repent soon. So, these are they toward whom Allah
returns (mercifully) and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

In the previous verse, the subject of the fulfilment of stripes upon
those who commit indecency, fornication, as their punishment with
repentance, was clearly stated. In the above verse, some of its
conditions are mentioned, too. It says:

***"Verily repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil
ignorantly..."***

The purpose of the usage of the term ***'ignorantly'*** in the above
mentioned verse is the violence of instincts and the domination of the
strong low desires, and their conquest over the strength of intellect
and faith.

In this state, the knowledge of man about sins, although does not vanish
completely, under the influence of those strong instincts becomes
affected and, actually, remains futile. So, when the knowledge of man
loses its effect, it will practically be equal to ignorance.

In the next sentence, the Qur'an has pointed to one of other conditions
of repentance, where it says:

***"... and then repent soon..."***

That is, they regret from their actions soon and return to *Allah,*
since a complete repentance is that which, on the whole, wipes out the
remaining effects of sins from the spirit and mind of the person.

After mentioning the conditions of repentance, the verse concludes as
such:

***"... So, these are they toward whom Allah returns (mercifully) and
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise."***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 18
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَتِ التَّوْبَةُ لِلَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ حَتَّى
إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ إِنِّي تُبْتُ الآنَ وَلاَ
الَّذِينَ يَمُوتُونَ وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ أُوْلَـئِكَ أَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ
عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**18.** ***"And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds
until death comes to one of them, he says: 'Verily now I repent', nor
for those who die while they are disbelievers. Those are they for whom
We have prepared a painful torment."***

Those whose repentance is not accepted is referred to in this verse. It
says:

***"And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds until
death comes to one of them, he says: 'Verily now I repent,'..."***

The second group whose repentance is also not accepted are those who
pass away while they are infidels. The verse says about them:

***"... nor for those who die while they are disbelievers..."***

In fact, the verse indicates that those who have repented from their
sins and they had been safe and sound and had a good faith, but at the
time of death they were not faithful, their former repentance is futile,
too.

At the end of the verse, it says about both groups:

***"... Those are they for whom We have prepared a painful torment."***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 19
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ يَحِلُّ لَكُمْ أَن تَرِثُواْ
النِّسَاء كَرْهًا وَلاَ تَعْضُلُوهُنَّ لِتَذْهَبُواْ بِبَعْضِ مَا
آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ إِلاَّ أَن يَأْتِينَ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُّبَيِّنَةٍ
وَعَاشِرُوهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ فَإِن كَرِهْتُمُوهُنَّ فَعَسَى أَن
تَكْرَهُواْ شَيْئًا وَيَجْعَلَ اللّهُ فِيهِ خَيْرًا كَثِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**19.** ***"O' you who have Faith! It is not lawful for you to inherit
the women against their will, and do not straiten them in order that you
may take a part of what you have given them, unless they are guilty of
manifest lewdness; but deal kindly with them, and if you hate them, it
may be that you dislike a thing while Allah has placed abundant good in
it."***

### Occasion of Revelation

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) that the above verse was revealed
about the men who used to keep their wives without treating with them as
a spouse, waiting for their death in order to possess their
properties.[^3]

The verse may hint to the fact that only the wealth is heritable, and
the wife of a man after his death does not belong to anyone as heritage.
After the death of her first husband, a woman can choose another husband
with her own decision.

### Explanations

1. Islam is the defender of the rights of women.

***"O' you who have Faith! It is not lawful for you to inherit the women
against their will..."***

2. Women have the right of possession.

***"….to inherit the women…"***

3. Conjugal life should be based on mutual love, not on taking
possession of wealth.  
 4. Taking back the dower forcefully is unlawful.

***"... and do not straiten them in order that you may take a part of
what you have given them..."***

***"... unless they are guilty of manifest lewdness..."***

5. Women should be treated well.

***"... but deal kindly with them ..."***

6. Many of goodnesses lie among the unpleasant things.

***"... and if you hate them, it may be that you dislike a thing while
Allah has placed abundant good in it."***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 20
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ أَرَدتُّمُ اسْتِبْدَالَ زَوْجٍ مَّكَانَ زَوْجٍ وَآتَيْتُمْ
إِحْدَاهُنَّ قِنطَارًا فَلاَ تَأْخُذُواْ مِنْهُ شَيْئًا
أَتَأْخُذُونَهُ بُهْتَاناً وَإِثْماً مُّبِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**20.** ***"And if you intend to take one wife in place of another and
you have given one of them a considerable property then do not take
anything of it. Would you take it by slandering (her) and with manifest
wrong? "***

At the Age of Ignorance, when some men desired to marry another wife, he
would denigrate his first wife so that she had to remit her dower in
order that the husband might divorce her. After that, the husband could
marry another woman with the same dower that he had taken back. This
verse blames the custom of the pagans of that time.

### Explanations

1. Remarriage is admissible from the point of Islam.

***"And if you intend to take one wife in place of another..."***

2. Divorce is in the authority of man.

3. Islam is the defender of the rights of women, and prohibits it if the
second marriage might waste the rights of the first wife.

***"... and you have given one of them considerable property ..."***

4. Wives have possession and their whole wealth must be given to them
completely.

***"... then do not take anything of it..."***

5. One of the worst sorts of transgression is taking the property of
others by justifying, denigrating and defaming them.

***"... would you take it by slandering (her) and with manifest wrong?
"***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 21
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَيْفَ تَأْخُذُونَهُ وَقَدْ أَفْضَى بَعْضُكُمْ إِلَى بَعْضٍ
وَأَخَذْنَ مِنكُم مِّيثَاقًا غَلِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**21.** ***"And how can you take it (back) when one of you has already
gone in to the other and they have taken from you a firm covenant?"***

This verse indicates that in the fulfilment of propagations and
forbidding wrong, human's affections should be utilized either. (You
that, for a long time, have had a whole relationship with your wife and
have obtained your wishes, why do you take back her dower unjustly now?)
Then, at the time of misfortunes of life, former pleasures should be
remembered, too.

***"And how can you take it (back) when one of you has already gone in
to the other? ..."***

The marriage contract is a firm covenant; therefore, breach of promise
is not proper.

***"... and they have taken from you a firm covenant."***

Surah An-Nisa',Verse 22
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَنكِحُواْ مَا نَكَحَ آبَاؤُكُم مِّنَ النِّسَاء إِلاَّ مَا قَدْ
سَلَفَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ فَاحِشَةً وَمَقْتًا وَسَاء سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**22.** ***"And do not marry women whom your father married, except what
has already passed; verily it is indecent and hateful and it is an evil
way."***

One of the customs in the pre-Islamic era of Ignorance was that whenever
a person passed away, his offspring would marry their step mother
***(their fathers' wife).***

It happened that one of the Helpers, called Abu-Qays, passed away and
his son suggested to marry his step mother. The woman said that she
should ask the matter from the Messenger of *Allah* (S)*.* When she went
to the Prophet (S) and told him the matter, this verse was revealed and
prohibited the marriage with step mother.

***"And do not marry women whom your father married, except what has
already passed;***

***Verily it is indecent and hateful and it is an evil way."***

[^1]: The Holy Bible containing the Old and New Testaments, Printed by:
London, the British and Foreign Bible Society.

[^2]: Al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 347

[^3]: Al- Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 1. p. 426; & Al-Tafsir-us-Safi, vol. 1,
p. 480


