Section 34, Surah Al-Baqarah, Chapter 2
=======================================

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 253
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الرُّسُلُ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ مِّنْهُم مَّن
كَلَّمَ اللّهُ وَرَفَعَ بَعْضَهُمْ دَرَجَاتٍ وَآتَيْنَا عِيسَى ابْنَ
مَرْيَمَ الْبَيِّنَاتِ وَأَيَّدْنَاهُ بِرُوحِ الْقُدُسِ وَلَوْ شَاء
اللّهُ مَا اقْتَتَلَ الَّذِينَ مِن بَعْدِهِم مِّن بَعْدِ مَا
جَاءتْهُمُ الْبَيِّنَاتُ وَلَـكِنِ اخْتَلَفُواْ فَمِنْهُم مَّنْ آمَنَ
وَمِنْهُم مَّن كَفَرَ وَلَوْ شَاء اللّهُ مَا اقْتَتَلُواْ وَلَـكِنَّ
اللّهَ يَفْعَلُ مَا يُرِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**253.** ***"These are the Messengers We have made some of whom excel
the others; of them are some to whom Allah has spoken, and some of them
He has raised in degrees. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, clear Signs,
and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. And had Allah willed, those
who came after them would not have fought (one another) after the clear
Signs had come to them; but they differed. So, of them (there were) some
who believed and some who disbelieved. Yet, had Allah willed, they would
not have fought (one another); but Allah does whatever He wills."***

In this verse some particular privileges of a few prophets are referred
to. For instance, as the following separate verse indicates, Moses (as)
talked to *Allah,* and it was the Will of *Allah* to choose him for that
purpose; as the Qur'an says:

***"He said: 'O' Moses! Verily I have chosen you above the people with
My Messages and with My words (discourse)..."*** [^1]

So, the verse under discussion says:

***"These are the Messengers We have made some of whom excel the others;
of them are some to whom Allah has spoken ..."***

In this regard, the holy Prophet of Islam (S) had some more privileges
than other prophets before him, such as; being 'the seal of the
prophets', the immunity of his Book (the Qur'an) from distortion, and
being entitled as 'a Mercy unto the worlds'. This is the word of
*Allah:*

***"And We sent you not (O' Our Apostle Muhammad) but a Mercy unto all
the worlds."*** [^2]

Or, Abraham (as) and Noah (as) received the best regards from the side
of Allah. Or, as the above verse says, that Jesus (as) was strengthened
with the Holy Spirit. It says:

***"... and some He has raised in degrees. And We gave Jesus, son of
Mary, clear Signs, and strengthened him with the Holy Spirit..."***

By the way, it is also mentioned in this Verse that if *Allah* willed,
He could stop the opposition and fighting between people who came after
those prophets and set them in one peaceful way. But *Allah's* way of
treatment is that people be free and wilful in order that they be able
to accept or reject a proper path by their own choice.

***"... And had Allah willed, those who came after them would not have
fought (one another) after the clear Signs had come to them; but they
differed. So of them (there were) some who believed and some who
disbelieved. Yet, had Allah willed, they would not have fought (one
another); but Allah does whatever He wills."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 254
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ أَنفِقُواْ مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاكُم مِّن
قَبْلِ أَن يَأْتِيَ يَوْمٌ لاَّ بَيْعٌ فِيهِ وَلاَ خُلَّةٌ وَلاَ
شَفَاعَةٌ وَالْكَافِرُونَ هُمُ الظَّالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**254. " O'** ***you who have Faith! spend (in alms) of that which We
have provided for you, before there comes a day wherein shall be no
bargaining, neither friendship, nor intercession; and the infidels -they
are the unjust."***

This verse is rendered as a warning to the believers, telling them to
give alms and not to lose the respite they have in this life. They are
recommended to provide some fitting provisions thereby for their certain
journey; the next life, the Hereafter. It says:

**"O'** ***you who have Faith! spend (in alms) of that which We have
provided for you..."***

On the Resurrection Day, there will be neither any bargain to buy the
means of felicity and security against one's infidelity, nor any friend
or intercessor to make their infidelity invalid.

**"...** ***before there comes a day wherein shall be no bargaining
neither friendship, nor intercession; and the infidels*** **-** ***they
are the unjust.*****"**

They are deprived from intercession in that world because they were the
cause of deprivation for others in this world. For example, a miser
person not only is unjust to himself, since he extinguishes the light of
generosity inside his self and wastes his situation in the Hereafter,
but also practically proves inequity against others when he ignores the
Divine commandments.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 255
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ لاَ إِلَـهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ الْقَيُّومُ لاَ تَأْخُذُهُ
سِنَةٌ وَلاَ نَوْمٌ لَّهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ مَن
ذَا الَّذِي يَشْفَعُ عِنْدَهُ إِلاَّ بِإِذْنِهِ يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ
أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا خَلْفَهُمْ وَلاَ يُحِيطُونَ بِشَيْءٍ مِّنْ عِلْمِهِ
إِلاَّ بِمَا شَاء وَسِعَ كُرْسِيُّهُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ وَلاَ
يَؤُودُهُ حِفْظُهُمَا وَهُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**255.** ***"Allah! there is no god but He, the Ever-living, the
Self-Subsisting (the Sustainer of all things); slumber seizes Him not,
nor sleep; to Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth. Who is it that can intercede with Him save by His leave?
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, while they
comprehend nothing of His knowledge except what He wills. His Kursi
(knowledge) extends over the heavens and the earth; and preserving them
both tires Him not; and, He is the Highest, the Greatest."***

'Ayat-ul-Kursi, One of the Most Important Verses
------------------------------------------------

Upon the importance and excellence of this verse, the only holy
tradition narrated from the holy Prophet (S), explained in the
following, is enough.

Once, the Messenger of Allah (S) asked Ubayy-ibn-Ka'b which verse of the
verses of the Qur'an was the most important one, and he answered the
verse saying:

***"Allah! there is no god but He, the Ever-living, the Self-subsisting
(the Sustainer of all things)..."***

Then the Messenger of Allah (S) touched his chest as a sign of favour
and told him

*"May your knowledge be wholesome to you. By the One in Whose hand is
Muhammad's soul, this verse has two tongues and two lips which glorify
the Lord below the Divine throne of authority,"* [^3]

Another tradition narrated from Imam Baqir (as) says:

*"The one who recites Ayat-ul-Kursi once, Allah will remove one thousand
unbecoming things from his worldly unbecoming affairs, the easiest of
which is poverty, and one thousand unbecoming things from his (affairs)
in the Hereafter, the easiest one among which is the pain of grave,"*
[^4]

The verse begins with the Pure Essence of Allah and continues with the
subject of Unity, Asma'-ul-Husna, and His attributes. It says:

***"Allah! there is no god but He…"***

"Allah*"* is the particular appellation for God Which means the Essence
that includes all the attributes of Divine Perfection, Glory, and
Beauty.

Then, it adds two other attributes of *Allah,* saying that He is the
Lord Who is Alive forever and is self-subsisting so that all other
creatures in the universe depend on Him. It says:

***"the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsisting (the Sustainer of all things);
"***

It is evident that life for *Allah* is the real life, because His life
is the same as His Essence, His Knowledge, and His Power. It is not like
that of living creatures whose lives are casual and after a length of
time they die.

*Allah* is completely different from His creatures from the point of
life, as verse 58 from **Surah Al-Furqan. No.25** says:

***"And rely you on the (Ever) Living One Who dies not..."***

Then, to indicate that neither drowsiness, nor deep sleep seizes Him and
never He stops managing the world, it continues saying:

***"…slumber seizes Him not, nor sleep;.."***

The Arabic term /sanah/ 'slumber' is the sleep which appears first in
the eyes, but when it becomes deeper and reaches the mind, it is termed
in Arabic /naum/ 'sleep'. This verse, pointing to the latter state,
means that the governance of the Absolutely Bountiful, *Allah,* is
perpetual and never ceases, even for a moment.

Then, it refers to the absolute ownership of *Allah,* saying:

***"….to Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in
the earth, …"***

This is the fifth attributes from the attributes of Allah mentioned
here. Formerly, four other attributes of Allah were referred to: Oneness
of Allah*,* the Everliving, the Self -subsisting, and that He never
sleeps.

It is quite clear that this attribute, that everything belongs to Allah,
has a great training effect in human beings.

When they know that whatever they have does not really belong to
themselves and it is temporarily handed over them as a deposit to use
for a short time, they will surely avoid of transgressing others'
rights.

These people, with this cognition, will certainly withdraw committing
such wrong actions as colonization, hoarding, greed, miserliness, and
the like.

For the sixth attribute, it says:

***"…Who is it that can intercede with Him save by His leave?…"***

In fact, by a positive interrogation with a negative sense, it says that
no person can intercede at His presence but by His leave.

Intercession was discussed fairly vastly when commenting on verse 48,
**Surah Al-Baqarah** No.1, in vol. part 1, pp. 174-177,

Referring to the seventh attribute, it says:

***"…He knows what is before them and what is behind them..."***

Therefore, whatever is in the expose of time and place is entirely
manifest in His Knowledge. That is why everything, even intercession,
depends upon His command.

In stating His eighth attribute, this fact is pointed out that He has
let others know only a small part of His knowledge that has been
advisable and proper for them. It says:

***"….while they comprehend nothing of His knowledge except what He
wills, …"***

Thus, the limited knowledge of others is a beam of the light of His
unlimited knowledge.

So, two other points is also understood from the above phrase. The first
is that no creature has cognition from his own and all human cognizances
are from the source of *Allah.*

The second is that *Allah* may award a part of some concealed knowledge
and some hidden secrets to those He pleases.

His ninthly and tenthly attributes are stated thus:

***"...His Kursi (knowledge) extends over the heavens and the earth; and
preserving them both tires Him not..."***

Then, power and sovereignty of *Allah* encompass the totality of the
heavens and the earth, and His Knowledge (Kursi) encompasses all of
these expansions wholly, so that nothing is out of His dominion and
authority.

It is, even, understood from some of the Islamic traditions that the
expansion of Kursi is very larger than the heavens and the earth. For
example, in a tradition Imam Sadiq (as) has said:

*"Heavens and earth, comparing Kursi, is like a ring in the midst of a
desert; and Kursi, in comparison with 'Arsh, is like a ring in the midst
of a desert."* [^5]

It is true, of course, that science has not discovered the secret of
this meaning yet.

Describing His eleventh and twelfth attributes, it says:

***"...and, He is the Highest, the Greatest."***

The Lord, Who is the Highest and the Infinite, is able to do everything
so that nothing is difficult for Him. Never has He tired of managing the
world of existence. Never He remains neglectful, unaware and feeble of
it. His Knowledge involves all things because He is Omnipotent,
Omnipresent.

It is worthy to note that, in spite of what is popular, the verse
entitled 'Ayat-ul-Kursi is this very single verse alone.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 256
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ قَد تَّبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنَ الْغَيِّ
فَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِن بِاللّهِ فَقَدِ اسْتَمْسَكَ
بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىَ لاَ انفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللّهُ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**256.** ***"There is no compulsion in religion. Truly the right way has
become clearly distinct from error. Therefore, whoever rejects false
deities ((taghut) and believes in Allah, has grasped the firmest handle,
that shall never break; and Allah is All-Hearing, All-knowing."***

### Occasion of Revelation

There was a man from Medina by the name of Abu-Haseen who had two sons.
Some of the Christian merchants, who used to import merchandise from
abroad into Medina, invited those two lads to Christianity whenever they
met them in Medina. Those two young men were seriously affected by them,
too.

Abu-Haseen became very inconvenient from that condition. He went to the
Prophet (S) and, informing him the matter, requested him to bring those
children back to their own religion. He asked whether he could bring
them forcefully to Islam. Then, the verse was revealed and manifested
this fact that there is no compulsion in accepting the religion.

The previous verse, 'Ayat-ul-Kursi, infect, was a collection of Unity
and the Attributes of *Allah,* Beauty and Glory, which make up the
foundation of the religion. This meaning is acceptable in all stages
with reasonable proofs. That is why embracing the faith needs not any
compulsion or force, and in this verse, it says:

***"There is no compulsion in religion. Truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error..."***

This verse is a serious answer to those who imagine that Islam applies
obligation and has developed and spread through the force of sword and
martial power.

Then, as a conclusion of the previous verse, it adds:

***"….Therefore, whoever rejects false deities (taghut) and believes in
Allah, has grasped the firmest handle, that shall never break…"***

And, at the end of the verse it continues saying:

***"…and Allah is All-Hearing, All-knowing,"***

This concluding phrase is a hint to the fact that the problem of belief
and disbelief is not something that can be fulfilled by mere pretence,
because *Allah* hears the words of all entirely, whether they state
openly or they speak privately and hiddenly.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 257
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ يُخْرِجُهُم مِّنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّوُرِ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ أَوْلِيَآؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُم مِّنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَاتِ أُوْلَـئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**257.** ***"Allah is the Guardian of those who have faith; He brings
them out of darkness into light; and those who reject faith, their
guardians are false-deities, (taghut), who bring them out of light into
darkness; they are the inhabitants of the Fire wherein shall they abide
forever. "***

With reference to the state of belief and disbelief, which was mentioned
in the previous verse, here, in this verse, it distinguishes the
situation of believers and disbelievers from the point of leader and
guardian. It says:

***"Allah is the Guardian of those who have faith…"***

So it is under the favour of this guardianship and leadership, that:

***"…He brings them out of darkness into light…"***

Then it adds:

***"…and those who reject faith, their guardians are false-deities,
(taghut), who bring them out of light into darkness; .."***

It is for this reason that:

***"…they are the inhabitants of the Fire wherein shall they abide
forever,"***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 258
---------------------------

### How the dead are again raised by Allah

Abraham's argument against Nimrod -Illustration of how the dead are
again raised by Allah -Abraham directed to an experiment to see how
Allah raises the dead.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِي حَآجَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ فِي رِبِّهِ أَنْ آتَاهُ
اللّهُ الْمُلْكَ إِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّيَ الَّذِي يُحْيِـي
وَيُمِيتُ قَالَ أَنَا أُحْيِـي وَأُمِيتُ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ فَإِنَّ
اللّهَ يَأْتِي بِالشَّمْسِ مِنَ الْمَشْرِقِ فَأْتِ بِهَا مِنَ
الْمَغْرِبِ فَبُهِتَ الَّذِي كَفَرَ وَاللّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**258.** ***"Have you not seen him who disputed with Abraham about his
Lord, because Allah had given him the kingship? When Abraham said: 'My
Lord is He Who gives life, and causes to die.' He said: 'I (too) give
life and cause to die.' Abraham said: 'Verily, Allah brings the sun from
the East; so you bring it from the West', whereupon the one who
disbelieved was confounded. And Allah does not guide the unjust
people."***

It is said in history and the Islamic narrations that it happened that
Nimrod (Namrood), the king of Babylon, disputed with Abraham (as) about
the Lord.

***"Have you not seen him who disputed with Abraham about his Lord,
because Allah had given him the kingship?.."***

Abraham (as) said that his Lord is He Who gives life and causes to die.

***"... When Abraham said: ' My Lord is He Who gives life and causes to
die' ..."***

In response, Nimrod said that he, too, gave life and caused to die.
Then, he ordered to fetch two prisoners and let one of them go and
commanded his men to kill the other,

***"...He said: 'I (too) give life and cause to die. '... "***

When Abraham (as) saw the wrong concept of Nimrod from giving life and
causing death and how he tried to prevail over others and impose his
false whims, he (as) immediately told him that *Allah* raises the sun
from the East, so if he claimed that he governed the world of existence
and everything was under his order and power, as he claimed, he would
bring the sun up from the West.

***"... Abraham said: 'Verily, Allah brings the sun from the East; so
you bring it from the West.'..."***

At that time Nimrod astonished and could say nothing save keeping
silent.

***"... where upon the one who disbelieved was confounded. And Allah
does not guide the unjust people."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 259
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّىَ يُحْيِـي هَـَذِهِ اللّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللّهُ مِئَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ لَبِثْتُ
يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ قَالَ بَل لَّبِثْتَ مِئَةَ عَامٍ فَانظُرْ
إِلَى طَعَامِكَ وَشَرَابِكَ لَمْ يَتَسَنَّهْ وَانظُرْ إِلَى حِمَارِكَ
وَلِنَجْعَلَكَ آيَةً لِّلنَّاسِ وَانظُرْ إِلَى العِظَامِ كَيْفَ
نُنشِزُهَا ثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْمًا فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ قَالَ
أَعْلَمُ أَنَّ اللّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**259.** ***"Or like him (Ezra) who passed by a town and it had fallen
on its roofs, he said: 'How shall Allah bring this to life again after
its death?' So Allah made him die a hundred years, then He raised him up
and said: 'How long have you tarried? ' He said, ' (Perhaps) I have
tarried a day or a part of a day.' He said: ' Nay, you have tarried
(thus) a hundred years. But look at your food and your drink -they show
no effect of age; and look at your ass; and that We may make of you a
sign for people; and look at the bones, how We assembled them together
and then clothed them with flesh! So, when it became clear to him, he
said: 'I know that Allah is All-Powerful over all things."***

The previous verse stated the dispute of Abraham (as) with Nimrod around
the subject of Unity. That statement, indeed, was guidance through
logical reasoning. Now, this holy verse speaks about Resurrection,
wherein guidance is accomplished through illustration of some sensible
things.

***"Or like him (Ezra) who passed by a town and it had fallen on its
roofs..."***

Some Islamic narrations and books denote that the name of the man
referred to in this verse has been 'Uzayr (Ezra). They also said that he
must be a prophet whom, as the verse indicates, *Allah* has spoken to.

### Explanations

1. Illustration is the best way of reasoning.

***"...but look at your food and your drink -they show no effect of
age..."***

2. It is appropriate to die one hundred years to recognize one important
point.  
 3. Increase your knowledge by experience, inquiring, and so on,
although you know the fact.

***"... he said: 'How shall Allah bring this to life again after its
death? …"***

4. We should take new lessons from old ruined towns and ancient
civilizations, too, and ask questions.

5. Everybody will be raised with the same feature the one has at the
time of death.

***"...then He raised him up..,"***

6. The past of time, however much long may be, does not affect on the
Might of *Allah.*

***"...so Allah made him die a hundred years, them He raised him
up..,"***

7. With *Allah's* Will, the firm bones rot, but fresh food, which
becomes rotten in a short time, remains one hundred years fresh.

***"…and said: ' How long have you tarried?'***

***He said, '(Perhaps) I have tarried a day or a part of a day.'***

***He Said: ' Nay, you have tarried (thus) a hundred years…."***

8. The exposition of *Allah's* Power is for guiding and leading people.

***"…and that We may make of you a sign for people;***.."

9. *Allah* has brought a scene of the Hereafter in this world. The verse
says:

***"...and look at the bones, how We assembled them together and then
clothed them with flesh.'..."***

10. The Resurrection is a resurrection of the body, because if it were a
mere spiritual resurrection, the statement of bone, dead and grave would
not come forth.

***"...and look at the bones..."***

11. A handful of a thing is a sample of a ton of that thing.

***"So when it became clear to him, he said: 'I know that Allah is
All-Powerful over all things."***

12. The dead returning to life again is also admissible in this very
world and before that the final Resurrection Day happens.

***"...so Allah made him die a hundred years, then He raised him up
..."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 260
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ رَبِّ أَرِنِي كَيْفَ تُحْيِـي الْمَوْتَى
قَالَ أَوَلَمْ تُؤْمِن قَالَ بَلَى وَلَـكِن لِّيَطْمَئِنَّ قَلْبِي
قَالَ فَخُذْ أَرْبَعَةً مِّنَ الطَّيْرِ فَصُرْهُنَّ إِلَيْكَ ثُمَّ
اجْعَلْ عَلَى كُلِّ جَبَلٍ مِّنْهُنَّ جُزْءًا ثُمَّ ادْعُهُنَّ
يَأْتِينَكَ سَعْيًا وَاعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**260.** ***And when Abraham said: ' My Lord! Show me how you give life
to the dead ', He said: 'Do you not believe?' 'Yes', said Abraham, 'but
to make my heart at ease.' He said: 'Take four of the birds. Then make
them to incline unto you and (cutting them into pieces) place a part of
them on each mountain, and thereafter, call them. They will come to you
in haste. And know that Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.***

This unique matchless claim is narrated but from the only man of
significance in history who after the Messenger of *Allah* said:

"*If the curtains be removed, there will be added nothing to my
certitude."* [^6]

But, other people wholly like to see what they were told, or what they
believe, in their objective state. For example, everybody likes to see
how sugar is produced and obtained from sugar-beet or sugar-cane
although they know that sugar is originally from it.

Concerning the above verse, it is cited in some books that: once Abraham
(as) was walking on the bank of a sea when he saw a corpse of a man over
the sands there. The corpse was half in the water and half on the land
so that both the animals in the sea and the birds and animals on the
land could feed from it.

Abraham thought himself if this condition happened for a man whose
little bits of body were distributed among other living creatures, how
could these bits be gathered together and raise on the Resurrection Day?
So, he (as) invoked *Allah:*

***"And when Abraham said...."***

***"... My Lord! Show me how You give life to dead..."***

### Explanations

1. We should attempt to elevate the standard of our faith and belief in
ourselves as much as we reach the limit of certainty.

***"... He said: 'Do you not believe?' 'Yes ', said Abraham, 'but to
make my heart at ease.'..."***

2. Intuition and vision appears only for those who have paved some
length of the path of knowledge, faith, and reasoning.

3. The call of the saints and Apostles of *Allah* can affect even on the
particles in the world:

***"...and thereafter, call them. They will come to you in haste..."***

4. Resurrection is a bodily resurrection, because, on the Day of
Judgement, the return of the soul will be unto the very particles of the
body.

5. Since the goal is reaching the certitude, the accomplishment is done
by Abraham (as) himself. (He killed four different birds, mixed their
meat with together and divided it upon several mountains.)

***"... He said: 'Take four of the birds. Then make them to incline unto
you and (cutting them into pieces) place a part of them on each mountain
..."***

6. For the purpose of a deep instruction, applying art and demonstration
is necessary.

However, we must always beware of the fact:

***"... And know that Allah is the Mighty, the Wise. "***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 261
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّثَلُ الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ كَمَثَلِ
حَبَّةٍ أَنبَتَتْ سَبْعَ سَنَابِلَ فِي كُلِّ سُنبُلَةٍ مِّئَةُ حَبَّةٍ
وَاللّهُ يُضَاعِفُ لِمَن يَشَاء وَاللّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**261.** ***"The likeness of those who spend their property in the way
of Allah is as the likeness of a grain (of corn) that grows seven ears,
(with) a hundred grains in every ear. And Allah multiplies (in
abundance) for whom He wills; and Allah is All-Embracing, All-
Knowing."***

Enjoining others to giving charity and prohibition from immoderation and
extravagance are the best way to solving the problem of the difference
of social classes. On the other hand, the appearance and spread of usury
is the origin and motive of social classes to be created.

That may be why that the necessity of giving charity and prohibition of
usury are stated beside each other in the Qur'an.[^7]

By the way, it should be noted it is not so that any grain of corn
planted in any land does grow seven ears with a hundred grains. But, the
grain should be safe, the land should be susceptible, the time must be
appropriate, and the preparation and protection should be complete.

### Explanations

1. Applying the natural phenomena will never become out of fashion at
any time. They are always comprehensible for all people in any age and
in any acceptable conditions.

2. Encouragement and promise of reward are often the most intensive
motives for individuals to move forward.

3. The grace of *Allah* is unlimited.

***"... And Allah multiplies (in abundance) for whom He wills; and Allah
is All-Embracing, All-Knowing."***

4. That charity is worthy which is given in the way of *Allah.*

***"The likeness of those who spend their property in the way of
Allah..."***

5. The praise of the Qur'an is upon those who spend in charity as a
habit in their current life. The Arabic term /yunfiquna/ (spend their
property), which is mentioned in this verse, refers to an action done
continually.

6. The best example is that example which has external reality.

***"...is as the likeness of a grain (of corn) that grows seven ears,
(with) a hundred grains in every ear..."***

7. If spending one's property can be multiplied as much as seven hundred
times then what about those who give their lives in charity for the sake
of *Allah?*

[^1]: Surah Al-A'raf, No.7, verse 144.

[^2]: Surah Al-'Anbya', No.21, verse 107

[^3]: Durr-ul-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 8

[^4]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 92, p. 262

[^5]: Al-Burhan fi Tafsir-il-Qur'an, vol. 1, p. 241

[^6]: Tafsir Ruhul-Bayan, Vol. 1, P. 416

[^7]: Al-Mizan, vol. 2, p. 406


