Section 36
==========

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 273
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلْفُقَرَاء الَّذِينَ أُحصِرُواْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ لاَ
يَسْتَطِيعُونَ ضَرْبًا فِي الأَرْضِ يَحْسَبُهُمُ الْجَاهِلُ أَغْنِيَاء
مِنَ التَّعَفُّفِ تَعْرِفُهُم بِسِيمَاهُمْ لاَ يَسْأَلُونَ النَّاسَ
إِلْحَافًا وَمَا تُنفِقُواْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ فَإِنَّ اللّهَ بِهِ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**273.** ***"(Charity is) for the poor who are restrained in the way of
Allah, and are unable to move about in the land. The unaware consider
them wealthy because of their restraint (from begging). You shall
recognize them by their countenance - they do not beg people
importunately. And whatever of good things you give, then Allah is
All-Knowing of it."***

In some books such as: Tafsir-Kabir by Fakhr Razi: Majma'-ul-Bayan, and
Tafsir-il-Gurtubi, it is cited that this verse has been revealed about
the Companions of the Ledge.

They were about four hundred people who had emigrated to Medina. Since
they had not any house and familiars there, they used to live on a large
platform in a corner of the Prophet's Mosque. They were always ready for
*(Jihad),* struggle in the way of *Allah.*

### Explanations

1. There is a portion for the indigents in the wealth of the rich.

***"(Charity is) for the poor..."***

2. The martial-blow groups, devotees in force bases, shelter less
emigrants and, on the whole, all those who are besieged in the way of
*Allah* and have not the opportunity of trying to earn the living should
be taken into necessary consideration. The scientific missions,
diplomatic corps, and research centers are in the similar condition,
too.

***"(Charity is) for the poor who are restrained in the way of Allah,
and are unable to move about in the land…."***

3. Those who are able to earn their living by travelling about should
not stay and abide in one land waiting for the charity of others.

***"... and are unable to move about in the land "***

4. The immaculate, pious and respectable poor ones are praised by *Allah
(s.w.t).*

5. The gentle-looking and undistinguished needy ones have priority.

***"... The unaware consider them wealthy because of their restraint
(from begging). You shall recognize them by their countenance… "***

6. They do not insist on begging from other people even when there comes
forth a necessity for them.

***"... they do not beg people importunately..."***

7. The feature of the indigent persons is illustrated, in this verse;
and in the final sentence, people are encouraged to spending out good
things.

***"... And whatever of good things you give, then Allah is All-Knowing
of it."***

8. It is not just that some people devote their selves and what they
have in the cause of *Allah* while some others impose insularity even in
giving charity in that way.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 274
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُم بِاللَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ سِرًّا
وَعَلاَنِيَةً فَلَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ وَلاَ خَوْفٌ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**274*****."Those who spend their property by night and day, secretly
and openly, for them shall be their reward with their Lord, and no fear
shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve."***

In some books, like Tafsir-us-Safi, Majma'-al-Bayan, Tafsir-al Qurtubi,
Tafsir-al-Kabir by Fakhr Razi, it is cited that this verse has been
revealed about Hadrat Ali (as).

Once it happened that he had only four silver coins when he spent out in
charity one coin in daytime, one coin at night, the third coin openly
and the fourth coin hiddenly in the way of *Allah.*

***"Those who spend their property by night and day, secretly and
openly, for them shall be their reward with their Lord..."***

But, in addition to the above mentioned occasion of revelation, the
promise of this holy verse covers all those who act similarly to that.

Such people neither scare of poverty in the world, because they believe
in the promises of *Allah* and trust in Him, nor become grievous because
of charity, since they are attentive to obtaining the pleasure of
*Allah* and what the action of giving charity will bring forth for them
in the Hereafter.

In another occasion in this very current Surah,[^1] too, the givers of
charity are stated about.

***"... and no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve."***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 275
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ الرِّبَا لاَ يَقُومُونَ إِلاَّ كَمَا يَقُومُ
الَّذِي يَتَخَبَّطُهُ الشَّيْطَانُ مِنَ الْمَسِّ ذَلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ
قَالُواْ إِنَّمَا الْبَيْعُ مِثْلُ الرِّبَا وَأَحَلَّ اللّهُ الْبَيْعَ
وَحَرَّمَ الرِّبَا فَمَن جَاءهُ مَوْعِظَةٌ مِّن رَّبِّهِ فَانتَهَىَ
فَلَهُ مَا سَلَفَ وَأَمْرُهُ إِلَى اللّهِ وَمَنْ عَادَ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ
أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**275.** ***"Those who devour usury will not rise up save like such the
one whom Satan has confounded with the touch of madness. That is because
they say: 'Bargaining is just like usury', whereas Allah has permitted
bargaining and forbidden usury. Hence, whoever receives an admonition
from his Lord, then desists, for him shall be what has already passed,
and his affair rests with Allah. And whoever reverts (to usury) -then
they are the inhabitants of the Fire, wherein shall they abide
forever."***

In Arabic philology, the word /riba/ (usury) means 'an excess, an
addition'. Usurers have been likened to the persons whom Satan has
driven them mad. On the Day of Judgement, usurers will be raised like
mad ones, because they have such an unjust manner in this world.

Mammonism makes their eyes of intellect blind. By their action, they
produce difference of levels in the society, because they do not even
think of sympathy, emotions and humanitarianism. They go so far that
poverty and hatred cause a burst in the society so that the principle of
possession becomes unstable, too.

***"Those who devour usury will not rise up save like such the one whom
Satan has confounded with the touch of madness…"***

Another point is that: to some persons, usury seems a principle, too.
Hence, they say that bargaining and usury are the same. As the verse
says:

***"... whereas Allah has permitted bargaining and forbidden usury."***

### Explanations

1. The usurers are deprived from equilibrium and, consequently, they
disturb the economical equilibrium of the society.

2. The justification of sin pave the way for more committing sins.

***"... That is because they say: 'Bargaining is just like usury..."***

3. It can be spared for those who are not aware of it, but not at all
for those who know it and persist on doing it.

***"... And whoever reverts (to usury) -then they are the inhabitants of
the Fire..."***

Objecting on usury began through verses of the Qur'an revealed from
before the Prophet's Emigration. For example, in Surah Ar-Rum, which was
revealed in Mecca, a verse about usury says:

***"... but it increases not with Allah..."***[^2]

Then, in Surah 'Al-i-'Imran, No.3 *Allah* commands:

***"…Devour not interest ...."***[^3]

which means usury is prohibited. Thus the most criticism and prohibition
have occurred in these verses of Surah Al-Baqarah.

By the way, the Qur'an through the statement:

***"And, (for) taking interest, though indeed forbidden were they
against it ..."***[^4]

announces that usury had been forbidden in the Jewish religion, too.
This prohibition is stated in Turah manifestly. [^5]

In Surah Al-Baqarah, the verses of usury have occurred next to the
verses of charity in order to state the two aspects of good and evil
which may come forth by means of wealth. Charity is a 'giving' without
recompense, but usury is a 'taking' without recompense.

In contrast to the good effects that charity has in the society, usury
creates evil effects therein. That is why the Qur'an, in the next verse,
says:

***"Allah effaces usury and He causes charities to flourish...".*** [^6]

The threats that are cited in the Qur'an against taking interest in
usury and accepting the dominance of illegitimate rulers are such that
they are not cited against even murder, oppression, drinking wine,
gambling, and fornication. Therefore the prohibition of usury has been
decidedly considered as a great sin by all Islamic parties.

***"... Hence, whoever receives an admonition from his Lord, then
desists, for him shall be what has already passed, and his affair rests
with Allah ..."***

It is narrated in a tradition that when Imam Sadiq (as) was informed
that so and so was a usurer, he said:

*"If I were allowed by Allah I would behead him. "* [^7]

It happened that Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) met a usurer. He (as) wanted
him to repent from his action. When he repented Ali (as) let him go and
told him:

*"The usurer must be made repent from his action just like that a person
is made repent from polytheism ".*

It is narrated from Imam Baqir (as) who said:

*"The worst income is (the interest of) usury."* [^8]

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*"When Allah wills to destroy a town, usury appears therein."*[^9]
*"And, Allah has cursed usurer, his agent, and the writer of
usury."*[^10]

Shaykh Mufid has cited in his book:[^11] "Whoever considers usury
lawful, should be beheaded."

Imam Sadiq (as), stating the reason of repetition of the verses of usury
in the Qur'an, says:

*"It is for making the rich prepared to do works of benevolence and
spending charities; because, on one hand, usury is unlawful (haram),
and, on the other hand, compiling wealth as a file is also unlawful.
Then, there remains no remedy for the rich but charity and productive
useful jobs."*[^12]

Also, upon the motive of the prohibition of usury, it is said that since
usury is a kind of hinder for money to be used in the way of production
and works of public utility, and, instead of effort and endeavour, only
the interest of money is enjoyed, then usury has become forbidden.

Again, it is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) who has said: "If usury were
permitted (halal), people would leave their businesses and trade."[^13]

It is also narrated from Imam Rida (as) who said: "If usury becomes
prevalent, the loan giving will disappear."[^14]

At the end of the verse, it says:

***"... And whoever reverts (to usury) -then they are the inhabitantly
of the Fire, wherein shall they abide forever."***

The word /ada/ 'returns', here, means that those who do not return from
usury and commit again devouring interest, will be the inhabitants of
the Fire of Hell and they will remain there for ever.

### The Disadvantages of Usury

Taking additional money, without performing any useful work, is unjust
and it is overburdening, which causes hatred and enmity. The giver of
interest sometimes has to fail and, as a result of debts that increase
progressively, accepts kinds of disgrace and captivity.

Usury disturbs the equilibrium of the society and causes it to be
divided into two poles: the oppressors and the oppressed.

Usury is the reason of prayers to be invalid. Regarding these
destructive causes, not only in the religion of Islam, but also in all
heavenly religions, usury has been forbidden. But, clinging to few
pretexts, some worldly people try to justify usury or try to find a way
of fly.

Yet, usury has certainly its own destructive effects, though some social
groups have accepted it in their own economical system.

Usury is an injustice and its disadvantages encompass those who apply
it. The progress of the western communities is because of their
attentiveness to science and industry, not because of usury.

By the way, usurers should be aware of the warnings of the Qur'an.
(Applying to legal tricks, like the Jews who did for going fishing on
Saturday, is only a sort of game.). The Qur'an has not been heedless of
such games and has criticized them.

Also, since economic affairs may attract people into the trap of usury,
there is a tradition which says:

"*He who begins trading without knowing (the religious laws of trading),
will be involved in usury".*[^15]

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 276
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَمْحَقُ اللّهُ الْرِّبَا وَيُرْبِي الصَّدَقَاتِ وَاللّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ
كُلَّ كَفَّارٍ أَثِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**276.** ***"Allah effaces usury and He causes charities to flourish,
and Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner."***

The Arabic word /mahq/ means ***'effacement, obliteration, erasure',***
and the term /muhaq/, from the same root, is used for the moon when it
disappears by the nights at the end of the lunar month. Then the term
/riba/ ***'usury interest',*** with the sense of gradual increase, is
applied in the opposite correspondence.

This verse admonishes that though a usurer takes interest from others in
order to compile wealth, Allah seizes the abundance and good results
that he expects from the gross of wealth gained through usury. The
property resulted from usury may not necessarily be obliterated itself,
but the goals, which are considered from compiling wealth, fail.

**"*****Allah effaces usury*** **..."**

In the course of usury, there is no love, happiness, and security, so
that many a rich person can gain no sort of comfort, peace, or
amiability from their wealth. On the contrary, in the regulations, where
there is charity, or donation and good loan, people enjoy of many
favours.

In such societies, the poor are not disappointed, and the rich are not
encountered with callousness of the heart and do not mind the
multiplication of wealth. So, in these regulations, the deprived do not
think of revenge, theft, and the like, and the rich are not anxious
about guarding and protecting their properties.

This society will have a relative equilibrium accompanied with kindness,
compassion, security and mutual understanding.

***"... and He causes charities to flourish ..."***

In Tafsir Kabir by Fakhr Razi, it is cited that when usurer obliterates
equilibrium, compassion, and human justice from him, his self and his
property will be cursed by the poor, and every moment, hatred, plot and
theft threaten him. This is an example of that effacement which is
stated in the verse.

### Explanations

1. Do not note and gaze at only the apparent growth of wealth.

***"Allah effaces usury ..."***

2. Sustenance is with Allah. The possessor of wealth may be deprived of
welfare while the poor may often live in the best state of peace of
mind.

3. Usurer is the one who is very ungrateful, and sin has settled in his
soul: ***"ungrateful sinner".*** By taking interest, he makes himself
debtful to people. He makes his livelihood unlawful for himself, and
also he nullifies his worships. He lets callousness, greed and avarice
dominate over him.

***"... and Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner."***

Yes, He is a very ungrateful, as well as a sinner.

4. To efface the wealth emerging from usury is Allah's way of treatment
which will be continued forever. The reference for this meaning is the
Qur'anic word /yamhaqu/ 'efface' where the present tense of which, in
Arabic, denotes the continuity of the verb.

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 277
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَمِلُواْ الصَّالِحَاتِ وَأَقَامُواْ
الصَّلاَةَ وَآتَوُاْ الزَّكَاةَ لَهُمْ أَجْرُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ
وَلاَ خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**277.** ***"Verily, those who have faith, and do righteous works, and
establish prayer, and pay the poor-rates, for them shall be their reward
with their Lord, and no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they
grieve".***

Opposite to the manner of the usurers who are ***'ungrateful
sinners'**,* this verse portraits the future of the believers, those who
do righteous deeds, establish prayers, and pay the poor-rates.

People are divided into four categories:

1. A group of people believe in truth and do righteous works. These are
the believers.

2. There are some people who neither believe nor do righteous deeds.
These are infidels.

3. Some people believe, but do not work righteously. These are the
mischievous ones.

4. There are some people who have not faith but they apparently do good
deeds. These are hypocrites.

Separate from usurers, who have taken apart from the Lord and human
beings, there are some believers who have faith, do righteous actions,
and have relevance with Allah by the way of prayer. They communicate
with people through paying the poor-rates.

***"Verily, those who have faith, and do righteous works, and establish
prayer, and pay the poor-rates, for them shall be their reward with
their Lord, and no fear shall be upon them, nor shall they grieve".***

Surah Al-Baqarah, Verse 278
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ وَذَرُواْ مَا بَقِيَ
مِنَ الرِّبَا إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**278.** ***"O' you who have Faith! be in awe of Allah, and forgo what
remains (due to you) of usury, if you are faithful."***

It is cited in some books, such as: Majma'-ul-Bayan, Al-Mizan, and
Maraqi, that when the verse upon the prohibition of usury was revealed,
some of the companions of the prophet (S), like Khalid-ibn-Walid, Abbas,
and Uthman, had claimed some amount of interest from people. They asked
the Prophet (S) about their claims, when the above mentioned verse was
revealed.

After the revelation of this verse, the holy Prophet (S) said:

*"My uncle, Abbas, is not rightful to demand interest either."*

Then, the Messenger of Allah added:

*"First of all, my relatives must abandon usury".*

He also in a sermon said:

*"I put all the interests of usury (belonging to) the age of ignorant
under my feet, and the first one I put is the interest of Abbas."* [^16]

### Explanations

1. The requisite of faith is to dispense with the rights of others and
the prohibited wealth.

***"... if you are faithful."***

2. The sign of piety is giving up the unlawful commodity.

***"O' you who have Faith! be in awe of Allah, and forgo what remains
(due to you) of usury..."***

[^1]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, Verse, 262

[^2]: Surah Ar-Rum, No.30, verse 39.

[^3]: Surah 'Al-i-'Imran, No.3, verse 129

[^4]: Surah An-Nisa, No.4, verse 161.

[^5]: The Turah, Exodus, Chapter 23, and Levitious, Chapter 25.

[^6]: Surah Al-Baqarah, no.2, verse 276

[^7]: Wasa'il-ush-Shiah, vol. 12, p. 429.

[^8]: Al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 147.

[^9]: Kanz-ul-'A'mal, vol. 4, p. 104.

[^10]: Wasa'il-ush-Shiah, Vol. 12, p. 430.

[^11]: Muqna'ah, p. 129.

[^12]: Wasa'il-ush-Shi'ah, vol. 12, p. 423.

[^13]: Bihar-al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 1l9.

[^14]: Alhayat, vol. 4, p. 334.

[^15]: Nahjul-Balagha, Saying 447

[^16]: Fi Zilal-il-Quran, Vol. 1, p. 486


