Part 1: At-Tawhid in the Value System of Islam
==============================================

At-Tawhid (Monotheism)-the base of Divine Religions
---------------------------------------------------

The matter to be discussed here is the system of At-Tawhid in the
ideological system and value system of Islam which constitutes the main
base of divine religions, in particular, the sacred religion of Islam.

The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We raised in every people a Messenger saying: ‘Serve
Allah and shun the shaytan’… (16:36).”***

Another ayah (verse of the Holy Qur’an) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ
أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا أَنَا فَاعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send before you any Messenger but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me, therefore, serve Me (21:25)”***

Also, each and every one of Allah’s Prophets (AS), as mentioned in the
Holy Qur’an, from the very outset of their being appointed as a Prophet
by Allah, said to their people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…يَا قَوْمِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مَا لَكُمْ مِنْ إِلَٰهٍ غَيْرُهُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… ‘O my people! Serve Allah, you have no god other than Him’…
(7:59).”***

Also, the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam, at the time of his
Al-Bi’thatun-Nabawiyyah (the appointment by Allah as His Prophet) said:

***“Say there is no god but Allah so that you will find salvation.”***

Prosperity, salvation and felicity both in this world and in the
Hereafter depend upon and are to be sought in At-Tawhid. So, believe in
Allah- the One and bear witness to His Oneness so that you will achieve
salvation.

The Necessity & Significance of At-Tawhid to Al-A’immatul Ma’sumuun (The twelve Infallible Imams)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Besides, it has been narrated from the Infallible Imams (AS), in various
forms that the felicity both in this world and the Hereafter are to be
found in At-Tawhid. One of such ahadith (traditions) is the following:

“The formula: ‘*La ilaha illallah*’ (meaning there is no god but Allah)
is the price of paradise.[^1]”

Also, there are many other ahadith in our books on ahadith indicating
that if a person is a muwahhid (monotheist, believer in One God) and
preserves the belief in At-Tawhid till the end of his life, he will be
protected against and immune from Allah’s torment.

The Hadith bearing Silsilatu-dhdhab
-----------------------------------

Hadrat Ali ibn Musa Ar-Rida (AS) - The Eighth Infallible Imam- in the
hadith bearing silsilatu-dhdhab (golden chain of Infallible narrators),
which he narrated among a gathering of twelve thousand men of learning
and ‘Ulama’ (Islamic scholars) of the city of Nayshapur and in the
social and political conditions prevailing at that time, when he said:
"I heard from my father. Musa ibn Ja’far (AS) who narrated from his
father and forefathers (AS) reaching to ‘Amirul-Mu’mineen (The Commander
of the Faithful), Al-Imam ‘Ali (AS) who narrated from the Holy Prophet
(SA) of Islam, who narrated the same from Jibra’il (the archangel
Gabriel) saying that Allah says,”

“The words *‘La ilaha illallah’* (there is no god but Allah) is My
Fortress, so anybody who entered my fortress became immune from my
torment.[^2]”

So, the words *‘La ilaha illallah’* and bearing witness to At-Tawhid (to
the Oneness of Allah) and belief in Allah The Almighty is the firm
Fortress of the Almighty Allah and the one who believes in At-Tawhid and
hears witness to the Oneness of Allah has entered this firm Fortress and
will be immune from Allah’s torment.

In a number of riwayat, it has been said that anybody who utters these
words of At-Tawhid sincerely, will enter the Paradise, According to the
Imam (AS), the sincere believing in At-Tawhid is to avoid disobedience
to Allah- The One. Anyhow, the riwayat it concerning At-Tawhid are many
and the ‘ulama’ and great men of religious learning’s have written
special books in this connection based on the sayings of the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam and the Infallible Imams (AS) which form an
invaluable treasure.

Here, a question arises and that is what role does belief in At- Tawhid
and in the Oneness of Allah play in man’s individual and social life and
that why this subject has so much been emphasized by Allah’s Prophets
(AS), so much so that they have unanimously put it at the head of their
call (to Allah) and that the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam and the
Infallible Imams (AS) have made utmost efforts and borne many sufferings
to clarify it and clarify the dimensions it has.

The statement made by Amirul-Mu’mineen Al-Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) on the Battle of Al-Jamal
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the Battle of Al-Jamal, a Bedouin Arab said: "I want to talk to
Amirul-Mu’mineen (AS)". He was taken to Amirul-Mu’mineen (AS). Those who
were around Al-Imam, ‘Ali (AS), his Companions and the army commanders,
were looking forward to see what matters that Bedouin Arab had to
discuss with Imam (AS) in that critical situation? Had he got some
information about the war? Had he got any secret news? What kind of
matter it is? While they were all waiting, that Bedouin Arab suddenly
raised the subject of Al-Tawhid, saying:

*“Do you say that indeed Allah is One?”*

Imam (AS)’s companions objected to him, saying: "Is it the proper time
for such talks? Don’t you see that Amirul-Mu’mineen (AS) is busy in
handling the affairs of the war?" Thus they attempted to take him away
from Imam (AS) and hinder him from continuing his talk. However, the
Imam said:

*“Let him speak, what this Bedouin is seeking is the very thing we
demand from these people whom we are fighting with.*[^3]*”*

Imam Ali (AS) meant that the war was for At-Tawhid. Then, in that very
battlefield and in those very conditions and circumstances, Al- Imam
‘Ali (AS) made certain remarks about At-Tawhid which have been recorded
in the books on riwayat, and which arc difficult to be understood even
by us- the educated ones.

By citing the above example, we mean to point out that the matter of
At-Tawhid has been of such a great significance to the Leaders of the
religion of Islam and all the great Prophets (A.S.) that they did not
want to miss any opportunity for paying attention to it, even in the
Battle of Al-Jamal which was being fought against a number of so-called
Muslims and muwahiddin.

Hence, this fundamental principle should be imprinted on the minds of
the people more and more and in a better way and the Muslims should
acquire acquaintance with all its dimensions so that it affects the
felicity of people in both this world and the Hereafter. If At-Tawhid is
known, as it should be, and penetrates into hearts, men’s life will
become totally divine and will be placed in the right direction, on the
straight path and towards the Almighty Allah and will remain immune from
deviational trends, errors and blunders which are all rooted in
deviation from At-Tawhid.

The introduction will hopefully serve to clarify the significance of
this matter from the view point of Islam and all other divine religions;
and, no doubt, this belief can guarantee man’s attitude towards the
world of creation and also man’s conduct towards his perfection. But
how?

At-Tawhid the Root of all Beliefs
---------------------------------

In short, we believe that At-Tawhid is the root of all Haqq (true)
beliefs and the root of all values and we have no doubt in this regard.
However, the question may arise as to how this matter should be
expressed so that it may be proved that At-Tawhid is the basis of all
the true beliefs and the basis of all the right values and how anybody
who becomes a believer in At-Tawhid will become an inmate of Paradise
and will he blessed with felicity both in this world and in the
Hereafter?

In the Holy Qur’an, there is a very interesting and valuable parable
which we would quote here to clarify the relationship of At-Tawhid with
the ideological system and the value system of Islam. The Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ كَيْفَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً
كَشَجَرَةٍ طَيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not considered how Allah has set a parable of a good word
(being) like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in
heaven (14:24).”***

Such a tree will invariably bear sweet and delicious fruits of its own.
However, the word which has no stable root and which is not based on the
firm and solid pillars of the truth and (he reality is the parable of a
tree whose root has been pulled out of the ground. Such a tree will
obviously not only bear no fruit, but will before long decay and be
destroyed too, as says the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَثَلُ كَلِمَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ كَشَجَرَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ اجْتُثَّتْ مِنْ
فَوْقِ الْأَرْضِ مَا لَهَا مِنْ قَرَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the parable of an evil word is as an evil tree pulled up from
the earth’s surface; it has no stability (14:26).”***

In this Quranic parable, the Islamic system has been regarded as a tree
whose root is “Al-Kalimatu tayyibah” (The Holy Kalimah) word, i.e., “La
ilaha illallah” (meaning there is no god but Allah). This word and this
belief is a firm root which becomes established in the hearts of the
talented men and which generates other roots as well.

With the growth of this root and tree, many branches leaves grow and
these will eventually bear blossoms, flowers and delicious and valuable
fruits. And the difference between this tree and the other trees is that
the other trees bear fruit only in particular seasons of the year, but
this tree never ceases to bear fruit and invariably puts its fruit at
the disposal of men, which fruit is nothing other than felicity both in
this world and in the Hereafter.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُؤْتِي أُكُلَهَا كُلَّ حِينٍ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهَا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Yielding its fruit in every season by the permission of its Lord…
(14:25).”***

Description of the relationship between At-Tawhid and the other beliefs
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

By deriving inspiration from this Holy ayah of the Holy Qur’an, we can
attempt to clarify the matter as to what relation exists between
AI-Tawhid and the other beliefs and also between At-Tawhid and the value
system of Islam.

Fortunately, unlike many of the schools of thought which on the basis of
detective thoughts, put together some elements and without having
considered any relationship between those principles and elements, say:
"This ideology as a whole is comprised by a number of principles", the
whole system of the religion of Islam is a coherent, well-knitted and
harmonious system of which all the elements are related to each other
and among which there is no disharmony.

The Two Ideological and value systems of Islam and their Relationship
---------------------------------------------------------------------

As a whole, the content of the religion of Islam can be regarded as a
two-part system and two secondary systems which are interrelated and
united together, and which constitute the whole Islamic system. One is
the system of the beliefs and the other is the system of the values, In
Islam, there are a series of beliefs in which the people should believe,
accept and have faith in and there are a series of values which they
should observe in their actions and behavior.

We call the former part ‘the ideological system’ and the latter ‘the
value system’ of Islam, and by deriving inspiration from the holy verse
regarding ash- shujarutul-tayyibah (the good tree, The Holy Qur’an,
Surah 14, Ayah 24), we can interpret the former part as usul’ud-Din (The
fundamental principles of Islam) and the latter part as furu’ud-Din (the
duties to be performed according to Islamic Shari’ath).

For men’s lives, the beliefs arc like the root of a tree which, if arc
firm in people’s hearts, will also affect their actions, provided that
they have adequate awareness and insight about those and properly know
all the dimensions of beliefs.

So, in the first place, the beliefs should be strengthened and made
firm; and in the second place, attention should be paid to their
practical effects; because though the system of Islam is comprised by
two systems, yet between them there exists a relationship to the similar
relationship between asl (root or principle) and far’ (the branch), the
relationship between the root and the branches and leaves. Hence the
Islamic scholars have called the true beliefs as usul’ud- Din and the
value system (as the furu’ud-Din). The former (the principles) are the
roots of the tree of Islam and the latter (the values) are the branches
of the tree of Islam.

On the other hand, there is mutual (relation of) affecting and being
affected between the root (on one hand) and the branches and the leaves
(on the other). Both the ‘root’ has a vital role in a tree’s growth and
in its development of branches and leaves and also the ‘branches and the
leaves’ have a considerable effect on the strength of the root. So, just
as in the beginning the roots cause the emergence of the branches and
the leaves, the latter, too, in their turn help the root to gain
strength.

In other words: the curve of the relation between the root and the
branch and their changes is the form of zigzag, in the way that from the
root it goes towards the branch and again from the branch it returns to
the root and in this way this current between the ‘root’, namely, the
faith or belief and the ‘branch’, namely, the action will continue, the
stronger the faith, the stronger and more effects it will have in
action; and in the same way, the more a man observes the laws (the
branches) of the religion and acts in accordance with his root belief,
the more will the root of his belief be strengthened. This is a mutual
affecting and being affected (relation) between the root on one hand and
the branches and the leaves on the other, between faith and action,
between worldview and ideology. However, it is basically the worldview
which evolves the ideology.

If we ponder carefully about the above-mentioned ayat of the Holy Quran’
an, once again this relation will be clear to us. In the Holy Qur’an,
Allah (SWT) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ قَبْلِكَ مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِي إِلَيْهِ
أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we did not send before you any Messenger but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me… (21:25).”***

And then Allah expresses the branch attached to the above principle: *“*
... therefore serve Me.”, That is now that you know that Allah is the
One and none other than Him in the world has this position, so you
should serve Me (Allah-The One). Serving (or worshipping) concerns the
action and knowing that Allah is one, causes man to attempt to serve
(worship) Him in action. If that base does not exist, there will not be
any room for this branch and if that root is not firm, this branch will
not bear fruit.

To avoid getting away from the subject, we should mention that the theme
of our discussion is the expression of the status of At-Tawhid in the
ideological system and value system of Islam, that is, in that
collection of beliefs and values in which a Muslim should believe and
which he should observe in action, what position does At-Tawhid have and
what role does it play?

The Relationship of At-Tawhid with other Principles of the Religion
-------------------------------------------------------------------

If we regard At-Tawhid just as this very simple and common concept which
we have learned in religious schools, though it is true, yet it does not
suffice to clarify this relation. We have learned that the first Asl
(principle) of the principles of the religion of Islam is that Allah
(SWT) is one and not two; that the second principle is that the Prophets
(AS) have been truthfully appointed by Allah (SWT) to guide the people;
that the third principle is belief in Ma’ad (the resurrection): that the
fourth principle is that Allah (SWT) is just and that the fifth
principle is that the successor of the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam is the
Ma’sum (Infallible) Imam who has been appointed by Allah (SWT).

If we measure these concepts as described, we will see no relation among
them, for example, between the belief that Allah is One and the belief
that men will he revived on the Resurrection Day. This thought of lack
of relation which at first occurs to the simple-minded persons, is
because At- Tawhid has not been properly understood (by them). To
clarify the relation of these principles with At- Tawhid, we need to
expand these relations to some extent, so that it will become clearly
known that how by uttering *“La ilaha illallah"* (there is no god but
Allah), man’s felicity both in this world and the hereafter will be
secured.

The great Islamic scholar and commentator of the Holy Qur’an -the late
Allamah Tabatabai (may Allah bless his soul) says: At-Tawhid, when
expanded, becomes the whole of Islam, and Islam, when condensed,
At-Tawhid is acquired.”

At-Tawhid is like a compressed treasure which on the surface appears
like a simple ideological principle, but which however, when, expanded
and spread, embraces the whole of Islam. In other words, the whole of
Islam is as a body which is formed by various limbs and parts and of
which the soul is At-Tawhid. If At-Tawhid, namely, the soul is breathed
into this body, it will be a body which is alive, otherwise it will turn
into a lifeless and dead system. The Holy Qur’an has also a comparison
in this connection, it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..كَلِمَةً طَيِّبَةً كَشَجَرَةٍ طَيِّبَةٍ أَصْلُهَا ثَابِتٌ
وَفَرْعُهَا فِي السَّمَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… a good word (being) like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose
branches are in heaven (14:24).”***

At-Tawhid is as the root and base of the religion.

The relationship of Tawhid with Adl
-----------------------------------

With the above introduction, we compare the relationship of each of the
beliefs (the principles of religion) with At-Tawhid: We know that the
Almighty Allah is unique in all perfections; but the uniqueness
(oneness) does not mean the uniqueness (or oneness) which may be
attributed to His creatures, i.e., every being in this world is one, or
as the philosophers say: unity is integrated with the being (wherever
there is a true unity, there is a true being, and wherever there is a
true being, there is unity).

This is the same misconception about the wrongness of which
Amirul-Mu’mineen Al-Imam Ali (AS) expressed to that Bedouin Arab in the
Battle of AI-Jamal. By saying that man or any other being is one, it is
meant that for him (or for the existence of it] two, three or thousands
of other beings can also he imagined. But Allah (SWT) has such Oneness
(or uniqueness) that it is impossible to imagine a second or a number
two for Him and in this same concept His uniqueness or oneness in all
His perfections is conceived.

That is, no one’s power is like Allah’s, wherever there is a power, it
is from Him. That is to say, other than Allah (SWT), no one has any
power or any knowledge of his own, wherever there is knowledge, it is
from Allah (SWT); wherever there is life, it is from Allah (SWT);
wherever there is perfection and beauty, it is from Allah (SWT).

If we understand the fact that the Almighty Allah possesses each and
every perfection of being infinite, we will know that no imperfection
can be imagined for Him. And naturally such a One, Who is the very
perfection and from whom every perfection emanates and stems, does not
perform any action which does not cause any perfection and which does
not lead to the emergence of perfection and also His aim of the creation
of His creatures is nothing other than their perfection and eternal
salvation.

And, He is also devoid of oppression which is a behavior away from
perfection and will treat each and every individual on the basis of ‘adl
(Justice) and fairness. So we see that the second principle of the
principles of the religion, namely, ‘adl has direct relation with
At-Tawhid and knowing the Oneness of Allah (SWT).

The relationship of At-Tawhid with Nubuwwah
-------------------------------------------

Nubuwwah (Prophethood), too, has such a relationship. If you invite a
guest to your house and insistently ask him to be your guest today, but
do not give him the address of your house, you have quite obviously not
done a wise act. Can it really be said that you desire to have the
person as your guest while you have not shown him the way.

If a person seriously means to be a host, he will certainly give the
would-be-guest the address of his house and will even warn the guest of
the mistakes which may possibly occur due to the resemblance of the
alleys and this is a wise act. Allah (SWT), too, has created men so that
they will attain eternal felicity. Therefore, as His wisdom demands,
Allah (SWT) should appoint Prophets (AS) to guide His creatures, show
them the way, keep them away from mistakes and errors and hence it is
again knowing Allah which leads us to (the knowledge of) Nubuwwah
(Prophethood ).

In the wake of the proof of sending the Prophets (AS), Divine Wisdom
demands that after the demise of Allah’s (Last) prophet (SA), Prophet
Muhammad (SA) - The Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam, people will not be left
without a leader and guide and will know whom to refer to when
encountering with problems. Thus the matter of Imamah (succession of
Prophet Muhammad (SA) by the Twelve Infallible Imams (AS)) is realized.

The relationship of At-Tawhid with Ma’ad
----------------------------------------

After the way (to Allah) has been clarified, the people either traverse
the way exactly as the prophets (AS) and their successors (AS) have
illustrated and follow the same path which they have directed, or they
deviate from that way. It will be away from Justice and wise conduct if
these two groups, (namely, those who have traversed that straight way,
have overlooked their desires and lusts and have sacrificed their lives
in the way of the exaltation of the words of At-Tawhid on one hand, and
those who have fought against them (against the followers of Allah’s
way) are looked upon with the same eye.

So, Divine wisdom & justice demands that after this world in which the
kafir (the infidel or the disbeliever) and the mu’min (the faithful or
the believer), the lewd and the virtuous equally enjoy material
blessings, there be another world (i.e., Ma’ad - the Resurrection) the
blessings of which will be exclusively endowed to the faithful and
Allah’s friends and the torment of which will be exclusively given to
the infidels and the enemies of Allah (SWT).

So, knowing the Almighty Allah and the attributes particular to Him
creates these other beliefs, like the main root of the tree which when
planted inside the earth, other roots will be brought into existence
from it, which however, collectively form a system. When these roots
become firm and the tree starts its vital activity, it begins to develop
branches and leaves, namely, these beliefs affect man’s action and give
direction to his behavior, just as in the ideological system of Islam,
At-Tawhid is the fundamental pivot and the mother root, so also in the
value system of Islam, Al-Tawhid (monotheism, worshipping the One God -
Allah) and serving Allah (SWT) is the essence of all values, and
basically any value set forth in Islam traces back to worshipping Allah
(SWT).

At-Tawhid-The Pivot of the value system (of Islam)
--------------------------------------------------

Unlike other value systems, the value system is not constituted by
dispersed and inharmonious elements, rather, it is an overall value
which is manifested in various forms and which is regarded as
miscellaneous manifestations of worshipping Allah (SWT). The root of
these values in Islam is devoting one’s heart to Allah (SWT) and
whole-heartedly loving Him, and it is with the existence of this love
that all values emerge and man no longer gets attached to this world.
The one who falls in love with Allah (SWT) and firmly plants His love in
his heart will no longer love the luxuries of this world and the worldly
possessions will not be of any value to him.

If a man whose heart is to be Allah’s place (as there is a riwayat which
says: *“A* *mu’min’s (a faithful person’s heart) is the ‘Arsh (the
throne of Allah) of Allah, The Compassionate”)* attaches his heart to
worldly possessions such as cattle, land & stones, he has certainly not
known Allah (SWT), for, if a person knows Allah (SWT), he will know that
no one other than Him is worthy of being worshipped, then he will
acquire no love for this world, and when there is no love for this
world, there will no longer emerge any jealousy, envy, stinginess,
enmity and rancor.

There will no longer emerge so many evils and mischiefs which are the
result of love for worldly position, there will no longer emerge
oppressions and injustice stemming from domination-seeking and the root
of all such conflicts, which arc due to the worldly matters, will dry
up. To the one who has no love for worldly possessions, the existence
and non-existence of such, possessions are the same. Such a person wants
worldly possessions to be a means for his perfection, or to spend them
in the way of Allah (SWT) so that it will be rewarded with a lasting
reward (in the Hereafter) for him (by Allah (SWT)).

The one, who comes to know Allah (SWT) and in whose heart is Allah’s
love becomes established will want for Allah (SWT) each and every thing
he may want. If Allah (SWT) commands him to hold such and such a
position so that by holding that position he could serve the people, he
will accept Allah’s command whole-heartedly, hut if it is just a
passion, he will never attempt to hold such a position, because it would
become an idol and At-Tawhid is not consistent with worshipping idols.

There is a hadith (tradition) with various documents in our books on
riwayat, including the book Al-Kafi as follows:

*“The ruin which two wolves, one from the front, and the other from
behind, that causes a herd to be left alone by its herder, is not
greater than a ruin caused to a Muslim’s faith by love of wealth and
love of position”*[^4]*.*

Imagine a herd of sheep left alone by its shepherd and this herd
(without their shepherd) has been caught by two wolves having attacked
the herd, from two sides. How much of these sheep do you think will
remain unharmed? Obviously, no sheep will he left unharmed and a great
harm will be suffered by the herd.

In the above hadith, the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam says that the harm
caused by two hungry wolves for a herd of sheep, is not more than the
harm caused by love for wealth and position to a Muslim’s faith, because
the love of wealth and love of position become idols for persons and
drive them out of At-Tawhid. So, just as At-Tawhid constitutes the root
of all facts and the axis of an ideological system or in today’s words,
the pivot of the worldview of Islam, so it is also the pivot of the
value system and the ideology of Islam.

Can At-Tawhid be found by Education?
------------------------------------

Discussion about the issue of At-Tawhid has various dimensions, part of
which is specialized and technical in nature and has to be surveyed in
scientific centers, just as the reality of At-Tawhid and the knowledge
of Allah (SWT) is a light which has to be shone by the Almighty Allah in
fit and pure hearts and that reality will not be acquired through
discussion and dialogue.

In the du’a (invocation to Allah) of ‘Arafah by Sayyid’ush-Shuhada’ (The
Lord of the Martyrs) AI-Imam Al-Husain (AS), we read:

*“O Allah! You are the One who shone the lights in the hearts of Your
righteous servants so that they knew You and Your Oneness and You are
the One who wiped out the aliens from the hearts of Your righteous
servants so that they love none but You and took refuge in none but
You.”* [^5]

However, in spite of all this, it is not so that the discussion and
education about the issues of At-Tawhid be closed and there be no way
other than shining lights in the hearts, as the exalted Prophets (AS)
too, taught realities concerning At-Tawhid alongside emphasizing action,
Ikhlas (sincerity of intention) in the acts of worship, and would miss
no opportunity, even in the battle-field and during Jihad (Holy War) for
the expansion of this great knowledge.

As already mentioned, At-Tawhid on one hand constitutes the pivot of the
ideological system and the more it becomes perfect, the greater will
become the belief in other realities and beliefs which are in fact
manifestations of faith and belief in At-Tawhid and on the other hand,
it (At-Tawhid) is the structure of the value system of Islam, namely,
each true perfection and virtue is acquired in the light of At-Tawhid
and stems from the root of At-Tawhid.

In other words, when At-Tawhid is manifested in action, it bears the
fruit of morality and virtue and its effects in the eternal world will
be (attaining) different degrees of the paradise. So, difference in the
degrees of the Paradise and true perfections are in fact subject to the
difference of the stage and degree of At-Tawhid of men.

At-Tawhid in Creation
---------------------

One of the most simple and most easy way to understand degrees of
At-Tawhid is At-Tawhid in creation, namely, that one believes that the
world of being has been created by One Creator. This belief existed even
among the polytheists. The Holy Qur’an quotes from the polytheists of
Makah and the idolaters who were during the life-time of the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam as having said that concerning their idols they
did not believe in creation, rather, they regarded the idols as a means
for drawing near to the One God and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا نَعْبُدُهُمْ إِلَّا لِيُقَرِّبُونَا إِلَى اللَّهِ زُلْفَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We do not serve then except that they make us nearer to Allah…
(39:3).”***

The idolaters imagined that Allah The Almighty, has daughters named the
angels (God forbid) and with this imagination, they made imaginary
physical portraits for them and worshipped them so that the souls and
lords of those idols would he pleased and as a result they would
intercede with the One God (for the idolaters).

In another ayah, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ
لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will
certainly say Allah… (31:25).”***

So, the Polytheists of Makah did not deny Allah, rather they believed in
gods lower than the level of the One God and worshipped them by making
their idols. They believed that gods hold the power and a authority over
the world and that the affairs of the world are managed according to
their view, i.e., it is they who are effective in the revolution of the
moon and the sun, in the emergence of the earthly phenomena and in men’s
felicity and adversity, that some were in charge of the management of
the seas, some others had undertaken the responsibility for the land,
that some had supervision over the affairs of the wars and some managed
the affairs of the men.

Theses polytheists considered the world to have numerous directors and
believed in Lords of the species. And this is the mailer against which
the Holy Qur’an has contested most severely. And, the Holy Qur’an
clarifies to the people that the same One Who is the Creator of the
world is also the (One) Lord and the Manager or the world and that none
can cause any effect or change in His creatures without His permission.

With this explanation, it becomes clear that in Islam mere belief in the
Oneness of the Creator is not sufficient and that Islam does not
consider those who have such beliefs to be monotheists and worshippers
of Allah ­The One and Only, rather, At-Tawhid in Lordship (belief in One
Lord) should also be added to belief in One Creator.

At-Tawhid in Rububiyyah (Lordship)
----------------------------------

If we comprehend Allah’s Lordship and properly understand its reality,
we will see that its concept is very extensive and has many
manifestations. As a whole, Lordship is divided into two pans: One
lordship is takwini (pertaining to creation) and the other lordship is
tashri’i (pertaining to Divines laws and religion).

Al-Tawhid pertaining to lordship in creation is to believe that
management and running of the world in the realities of creation are in
the hand of the Almighty Allah and to believe that the revolution of the
moon and the sun, the emergence of the day and the night, men’s life and
death and the protection of the creatures and the world from destructive
strikes and clashes is with Allah and it is He Who preserves the heavens
and the earth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُمْسِكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ أَنْ تَزُولَا..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah upholds the heavens and the earth lest they come to
naught… (35:41).”***

Just in the same way, the coming into being of every creature in any
part of this spacious world, its growth, its death, its reproduction and
or its emerging any sign(s) of being, are all under the management and
will-power of Allah The Almighty and there is no phenomenon outside the
sphere of the Lordship of the Almighty Allah. Breathing, speaking,
listening, the movement of the wind, the growth of the plants, the
movement of even a little leaf on the branches of a tree, the movement
of an ant, and even a movement of a gnat are not outside Divine Lordship
and no being in any part of the world can make the least movement
without His permission in creation.

Therefore, there will no longer be any room for independently bringing
about changes or affecting by angels and other creatures of Allah and
any change or effect brought about by the creatures, it is under Allah’s
permission in creation and due to the power Allah has given them and
they have no independence of their own in the fulfillment of an action
and in applying that power.

That is to say, it is not that even if Allah does not will, a creature
is able to fulfill an action, bring about a phenomenon and/or create a
change in the world. Allah’s will-power in creation is dominant over the
whole world and everything lies under His will-power. Of course, this
does not mean compulsion and is neither inconsistent with men’s
freewill, the description on which has been given in its own place.

Rububiyyah pertaining to Divine Laws
------------------------------------

Another part of Lordship contains men’s freedom of will and choice.
Among the creatures, Allah (SWT) has created in this natural world,
there are groups of which the movements, effects and evolutions arc
subject to the actions which they fulfill out of their own freewill and
they are human beings. To reach his true perfection, man must move with
his own freewill and choice, for, if a movement emerges in man out of
compulsion, it will not be a human movement.

For instance, if a man is lifted with a crane from one place and taken
to another place, it would be a mechanical movement, not a human
movement. Also the growth of the body which is common to the plants,
animals and men is a vegetal movement and the movement will in reality
be human which stems from the origin of man’s freewill and choice, even
though the will-power is bestowed upon man by Allah and it is Allah Who
provides the conditions for work, it is also Allah Who creates the
matter and it is also Allah Who gives man the ability to act and the
fact is that in each and every moment man needs Allah’s creation and
bestowal, but in spite of all this, the action which emerges from man is
from the origin or his own freewill and choice and such an act is human.
Now let us see how Allah’s management is, regarding these acts which man
fulfils out of his own freewill.

Allah’s Rububiyyah demands that besides putting the origins of
willpower, choice, the means and the toots of work at men’s disposal, He
also introduces to him the proper knowledge of the true and straight
way, lets him know the good and the bad and issues and stipulates
commands and laws for his individual and social life and this is the
meaning or Lordship in divine legislation.

So, At-Tawhid in Lordship in creation demands that man believes that the
management or the affairs or the world and or men in creational matters
which are beyond his own willpower are attributed to Allah the Almighty,
just as at-Tawhid in regard to Rububiyyah pertaining to Divine Laws
demands that man gets the direction for life only from Allah, regards
the right of law-giving to be only Allah’s and considers no other being
to have any independent right in giving laws.

That is to say, to him the law should be valid which has been legislated
by Allah’s permission and which is based on the legislative permission
of the Almighty Allah, the very permission which Allah has given to the
Holy Prophet (SA) and the Infallible Imams (SA) and this permission has
been communicated through the nass (divine decree, explicit stipulation)
of the Infallible Imams (SA), in a general way, to the qualified Fuqaha
(Islamic Jurisprudents), the very thing in our society which is
recognized as one of the pivots of religion, namely, Wilayatul Faqih
(the guardianship of the Islamic Jurisprudents).

So, the laws are valid to the monotheists (believers in At-Tawhid
because they are eventually supported by and based upon the divine
legislative permission given by Allah and if such base and support do
not exist, no law will be valid to the monotheists and rather it will be
considered a kind of shirk (polytheism)).

Quranic Ayah in regard to Rububiyyah pertaining to creation
-----------------------------------------------------------

Lordship in creation has many parables and innumerable ayat of the Holy
Qur’an denote its validity. For instance, wherever we encounter the word
Rabb (Lord) in the Holy Qur’an, it points this fact:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O men! worship your Lord Who created you and those before you, so
that you may practice taqwa (2:21).”***

You should worship the One Who is the Lord of you, of those who were
before you and of all creatures.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ خَالِقُ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا
هُوَ فَأَنَّىٰ تُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of everything; there is no god
but He; whence are you then turned away (40:62).”***

Your Lord is only Allah, so which way are you are being taken and to
which direction arc you being deviated? Your direction should be towards
Allah Who is your Lord. The sentence *“Al-hamdu lillahi Rabbil alamin”*
(All praise is due to Allah-The Lord of the worlds) (Surah 1 of the Holy
Qur’an) which each Muslim is duty-bound to repeat at least ten times
each day (in wajib salawat) is an emphasis on this matter that every day
we repeatedly take notice of the fact that the Lordship of the world of
being, the possession of power, authority and control over the world,
the management and running of the world arc wholly and perfectly in the
hands of the Almighty Allah.

The position of Lordship in Divine Legislation and the required level of At-Tawhid
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As for Lordship in Divine Legislation, we know that from the Islamic
perspective and in accordance with the teachings which the Holy Our’ an
presents, the origin of deviation in belief and action is Iblis which is
the same being who had been created before Hazrat Adam (AS) and had been
engaged in worshipping Allah for many years. Amirul-Mu’mineen (The
commander of the faithful) Al- Imam ‘Ali (AS) says in "Nahjul-
Balaghah":

*“Iblis worshipped Allah for six thousand years, while we do not know
whether it was the years of this world or of the years of the
hereafter*[^6]*”*

Iblis worshipped Allah for six thousand years and yet it is not known
whether these years have been of the years of this world each year of
which is 365 days or of the years of the other world each day of which
is one thousand years. Anyhow, for a very long period of time which is
not quite imaginable for us, Iblis had existed and had been worshipping
Allah (SWT), so that the angels had though that Iblis was of the angels
and had given it a place in their own ranks. But Iblis had a two-sided
nature (namely, like man, it had free will) and had to be tested so that
the level of its At-Tawhid and knowledge of Allah (SWT) would emerge and
it would become clear whether he had the necessary level of At-Tawhid or
not.

The test of Iblis was realized through Hazrat Adam (AS), in the way that
after the creation of Hazrat Adam (AS), Iblis was commanded (By Allah)
to perform sajdah (prostration) to Adam (AS). But Iblis disobeyed this
Divine command and because of this disobedience, it was driven away from
the nearness to Allah and became the head of the inmates of hell and the
rest of the inmates of hell will go to hell for following Iblis.

But why the one who has worshipped Allah (SWT) in His Oneness is driven
away from His nearness for one opposition and one sin and reaches such a
level of wretchedness which is unthinkable for us? What is the secret
behind the fact that so much worship is ignored and Iblis falls so low
because of just one sin?

The analysis which on the basis of Islamic outlook can be made on this
matter is that the sin of Iblis stemmed from defect in its At-Tawhid,
manifested itself in the form of a practical disobedience (to Allah) and
caused its fall. Because in reality Iblis did not believe in whatever
Allah (SWT) commands, His creatures should accept His command
unquestionably, Iblis said;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..أَنَا خَيْرٌ مِنْهُ خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…I am better than he; You have created me out of fire**,* ***while
him did you create out of dust (7:12).”***

What is this command You are giving me, how should I prostrate to Adam
while I am better than him? These words in fact arose from Iblis spirit
of disbelief and unfaithfulness and were demonstrative of his inner and
hidden kufr. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَكَانَ مِنَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And he was one of the disbelievers (2:34)”***

Such disbelief existed in Iblis before, but it had not yet emerged and
turned into the stage of action. Iblis did not have belief up to the
required level of At-Tawhid and did not believe that the right to
command order and inhabit unquestionably belongs exclusively to Allah
(SWT) and whatever He commands has to be fulfilled: otherwise, Iblis
believed in the One God and he also talked to Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..خَلَقْتَنِي مِنْ نَارٍ وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…You have created me out of fire**,* ***while him did you create out
of dust (7:12).”***

Iblis even believed in Allah’s Lordship in creation and in the
Resurrection Day.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..أَنْظِرْنِي إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Respite me until the day when they are raised up (7:14)”.***

So, Iblis had neither any defect in the principle of belief in Allah’s
being the Creator, or in belief in Allah’s Lordship in creation and nor
in belief in ma’ad. But still he falls so much! Why? Because he does not
believe in Allah’s Lordship in Law-giving (Divine legislation) and docs
not regard Allah’s command to be obeyed unquestionably, unless Allah’s
command would be consistent with (Ibis’s) own thought and desire.

There are many evidences proving that the Almighty Allah regards those
ones as mushrik (polytheist) who consider the right of independent
law-giving for themselves or for the others, , including the Jews and
the Christians who thought their ‘ulama’ (religious scholars) and monks
to be their Lords and who are reproached by Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّخَذُوا أَحْبَارَهُمْ وَرُهْبَانَهُمْ أَرْبَابًا مِنْ دُونِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have taken their doctors of law and their monks for lords
besides Allah (9:31).”***

In the riwayat, in the interpretation of this ayah of the Holy Qur’an,
it has been said that they unquestionably obeyed the chiefs of the
churches and the synagogues. That is, just as they considered it
necessary to obey the commands of Allah’s Book, so also they regarded it
incumbent to obey the command of the council of the church and the
command of the council of the synagogue, such as also today such things
exist among various Christian groups that sometimes the council of the
church decides and makes a law named religious law, and the Christians
are obliged to regard it as divine and Christian law.

This is in reality the shirk in legislation (law-giving) and in lordship
in legislation. A monotheist should consider the right of law-giving to
be independently for the Almighty Allah and should consider valid only
the law which is given in the light of Allah’s legislative permission.

So, the required level of At-Tawhid in Islam. namely, the first level at
which man is considered a muwahhid (monotheist) from the Islamic
viewpoint is that man believes in the Oneness of the Creator, the
Oneness of the Lord in (relation to) creation and the Oneness of the
Lord in (relation to) law-giving. That is, man should believe that the
Creator, The Lord, The Master, The Holder of power and control over the
world and also the Genuine is One.

At-Tawhid in Ubudiyyah (servitude) to Allah
-------------------------------------------

After belief in the above matters, there comes the turn of At-Tawhld in
Ma’abud (The Worshipped One). That is, besides all these, a muwahhid
(monotheist) person should believe that no one but Allah (SWT) Who is
the Absolute Lord and the Absolute Law-Giver is worthy of being
worshipped. Belief in this matter, (At-Tawhid in Divinity and in Being
Worshipped) is among the ‘usul (Principles) of the religion of Islam but
its external practice is rated among the furu’ of the laws of the
religion of Islam. Therefore, for a muwahhid, it is necessary to know
the Creator, the Lord and the Planner of the World, the Chief Law- Giver
and also the Only One Who is worthy of being worshipped to be Allah and
all these have been summed up in the pure word:

*“La ilaha illallah (There is no god but Allah).”*

This word, besides denoting At-Tawhid in (Allah’s) being the Creator,
also guarantees the other stages of At-Tawhid and without these, the
least of At- Tawhid from the Islamic viewpoint is not achieved. This
stage aside, there are the perfection stages of At-Tawhid which stages
man should gradually reach from the viewpoint of knowing Allah and put
into practice from the viewpoint of action.

The important point which should be pointed out here is that if a person
really believes in At-Tawhid in Allah’s Lordship, namely, if he regards
the management of the affairs of the world to be exclusively in the
hands of Almighty Allah, he will certainly observe certain effects in
his life, the first stage of which being his refusal to bow down in
humiliation to any being (other than Allah), because when man believes
that the power and control of the whole being is in the hands of Allah,
there is no longer any reason for him to pay homage to anybody.

A man bows down and pays homage to the others when he considers them to
be effective in an action and or runner of an action. But when one the
management that the whole world is in the Hands of One God, he no longer
pays homage to anybody (but Allah). The Muslims of the early period of
Islam, by realizing this very fact that the term At-Tawhid includes such
meaning, were built-up and in a short lime this knowledge about Allah
and His virtues were manifested out of them and they achieved such great
positions.

All have heard that when the armies of Islam reached Iran, the Iranians
sent a commander of an army to speak to the armies of Islam to ask them
what they wanted to say and what they wanted from them, money, position,
land or, did they want something else?

The troops of Islam, the very persons who had been trained in the light
of Islam for several years and had benefited from the Holy Qur’an, had
reached such a high level of attitude, broad-mindedness, and magnanimity
of spirit and endeavor, replied:

*“We have not come to take any money from you or to occupy any land,
rather we have come to liberate Allah’s creatures from the yoke of
slavery to you. Our aim is that human beings all over* *the world be
liberated from slavery and servitude to persons like themselves who are
also the creatures of Allah*[^7]*.”*

Man should acquire such greatness and should not make himself humble or
low before anyone other than Allah.

Manifestations in At-Tawhid in Ubudiyyah to Allah
-------------------------------------------------

The slogan of “Allahu Akbar” (Allah is the Great) which today prevails
in the Islamic Republic of Iran and for which slogan, namely, the slogan
of “Allahu Akbar”, the world knows us, conveys this very meaning that
greatness and magnanimity is exclusive to Allah and that man should only
humble himself to Allah and to no one else unless Allah commands to
respect others, as He has commanded us to respect our parents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنَ الرَّحْمَةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion…
(17:24).”***

Such an expression of submissiveness is ‘ibadah (servitude) to Allah and
humbling before His infinite greatness and a muwahhid does so only at
the command of Almighty Allah. And the same is also true of humbling
before the Holy prophet (SA) and the Infallible Imams (AS).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Messenger… (49:1).”***

Otherwise the person of the Holy Prophet (SA) and the Imams (AS), apart
from their relation to Allah The Almighty and the respect in which Allah
has held them, from the viewpoint of a muwahhid, should not in
themselves be sanctified and before them one should not humble himself.
This respect too in which the people hold the successors of the Imam
(AS) and today for the esteemed leader of the Islamic Revolution is in
fact servitude to Allah.

This respect is not out of family relations with him, nor is it because
of greed for wealth or fear of punishment. This is a sentiment which
stems from At- Tawhid, and since our people have acquired the love for
Allah, they hold in greater respect anybody who is nearer to Allah and
who endeavors more for the establishment of His rule and before such a
person, they consider their lives of little values.

That some Sunni brother accuse the Shi’ahs and the other Muslims of
shirk, it is out of the misunderstanding that has arisen from this very
matter. They imagine that At- Tawhid in Allah’s Lordship and in His
being the Worshipped (One demand that man holds no other one in respect,
because if one does so and/or for example kisses the grave of the
Prophet (SA) or the Imams (AS), he will be a mushrik.

Such accusations are due to unawareness of the fact that this respect is
in fact the respect for Allah and for divine positions. Were it not for
Allah’s command and were it not for the relation which Allah’s awliya’
(friends) have towards Allah - The exalted, this could be considered a
stage of shirk, but now that it is done in obedience to Allah’s command
and due to the relation of Allah’s awliya’ to Him, it is not only not
the shirk, but is also the very At-Tawhid, It is Allah Who commands us
to respect His Prophets (AS) and awliya’ and it is also Allah Who says:
If anybody wants his sin to be forgiven (by Allah), he should go to the
door of the house of the Holy prophet (SA) of Islam.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ إِذْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ جَاءُوكَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا
اللَّهَ وَاسْتَغْفَرَ لَهُمُ الرَّسُولُ لَوَجَدُوا اللَّهَ تَوَّابًا
رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger had (also) asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning (to
mercy), Merciful (4:64).”***

Allah says that for the forgiveness of your sins you should refer to the
Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam, he asks (Allah for) forgiveness for you and
you yourselves ask (Allah for) forgiveness, then Allah will forgive your
sins, At that time too, the munafiqun (the hypocrites) said: "We will
ask forgiveness before Allah Himself, then why should we also go to the
Prophet?" They refused to go to the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam, to
express their want to him, to appeal to him and to request him to act as
intercessor with Allah for them.

This refusal brought about their nifaq (hypocrisy) and deprived them of
Allah’s favor and of the Holy Prophet (SA)’s asking Allah for
forgiveness for them and it was because of this very disregard and
hypocrisy that Allah said (to the Holy Prophet (SA) ): "Even if you ask
forgiveness for them seventy times, they will not be forgiven (by
Allah);" "Why? Because they rendered arrogance and disobedience towards
Allah’s command and did not observe the respect which they should have
paid towards the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam. Since they disbelieved in
Allah’s blessing, they are no longer deserving of Allah’s forgiveness,
even if the Holy Prophet (SA) himself asks forgiveness for them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…اسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ أَوْ لَا تَسْتَغْفِرْ لَهُمْ إِنْ تَسْتَغْفِرْ
لَهُمْ سَبْعِينَ مَرَّةً فَلَنْ يَغْفِرَ اللَّهُ لَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them; even if
you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive them…
(9:80).”***

So, those who out of arrogance, refuse to pay respect to the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam and to Allah’s awliya’ and feel scorned to be
humble before Allah’s awliya’, will not deserve Allah’s Mercy. They are
not only not muwahhidun, but have rather the worst kind of shirk,
namely, the very kind of shirk which Iblis had, whereas, had they any
shirk in Allah’s being the Creator, this would not cause so much
degradation for them.

If those who have recognized the One God and who know that all things in
the world arc in His hands disobey His command and arc arrogant before
Him, they are then worse than those who have not known Him and hence
Iblis is worse than the idolaters, though he had recognized Allah and
had also worshipped Him, So, the one who has recognized Allah, has
understood His greatness and still disobeys Him, is more deserving of
fall and torment than the one who has not yet acquired any recognition
of Allah and has not known Him.

Therefore, it should not be wrongly imagined that belief in At-Tawhid in
Allah’s Lordship has any inconsistency with the belief of the Shi’ahs
and of the majority of the Muslims about the Prophets (AS) and the Holy
Imams (AS).

We do not regard anyone to be independently effective in the creation
and management of the world besides Allah and alongside Him, However, we
believe that Allah The Almighty has granted certain powers to some of
His creatures and that He has willed that many of the works he fulfilled
through the channel of their will-power, Allah fulfils miracles at the
hands of His Prophets (AS) and even that He revives the dead at the
hands of ‘Isa (Jesus Christ) (AS), it is by no means inconsistent with
At-Tawhid in revival.

The true Reviver is Allah and it is He Who grants such a power to ‘Isa
(AS), the son of Maryam (AS) and also grants any power to anybody He
wills, as He has willed to grant such power to our Holy Imams (AS) and
this belief has not only no inconsistency with At-Tawhid, but is also of
the stages of At-Tawhid. Just as Allah tested Iblis through commanding
him to obey Adam (AS) and be humble before him, so He will also test
other creatures of His through commanding them to obey His Prophets (AS)
and awliya’.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا مِنْ رَسُولٍ إِلَّا لِيُطَاعَ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send any Messenger but that he should be obeyed by
Allah’s permission… (4:64).”***

Thus, as Allah has commanded, it is incumbent upon all the people to
obey the Prophets (AS) and the one who refuses to obey the Prophets (AS)
has refused to obey Allah.

According to a riwayat, Iblis said to Allah: *"I will worship you as
much as you want,* *exempt me from prostrating to Adam."* But Allah
addressed him; *"If you want to* *worship Me, worship Me the way I want
you to."* Otherwise, you have obeyed your own desire and worshipped your
own passions. If you are a worshipper of Allah, you should step in the
way which Allah has ordained, not the way which your own imperfect mind
thinks, as some groups had invented some ways for worshipping Allah.

This kind of worship in fact traces back to worshipping oneself, not to
worshipping Allah. Therefore, to believe that Allah’s awliya’ are
endowed with certain levels of creational guardianship and bring about
certain changes in this world by Allah’s permission is the same as
At-Tawhid and to appeal to them and to ask them for intercession (with
Allah) has no sort of inconsistency with At-Tawhid.

The Reality of At-Tawhid
------------------------

In this part of the discussion, it is very appropriate to take certain
points. The first point is that: At-Tawhid is not just to profess by
tongue and to bear witness to the Oneness of (Allah) and the Prophethood
(of Prophet Muhammad (SA)) although the utterance of shahadatayn (the
two witnesses by a Muslim that Allah (SWT) is One and Prophet Muhammad
(SA) is His Messenger) cause a number of external decrees in this world
to embrace the one (who utters the shahadatayn).

However, that At-Tawhid which is the source of man’s eternal felicity
and his true perfection docs not revolve around the axis of word and
tongue, rather it (At-Tawhid) is a reality in the heart and is a faith
which develops in the heart. To express At-Tawhid and to utter
shahadatayn is a factor for which the person (who expresses At-Tawhid
and utters the shahadatayn) receives Islamic treatment, his body is
regarded as tahir (Islamically pure), he may marry a Muslim and his life
and property is safe, and slaughtering of animals by him for meat is
halal (Islamically lawful).

But it is by no means indicative of the perfection of the soul and
eternal felicity (of the person), because there may be some who
apparently claim Islam, whose life and property arc protected and the
(meat of) an animal slaughtered by them is considered halal, but who
have, however, no trace of spirituality and eternal salvation, and who
even in the hereafter, are placed in the lowest parts of Hell, such as a
munafiqun who apparently claim Islam, but who have no faith in their
hearts, about whom the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..الْمُنَافِقِينَ فِي الدَّرْكِ الْأَسْفَلِ مِنَ النَّارِ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…the hypocrites are in the lowest stage of the fire… (4:145).”***

And for this very reason in the hereafter, the condition of the
hypocrites is worse than that of those who openly expressed kufr and
shirk.

So, what becomes the source or eternal felicity is the faith in the
heart which should develop in the heart out or insight and awareness and
a muwahhid should devote his heart to Allah (SWT).

Expression of At-Tawhid with the tongue and not out of conviction
-----------------------------------------------------------------

During the early period of Islam, there were some people who out of
unawareness and following the social wave expressed about embracing
Islam, in the way that when the distinguished classes of the society and
the famous persons in the community became Muslim, then following them,
this unaware class, too, embraced Islam. The Holy Qur’an, while
accepting their external Islam and not rejecting them, warns them not to
think that they have real faith, and tells them rather what they have
acquired is an external Islam and that they should try so that iman
(faith in Islam) enters into their hearts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتِ الْأَعْرَابُ آمَنَّا قُلْ لَمْ تُؤْمِنُوا وَلَٰكِنْ قُولُوا
أَسْلَمْنَا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The dwellers of the desert say: we believe. Say: You do not believe
but say, we submit; … (49:14).”***

The desert-dwelling Arabs said that we believe and arc like other
believers. Allah The Almighty told the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam to
tell them that they have not yet believed and faith has not yet entered
into their hearts, that however they were Muslims and if they wanted to
become true believers and to use the spiritual and eternal effects of
faith, they should try so that faith would enter into their hearts and
that they would attain trust and certainty (in faith) and devote their
hearts to Allah out of insight and awareness and that it is then that
they would be among true believers.

Anyhow, one of the critical and dangerous currents of the early period
of Islam was this very issue or nifaq, that a number of persons
apparently expressed Islam, but did not believe in Allah and in the Holy
Prophet (SA) in their hearts. Of course, shirk, and kufr have stages,
just as Islam and iman have stages. Some of these munafiqun were the
most obstinate enemies of Islam and of Prophet Muhammad (SA), but some
others were not as obstinate although they did not like the Islamic
system either. In description of some of these munafiqun the Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَإِذَا قَامُوا إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ قَامُوا كُسَالَىٰ يُرَاءُونَ
النَّاسَ وَلَا يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And when they stand up for the salat they stand up sluggishly;
they do it only to be seen of by the people and they do not remember
Allah but a little (4:142).”***

Such munafiqun take part in the salawat, go to the mosque, attend the
congregational prayers, but with listlessness, languidness, without
enthusiasm and just for showing themselves to the others and making them
believe that they are also among those who recite salawat; and by
attending religious gatherings their purpose is also the same, as the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..يُرَاءُونَ النَّاسَ وَلَا يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…They do it only to be seen of by the people and they do not
remember Allah but a little (4:142).”***

And in their hearts they have but little remembrance of Allah and this
is one of the styles of the Holy Qur’an that if some individuals have
even a little attention to and remembrance (of Allah), Allah makes an
exception of them.

By the above statements we meant to point out the fact that external
Islam may be accompanied by inner disbelief; there may be persons who
are apparently Muslims and who even perform the acts of the Muslims, but
who have no faith in their hearts, for iman is a different matter. That
it is said that the body of a person who has uttered shahadatayn is
tahir and his blood is immune, should not prompt one to imagine that
eternal felicity is also attained by him. The former is one matter and
the latter is another matter. The former concerns fiqh (Islamic
Jurisprudence) and the latter concerns beliefs and commandments.

Obligation to At-Tawhid
-----------------------

Another point which should be taken note of is that some feeble-minded
persons who more or less exist in all societies, when coming across the
mutashabih (metaphorical, intricate) Ayat and riwayat, mean them
according to their own advantage and do not pursue the muhkam (clear)
Ayat and riwayat which interpret the mutashabih ayat. For instance,
there is a riwayah which states; *"If anybody utters the word ‘La ilaha
illallah’ (There is no god but Allah), he will enter Paradise"*.

There is also the well-known silsilatudh-e-dhahab (The golden chain)
riwayah from Al-Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa Ar-Rida (AS) (the eighth Imam of the
Shi’ahs) which states: *"The words la ilaha ilIallah are my fortress."*
The weak-minded individuals think that just saying "La iaiha illallah"
suffices to make one enter Paradise, whereas mere verbal utterance and
the movement of the tongue do not work and can only be the source of
external decrees. In the terminology of Ayat and riwayat, by uttering a
word, verbal utterance is not meant, rather belief in the heart is meant
which has been interpreted in other riwayat and reference should be made
to them, so that by paying attention to those interpreting and muhkam
riwayat, the meaning of such mutushabihat and intricate ayat and riwayat
be realized. Or in the Holy Qur’an we read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَنْ يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ
ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَمَنْ يُشْرِكْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدِ افْتَرَىٰ
إِثْمًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated
with Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He wills…
(4:48).”***

Some persons infer from such kind of Ayat that the rest of the sins are
not important and it is enough for a person just to avoid saying God is
two to enter Paradise and Allah forgives the rest of the sins, as the
Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..مَا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He wills…
(4:48).”***

Such superficially derived inferences which stem from ignorance and the
spirit of slackness, should not become the source of our deception and
we should not let ourselves he deceived by satan by this means. The
matter is not so simple.

The Meaning of the term At-Tawhid and the Initiation of Distortion in It
------------------------------------------------------------------------

To clarify the matter, we should better give the meaning of the term
At-Tawhid and take advantage of the ayat and the riwayat for the
interpretation of this significant Islamic Principle which is the root
of all beliefs and values.

The term At-Tawhid means to regard as one and only. However, in the
common usage of Islam and according to Religious Jurists it means to
regard Allah as one and only and does not mean to regard everything as
one and only. Some leftist deviated groups try to mean At-Tawhid in such
a way as to be consistent with their own vested interests.

They say At-Tawhid means to make one and since it is not possible to
make Allah one, because Allah is Himself One, so At-Tawhid has nothing
to do with the Oneness of Allah and by At-Tawhid it is meant that the
society should be made one; class differences should be removed so that
a new society with oneness be created. These arc the so-called Islamic
Marxist groups who had been impressed by the Marxist school of thought
and wanted to give Islamic color to their own Marxist ideology.

We know that Marxism in the philosophy of history and historical
materialism propounds that human society is moving towards a classless
society, in the way that the differences existing in the society will
intensify and reach to an extent where class differences will totally be
removed and all people will be the same as far as enjoying the offerings
of the material life is concerned. In other words, the people will reach
a new balanced society.

These leftist groups , too, molded the same expression with “Tawhidi
(based on Tawhid- related to Tawhid) suffix and said: “a new balanced
Tawhidi society” and by Tawhid they meant the very unity of class or
removal of classes, and for proving it they reasoned that basically
Tawhid means *"to make one"* and this has nothing to do with God.

These mixed and in fact atheistic thoughts left ill-effects upon our
unaware youth so much so that it became one of the greatest dangers for
Islam and the Muslims.

As for the term "Tawhid’’, which is from the infinitive "taf’il" in
Arabic literature, sometimes it is employed to mean *"making one"* and
sometimes to mean *"considering one"* and we know that the infinitive
"taf’il*"* is not always employed for making transitive of its famous
meaning. There are many words which we even employ in our Persian
expressions, which words though are of the infinitive "taf’il", yet do
not have that meaning.

For example, the words "ta’zim", "takfir", "tamjid", "tasbih’’,
"taqdis", "takrim" and the like which are all of the infinitive
"taf’il", yet none of which mean La bring about the quality. You have
heard that it is said that for such and such a person "takfir" is made.
By saying this word, is kufr infidelity, disbelief created in him? Or,
is he regarded as "kafir" (infidel, disbeliever), or, when for a witness
is declared "tafsiq" in a law-court, and it is said that "this witness
is a fasiq (an evil-doer) and thus his appearing as a witness is not
acceptable,"

Is fisq (evil-doing) created in him? Or, is he considered as a fasiq (an
evil-doer)? When it is said that for such and such a person was offered
ta’zim, is it meant that ‘azamah (greatness- the adjective of the
infinitive ta’zim) has been created in him (by those who offer to him
ta’zim)? All of you pay ta’zim (respect) to Imam. Do you (by so doing)
create ‘azamah (greatness) in him or do you perceive his ‘azamah
(greatness)? All of us utter takbir for Allah (to pronounce Allah’s
glory through the call "Allahu Akbar" (Allah is the greatest). Do we (by
doing so) create greatness in Allah (SWT) or consider Him as great and
recall His greatness?

These are all from the infinitive taf’il At-Tawhid too means to regard
Allah (SWT) as One, not to make Him or any other thing one. Even if we
have a classless society in Islam and it is also desirable, it does not
concern as At-Tawhid as a principle of faith of Islam, and it is
interesting to note that in the Holy Qur’an, the word At-Tawhid and its
derivatives are not found at all and this great Islamic principle has
appeared in the Holy Qur’an in other wordings. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِلَٰهُكُمْ إِلَٰهٌ وَاحِدٌ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And your God is one God! There is no god but He… (2:163).”***

Your God is One and Only God and He has no partner, either inside or
outside His Being.

The discussion is about knowing Allah, not the society, so the creation
or non-creation of oneness of class cannot he meant here.

Anyhow, this was one of the greatest intellectual distortions which were
made towards this ideological principle of Islam, and sometimes it was
even said: "Basically God in Islam is a moral concept and is not
propounded as a true and real being." Sometimes it was said: "God and
the hereafter do not have philosophical concept, rather utter goodness,
absolute perfection, forgoing worldly pleasures and profits and in one
word moral ideal is the very God and He has no external existence either
(God forbid) and that we should pursue these absolute words and try to
become perfect and that worshipping God means just this."

Wrong Imaginations concerning the Meaning of At-Tawhid
------------------------------------------------------

Some others believed that just giving the world a movement by Allah and
so to say His giving the world a start suffices for the world wheel to
rotate till eternity, without being in any need of Allah again. Such a
way of thinking existed even among some philosophers and probably that
some philosophers of the ancient Greece called God as the first
stimulant has stemmed from this very thought. Some groups or Islamic
philosophers have also had such inclinations arid it is regrettable that
such a deviational way or thinking has been from those who also believed
in the Only Allah, let alone the atheists and the polytheists.

Such way of thinking, namely, to think that Allah’s work is just the
creation of this world, or at most inflicting the first blow or the
primary stimulation, is totally rejected in Islam.

Allah (SWT) introduced by Islam is the One Who is constantly planning
the world matters and Who if does not will the survival of the world for
even a single moment, everything will he destroyed and the very non-will
of Allah for the survival of the world suffices for the world to be
destroyed and in such a case, there is no need for Allah to destroy the
world, like a builder who takes a pick and destroys a building. The
destruction of the world does not need such a process.

Although, with our imperfect minds, we cannot realize the true relation
of Allah and the world, but for approximation to the mind, it can be
said that the mental images which are created in the mind, the scene of
a garden, a battlefield and or other things arc created by the mind and
despite their being existing in the mind and their being capable of
creating certain effects[^8], yet their survival is subject to Allah’s
attention and His will and if Allah’s will and his attention is removed
from them, there will no longer he left anything.

The God introduced by Islam is such a God upon Whose will depends the
whole world or being and Who if wishes something to come into existence,
it will come into existence and if wills the destruction of something,
that thing will he destroyed. The emphasis of the Holy Qur’an, too, is
in the first place, on the concept of Rabb (The Lord), i.e., we should
know Allah as Rabb (The Lord), The slogan of Islam is not *"there is no
creator but Allah",* so to think that the world only needs creation and
from then on, namely, after being created it will stand on its own, is
not an Islamic thought.

Some, too, had imagined that the meaning of “Allah plans the world” is
that a pre-made plan has been fulfilled in the past hundreds and
thousands of years, in the way that Allah, has, for example, drawn a map
and arranged the world factors according to that map and has no longer
any concern for and attention to the world, and has nothing to do with
the world affairs. This was the belief held by some Jews. They said:
*"God has created the world and should also plan it, but not (plan it)
always, rather, in the beginning of creation, God has made a plan, drawn
a map and implemented it on the world and does not interfere in the
world affairs any longer."*

The Holy Qur’an quotes them as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَتِ الْيَهُودُ يَدُ اللَّهِ مَغْلُولَةٌ غُلَّتْ أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَلُعِنُوا بِمَا قَالُوا بَلْ يَدَاهُ مَبْسُوطَتَانِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the Jews say: Allah’s hand is tied up! May their hands be tied
and they be cursed for what they said. Nay, both His hands are stretched
out… (5:64).”***

They thought that God has implemented a plan/map and that His hands are
then tied up, like an engineer who draws the map of a building,
implements and constructs it and when it has been constructed, the
engineer can no longer change it, (they thought) that God, too, had a
plan for the world, implemented it in the world and it will continue to
be implemented forever and it cannot be changed any longer (God forbid).

These beliefs of the Jews in matters of creation and religious
legislations had some manifestations. On the one hand, they say that
since the planning of the world is unchangeable, so praying and
appealing are of no use and do not solve any problem. On the other hand,
they believed that the system of religious law which God has ordained
for the world and which is also not changeable, is the very system
Prophet Musa (Moses) (AS) has brought from the Almighty Allah as tablets
and that since God’s will has rested upon these decrees and it is
unchangeable, so abrogation in decrees does not exist either. Such a
thought is not acceptable in the viewpoint of Islam. The Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي شَأْنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Every moment He is in a state (of glory) (55:29).”***

According to the Holy Qur’an, Allah is planning the world the everyday
and every moment, and any moment He wills, He can change the plans of
the world and nothing has and will come outside His powerful hands and
all things are in His hands. No force affects Him and no factor ties up
His hands.

Of course it should be noted that there are also immutable divine
destinations and immutable divine decrees, but this does not mean that
we should think that the world system is a compulsory system, that man
has no right in it, and that prayers, appealing (to Allah), reliance on
Allah, endeavors, efforts and jihad (endeavoring in the way of Allah)
cannot change pre-destinations. There are changeable pre-destinations
which are changed with jihad.

The Subject of Bada’
--------------------

Here, it is useful to also point out about the subject of bada’ (the
belief that Allah (SWT) can change the world affairs at any moment). To
believe that at any moment Allah can change the trends of the world,
nullify the past factors, create more powerful factors in their place,
is termed as bada’ in the terminology of Islamic learning. There is a
riwayah as follows:

*“No ‘ibadah (Allah’s worship) is superior to belief in Bada*[^9]*",*
that is, the same belief which is set forth in the face of people like
the Jews and due to which one (having such belief) notices that in any
situation, Allah is able to change the causes and requirements and bring
about new conditions. This belief, on one hand, makes one hopeful of the
future, so that even if apparent causes are not at hand, he will not
despair and lose hope and on the other hand makes him fearful about his
own future, and this is the very thing which is desirable in the value
system or Islam.

That is to say, man should always be in a state between fear and
hopefulness, so that he will fully realize his need of Allah (his being
invariably in need of Allah) and so, if a misfortune befalls him, he
will not think that this misfortune is lasting and that it will not be
removed. If there is a misfortune (facing him), he should be hopeful of
its removal, in the way that he should start struggling and making
efforts and also beseech Allah so his problem will he solved. If he has
a material and worldly blessing, he should not become proud and gay and
should not think that (his blessing is ever-lasting and that he will
never lose it.

Even for the survival of his spiritual blessings, man should constantly
be stretching his hands (for begging) to Allah and should beseech Allah
to make those blessings lasting for him} For instance, this very Islamic
Republic system is one of the greatest gifts and blessings Allah has
granted us. If we know the value of this blessing and are thankful for
it, it will continue, otherwise there is no guarantee for its survival.

Clarification of Mechanical and Dynamic Movements
-------------------------------------------------

Earlier it has been mentioned that some Western scientists have imagined
that God has just inflicted a stimulating force on the world and that He
has no longer anything to do with it and that the world itself with this
movement and transference of power becomes the cause of other movements
and developments in the world of matters and gradually brings the
phenomena into existence.

Some others have imagined the movement of the world of nature to be
dynamic, that is, if in the above mentioned way of thinking, God was
thought of as the Creator of power in the world of nature, in this way
of thinking only the existence of the nature is attributed to Allah
(SWT) and the developments of the world are attributed to the dynamic
movement of the matter itself.

These individuals had in fact accepted the same view of dialectic
materialism and considered the developments of the world to be dynamic
developments and just for having an Islamic color, they said: *"The
essence of the matter has been created by God, but He no longer has any
role in it and the developments of the matter and the emergence of new
and new phenomena are as a result of the dynamic movement of the nature
itself, and it is the world which through its natural movement gradually
brings about changes and creates phenomena. The phenomena of life, too,
gradually come into existence in the world and evolve into various
animals till they reach man."* (Just as the so-called ‘theory of
evolution’ is illustrated.).

Between this way of thinking and the Islamic view there is a difference
of 180 degrees. The Holy Qur’an teaches us that then Almighty Allah is
continuously involved in creation and that no being, in any moment is
needless of Allah.

To reject the above view (dynamic movement), we start with the most
simple reasons which are understandable, perceivable and absorbable and
with a simple expression which does not need accurate philosophical
foundations either, we say that dynamic movement, supposing that it
exists in the essence of the nature and is clarifiable and acceptable in
a way, can never cause the emergence of a new being, because, just as
mechanical movement is nothing hut the transference of an object from
one place to the other, dynamic movement is also nothing more than the
natural development of the matter itself and can never create a new
being which is not of the category of matter and the materials and which
has not been in the matter before, either, though it can create
developments in the lifeless matter.

We constantly see that living beings come into existence in the world,
possessed of intelligence, senses, emotions (and in the case of man)
possessed of initiative, free-will, creativity, qualities which cannot
he attributed to the matter, and even the materialists themselves admit
this reality that intelligence and will-power is not a material matter
and do not have the quality of the matter, but to justify their view,
they say: *"These are brought into existence by themselves and* *as a
result of the* *developments of the matter"*- a view which means the
emergence of a being without a cause and without a creator,

Anyhow, it is obvious that natural movement, whether it be thought of in
the mechanical form (namely, as a result of the force which enters the
object from outside) or in the dynamic form (which is the natural
requisite of the matter itself and the matter is naturally mobile and
dynamic) does not create soul and life, intelligence and will-power do
not come into existence from it.

So, the emergence of living phenomena, both animal and man which is
taking place in this world continuously indicates that a creator is
continuously giving life to these creatures and creates them and that
not just once, but in various stages. For instance, man, though has one
soul, he does not have one creation. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…يَخْلُقُكُمْ فِي بُطُونِ أُمَّهَاتِكُمْ خَلْقًا مِنْ بَعْدِ خَلْقٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…He creates you in the womb of your mothers-a creation after a
creation… (39:6).”***

From the moment human sperm enters (a mother’s) womb, creations start,
when it turns into ‘alaqah (clot), it acquires a new share of life which
it has not had before. This (being given the) share of existence
requires a creator, because the sperm itself does not possess the
perfections of ‘alaqah, nor can it create those perfections. These
perfections have been granted to it by the Creator. The Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ خَلَقْنَا النُّطْفَةَ عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً
فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ عِظَامًا فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْمًا ثُمَّ
أَنْشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقًا آخَرَ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then We made the life-germ a clot, then We made the clot a lump of
flesh, then We made (in) the lump of flesh bones, then We clothed the
bones with flesh, then We caused if to grow into another creation ...
(23:14)."***

Each development it acquires, and each new share of existence it gets,
is a new creation which has to be granted by Allah (to it). The creation
of the essence of the matter is not sufficient for the creation of these
new perfections of existence which are being realized anew and this
makes no difference with regard to man, animals and the plants.

A plant-seed, when placed inside the earth, absorbs water, is soaked,
and physical and chemical effects are developed in it. But when the seed
starts growing, stretches a root inside the earth and sends a stem out
of the ground, it has acquired new shares of life and existence which it
did not have before. These effects do not exist in a dead seed, nor can
dynamic movement create this plant movement. Then it grows, turns into a
stem and bears branches and leaves. These, too, have a new life and a
fresh share of existence.

The same holds true of flowers, blossoms, beautiful and startling
colors, pleasant smells; by the time the fruit appears, each have a new
creation which is fulfilled by the Creator. To move further, even the
beings in whom new developments are not observed and who arc thought of
as having a monotonous existence, has to receive their existence from
the Creator at any moment.

So, in general, the beings at each and every moment need to be granted
life by the Almighty Allah. We, who arc seated or standing here now, do
not have our tomorrow’s life and existence. We may be destroyed and so
there would be no tomorrow for us. So the tomorrow’s existence does not
exist now and a Creator will create it tomorrow. Tomorrow may be too far
(for our discussion): Let’s consider the next hour.

We do not own, nor have the existence of the next hour. When the next
hour comes, Allah will grant us that existence. Let us also set aside
the next hour and consider the next minute, We do not own our own life
in the next minute, it is also in Allah’s hands. If He wills, He will
grant us this existence and if He does not will, our life will not
continue.

If we acquire such knowledge about Allah The Almighty, it is then that
we can accept, admit and believe in Allah’s hand in all existence and in
all conditions. But that view which says: ‘God created the matter, but
then it is the automatic movement of the matter which becomes the source
of the emergence of beings’, will never acquire such knowledge (of God).
Those who hold such a view, regard themselves as having been left to
themselves in the world, neither realizing any need to God, nor
expecting any help from Him.

In their view, God created a matter which is automatically moving,
or/and that according to mechanical imagination, God inflicted the
primary movement upon this world and has no more anything to do with it,
like a clock which a skillful clock-maker makes and tunes in such a way
that its tune continues to exist for ever and does not need to be tuned
anew.

Usually, when clocks are tuned, after a while, due to the gradual
consumption of the mechanical energy, they come to need tuning anew. But
if the system is arranged so that this energy which remains inside the
clock is not consumed, is again transferred to the spring and causes the
movement of the hands of the clock to continue till eternity, there will
no longer be any need for the clock-maker and the tuner. Some have
thought of the world current this way and imagined that God has tuned
and then set aside the world.

Another group says that the world did not even need the primary tuning
either, that this is the inherent movement of the nature which
automatically emerges in it and proceeds to any place the causes and
conditions might demand. These are not Islamic views. These arc the
modern forms of shirk.

In the view of Islam, the existence of the world is in Allah’s hands at
each and every moment successively and ceaselessly, each being, with
whatever share of existence it may he endowed and whatever sign of
existence it may acquire, receives it from Allah (SWT) and is in need of
Him, so that if He does not will the existence or the world for even a
single moment, the whole world will be brought to naught. In the Islamic
way of thinking, no power other than the power of Almighty Allah governs
the world of being.

The other powers arc a limited ray of His infinite power, are dominated
by Him and are effective just in the extent He has granted permission in
creation for their effectiveness.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلَا
لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالْأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And (He created) the sun and the moon and the stars, made
subservient by His command; surely His is the creation and the command;
blessed is Allah, the Lord of the worlds (7:54).”***

The movement of the moon and the stars, the shining of the sun, the
growth of each plant, the splitting or even a single seed, and/or a sick
man’s being healed are all with the will of Allah and subdued by His
Will-Power. If Allah does not will, no being can do anything.

The holders of such (an Islamic) view, attach no value to any power
(other than Allah’s) and let no fear enter their hearts in the face of
the threats of the enemies of Islam, because they know that wherever any
power exists, it is dominated by Allah’s Will-power.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَاللَّهُ غَالِبٌ عَلَىٰ أَمْرِهِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Allah is the Master of His affair… (12:21).”***

It is such spirit that makes the Muslim combatant at the front or jihad
so strong that he fears nothing, because he knows that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَنْصُرْكُمُ اللَّهُ فَلَا غَالِبَ لَكُمْ وَإِنْ يَخْذُلْكُمْ
فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يَنْصُرُكُمْ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If Allah assists you, then there is none that can overcome you, and
if He forsakes you, who is there then that can assist you after Him…
(3:160).”***

Those who have been raised with such a culture, bow their heads to no
power (other than Allah), to them everything is humble and worthless and
to them is valuable only that which has a way to Allah and which is
related to the source of power, greatness and glory, (i.e., Allah), as
the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And to Allah belongs the might and to His Messenger and to the
believers… (63:8).”***

Glory and honor is for Allah, His messengers and the believers and the
others are all abject and humiliated. If there is glory, it is that
which Allah has granted and He has ordained this degree, in the first
place for the exalted position of the Holy Prophet of Islam, Muhammad
AI- Mustafa (SA) and after him, to the extent any person who is closer
to Allah (SWT), whose faith is greater and whose relation to Him is
firmer, enjoys such a glory.

It is with the Islamic view that a Muslim views all the forces of the
nature as nothing before the infinite divine Power and feels such glory
and greatness inside himself which make him invincible. He knows that
power is not just these material powers, though these very material
powers are also created by Allah and the power over them lies in Allah’s
hands, rather the supernatural powers and the divine aids arc also in
Allah’s hand. Where He wills, the water of the Nile River drowns Fir’awn
(Pharaoh) and his men in it and where He wills, one divine cry from the
heavens destroys and vanishes a people. Therefore, At-Tawhid in creation
demands that one believes that each creature in any condition, any place
and at any time is in need of Allah and will never be needless of Him.

Divine Management
-----------------

The next stage is the stage of Rububiyyah. In this stage, one should not
only believe that creation is from Allah, but should rather believe that
the developments of the matter, and the relation of creatures with each
other, the effects they make and the effects made upon them are all
under Allah’s management and command.

Here, again two extreme inclinations exist: some, when faced with these
expressions (related to At-Tawhid) of the Holy Qur’an, imagined that the
meaning of at-Tawhid in creation and in Lordship is that no other
creature has any effect of its own (as is observed in the Asha’irah
(Ash’arite school of thought) and these materially affecting and being
affected is just a superficial relationship or as some say: "God’s habit
has ordained that when fire falls on a piece of wood, it burns,
otherwise there is no relation between them."

Though their goal and motive or making such remarks has been to reach
the ultimate degree of At-Tawhid, but they have neglected the fact that
Allah The Almighty is not incapable of giving an effect to its creature.
It is true that the essence of being is from Allah and each creature in
any moment receives its being, its existence from Him, but this does not
mean that no being has any effect.

If it meant so, then the system of divine legislation would he a
meaningless system, If the words you speak, the voice you hear, the
decision you take, the work you do, the acts of worship you fulfill and
the jihad you embark upon were not the effects of your being, and you
had no role in their creation, then in this case there would be no
difference between the obedient and the disobedient, since (according to
the above supposition) Allah (SWT) had created one obedient and the
other disobedient.

So, why should He reward the former and punish the latter? The
impression of causes and reasons on the emergence or effects is not
deniable. However, the fact to be emphasized is that these are all
subordinate to a higher power, that it is He Who constantly grants them
the grace of existence and endows them the signs of existence and
renders them effective with His own permission. Let us consider a
statement of the Holy Qur’an in this regard. It says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ تَخْلُقُ مِنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ بِإِذْنِي ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And when you determined out of clay a thing like the form of a bird
by My permission… (5:110)”.***

In the above Ayah, the Almighty Allah addressing; ‘Isa (AS) (Jesus
Christ), the son of Maryam (AS), says that he brings into existence, but
with His (Allah’s) will and that he heals (the blind and the leper) but
with His (Allah’s) will. That is to say, the authority and the will has
not come outside Allah’s hand, This is the light of existence which
emanates from Allah, but at the hands of Ibrahim (AS) (Prophet Abraham),
Isma’il (AS) (Prophet Ishmael), ‘Isa (AS) or Musa (AS) (Prophet Moses),
or any other of Allah’s Prophets (AS) and awliya’, and through the
channel of their will-power, choice and option. The whole matter lies
just here.

To totally deny the impression of causes, would be to believe that the
world is based on fatalism, leaving no room for duty, all learning’s
should be washed away, because (according to such assumptions) they no
longer have any relation to each other, no cause affects any effect, no
microbe has any role in the emergence of sickness and no medicine cures
any ailment, But this is not the case. Allah has put this effect in the
medicine and the medicine falls effective with Allah’s permission, and
this matter makes no difference whether in natural matters and/or in
supernatural matters and the Prophet who heals a sick man also does so
with Allah’s permission. Those who have not been able to understand the
combination between these two imagine that if we say that a Prophet, an
Imam or one of Allah’s friends has healed a sick person, this will
become shirk.

Anyhow, Allah may grant a power to His wali (friend) to revive a sick
person by His permission or to manifest other miracles and wonderful
workings. But those who have thoughts that the man is compelled to do
everything and has no option, by attributing actions and effects to
Allah in a direct manner, arc considerable preys for the colonialists,
the oppressors and the tyrants, as in the lime of the Omayyad’s and the
Abbasids, under the pretext of strengthening the spirit or At -Tawhid,
they more or less spread these thoughts that the man is compelled and
not free, thereby creating weakness in the people, while these two facts
should be understood together, combined together, and attain the great
effect resulting from them.

Both the spirit of At-Tawhid should be completely strengthened, namely,
no independent power exists but that of the Almighty Allah and also the
effect of causes and particularly the effect of man in his optional acts
should be taken into consideration and it should be known that the basis
of religions is the recognition of free-will. If there had been no
free-will, then no room would be left for teaching, guidance, revelation
of Books, sending of Prophets, warning and giving of good tidings (by
Allah). The Prophets warn the people against Allah’s torment which
befalls them due to their bad actions, whereas if there were compulsions
(as fatalists hold) then no room would be left for fear and torment.

Divine Wilayah
--------------

With these introductory statements we conclude that not only the
planning of the whole world as a total system is in Allah’s hand, but
also every trivial system and every small system has also its own plan
which is fulfilled under Allah’s Will-power. In the midst of all these,
man’s plan, because of his miscellaneous virtues and aptitudes, has very
extensive and widespread dimensions each or which necessitates a
particular plan (or management). That pan of divine plan which concerns
sense-possessing creatures including man is in the language of the Holy
Qur’an, called wilayah.

In the Holy Qur’an, we come across ayat in which the words wali (Islamic
jurisprudential guardian), wali (governor, ruler) and Mawla (master)
have been employed and mentioned as names and attributes for Almighty
Allah. All these have been derived from the root wilayah which briefly
includes the meaning of taking charge or and managing the affairs of the
sense-possessing beings.

That is, the Almighty Allah, after creating man, does not leave him to
himself. Rather, He has undertaken the planning of his life and arranges
the events so that he can go ahead in the direction of perfection and
growth. (That we say: “he can go ahead in the direction of perfection”
is because man is a free agent, possessed of free-will and in spite of
the existence of all conditions and facilities, he can still misuse the
same and traverse the way of fall and decline instead of following the
way of perfection and exaltation.).

However, Allah’s work in this field is fulfilled in two dimensions or in
two stages; one pertains to AI-Wilayatul-ammah (general guardianship)
towards all men and the other pertains to Al-wilayatul-khassah
(particular guardianship). The Almighty Allah in all periods of history
and in all pans at the world has laws and traditions which provide the
grounds for the growth and perfection of all men. This is a general
guardianship which is implemented towards all men, whether some people
accept this guardianship and submit themselves to the position of divine
guardianship, or they indulge in kufr and rebellion (against Allah’s
commands). Anyhow, this true divine guardianship exists towards the
faithful and the infidel, the pious and the impious and will become
manifest on the Resurrection Day.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ الْوَلَايَةُ لِلَّهِ الْحَقِّ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***”Here is protection only Allah’s, the True One… (18:44).”***

It is then that divine guardianship becomes manifest and it becomes
known that His wise management has been and is governing over the whole
world.

But the Holy Qur’an, in many cases, has also talked about particular
guardianship which is only for the mu’minin and the muwahhidun, namely,
those who make good use of these grounds and have attempted to achieve
their free perfection. These wilayah does not concern the infidel, the
libertine, munafiqun and those who arc obstinate (towards Allah’s
commands) and they are outside the domain of this wilayah. In a sense,
they have been left to themselves (by Allah) and only that very general
divine planning governs them.

Al-Wilayatul-Khassah has very different stages. For example, the one who
takes even a small step in the way of Allah and fulfils a small action
for Allah, he will have a low stage of this guardianship and a limited
share of divine favor will embrace him. Of course, if a mu’min makes
proper use of this particular blessing of Allah and appreciates it, this
very favor which has embraced him in the first stage, prepares him for
taking a larger step and achieving greater growth and also causes him to
receive more favor from Allah.

However, if he stops at this stage, he has enjoyed just this very stage
of guardianship and will no longer reach higher stages. Anyhow, if a
faithful person, i.e., a mu’min benefits from and makes good use of
Divine Guardianship and takes more steps in the way of his own
perfection, Allah will shower loftier favors upon him and in this way,
these stages continue till they reach the most excellent position which
a man may attain and that position is the sacred position of Allah’s
Wali and His Last Messenger, Prophet Muhammad ibn ‘Abdullah (SA).
Therefore, to the extent that man submits to Allah and makes his own
will subject to Allah’s will, and the more he uses Allah’s blessings for
his spiritual and real perfection, the more he will enjoy the blessing
of divine guardianship.

The first step in the way of attaining divine guardianship is faith in
Allah, pious deeds and struggle against taghut (satan):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..فَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِالطَّاغُوتِ وَيُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ لَا انْفِصَامَ لَهَا وَاللَّهُ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Therefore, whoever denies in the taghut and believes in Allah, he
indeed has a strong hold on the firmest handle, which shall not break
off; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing (2:256).”***

Such a person has taken hold of the surest and firmest handle, and will
save himself from perilous situations. In the continuation or the above
ayah it said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..اللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ
إِلَى النُّورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of
the darkness into the light… (2:257).”***

Those who believe in Allah and turn their back to taghut, Allah will
undertake the planning of their affairs and takes them out of darkness
and leads them towards light.

But those who are kafir are deprived of such guardianship, supervision
and management and their supervision is with taghuts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَوْلِيَاؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And (to as) to those who disbelieve, their guardians are the
taghuts… (2:257).”***

Faith and pious deeds which are conditions required for aptitude for
divine guardianship and the enjoyment of Allah’s particular favor, have
different dimensions and stages and go ahead so far that Allah plans all
the good for man, provides the means for their attainment and even more
important than this, man reaches such a level where according to the
following riwayat:

*“The man reaches such a level where as if it is Allah who hears in
place of his ear, and sees in place of his eyes and moves in place of
his hands.*[^10]*”*

It is obvious that Allah does not leave the affairs of such people to
themselves, and rather He inspires them to what they should achieve
through taking pains of experience and intellect, and even where their
ordinary forces are not sufficient for the fulfillment of their affairs,
Allah sends them divine hidden aids.

One dimension of divine guardianship is in relation to human societies
and communities. Allah’s planning and guardianship is sometimes for each
and every one of human beings, and sometimes for the formation of divine
communities which is fulfilled on a very extensive level and which has
innumerable blessings. When Allah sees the merit for perfection in a
people and observes some good in them, He provides the ground for their
growth.

When human society achieved the aptitude for the emergence of the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam, the Almighty Allah provided the grounds for the
emergence of a monotheistic and Islamic society in the Arabian
Peninsula. Allah created a man from the family of the past Prophets
(AS), raised him so that at the age of forty he was appointed (by Allah)
a Prophet and when a group of people came to believe in him and followed
his way sincerely, Allah provided greater grounds for their growth and
provided conditions so that they took steps towards perfection. Certain
hardships occurred, sometimes people were troubled also, but Allah
provides all grounds for the formation of a strong Islamic society, a
society which can create a great development in the world.

Our Islamic Revolution was also like this. For centuries various
conditions occurred for the Islamic society, Muslims had vacillations,
peaks and abysses, until the Almighty Allah knew that a people in a
country named Iran are ready for divine particular favor and from such
people, a society can be made which can be the standard bearer of
At-Tawhid throughout the earth.

Almighty Allah created a man from the family of the Prophets (AS) and
the Infallible Imams (AS), raised him (to a lofty spiritual and
intellectual level), taught him the required awareness, information and
all-sided and comprehensive knowledge from Islam (of course through
causes) and when a movement was to be started in the society, this man,
(Al Imam AI-Khumayni (QS) ) cried out his Tawhidi clamors and called on
the people to move, till finally, in the year 1979 AD (1357 of the solar
hejirah), they created a great resurrection (The Islamic Revolution of
Iran) on the earth.

The particular divine guardianship is not limited to one stage and one
phase and it can be said that it has innumerable stages, provided
however that we properly observe the conditions for each stage and take
more advantage of the possibilities which Allah The Almighty grants us
and be thankful to Him for the blessing. (i.e., we use Allah’s blessing
in the way He Himself has ordained and we do not use them against His
commands and will).

All that men should fulfill in the direction of benefitting from Allah’s
blessings and favors are summed up under one main title and that title
is: “servitude to Allah”.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that you should serve Me; this is the right way (36:61)”.***

This servitude (to Allah) manifests itself in two general forms, one in
the attainment of more understandings and the other in the performance
of better actions.

At-Tawhid in Guidance
---------------------

At-Tawhid in Rububiyyah has numerous branches. One of its branches is
At-Tawhid in guidance. The leaching of the Holy Qur’an concerning the
knowledge about At-Tawhid is that just: as the Almighty Allah has
granted the existence to every being, He has also granted particular
guidance to every being. After Musa (Moses) (AS) and Harun (Aaron) (AS)
announced their call and Prophetic mission Flr’awn (Pharaoh) asked them:
*"Who is that Lord to Whose worship you call me?"* Prophet Musa (AS)
replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..رَبُّنَا الَّذِي أَعْطَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلْقَهُ ثُمَّ هَدَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(20:50)”.***

As the above ayah of the Holy Qur’an appears to indicate, just as
creation has universality and includes every being, Divine guidance is
also a general guidance which includes all beings. Of course we will
later on elaborate that besides this general guidance which includes all
beings, there is also a particular guidance which is particularly
provided to mu’minun, just as it is the case with *wilayah.*

The general divine guidance has several parts; one the guidance which
pertains to senseless creatures, such as material and natural creatures
which have been created in this world. The other kind of guidance
concerns sense-possessing creatures which have just one direction and
are just active in that very direction, such as the angels (may
greetings be upon them). The other kind of guidance is for the creatures
which have animal sense and finally there is a guidance which concerns
man - the being who besides the instinctive sense has the intellectual
sense and in whose direction there are two different ways of which he
selects one.

To give more explanation for these parts, it should be said that each
being which is created in this world, from the smallest particle to the
greatest galaxies, so far as man’s knowledge and information have
reached them, has a particular effect and movement which have been
placed in a determined direction.

The smallest particle which man has known so far is called an atom.
Inside an atom there is a nucleus around which small particles named
electrons revolve. This movement is a particular movement in a
determined axis and particular direction. Allah The Omnipotent has
created this invisible, little and tiny particle such that the electrons
traverse their own way inside it and never follow any way against the
direction Allah has determined for them and the electrons do not go out
of their axis/orbit unduly.

This orderliness is on the basis of the law which Allah has placed in
the nature of this being and for this reason we call it a creational and
natural guidance, namely, these effects and movements, with particular
directions and special qualities are all subject to the creation the
Almighty Allah has granted them.

After the atoms, there are the molecules which are formed of a number of
atoms, the formation of molecules which takes place with particular
composition, condition and manner, so that particular effects of them
would be realized in the world is also a kind of divine creational
guidance. Molecules gradually turn into a complicated form and are
combined and from them various matters come into being.

In chemistry, there is a wonderful story of how the atoms are put
together in a particular way and how these atoms bring into existence
these various objects with great and complicated properties. Really, Who
has created these things in such a way and has put these properties in
them that they rest beside each other in such ways?

After mineral and chemical matters, we enter the world of plants. The
stone of a tree is put in the earth. It uses the moisture and heat of
the earth. Gradually, the shell of this stone split, a root is sent
inside the earth and a stem is sent out of the ground and the next
stages which a plant goes through from the start to the end follow.

This is the law and guidance Allah The Almighty has put in the world of
plants according to which they absorb the food particles from the earth,
combine and analyze them, so that they partly turn into leaves and
partly into branches. The more we study about the world of plants, the
more wonderfully we will observe the signs of Divine guidance.

In the world of animals, divine guidance emerges in more strange form.
Among plants, we did not know of any sense, though it has been said that
some plants have a weak sense. For example, among trees it is known that
the palm trees have a weak sense, or that some plants are carnivorous
and hunt their prey with their leaves, in the way that when an animal
sits on their leaves, the leaves contract, draw that animal inside
themselves, digest it and grow in this way, but generally in plants we
do not recognize and know of such senses (intelligence) and even if it
does exist, we cannot distinguish,

But, there are other groups of beings in whom the signs of senses
(intelligence) are quite clearly apparent and everybody can understand
that such beings possess particular senses. A chicken, as soon as it
comes out of the egg, goes under the wings of its mother; if it feels
cold, and hits with its peck at the ground, if it feels hungry. Each
kind of animals has its particular senses.

There are some fish that go hundreds of kilometers in the sea to reach a
place which is fit for laying eggs and where their eggs are not
destroyed, and then they return. The fish which come out of the eggs and
open their eyes to the sea for the first time traverse the same route
their mothers have traversed and return to their place. One of the
animals about which the Holy Qur’an has particularly discussed is the
bee.

The particular sense of this animal in making hexagonal houses and its
providing its food from various flowers and blossoms, its storing them
and the other phases of its life are distinguished proofs for this
claim. Also there are birds which make nests for themselves for the
first time, without having seen it (being made) anywhere before.

For instance, we see that swallows make nests in a particular from in
the roofs of houses, in a safe place and lay eggs there, and/or we see
that domestic hens, after laying eggs, sleep on them and every now and
then turn them over. If the hen were asked why it sleeps on the eggs,
perhaps it had no reply to give, of course we do not know of the inside
of the soul of the hen and do not know what senses and understandings it
has. But it seems very probable that it does not have a logical answer
for this action, only a desire is created inside it that drives it to
such acts.

These are divine teachings and guidance. No one has taught such things
to hens and to thousands of kinds of animals each of which has
particular characteristics, rather Allah has revealed to them. About
such kinds of instinctive guidance’s, the Holy Qur’an applies the
expression Wahy (divine revelation).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْحَىٰ رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Your Lord revealed to the bee… (16:68)”.***

This is a mysterious and unknown learning which is not understandable
for the others and which is developed in the inside of the animal.

The other kind of guidance is for the sense-possessing beings which have
but one direction, such as the angels (greetings be upon them). They are
very noble and intelligent beings, but they fulfill their actions only
at Allah’s command.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ بَلْ
عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“...Nay! They are honoured servants: they do not precede Him*** ***in
speech and (only) according to His commandment do they act
(21:26,27)”.***

This group of creatures whose being we understand just through the
information given by the Almighty Allah and the Infallibles (AS), have
particular guidance and perform the very action which Allah -The
Almighty has determined for them and of which the way of performance He
has taught them.

There is a group of the angels whose function is to write down the
actions of men. Allah has created them for this very action and has also
taught them how to fulfill their function and from the beginning of
creation up to now, their work has been and will be this. The other
groups (of the angels) are in charge of means of subsistence and the
third group in charge of the other works of creation.

The kind of angels mentioned in the Holy Qur’an have each a specific
position, special work and particular guidance and they are all engaged
in praising, glorifying and extolling Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَنَحْنُ نُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِكَ وَنُقَدِّسُ لَكَ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And we celebrate Thy praise and extol Thy holiness… (2:30).”***

Though in the Holy Qur’an the sort of praising (Allah) and even acts of
worship and prayers have been proved for all beings, but we do not
really understand how birds in the sky perform prayers or praise Allah.

The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُ وَتَسْبِيحَهُ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…He knows the prayer of each one and its glorification… (24:41).”***

In another place, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And there is not a single thing but glorifies Him with His praise,
but you do not understand their glorification… (17:44).”***

The Guidance particular to Man
------------------------------

Amidst these guidance’s man is blessed with an excellent guidance. Man
is an essence of the whole system of creation; right from the
characteristics of atoms, molecules, protein and chemical matters to the
vegetal, animal and instinctive characteristics are all found in his
being. But above all these things, there is a guidance which has
privileged and distinguished him from other creatures and which has made
him superior even to angels, and that is the power of the intellect
which the Almighty Allah has bestowed in man’s being so that he can
understand certain facts both in theoretical dimension and the practical
one.

In regard to man, mere instinctive inspiration, which exists in animals,
has not been contented with. Of course human infant has an instinctive
understanding too. For example, it knows how to suck its mother’s breast
and when feeling pain, how to make known its pain through crying and
groaning. This is an instinctive sense which exists in animals too. But
on man’s reaching maturity, another sense appears in him, the like of
which does not exist too to such an extent in animals. Man, being
possessed with this characteristic, makes intellectual analyses and
logical reasoning’s, becomes informed about unseen facts and finds out
about their existence.

We know that scientists have assumed in their minds many of the
scientific theories without having any information about their external
existence and then proved the same with analogies and experience, Man
even possesses such an ability that through intellect besides innate
understanding and the knowledge which is acquired not through using the
five senses but through illumination into the heart, can achieve a
conscious and acquired understanding towards the Almighty Allah and His
attributes and best names and this is a very great and noble power and
very constructive and significant for man’s perfection.

Also, in the practical part, human intellect has the ability to
distinguish good and bad, praiseworthy and indecent in doings and
actions. Allah has put this power in man to recognize both the good
directions and the bad ones, to know both the way of impiety and the way
of virtuousness, to recognize both the way or justice and truth and the
way of oppression, tyranny and injustice: and with profound insight he
can select any one he wishes.

The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or unthankful
(76:3).”***

Thus without any thing being compulsorily imposed upon him to acquire
perfection of his truth with his own choice.

The existence of the power of intellect causes man to recognize the
generalities of the matters and the main lines of truth and falsehood,
but in detailed and minute cases, he needs another form of
guidance[^11]. Allah - The Wise Who has created man for voluntary
perfection, has not spared him such guidance either and has compensated
for the defect in his understanding and recognition by Wahy and
Nubuwwah.

Thus, to the first man (Adam (AS)) He created, besides giving him the
power of intellect, Allah also made revelation and ordained him one of
the Prophets, and later Almighty Allah also appointed other Prophets
(AS) according to what His wisdom demanded, so that the deficiencies in
the insights of the intellect in theoretical and practical grounds,
which are needed by men, are compensated.

So, in reality, the greatest blessing the Almighty Allah has granted man
is this particular guidance which is summed up in two parts, one the
guidance of the intellect and the other the guidance of the Wahy. In
other words, Almighty Allah has ordained two kinds of proof and guide
for men: one the inner proof, namely, the intellect and since this proof
was not sufficient, Allah has also arranged another proof outside the
being of the individuals, (namely, the Prophets (AS)) which compensates
for the deficiency in the insight of the intellect.

So far, for the general guidance’s, i.e., the guidance’s of the contents
of which both the mu’min and the kafir, the virtuous and the un-virtuous
can be informed, but just as the guardianship of Allah over the
creatures has two parts; one the general guardianship which includes the
mu’min and the kafir equally, and the other guardianship which is
particular to the mu’min and of which guardianship the kafirun have no
share, the same is also true of guidance. That is, besides the general
guidance, there is another form of guidance particular to the mu’min the
honor of which only includes those who sincerely tread the way of
servitude to Allah.

After the reaching of the guidance of the wahy to the people, people
divide towards it into two groups: One group being those people who
accept the divine guidance and believe in the wahy and in the
prophet-hood and who also follow the orders of the Prophets (AS) in
performing their deeds.

The other group of people, with their wrong choice, ignores and
disregards this guidance and do not put it as the source of effect in
their lives. These two groups, though each will receive the reward (or
the torment) for their good and bad actions, it will not be the same in
this very world either. Upon those who are thankful for the blessing of
guidance, who behaves in the way Allah has commanded and who know the
value of this blessing, Allah increases His blessing:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اهْتَدَوْا زَادَهُمْ هُدًى..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (as for) those who follow the right direction, He increases them
in guidance… (47:17).”***

And in contrast, as for those who are unthankful, Allah will turn their
hearts away from the truth.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…فَلَمَّا زَاغُوا أَزَاغَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…But when they turned aside, Allah made their hearts turn aside…
(61:5).”***

But the Holy Qur’an depicts the way of achieving this true guidance:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُبِينٌ… يَهْدِي بِهِ
اللَّهُ مَنِ اتَّبَعَ رِضْوَانَهُ سُبُلَ السَّلَام
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…There has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah; with it
Allah guides him who will follow His pleasure into the ways of safety…
(5:15-16).”***

Those attain true guidance who possess this spiritual and cordial
condition, namely, being desirous and in search of Allah’s pleasure and
satisfaction and this condition is not achieved unless with possessing
the following levels: Faith, holding fast to Allah in action and love
for Allah and it is in the wake of these attainments that man attempts
to acquire Allah’s pleasure and satisfaction and such men will enjoy the
spiritual light of the Holy Qur’an and the particular divine guidance.
This guidance is just and only just in Allah’s hand and It is He Who
creates such a light in their hearts,

Therefore, to be able to benefit both from the particular divine
guidance and also to be embraced by particular Allah’s guardianship, we
should appreciate Allah’s blessings, abandon egotism and replace it with
theism and Godliness. This will not be achieved by mere slogans, nor is
it acquired by just performing the prayers. Rather, one’s heart should
be submitted to Allah and also the motives out of which one acts should
be Divine and self-centrism and groupism should be wiped out of one’s
life and one’s goal and objective should become just his perfection as
well as the others’ perfection. One should desire Allah’s guidance for
himself and for the others and in this way desire nothing but Allah’s
pleasure and in one word, one should submit his being totally to Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُسْلِمْ وَجْهَهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَهُوَ مُحْسِنٌ فَقَدِ
اسْتَمْسَكَ بِالْعُرْوَةِ الْوُثْقَىٰ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever submits himself wholly to Allah and he is the doer of
good (to others), he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon
which one can lay hold… (31:22).”***

Such a man acquires the merit for acquiring the blessing of Allah’s
particular guidance; otherwise due to being unthankful for the blessing,
the blessing will be taken away (from him) by Allah.

Providing Sustenance
--------------------

Another branch or dimension of At-Tawhid in Rububiyyah which has been
greatly emphasized in the Holy Qur’an is that Almighty Allah is the Only
One Who provides sustenance to His creatures and provides for their
needs. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ هَلْ مِنْ
خَالِقٍ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ يَرْزُقُكُمْ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ وَالْأَرْضِ لَا
إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا هُوَ فَأَنَّىٰ تُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O’ men! Call to mind the favor of Allah on you; is there any creator
besides Allah who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth?
There is no god but He; whence are you then turned away?” (35:3)***

As is observed, in the above ayah of the Holy Qur’an, being the Creator
and being the Giver of sustenance have been regarded as being
necessarily accompanying each other. The Holy Qur’an says: “*Is there
any creator besides Allah who gives you sustenance?”* This contains a
very delicate point. As a rule, it might seem that the question should
have been put in the following way: “*Is there a giver of sustenance who
gives you sustenance?”*

However, the Holy Qur’an puts the question in this way: "Is there any
creator besides Allah who gives you sustenance’?’ This ayah of the Holy
Qur’an points out the fact that giving sustenance is one of the
prestigious matters of creation; namely, means of sustenance (including
food) should have been created in the world so that when a creature
needs any means of sustenance, for example food, he can have access to
it, use it and continue his life.

So, in reality, it can be said that The One Who has created him in need
of means of sustenance and Who has put the means of sustenance,
including foodstuffs within his reach, is the same One Who gives
sustenance to him and in fact giving sustenance is nothing but the fact
that he can use the foodstuffs which have been created and which have
been put within his reach.

Of course the word “rizq” (sustenance) is sometimes applied in a more
extensive sense which also includes non - material sustenance’s. For
instance, it is said that the sustenance for the soul is knowledge or
even about the angels there is a riwayat that: *"and their food is
praising (Allah)"*. But by sustenance which is discussed here, material
sustenance for the continuation of worldly and a perfect life is meant
which depends on sustenance. One of men’s reproachable characteristics
is that as long as they feel in need and sense their hunger, thirst, and
their other material needs, they stretch out their hands towards Allah,
but when their needs are met, they become neglectful of Allah,
particularly if they have themselves made an effort or applied their
mental and scientific capabilities (in connection with meeting the
needs). In this connection, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا مَسَّ الْإِنْسَانَ ضُرٌّ دَعَانَا ثُمَّ إِذَا خَوَّلْنَاهُ
نِعْمَةً مِنَّا قَالَ إِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ بَلْ هِيَ
فِتْنَةٌ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَهُمْ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when harm afflicts a man he calls upon Us, then, when we give him
a favor from Us, he says: ‘I have been given it only by means of
knowledge’. Nay, it is a trial, but most of them do not know
(39:49).”***

The Almighty Allah showered His blessings on some of His creatures, but
they imagined that these blessings have been achieved as a result of
their own endeavors, cleverness, sagacity, knowledge and intelligence.

One of the distinguished examples of such persons is Qarun (Koran,
Croesus). About the wealth of Qarun there are many stories. The Holy
Qur’an talks about his wealth in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَآتَيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْكُنُوزِ مَا إِنَّ مَفَاتِحَهُ لَتَنُوءُ
بِالْعُصْبَةِ أُولِي الْقُوَّةِ إِذْ قَالَ لَهُ قَوْمُهُ لَا تَفْرَحْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And We had given him of the treasures, so much so that his hoards
of wealth would certainly weigh down a company of men possessed of great
strength… (28:76).”***

The pious people admonished Qarun and said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَابْتَغِ فِيمَا آتَاكَ اللَّهُ الدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ وَلَا تَنْسَ
نَصِيبَكَ مِنَ الدُّنْيَا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And seek by means of what Allah has given you the future abode, and
do not neglect your portion of this world… (28:77).”***

The pious people advised him not to become proud of these riches, not to
make them means of mischief on the earth and to try to use the bounties
Allah had given him for his life in the Hereafter. But in reply to them,
Qarun said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ عِنْدِي..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I have been given this only on account of the knowledge I have…
(28:78).”***

So, Qarun’s response was: *"Which wealth has Allah given me’? I myself
have endeavored and acquired the wealth with my knowledge and industry
and no one has any right in my wealth. The poor and the subdued should
themselves go and get money."*

Such attitude, namely, to think that what we achieve is due to our own
endeavors and efforts, and that our achievements are of our own is the
very polytheistic attitude und a muwahhid should know that his being is
from Allah, his physical power, his intellectual power and all the
matters in which he brings about changes are all from Allah, and still
more, using the same is also depending upon Allah’s planning and it is
not the case that anybody who has gathered wealth and acquired some
riches, will be able to use that wealth well in this world.

There might he many who amassed lots of wealth (whether in a halal
(lawful by Islam) or in a haram (unlawful by Islam) way), but did not
succeed in using this wealth. Qarun was also rated among such persons.
He could not use the immense wealth he had amassed, because Allah’s
torment fell upon him and both he and his wealth were swallowed up by
the earth (at Allah’s command). Those who desired to have Qarun’s
wealth, when saw this event, became conscious of the fact that merely
possessing wealth and worldly riches is not sufficient for felicity in
this world.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْبَحَ الَّذِينَ تَمَنَّوْا مَكَانَهُ بِالْأَمْسِ يَقُولُونَ
وَيْكَأَنَّ اللَّهَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ
وَيَقْدِرُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who yearned for his place only the day before began to
say, ‘Ah! (know) that Allah increases and straitens the means of
subsistence for whom He wills of His servants’… (28:82).”***

They saw that all that wealth sank in the earth and nothing of it was
won by Qarun and that even he himself perished. They said that: *‘Ah! it
seems that it is Allah Who increases the means of subsistence for
anybody He wills and straitens it for anybody He wills’*, This matter,
(namely, the increasing and straitening of (he means of subsistence) has
been clearly stipulated in over ten ayat of the Holy Qur’an, including
the following Ayah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاءُ وَيَقْدِرُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah increases and straitens the means of subsistence for whom He
wills… (13:26).”***

The planning of the means of subsistence, increasing it or straitening
it is all in Allah’s hand.

Allah’s predestination in Men’s Sustenance
------------------------------------------

Of course it is not the case that Allah decreases or increases anybody’s
means of sustenance without expedience and wisdom, and if some persons’
means of subsistence are increased or decreased, it is on the basis of
Allah’s wise rules and principles. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ بَسَطَ اللَّهُ الرِّزْقَ لِعِبَادِهِ لَبَغَوْا فِي الْأَرْضِ
وَلَٰكِنْ يُنَزِّلُ بِقَدَرٍ مَا يَشَاءُ إِنَّهُ بِعِبَادِهِ خَبِيرٌ
بَصِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if Allah should amplify the provision for His servants they
would certainly revolt in the earth; but He sends it down according to a
measure as He pleases; surely He is Aware of, Seeing, His servants
(42:27).”***

The Holy Qur’an says that if Allah amplified men’s means of subsistence
to such an extent that there would be no need for them to endeavor and
try, these men would become rebellious, so Allah sends down the means of
subsistence to the extent He knows advisable and It is He Who is Aware
of the situation of His creatures and knows all that is expedient for
each

Besides the more important point is that the existence of various means
of subsistence and their being less and more is one of the Divine tests
as the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَرَفَعَ بَعْضَكُمْ فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ دَرَجَاتٍ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ فِي مَا
آتَاكُمْ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And raised some of you above others by (various) grades, that He
might try you by what He has given you… (6:165).”***

And above this, basically all the affairs of the life in this world are
the means for a test.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي خَلَقَ الْمَوْتَ وَالْحَيَاةَ لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ
أَحْسَنُ عَمَلًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who created death and life that He may try you- which of you is the
best in deeds… (67:2).”***

As for the manner of testing, we know that people are not equal in
physical force and not all can perform one kind of economic activity at
the same level: One has more physical power and the other less.
Likewise, people’s mental power and their management abilities are not
the same, In the midst of all this, those who have less physical and
mental power, enjoy less material shares and naturally those who have
more mental, scientific and administrative powers, gain more products
and willy-nilly people’ means of subsistence become different.

The Almighty Allah, with this difference in means of subsistence. tests
the men that whether individuals arc contented with their own rights or
extend the hands of aggression to the rights of the others; whether the
one who has lots of wealth, supposing that he has also acquired that
wealth through halal ways, fulfils his duties or whether like Qarun, he
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أُوتِيتُهُ عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ عِنْدِي…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I have been given this only on account of the knowledge I have…
(28:78).”***

And, in the other case. whether he worships Allah only when he has
wealth or whether even if his wealth is taken away from him, he still
remembers Allah; and whether a person beseeches Allah and extends his
hands of prayer, benediction and appealing to Allah just when he is
empty- handed and has no wealth or whether he remembers Allah when he is
rich too? Therefore, the difference between means of subsistence and
people’s enjoying different blessings is a general wisdom by which
people are tested and tried.

Reasons for and causes of change of subsistence
-----------------------------------------------

But sometimes the cause of change of means of subsistence is the
individual himself, in the way that if an individual appreciates a
God-given blessing, makes good use of it and treads the path of Allah,
that blessing will be increased for him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…..لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…If you are grateful, I would certainly give to you more…
(14:7).”***

And likewise, being ungrateful for the blessings and not treating the
God-given blessings in a thankful way, will cause the straitening and
decrease in the blessings and will be followed by Allah’s torment and
displeasure:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ كَفَرْتُمْ إِنَّ عَذَابِي لَشَدِيدٌ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And if you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe…
(14:7).”***

Of course, this misconception should not occur either that if anybody
has more blessings, it indicates that he is fulfilling Allah’s commands
better, for, there are many who not only do not appreciate Allah’s
blessings, but who also misuse the same and attempt to obstinately
oppose and fight against the truth and the true servants of Allah, as
are the superpowers of the world today, and yet Allah does not take His
blessings away from them, but sometimes even increases those blessings
upon them.

This is another divine Sunnah (tradition). called imla’ (giving respite)
and istidraj (drawing one towards a failure situation), That is, if some
people, due to their own wrong choice, follow the path of falsehood and
continue to tread on it rapidly and severely and there is no hope of
their returning (to Allah’s way), Allah will, through increasing the
material blessings, provide the grounds for their spiritual collapse,
their peace and tranquility arc taken away from them and eventually
eternal torment will be brought about for them. In this regard, the Holy
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ خَيْرٌ
لِأَنْفُسِهِمْ إِنَّمَا نُمْلِي لَهُمْ لِيَزْدَادُوا إِثْمًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And let not those who disbelieve think that Our granting them
respite is better for them; We grant them respite so that they increase
their sins… (3:178).”***

The Holy Qur’an warns us against imagining that when Allah gives some
blessings to the disbelievers, these blessings will do well for them.
According to the Holy Qur’an, this is not at all the case and rather
Allah increases the blessings for them so that they will be polluted
with more sins and be afflicted with more torment both in this world and
in the hereafter.

One of the other divine traditions in planning for men is the tradition
of helping. That is, if someone, of his own free will, chooses to follow
the way of mischief, Allah, too, will help him to proceed further in
that way and if he chooses the way of goodness, Allah, too, will help
him to become better. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلًّا نُمِدُّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ وَهَٰؤُلَاءِ مِنْ عَطَاءِ رَبِّكَ وَمَا
كَانَ عَطَاءُ رَبِّكَ مَحْظُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All do We aid-- these as well as those-- out of the bounty of your
Lord, and the bounty of your Lord is not confined (17:20).”***

According to the Holy Qur’an, both the ones who turn into worshippers of
this world’s life and who turn their whole attention to the material
pleasures and also those who devote themselves to the love for Allah and
the truth and who tread the path of human perfections, are aided and
helped by Allah. The help to the world -worshippers is that they are let
more deeply drown in the world and become more neglectful of Allah and
the help to the believers and the seekers of the truth is that their
insight and spirituality are increased, their faith is exalted and
through the fulfillment of more pious deeds, their spiritual degrees and
other worldly perfections are increased.

So, Allah’s giving means of subsistence to His creatures and His
increasing and decreasing the same arc under particular laws,
regulations and principles of which some were pointed out here. However,
we are not aware of the formula of many others (of these laws,
regulations and principles). Briefly it can be said that Allah gives,
whatever He knows expedient and His wisdom demands, to anybody anywhere.
For some people expedience demands amplification of the means of
subsistence and for some, straitening of the means of subsistence is
demanded by expedience.

Likewise, in the Holy Qur’an certain causes and traditions have also
been expressed for straitening the means of subsistence. One of those
traditions is being ungrateful for the blessings. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا قَرْيَةً كَانَتْ آمِنَةً مُطْمَئِنَّةً
يَأْتِيهَا رِزْقُهَا رَغَدًا مِنْ كُلِّ مَكَانٍ فَكَفَرَتْ بِأَنْعُمِ
اللَّهِ فَأَذَاقَهَا اللَّهُ لِبَاسَ الْجُوعِ وَالْخَوْفِ بِمَا
كَانُوا يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah sets forth a parable: (Consider) a town safe and secure to
which its means of subsistence come in abundance from every quarter; but
it became ungrateful to Allah’s favors,*** ***therefore Allah made it to
taste the utmost degree of hunger and fear because of what they wrought
(16:112).”***

In the above verse of the Holy Qur’an, Allah sets forth as a parable, a
people who lived in a fertile land and for whom there were plenty of
blessings and besides, to whom blessings came from other places too and
who lived in the utmost degree of happiness, ease and plenty, until they
became ungrateful for Allah’s blessings, used them in improper ways,
spoiled and wasted them and in one word, did not fulfill their duties in
regard to Allah’s blessing. For this reason, the garb of hunger and
insecurity were put on them and they tasted poverty and misery and this
was the punishment for the bad deeds they had committed.

Sometimes, too, the means of subsistence are straitened (by Allah) for
testing (the people). There is a man who is a believer, who obeys
Allah’s commands, and who is not ungrateful for Allah’s blessings
either, but who should be tested for his perfection, (i.e., so that he
will achieve perfection). Prophet Ayyub (may Allah’s blessings be upon
him) is one of the great and praiseworthy Prophets of Allah who has a
very lofty position.

The Almighty Allah, for increasing his degrees, made him the object of a
severe test and trial and took away from him the material blessings. But
this worthy servant of Allah, in all the hardships was greatly patient
and rendered forbearance and did not speak even a word of complaint and
he reached (such a lofty) position that the Almighty Allah, concerning
his status has made a statement which He has made about few Prophets:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..إِنَّا وَجَدْنَاهُ صَابِرًا نِعْمَ الْعَبْدُ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Surely We found him patient; most excellent the servant! ...
(38:44).”***

One of the other reasons for the straitening of the means of subsistence
is the people’s negligence of their duty towards the deprived and the
poor. In this connection, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الْإِنْسَانُ إِذَا مَا ابْتَلَاهُ رَبُّهُ فَأَكْرَمَهُ
وَنَعَّمَهُ فَيَقُولُ رَبِّي أَكْرَمَنِ وَأَمَّا إِذَا مَا ابْتَلَاهُ
فَقَدَرَ عَلَيْهِ رِزْقَهُ فَيَقُولُ رَبِّي أَهَانَنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And as for man, when his Lord tries him, then treats him with honor
and makes him lead an easy life, he says: My Lord honors me. But when He
tries him (differently), then straitens to him his means of subsistence,
he says: My Lord has disgraced me (89:15-16).”***

Here (in the above ayat), it is well observed that in both cases first
the "trial" has been emphasized; the "trial" sometimes has the form of
an amplification of the means or subsistence and sometimes the form of
straitening it. The Holy Qur’an says that if Allah grants man the
blessing of honor, makes him respected and honorable in the society and
gives him lots of blessings, he says: *"1 am very dear In Allah for He
has given so many blessings to me."*

But if his means of subsistence is straitened, it is here that he says:
*"Allah has disgraced me"*. But this is not true, because both are
"trials", both, that is, amplification of the means of subsistence and
the straitening of the means of subsistence. But this straitening of the
means of subsistence and becoming disgraced, is the punishment for the
actions man has himself performed.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا بَلْ لَا تُكْرِمُونَ الْيَتِيمَ وَلَا تَحَاضُّونَ عَلَىٰ
طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ وَتَأْكُلُونَ التُّرَاثَ أَكْلًا لَمًّا
وَتُحِبُّونَ الْمَالَ حُبًّا جَمًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! But you do not honor the orphan; Nor do you urge one another to
feed the poor; and you eat away the heritage, devouring (everything)
indiscriminately; and you love wealth with exceeding love
(89:17-20).”***

The Holy Qur’an says that you did not honor the people’s orphans and
discriminated between them and your own children that you did not urge
one another to feed and tend to the poor. (The Holy Qur’an does not say
*"and you do* *not feed the poor"*, the significance of feeding the
poor, is preserved in its own place and anybody who has the ability
should tend to the poor and the needy, rather above this, according to
the Holy Qur’an, you should urge one another to tend to the poor and the
needy, so that through cooperation, co-thinking and urging each other, a
remedy will be worked out for social poverty).

The Holy Qur’an says that with your strange attachment and love for
wealth, you indiscriminately devoured the wealth inherited from your
fathers and relatives and even did not give part of it to the poor, to
your neighbors and to your relatives. These caused the leaf of your
trial to change and your means of subsistence to be straitened.

Providing sustenance through uncommon ways
------------------------------------------

The point which needs to be pointed out here is that besides granting
the means of subsistence in an ordinary way and through the causes and
the means, Allah is able to provide sustenance without the natural means
and in an exceptional way, as was the case tor Maryam (AS). The Holy
Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَفَّلَهَا زَكَرِيَّا كُلَّمَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهَا زَكَرِيَّا
الْمِحْرَابَ وَجَدَ عِنْدَهَا رِزْقًا قَالَ يَا مَرْيَمُ أَنَّىٰ لَكِ
هَٰذَا قَالَتْ هُوَ مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَرْزُقُ مَنْ
يَشَاءُ بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And Zakariyya took charge of her; whenever Zakariyya called upon
her at the sanctuary, he found food with her. He said, “O Maryam! whence
comes this to you?” She said: “It is from Allah. Surely Allah gives to
whom He wills without measure” (3:37).”***

Among the pious men and ‘ulama’ of this ummah, too, such miracles and
stories exist in plenty which if collected, will form a voluminous
encyclopedia. However, Allah’s wisdom demands that man be always exposed
to test and that his perfection is fulfilled by the way of his own
choice and selection.

If people saw their food ready and descended from heavens each day, they
would feel no need and would not realize the fact that they are
creatures who are totally in need. If people did not have to endeavor
for achieving their means of subsistence, these sciences and industries
would not develop in the world and divine wisdoms and the mysteries of
Allah in creation would not be known in their light and naturally
neither material progress, nor spiritual evolution would be attained by
man.

If everybody’s means of subsistence reached him without his taking pains
and going through difficulties and if it were not necessary for him to
work and engage in activities, the matter of halal and haram would not
be propounded in business and trade and it would not become known
whether a person makes aggression upon other people’s property or not?
Whether in business dealings he speaks the truth or he cheats! Whether
when enjoying Allah’s blessings, he pays the others’ rights or not and
whether he helps the poor, the relatives, the kin’s and the needy and
many other such possibilities which become known just through testing
and trial in different forms and manners.

Therefore, behind endeavoring and being tested, there are certain
wisdoms which if they did not exist, the way of so many perfections
would remain closed to man.

Divine Wisdom
-------------

At the conclusion of this section, namely, the section on the
clarification of At-Tawhid in the ideological system (of Islam), we pay
to the discourse that all divine planning’s are wise, of course, great
Divine scholars have discussed this matter in detail and written many
books, but here we will just content ourselves with a simple expression.

When we know Allah and come to believe that firstly; Allah is aware of
future events: secondly; Allah is able to create any creature the way He
wants to; thirdly: Allah loves good and perfection and since good and
perfection are rays or the perfection of His Being and are desired and
loved by Him, He creates His creatures with great goodness and
perfection; fourthly: Allah docs not envy His creatures and in other
words, when we believe in Allah’s knowledge, power, good-will and His
being not envious, we conclude that the world has been created in the
best condition of goodness, perfection and expedience and it is planned
in the most possible suitable manner.

The Holy Qur’an, too, explicitly points out this matter and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who made good everything that He has created… (32:7).”***

At another place the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..صُنْعَ اللَّهِ الَّذِي أَتْقَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ إِنَّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…The handiwork of Allah Who has made everything thoroughly; surely
He is Aware of what you do (27:88).”***

Allah’s handiwork is such that He has created everything in a firm and
concrete form and in the best manner and without vacuum. He has placed
in creatures everything that wisdom demands and has not rendered any
stinginess and parsimony.

In the face of this general principle, namely, the divine wisdom and the
fact that the planning of the world and of man is in the best way,
naturally, some questions may occur to individuals as to which wisdom is
involved in each particular case?, though It is an undue expectation and
man does not have the ability to understand and realize all secrets and
wisdoms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَمَا أُوتِيتُمْ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And you are not given aught of knowledge but a little (17:85).”***

However, Allah has generally expressed certain principles in the Holy
Qur’an and on the basis of those general principles we can, with the
guidance of wahy interpret many of the phenomena and discover, to the
extent of our ability, the wisdoms behind them. But a faithful person,
should both on the basis of logical reason and also on the basis of the
verses of the Holy Qur’an, possesses this confidence that whatever
happens, in any place it happens and in any form it happens, it is the
demand of the wisdom of creation and that were it other than this, it
would be against (divine) wisdom.

The Wisdom behind bearing difficulties by Man
---------------------------------------------

One of the most important principles behind men’s bearing difficulties
and hardships is the blossoming of the talents and the actualization of
their hidden potentialities, so that whereby they attain their worthy
perfection. For instance, just as physical growth and physical power
come into being in the light of severe exercises (by the individual),
and the one who wishes to have more physical power should do more and
harder exercises, so also the growth of spiritual perfections is
acquired through entering the field of difficulties and hardships and
bearing them, and by this means man’s God-given talents turn into
reality.

In the language of the Holy Qur’an, providing the grounds for spiritual
practices is called “testing”, “ibtila”, “imtahan”, “fitna” and similar
expressions which have been pointed out in the Holy Qur’an are viewing
these very events which occur for men due to divine planning and
predestination.

In fact, what is called “test” in the language of the Holy Qur’an is
also raising and in this respect, we can call the world a place of
raising besides a place of testing, because man’s talents are raised in
the world and in the world his potential abilities arc actualized. In
the riwayat, it has been said that the Almighty Allah tests the mu’min
(the faithful person) by means of hardships and difficulties, as a
mother raises her child by suckling it.

However, the Holy Qur’an, among the above meanings, has pointed out
another fact in connection with these divine tests and that fact is that
if a person passes his test well and is properly raised in this place of
raising and gets good marks, besides achieving certain levels of
spiritual perfection and growth, he becomes a model for the others too
and attains the position of men’s leadership and imamah. So, one of the
goals behind tests which is the very existence of hardships and
difficulties is that among men, individuals emerge who will be examples
for the others (to follow).

Such divine goals behind putting forth hardships and testing men, are
depict able in three forms: one, a distinguished person grows in the
society and attains high positions and the others follow him. This,
being model and parable, has many levels, its higher level being the
level of the exalted prophets (AS) and the Infallible Imams (AS), the
very level which Allah - The Almighty has granted to Prophet Ibrahim
(Abraham) (AS). In the following ayah which we have repeatedly heard,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذِ ابْتَلَىٰ إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِكَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ قَالَ
إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Ibrahim’s Lord tried with (certain) words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an Imam*** ***(religious leader)…
(2:124).”***

After (granting) the position of Nubuwwah, risalah (being a Messenger of
Allah) and Khullat (being a friend of Allah) (all of which were
wonderful positions the Almighty Allah had granted to Hazrat Ibrahim
(AS)), when willing to grant a higher position to Ibrahim (AS) the
Almighty Allah tested him. Thus, Ibrahim (AS) was first afflicted with
the fire of the men of Numrud (Nimrod). This was one stage of the test
after successfully passing which he achieved the needed readiness for
accepting the position of Imamah.

In the riwayat it has been said that when Ibrahim (AS) was been put in
the fire, Jibra’il (the archangel Gabriel) came to him and said:

*“Do you want any help?”*

Ibrahim (AS) said: *"I do need help. I’ am totally in need, Every
creature, every being is nothing but in want and in need."But not from
you?*[^12]*”* This was the first test for Ibrahim (AS) that whether he,
under such hard conditions would extend his hands for want to even
Jibra’il (AS) or not?

In another stage of the test, Ibrahim (AS) was asked (by Allah) to take
his wife (Hajar (AS)) and his beloved child (Isma’il) (AS)) in a dry
wilderness, in the Hijaz deserts of Makkah. As per Allah’s command,
Ibrahim (AS) made his family migrate to this land, left them there, and
tolerated the pains of separation for the sake of the pleasure of the
Almighty Allah.

The third test, which was at the same time, the hardest of them too, was
the test to which Ibrahim (AS) was put at old age (at the time when his
physical capability was reduced, the Almighty Allah granted a son,
named, Isma’il to him and naturally he enjoyed seeing such a son and
having companionship and association with him.). Ibrahim (AS) was
commanded (by Allah) to cut off with his own hands the head of his young
son (Isma’il (AS) ) who was then at the peak of fruitfulness,
handsomeness, perfection and worthiness. This is a very hard and a very
great test. But without any hesitation, Ibrahim (AS) told his son that
he had such a command. Isma’il (AS), too, responded:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..يَا أَبَتِ افْعَلْ مَا تُؤْمَرُ سَتَجِدُنِي إِنْ شَاءَ اللَّهُ مِنَ
الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“...O my father! Do what you are commanded; if Allah please, you will
find me of the patient ones (37:102).”***

It is here that such a person who has tolerated hardships and offered
all he had in the way of Allah should become an Imam and model for the
others.

Likewise, some of the other great Prophets (AS), after bearing certain
hardships attained the position of Imamah who have been briefly referred
to in the following ayah of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا مِنْهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا لَمَّا صَبَرُوا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command when they were
patient… (32:24).”***

Also sometimes a group of the society becomes a model for other groups.
If in a society, the people adorned with goodness, moral soundness and
piety voluntarily embrace hardships and difficulties, dispense with
comfort, ease and welfare of life and direct their efforts towards
serving Allah’s creatures; such a group of the society acquires the
position of leadership and becomes an example and model for the others.

However, above all this is that when an Ummah (Islamic people) becomes a
model for the other people; if the people collectively achieve its
goodness and successfully passes its test, the whole of this people
becomes a pattern for the other people and just as it has been ordained
by Divine will that among each Ummah (people), a distinguished
individual, the distinguished individuals, or a distinguished group
undertakes the leadership of the others, so also it has been ordained by
the Divine Will that among all human societies, a society be realized
which will be a model for all human societies.

This (Divine) Will, at the present age, has ordained that our Islamic
Ummah, should rise up in this land (in the Islamic Republic of Iran),
pass the tests one after the other, pass the tests of Khurdad 15, 1342
SH (solar Hijrah) (June 5, 1963 AD), the test of Bahman 22, 1357 SH
(February 11, 1979 AD), of the war, of the economic siege, the
back-breaking tragically events, problems and hardships successfully and
honorably and with hands overflowing with matchless self-sacrifice, epic
and resistance[^13], attain the position of leadership, and become a
pattern and model for other nations and its people.

The other wisdom behind the existence of hardships and troubles is that
man comes to notice the fact that the worldly life is not an ideal life
and that man’s innate ideal which is eternal perfection and felicity is
not possible in this world. Man’s eyes, due to his weakness of
recognition, particularly in the primary stages of life and before being
trained by Allah’s Prophets (AS) and Allah’s awliya’ (AS) are fixed at
material pleasures and worldly enjoyments, and that which he primarily
understands and recognizes are these very pleasures of this world’s life
and he knows no other thing; whereas, if this world’s life was totally
for pleasures and comforts, it would cause man to go astray.

So, on the basis of Allah’s wisdom, there should be hardships in this
world to warn man that what he truly demands and what his inborn nature
desires, namely, ‘eternal felicity’, is not possible in this world.
Therefore, the existence of disasters and problems in this world’s life
is for man to take lesson, for him not to become infatuated with this
world, not to be entrapped by its pleasures and luxuries and to know
that this life is a means for testing, that here is a bridge for passing
and a passage which should be passed by and left, for the eternal
felicity.

Another fact of wisdom pointed out in the Holy Qur’an is the fact that
when man is engaged in enjoyment and comfort and all that he wants is
provided for him, he does not notice his weakness and needfulness and
consequently the seeds of rebellion and disobedience (towards Allah’s
Commands) grow in his soul, leading him towards selfishness and egoism
and he gradually forgets Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ الْإِنْسَانَ لَيَطْغَىٰ أَنْ رَآهُ اسْتَغْنَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! Man is most surely inordinate; Because he sees himself free
from want (96:6-7).”***

Therefore, Allah must, on the basis of His supreme wisdom, make men
realize their needfulness in various conditions and with various methods
and make them notice the fact that they are thoroughly in need so that
by this means their hearts turn to Allah. This general rule has been
expressed by the Allah in two verses of the Holy Qur’an, saying that He
has sent no Prophets to any people, but first having afflicted that
people with hardships and troubles, so that the grounds for paying
attention towards Allah and the state of modesty, humbleness and
entreaty (towards Allah) occurs for them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلَىٰ أُمَمٍ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ
بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَضَرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We sent (Messengers) to nations before you, then We
seized them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble
themselves (6:42).”***

In another verse, Allah, with a more explicit and decisive tone, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِي قَرْيَةٍ مِنْ نَبِيٍّ إِلَّا أَخَذْنَا أَهْلَهَا
بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَضَّرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send a Prophet in a town but We overtook its people
with distress and affliction in order that they might humble themselves
(7:94).”***

In the former Ayah (6:42), it is said (by Allah) that *(and certainly We
sent)*, but in the latter Ayah (7:94), Allah in a language which points
to a particular case says that:

***"And We did not send a prophet in a town but We overtook its people
with distress and afflictions ... "***

So, another Divine wisdom behind the existence of disasters and problems
in life is that man gets into the state of humbling himself (before
Allah) and beseeching (to Him) and feeling of being in need and does not
become proud of the blessings Allah has put at his disposal.

He does not think that they belong to himself, that he himself has
acquired them and that whenever he wishes, the blessings will be
provided for him with his own efforts, and that man knows that this is
not the case, that Allah’s planning is above these planning’s and that
sometimes in spite of all his efforts and endeavors, he still becomes
afflicted with hardship.

One of the other of these wisdoms is the understanding (by man) of the
significance of the blessings, for, if all blessings are provided for
man and his needs are met, he becomes neglectful and fails to understand
their significance. A simple example serves well to clarify this matter:
All of us use the air and know that the greatest needs of life for each
living being are air and water. If the oxygen of the air does not reach
us, our life will be endangered in a few seconds. But how many times,
have each of us in our life-time said to Allah: “*O Allah, thanks to You
for having created the air.”* Few are those who notice the fact that the
air too is a great blessing, because it is and has always been at our
disposal.

So that people would know the value of His blessings and endeavor to be
thankful, whereby attaining perfection and providing the ground for
their being endowed with the ever-lasting eternal blessings, Allah
sometimes brings about certain vacillations in the existence of the
blessings, by the way of creation (such as destitutions - disasters and
problems) and by the way of shari’ah (Islamic laws[^14]) (such as
performing sawm), so that when faced with shortage, people would realize
that this blessing is valuable and what would happen if that blessing
did not exist.

Sometimes it may occur to the mind of some unaware individuals that what
would it matter if Allah arranged men’s lives in such a way that no poor
and oppressed person would be found in the world and the people would
live in pleasure and joy without making efforts, pains-taking and
enduring the suffering? It should be said that this is one of Allah’s
wisdoms in His planning for men, so that by this means, people would
understand the various blessings and become conscious of their
significance.

In a riwayah it has been said that Jibra’il (AS) came to the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam and after conveying Allah’s salutations to him
said: *“O the Prophet (SA) of Allah, the Almighty Allah has sent a
message to you that if you want, He will put all the treasures on earth
at your disposal”*, (of course the expression of such a riwayah is for
our education and understanding the significance of the matter,
otherwise Allah is aware of the heart (the inner desires) of His Prophet
(SA)).

The Holy prophet (SA) of Islam replied: *“I beseech Allah to feed me one
day so that I will fulfill the thanks-giving to His blessings and to
keep me hungry for one day so that I will well understand my
needfulness, destitution and poverty towards the Almighty
Allah.*[^15]*”* This is a great lesson of At-Tawhid and wisdom as to why
there should occur hardships in man’s life.

One of the very significant (divine) rules in planning for men is that
man acquires the merit and capability for understanding and attaining
divine invisible aids when he bears certain hardships and tolerates
pressures. We, in the world of nature know a series of causes and
effects, for instance, when our physical condition becomes ready to use
foodstuffs and to assimilate them.

If one eats food while he is satiated, this food not only does not
benefit him, but also afflicts him with various diseases and also spoils
the food previously taken (by him) to, because his body is not in a
condition to assimilate the food. But if one’s stomach becomes empty and
one feels hungry, then the body uses the food one eats and assimilates
it. The same is also true of man’s spiritual condition and man becomes
fit to benefit from the divine invisible (hidden) aids and the
supernatural blessings when a feeling of need and vacuum come into
existence in his spirit and cuts his attention off from the causes and
so long as one’s attention is not cut off from the natural causes and
worldly causes, he will not conceive the Divine occult blessing.

This is a very significant point which has been emphasized in many Ayat
and even in our day-to-day life we need to notice this point, so that we
can analyze the events (both the events related to the individual life
and those related to the social area) and strengthen our faith
concerning divine wisdom.

In the wars of the “Early Islam”, sometimes, people’s attention, due to
weakness of recognition and weakness of faith, was drawn to external
causes and they said: *"Thanks to Allah, everything is provided for us
and there will not be any defeat for us any longer"*. But at that very
time, in spite of the existence of ordinary causes and conditions, they
still suffered a defeat and the divine aids no longer came to their
help.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَيَوْمَ حُنَيْنٍ ۙ إِذْ أَعْجَبَتْكُمْ كَثْرَتُكُمْ فَلَمْ تُغْنِ
عَنْكُمْ شَيْئًا ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And on the day of Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain,
but they availed you nothing… (9:25).”***

One of such battles was the Battle of Hunayn. In the beginning of the
battle, the Muslims, due to the excess of power and war equipment, said
in their hearts: *"We certainly will become victorious in this war”*,
but because of paying attention and relying upon external causes, they
suffered defeat. But in the Battle of Badr, because they felt themselves
weak, and humble, and beseeched to Allah, though they were not at all
ready for fighting, yet Allah helped them and rushed to their aid:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ نَصَرَكُمُ اللَّهُ بِبَدْرٍ وَأَنْتُمْ أَذِلَّةٌ ….
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah did certainly assist you at Badr when you were weak…
(3:123).”***

So, this is a general rule that so long as the faithful men’s attention
is towards the natural causes, they will not be embraced by Allah’s
favors and that this divine grace will include them when they cut
themselves of from everything, turn their attention solely to Allah and
give up relying on material causes. Hardships, problems, disasters and
discomforts are most effective in paving the ground for the realization
of this condition, namely, cutting man’s attention off towards anything
other than Allah.

Divine Qada’ (Destiny) and Qadr (Decree)
----------------------------------------

Besides these general divine planning’s which are, to a large extent,
understandable for the people, the particular planning are also not
independent of Allah. In the Holy Qur’an it has been said that all that
occurs in the world is by Allah’s will and no phenomenon, in any place,
is realized without Allah’s will, including man’s death:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِنَفْسٍ أَنْ تَمُوتَ إِلَّا بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ كِتَابًا
مُؤَجَّلًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And no soul will ever die but with the permission of Allah, (at the
end of) an appointed term… (3:145).”***

Each man has a fixed appointed time (for life) and a decreed fate which
the Allah - The Almighty has determined and his death comes when Allah’s
wise destination demands it. In other words, no man dies without Allah’s
permission and no man dies outside the time appointed by Allah and
ordained in the book of his fate which has been determined by the
Allah - The Almighty, be his death a natural death or an unnatural one,
be it in the way of the truth or in the way of falsehood.

This is one of the matters which have a very constructive role in men’s
life. Of course, if Islamic learning’s are taught properly, but however
deviational expression are set forth in these fields, from the best and
loftiest learning’s, wrong and undesirable results will be derived and
this is one of the jobs in which the Shayatin and the satanic men have
invariably indulged themselves.

One of those matters which have been the object of incorrect
interpretations is this very matter of predestination and men’s fate.
Some have thought that the Almighty Allah has predestined a fate for
each man which means that man’s free choice is totally not allowed
towards fate and that what happens to man is outside the domain of his
will-power and free-choice and that he himself can play no role in it.
(this is that very fatalistic inclination which has prevailed in some of
the Islamic philosophical schools and still the remnants of such
thoughts are more or less existing in many of the Islamic countries and
among the Muslim nations), whereas, the predestination and fate of man
do not mean negating his free choice, his being answerable and
responsible.

In the system of creation, we have a discussion on creation and the real
courses of the world, as to what has occurred, what is occurring and
what will occur in the world and there is also another part which
concerns divine legislation and men’s duties, what they should do and
what is their responsibility towards themselves and that what effects
the actions that they fulfill out of their own free will, will have on
their lives in this world and in the hereafter.

### Correct Clarification of the Meaning of Divine Qada’ and Qadr

Unfortunately, the mixing up of these two subjects has brought about
undesirable results, so much so that it has not only had no positive and
constructive role on some people, but negative effects have also
resulted from them. Here, we do not have the time to pay to
philosophical discussion and the technical doubts in this connection and
their expression and solution, and/or to survey the matter historically,
i.e., to survey when and by what factors these inclinations prevailed
and what effects resulted from them.

However, we can briefly say that at the time of the usurping rules when
the spirit of Islam and the Islamic goals were at the utmost degree of
their state of being disregarded, some of these deviated ideas,
including fatalism, were projected for political private motives. The
Banu Umayyah (Umayyad) rulers, for making the people obey and follow
them, encouraged some persons to spread such thoughts among the people
that whatever happens, since Allah has willed, all should accept it and
offer no resistance against it.

In this connection, there are many examples. Ibn ‘Abbas (one of the
Sahabah (companions of the Holy prophet (SA) of Islam) says: *"During a
journey in which, we were going on a war, along with the second caliph,
the caliph summoned me and said: "Do you know why your cousin (meaning
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (AS) did not take part in this war?" I replied: "I do
not know." He said; "He stayed in Madinah to prepare the ground for his
own khilafah (succession) after me, so that he would become khalifah
(successor of Prophet Muhammad (SA)) after me." I said: "My cousin
believes that he has no need for preparing such ground, because Allah’s
Prophet had appointed him for Khilafah." The second caliph said: "Yes!
The Prophet wanted to do this! But Allah did not will it*[^16]*"* This
saying, in any way interpreted, according to what has been narrated, is
a sign of a narrow-mindedness concerning Islamic learning’s.

It is clear that what occurs in the world is subject to the Divine
creational will. But this does not mean that it is also subject to the
Divine legislative will. Allah - The Almighty, with His creational will
has paid attention to all events, so that nothing happens without His
creational will. The rise of ‘Sayyidush-Shuhada’ Al-Imam Al-Husayn (AS)
and his becoming martyred, are in accordance with the divine creational
will, but this does not mean (Divine) permission for his killing and the
negation of responsibility from those who took part in his martyrdom.

Likewise, those who, after the demise of the Holy prophet (SA) of Islam
sat on the seat of caliphate over Muslims and who also later turned the
Islamic khilafah into the form of Umayyad and Abbasid monarchy, acted as
per Allah’s creational will, but from the viewpoint of His legislative
will, namely legitimately by no means they were permitted to commit such
an act and they did not have the right to usurping deprive Islam and the
Muslims from their indisputable right Therefore, it should be noticed
that men are responsible for what takes place as per the divine
creational will, whether in connection with the individual issues and/or
in connection with the social affairs and will see their worldly and
otherworldly effects.

This was a reference to a very precise subject which should be pursued
in scientific circles. However, to see how man, while being possessed of
free will and performing his works with free will and free choice, is
under Divine planning, we will give a simple example:

‘Consider two persons who come out of their homes in the morning; one
aiming to go to the bakery to buy bread and the other to board a bus and
go to his work, but at a road crossing they come across each other,
discuss a matter with each other and take a decision for an action. For
example, they decide to go to the warfront (to fight against the
aggressors) or to rush to the help of homeless flood-stricken people or
to fulfill another good deed and/or God-forbid, commit a sinful act. It
is obvious that these two persons came out of their homes with their own
free will and decided to fulfill some acts with their own free choice.

But this is not inconsistent with the belief that Allah arranges the
matters in such a way that a ground be made so that the persons think of
going to the war-fronts out of free will. But if these two events did
not occur simultaneously and one of the two persons came out of the
house when the other person had already boarded the bus and left (for
his work) and/or vice versa, these two persons would not meet each other
and would not decide to go to the war-front together. This is an example
of predestination. You see, Allah has arranged the events in such a way
that good and wise consequences will result from them which will bring
about perfection for Allah’s creatures and open a way towards their
salvation.’

Here, we quote another example which is about Prophet Musa (Moses) (AS)
from the Holy Qur’an, When Musa (AS) reached maturity under the care of
Fir’awn (Pharaoh) and killed a Coptic (Egyptian) man, a person guided
him, saying that he should leave the place, because the men of Fir’awn
were attempting a plot on his (Musa’s) life. Musa (AS), too, took his
advice, left Egypt and went towards Madyan.

After going through a long way, he reached the vicinity of Madyan. There
the people had gathered over a well and were drawing water out of it to
water their sheep. Musa (AS), tired and hungry, had sat down on a corner
to get over his fatigue when suddenly his eyes fell on two chaste girls
who were standing in a corner and keeping their sheep there. Musa (AS)
got up, went to them and asked: *"Why do you water your sheep?"*

They replied: *"We have an aged father who is staying at home and who is
unable to fulfill the pastoral deeds. So, we have to bring the sheep
here ourselves, so that after the shepherds water their sheep, we will
water our sheep and/or somebody will help us and draw a bucket of water
out of the well and we water our sheep. We cannot do it on our own.”*

Musa (AS) came forward, took the bucket and watered the sheep ... and,
the story continues, as we know, from Surah 28 of the Holy Qur’an, and
Prophet Shu’ayb (Jethro) (AS) married one of his daughters to Musa (AS)
and Musa (AS) spent ten years in Madyan serving as a shepherd for
Shu’ayb (AS).

All these events which constitute a system of miscellaneous phenomena
are the actions which certain persons, out of their own free-will have
fulfilled out of particular motives and for specified goals. Musa (AS)
did not leave Egypt aiming to come to Prophet Shu’ayb (AS). He wanted to
be saved from the mischief of Fir’awn and probably he apparently did not
know that Shu’ayb (AS) was there, and that he had a daughter and that in
that city he was the Prophet.

But Allah had predestined that on one hand, Musa (AS) comes to the
service of a great Prophet (AS) such as Prophet Shu’ayb (AS), who
because of his old-age was lacking the ability to work, and to fulfill
his duties towards the others. (He had) predestined that Shu’ayb (AS)’s
daughter marries Musa (AS) and that after ten years, when Musa (AS) was
appointed a Prophet (by Allah), they return to Egypt and call upon
Fir’awn to worship the One God - Allah -The One and Only. These were all
Allah’s predestinations.

However, in any place of these predestinations, did any compulsion exist
over Musa (AS), Shu’ayb (AS) or his daughter? No! The actions were all
out of free-choice. Yet, there is a wise arrangement and plan over all
these planning’s and that is Allah’s planning. It is here that Allah
says: *“O Musa You came here on the basis of an exact deliberation and
precise plan and these events should have* *happened so that in this
safe valley you will receive the divine Prophetic mission and go to
Fir’awn.”* Those (events) were preliminaries for this task, but in no
stage did they cause any compulsion over Musa (AS) or the others.

If one carefully thinks about the events in his daily life, he will see
that in each phenomenon, there are thousands of preliminaries which
Allah - The Almighty has provided with His planning device and that we
are neglectful of the fact that what wise planning rules over each and
every one of the events of the world.

One of the great men of religion (may Allah be please with him) said:
*"If a man thinks about the secrets of his life and if he has (inwardly)
clear-sighted eyes and a conscious heart, he will see as if the whole
world has been created for him and that all things are preliminaries for
him so that his affairs will he performed in a perfect way.”*

Likewise, if another man thinks in this way, he will reach the same
result. In a hadithun-qudsiyy (a hadith which relates a revelation from
Allah in the language of the Prophet (SA)) Allah - The Almighty says:
*"I treat each one of the off springs of Adam so kindly and
compassionately as if I had just that very creature, but My creatures
treat Me as if everybody but Me were their God."*

This is a complaint from Allah in this hudithun-qudsiyy and so, each
creature should know that he is constantly under the planning and
supervision of Allah and that what Allah ordains for him alongside with
having responsibility is good and is a duty for him. Therefore, we
should know that the divine pre-destinations are all to our advantage,
even if they are from disasters and hardships and apparently to our
disadvantage.

If a child falls sick at home and his affectionate mother prevents him
from eating some kinds of food and/or even for his rapid recovery makes
him take bitter medicines and takes him for injections, she is certainly
meaning good for him and these actions (of the mother) are the very
signs of her kindness and affection, thought the child might be
displeased with this behavior of the mother and accuse her of
mercilessness. Therefore, the existence of bitter and annoying events
(including floods and earthquakes) are not aimless and are under the
wise planning of Allah, though the actions are fulfilled as per the
individuals’ free choice, too, and that the sinners are also responsible
for their indecent actions. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَصَابَ مِنْ مُصِيبَةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ إِلَّا
فِي كِتَابٍ مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ نَبْرَأَهَا إِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرٌ. لِكَيْلَا تَأْسَوْا عَلَىٰ مَا فَاتَكُمْ وَلَا تَفْرَحُوا
بِمَا آتَاكُمْ وَاللَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ كُلَّ مُخْتَالٍ فَخُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No evil befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it is in a
book before We bring it into existence; surely that is easy for Allah;
So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant at
what He has given you; and Allah does not love any arrogant boaster
(57:22-23).”***

No disaster befalls anybody unless it has been written in a book before
and this (as everything else) is easy for Allah to do. Then, immediately
Allah expresses the reason for this: so that you believe in Allah’s wise
planning and should not be worried if anything is lost by you; if you
lose any properly, if a house is ruined, if a dear one is martyred and
you should know that this is divine pre-destination. And on the other
hand, so that you do not become proud and arrogantly gay either when the
joys turn to you, and that you will always notice the fact that you are
dutiful and responsible in the face of each and every event, whether
pleasant of unpleasant and that you should only be thinking of
fulfilling your duties.

The Imam of the ummah (Imam Khumayni (QS)) had, from the very years of
1341 SH and 1342 SH (solar hijrah) (1962 and 1963 AD) repeatedly said:
*"We aim at the fulfillment of our duties and do not mind what happens.
If we fight, it is not known to us that we will be one hundred per cent
victorious. But when our duty is to fight, we fight, even though we
apparently suffer a defeat."*

In some of the battles of the early Islam, such as the Battle of Uhud,
too, Muslims suffered defeat, but because they fought for the
fulfillment of their duty and the exaltation of the word of At-Tawhid in
the world, they were always satisfied and their faith in the leadership
of the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam never decreased either. They said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَنْ يُصِيبَنَا إِلَّا مَا كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَنَا هُوَ مَوْلَانَا
وَعَلَى اللَّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Nothing will afflict us save what Allah has ordained for us; He
is our Patron; and on Allah let the believers rely (9:51).”***

The logic of these believers was that what Allah has predestined for us
will happen and that we arc contented with His predestination, though
they might be unpleasant. Many of the events are not pleasing for us and
hurt our sentiments, but we must know that Allah’s wise planning is
above these and that, as a whole, these phenomena will be useful for the
progress of Islam and the fulfillment of the Islamic movement.
Therefore, we should fulfill our own duties and seek the true goodness
which is achieved just in the light of the fulfillment of our religious
duties. As fur what happens, it does not concern us. The universe has a
Creator and a Planner Who has left nobody to himself, He knows what
should happen and what is expedient.

The phenomena of this world are from one aspect a combination of good
and evil, pleasant and unpleasant. Sometimes there is good health and
sometimes there is illness; in one year there is security and comfort
and in the other year insecurity and suffering, but none are absolute
good and evil. True good and evil depend on how man faces that
phenomenon.

All of us regard health to be good. But if one abuses good health and
falls into committing sin, is good health still to his good? Would it
not be closer to his good and felicity if he were ill and could not
commit that sin? Property, wealth and welfare are not always good for
man either, and it depends on how man treats them.

Of course, from the view point that Allah has created all, all are good,
but their being good and evil for you and I depend on the manner in
which we treat them. The Almighty Allah, plans the world affairs such
that men can derive various benefits from these double-faced phenomena
and stand by the promise they have made with Allah that they will help
His religion to the last drop of their blood, so that they will attain
both the glory, honor and victory of this world and the eternal felicity
and mercy.

[^1]: Ash-Shaykh As-Saduq, “At-Tawhid”, p. 21, Riwayah No 13.

[^2]: “Uyun Akhbarir-Rida”, vol.1, p. 135; Ash-Shaykh As-Saduq,
“At·Tawhid”, p. 24, Riwayah No. 2l.

[^3]: Ash-Shaykh As-Saduq, “At-Tawhid”, p. 83.

[^4]: “Usulul-Kafi”, vol. 2; p. 315, Hadith 2 and the translated text of
Usulul-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 3.

[^5]: “Mafatihul Jinan”, the end of Du’a’u ‘Arafah.

[^6]: “Nahjul-Balaghah” of Fayd, p. 779.

[^7]: Ibnul-‘Athir, “Al-Kamilu Fittarikh”, vol. 2, p. 462.

[^8]: Sometimes mental imaginations have certain effects, for example,
if one imagines sour things, his mouth waters and/or on imagining
pleasing or displeasing things, one feels pleasure or displeasure and on
the whole, the renewal of memories have effects.

[^9]: “Al-‘Usulul-Kafi”, vol. 1, p. 46, Hadith 1 and the translated text
of “Al-‘Usulul-Kafi”, vol. 1, p. 200.

[^10]: “Al-‘Usulul-Kafi”, vol. 2, p. 352, Hadith 7 and Hadith 8 and the
translated text of “Al-‘Usulul-Kafi”, vol. 4, p. 53 and 54.

[^11]: Intellect does not have the ability to perceive all the details
of the matters. For example, all wise men know that justice is good and
oppression is bad. But they cannot distinguish the details of the cases
of justice and oppression, that exactly where is oppression and where is
justice? The matter might reach to such a point where the truth and
falsehood -justice and oppression- are mistaken for each other and the
truth is regarded as falsehood and justice as oppression.

[^12]: “Biharul-Anwar”, vol. 2, p. 39, Hadith 24.

[^13]: In one of the towns of our Islamic country which is a relatively
small town too, two hundred missiles were hit, rendering the town into
the form of a ruin. However, the people of this town say: “We wish the
missiles and bombs too which hit the other towns and cities of our
country would hit our town, so that the people of the other towns and
cities would remain safe and sound.” Where in history has self-sacrifice
been witnessed?

[^14]: Related to takwin (creation) such as destitutions, disasters and
problems, and related to tashri’ (divine legislation) such as sawm.

[^15]: “Jami’us-Sa’adat”, vol. 2, p. 59.

[^16]: “Sharhu Nahjul Balaghah”, Ibn Abil-Hadid.


