Part 2: At-Tawhid In the Ideological System of Islam
====================================================

**In The Name of Allah - The Beneficent, The Merciful**

The second part of this subject concerns At-Tawhid in the value system
of Islam. The terms “value”, “value system” and other words of this kind
are quite prevalent in today’s terminology and people have become
familiar with these terms. But since this term "value" has in fact been
translated from other languages and has gone into our culture and is not
from the viewpoint of concept and contents which are in conformity with
the interpretations and words which have appeared in the genuine culture
of Islam and the riwayat, it is necessary to first give an explanation
about this term giving an extensive meaning which is today meant by it,
so that we are able to see what equivalent of this term is in the
Islamic culture.

The concept of value
--------------------

The common and general concept which we have about the term “value” is
in fact the economic concept. The relation of a commodity and/or a
service with the thing man is ready to pay for getting that commodity or
service brings into existence the concept of value. But the meaning of
value and the value system is other than this economic concept, though
it is not totally alien to this concept and though it might very
probably have at first been harrowed from this very economic concept.

The justification which can be made is that we are ready to pay some
money for a good and/or a service or to deliver another good or service
in return for that when that good and/or service are desired and liked
by us and we have a liking for them. A hungry man needs food. Food is
desirable for him and he is ready to pay some money in return, which
satisfies his need. So, the criterion for economic value too, is in fact
desirability and being demanded.

Hence we can abstract this meaning from its economic specifications and
say: *“anything which is desired and demanded by man and which can meet
his need or his want, that thing is of value.”* The term “value”, in
this extensive meaning is both applied to objects as well as to men and
their conduct. But since our discussion is about man and his behavior,
we have to continue speaking in this connection. Now let us see which
man is more valuable from the viewpoint of Islam.

Man’s honor
-----------

In spite of what is propounded in today’s world culture and which is
also claimed by the humanists that each man, due to his being a human,
has a natural value and in other words has honor, even though he might
commit many murders and crimes Islam considers two kinds of honor for
man.

The first kind is general honor, meaning that each man, due to his being
a man (irrespective of his conducts and attitudes) enjoys that honor.
This is a creational honor and a God-given value which the AlmightyAllah
has bestowed upon man and which He has not bestowed upon the other
creatures and perhaps the axis of these God-given blessings is man’s
intellect. In some of the ayat of the Holy Qur’an, too, this creational
honor has been pointed out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ
كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And surely We have honored the children of Adam, and We carry them
in the land and the sea, and We have given them of the good things, and
We have made them to excel by an appropriate excellence over most of
those whom We have created (17:70).”***

In the above ayah of the Holy Qur’an, it has been stipulated that Allah
has bestowed an honor to the children of Adam (AS) and excelled them to
many of His creatures. This honoring includes all men, namely, both man
and woman, little and mature possess the human creational
specifications. Allah has given them eyes, ears and the other limbs and
parts (of the body), a beautiful and erect body, and has also bestowed
upon them mind, intellect, intelligence, talents and the other spiritual
and physical characteristics which every man enjoys.

But when we meditate, we will see that this honor and value in reality
belong to Allah and that it is He Who has bestowed these blessings on
men freely and that men have themselves no role in attaining this honor

The other kind of honor is that which man himself with free -will and
the power of free choice and free selection which the Almighty Allah has
granted him achieves and attains. In this kind of honor, not all men are
equal and it is enjoyed just by the virtuous and if some men act
un-virtuously, they will not only have any share of this honor, but
rather they will get anti-value and fall so down that they will become
lower than any animal. About this group of men who have not acquired any
honor for themselves the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ
الْغَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…They are as cattle, nay, they are in worse errors; these are the
heedless ones (7:179).”***

Hence, that creational honor does not suffice for man to become
recognized as an honorable and noble creature forever, because he may
lose the God-given honor and buy for himself anti-honor, namely,
meanness and lowness. The expression of the Holy Qur’an in this regard
is such:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ فِي أَحْسَنِ تَقْوِيمٍ ثُمَّ رَدَدْنَاهُ
أَسْفَلَ سَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We created man in the best make. Then We render him the
lowest of the low (95:4-5).”***

Allah has created man in the best and most admirable form and fulfilled
His creational honoring in the best manner, but some men are found who
deprive themselves from this divine honor and who degrade themselves
down to the lowest stages which are possible for a human being.
Therefore, although all men have the creational and God-given honor in
common, but in the stage of free choice all are not the same and equal
and will have different degrees of value and honor in proportion to the
difference in their degrees of virtuousness, and even sometimes some may
degrade themselves so much that no honor is viewed for them and they
should be omitted from the society like cancerous glands.

**Moral Value**

The other matter which concerns this subject is men’s conduct which
generally constitutes the main axis or our discussion in this series of
matters. Here, starts the display of arts among the philosophers of law,
the philosophers of ethics and the various thinkers of humanity.
However, during tens of centuries in which they have discussed about
these subjects, still their thought has not reached any decisive and
correct result. A short introduction will serve to open the way towards
this discussion, paying attention to which helps us in attaining this
objective.

Basically, any free action fulfilled by a free agent is for the sake of
attaining the result which is derived from that action and very often it
might be that no action would take place if no goal was in view.
Therefore, since every action is a means for a goal, and no action is in
itself desirable by nature, the value and desirability or every action
is also subject to the result which is derived from that action.

The person who intends to go on a trip, takes a series of actions, for
instance, he buys tickets, prepares the means and necessities for the
trip and gets ready for boarding the bus or an aero plane. But by
fulfilling these preliminary actions he certainly means to reach the
goal, the destination and the place he has in view, and does not mean
the mere fulfillment of these actions.

Here, there is a very delicate point of which many of those involved in
discussion and reasoning arc neglectful and it is that sometimes some
results are derived from one’s actions which either he does not know
and/or does not notice, or for which he has not fulfilled that action.

For instance, when one leaves home to go to visit his friend or to go to
school or to perform some other action, if en route, other results
follow this action of his which (results) he has not considered at all,
nor he has meant them, it cannot be said that he has fulfilled this
action for that result (which he had not meant). So, the value of man’s
free action is subject to the result which he has meant from the
beginning and which he has put as his goal.

Another example will serve to better clarify this matter; a person
builds a hospital for showing off and so that the people will applaud
him and his only goal in spending money and time is gaining fame and
popularity among the people. Now if this hospital is built and thousands
of people, including the esteemed Islamic combatants and the fighters in
the way of Allah are treated in that hospital, and good result is
derived from this action, can it be said that the builder of the
hospital (the person referred to) will also derive a benefit from this
action? Certainly not! Because his aim has not been the realization of
these results and only the love for fame has driven him to perform such
an action.

On the contrary, if a person builds a hospital with the intention that
Allah’s creatures and the wounded and the oppressed people of the
society use it, but a bomb happens to hit and destroy that hospital and
so the building of the hospital would not lead to any result, his action
has by no means-become valueless, because he had indeed built the
hospital for an invaluable goal. Of course if that hospital remained
safe and the aims of construction were also fulfilled, he would achieve
more benefits.

The Criterion for Moral Value
-----------------------------

Now, taking into consideration the above introductions which clarify
that besides the result’s being taken into consideration, intention and
viewing the aim have also direct hearing on giving value to man’s
actions, the question is raised as to what behavior men should have and
what goal they should take into consideration so that their actions,
conducts and behaviors become valuable? Before paying attention to this
matter, we should first see what is basically the truth and criterion
for values from the viewpoint of Islam?

As a whole, the truth and criterion for values from the viewpoint of
Islam and the value system of this school (the school of Islam) is that
perfection which emerges in man’s soul and which leads man towards
worshipping Allah, getting near to Him and winning His favor. This
perfection is not a conventional concept and is like physical power, a
reality and a fact. Of course this perfection is to be achieved as a
result of the free actions of men themselves so it will become possessed
of moral value and the man possessing perfection attains true honor and
real nobility.

Therefore, from the viewpoint of Islam, only the acquired spiritual
perfections are the source of the exalted and positive human value,
otherwise physical and body perfections have no genuine value and even
the God-given powers of the soul cannot by themselves be the source of
value either. Extraordinary intelligence and strong memory do not by
themselves become the source of the perfection of the soul, because
there have been persons who were endowed with high-level of intelligence
but who however sank into the lowest abysses of human fall and/or who
misused their intelligence and intellect for selling out themselves and
the others. So, intelligence by itself is not a source of absolute
value. Intelligence and memory are not absolute values; rather they are
rated as tools for attaining true values.

People, more or less, measure some of the values with their own innate
nature and intellect, included among such values are truthfulness,
honesty and standing by one’s words. But sometimes the matter reaches
such a stage, the reality of which cannot be understood by all and
rather the superior ones (those who are above the others in respect of
spiritual perfection and knowledge of the religion) should understand it
and teach it to the others and even, more significant than this, some of
the values are not recognizable with man’s ordinary thought. It is there
that wahy rushes to the help of man and makes those values recognizable.
Many of the moral and legal issues in the value system of Islam are
determined just on the basis of wahy and their limits, terms and details
are defined by the Divine Law.

For example, we briefly know that if we tell a lie which causes an
innocent person to be released from the hands of an oppressor, such a
lie does not have the indecency the other lies have, but how far and
with what conditions? These are the issues to be determined by the
Divine law. So, the basis of values consists of the virtues, qualities
and manners which exalt and perfect man’s soul. Among the values which
are propounded in various communities of the world, there are matters
which all people have-more or less accepted but which they are unable to
understand.

All know that justice is good. But what is the criterion for this
goodness’? All know that truthfulness and honesty are good. But which
truthfulness and which honesty’? All know that the spirit of
self-sacrifice is beautiful, but by what criterion? If we acquire these
criteria properly, we can judge in cases of doubt and mistake properly.
For example, today, in all world communities, freedom is propounded as a
great value, so that if anyone says: *I oppose freedom;* it is as if he
has said that I oppose the light of the sun. But do all know as to what
is the criterion for this value?

The Value of Freedom
--------------------

The word “freedom” has a very broad concept and has different meanings.
Certainly it cannot, with this extent, be a criterion for value and the
reason for making mistakes and misusing these concepts is this very fact
that these values have been spread without acquiring their criterion and
that the people, too, have accepted them for the sake of their sensual
desires.

Anyhow, the desirability of freedom is not absolute. Rather, it is a
means and tools for that spiritual perfection which is attained as a
result of the person’s free will and free choice. Suppose that if we
leave a child free in a house where the child is surrounded by
explosives or poisonous medicines, the child can freely light the match
and approach the gas capsule and/or can throw the lit match near a
vessel of gasoline or can consume a poisonous medicine, have we (by
doing so) caused the child to become perfected or have we caused it to
be killed?

Is, from the viewpoint of logic and intellect, giving such freedom to
the child correct? Or, should the child be left free to the extent that
it does not harm itself and the others? Of course, if we tie up the
child’s hands and legs or confine it to a cage, it will never make human
growth.

The child should be left free, but within a specified and planned
framework and should not be left totally free. When this child reaches
maturity and distinguishes between good and bad, then he should be left
free. Also human individuals in different societies have different
degrees of wisdom, perfection and recognition. If the general people (in
a society) are not perfectly aware and the means for any kind of action
is at their disposal, its result will be nothing but destruction for
that people.

It is not proper on the strength of the fact that freedom is an absolute
value, to make all things for all individuals free so that they will
behave in any way they choose. This is a wrong logic. This is of the
inauspicious souvenirs of the Western culture which has spread in our
society. We should know these anti-values and separate them from the
true values so that we can bring our society near to more and more
growth on the basis of the Islamic values and attain that perfection
which, if not achieved by man, can be replaced by nothing else.

Commitment and sense of duty
----------------------------

We have already mentioned that value is sometimes applied to man’s free
conduct (the actions he performs out of free -will) and it is said that
such and such an action is valuable and this term “value” is sometimes
applied to the final goal of these conducts and it is expressed that for
what values) such and such actions are performed.

In other words, in a value system, firstly we should take into view a
final goal so that for attaining that final goal the actions become
valuable, provided that that very goal itself has innate and genuine
value, and secondly we choose such conducts that are commensurate with
that value. The most general and universal valuable conduct which exists
in all value systems (whether or not those who propound that system are
heedful of that general value) is commitment and being bound to fulfill
the duties and responsibilities.

In the midst of such kinds of systems which are propounded in the world,
one of the European moral philosophers named Kant notices this point and
says: *"A good action is that which is fulfilled for the sake of the
fulfillment of duty."* He has properly understood this far that a
general value for all actions and conducts is the fulfillment of the
duty. But what has been away from his view and has remained undone (in
his expressions) is that the fulfillment of the duty itself is not the
final end, rather its value is for the sake of another genuine and
innate value, named man’s "final perfection" which is attained in the
light of proximity to Allah.

The word "committed’ which is used in today’s public culture, is applied
to the one who attempts to know his duty and fulfill it. But in Islam,
we have by far a richer and more meaningful term than the terms
“commitment” and “being bound over” and that is the beautiful term
“taqwa” (piety). Taqwa is that very commitment which is propounded in
other moral systems, plus the particular specifications which have
arisen out of the Islamic attitude and culture. Although there have been
detailed discussions about the concept of taqwa and basically in all
sermons of the salatul-J umu’ah (Friday prayer), it (taqwa) should be
enjoined and emphasized, however, as it suits the matter, we shall
express a few points briefly in this connection so far as it concerns
the discussion.

Taqwa
-----

The term “taqwa” which is from the root “wiqayah” and which means
“guarding” is applied where something which is exposed to danger and
corruption is to be guarded. This is the literal meaning of “wiqayah”
and also “taqwa” which is the infinitive mood and/or the verbal noun of
“ittiqa” that contains this same meaning. But “taqwa”, as a moral
concept, has a particular point and that is that man feels that as a
result of some conducts, the perfection and purity of his soul and the
value of his being are endangered.

Here, two basic points exist which separate the moral taqwa from its
other meanings, the first point is that what is in danger is man’s soul,
not his body and physique and the second point is that the danger which
threatens a man’s soul, is his own conduct, not the other men’s conduct,
nor the natural events.

So, it is appropriate that man behaves in such a way as to remain
guarded so that his soul will not be contaminated, will not fall in
respect of value, will not be fallen and declined and will not be
afflicted with eternal torment. In such cases man has naturally also
fear of contamination or danger, because if he does not have fear, he
will not attempt to guard himself. That is why in the concept of taqwa,
the concept of fear has also been guaranteed and the expressions of the
Holy Qur’an and the riwayat and the case of common usage, indicate that
this is the case:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا لَا تَجْزِي نَفْسٌ عَنْ نَفْسٍ شَيْئًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be on your guard against a day when one soul shall not avail
another in the least… (2:48,123).”***

Fear the day when no one comes to the help of another one and for such
fearing, guard yourselves from such danger (both the meaning of guarding
and the meaning of fear arc considered.).

In the Islamic attitude which is based on At-Tawhid (monotheistic)
viewpoint, we know all effects to be from Allah. Although there exist
causes and means for these effects, but eventually it is Allah Who moves
the chain of the world of being, Who is the cause of all causes and Who
is the Maker of all means. Therefore, on the basis of At-Tawhid in
actions if a danger threatens a person, it is also in the control of
Allah.

So, if a person fears lest in future his existence, his life, his
perfection and purity and also his honor and nobility be endangered,
from the At-Tawhid outlook (the outlook based on At-Tawhid), he fears
lest Allah -The Almighty should provide the means so that he will fall,
whether in worldly means or the means of the hereafter. So this fear
eventually leads to fear of Allah and so if we fear lest we should fall,
we should fear Allah, i.e., lest Allah should let us fall, or if we fear
lest our soul should be polluted or lest we should become afflicted with
eternal torment and remoteness from Allah’s mercy, we should fear Allah
and regard Him as the Maker of all causes and this attitude becomes the
cause and source for taqwa to be attached to Allah -The Almighty in the
Islamic culture.

Do meditate about the ayat of the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah… (59:18).”***

The word “ittaqu” means be careful, guard yourself, but what role does
the word "Allah" have here? “Allah” is the object of the verb “ittaqu”,
it means fear Allah and guard yourselves against that danger which
threatens you from Allah as punishment for the (bad) actions you do out
of free choice.

So, it became clear that taqwa is that very commitment towards the
fulfillment of the duties with richer and more fruitful concepts. That
is to say, in the concept of taqwa, both the spiritual source of taqwa
which consists of fear of danger and the fact that the effects and
emergence of these dangers and falls are in Allah’s hands have been
noticed. It is He Who can make this danger reach man, Who can descend
torment upon him or keep him secure from those dangers. and since the
man’s fall in the hereafter is the torment in hell, sometimes fire and
torment have been regarded as pertaining to taqwa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..فَاتَّقُوا النَّارَ الَّتِي وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Then fear the fire whose fuel is people and stones… (2:24).”***

The like of the above ayah has also been employed from the root word
“wiqayah”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Save yourselves and your families from a fire… (66:6).”***

The word “qu” (save) is from that very root word “wiqayah”. So,
sometimes taqwa is attributed to the fire, torment and hell, due to the
fact that it (taqwa) is the means which hinders man from fall. Also*,*
on some occasions, taqwa is attributed to a time:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا لَا تَجْزِي نَفْسٌ عَنْ نَفْسٍ شَيْئًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And be on your guard against a day when one soul shall not avail
another in the least… (2:48, 123).”***

Fear the day when no one rushes to the help of the other and no one
suffices another one’s cause. That day is the Qiyamah (Resurrection
Day). Another point which should be taken into view in taqwa is that
sometimes taqwa is regarded as the adjective of the verb itself and its
application is meant to enjoin performing the prayers (and other
religious duties) and to desist from the sins and sometimes too it is
applied just to desist from the sins:

*“No (good) action, if coupled with taqwa is little.*[^1]*”*

In the above riwayah, good action has been placed alongside taqwa,
namely, fulfill good actions and do not commit sins. So, according to
one probability, by taqwa in the above riwayah it is meant that if you
want your good actions to be useful, you should also desist from bad
actions, otherwise the bad actions cause the effects of the good actions
to be destroyed, too. For example, if you collect money in a bag, but
however because there is a hole in the bottom of the bag, though you
have worked and taken trouble too, you have saved nothing.

According to a ruwayah, the Holy Prophet (SA) of Islam said to his
companions: "The one who utters At-Tasbihatul-Arba’ah (the four
praises): *‘subhanallalhi wal-hamdu lillahi wa la ilahaillallahu wallahu
akbar’*, for each praise Allah grows a tree in Paradise for him." One of
the Companions of the prophet (SA) remarked: *"O the Prophet (SA) of
Allah! So, we have plenty of trees in Paradise."* The Holy Prophet (SA)
of Islam replied: *"If you do not send a fire to burn the trees."* Good
actions bear (good) fruits if they are accompanied by taqwa, namely, by
desisting from sins.

Therefore, one of the cases of the application of taqwa is the very
desisting from sins and its other application consists of that spiritual
state which becomes the source of the fulfillment of duties and
desisting from forbidden acts. Also, sometimes taqwa is applied to that
state of fear which becomes the origin of this action and eventually
another case of the application of taqwa is a spiritual Slate which is
realized in man’s soul.

This fixed spiritual quality which is called the well-grounded quality,
is a fixed spiritual slate which is present in man’s soul and which is
not quickly given up. Those who during years of assiduity and practice,
have acted according to their duties, a well-grounded quality develops
in them so that automatically, anywhere a duty is to be performed, they
immediately act.

In a broader definition and explanation it should be expressed that
man’s spiritual states are divided into two groups; one group consists
of transient, changeable and unstable states which states, in the
philosophical terminology is interpreted as “hal” (natural disposition)
and the other group consists of permanent, stable and well-grounded
qualities in the soul which is interpreted as “malakuh’’ (fixed
spiritual quality).

These states and qualities are propounded in the case of all the value
behaviors of man. Chastity, modesty, self-sacrifice and the like, arc
sometimes in the form of a transient state and sometimes in the form of
a constant spiritual quality and it exists in the form of a malakah in
the soul.

In the traditional and classical ethics, the discussion is on malakat,
namely, those constant and firm qualities which exist in individuals’
souls, but in value concepts in the general meaning, individual and
personal behaviors which stern from transient states should also be
discussed.

That is, for the clarification of the value system of a school (of
thought) it does not suffice that we just rely on the malakat, because
eventually the question may arise as to what value does this behavior,
which has not reached the level of malakah, has from the viewpoint of
this system. Is it totally lacking in value? Certainly this is by no
means the case.

So, the value of behaviors should also be discussed irrespective of
malakat. Consider a youth who has just reached maturity (from the point
of view of the religious duties). When he performs his actions with a
divine motive, his deed is taqwa, even though malakah may not yet have
come into existence in him. The expressions of the Holy Qur’an and the
Infallible Imams (SA) too are mostly viewing the behavior and do not
mean that one should necessarily have the malakah of taqwa, Because if a
person religiously becomes mature just today, he is duty-bound to have
taqwa.

Besides all these, basically the malakat, from two aspects, have direct
and close relationship with actions and conducts, one that they
(malakat) are themselves caused by behaviors, namely, they come into
existence as a result of practice, assiduity and continued action and on
the other hand, they are the cause of further actions. Therefore, taqwa,
in the meaning of an abstract title conforms to actions, not just
malakah and that spiritual quality which is discussed in ethics,

The other matter which should not be neglected in regard to taqwa is
that when we say that in the value system of Islam no good action is
outside taqwa, this imagination should not occur that just physical and
perceptible action is meant; rather by action, it is meant here as a
philosophical concept, that is, any kind of activity which stems from
man’s soul, whether it is in man’s heart and the environment of the
mind, or outside the body and on external matters, whether it be a
physical action or a spiritual action.

When you are seated, your body is not in movement and you are not
bringing about changes in external matters, but with thinking and
meditating, you can fulfill an action which has value and which is
rewarded in the hereafter or vice-versa, i.e., an action which is among
severe and cardinal sins, such as unduly suspecting your faithful
brothers.

Sometimes even refraining from an action becomes the proof of taqwa.
Suppose a youth faces a situation which tempts the commitment of a sin,
but he controls himself and does not commit that sin. Here, apparently
no action has been fulfilled, but in reality a great action has taken
place and that is deciding to desist from the sin and in the terminology
of fuqaha (the Islamic jurisprudents), it is kaffun-nafs (controlling
one’s self), that is, a spiritual energy should be spent so that man can
restrain himself from committing a sin.

Hence, taqwa includes the palpable, external and physical actions as
well as the spiritual actions and even desisting from (sinful) actions,
when it is with decision and out of consciousness. But if desisting from
a sinful action is unconsciously and without intention, such as when a
man is asleep and in this state no sin is committed by him, such a
person has (in that condition) desisted from sin(s), but his action is
not taqwa, rather it is utter negation and there is no a affirmative
aspect, nor spiritual activity in it, because neither spiritual energy
has been spent, nor any decision has been taken for anything. So, those
who imagine that taqwa is just desisting from sin(s) and thus keep aloof
from the community so that no error and sin might be committed by them
have in fact performed no action and arc not muttaqi (possessed of
taqwa, virtuous, pious). Taqwa requires spiritual activity.[^2]

We give another example: In a scene of wrestling, two persons are busy
wrestling at a gymnasium and around the scene; there are a number of
spectators watching them. After some time of struggle, one of the two
wrestlers falls on ground and as wrestlers call it becomes knocked down
and the other wrestler who has not been knocked down will be declared as
the winner. Well, as for those spectators who are seated around the
scene and who have not been knocked down and who are also seated or
standing erect, are they winners too?

The answer is quite clear. They have not taken part in this event so
that a case for winning and losing would come forth. Taqwa is when a man
draws sword against Satan and against one’s soul and succeeds to guard
himself from evil and commit no sins. Taqwa is an affirmative action and
a positive activity, be it in one’s soul or in his body. Of course the
physical actions after all stem from spiritual activity and arise out of
will-power and determination.

### Stages of Taqwa

The other point which concerns Taqwa is that Taqwa has certain stages
and it is not such that we could say it exists or it does not exist.
Rather it is a matter with stages and these stages arc innumerable and
have no definite limits and extents either. In the ayah of the Holy
Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you
most careful (of his duty)… (49:13).”***

The word (atqa), meaning the most honorable is in the superlative
degree. This meaning is applied in a case where one thing has different
stages, being little or in excess and/or intensity and weakness. For
example, the one who performs the (obligatory) prayers so that he will
be immune from Allah’s torment and would not go to hell, has attained
one degree of taqwa and relation with Allah, but this is a low stage and
a weak relation.

A better stage and a stronger relationship with Allah belongs to the one
who performs the wajib salawat not only for the sake of immunity from
Allah’s retribution, but also because he wishes to enter the sphere of
Allah’s mercy and to enjoy His eternal blessings.

Such a person, besides performing the wajib (obligatory) salawat is also
attentive of the mustahab (recommended but not obligatory) salawat and
tries to perform more and more mustahab acts. The loftiest stage and
degree belongs to the awliya’ (Allah’s friends), that is, even if they
know that in spite of fulfilling this religious obligation (the
salawat), still Allah will take them to Hell, but He is pleased with
them, they still recite salawat in order to acquire Allah’s pleasure and
love.

The same is also the case (with them), if they know that even there is
no hell and paradise. In some supplications of the Infallible Imams
(AS), it has appeared that they say (to Allah): *“O Allah! If you take
me to hell and burn me for thousands of years, your love will not come
out of my heart and if I know that your pleasure is, that I burn in the
fire of Hell for ever, that fire will be desirable for me.”*

 Of course this supposition (that Allah might take the Infallible Imams
(AS) to hell...) is contrary to the truth and there is no room for the
probability of such a thing, but this is the spiritual state of such
persons (The Infallible Imams (AS) and all other Allah’s friends) .

They do not demand paradise and hell and seek only Allah’s meeting and
pleasure. The following words are well-known from Amirul-Mu’mineen (The
Commander of the Faithful) Al-Imam ‘Ali (AS) who says: *“O Allah! I do
not worship You out of fear of torment and desire for paradise, rather I
worship You because you are lovable and worthy of being worshipped.”*

Anyhow, taqwa has different stages and naturally, that nearness to Allah
(pleasing Allah, winning Allah’s favor) which is attained due to taqwa
will have different degrees. Examples of that too, sometimes in our
time, are witnessed in the combatant brothers and in their last wills.
Sometimes they write and sometimes it comes to their tongue that: *"O
Allah, we have not come to the warfront to be rewarded with Al-hurul-’in
(the pure beautiful mates in paradise), we have not come fur jihad to
just be released of the torment of hell, rather since we love You and
seek Your pleasure and meeting, we sacrifice our unworthy lives.”*

The above points were a brief description about the concepts which are
propounded about taqwa and this word by itself denotes all these
delicate and precise concepts and hence it becomes clear why in the
Islamic culture this word (taqwa) has been so much emphasized:

So, taking in to consideration the ayah of the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you
most careful (of his duty)… (49:13).”***

it becomes quite clear that the most general and overall value regarding
moral (permanent) dispositions and behavior is taqwa and any other thing
which has value will be one of the proofs of taqwa, If justice and
seeking the truth have value, it is because they arc of the proofs of
taqwa. If the acquisition of knowledge is of value, it is because in the
Islamic culture, it is regarded as one of the proofs of taqwa; likewise,
the other values, such as self-sacrifice.

**The Relationship of Taqwa with At-Tawhid**

As for the relationship of taqwa with At-Tawhid, what is of significance
and should he paid attention to, is that in the value system of Islam,
taqwa, without relationship with Allah has no value and it is directly
or indirectly related to Allah. Even this it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…. النَّارَ فَاتَّقُوا …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Then fear the fire… (2:24).”***

The fire is to be feared because it is “Allah’s torment”; or

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَاتَّقُوا يَوْمًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And guard yourselves against a day… (2:281).”***

The qiyamah (resurrection day), too, is to be guarded against because it
is the day of Allah’s judgment and the day of Allah’s reward and
punishment and taqwa becomes related and associated with it. In other
words, since taqwa includes fear and the fear desired in Islam is the
fear of Allah, so this concept includes a relationship with Allah and so
long as we do not know Allah and do not know Him as the Possessor of all
perfections and powers, no room will be found for having taqwa towards
Him (for fearing Him).

The more significant relationship which At-Tawhid has with taqwa is from
the viewpoint of acquiring taqwa, in the way that when we learned that
taqwa is a general value and the malakah of taqwa is one of the most
excellent malakat with which man is related, we should know how this
malakah is acquired. One general way common to all malakat is practice,
that is, anyone who wants to acquire a permanent spiritual disposition
should practice and repeat the actions related to it so that that
malakah will emerge out of him.

As for the malakah of taqwa (so that it will emerge in mu’minin as a
permanent spiritual disposition and lifts them to the most excellent of
values), the main condition is paying attention to Allah, in the way
that the greater man’s attention is to Allah, the better he is able to
fulfill his duties and provide the ground for the emergence of malakah
of taqwa in his soul.

It is true that many people perform some actions without paying
attention to Allah or desist from some actions, but these kinds of
conducts are not the source of that value attached to taqwa which is
propounded in Islam. These provide a ground for perfection and have
imperfect causality. This cause reaches its true effect and acquires
perfect causality when it has a relationship with Allah, then it can be
regarded as a means for man’s getting near to Allah, winning Allah’s
pleasure and favor and for his eventual perfection and be fulfilled for
the sake of its very being a means (towards winning Allah’s pleasure),
not out of other motives.

Suppose in a society in which theft and treachery is regarded indecent,
a person avoids committing theft so that his social value will not
decrease or his reputation will not be damaged, such a person has
desisted from a sin, but never attains that value which is propounded in
the Islamic taqwa, because a voluntary action has value when it is
fulfilled for the sake of that eventual desired goal behind it. If
desisting from sin is for the sake of Allah, it has that eventual value,
but if it is because of fear of the people and fear of legal torment and
persecution, it will no longer have that value. So, all value action of
ours should be in relation to Allah and take place for the sake of
getting near to Allah, winning His pleasure, favor and mercy and
immunity from His torment.

In the following ayah of the Holy Qur’an,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ
مَا قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! fear Allah, and let every soul consider what it
has sent on for the morrow, and fear Allah; surely Allah is Aware of
what you do. And be not like those who forsook Allah, so He made them
forsake their own souls: these it is that are the transgressors
(59:18-19).”***

These two basic points have been mentioned for the acquisition of taqwa;
one to be attentive to the fact that the Almighty Allah is always
present and conscious and that we are in His presence and the other is
that the Almighty Allah spares the reward and the punishment for no
action and that He returns the result of all our actions to ourselves.
Paying attention to these matters causes man to, with the fulfillment of
the duties, attain divine taqwa.

The point which is contrary to taqwa, namely, that which is propounded
as anti-value, is fisq (evil-doing) and fujur (wickedness or
debauchery); and fasiq (evil-doer) and fajir (the debauchee) is the one
who does not reck any danger (neither apparent and material dangers nor
the dangers which damage his humanity), and accepts no border for his
own life and who, waywardly and licentiously moves in any direction he
chooses to. Although, in the Holy Qur’an, taqwa is sometimes applied in
the face of fujur and sometimes in the face of fisq, but its proof is
the same.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the soul and Him Who made it perfect, then He inspired it to
understand what is right and wrong for it (91:7-8).”***

and/or:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… أَمْ نَجْعَلُ الْمُتَّقِينَ كَالْفُجَّارِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Or shall We make those who guard (against evil) like the wicked?
(38:28).”***

In the above ayat of the Holy Qur’an, taqwa has been propounded as a
general value and fujur has been propounded as an anti-value. The same
is true of the ayah mentioned before.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And be not like those who forsook Allah, so He made them forsake
their own souls: these it is that are the transgressors (59:19).”***

These verses first emphasize taqwa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ
مَا قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! fear Allah, and let every soul consider what it
has sent on for the morrow, and fear Allah; surely Allah is Aware of
what you do (59:18).”***

Then, it (the Holy Qur’an) mentions the point opposite to it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…These it is that are the transgressors (59:19).”***

The term fujur, in the root of the word, means impudicity and license
and fisq, as the etymologists have mentioned is that something comes out
of its natural shell, for example, if a date comes out of its natural
shell, about it is said: “fisquttamr”, Also man’s existence has been
surrounded by a natural border which is called the border of ‘ubudiyyah’
(worship to Allah).

If man comes out of this shell and transgresses that limit which Allah
has ordained for him, he has committed fisq, just as taqwa is the
observance of that very natural and godly border. Anyhow, the most
general concept of value which has positive value is taqwa, and the most
general anti-value or concept which has negative value is fisq and
fujur.

Ibadah (worship to Allah)
-------------------------

One of the other value concepts of Islam, which is particular to the
(monotheistic and godly cultures and communities, is worshipping Allah
and serving Him, for, all world communities more or less accept the
concept of taqwa, yet they consider its proofs to be the things which
are probably different from our Islamic attitude.

For more explanation of this concept, which is particular to the
monotheistic cultures, we present an introduction. We said that the
fulfillment of the duties and being bound over the responsibilities is a
general value. Now let us see what these responsibilities are and who is
the one who calls to account for these responsibilities?

Usually, the responsibilities are divided into three groups, of which
two groups have universal acceptance and one group is particular to the
religious and theist communities. As for the responsibilities which have
been accepted in all human communities, one is responsibility towards
the community, so that if individuals do not fulfill them, they will be
called to account, and the other is towards the conscience of the
individual himself, namely, everybody has certain duties towards his
conscience which he should fulfill even if the society does not call him
to account. In the midst of this, there is another kind of
responsibility, too, which is just accepted in godly communities and
that is the responsibility towards Allah and naturally those people
submit to it who believes in Allah.

But if we view the matter with a wider outlook, we will see that we (on
the basis of the divine outlook in Islam) have just one kind of
responsibility and that is just towards Allah, of which the cases are
however different, not that there are numerous ones who call to account
for them. It is Allah, Who has created man’s existence, has granted him
the blessings and has endowed him with social life, intellect and
conscience.

So, the true caller to account is Allah and all responsibilities are
towards Him, but their cases are different. Sometimes Allah calls to
account for the duties which He Himself has ordained as ‘ibadah (acts of
worship), for example, He calls a person to account and asks him why he
has not performed the wajib salawat or why he has not fulfilled the
other act(s) of worship.

Also, sometimes Allah calls one to account for the duties He has ordered
regarding His (other) servants, for example, he asks: *“Why did not you
observe My command regarding the poor?”* Hence, the poor or the
community themselves have no right upon the others and cannot call the
others to account, unless Allah has permitted it.

The case of one kind of responsibilities is the individual himself, not
that the individuals call one to account for it, e.g., Allah asks: *“Why
did you oppress yourself?”* If a person attempts a suicide or any other
action which is a proof of oppression to one’ self, Allah calls the
person to account for the same and asks him: *"Why did you oppress
yourself’?”* again the one who calls to account and who holds
responsible is Allah. So, on the basis of At-Tawhid (monotheistic) view,
all responsibilities are basically towards the Almighty Allah.

### The Basis of Responsibility

Taking into consideration the above matters, the question arises as to
what is the basis of responsibility and how is it that Allah calls us to
account? This is a technical discussion which should be propounded in
the philosophy of ethics and in the philosophy of law. But here, we will
just point out the secret of the solution of this matter.

Basically, the caller to account can be the one who is the owner of the
case for which someone is to be called to account. If someone enters
another one’s house (without being permitted), the inmate of house can
call the newly entered person to account in case the former is the owner
of the house. As for the public properties of the society, too, because
all are owners (of the same) to some proportion, they have the right to
call to account. So, man can call to account when he has a right towards
something and owns something.

As for us men, the same is the case, namely, the one who calls us to
account should be the one who is the owner of us and the owner of the
things which are at our disposal and who can say: *"Why, I granted you
being and endowed you with a healthy body, why did you oppress this
body?"; "Why, I gave you the power of meditation and intellect, why did
not you use it in the proper way’?" ; "Why, I put clean air at your
disposal, Why did you pollute it’?"* And all such accounts are called to
by the one who is the owner; otherwise, there would be no right for
calling to account.

Therefore, true ownership belongs to Allah and it is just He Who has the
right to call to account, to ordain duties and hold responsible and Whom
we are truly owned by, so that this being owned is never negated,
contrary to nominal cases of being owned which are negotiable and
transferable, such as the house, the car or the dress which you own, but
which on selling them, you no longer own them.

This is a nominal ownership which is both vanish-able and transferable
and among the things which the Almighty Allah cannot do, one is this
very fact that He cannot release His servants from servitude (to Him)!
Because it is an impossible matter. Allah cannot drive any being out of
being His creatures and say: You are no longer owned by me and neither
are you My creature. As long as anything exists in the world, us being
are the same as being the creature of/and owned by Allah and coming out
of being owned means to become nothing.

### Creational and Divine Legislative ‘Ibadah

Taking into consideration this outlook which takes form on the basis of
At-Tawhid, each movement of the creatures is the emergence of an effect
from servitude to Allah, because its being in existence is the same as
being owned (by Allah). The heat and the light which emanate from the
sun, the breeze which blows, the rain which falls, the plant which grows
and the flowers and fruits which appear on the trees are effects of all
these beings being owned and are indicators that the manner of creation
and planning are of the same.

Hence, all the movements of the beings can be regarded as a creational
‘ibadah (a creational servitude to Allah); that is, any being,
willy-nilly, whatever effect emerges out of it, has manifested a sign of
it being owned by - and its servitude to - the Almighty Allah. In the
Holy Qur’an, it has been said that all beings praise Allah and there are
even a number of suwar which begin with the following sentences:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُ لِلَّهِ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ ۖ لَهُ
الْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ الْحَمْدُ ۖ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the
glory of Allah… (64:1).”***

In other verses of the Holy Qur’an, it has been said that all things
make sajdah (prostration) to Allah, even the shadows which fall on the
ground:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. مِنْ شَيْءٍ يَتَفَيَّأُ ظِلَالُهُ عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَالشَّمَائِلِ
سُجَّدًا لِلَّهِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Its (very) shadows return from right and left, making obeisance to
Allah… (16:48).”***

More delicate than these, the Holy Qur’an says that the sound of the
thunder and the song of nightingales and the twitter of sweet-singing
birds are all praise of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَيُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ مِنْ خِيفَتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the thunder declares His glory with His praise, and the angels
too are in awe of Him… (13:13).”***

And finally, the most general ayah of the Holy Qur’an in this connection
is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***their glorification… (17:44).”***

One of the interpretations made for this group of ayat is that they mean
creational ‘ibadah (worship), creational tasbih (praising, glorifying)
and creational sujud (prostration); all the movements and the effects of
their existence are signs of them being servants of and owned by the
Almighty Allah which on one hand they manifest Allah’s qualities of
beauty and perfection and on the other hand, declare Allah’s being free
from defects, destruction, naught, and the negative qualities (the
qualities which Allah is devoid of and which can never be attributed to
Him).

That aspect which is demonstrative of the qualities of perfection (of
Allah) is called hamd (praising Allah’s qualities), and that aspect
which is indicative of and which establishes transcendence of Allah from
defects is called tasbih (praising Allah’s transcendence over all
defects) which is a creational ‘ibadah (servitude) to Allah. The limbs
of our bodies have this ‘ibadah too. Our hands, without our will-power,
praise Allah, our feet, without our will-power praise Allah, the same is
true also of the other limbs and parts of our bodies. Yet, there is also
a divine legislative and voluntary ‘ibadah which is particular to men.

Although the free actions (the actions which we perform out of our own
free will) in any form they might be, are also signs of servitude to
Allah and are creational ‘ibadah, but in terms of divine legislation and
the sphere of selection and free choice, ‘ibadah is applied to
particular actions, A man, who is without ‘ibadah (without servitude),
does not and will not exist in the world, because the reality of his
existence is being possessed (being owned) and is dominated by the
powers which have surrounded him and which have affected his effects and
movements.

In this midst, if he recognizes the true Effective One (Allah), learns
the way to reach Him and moves in that very direction, he has made
‘ibadah to Allah, but if he does not know Him (Allah) and docs not step
in His path, he has not fulfilled divine legislative ‘ibadah, Anyhow,
man’s conduct is a conduct of ‘ibadah (a conduct of servitude), either
‘ibadah to Allah or ‘ibadah to the others; ‘ibadah to the Shaytan
(satan), ‘ibadah to one’s self, ‘ibadah to the self-made idols or
‘ibadah to null beings which have no external reality at all.

In the Holy Qur’an, Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَنْ لَا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ ۖ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُبِينٌ وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي ۚ
هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not serve
the shaitan? Surely he is your open enemy. And that you should serve Me;
this is the right way (36:60-61).”***

In the above verses of the Holy Qur’an, Allah says that man is on two
paths, one is the way of ‘ibadah to Allah and the other is the way of
‘ibadah to shaytan and Allah has advised the people to choose the way of
‘ibadah to Him which leads to their felicity and perfection.

The point which is necessary to notice here is that the concept of
‘ibadah in this sense is different from the meaning which is generally
in our minds of ‘ibadah and which is just applied to a series of acts of
worship and values such as the wajib salawat, sawm and hajj (specified
pilgrimage to Makkah according to the Islamic shari’ah). In the concept
of ‘ibadah in the extensive and general sense, all the free actions of
man (all the actions which man fulfils out of free will) are ‘ibadah.

Now, if such actions and conducts have favorable effects on man’s
felicity and perfection and are pleased at by Allah they become ‘ibadah
to Allah, but if they cause man’s fall, decline and his gelling away
from the (divinely ordained) end, they will be ‘ibadah to shaytan and
are rated as an anti-value. But in any way, they (man’s free actions)
are ‘ibadah and anyhow, we are not outside either of the two conditions,
we are either in ‘ibadah to Allah or in ‘ibadah to shaytan.

The conclusion derived from these preliminaries is that worshipping
Allah and ‘ibadah to Him, too, have general and value-related concepts
in the Islamic culture, as is the case with taqwa, so that an action
fulfilled by an individual, a group, or a society has value when the
title of taqwa and the title of worshipping Allah correspond to it. Even
if an action is, in terms of the other value systems praise worthy and
acceptable, but is not corresponded to by these two titles, in the value
system of Islam it does not reach the necessary limit for value and is
below the necessary limit. For example, helping the poor and the weak is
a value which has been more or less accepted in all the ethical systems
or the world but in the value system of Islam it has no value in the
abstract form and is generally regarded as a good action.

Yet, (in the Islamic value system) such actions reach the necessary
level of value when they stem from the individual’s faith, are fulfilled
out of divine motive (out of motive of winning Allah’s pleasure) and in
one word, it has goodness of action (in accordance with Allah’s command)
and goodness of the doer having free will (divine motive), otherwise if
it is merely regarded as an emotional matter, it will not be of much
value and will not reach the necessary level of value either, because
such emotion more or less exists in animals too, particularly the
motherly emotion and the emotion of supporting one’s kind which is
observed in, for example, ravens too; therefore, it cannot be the only
criterion for value.

### Criticism on a Theory

This matter is in fact a response to one of the great foundations of the
philosophy of ethics which is today prevalent in Western countries and
which due to our Islamic insight being not very strong, has
unfortunately more or less spread and penetrated among some groups of
our society too. Many of the philosophers of ethics in Western countries
regard the criterion for value to be serving the others and love for the
others and say if an action is performed for the sake of personal
benefit and with individual motive, it has no value and/or it is
anti-value, but if it is performed with the motive of loving the others
it will be desirable and of value.

Some of our intellectuals too who have had discussions and writings in
the field of ethics, have sought the relationship of At-Tawhid with the
philosophy of ethics just here and have imagined that At-Tawhid means
that man melts himself in the society and instead of “1” always says
“We” and always takes “We’’ into consideration.

This matter is objectionable in the Islamic outlook from numerous
viewpoints:

The first objection: The first objection is that At-Tawhid has no
concern with the social "I" and "We". In the previous discussions we
have fully clarified that At- Tawhid, as an Islamic concept, means
belief in the One God in the dimension of creativity, creational
Lordship, Divine Legislative Lordship and in (Allah’s) Being the (Only)
Worshipped. At-Tawhid is not a sociological and psychological concept;
rather it is a theological and philosophical concept, that is to know
God as One and Only and to believe in His Oneness and to put this belief
into effect in action. So, man’s melting or not melting himself in the
society has nothing to do with At-Tawhid as an Islamic concept.

The second objection: It is that the criterion for value is not just
love for the others, Many of our actions are performed with individual
motive and yet are of very high value. That faithful servant (of Allah)
who gets up at mid-night in winters from the warm bed and engages in
‘ibadah to Allah on the cold and coarse carpet of the Mosque and starts
supplicating and praying to Allah, is his action individual or social?
Is this action performed out of the motive of serving the society or for
attaining the good of the hereafter and spiritual and eternal good of
the individual himself’? Whereas the Holy Qur’an cites such persons with
a very exalted interpretation and at the loftiest level of value and
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So no soul knows what is hidden for them of that which will refresh
the eyes… (32:17).”***

No one knows what felicity and joy the Almighty Allah has provided for
such persons. Allah will give them such a great reward that no man’s
mind can think of. So, it is not the case that values arc confined to
serving the others or, as there is a famous saying “‘ibadah is nothing
but serving Allah’s creatures."

The third objection: It is that not every love for others is valuable
and at least it does not have the necessary amount for value. We have
already expressed that caring for others is also observed among ravens,
monkeys and in many other animals. But it is not the case that the
emotion of care for the others is by itself sufficient for man’s action
and man’s soul to attain value, rather they will be of value if they are
with divine motive and this is not exclusive to emotion either. The
satisfaction of instincts, with divine motive is ‘ibadah to Allah too.

Eating, drinking and even sexual intercourse, if fulfilled with divine
motive, are also ‘ibadah. So, the only criterion (according to Islam) is
that firstly, the action is to be approved by Allah (be in accordance
with Allah’s commands) and secondly, to be with a divine motive and the
intention of getting close to Allah (winning Allah’s pleasure). In one
of the stages already expressed: fear of punishment, covet for reward
and hope for meeting Allah and winning His pleasure.

### Clarification of the Ethical Theory of Islam

A significant matter to be noticed here and to be reasonably and
philosophically clarified and justified is how human behavior and
permanent qualities become possessed of value ·through ‘ibadah to Allah
and perfect obedience and humbling oneself before Allah? In this regard,
from the outlook of Islam and the ayat of the Holy Qur’an and the
riwayat, we have no doubt, for the Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should
worship Me (51:56).”***

The only aim of creation of man and of jinn who from the viewpoint of
the Holy Qur’an are two kinds of responsible (entrusted with duties)
beings is just (their) serving the One God (Allah - The One and Only).
Of course taking into consideration other ayat (of the Holy Qur’an) we
come to realize that this is not the final goal, this very ‘ibadah for
Allah in another ayah of the Holy Qur’an, has been propounded as the
right way.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that you should serve Me; this is the right way (36:61).”***

Worship Allah, this is the right way. The same thing which in the former
ayah (56:51) had been mentioned as the aim or creation, has been
introduced as the right way in the latter (61:36), meaning that ‘ibadah
is a medium goal and above it there is another goal. That very act of
‘ibadah itself has been considered for a higher goal and that is
attaining nearness to the Almighty Allah (attaining Allah’s pleasure) in
which all human virtues and perfections are summed up.

But for this theory to be presentable and defendable in the face of the
other ethical and value theories of the world and particularly so that
our educated youth will be able to defend the righteous position of
Islam before other schools of thought, it is necessary to clarify this
theory on the basis of intellectual reasons and philosophical proofs.
The principles which are necessary for the clarification of this mailer
arc three basic principles.

### The First Principle

It is that the criterion for the goodness and value of the action is the
effect which a free conduct has on man’s spiritual and intellectual
perfection. For the clarification of this basic principle which is of
the significant matters of the philosophy of ethics in the scientific
and philosophical circles of the world, we express an analysis on the
concept of value and anti-value and their equivalent in the Islamic
culture, namely, “good” and “evil”.

We regard certain things as goad and also accept certain things as evil.
For instance, all of us regard health to be good, rate knowledge, power
and ability as good and opposite to them, regard sickness, being
malformed, being ignorant, disabled and powerless to be evil.
Philosophers have conducted a wise analysis on this concept and have
come to the conclusion that the common aspect among all these goods
consists of the perfection of the being and the common aspect among all
these evils consists of the imperfection of the being.

For instance, when we compare an ignorant man with a learned man, we
observe that the learned man has a perfection which the ignorant man
lacks. So, the being of the learned man is more perfect than the being
of the ignorant man, and/or since a sick man does not have the power to
defend against diseases and cannot confront aggressive microbes and
loses his body’s balance, his being is imperfect compared to a healthy
person.

A brave man, in various phases, can achieve his goals, but a timid and
cowardice cannot. Then they (the philosophers) have gone further and
with a more careful analysis have come to the conclusion that perfection
is a stage of being and imperfection is a stage of non-being and is a
matter of non-being. Hence, we can regard being (existence) as equal to
good, since it is being (existence) and regard non-being (non-existence)
to be evil, since it is non-being (non-existence). Therefore, the good
of every being is its perfection and tile evil of every being is its
imperfection.

Sometimes the perfection of a being causes the imperfection of another
being. The burning effect of the fire is the perfection of the fire, but
if it falls into a harvest, it causes the destruction of the harvest.
The cutting effect of knives and swords is their perfection, but when
they come into contact with the body of an innocent man, they cause his
death.

A microbe has perfection since it is a living being, but this very
microbe, when it enters our bodies, it may afflict us with diseases and
cause an imperfection for us. Maulawi, the great gnostic and poet has
famous poems in which it is said that poison is good for the snake
itself, but bad for the one who is stung by the snake.

Also sometimes the opposite is the case, A matter may be a
non-existence, imperfection and in itself evil, but becomes good and the
cause of perfection for another thing. You enter a garden and see a
gardener cutting of the branches and leaves of a tree, but if you are
not aware of the gardening works, you will think that the gardener is
doing work which is bad, cutting off the branches and leaves of the tree
which arc apparently being and perfection for the tree.

But if you are aware of the matters related to gardening, you know that
the gardener cuts off some of the extra branches (which hinder the
growth of the tree) so that the tree will grow more. Here, the
non-existence of these branches is an imperfection and non-existence
matter, but for the tree it is considered to be good and causes the tree
to grow better.

Now let us see what the superiority of perfections depend on?

We start this matter from plants. In your opinion, in comparison, which
one is more perfect, a walnut tree or a plain tree? You certainly think
a walnut tree is more perfect. Why? Because a walnut tree has something
more than the plain tree and that is the fruit it (the walnut tree)
bears. Therefore, since it has more effects of existence, it is more
perfect. Comparison is in the same manner between two walnut trees.

That walnut tree is more perfect of which the final result and fruit is
more, and the same is true of the walnut tree which is of less size but
which gives more fruit, compared to the walnut tree which occupies more
size, but has little fruit. Now let us compare an animal with a tree.
Can the criterion for superiority be regarded to be the size of the
animal? If it were so, a plain tree would be a thousand times more
perfect than a nightingale.

But it definitely is not so. Because a nightingale has something’s more
than a plant (something’s which a plant lacks), namely, besides us
physical growth, it has senses and (the ability of) voluntary movement.
It is the nightingale which on seeing a flower starts twittering and in
which a feeling and sense emerge, a sense which a plain tree will never
have.

So the criterion for the superiority of a nightingale to a tree is not
bigger for either being. But if we also compare two animals with each
other, that animal which has more sense and stronger understanding is
more perfect, not that one which is bigger in size, like an Arabian
horse and a rhinoceros. An Arabian horse has more wits, has better
leaping, is capable of performing more useful work and is more loyal
than a rhinoceros, but a rhinoceros is just big in size.

Now let us consider a man. If we want to compare a man with trees and
animals, what should we consider his superiority to be? Which one is
more perfect, a man or a plain tree? Is a man more perfect or an
elephant? Man’s superiority to plants and animals is not in having more
bodily growth, more physical power, more passions (carnal desires),
greater power of defense and/or even more animal perceptions; these do
not contribute to human perfection. If these were the criterion, then
animals would be by far ahead of us and is this not selfish of us that
since we regard ourselves more perfect, we should look for another
criterion! This is a truly philosophical matter).

Rather what makes man superior to and more perfect than the animals and
other beings is that human and divine soul of his which constitutes the
proof for the following ayat of the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And I breathed into him of My spirit… (15:29 and 38:72).”***

and,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…So blessed be Allah, the best of the creators (23:14).”***

The question which is raised here is that, is the value just in the
superiority of man’s spiritual perfections or arc plant and animal
perfections also of value?

Let us consider an apple tree. In an apple tree, taking root, turning
green, bearing branches, leaves and even blossoms are considered
perfection insofar as they cause bearing fruit, otherwise they will not
be of value. These kinds of perfections are preliminary perfections
which are not of value in themselves, rather they are preliminaries for
eventual and genuine perfection, and value is acquired through them.

In man it is also true. If a growth emerges in the body by itself and
does not cause that main, basic and eventual growth, it is an animal
growth and will not be of any value for man from the viewpoint that he
is man. A healthy body is valuable for man in case he uses it for his
spiritual and intellectual progress, not if he misuses his health -
using it for hurting others.

The same is true of other qualities too. For example, bravery is
desirable from the Islamic viewpoint when it is used in the way of man’s
spiritual and intellectual perfection and in the way of getting near to
the Almighty Allah (winning Allah’s pleasure and favor), otherwise ‘Amr
ibn ‘Abd Wadd (the great (notorious) enemy of Islam) and some others
like him were also brave and had this animal value.

The superiority of a brave man, apart from his spiritual goal and
perfection to another man is like the superiority of a rhinoceros to a
horse and the superiority of an elephant to a gazelle. This preliminary
perfection will be of value when it is used in the way of attaining that
eventual human perfection, when it has been achieved for that and used
in the way of attaining it (eventual human perfection). Justice, too,
which in today’s world culture has absolute value, in the view of the
Holy Qur’an, it is valuable since it is a preliminary stage for getting
closer to taqwa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
….اعْدِلُوا هُوَ أَقْرَبُ لِلتَّقْوَىٰ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Act equitably, that is nearer to piety… (5:8).”***

Otherwise, this sense is found in some animals like the honey-bee,
termite and some others too. This is not an absolute human value. In the
value system of Islam, justice is of value when it is in the way of
Allah and for attaining a loftier goal and moves man towards that point
of peak (that highest point of perfection).

The point which is necessary to be paid attention here is, the
relationship between the philosophical good and the ethical good, but
before clarifying this relationship, we will somewhat discuss about the
good and the evil and their criterion.

#### Clarification of the Criterion for the Good and the Bad

One of the most disputed human matters in the course of the history of
man’s life has been the issue of the criterion for a good and bad action
and good and evil. Today, many of the world’s philosophical schools
which have the great universities of the Western World under their
domination, including the Positivists maintain that good and bad arc
subjects to the persons’ taste and inclination and that there is no
reality beyond this like and dislike. In the Greek moral philosophy it
was said that the criterion for value is moderation of three powers; the
power of passion, the power of anger and the power of intellect.

But the question remains to be answered as to who says that moderation
should be the criterion for goodness and badness. Eventually, the
highest ethical school which the West presented was the ethics of Kant.
Kant maintained moral axioms and stated that they are unquestionable;
telling the truth is absolutely good and there is no condition for it
either, it is a criterion itself. When asked in case telling the truth
causes an innocent man to be killed, should one still tell the truth?"
Kant replied: *"One should tell the truth, this is an absolute value."*
This is the zenith of the Western thinking in the clarification of the
philosophy of ethics. But Islam says: *“Basically, action is a means not
an end.*”

A free action is performed for an end and receives its value from that
end. In the philosophy of the morality of Islam, good is an action which
drives man towards his eventual perfection, namely getting near Allah
and bad is an action which drives man away from that end (i.e., from
attaining nearness to Allah) and from this it becomes clear why in Islam
so much emphasis is laid on niyyah (intention); well, in fact it is
man’s niyyah which gives direction to his action.

As for the relationship between philosophical good and ethical good,
ethical good is propounded in relation to man’s free conducts and
actions and there is a good which is a means, because it is a quality
for action and the nature of action is a means for the result and the
end; but as for the desired result, it is not an ethical concept, rather
it is a philosophical topic.

So, the ethical good is in one sense other than philosophical good, but
is however not separate from it either and there is a cause and effect
relationship between these two, and in other words, ethical good is
preamble for philosophical good, Therefore, when we say that good action
causes perfection for man’s soul, the goodness of the action is an
ethical concept, but the perfection of the soul is a philosophical
concept.

### The Second Principle

In the clarification of the criterion for the evaluation of actions is
the fact that perfection of the soul which man should attain through
(good) free actions is nearness to Allah (winning Allah’s pleasure and
favor). About the meaning and concept of this qurb (nearness) to Allah,
various statements and views have been expressed about each one of which
we will give some explanation to the extent necessary.

#### Various Meanings and Cases of the Application of Qurb

The first concept which in common conversations is applied about ‘qurb’
is qurb in terms of place. For example, as when two persons are seated
near or in proximity to each other, ‘this person is near that person
and/or this person is away from that person’. Is man’s being near to
Allah in this sense? where (in the Holy Qur’an) Asiyah - the wife or
Fir’awn (pharaoh) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…رَبِّ ابْنِ لِي عِنْدَكَ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…My Lord! Build for me a house with Thee in the garden… (66:11).”***

Did she (by saying so) mean that a faithful person attains nearness of a
place with Allah in Paradise? Those who know even the fundamentals of
the Islamic beliefs will know that nearness to Allah is definitely not
in this sense, because nearness of a place is imagined among objects and
Allah is not an object to have a place, to Whom another object becomes
near or from Whom another object gets away. So, getting near to Allah
does not mean nearness of a place.

One of the other cases (of the application) of qurb in our conversations
is the nearness in terms of time. About two persons living in a time
close to each other it is said that they arc qaribul-’asr (near in terms
of time), vis-a-vis two beings, two individuals and/or two societies
which have great time distance, one has been living thousands of years
ago and the other is living today, about them it is said that they are
away from each other.

It is obvious that man’s getting near Allah is not in terms of time
either, because firstly Allah does not have a time, rather He
encompasses all times, just as He has no place and is available at all
places. Besides, being near and/or being away in terms of time and place
in themselves do not create any perfection. Anyhow, nearness in terms of
place and time is impossible with regard to the Almighty Allah and
getting near Him in these two definitions is false. So, how is man to
get near Allah?

One other kind of qurb which we have in common conversations is that two
things arc compared with each other in respect of resemblance in
specifications, perfections and characteristics apart from time and
place. In this sense can it be said that man gets near Allah? Does qurb
to Allah mean that more resemblance to Allah is achieved? Some have
attempted to interpret qurb to Allah in this way, but in reality this
sense is incorrect too. because firstly, Allah does not resemble
anything, (as the Holy Qur’an says):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Nothing is like a likeness of Him… (42:11).”***

and that sometimes the interpretation of "being like God" is applied, is
a neglectful interpretation. Secondly, this comparison is where two
beings are independent of each other. For example, when we compare two
learned men with each other and say that the knowledge of this learned
man is near that of the other learned mall, none of these is dependent
on and/or the ray of the other, rather each one of them is independent
of the other, this learned man has a knowledge for himself and the other
learned man has a knowledge for himself, we compare these two knowledge
together and say this one is near that one.

Such a comparison between man and Allah is not proper, because man has
nothing independent of Allah and all he has is from Allah. Thirdly,
Allah’s perfection is infinite and each being, at least in the stage of
existence has a phase of finiteness and limitation, and never the finite
is comparable with the infinite. If you consider a line with a length of
one meter and ask what proportion docs this one meter line have with an
infinite line, those who are even a little conversant with mathematics
know that the answer to this question is that there is no proportion
between the finite and the infinite.

Now if Instead of a one meter line a two-meter line is put, again the
answer is "nothing" and even if we draw a line as long as the distance
between the earth and the sun, and it is asked that what proportion does
this line have to an infinite line, again the answer will he "nothing".
No matter how much man attains perfection, he is after all limited and
is not a party in proportion to Allah’s infinite perfections, to be said
about him that he has now got some what nearer to Allah.

Therefore, that some imagine that when man’s perfection becomes more,
his difference with Allah becomes less and in this sense he gets nearer
to Allah, is due to short-sightedness in knowing Allah. Such comparisons
can be assumed between objects and the beings which are independent of
each other which do not have relation of existence with each other and
one of which is not of the stages of the other and is not its effect,
but between the existence-giving Cause and the effect such a comparison
is totally wrong.

Also some have imagined that by qurb, it is meant just what the
following verse of the Holy Qur’an refers to:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And We are nearer to him than his life-vein (50:16).”***

namely, Allah is nearer to man than his life-vein.

Though this matter is true and no firmer and closer relationship between
this (relation) can be assumed between Allah and His creatures, it is
clear that this qurb and nearness is not particular to the believers and
that it exists not only for all men, whether believers, or the
disbelievers, the pious, the lewd, but it also exists for all creatures
and all creatures have this relationship with Allah.

Sometimes qurb is also applied in the sense of honor and formality. For
example, we say that such and such a person is near to such and such a
minister and is favored by him, that is, they have friendly relations
with each other and if the former has a request, the latter will not
reject it and will listen to him. About man’s qurb to Allah, too,
sometimes interpretation is made in this way, that man gets so near to
Allah in the sense that Allah heeds his words, pays attention to his
requests and hears his prayers.

Among these five meanings, only the last-mentioned meaning conforms to
qurb of Allah, a qurb which is attained through worship and obedience to
the Almighty Allah, as is said in a hadithun-qudsiyy.

*“A servant (of Allah) owing to servitude (to Allah) attains such a
position where the Almighty Allah becomes his hearing ears, his seeing
eyes and his mighty hands.*[^3]*”*

A servant (of Allah) owing to servitude (to Allah) attains such a
position that in accordance with the interpretation of the above hadith,
the Almighty Allah becomes his hearing car, his seeing eye and his
capable hand and it is clear that the prayer of such a servant (of
Allah) will be heard (by Allah) and that the Almighty Allah will secure
his needs and wants.

But the question (which may be raised here) is that is such a position
just an honorary and formal position or is it an existential and true
perfection? And our reply is that this position of qurb to Allah is a
true perfection for human soul and that to become mustajabud-du’wah (one
whose prayer is heard by Allah) and even the acceptance of one’s
intercession for the others with Allah are of the effects of this
spiritual perfection, not that they are merely a credit and an agreement
and in other words, the true meaning of qurb to Allah is the sixth
meaning which we will now explain to the extent the situation demands.

For the clarification of this meaning, we should point out two noble
philosophical matters, the details of which should be sought in their
own place and in the related books.

**The first matter**

The existence of each creature has a relation between itself and the
Creator and no creature has any independence of the existence-giving
Creator and this is a matter of clarification which is rated among the
honors of the great Islamic expert Sadrul-Muta’allihin Ash-Shirazi and
the philosophical expression of the fourth meaning of the
above-mentioned meanings is also based on this very matter, that is, the
reason why the Almighty Allah is nearer to each being than any other
thing is the very fact that the existence of each creature has a
relation itself to and dependence on Him (the Creator) and if this
relation is cut off, it will no longer have any existence; it can be
said that the existence of each creature in relation to the Almighty
Allah is like the existence of a subjective figure for man which if set
aside, will have no existence any longer and certainly the relation of
the beings with the Almighty Allah is by far stronger than this example.

**The second matter**

It is that the existence of the soul is of the category of the existence
of science and in other words; just as the requisite for each physical
existence is “extension”, the requisite for each abstract existence is
also “knowledge” which requisite is of course not anything outside the
existence of the soul.

Taking into consideration these two matters, we conclude that whenever
the existence of man’s soul becomes more perfect, his knowledge will
become more perfect. The first stage of the perfection of the soul is
attaining “self-awareness” and when one’s self-awareness becomes
perfect, he will find the reality of his existence which is the same as
relation, belonging to and dependence on the Almighty Allah, namely, he
will attain “self-awareness” and it is for this reason that in the
Islamic culture “self-awareness” and “God-awareness” are coupled
together. On the one hand, it has been said that:

*“Anybody who knew himself knew his Lord.”*

and on the other hand, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…نَسُوا اللَّهَ فَأَنْسَاهُمْ أَنْفُسَهُمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Those who forsook Allah, so He made them forsake their own souls…
(59:19).”***

Those who forsook themselves become afflicted with Allah’s forsaking.

So, an inseparable relation exists between knowing one’s self and
knowing Allah and also between forsaking one’s self and Allah’s
forsaking. The reality of “forsaking oneself” and “self-alienation” in
the Islamic culture is this very matter that a person forgets his human
identity and his attention is so diverted to this world’s luxuries and
pleasures that he forsakes his reality and his human perfection and
felicity, namely, he forgets about his relation to and dependence on the
Almighty Allah.

The conclusion is this, that true perfection of man’s soul is
God-awareness (awareness of Allah) which has innumerable stages and the
more man’s celestial soul becomes perfect, the more his awareness of
Allah will increase and this awareness of one’s self and of one’s God is
the same as the existence of the soul.

Therefore, man’s eventual perfection is his attaining perfect awareness
and his innate and intuitive knowledge (knowledge acquired not through
the five senses, but through illumination of one’s heart) about the
Almighty Allah and this awareness about Allah is the very true qurb to
Allah which should be attained through efforts and endeavors. Therefore
the true meaning of qurb to Allah as an acquired perfection for man’s
soul consists of intuitive and inner qurb, and the realization of this
fact that man’s existence is nothing but relation and attachment to the
Almighty Allah, and that it is not merely knowledge and acquired
learning which are attained through concepts and by way of intellectual
reasoning.

### The Third Principle

The clarification of the moral und value theory of Islam says that this
perfection and qurb to Allah is attained just in the light of the
conducts the general title of which is ‘ibadah, worshipping Allah, and
virtuousness. To prove this principle from the philosophical point of
view, too, requires a technical and complicated expression which does
not suit this discussion. However, we will try to explain, with a simple
expression this principle, too.

We came to know that the Almighty Allah is not a physical and
place-occupying being whom we could get near to with the movement of the
body and traversing material distance and that no kind of physical
action and reaction and body change and development can in itself have
any role in changing man’s relation to the Almighty Allah and that the
truth of man’s qurb to Allah is inner and intuitive nearness and
attaining man’s existential relationship with Him.

Taking into consideration these points it can easily be accepted that
what plays the main role in man’s getting near to the Almighty Allah is
that very man’s power of perceiving and witnessing, namely, the truth of
his soul which in many cases is called "heart" and the free (voluntary)
relationship which is established between man’s heart and the Almighty
Allah is by means of attention (to Allah), this very attention itself is
termed "dhikr (remembrance of Allah) of the heart" and when this
attention and remembrance become the source of performance of an action
and a conduct, it is rated as the niyyah (intention) and motive for the
action, and since the perfection of man’s soul and spirit is attained by
means of free actions and each kind of conducts can have a role in the
promotion or regression of the soul in one of its dimensions, therefore
we conclude that man’s all-sided perfection is attained when all
distinguished conducts are fulfilled with divine motive, and the main
stimulant and the giver of direction to conduct is attention to Allah
(SWT).

In other words, just as physical forces determine the direction of the
movement of the objects, so also psychic motives which stem from
attention to and remembrance of Allah are spiritual forces which
determine the spiritual direction of man’s actions and conducts and
which give value to them and as already explained, such conducts have
two general terms in the Islamic culture: one is taqwa in its general
sense and the other ‘ibadah in its general sense.

The conclusion is that each free action to the extent it enjoys divine
intention and motive will have a positive value; and to the extent it
stems from ungodly, egoistic and polytheistic intention it will have a
negative value. Thus, the role of At- Tawhid in the value system of
Islam becomes clear.

Quranic Expressions about the Philosophy of Morality
----------------------------------------------------

So far, we have explained the theory of Islam in the philosophy of
morality and values with the simplest rational expressions which were
possible for us. Now we cite some examples of Quranic expressions
concerning the principles of this theory:

In Suratush-Shams (Surah 91 of the Holy Qur’an) in the wake of a number
of ayat in which the Almighty Allah swears by the sun, by the moon, by
the night, by the day and the like, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا قَدْ
أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the soul and Him Who made it perfect, Then He inspired it to
understand what is right and wrong for it; He will indeed be successful
who purifies it, And he will indeed fail who corrupts it (91:7-10).”***

Of the many points inferred from these ayat, we content ourselves with
citing three points:

**The First Point:** is that Allah swears by human soul, the soul which
Allah has made and delivered well and among all creatures man has a
particular privilege to determine his destiny with his own free will: to
choose either the way of felicity and salvation or the way of adversity
and corruption and certainly Allah’s goal of the creation of man is that
he attains felicity and salvation, but since human felicity is a matter
to be attained by the way of man’s own will-power and free choice, so
there should necessarily exist another point in the face of it too
towards which would retrogress of his own ill-choice anybody who chooses
to.

**The Second Point:** is that selection of either of the two points -
exaltation and perfection or fall and retrogression demands recognition.
Because it is obvious that without awareness and recognition proper
selection and choice does not take place. Hence, the Almighty Allah has
made two general ways known to man: one the way of taqwa and the other
the way of fujur, and from this very interpretation it is inferred that
the criterion for the positive conduct values is “taqwa” and the
criterion for the negative moral values is fujur, as was already
explained in the foregoing expressions.

**The Third Point:** is that to traverse the way of taqwa is the very
“purification of the soul” and its result is the growth and perfection
of the soul, just as to traverse the way of fujur is the very pollution
of the soul, the result of which is the fall and destruction of the soul
itself. So man, by selecting the way of taqwa, gives growth and
perfection to his soul and by selecting the way of fujur and license
pollutes and destroys his own soul.

Therefore, the result of man’s free conducts, be they in the direction
of growth and perfection or in the direction of fall and retrogression,
will accrue to man himself, and from here it can well be inferred that
the value conducts have true effect on the perfection and imperfection
of the soul, and that the positive or negative value criterion is this
very perfection and imperfection of man’s soul and this is that very
first principle in the expression of the logical reason we referred to
previously.

From another set of the ayat of the Holy Qur’an it is inferred that
man’s eternal felicity and adversity is the result of his own faith and
infidelity and praiseworthy and indecent actions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ لَيْسَ لِلْإِنْسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that man shall have nothing but what he strives for (53:39).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…For it, what it has earned, and against it what it has incurred…
(2:286).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَوُفِّيَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا كَسَبَتْ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And every soul is paid of whatever it has earned (3:25).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُحْضَرًا…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The day when every soul shall find present what it has done of good…
(3:30).”***

And there are tens of other ayat in the Holy Qur’an indicating that the
blessings and torments in the Hereafter are the result of the actions
which man has himself fulfilled in this world, rather they are those
very actions of his which would in the hereafter world appear in the
form of blessing or torment.

Of course the language of most of the ayat of the Holy Qur’an is that
the blessings or torments in the Hereafter are the reward or punishment
for the conducts in this world. With our mind having got acquainted with
the concepts of reward and punishment, it might at first be imagined
that the relation of good and bad actions with their hereafterly results
is a nominal and conventional relation, but taking into view the cited
ayat of the Holy Qur’an it becomes clear that beyond these nominal
concepts a series of creational facts and true and real relations are
hidden, though our knowledge is not sufficient for the discovery of
these true relations, because we have no experience of such relations.

Included among the ayat to be considered in this discussion are the ayat
which have mentioned about spiritual light and darkness, which terms
have been largely applied with regard to truth and falsehood, moral and
value, good and evil and with regard to the affairs related to them in
the Holy Qur’an and also in the sayings of the Holy Prophet (SA) of
Islam and the Infallible Imams (AS) and which have a particular position
in Islamic culture.

On one hand, the Holy Qur’an introduces the Almighty Allah as “nur (the
light) of the heavens and the earth” and it is obvious that by this
light, the generally known physical light is not meant and on the other
hand, the Holy prophet (SA) of Islam has been introduced (by the Holy
Quran) as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سِرَاجًا مُنِيرًا..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…A light-giving torch (33:46).”***

and on the other hand the Holy Qur’an has itself been named “nur”
(light):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ جَاءَكُمْ مِنَ اللَّهِ نُورٌ وَكِتَابٌ مُبِينٌ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…There has come to you light and a clear Book from Allah (5:15).”***

And also the aim of the revelation of the Holy Qur’an to the Holy
Prophet (SA) of Islam has been considered (by the Holy Qur’an) to be
taking the people out of darkness and bringing them into the "light":

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..لِتُخْرِجَ النَّاسَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى النُّورِ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…that you may bring forth men, by their Lord’s permission from utter
darkness into light… (14:1).”***

Also, the believers have been introduced (by the Holy Qur’an) as those
who in this world arc possessed of light (nur), versus the infidels and
those who are disobedient to Allah’s commands who have sunk into
darkness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَمَنْ كَانَ مَيْتًا فَأَحْيَيْنَاهُ وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُ نُورًا يَمْشِي
بِهِ فِي النَّاسِ كَمَنْ مَثَلُهُ فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ لَيْسَ بِخَارِجٍ
مِنْهَا …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people, like him whose likeness is
that of one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth?...
(6:122).”***

Finally, among the descriptions or the Resurrection Day, the Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَرَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَسْعَىٰ نُورُهُمْ بَيْنَ
أَيْدِيهِمْ وَبِأَيْمَانِهِمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On that day you will see the faithful men and the faithful women--
their light running before them and on their right hand--… (57:12).”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَقُولُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتُ لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
انْظُرُونَا نَقْتَبِسْ مِنْ نُورِكُمْ قِيلَ ارْجِعُوا وَرَاءَكُمْ
فَالْتَمِسُوا نُورًا….
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will
say to those who believe: Wait for us, that we may have light from your
light; it shall be said: Turn back and seek a light (hinting that for
seeking light you should return to the world which is impossible)…
(57:13).”***

And the most comprehensive ayat in this connection are ayat 35 to 40 of
Suratun-Nur (Chapter 24) of the Holy Qur’an which start with this
sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. اللَّهُ نُورُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth… (24:35).”***

And ends with this sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ لَهُ نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And to whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has no light
(24:40).”***

Here, we do not helve the time to completely interpret and explain these
ayat, but for the clarification of their relationship with the present
discussion, we have to give a brief explanation:

In these ayat, after the Almighty Allah has been introduced as the light
of the heavens and of the earth (the light of the worlds), a parable has
been given for His light in ayah 35 of surah 24.

***“…A likeness of His light is as a niche in which is a lamp, the lamp
is in a glass, (and) the glass is as it were a brightly shining star,
lit from a blessed olive-tree, neither eastern nor western… (24:35).”***

(Hinting that the sun shines from all its sides perfectly and no unripe
fruit remains in it). Such oil is so susceptible for being inflamed that
it is as if it automatically is lit without any fire reaching it.

About this parable many sayings have been expressed by the exegetists
who we are unable to survey here. One of such commentaries is that the
proof of this torch which is; ready to he kindled is the heart of a
mu’min person which has the perfect aptitude for a relationship with the
Almighty Allah and is enjoying the divine light. The other ayat confirm
this view:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللَّهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْكَرَ فِيهَا اسْمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالْغُدُوِّ وَالْآصَالِ ... رِجَالٌ لَا
تُلْهِيهِمْ تِجَارَةٌ وَلَا بَيْعٌ عَنْ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His name
may be remembered in them; there glorify Him therein in the mornings and
the evenings, men whom neither merchandise nor selling diverts from the
remembrance of Allah… (24:36-37).”***

In fact, it is the remembrance of Allah which makes their (godly men’s)
lives lit and luminous and which gives value to all their conducts and
deeds.

On the opposite side of these, there are the disbelievers. who due to
forgetting Allah have sunk into darkness and whose actions have become
null and valueless. And in the two last-mentioned verses, two parables
have been cited for the actions of the disbelievers; The first parable
is:

***“…The mirage in a desert, which the thirsty man deems to be water;
until when he comes to it he finds it to be naught, and there he finds
Allah, so He pays back to him his reckoning in full… (24:39).”***

That is, the disbelievers engage in efforts and endeavor in hope of
felicity and attach their hearts to their own deeds, but when they
should derive benefit from these efforts (in the Hereafter), they see no
useful thing and the Almighty Allah will make it clear to them that they
have done no useful work for their felicity.

The second parable for the disbeliever and the value of their deeds is:

***“…Utter darkness in the deep sea: there covers it a wave above which
is another wave, above which is a cloud, (layers of) utter darkness one
above another; when he holds out his hand, he is almost unable to see
it… (24:40).”***

The above ayah ends with the following sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلِ اللَّهُ لَهُ نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And to whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has no light
(24:40).”***

Whatever ambiguity, if any, might exist about the reality (the true
meaning) of “misbah” (lamp), “zujajah” (glass) and “mishkat” (niche)
(the expressions applied in surah 24 of the Holy Qur’an, in ayah 35
referred to) and whatever discussion, if any, might he made regarding
the sea, the waves and the clouds surrounding it, there is no room for
any doubt and ambiguity about this matter that these ayat regard the men
of Allah (the believers) to be those who are blessed with light and
felicity, who through their remembrance of Allah and heart-fell
attention to the Creator make their lives valuable and that the
disbelievers, through forgetting Allah, destroy the value of their deeds
and will finally be afflicted with darkness and adversity.

So, the criterion for good, felicity, light and true value is the
relation with the original source of light which is attained by means of
faith in Allah and the attention of one’s heart to Him and the criterion
for evil, adversity, darkness, valueless and futility is the lack of
relationship and connection with the original source of light which
develop as a result of disbelief (in Allah), forgetting Allah and
turning away from His remembrance, like an electric light which on
connection with the electricity-generating system is lit and on
disconnection is extinguished. And these are the purports of those very
principles to which in the last expression of logical reason we referred
and thus the conformity of the expression of logical reason with the
Quranic expressions becomes manifest.

Here, we end our discussion and beseech the Almighty Allah to deliver
all of us from the various kinds of darkness’s, to strengthen our
relation and connection with the origin of Light, to protect all of us
against any sort of deviation and unsound judgment and to finally
associate us with His worthy servants and the pure lights of Ahlul-Bayt
(AS) The Infallible and the Purified.

May greetings and Allah’s blessings and mercy be upon you all.

[^1]: Al-‘Usulul-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 75.

[^2]:  It has even been narrated that in the past some unaware persons
had blinded or had closed their eyes so that they couldn’t look at
anything haram (forbidden by Islam).

[^3]: Al-‘Usulul-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 352.


