Man's Future From Different Viewpoints
======================================

Some people are doubtful about the fact as to whether man has a future
at all. They are uncertain because man is threatened with
self-destruction. Such an uncertainty is evident among the enlightened
and learned men of the West. Another group go a step further, and in
addition to uncertainty, they are extremely pessimistic about humanity's
future and openly cynical about human nature.

They believe that man's nature consists of animality, lust,
selfishness, egoism, deceit, cunning, falsehood, tyranny and such
things, and since times immemorial when man began his life and social
existence, this familiar scene of life has been always as full of evil
and mischief, both in the days of barbarism and in the age of
civilization. They believe that civilization and culture have not
changed the nature of man, and nothing has been able to transform the
wicked nature of this creature called man.

The difference between the savage of primitive times and the civilized
man of today is nothing with regard to goals and objectives. The only
difference lies in the method of work, and outward form and style. The
primitive man, because of his primitiveness and lack of civilization and
culture, committed his crimes more openly and unaffectedly, whereas the
civilized man equipped with modern culture, commits the same crimes
under the deceptive cover of high-sounding and stylish phrases and
euphemisms. But both are essentially alike. What the wild man did, is
not different in nature from what the civilized man does; the difference
lies only in the outer form and appearance of their acts.

What is the conclusion? They say: pessimism and despair. What is the
solution? They say: suicide, collective suicide. Fortunately, there are
few among us who think in this fashion. If there had been no such ideas
at all amongst us, I would not have mentioned it. But the thinking
exists, and it may more or less exist mainly among students, and I
mention it because I have noticed such thinking in some of the books
which I have come across.

What is amazing in what they say is that man, after having reached
cultural maturity, should commit suicide. Why? Because, they explain,
when we find that human nature is beyond remedy, every person has the
right to kill himself, and encourage others to commit suicide too. This
is the logic of the type of writers such as Sadegh Hedayat. Such a kind
of thinking is prevalent in various forms in Europe, and statistics show
that in spite of all the welfare that exists in the civilized world, the
number of suicides is increasing daily. By comparing the figures
published in our newspapers we see this steady increase between the
years 1955 and 1975. The Hippie movement was a social phenomenon, which
was a reaction that took the form of dislike of civilization.

It meant that civilization has failed to do anything for man, and that
it has failed to change his nature. Do not compare this Western hippyism
with our own hippyism, which is only a superficial imitation. But those
who had originated this way of thinking in the West, had in fact a
philosophy for it: the philosophy of disgust for civilization, and
despair on account of its inability to do something to solve human
problems. And this difficulty, too, is considered insoluble, a knot that
by no means can be disentangled.

You may have read the reports coming from the UNESCO and elsewhere, as
well as the articles written by our own experts, about the urge for
taking refuge in narcotics. This trend in Western countries is the
result of despair and cynicism about the future of mankind. When man
reaches the stage where he finds no remedy, when he thinks that reform
and revolution have, both, failed to change man, when regimes and
systems of government and economic and non economic solutions have only
changed their form without changing the content, then some people say:
let us drop this matter once for all. And this is one type of view and
theory.


