The View of Scientism
=====================

Before this, there existed another view or theory which finds no
support in the developed countries today, although there are still some
who follow it in the developing countries. This view began with Bacon
and those like him who said that the remedy for all human pains is
science: when you build a school, you destroy a prison. By securing
science and freedom, all sufferings will come to an end. Why does man
suffer? On account of ignorance, weakness and helplessness before
nature, sickness, poverty, worry and anxiety, oppression of man by man,
need and greed. They offered science as the remedy for all these pains

There may be some truth in this view. Science remedies ignorance, and
weakness, helplessness and abjectness in front of nature, and the pain
of poverty-in so far as it is related to nature. But not all human
suffering comes within bounds of his relation with nature. What about
the suffering produced by the relation of man with man, namely, greed,
tyranny and oppression, which are derived from man's own nature, his
feeling of loneliness, fear and anxiety? Science has not been able to
remedy these.

Therefore, this view that science can remedy all human pains has been
abandoned in those countries. But in the countries which follow on the
trails of the West, there are still individuals who think that science
can really remedy all pains and sufferings.

Do not misunderstand me; my intention is not to negate science: for, as
I said before, half of human pains find no remedy except through
science. But man has other pains which constitute his 'human' suffering,
the suffering which relates to his human dimension. Here science
provides no help, and the scientists, when they reach this point,
declare that science is neutral and indifferent; it is a means and it
does not prescribe any goal for mankind. Science does not elevate human
objectives, and does not provide a direction. Rather, it must be said
that man uses science as an aid in the direction which he selects in
life.

Today we observe that most of the human suffering is caused by human
beings, by those who are well-informed, and not by the ignorant. In the
problem of colonialism in the world of today and since the last few
centuries, were it the ignorant who exploited and plundered the
resources of others, the ignorant and the learned alike? Or were it the
learned and well-informed men who exploited both the ignorant and
others?

Therefore, this supposition that science and education are the remedy
for all pains and suffering of humanity is unacceptable. What I mean by
'science' or 'education' is that which makes man aware of the world; and
awareness or understanding is something which is necessary, and nothing
else can take its place. Again, do not misunderstand me: understanding
is not enough to remedy all the pains of humanity.


