The Viewpoint of Marxism
========================

There is a third viewpoint here which says that the problem lies
somewhere else, and that we should not be cynical of man's nature and
despair on its account. The answer as to why the past has been
disappointing, is that you have not been able to discover the roots of
human suffering. These roots lie not only in ignorance, helplessness and
such things, but in the type of ideology ruling over mankind. There is
another problem for man which is independent of science, education and
technology, and that is the problem of the ideology prevalent in
society. To enable man, with all his human weaknesses, to start his
struggle to change his situation, his ideology must be changed.

According to this view, since man left behind his early communistic
system and since the institution of private property came into
existence, and since ideologies have been based on private property and
class distinctions, and social systems have been based on class
division, and the exploitation of human beings by other human beings has
been given legality and legitimacy, all these defects and shortcomings,
these bloodsheds, wars, conflicts, massacres and cruelties have
occurred.

But if the ideology ruling over man is changed, then all these defects
will be removed; for then, mankind takes the form of a united entity,
and all will be like brothers. There will remain no trace of tyranny,
fear, worry and anxiety. Then human society will advance in its human
dimensions on a par with the technical and material evolution; the
spiritual development of society will then be parallel with its physical
growth. This is the view of Marxism.

Marxism considers the root of all human suffering to lie in the
ideology of class distinctions and private property; therefore, a
society which has attained its ultimate form is a classless society,
free of any contradictions.

There are many objections against this theory. One of them is: if an
ideology is merely a system of thought or a philosophy, does it possess
the power to change man's nature? Why, then, science couldn't change the
nature of man? If all the elements of an ideology consist only of
understanding without possessing the element of faith or belief, how can
it influence human nature?

Is the ruling ideology derived from the nature of human beings in
power? Or is it ideology that shapes the nature of the rulers? If you
believe in the priority of objectivity over subjectivity, can you say
that the dominant classes oppress others because they possess that
ideology? Do they possess this tyrannical ideology because their nature
is tyrannical? This means that their self-seeking nature requires it in
so far as it is human nature to pursue selfish interests to the greatest
extent possible.

Then, according to this view, the quality of seeking profit has created
this tyrannical ideology, and not that the ideology has produced that
nature in man. Ideology is a tool in man's hand, and not vice versa. It
is sheer idealism to say that man is a tool in the hands of his own
thought and the ideology created by himself. If that is true, when the
ideology is changed while human beings remain unchanged, has man then
reached a dead end to the effect that the greatest exploitation of man
by man and the extreme suppression of man by man should be perpetuated
by those in the name of a classless ideology? The heart of the matter is
that, no matter what form the social system may have taken in the past,
man has remained unchanged and used that system as his own tool.

How can we guarantee that it would not be repeated again? Do people
have freedom in the countries where such an ideology is followed? There
may be equality, but not in happiness; it is an equality in misfortune.
There are classes there, but not economic classes. Out of a population
of two hundred millions, ten millions control everything in the name of
the communist party. Why do they not allow the other 190 millions to
share the same privileges provided by the communist ideology? Because,
if they do so, then there would be an end to those privileges.

The severest repression and gravest misfortunes and miseries have been
inflicted in the name of a classless ideology. A new class has emerged
without bearing the name of a class. This is because when an idea or
philosophy is related to the mind and based on an abstract understanding
of mankind, such an understanding by itself cannot influence his nature.
Understanding clarifies the way for man to distinguish his interests
better and to be more farsighted. But it does not offer him any higher
goals. If I lack a higher goal intrinsically, in my nature, how can I
find it? Do the Marxists not say that thought does not have any
fundamental reality for man? If thought has no fundamental reality,
clearly it cannot control human behaviour.


