The View of Existentialism
==========================

There is another philosophy called existentialism, whose outlook of the
world and man is the same as the materialist world-view. The
existentialists have a plan and a theory which tries to solve the
deficiency of Marxism, namely, the question of human values.

Since in Marxism the questions of humanity and human values and ideas
such as peace and justice and ethical norms are considered worthless,
idealistic chimeras, existentialists clung to the question of human
values in order to provide man with a source of inclination, not just a
source of thought but something which would be attractive enough to draw
man towards itself, something which would provide exalted goals besides
material ends. That is why they emphasize human values and what is
called man's 'humanity'.

One may ask: you who say that the world is a mass of matter and
physical action and reaction, and that totality of being is confined to
matter, then what are these 'human values' in a universe of matter?
Where do they come from?

Let us now talk of man. According to this view, man has no reality
except his body. Matter constitutes his entire being. What may be
related to this material composition is profit, which is something real.
If I am totally a material entity, and nothing but matter exists in me,
then in my relation with the external world, too, nothing but matter can
interfere, and I must seek something which has material objectivity. For
me, food, clothes, sexual relations and housing are objective matters.
What, then, are the human values and the value of self-sacrifice which
man senses within his being? They answer that they do not exist;
however, man by his will can create values. Values do not have an
objective existence; there is no such thing as 'value' in the external
world that man can attain, they say.

Then, this question crops up: what is the destination of this mass of
matter? It can only move from one point in space to another; reaching a
destination which lacks a material or physical existence is meaningless.
They say that values have no objective reality, but we give them 'value'
by creating them.

This is one of the most comical and stupid remarks ever made. They
should be asked: what do you mean by your claim that you 'create'
values, and 'give' value to an act, to friendship, to generosity, to
sacrifice, and to service (which according to you have no value in their
own nature, since value has no meaning in the world of matter.)? Do you
then mean that you can really give value to an objective existence? It
is like saying to this steel microphone: "O microphone, I will give you
the value of gold." Does it become gold with my saying so? Iron is iron.
Or if I say: "O piece of wood, I grant you the quality of silver." If I
keep on saying so to the end of time, it will not become silver. Wood is
wood. Its reality cannot be changed, and man is unable to change it.

Therefore, granting value by creating it in the sense of giving
objective reality has no meaning. What has meaning is giving an
arbitrary, suppositional reality. What does this mean? It means,
supposing something to be what it is not. Such arbitrary and
conventional notions are useful only as means. FoE example, a
non-Iranian visits our country, and we can grant him Iranian citizenship
and an Iranian identity card, on the basis of which he becomes an
Iranian national and can benefit from all the privileges and rights
which an Iranian enjoys. The value of this conventional act is a means
to something which may have an objective significance. This is like
saying that a man or woman may want his or her spouse to be handsome.

If the spouse happens to be ugly, and if the other says,"I grant you
the hypothetical credit of being handsome," and then begins admiring the
spouse for his or her hand someness, it is meaningless. This is the cult
of idolatry, creating idols and then worshipping them. The Quran says: "
O man, how can you make a goal out of something that you have yourself
created, and make an idol of something that you have yourself hewed? "

The goal must possess a reality beyond imagination and assumption. One
cannot assume something for himself as a goal, and then think it to be
real. The value of an assumed thing is only within the limit of its
being a means and a tool. Therefore, it is an illusion to say that man
creates his own values. It is here that Islam asserts the existence of
its absolutely coherent ideology.


