The Last Word!
==============

**The Statement issued by the Council of Senior Ulema of Saudi Arabia
condemning the aggression of Wahhabis**

Translation Of The Statement By The Council Of The Senior Ulema [Religious Scholars] Of Saudi Arabia
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All praise is due to Allah, and may the blessings and salutations be
upon God's Messenger (S) as well as his kin and companions and those who
were guided by them, thereafter:

The council of the *"the senior scholars"* in its forty ninth assembly
which took place in Ta'ef on the 2nd of Rabi u Thani 1419 AH, examined
the incidents taking place in the Islamic countries and other places
involving ex-communications, explosions, bloodshed and destruction of
institutions. In view of the importance of this matter and its
consequences, the killing of the innocent, the destruction of property,
causing fear amongst people and creating insecurity, instability and
precariousness in society, the assembly has decided to clarify the
ruling regarding this matter for the sake of divine benevolence for the
servants of God and fulfilment of duty, in order to eliminate any
misunderstanding of Islamic concepts.

On this basis the following points are mentioned and success from Allah
in their fulfilments is pleaded:

1) Ex-communication (regarding one as an infidel [Kafer]) is a religious
ruling which requires certain criteria to be appointed by God and His
messenger, just as the permissible, the prohibited and the compulsory
rulings must be set by Allah. Moreover, ex-communication and the sayings
and deeds which are sometimes considered as blasphemy (Kufr) are not
equivalent to the ***greater blasphemy*** which will cause expulsion
from the religion of Islam.

Therefore – since the ruling to ex-communication must be on behalf of
Allah and His messenger – it is not permitted to ex-communicate someone
unless a clear proof from the book and tradition witness his blasphemy,
hence, suspicion and presumption is never sufficient, because very heavy
rulings will be laid on this judgement. While we believe that according
to the principle that asserts *"legal punishments are repudiated through
doubts"* we must not act without certainty, in the case of
*"ex-communication"*, due to the significant impact that it
incorporates, it is even more important than the fixed penalties and
thus the Holy Prophet (S) forewarned everybody of ex-communicating
someone who is not really an infidel, and stated:

***"If somebody addresses his Muslim brother as: O Kafir! (Infidel) and
is speaking the truth, the opposite side will be ensnared in divine
retribution, but if he is lying this will return to him."***

At times certain phrases are seen in the Book and traditions which
reveal that a certain word or deed or belief will result in blasphemy,
while there are certain obstacles which prevent this ruling. This is
similar to the other rulings which are not ascertained without the
assemblage of all legal causes and conditions and the elimination of the
obstructions. For instance, heritage is one of the divine rulings which
comes with kinship but at times certain obstacles prevent this ruling to
materialize, like disparity in religion. Also, there are instances when
somebody is forced to utter blasphemous statements but it does not make
him an infidel (as he has been compelled); at times one might utter a
blasphemous statement in a state of excessive joy or anger (when one is
not in control of his emotions) and it would not lead to his infidelity.
This is much the same as the famous story where somebody said in a state
of extreme bliss: *"Oh* *God! You are my servant and I am your Lord!"*

Significant and threatening consequences proceed from haste in
ex-communication, amongst which are declaring a person's life and
property as permitted for offence, preventing his inheritance and
declaring his separation from his wife, which are amongst the
consequences of apostasy. How can a Muslim be allowed to accuse another
Muslim without being absolutely certain and not having the smallest of
doubts (and take the responsibility for all these?)

Hastiness in excommunication has great dangers, since Almighty God
states:

*"Say [O, Messenger] The things that My Creator and Nurturer has
forbidden are: Shameful deeds whether committed openly or secretly: and
sins and unjust Rebellion and considering partners for Allah for which
Allah has not sent down any authority; and saying things about Allah of
which you have no knowledge."* [^1]

According to this Holy Verse any kind of indecent act, aggression,
polytheism and undeserved accusations and baseless statements about God
are considered as forbidden.

2) The outcome of this false ideology (accusing Muslims of polytheism),
that is regarding lives as permitted for offence, dishonouring and
disgracing other people and plundering their properties, and exploding
buildings, vehicles, business and trade centres, according to the
consensus of all Muslims are forbidden and sinful acts, as they will
lead to the dishonouring of lives and possessions and will destroy the
peace and security of the people who make journeys every day morning
till evening from their houses to their work places. These dreadful
deeds will also dismantle the public interests of society without which
life will become unbearable.

Islam has honoured the properties, belongings and lives of Muslims and
allows no one to trespass their inviolable sanctuary, and among the last
issues that the Holy Prophet (S) announced to all Muslims in his
farewell pilgrimage was that he stated: *"Your lives, property and
belongings must be honoured by all of you, just as you honour this month
(prohibited month) and this Holy Land (Mecca). He then repeated: Oh
Lord! Be witness that I said (that which I had to say)!"*

This tradition is approved unanimously by the narrators.

And he stated further: *"A Muslim is prohibited to dispossess another
Muslim of his belongings; his life, property, women, and reputation".*
He also said: *"Refrain from injustice since an unjust person wil be
alone in darkness on Judgement day."*

Moreover the glorified Lord has threatened those who shed the blood of
the innocent, with the severest punishment:

*"Should anyone kill a believer intentionally, his requital shall be
hell, to remain in it [for ever]; Allah shall be wrathful at him and
curse him and He shall* *prepare for him a great punishment."* [^2]

And also with regards to the inadvertent killing of a non-believer who
lives under the refuge of Muslims, he said: "*Must pay blood money and
award compensations to his family."* [^3]

In view of all these, what would be the ruling for his deliberate
killing? For sure this crime would be greater and its punishment more
severe.

In an authentic tradition from the Holy Prophet (S), it has been
mentioned that he who kills a non-Muslim who is in treaty with the
Muslims will never smell the scent of heaven!

3) This council announces to all the people of the globe that Islam
repudiates these sorts of invalid beliefs and regards all that is being
carried out presently in some countries, like the killings of the
innocent, exploding of houses and vehicles, city centres and private
property and destruction of work places, as a heinous crime.

Similarly, every Muslim who believes in God and the day of judgement is
weary of these acts. These acts are performed by those whose thoughts
have deviated and gone astray, so the blame for these crimes falls
solely on them and should not be aligned with Islam nor the Muslims who
are guided by Islam and adhere to the Holy Quran and the traditions.

These are obscene acts of corruption and ruthless homicide which are not
accepted by Islamic divine law and basic human nature.

Thus the Islamic traditions have strictly prohibited these actions, and
have forbidden companionship with these kinds of people….

This statement ends with several verses and traditions that demonstrate
Islam as the religion of love, friendship, cooperation in goodness and
virtue, logical faith and wise dialogue, the religion of abstinence from
any sort of violence and aggression.[^4]

A Concise Analysis Of This Statement
------------------------------------

This statement was signed by the highest ranking religious scholar of
Saudi Wahhabism,*Abdul-Aziz ben Abdullah ben Baz,* and twenty other high
ranking scholars and was issued shortly before the demise of b*en Baz*.
It consists of several important points, some of which are presented as
follows:

1) Though this statement should have been published prior to all the
bloodshed and wastage of precious lives, property and reputations, and
is like the cure that arrives too late, but, at whatever stage of
danger, preventing it is gain and benefit, and so worthy of gratitude
and appreciation. Finally, a very strong and expressive ultimatum was
issued against the hard-liners who claimed to be admirers of the divine
legislator, yet they made it clear to all that they didn’t accept this
statement, and followed their own desires and aspirations not the
Islamic rulings**.**

2) This statement has in practice paved the way for criticising the
thoughts and beliefs of *Sheikh Mohammad ben Abdulwahhab* and even the
Wahhabis can criticise him respectfully, and arrive at a more moderate
outcome in the their creed so that they can work in cooperation with
other Muslims.

3) This carefully worded statement, announced to the hard-liners that
the era of excommunicating Muslims had now ended, and they could not
accuse anyone who did not agree with their thoughts, of blasphemy and
destroy their lives, wealth and reputation because this act might lead
to the infidelity of its doer.

4) This statement improved the detestable and aggressive picture that
this group had sketched of Islam to the world and demonstrated that the
real Muslims were weary of these actions, especially since those acts
granted a very good excuse to the lords of the church and the Zionists,
to introduce this ugly sketch as the real face of Islam and frighten the
world by it. We seek refuge in God from the detriment of the ignorant,
and pray that God guides everyone towards the straight path and relieves
them from the traps of Satan.

A Friendly Advice To The Islamic Scholars Of The Hijaz
------------------------------------------------------

We offer our friendly and humble advice to all Wahhabi scholars who seek
the path of moderation; do not lose this precious opportunity to
re-examine the principles of Wahhabism and vigilantly fill the huge gap
between them and all other Muslims, which the enemies are currently
making the most of.

We make the following friendly suggestions:

1) Condemn accusing Muslims of polytheism and blasphemy for matters that
are highly jurisprudential and advise their followers to abide by this
holy Quranic command: ***"Do not say to someone who offers you peace,
'You are not a believer'"***.

2) Strongly condemn any religious aggression which has resulted in
horrendous terrors in Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan and even in Saudi
Arabia and other parts of the world. Those aggressions that defame the
glorious religion of Islam, which is for sure the future faith of the
whole world, and offers the best means of propaganda to the enemies of
Islam, and ruins all the efforts that the Islamic thinkers, missionaries
and informed Islamic writers have carried out in the way of propogating
Islam. Condemn all that injustice and regard it as an example of the
extinction of a race and generation[^5] which is mentioned in the Quran.

3) To make way for friendly and logical dialogues on the basis of mutual
respect without affront (disrespect) and accusations of polytheism and
ignorance, with the other Islamic scholars and accept that which they
find true according to this verse ***"those who listen to the word [of
Allah] and follow the best [sense] of it"***.

To open their ideological and geographical borders to the scientific and
logical books of the Islamic creeds and to feel no danger for themselves
in doing so, and to exchange students and learners with the seminaries
of other Islamic countries.

To remove the walls of distrust, suspicion and bad intention between
themselves and other Muslims and to be in touch and visit each other's
seminaries and be prepared to participate in the conferences on
different Islamic matters in any part of the Islamic world.

4) To warn their friends against considering their exegesis of divine
law on the major and minor matters as the reality of Islam and regard
other than that as blasphemy, wrong-doing and forbidden innovation, and
to hear the message of the Holy Verse that states: ***"We do not grant
you knowledge, except a little."***

Whenever these six principles are put into practice it is hoped that
unity amongst the ranks of Muslims will prevail and the reaching out for
Allah's cord will be desired and Islam’s objective to *"prevail over all
religions"* will be accomplished.

In the hope of such a day… with Allah as the helper INSHAALLAH.

**Muharram ul-Haram 1426**
**Nasir Makarim Shirazi.**

[^1]: – Surah A'raf 7:33.

[^2]: – Surah AL-Nisa 4:93.

[^3]: – Extracted from verse 92 of Surah 4 (Al-Nisa).

[^4]: – This statement was published in many newspapers and journals of
Saudi Arabia, but we quoted from the book "طبقات المتکلمين", Volume 4
page 100.

[^5]: –حرث و نسل .


