Section 1: Causes of Extinction
===============================

Is Wahhabism nearing its end?
-----------------------------

Ten years before the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the author of
the book *"The end of* *Marxism's life"*, wrote:

"In my opinion, we must accept this fact, which may be unpleasant and
bitter for some, and astonishing for others, that Marxism – and its
product Communism - is approaching its demise and is now on the decline.
More explicitly, I should say Marxism - according to a freethinking
explorer - is a doctrine belonging to the past that must eventually be
placed in the archives of history.

Marxism has utilised all its skills and failed in fulfilling its
commitments towards human society. Logically and philosophically Marxism
is not a live doctrine any more and the dreams that Marx, Angles and
Lenin saw were misinterpreted or turned out to be false; with its
idealism devastated.

Marxism is heading towards isolation and fragmentation with different
brands being implemented in different countries all over the world. *The
Marxism of Mao*[^1] does not resemble *the Marxism of Brezhnev,*[^2] and
*the Communism of Tito*[^3] is different from *the Communism of* *Enver
Hoxha,*[^4] and both these are different from Fidel Castro's version,
and the three are unrelated to…"[^5]

Indeed, as predicted, the Marxist Soviet Union, with all the huge claims
that the Capitalist State would soon diminish and Marxism would conquer
the entire world, suddenly disintegrated and joined the archives of
history!

Such a prediction was neither precognition nor divination, but a
consequence of Marxism itself.

Today, all evidence and proof suggest that the life-line of the *extreme
form of Wahhabism* has come to an end and it is rapidly losing its
advocates and supporters. Today, signs of this demolition have become
visible, because there are some fundamental principles of hard-line
Wahhabism which cannot survive in the ‘global village’ of the 21st
century.

These fundamentals are as follows:

1. Extreme ruthlessness

2. Beliefs forced on others

3. Intense fanaticism

4. Obduracy in acceptance of any new phenomenon

5. Irrational and incorrect understanding of six Quranic terms

Extreme Ruthlessness
--------------------

The ruthlessness of extremist Wahhabis is not something hidden from
anybody. The massacre of Muslims – not the disbelievers - by Wahhabis
throughout their life is extremely horrendous.

The flood of Shia blood that got underway in the town of Karbala, the
plunder of possessions and its devastation are remembered by all. More
shocking than that, was the horrible massacre and bloodshed of the
Sunnies of Ta'ef.

Ruthlessness is the essence of Wahhabism, and the reason for that is
their flawed perception of disbelief (Kufr), faith (Iman), monotheism
(Tawhid) and Polytheism (Shirk). They easily accuse anybody of
polytheistic belief followed by antinomianism, (*Ebahe*) permissibility
of lives and possessions.

The leader of Wahhabis regards the Muslims of our age as worse than the
disbelievers of the era of unenlightenment (ignorance). Among the bitter
fruits of this savage tree in our era are the "Taliban", "the Sipah e
Sahaba", and "Al-Qa'idah", and we have seen the revolting image each of
them has sketched in the minds of the world, and the detriment they have
caused to the most peacefully progressing religion, Islam.

### The Taliban

They were formed by *Mulla Mohammad Omar* in 1994, in the southern parts
of Afghanistan in the town of Kandahar, and from 1996 to 2001 they
dominated the greater parts of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan was invaded by the Soviet Union and Afghan warriors were
supported by the US, so Russia's dominance over Afghanistan did not last
long.

After the retreat of the Russian forces in 1989 from the towns of Uzbek
and Tajik, other small groups gained relative power. It was at this
point that the Taliban forces introduced themselves as the *Callers to
Islam*. Whilst they were predominantly from Pashtoon backgrounds, they
decided to take control over the government and were supported and
supplied with arms by the U.S!

At the outset of this movement thousands of young refugees, orphans and
guardianless individuals joined this group.

The Taliban introduced themselves as the *army of peace!* Many
individuals who were mainly Pashtoon, and fed up with the wars and
chaotic conditions dominating the country, supported this group; whereas
many of the Taliban leaders were nurtured in the schools of extremist
Wahhabis.

The Taliban began to battle in the year 1994 in the southern and western
sectors of Afghanistan, and conquered Kandahar, Herat, and other
neighbouring towns. In 1995 they reached the suburbs of Kabul but were
backed off by state forces. They persisted until they managed to conquer
Kabul in 1996, after causing the death of 50,000 people!

Burhanuddin Rabbani and Gulbadin Hekmatyar took refuge in the north of
the country, and the Taliban, after occupying Kabul, executed Mohammad
Najib-Allah who was ruling the country with the support of the Soviet
Union.

Mulla Mohammad Omar, who was the leader of the Taliban forces,
established an assembly of the leaders of the Taliban, instituted the
*bigoted religious rulings of extremist Wahhabism* and the ultimate law
was executed only by his approval!

The Taliban, through the Kabul radio and loudspeakers fitted in trucks,
announced their laws to the citizens. They closed down cinemas and
theatres, men were forced with lashes to offer prayers in the mosques,
closed down girls' schools, and prohibited the employment of women
outside the house, resulting in shortage of staff in hospitals. This was
done when many of the women had lost their men in war and were
financially destitute.

The Taliban totally prohibited female education, and campaigned against
any sort of modern life expositions however useful and positive they
were, and considered all as heresy (bid'ah). Whilst they reproached and
sometimes imprisoned individuals for not growing long beards, they
expanded the cultivation of opium in Afghanistan and gave substantial
support to the smuggling of narcotic substances, inspite of declaring
cigarettes as unlawful! And this was because they earned considerable
income from the cultivation and smuggling of opium, with which they used
to purchase weaponry and kill their brothers in faith. No one knows how
they justified this pragmatic contradiction; smoking prohibited, growing
long beards compulsory, but cultivation and smuggling of narcotic
substances on a large scale legitimate!

Without holding any trial the Taliban tortured and slaughtered people
like sheep, whether they were Sunni or Shia; anybody opposing them was
put to the sword. Since Osama bin Laden had accomplished many missions
in the 1980s against the Soviet Regime for the good of Afghanistan, the
Taliban Regime had prepared a secure location for him, and it was at the
end of this battle that he established the group called "Al-Qa'idah",
which played a substantial role in sustaining the Taliban and helped
them battle the coalition forces in the north.

Bin Laden was somebody that the Americans had recognized as an expert
and talented terrorist since he had attacked the American embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania in the year 1998, killing 250 and 190 people and
wounding more than 1400!

According to the Americans, the September 11 attacks were carried out by
Bin Laden, so obviously, the U.S. asked the Taliban to hand over Osama.
However, the Taliban could never accept this request, as they were in-
debted to Bin Laden and considered him a guardian of their interests.In
October, the U.S and U.K begun their attacks against terrorism and
directed these attacks towards the Taliban and Al-Qa'idah.

At this moment the coalition forces in the North who were now supported
by the U.S, embarked upon an attack against the Taliban and invaded
Kabul and other important towns. The Taliban lost and eventually ceded
Herat the same year.

During the peak of power, the Taliban were supported by countries such
as Pakistan, Saudi-Arabia and the U.S. However, this support did not
last long.

The Taliban movement required seventy million dollars each year in 1995
and 1996, to continue its activities. According to the Indian journal
*"Strategic Analysis",* the bulk of that budget was sustained by Saudi
Arabia. "Newsweek" wrote in one of its reports concerning this issue:

*"Riyadh is the most important financial supplier of the Taliban
movement".*

In one of his tours to Saudi Arabia, Mulla Mohammad Omar visited and
held discussions with high-ranking authorities in the country, and
Riyadh presented a sum of $10 million as aid to the group under his
command to continue with their ceaseless brutalities. However, later on
everybody turned their backs on the Taliban and the ruling-Taliban was
assigned to history[^6].

Due to the outrageous brutalities of the Taliban no one defended them
when the Americans attacked them, rather they assisted their decline,
and despite the problems the Americans had created for the people of
Afghanistan, the Afghan people preferred them to the Taliban, realizing
that the ruthlessness of the Taliban was greater than that of the
Americans.

Army Of The Companions (Sipah E Sahaba)
---------------------------------------

For centuries in the subcontinent of India, the Shi'as and the Sunnis
lived alongside one another as Muslim brothers, until the time when the
fanatic Wahhabis, simulating the army of the companions, began to
massacre the Shi'as manipulating inhuman assassinations. They shed the
blood of this party of Muslims including men, women and children. In
certain cases they caused retaliation and insecurity pervaded the
atmosphere.

The formation and movement of this group according to the world wide
media is as follows:

This army that claims to be a follower of the religion of the Prophet of
Islam (S) is an extremist group, which incorporates one of the Sunni
sects. This group was established at the beginning of the 1980s by a
Sunni cleric Maulana Haq Nawaz Jhangavi, which was concurrent with the
Islamic revolution in Iran, and the reason for forming this group was to
prevent the influence of the Islamic Revolution of Iran on the people of
Pakistan.

The most important objective of this group was to condemn the
commemoration ceremonies of Imam Husain (‘as) and denigrate the
revolution of Imam Khomeini. The "Khilafat-e-Rashed" magazine frequently
stated this objective throughout the duration of its publication, and
requested the Pakistani government to close down the Shi'a mosques and
centres, and prevent Ashura commemoration events to be held in any
school or university. However this request was never accepted by the
Pakistani government.

Another ambition of this group was to campaign against a Shi'a group
established in Pakistan in 1979 named the “Tehrik e Ja'faria”.

Another central cause for the institution of the "Army of companions"
was to counter the threat of the growth of Shi'a military, political and
religious strength in the region.

According to the statistics reported by Parvez Musharraf, four hundred
people from both groups were killed in bilateral attacks in only one
year. Besides their attacks against the Shi'as, this Army of the
Companions attacked Iranians residing in Pakistan on the pretext that
they were being supported by a Shi'a government in Iran which must be
removed. Their real aim is to make Pakistan officially be declared a
Sunni state.

The military fortress of this group is mainly based in the southern
region of Pakistan, mainly the central and populated areas of the Punjab
and the suburban areas of Karachi. The number of centres of activity and
offices belonging to this group exceeds 500, and in each district of the
Punjab province there exists a branch of this group. Approximately one
hundred thousand people have registered as members of this group and
they have also set up centres of activity in foreign countries, such as:
The United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Bangladesh, Canada, Yemen,
India, etc.

Many schools and theological seminaries in the Punjab province are run
by this group and it has been reported that many of the Sunni schools of
Pakistan, are run under the supervision of the teachers and staff of the
Army of Companions, and as part of their programme, they train their
personnel to assassinate all opposition.

'Maulana Jhangavi was assassinated in 1990. The very same year he had
participated in the national council elections but was not elected.
After him Maulana A'zam Tariq took the responsibility of leading this
group.

The Army of the Companions were supported by the Taliban militants and
A'zam Tariq used to publicly announce his support for the leader of the
Taliban. He also proclaimed the prohibition of cinema and television.

Initially, A'zam Tariq supported the Army of Jhangavi (Lashkar e
Jhangavi), but in February 2003, denied his links with it, declaring
that some aggressive members of the Army of the Companions were fed up
with their peaceful movement for instituting Islamic law in the country,
and had established this Army of Jhangavi. He denied any collaboration
with them henceforth.

A'zam Tariq was held responsible for leading the assassination missions
of approximately 103 cases of Shi'a leading personalities.

The source of income of this group was at times provided by the
rich-extremist Sunnis from Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf, and at
times by the civil fanatical parties such as the "Jama'at-e-Islami" (The
Islamic Community), "Jamiat ul Ulema e Islam”(The Assembly of Islamic
Clerics) and other groups sharing the same beliefs.

The State of Pakistan decided to halt the movements of all extremist
groups on August 14, 2001. Five months after this decision, the Sahaba
group (Army of Companions) were still continuing their radical
activities. Consequently Parvez Musharraf announced the activities of
this group as forbidden and attacked the group and arrested many
individuals on January 12, 2002.

After this incident A'zam Tariq renewed his activities under the new
title, "Islamic nation" (Millat-e-Islamiyah) and received excessive sums
of money from his foreign promoters. The government of Pakistan
announced this group as illegal and arrested its chief members,
confiscated their bank accounts and attacked the locations of their
assemblies (gathering) in houses, mosques and other places on November
15, 2003.

The government of Pakistan sentenced around 600 of those arrested to pay
a fine of Rs. 100,000 each, in order to put an end to further activity
by this group under a different title.

In the beginning of October 2001, "A'zam Tariq" was arrested. While in
prison, he participated in the general elections of October 2001, and
was elected as an independent member of the Federal Parliament from the
Punjab and released from prison on October 30, 2001.

Only a few months after his release, he began his support for the
elected government of Zafarullah Khan Jamali and continued his extremist
acts against Shi'as.

He was murdered on October 6, 2003. After his murder the security forces
took positions in the region and the next day his followers carried out
his funeral with great agitation in front of the parliament building.
After that the crowd attacked shops, restaurants and a few cinemas, and
set them aflame causing a great deal of devastation[^7].

Ruthlessness In Iraq
--------------------

The hard-line and extremist Wahhabis, in recent years, exceeded all
limits of ruthlessness in Iraq, and slaughtered men, women, old, young,
Sunni, Shi'a, Kurd. The earth was coloured by their blood and pieces of
their bodies were scattered around streets and deserts. Not only the
Muslims but all the people of the world were astonished and terrified by
these brutalities and asked if they were blood-thirsty savages. They
wished to find out what their objectives were and what religion they
professed

Some insist upon associating this ruthless behaviour with the Ba'th
party. This is not correct because the method of suicide attacks was
never used by the Ba'th party. This activity is only performed by the
fanatic Wahhabis who consider themselves as Muslims and the rest as
idolators (Polytheist or Mushrik) whom they are allowed to kill.

Ruthlessness In Their Own Homeland
----------------------------------

More astonishing and terrifying than anything else is that the fanatic
Wahhabis do not even show mercy to their fellow Wahhabi compatriots and
have extended the scope of ruthlessness to the state whereby, through
numerous explosions in Riyadh, Jeddah and other regions, they have slain
and murdered a group of their own innocent citizens.

In1425 AH during the Hajj, orators of Friday prayers addressed massive
assemblies of Muslims, held many debates, reproached this group,
condemned their ruthless conduct and raised the slogan "No declaring
others heretics, no terrorising".[^8] The Saudi government was compelled
to hold an important conference against "Terrorism" (Irhab) and invite
different countries to arrange and organize a plan to campaign against
it. By this action the Saudi government wanted to exonerate itself from
any involvement with them and to find an effective means of getting rid
of them.

Unfortunately, this caused the name of Islam to be associated with
ruthlessness, and gave a pretext to the enemies of Islam to defame the
religion to the extent that in many countries Muslims are today
introduced as a homicide community. The fraudulent campaign of the
Americans, in particular the Zionists, helped advertise this issue,
whereas Islam is a religion of peace, justice and mercy.

We all know that there are one hundred and fourteen Chapters in the holy
Quran all of which, except for one, begin with the name of the Lord of
Mercy and Beneficence, that refer to His *All-encompassing* and
*All-forgiving* *Mercy*. And that one exception is related to the
declaration of war against those who broke the peace treaty with the
Muslims. The Quran tells the Prophet of Islam (S) explicitly that he was
not made cruel and hard-hearted because that would have dispersed people
from around him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{... وَلَوْ كنتَ فَظًّا غَلِيظَ الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّواْ مِنْ
حَوْلِك...}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had you been harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have
scattered from around you”.*** [^9]

The Islamic traditions are full of such definitions of religion,"*Is
religion anything other than love?*" [^10]; love for God (swt), the
Prophet (S), the righteous people and all God's creation; but the deeds
of the Wahhabis granted the worst pretext to the opposing forces to
disgrace and defame Islam.

The Roots Of Ruthlessness Imbedded In The Teachings Of The Founder Of Wahhabism
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allow me to present a very brief biography of the founder of Wahhabism
through the writings of Eastern and Western historians.

The leader of the Wahhabi creed Mohammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab was born in
1115 AH in Oyaynah, a small town in the Hijaz and passed away in 1207.
His father, one of the Hanbali juries, was also his childhood teacher.
The author of the book *Ezalat-o-shobahat* writes: "He was deeply
influenced by *Ibn-e-Taymiah* and *Ibn-e-Qayyem-e-Jawzi* who both lived
in the eighth century, and extracted the main ingredients of his
thoughts from them.

Many have written that his father was disturbed by his early thinking,
realizing that it contained too many ideological faults, and was worried
about his future, so he constantly reproached him for his ideological
waywardness.

He travelled to Mekkah and Medinah, stayed there for a period and then
went to Iran and studied along-side a scholar named Mirza Jan-e-Isfahani
in Isfahan. He then went to Qom for a very short stay and proceeded to
the realm of the Othmani government in Syria and Egypt, finally
returning to Najd in the Arab peninsula to voice his beliefs.

At first, a group opposed his views and deported him from Harimele, so
he went to Ayineh. The news of his misguided ideology reached Suleiman
ibn Mohammad, the ruler of Ehsa and Qatif, and he ordered Othman, the
governer of Ayineh, to execute him, but as Othman did not want to get
defiled by his blood, he ordered his expulsion from the town.

At last he pleaded for refuge in the town of Dar'iyeh. The governor of
the region was Mohammad ibn Saud of the Ghanizeh tribe. Shaikh Mohammad
met him and presented his ideology to him goading him with the hope
that, with his assistance, he could dominate the whole of the Najd
region.

Mohammad ibn Saud, the ancestor of the Saudi kings, felt that he could
benefit from the presence of Mohammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab to expand his
territorial control, because he had gathered around him a large crowd of
enthusiastic and passionate youths who were committed to him and were
being prepared by ibn Saud as a force to achieve his ambitions.

Ibn-Saud promised to support and defend the Shaikh under two conditions.
Firstly, the Shaikh must not have any contact with anybody except him,
and secondly to still receive that funding that he received every year
from the people of Dariyeh! The Shaikh accepted the first and rejected
the second obliquely and said: "Hopefully many conquests and great
spoils, more than the funding of Dariyeh, become your fortune".

However it shouldn’t be forgotten that the spoils Shaikh Mohammad was
expecting were in the first place the wealth of the Muslims of the
Hijaz, Mekkah and Medinah and, thereafter, other Muslim countries who
did not obey him, because he regarded everybody except his followers as
idolaters and considered their blood and wealth as admissible.

The followers of Mohammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab attacked different towns of
the Hijaz, accompanied by large scale massacres, bloodshed and plunder
to propagate Wahhabism, or in fact, for power through conquest. After
the death of Mohammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab the kings of Saud continued with
his scheme and extended the circle of their reign, dominating the whole
of Najd and the Hijaz.

Amongst the most horrendous actions recorded in the history of
Wahhabism, also confessed by the Wahhabi historians, was the horrendous
massacre of the people of "Ta'ef". More horrifying than that was the
massacre of the people of Iraq and Karbala. The Wahhabis, since 1216 AH,
under the pretext of spreading their definition of Tawhid attacked Najaf
and Karbala several times.

Many of the people of Karbala visited Najaf as a pilgrimage to Imam
Ali’s Shrine (‘as). The Saudis made a surprise attack on Karbala, pulled
down the city-walls, entered the city, murdered thousands of people in
the streets and markets, irrespective of whether they were women and
children, and plundered whatever they found in their way. They attacked
Imam Husain's Shrine (‘as), which was decorated with innumerable pieces
of exquisite craftsmanship, ravaged the shrine and took all the
ornaments and precious materials with them.

Some have reported one hundred and fifty thousand dead! Streams of blood
flowed in the streets of Karbala, and the interesting part is that they
call this deed 'Striving in the way of Allah to spread ‘Tawhid' in a
Muslim country!

The events of Karbala are reported by many historians. You can refer for
details to *The history of the Arabian Saudi State*, written by the
oriental scholar *Nasi Lif*, and *Miftah al-Karamah* by *Sayyid Jawad
Ameli,* and other books written on this topic.[^11]

In any case, *Mohammad ibn Abdul-Wahhab* has written several concise
books in which he has openly mentioned his beliefs. He was barely
literate and possessed little knowledge of the Islamic sciences because
he had never studied in the main Islamic seminaries and alongside the
great scholars of the past. Because of this, his belief system was
extremely flawed and erroneous. Unfortunately, he insisted upon the
mistakes pointed out to him by scholars.

One of his books is called *Kashf al-Shubuhat* (Unveiling doubts). This
small book is written to answer the criticism leveled against him by
mostly Sunni scholars. [^12]

The following points constitute the belief system of the Wahhabis and
are sufficient to show where the roots of ruthlessness originated from:

1) Muhammad bin Abdul-Wahhab had an erroneous concept of Tawhid
(monotheism) and Shirk[^13] (Polytheism). He regarded all those who
beseech intercession from the Prophet of Islam (S) besides their Lord
–when it complies very explicitly with the Quran and Hadith – as
infidels (Kafir) and Polytheists (Mushrik) and considers their life,
wealth and women as admissible.

For sure all the Muslims, including both Shi'a and Sunni seek
intercession from the Holy Prophet (S) besides Allah (swt), and so their
lives, wealth and women are permissible to the Wahhabis!

2) They have gone even further than that and state explicitly: For two
reasons the believers of our era are worse than the disbelievers of the
era of the Holy Prophet (S), whom His Holiness (S) fought against.

Firstly, the disbelievers of the Prophet's (S) era resorted to other
than God only while they were in a state of repose, but -according to
the Quranic Verses- they called sincerely upon God only whilst they were
ensnared by a calamity (for instance when they were trapped in turbulent
sea waves).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{فَإِذَا رَكبُوا فِي الْفُلْك دَعَوُا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ
الدِّينَ فَلَمَّا نَجَّاهُمْ إِلَى الْبَرِّ إِذَا هُمْ يُشْرِكونَ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"when they board the ships they invoke Allah putting exclusive faith
in Him,*** ***but when He delivers them to land, behold, they ascribe
partness [to Him]"*** [^14]

But the disbelievers (polytheists) of our age resort to other than God
in the two states together, both at comfort and calamity.

Secondly the polytheists of the un-enlightenment[^15] *(Jāhiliyyah)*
epoch worshipped wood and stone, which were the creations of and
obedient to God, but the disbelievers of our age worship wrongdoers (it
seems that they are referring to some of the Sufi Priests)[^16] so their
blood, wealth and women are even more certainly admissible.

3) Another example of their ruthlessness is the discourteous manner in
which they address the group of prominent Sunni scholars during
discussions, using offensive and rude names, for instance:

Oh you disbeliever! أيها المشرك)) [^17]

Enemies of God! ( (اعداءالله[^18]

The disbelievers have some other doubt! [^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
للمشركين شبهة أخری
  </p>
</blockquote>

Those ignorant disbelievers! [^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(هـؤلاء المشركين الجهّال)
  </p>
</blockquote>

The enemies of Tawheed (monotheism)! (اعداء التوحيد) [^21]

One illiterate and unlearned individual prevails over one thousand
scholars of disbelievers (Muslims who believe in intercession
***Shafāah***)![^22]

The leader of this creed has attained very little from the Islamic
sciences and it appears that being annoyed by the criticism of great
scholars, he addresses them by various offensive names and accuses
everyone of ignorance, polytheism shirk and disbelief, whereas the Holy
Quran states explicitly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{...وَلاَ تَقُولُواْ لِمَنْ أَلْقَى إِلَيْكُمُ السَّلاَمَ لَسْتَ
مُؤْمِناً تَبْتَغُونَ عَرَضَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا...}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Do not say to someone who offers you peace, 'You are not a
believer', seeking the transitory wares of the life of this
world"***[^23]

Green Light To Ruthlessness
---------------------------

Considering the above it can be understood why the Taliban, Al-Qa'idah
and other fanatic Wahhabis easily shed the blood of other Muslims in
different parts of the world and raid their properties. The massacre by
the Taliban in Afghanistan has mostly been of Muslims, (including both
Sunni and Shiah) and the blindfolded killings and assassinations by
Al-Qa'idah and fanatic Wahhabis in Pakistan and Iraq have all been of
Muslims.

Who caused these groups to be so relentless? The same individual who
said non-Wahhabis are polytheists and declared admissible (*Mubāh*) the
lives and properties of polytheists (disbelievers). It isn’t surprising
that the blood they have shed has mainly been Muslim blood and all the
wealth that was raided, the wealth of Muslims.

Ruthlessness And A Raging Strike To The Pillars Of Islam
--------------------------------------------------------

Throughout history no one has caused more harm to Islam than the fanatic
Wahhabis, the Islam that has been a religion of mercy and compassion,
that advises man to begin every deed in the name of the most Merciful
and Compassionate;[^24]a religion that states that even if disbelievers
approach you to question you about Islam give them shelter so that they
hear the Quranic Verses, then deliver them safely to their homes
(whether they embrace Islam or not);[^25] a religion that urges man to
show kindness in turn for meanness so that the stubborn enemies would
become pliant and befriend them;[^26] a religion that asks; "Is religion
anything other than loving each other?"[^27]

They presented such an exquisite religion (Islam) so formidably that
made both friend and enemy weary of it!

The true essence of Islam is always prepared to perform its job and make
human beings "Enter Allah's religion in throngs"[^28] group by group,
but unfortunately, the acts of this ruthless and fanatic group have
become a threat to the spread of Islam and Muslims globally.

Oh Lord! Bestow your guidance upon them!

Strange Contradiction
---------------------

Their government that has come to power under the patronage of this
creed, has established political, economic and cultural relations with
all the countries of the world – Islamic and non-Islamic countries –
denoting that they are friends with all the disbelievers (polytheists)!

Furthermore, they have transformed the whole of Mecca and Medina into a
concentre of the most beautiful hotels to entertain the Muslim
Polytheists who come every year to perform Hajj and Umrah and are served
with immense hospitality!? Why? You see, these Polytheists fill their
treasury.

The Holy Quran asserts that Polytheists are unclean (*Najes*) and
permission to enter *Masjid-ul-Haraam* (The holy Mosque in Mecca) is
forbidden to them, even if poverty is feared, for the Lord will sustain
the believers out of His grace.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ إِنَّمَا الْمُشْرِكُونَ نَجَسٌ فَلاَ
يَقْرَبُواْ الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرَامَ بَعْدَ عَامِهِمْ هَذَا وَإِنْ
خِفْتُمْ عَيْلَةً فَسَوْفَ يُغْنِيكُمُ اللّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ إِن شَاءَ
إِنَّ اللّهَ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who have faith: the Polytheists are indeed unclean: so let
them not approach the Holy Mosque after this year. Should you fear
poverty, Allah will enrich you out of His grace, if He wishes. Indeed
Allah is all-knowing all-Wise."*** [^29]

How come the same polytheists happen to become monotheists and are
received warmly with love and compassion as "Guests of God"[^30], with
major and minor lending them their homes?!

We Declare Unequivocally
------------------------

The undersigned, as a servant of the Islamic sciences, states loudly and
clearly that this Wahhabi sketch of Islam is not by any means true
Islam. It is a personal perception of individuals who have little
knowledge of the Islamic sciences and a unanimous majority of the
Islamic clerics are opposed to that. In the final section of this book
we will clarify through explicit Quranic Verses and Islamic traditions
their mistaken perception so that the moderate individuals amongst them
who feel duty-bound to logic and reasoning can know that the straight
path lies elsewhere.

I would request everyone to join hands and call out with one voice that
this little fanatic group does not represent true Islam. It is obvious
that such an ideology cannot survive in the world today, and is on the
decline. We must present Islam which is a religion of mercy in its true
essence so that it is accepted and can continue its evolution in the
world and influence minds and hearts.

More peculiar than anything else is that the ruthlessness of this group
controls the government that they themselves brought to power (the
government of the descendants of Saud[^31]) and has set up horrifying
assassinations in the Saudi kingdom. The Saudi government has confessed
to their being a threat to its citizens and has decided to restrain
them. It has reconsidered the teachings of Wahhabi religious schools,
and has displaced radical fanatics from leading the mosques, which
itself is another sign of the end of Wahhabism, as it now has no place
even where it came into being.

[^1]: – Mao Zedong December 26, 1893 – September 9, 1976) (also Mao
Gi-dong in Wade-Giles transliteration) was a Chinese Marxist military
and political leader and writer, who led the Communist Party of China
(CPC) to victory against the Kuomintang (KMT) in the Chinese Civil War,
leading to the establishment of the People’s Republic of China on
October 1, 1949 in Beijing.

[^2]: – Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev (January 1, 1907– November 10, 1982) was
the effective ruler of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982, at first in
partnership with others. He was General Secretary of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982, and was twice Chairman of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet (head of state), from 1960 to 1964 and
from 1977 to 1982.

[^3]: – Josip Broz Tito (May 7, 1892 – May 4, 1980) was the leader of
Yugoslavia between the end of World War II and his death in 1980.

[^4]: – Enver Hoxha [en-vehr hoj-e] (October 16, 1908–April 11, 1985)
was the communist leader of Albania from the end of World War II until
his death.

[^5]: – End of Marxism's life", pg 10,11- this book as mentioned above
was published in year 1360 (according to the Solar-Persian calendar)
approximately ten years before the disintegration of Soviet Union and
was published by "Nasl-e-Javan" publication.

[^6]: – Obtained from popular Sites and Journals of the world.

[^7]: – Extracted from popular global media and the Encyclopedia of
Encarta.

[^8]: – لا التكفير ولا الإرهاب.

[^9]: – Surah Al-e-Imran: 159.

[^10]: – هل الدين إلا الحب؟

[^11]: – تاريخ المملكة السعودية، تاريخ العربية السعودية، عنوان المجد في
تاريخ نجد.

[^12]: – Amongst those who have written expositions to this thesis is
Mohammad-ibn-Saleh Al-Othaimin (محمد ابن صالح العثيمين), who was
relatively moderate and intellectual but unfortunately, either due to
the threat of losing his position or for dissimulation (تقيه), tried to
become the justifier.

[^13]: – Associating other deities with God.

[^14]: – Surah Al-Ankabut 29:65.

[^15]: – Pre-Islamic Arabian age of ignorance.

[^16]: – He says: اعلم أن شرك الاوّلين أخفّ من شرك اهل زماننا بأمرين،
احدهما: انّ الاوّلين لا يشركون و لا يدعون الملائكة والاولياء و الاوثان
مع الله إلا في الرخاء و أ ما الشدة فيخلصون لله الدعاء كما قال تعالی:
{فإذا ركبوا في الفلك... } الامر الثاني: أن الاوّلين يدعون مع الله اناساً
مقرّبين عندالله...و اهل زماننا يدعون اناساً من افسق الناس. (شرح كشف
الشبهات، صفحة 100)

[^17]: – Exposition to Kashf al-Shobahat Pg. (شرح كشف الشبهات) 77.

[^18]: – Ibid, Pg 79.

[^19]: – Ibid, Pg 109.

[^20]: – Ibid, Pg 120.

[^21]: – Ibid, Pg 65.

[^22]: – Ibid, Pg 68.

[^23]: – Surah Nisa 4: 94.

[^24]: – Every affair in which the name of Allah is not mentioned is
indeed futile. كلّ أمرٍ ذي بالٍ لم يذكر فيه اسم الله فهو أبتر (تفسير
البيان، جلد۱، صفحة 461)

[^25]: –Surah Tawbah 9: 6.

[^26]: – Surah Fosselat 41:34.

[^27]: – "Khesal" (خصال) by Sadooq (صدوق)Pg 21 (Narrated from Imam
Al-Sadiq هل الدين إلا المحبة).

[^28]: – Surah Nasr 110:2 (يدخلون في دين الله أفواجاً).

[^29]: – Surah Tawbah 9:28.

[^30]: – ضيوف الرحمن.

[^31]: – آل سعود.


