Section 2: Imposing belief
==========================

Islam has decreed that cooperation of different Islamic sects with one
another must only be through friendly and logical discussions, more so
with non-Muslims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{ادْعُ إِلَى سَبِيلِ رَبِّكَ بِالْحِكْمَةِ وَالْمَوْعِظَةِ الْحَسَنَةِ
وَجَادِلْهُم بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَن
ضَلَّ عَن سَبِيلِهِ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِالْمُهْتَدِينَ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good advice and
dispute with them in a manner that is best. Indeed your Lord knows best
those who stray from His way, and He knows best those who are
guided."***[^1]

And He also remarks:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{وَلَا تُجَادِلُوا أَهْلَ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا بِالَّتِي هِيَ أَحْسَنُ
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْهُمْ وَقُولُوا آمَنَّا بِالَّذِي أُنزِلَ
إِلَيْنَا وَأُنزِلَ إِلَيْكُمْ وَإِلَهُنَا وَإِلَهُكُمْ وَاحِدٌ
وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Do not dispute with the people of the Book except in a manner which
is best, barring such of them as are wrongdoers, and say, 'We believe in
that which has been sent down to us and has been sent down to you; our
God and your God is one (and the same), and to Him do we submit."***[^2]

Islam does not permit anyone to address the opposing faction by titles
such as *"ignorant polytheists"*, *"enemies of God"*, *"enemies of
Tawheed (monotheism)"*; to consider oneself as the axis of Islam, and to
strike all and sundry with allegations of disbelief and polytheism, an
act done ferociously in most of the books published by this community.

All Muslims share common principles in Islamic teachings and beliefs,
and all the Islamic scholars, despite deviating interpretations of
certain principles, share common doctrines in canonical matters.

These differences in opinion should not cause disputes, frays and
bloodshed; they should rather, through logical reasoning and proper
dialogue and discourse, harmonise ways of thinking.

The fanatic Wahhabis (the Salafis) oppose this logical and fair Islamic
rationale. They believe that they must enforce their perceptions in
polytheistic and monotheistic matters (*Shirk and Tāwhid*) on others,
even if it is achieved by bloodshed and plundering of property, proofs
of which are present in the books of the founders of this faith.

When we tell their scholars that if you are erudite, we are also erudite
and we are more educated than you, and have authored more books than you
have. If you are clergymen (*Mujtahid*) [^3] we are too clergymen, the
scholars in Al-Azhar and the seminaries of Damascus, Jordan and other
countries have many clergymen amongst them. Why should others be
compelled to accept your beliefs (on the issue of Monotheism and
Polytheism) which are undoubtedly flawed in our view? They insist that
what they say is Islam!!

What is their advantage over other Islamic scholars that they intend to
enforce their belief on them, and why do they beat others with lashes?!
They have no logical answer.

Apparently they assume they sit on the peak of knowledge and piety and
everybody else has fallen into the abyss of ignorance.

This is something that nobody favors in today's world and there is no
place for it amongst the Muslims. It is for this reason that we claim
they are at the end of their term in this world.

A Bitter Memory!
----------------

I cannot forget the first years of being blessed to visit the house of
God, when I saw a very strange scene in Medina that left me deeply
pondering. A group called *"The Commanders to virtue"* (form the fanatic
Wahhabis) with long beards had surrounded the Prophet's (S) shrine. Each
one was holding a whip in hand and anybody who approached the shrine of
the Prophet (S) to kiss it was whipped and told:

"This sepulchre is nothing more than a piece of iron and wood, what you
are doing is Shirk! (Polytheism)." [^4]

They did not realise that no rational being kisses wood and iron for
being wood or iron, rather, such conduct is a symbolic act for
expressing devotion, love and passion towards the owner of the grave,
just as all Muslims, including the Wahhabis themselves, kiss the cover
of the Holy Quran whether it is made of leather, cardboard, cloth or
wood.

Is the expression of love and devotion for the Holy Quran and the Holy
Prophet (S) shirk? No logic and rationale agrees with such belief.

All the people in the world kiss the flag of their country and show
respect to it. Is their intention to express devotion towards a
worthless piece of cloth which was part of a bolt, a piece of which has
become a flag and the rest turned into shirts and trousers? Certainly
not! Their aspiration is to show respect to the independence of their
country and that is an exemplification of patriotism.[^5] Is there
someone who considers respect towards his homeland and soil as Shirk?!

Interesting is that all the Wahhabis show respect towards
*Hajar-ul-Aswad* (the Black stone) and kiss it. When we say: this is
nothing but a stone and our destiny does not lie in its hands, they
reply: "The Holy Prophet (S) used to kiss it so we follow his tradition
and kiss it!"

We say: Do you mean that the Holy Prophet (S) gave you permission to
commit Shirk (Polytheism), and this is an exception so it is a kind of
permissible Shirk (polytheism), or rather kissing it is not Shirk?

They Remain Silent For They Have No Answer
------------------------------------------

We proclaim that all of you kiss the "cover of the Quran" and regard
this as a permissible act of respect. What is a piece of leather and
cardboard worth that you kiss it?

They reply: The intention is to express affection and respect towards
the Quran!

We say: Is this not considered to be Shirk?

They reply: The companions of the Holy Prophet (S) used to kiss the
Quran.[^6]

We say: Has His Holiness (S) given you permission to become polytheists?
Even though it is impossible for the cause of polytheism to encounter an
exception:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ
ذَلِكَ لِمَن يَشَاءُ وَمَن يُشْرِكْ بِاللّهِ فَقَدِ افْتَرَى إِثْمًا
عَظِيمًا}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Indeed Allah does not forgive that any partner should be ascribed to
Him, but He forgives anything besides that to whomever He wishes. And
whoever ascribes partners to Allah has indeed fabricated [a lie] in
great sinfulness."*** [^7]

The annulment of Shirk (polytheism) is purely a rational decree which
does not allow exception. They have no answer to offer. In short, they
are submerged in a vortex of contradictions.

The Main Duty Of The Custodians Of The House Of God
---------------------------------------------------

The Holy Places and the Sacred House of God belong to all the Muslims of
the world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{جَعَلَ اللّهُ الْكَعْبَةَ الْبَيْتَ الْحَرَامَ قِيَامًا لِّلنَّاسِ
وَالشَّهْرَ الْحَرَامَ وَالْهَدْيَ وَالْقَلاَئِدَ ذَلِكَ لِتَعْلَمُواْ
أَنَّ اللّهَ يَعْلَمُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ وَأَنَّ
اللّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Allah has made the Ka'bah, the sacred House, a [means of] sustenance
for mankind, and [also] the sacred month, the offering and the garlands,
so that you may know that Allah knows whatever there is in the heavens
and whatever there is in the earth, and that Allah has knowledge of all
things."*** [^8]

Every individual from near and remote should benefit equally from the
house of God;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{...سَوَاءً الْعَاكِفُ فِيهِ وَالْبَادِ...}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"The native and the visitor are equal therein."*** [^9]

Thus the responsibility of the custodians of the House of Ka'bah is only
to establish order and security and provide the required facilities to
the pilgrims, **not to designate this Islamic centre as a base for
preaching their creed and enforcing their beliefs on others.**

They have no right to enforce on the pilgrims their specific perceptions
on Islamic matters which oppose the knowledge (*Ijtīhad*)[^10] and
conceptions of the scholars of other countries. Even in the era of
Ignorance[^11] the job of the custodians was nothing more than what is
referred to in the Holy Quran; providing water to Hajj pilgrims and the
maintenance of the Holy Mosque:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{أَجَعَلْتُمْ سِقَايَةَ الْحَاجِّ وَعِمَارَةَ الْمَسْجِدِ
الْحَرَامِ...}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Do you regard the providing of water to hajj pilgrims and the
maintenance of the Holy Mosque…"***[^12]

Therefore if the scholars of this region have a particular view on the
issue of Tawheed (Monotheism), they have no right to enforce their
belief on others, especially when other great Muslim scholars consider
these perceptions as invalid. For example this group regards as
blasphemy[^13] the "seeking of intercession"[^14] from the Messenger of
God (S) inferring that he intercedes for the servants whereas, others
note this as perfect Tawheed. Often they regard something as Heresy
while others consider it a tradition.

The Wahhabis, nor any other group, has the right to impose their
thoughts and perceptions on others. I stress this point: they must only
deal with the order, security and maintainence of this holy place, not
designate it to a centre for preaching their creed, and it is
interesting that the king of Saudi Arabia deems himself as the
**'Servant of the Two Holy Shrines'** not the **'ruler of the Two Holy
Shrines'.** How come the scholars of the Salafi (extremists) Wahhabis
regard themselves as the **"rulers of the Two Shrines"**[^15] even
though they believe that obedience to their Rulers[^16] is compulsory
for them.

Of course, they must prevent acts that are prohibited according to the
consensus of the scholars of Islam. In brief, the enforcement of thought
by a small group who are on a lower level of knowledge, on the majority
of the Muslims is not rationally acceptable. However, the fanatic
Salafies use the worse kinds of methods to impose their ideology upon
the pilgrims, which is very unfortunate.

The Worse Form Of Imposing Belief!
----------------------------------

The fanatic Wahhabis have recently written some books rejecting some of
the Islamic creeds and distributed them amongst the pilgrims. They are
books with indecent language and obscene terminology, containing all
sorts of lies and slander, accusing others of polytheism (shirk) and
blasphemy. This is in a state where if only one logical and polite
answer was written to these hideous books, it was practically impossible
for them to allow the publication of even one edition of those books.

Is this the meaning signified in the following Holy Verse?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{...فَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ \* الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقَوْلَ
فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ...}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"So give good news to my servants- who listen to the word [of Allah]
and follow the best [sense] of it."*** [^17]

It is clear that such a creed with such a culture has no place in
today's world where respect towards other people's beliefs, according to
intellectuals, is of significant value. This very fact has prepared the
grounds for the isolation and fall of this creed, because no Muslim can
tolerate allegations of being polytheists and infidels, that the
custodians of the House of God openly declare them as.

The Prophet’s (S) shrine and the graves in *Baqī* belong to all Muslims
and their guardians are only responsible for establishing order and
security, providing the required facilities and preventing that which is
against the consensus of all Muslims, and nothing more.

They must respect the beliefs of all Muslims of the world and refrain
from profanity and disparaging remarks about their sacred adherence and
not over extend themselves, as neither God nor the Servant of God (S)
are pleased with that nor has this act any laudable aftermath.

The secure Abode of God must remain secure at all costs. What sort of
security is that when *non-Wahhabi Muslims* put a foot forward and back
they must be accused of blasphemy!?

I can never forget my first visit to the House of God, when I saw a
group of Muslims from different countries wanting to kiss the rostrum of
the Prophet (S) and enraged the police. One agent of the *"instructors
to virtue"* stood and uttered this profanity:

"I swear to God that it is permissible to attack this group with the
sword (and shed their blood!)" [^18]

What is the difference?! You kiss the cover of the Holy Quran and they
kiss the rostrum that was for years the position of guidance and
indoctrination of the Holy Prophet (S) of Islam. Why do you issue the
decree for their murder and not for your own followers?!

You consider this act as heresy[^19] but yours as a rite[^20]. Now we
understand why the Taliban and Al-Qa'idah, who are the same extremist
Wahhabis, killed in just one explosion one hundred and fifty innocent
people and cause injury to three hundred, amongst which are children,
infants, women and the elderly in Najaf (two years ago). These are the
painful and bitter results of misguided ways of thinking which has
damaged the image of Islam in the world and has made their foothold
insecure, even in the Saudi kingdom, which has been their place of
origin.

Can such an ideology survive?!

The Intellectual And Moderate Wahhabis
--------------------------------------

Recently some trends towards moderation and signals of reappraisal of
past ideas have been seen from both the Saudi government and from some
intellectual Wahhabi scholars. This trend is extremely firmfooted, so,
it is hoped dialogue and discourse will soon replace dispute, war,
dissension, slander and accusations of blasphemy and polytheism.
Although this has not yet become a universal practice but numerous cases
indicate the budding of this auspicious sapling.

The news received is that some of the Shia clerics of the Hijaz (Saudi
Arabia) have sat for dialogue with some of the moderate Wahhabi scholars
and their declarations broadcasted in some of the public media. This is
exactly what the fanatical Wahhabis consider as blasphemy and heresy and
are so angry about. They deem it the decline of their convoluted system
of Islam, whereas, if this amicable rule of conduct, that orders Muslims
to *"discuss in a manner which is best"*[^21], becomes universal, Islam
will get rid of the aggressivists and the ground will be paved for the
true image of Islam to take root in the world, an Islam in which logic,
reason and friendly discussion will replace excommunication, insult,
bloodshed and plunder, and Islam in the Hejaz will return to its true
path.

A group of moderate writers of this country have traversed this route
mounting their pens. For instance a scholar by the name
*Yousef-ibn-Alavī*[^22] has recently authored a book titled *"Ideas-
that Need to be Re-examined and Corrected"*[^23].

This book is regarded as one of the wonders of its kind and we hope to
explore it, God willing, at the end of this book.

[^1]: – Surah Al-Nahl 16:125.

[^2]: – Surah Ankabut 29:46.

[^3]: – (مجتهد)A clergyman practicing religious jurisprudence, who has
the authority to deduce religious rulings from divine law.

[^4]: – (!هذا حديد هذا خشب و هذا شرك).

[^5]: Safinat-ul-Bihar (سفينة البحار), under the root word وطن
(homeland), it is reported in a tradition from Imam Ali (A) that he
said: The prosperity of nation states is through the love towards
homelands (عَمَرتُ البُلدانَ بحُبِّ الأوطان) Mizan-ul-Hikmah, Volume 4,
page 3566. In the course of prophet's immigration from Mekkah to Medina
a seemly tradition has been reported in al-Dor-ul-Manthoor (الدر
المنثور) Volume 1, page 300.

[^6]: – In the Kuwaiti Encyclopedia, under root word Taqbil (تقبيل) we
read: it is prominent amongst the Hanbalies (حنابله) and also Hanafies
(حنفيه) that kissing of the Quran is permissible and it is narrated from
Omar that he kissed the Quran every morning and it is also narrated from
Othman that he used to kiss the Quran and wipe it on his face.

[^7]: – Surah Nisa 4:48.

[^8]: – Surah Ma'idah 5:97.

[^9]: – Surah Hajj 22:25.

[^10]: – اجتهاد.

[^11]: – عصر الجاهلية.

[^12]: – Surah Tawbah 9:19.

[^13]: – كفر.

[^14]: – شفاعة.

[^15]: – حاكم الحرمين.

[^16]: – ولاة الأمر.

[^17]: – Surah Zumar 39:17 & 18.

[^18]: – والله يجوز قتال هؤلاء بالسيف.

[^19]: – بدعة.

[^20]: – سنة.

[^21]: – جدال بالتي هي أحسن.

[^22]: – Yousef-ibn-Alavi is one of the respected and influential
scholars of Mekkah who had a large seminary and has recently passed
away. He has authored different kinds of books which have attracted the
attention of many researchers, amongst them is the book "Ideas"
(مفاهيم).

[^23]: – مفاهيم يجب ان تصحح.


