Section 3: Extreme and Severe Fanaticism
========================================

Fanaticism today is referred to "extreme beliefs or behaviour in
connection with something", whether it is about origin and return, about
an ethical issue, some kind of custom and tradition of a nation or
community, or even in defense of a particular individual.

The Commander of believers, Ali (‘as) in the Nahj-ul-Balaghah[^1]in the
sermon of Disparagement[^2] has divided fanaticism into two types:
positive and praised fanaticism, negative and forbidden fanaticism.

Regarding negative fanaticism he mentions Iblis's fanaticism that
prevented him from prostrating before Adam. The Holy Imam (‘as) calls
him the leader of fanatics of all creation, and asserts:

*"The enemy of God (Iblis) is the leader of all fanatics and fore-runner
of the haughty."* [^3]

And regarding the praised fanaticism, he states:

*"In case you cannot escape fanaticism, let your fanaticism be for noble
attributes and praiseworthy acts"*[^4]

**Despicable fanaticism** has always been linked with ideological
obduracy, unilateral perspectives and irrational pre-judgments, and has
always been – especially in our era – the cause for hatred and
underdevelopment. An indication of this kind of fanaticism is taking
implacable and extreme stands, occasionally appealing to bloodshed and
plunder, humiliating others, and resorting to obscene, hot-tempered and
offensive phrases. Such fanatics grant no value to other people's views,
have no ears for the reasoning of their opposition, and are disdainful
and proud people.

All this is observed in the statements and actions of Extremist Wahhabis
and unfortunately, also in the books of the leader of this group.
Samples of their behavior are evident from the fact that on the
slightest pretext they call Muslims Disbelievers or Polytheists:
*Mushrik* and consider their blood and property permissible.

Those who address the scholars and esteemed individuals of its
opposition as "ignorant" and greet them with "Oh you polytheist[^5], and
regard whoever refuses to accept their beliefs as targets, can they ever
be ready for logical discussions and dialogue or "debate in a manner
which is best"?

The Holy Quran does not consider fanatics, who have no ears for other
people's opinions, amongst the pious servants of God, as He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{...فَبَشِّرْ عِبَادِ\* الَّذِينَ يَسْتَمِعُونَ الْقَوْلَ
فَيَتَّبِعُونَ أَحْسَنَهُ أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ هَدَاهُمُ اللَّهُ
وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ أُوْلُوا الْأَلْبَابِ}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"So give good news to my servants - who listen to the word [of Allah]
and follow the best [sense] of it. They are the ones whom Allah has
guided, and it is they who possess intellect."*** [^6]

The Holy Quran severely condemns those who put their fingers in their
ears during the summons of the previous prophets and reveals Noah's (as)
complaint to the Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{وَإِنِّي كُلَّمَا دَعَوْتُهُمْ لِتَغْفِرَ لَهُمْ جَعَلُوا
أَصَابِعَهُمْ فِي آذَانِهِمْ وَاسْتَغْشَوْا ثِيَابَهُمْ وَأَصَرُّوا
وَاسْتَكْبَرُوا اسْتِكْبَارًا}
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Indeed whenever I have summoned them, so that You might forgive
them, they have put their fingers into their ears and drawn their cloaks
over their heads, and they persist [in their unfaith], and are
disdainful in [their] arrogance."*** [^7]

In the past, in Saudi Arabia, every kind of logical, rational,
scientific criticism of the Wahhabi creed was banned, and a severe
censorship on the entry of any kind of book even from Islamic countries
like Egypt was and is still disallowed. Anything, besides this
principle, is exceptional.

Obviously, they will never relent from their state of obduracy nor ever
gain from the logical criticism which could help in their theoretical
development.

The interesting point is that the libraries of us Shias are overflowing
with the books of the Sunnis (the people of tradition)[^8] and the
Wahhabis and we sense no danger to our faith from the presence of these
books, whereas you hardly find any library in the Saudi kingdom that
holds Shia books (not even a single book) let aside books on criticism
of Wahhabism! Why are they so frightened and we not afraid at all? The
conscience of an honest, honorable reader can answer this question!

Such radicalisms have never been favored in any era, let alone in this
time and age. The supporters of such radicalisms should pack their gear
and join history!

The Wahhabi youth have the right to ask their elders why the books of
other Islamic creeds and also the books on scientific and logical
criticisms of Wahhabism are not within their reach?!

However as was mentioned earlier, the moderate and enlightened strata of
Wahhabis have shown willingness for dialogue and this is a gracious dawn
for the Islamic world.

[^1]: – نهج البلاغة.

[^2]: – Nahjul-Balaghah, Sermon 192 (خطبة القاصعة).

[^3]: – فَعَدُوُّ اللهِ (إبليس) إمامُ المُتَعَصِّبينَ و سَلفُ
المُستَكبرين.

[^4]: – Nahjul-Balaghah, Sermon 192 (خطبة القاصعة) فإن كان لا بُدَّ من
العَصبيةِ فليكن تَعَصُّبُكم لِمَكارِمِ الخِصالِ و مَحامِدِ الأفعالِ.

[^5]: – أيها المشرك.

[^6]: – Surah Zumar 39:17 & 18.

[^7]: – Surah Nooh 71:7.

[^8]: – أهل السنة.


