Section 4: Lack of familiarity with Cultural Values
===================================================

Destruction Of The Most Valuable Monuments Of Islam
---------------------------------------------------

In few countries, have there existed ancient monuments related to the
first centuries of Islam as in the Hijaz, the Saudi kingdom of today.
Given that it is the original birthplace of Islam, valuable monuments of
Islamic history could be seen in every place of this land.

The shrines and graves, the places of birth, the testimonials of the
companions and their followers and the precious monuments of the Imams
of the Prophet’s Household (S), the scholars and the jurist-consults[^1]
and even the rulers and their centers of sovereignty, architectural and
artistic works, etc., but the hostile fanatic Wahhabis destroyed most of
them using the baseless excuse of their resemblance to the testament of
polytheism![^2] And very few of these monuments are left and it is
proper that Muslims cry blood, for the destruction of these valuable
monuments.

Today, we all know that every nation, for the testimony of its origin,
relies on its past history, and regards important monuments from the
past as proof and witness of this matter. In view of this they
cautiously protect their historic monuments. But this group left nearly
nothing of the historic monuments of Islam in this holy land and
destroyed and removed all of them, monuments that were priceless.

A clear case of that is the *Baqī* graveyard. The *Baqī* graveyard is
the most important graveyard in Islam which holds an important fraction
of Islamic history and is a vast and descriptive book of the history of
Muslims.

The graves of the wives, offspring and the Imams of the Household of the
Prophet (S) of Islam, the jurist-consults and great scholars, the highly
ranked companions, great martyrs, courageous warriors of Islam are all
buried in *Baqī*; may be more than ten thousand companions lie buried
there. In other words, a huge chunk of Islamic history lies hidden in
the heart of *Baqī*.

But today, when we enter *Baqī*, an unsightly wreckage, abhorrent and
rugged, without any name, sign or symbol is witnessed, that moves one to
tears.

These stringent fanatics, have most unfortunately, removed these
valuable historic monuments on the baseless excuse of "fight against
polytheism" and un- pardonably laid the Islamic world destitute.

Indeed, this is how dangerous a fanatic can be and how he can fritter
away the precious resources of the country, the resources that belong to
everybody, the people of today, yesterday, and tomorrow!

Another Contradiction: Why Is The Shrine Of The Holy Prophet (S) Still Maintained?!
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Those who have been to Mekkah and Medina, know that despite the
destruction of the entire *Baqī* graveyard and the graves of the martyrs
of *Ohud*[^3] and the rest, the tomb and the Sacred shrine of the
Prophet of Islam (S) is still there and Muslims from every part of the
world keenly desire to visit it, drawing a very important question in
their minds: Why did this group not go for the Shrine of the Holy
Prophet (S)?!

The truth is that they saw themselves as losers going for such a job and
enraging the whole Islamic world against them. Indeed, the fanatic
Wahhabis tried, but couldn’t remove the sanctified Shrine of the Prophet
of Islam (S) and demolish the Green Tomb and raze the Holy Mausoleum.

When they were asked how come you removed the sepulchre and burial
chambers that were assembled over the graves of the Imams of Baqī and
the martyres of Ohud and others in that graveyard but you left the Tomb
and the Holy Shrine of the Prophet (S) as it was? What is the meaning of
this contradiction in realistic terms?

If these are symbols of idol worship and polytheism, why then have you
retained this "greatest symbol" right next to this grand and splendid
Mosque? And if that isn’t a symbol, then why have you removed the rest?

They have no answer to this question and they get truly cornered.

In one of my religious expeditions that took place long ago, I went to
visit the *Imam of Madina,* who was a bright and honest person and I
asked him the same question.

He tried to distract me from this annoying and unanswerable question by
relating a historic event. the story related to the time of
*Naser-ud-Dowlah*[^4]*,* about two jews who had burrowed a tunnel from
the houses beside the shrine to get to the grave of the Holy Prophet
(S). *Naser-ud-Dowlah* dreamt of the Prophet (S) asking him to save him
from those two people! This dream was repeated for several nights. He
wondered what was going on in Medina. He came to Medina and arrayed all
the people in town, and found those two people that he repeatedly saw in
the dream. He ordered their arrest and stopped their unholy plan from
being completed.

Then he instructed his people to dig the surroundings of the holy shrine
and fill it with molten metal to form a metallic wall so that nobody
could dare to do something like that in future.

This answer could, at most, justify the building of the underground
segment of the sacred grave, but could not justify the maintenance of
the Tomb, Holy Shrine and Mausoleum. However, courtesy and the feeling
that he had nothing else to say and might feel embarrassed prevented me
to continue the discussion.

It was heard recently that one of the fanatic Wahhabis has said that
they will demolish the Shrine and the Tomb of the Prophet (S) in the
future. Although this saying is consistent with the theoretical basis of
their fanaticism, it is certain that they will never have the guts to do
it, especially now that the moderates of this creed have shown up.

It is strange that some people relate this saying to the leader of the
Wahhabis *Muhammed-ibn-Abdulwahhab*. But he has considered this report
as fraudulent in some of his sayings, although *Hasan-ibn-Farhan
Maleki*[^5] in his book *"Pretension and not a Prophet"*[^6] believes
that reference to this saying: ‘If I have the ability, I will destroy
the Shrine of the Prophet (S)’ is present in the words of *Shaikh
Mohammad (ibn-Abdulwahhab)*!

[^1]: – فقها.

[^2]: – شرک.

[^3]: – أحُد.

[^4]: – ناصر الدولة.

[^5]: – حسن بن فرحان المالکي.

[^6]: – داعية و ليس نبيّاً.


