Section 7: The Calls
====================

1. The Call That Was Raised From Mecca
--------------------------------------

### Yusuf ben Alawi and his brave criticism

*Yusuf ben Alawi* was a brave scholar, who lived in Mecca and had a
remarkable study circle of scholars and intellectuals. The Saudi
political statesmen held him in great esteem. He passed away recently
and a tide of grief and remorse filled the whole region.

He called himself *a servant of the sacred knowledge in the Holy City*
and was a follower of the *Maleki* creed. He was an offspring of
Zahra(‘as), the daughter of Prophet Muhammed (S) and proudly adorned his
name with the title *Al-Hosna*[^1].

His study circle in Masjid-ul-Haram was one of the most crowded study
circles of the Mosque, and he also authored many books on Islamic
sciences. He was strictly against the extreme, fanatic Wahhabis and he
eventually wrote the book *"The Concepts That Need to be Rectified"*[^2]
criticising their thoughts and beliefs.

He criticized the most important ideological foundations of this
extremist group in a very scholarly and polite manner and relied
commonly on the Quranic Verses and the Traditions of the Holy Prophet
(S) narrated by the authentic sources of the Sunnis. He drew on books
and sources, the authenticity of whose content, even the extremist
Wahhabis were not able to deny.

He came on stage on the premise that there existed a series of concepts
in the minds of this group that needed to be corrected because they
declared Muslims to be infidels and made their lives and wealth
permissible, and destroyed the unity of Muslims. Thanks to his endless
efforts, he managed to deal with the matter very well.

This book is unique for certain reasons:

1) This book was republished ten times in a period of only ten years. In
just one year this book was published four times and it aroused great
interest among the people in most Islamic countries, including Saudi
Arabia!

2) A great number of prominent scholars of the Sunnah in Egypt, Morocco,
Sudan, Bahrain, Pakistan, the Emirates and other countries wrote
approving reviews on this book praising his courage in presenting his
thoughts in this book, of which 23 reviews covering 70 pages precede his
manuscript. This reveals the consensus on its content, and even these
reviews themselves make fascinating reading.

3) This book was published in "Dubai" and despite the harsh censorship
that the fanatic Salafis imposed on the book market in the Saudi kingdom
where they allowed no book criticising their ideas to enter this
country, this book was openly being sold in the markets of Mecca from
where we purchased it. This shows that the new class of Wahhabis do not
support the thoughts of the fanatic Salafis, and regard it necessary to
reconsider them.

### Reviews On This Book

Here are only three reviews that were written on this book by famous
scholars, to show what the Islamic world thinks of the fanatic class of
Wahhabis:

1) *Dr. Abdul Fattah Barakah,* the secretary general of the Assembly of
Islamic Discourse writes in his review:

*"In this precious book a very great attempt and effort is made on
behalf of a conscientious scholar and Islamic intellectual to unify the
disarrayed Muslims and remove all signs of fanaticism from minor affairs
and individual judgements, in accusing Muslims of polytheism and
blasphemy, regarding the issue of intercession, pilgrimage to the
Sanctuary of the Holy Prophet (S), and other substantial issues.*

*It is hoped that this valuable book will help in unifying the Muslims
and remove the grounds of dispute."*[^3]

2) *Shaikh Ahmad Al-Ewadh,* the head of the Assembly of Religious Decree
in Sudan writes in his review:

"Fortunately, I was informed of the book written by the honorable
intellectual *Ben Alawī* *Mālekī* *Makkī* *Hasanī -* the servant of
knowledge in the Two Holy Shrines – titled *The Concepts That Need to be
Rectified.*

This book speaks of rectifying the fallacious concepts that are related
to three affairs:

*"The first is the ideological debate where he proves through logical
reasoning and justifications that the standards chosen for blasphemy and
deviation by a group (of Wahhabis) are corrupt.*

*The second is the discourse related to the Holy Prophet of Islam (S)
and the reality of prophethood.With firm reasons, he has proved the
concept of acquiring blessings from the Prophet (S) as correct and its
subsequent effects.*

*The third discussion is related to the intermediary world*[^4]*, and
the legitimacy of the visit to the Shrine of the Prophet (S) and other
related issues. This scholar has carefully and successfully rectified
misleading thoughts."* [^5]

3) *Abdul-Salām Jobrān,* the head of the Regional Scientific Assembly in
Morocco, alongwith the members of that Assembly, has jointly written a
comprehensive review of this book. A section of that review is as
follows:

*"When this book was offered to the informed scholars, they all endorsed
it and praised the author for fulfilling this obligation before God, the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Islamic nation, it being the responsibility of
all scholars… Thus the members of the Scientific Assembly of Morocco
under the guardianship of the head of that Assembly, after being
informed of the book, read it and announced their approval of the entire
book, expressed their gratitude to the great author, and congratulated
him for undertaking this vital task."* [^6]

Furthermore, in praising this book, sensational and moving verses were
composed by great poets, of which we will touch upon only three
couplets.

These three couplets are from the poem that *Shaikh Muhammad Salem
Adood*, the former head of the High Judicial Court in Mauritania and a
member of the Jurisprudential Assembly of the Islamic World
Association[^7] composed in Mecca:

*Confusing, mistaken and ambiguous*

*Concepts are clarified by him for us*

*Deception, absurdity and falsehood take flight*

*When reasoning pure and evidence delight*

*How Alawi clears those concepts with ease*

*No great scholar has done for centuries*[^8]*"*[^9]

### Content Of The Book

This book has criticized the beliefs of extremist Wahhabis in three main
areas and clarified their weaknesses by means of referring to Quranic
Verses and authentic Traditions.

#### First Area

Issues related to belief and disbelief. He clarifies:

*"Many people (the fanatic Salafis), may Allah rectify them, have gone
astray in* *understanding the principle which excommunicates somebody
from Islam, to the extent that whoever disagrees with them, that is,
almost all the Muslims on earth – except their small minority – are
regarded by them as disbelievers!!"*

He believes that the leader of this faith was not in favour of such
extremism. He refers to the famous Prophetic tradition: *Revilement of
Muslims is debauchery and their killing is disbelief*[^10]*,* and
censures the vilification and prosecution of Muslims; gives sufficient
reasons to clarify the borders between belief and disbelief, and,
thenceforth, points out their faulty reasoning which has led to their
mistaken concepts.

It is interesting to note that his tone against the Salafis is, at times
harsh and, occasionally, furious at the contemptuous terminology used by
them.

For instance, he quotes from their works*:"At times people request
things from the Prophets and other Saints that no one except Almighty is
capable of giving, and this is Polytheism (and disbelief)."*

In reply he asserts: *"This saying results from inadequate knowledge and
understanding of a practice that has existed among Muslims since the
beginning. People entreated those gracious individuals to pray to God
and ask for His Glory to resolve an irresolvable problem, and countless
cases of these pleadings to the Prophets are seen in authentic Islamic
traditions; such as, the treatment of cureless maladies, the falling of
rain, the gushing of spring water from the fingers of the Prophet (S),
the sufficiency in a small quantity of food to feed and satiate a large
crowd, and similar cases."*

At the end he suggests: *"Do they understand the meaning of Tawheed
(monotheism) and Kufr (disbelief) better than the Prophet(S)? This is
something that no ignorant Muslim, let alone scholars, could dare to
imagine."* [^11]

His tone is polite throughout, but his language is harsh against their
anathemas, accusations of debauchery and insulting statements.

#### Second Area

In this section, *Alawi* clarifies the high status of the Prophet of
Islam (S) according to the Quran and Islamic traditions. He then
explains the concept of acquiring blessings from the traces of the Holy
Prophet (S) and how this has nothing to do with polytheism, Thereafter,
he recounts the many incidents mentioned in the traditions and
statements of scholars concerning the permissibility of acquiring
blessings by kissing the Prophet's (S) hand, gaining blessings from the
container that he used to drink water from, gaining blessings from his
Glorious House, from his Holy Rostrum and Noble Grave, and sanctifying
the traces of the Holy Saints and the past Prophets (‘as). He quotes his
evidence mainly from the famous books of the Sunni orthodoxy so that
there remains no room for any doubt, and then he names the companions
that acquired blessings from the traces of the Messenger of God (S).

He wonders why despite all these manifest traditions and authentic
evidence, a group with ears and eyes folded, denies this fact and
condemns it as a type of ignorance and demagogy. [^12]

#### Third Area

This section of the book deals with many controversies, the most
important one being the recommendation of visiting the Holy Shrine of
the Prophet (S) and supplicating besides that Sacred Monument, and
acquiring blessings from his (S) traces. He supports his case with
reference to many quotes of the great accepted scholars of the past.

In the end he clarifies a point strongly opposed by the extremist
Wahhabis, which is, commemorating the birth of the Prophet (S), the day
of migration, the occasion of being delegated as a Prophet, the descent
of the Quran, the victory of the Muslims in the battle of Badr (the
first battle of the Prophet (S)), and the night of mid-Sha'ban.

The extremist Wahhabis believe that all these acts are forbidden
innovations and thus savagely prevent the performance of ceremonies and
commemorations.

In a simple, common sense, logical response, Ben Alawi tells them that
these commemorations are conventional affairs, and nobody performs them
as a religious ruling and, therefore, they have nothing to do with
innovation and non-innovation. But they certainly involve crucial
side-effects that shouldn’t be overlooked. The message of Islam at all
costs should be conveyed to people in these glorious gatherings. He
concludes: these gatherings are, in reality, very precious occasions,
which must be guarded and taken advantage of in the best manner, and
those who oppose them and strive for their elimination, are ignorant and
narrow-minded. [^13]

### A Necessary Reminder

The aim of presenting abstracts from the book is to suggest that the
foundation of his statements which are interwined with reason, logic,
grace and bravery are factual and welcomed by a large faction of the
great Islamic scholars of different countries, including the Saudi
kingdom.

It seems that the fanatic Wahhabis have exhausted their term,
considering the fact that a book which is exclusively engaged in
censuring extremist Wahhabism is getting such applause from the Islamic
world.

However, Ben Alawi in return for this great gift to the Islamic world
and even to the moderate Wahhabis, received his reward. Books were
published by that same crowd of fanatics, in which the same old and
coarse method of excommunication was employed and the decree for his
infidelity was issued. (Books by the name *"Discourse with Maleki"* and
*"Refutation to Maleki on his Misguidance and Indecency"*)

Not only were these books condemned by readers but were regarded, by a
collection of the scholars of Al-Azhar, as of service to the Zionists
and an attack upon Islamic unity. Ben Alawi was still very much
respected by the people of Saudi Arabia, and tens of thousands of people
participated in his funeral procession, and the Saudi leaders visited
his house several times to condole with his family.

This popular response demonstrated the general opinion of the people
against the extremist Wahhabis and their weapon of excommunication and
anathemisation!

However, the chief justice of Mecca summoned him to court in Riyadh and
pronounced him guilty. He defended his writings for a few hours and at
last he said: This is my personal judgement. **At most, you are a Muslim
jurist and I too am a Muslim jurist and no jurist can impose his opinion
on any other jurist. The court acquitted him!**

#### A) The New Class Of Wahhabis

What is decaying is the fanatic, bigoted and dangerous Wahhabi group
which considers all Muslims but itself as polytheists, but a more
moderate class is emerging and materializing. This class consists of the
educated youth, and some university lecturers in cooperation with some
great scholars. They demonstrate the following characteristics:

1) They respect other people's beliefs, don’t accuse Muslims of
polytheism, blasphemy and forbidden innovation, and are weary of
bloodshed.

2) They welcome dialogue and logical discourse among Islamic creeds and
have ears for what other people say, and read other people's books.

3) They don’t consider forbidden the new positive maninfestations of
contemporary lifestyle whilst there is no reason for their prohibition,
and they do not object to commemorating the great saints of religion,
nor confuse the religious with traditions.

4) They allow women, to receive education and take part in social
constructive activities, provided they observe their Islamic covering
and the standards of chastity.

5) They are ready to collaborate with the other Islamic sects and their
hatred is focused on those who aim to obliterate Muslims. They will
gradually displace the extremely coarse fanatic Salafis. The expansion
of this group is evident in the scientific and cultural encounters
during pilgrimage and its impact is noticed in the recently published
books.

We believe that the elimination of that group and emergence of this, can
help to sketch an appropriate image of Islam in the world, and reimburse
this chaste faith which has been endangered by the dogmatic and
aggressive beliefs of the past Salafis, and God willing, prepare the
ground for *entering Allah's religion in throngs*[^14]*,* and set the
stage for Islam to find its real place in the world.

The Muslims of the world welcome the emergence of such a crowd, and
consider it as an important factor in stabilizing the pillars of Islamic
brotherhood and unifying the Muslims against the enemies who are
striving to emasculate and affront Muslims. The commentaries that a mass
of Islamic scholars wrote on *Alawi’s* book, is another witness to this
fact.

It is upon the Saudi leaders to promote this progress by opening their
closed borders to Islamic books and the writings of other Muslim
countries, prepare the grounds for dialogue between the Islamic creeds
and encourage interaction between the scholars of these countries. This
will be beneficial both for them and the Islamic world!

#### B) The danger of Extremists

**B) The danger of Extremists**[^15]

One of the factors leading to the extremist Wahhabi thought are a throng
of Muslims, ignorant and illiterate individuals who exaggerate about the
Saints of religion and raise them from the level of servitude to
divinity and partner them with God. *Without a doubt their threat is not
and has never been less than the threat of the extremist Wahhabis* and
if it wasn’t for them, there was no excuse for the Wahhabis. Expressions
that are not in harmony with the spirit of Islamic monotheism and have
never been mentioned in Scripture and Tradition, such as "Creator of the
Heavens and Earth", "Most Compassionate of the compassionate" and other
similar attributes specific to Almighty God, should not be used for
God's Saints as neither are they satisfied by this nor is this in
accordance with Islamic teachings.

The insistence of some ignorant people on these matters has caused a
group who are similar to the Extremist group in ignorance, to stand in
opposition and declare that the Holy Prophet (S) (God forbid) is
powerless to do anything after his demise, including intercession and
prayer for the believers and even going to visit His (S)Tomb is
forbidden innovation and so prohibited.

And this is what the Master of the faithful, Imam Ali (‘as) states:
*"Two kinds of people will be damned on my account: The friends who form
exaggerated opinions about me and the malevolent enemies who
under-estimate me"* [^16]

The Khavarej and the Nasebies set the grounds for the existence of the
Extremists[^17], and the Extremists in turn promoted the Khavarej. It is
the duty of the Islamic scholars to make every effort to guide the
Extremists and on the other they should answer the sophistries of the
hard-line Wahhabis. It is difficult to keep the solidarity of the less
learned masses of people in such affairs, but even harder at times when
some apparently learned ones stumble onto either side. *"May Allah the
Almighty keep us away from extremism and guide us towards the right
path."*

2. Another Call From Another Brave Author
-----------------------------------------

### The Book "A Missionary and not a Prophet"!

The book, *A Missionary and not a Prophet*[^18]*,* is a critical
appraisal by a leader of the Wahhabi creed on the issue of
excommunication and declaring others as kafirs, published lately and its
fame has spread all over the Hijaz (Saudi Arabia) and other countries.

The unique features of this book are the following:

1. The author of the book, Shaikh Hasan bin Farhan Maleki, is a famous
intellectual of the Sunnis of Saudi Arabia and a follower of the Maleki
creed who calls himself a moderate Wahhabi.

He respects the leader of the Wahhabis, Shaikh Mohammad bin
Abdul-Wahhab, but he strongly criticizes his declarations, especially on
the issue of excommunication[^19] of the Muslims. He states expressly:

‘Even though I respect him, yet not only have I found him fallible, but
I believe he has committed many mistakes.’

2. His method of criticism is very polite and logical, but when it comes
to criticising the themes of the leader of Wahhabis, he is not concerned
with anything at all; he even neglects the many threats that intimidate
him on behalf of the Extremist Wahhabis, as he calls them [^20].

3. He is well-versed in Islamic faith and religious sources, and he is
especially good at employing the terms used by the opposite side against
them, and he has amusingly dedicated a part of his book to “the
contradictions and inconsistencies in the statements of Muhammed bin
Abdul-Wahhab”.

4. He believes that the Extremist Wahhabis who regard the life, wealth
and reputation of the non-Wahhabi Muslims permissible, are ensnared by
fanaticism and are a threat to Islam, Muslims and the region.

5. He has focused most of his criticism on the two books
*"Kashf-o-Shobahat"*[^21] and *"Kitab-o-Tawheed"*[^22] by Muhammed bin
Abdul-Wahhab, and he addresses the sources of many of his accounts to
the book, "Al-Dorar-o-Seniyah"[^23].

Al-Dorar-o-Seniyah is compiled by *Abdul-Rahman bin Muhammed bin Qasim
Al-Hanbali*, who has compiled the set of books, articles and letters by
*Muhammed bin Abdul-Wahhab* and a group of Wahhabi chiefs from the time
of the Shaikh till today. He died in the year 1392 AH. Ben Baz, a famous
Wahhabi Jurist who died recently, used it as a text book to teach from.
This book of ten volumes is a very good source of information about
Wahhabism.

6. The author of *"A Missionary not a Prophet!"* did not remain safe
from the threats and pressures of the extremist Wahhabis and the verdict
of his ex-communication has been issued, as done to *Ben Alawi Maleki,*
and it is not clear what sort of destiny is awaiting him. However, he
has done Islam a great favour through this book and proven that
bloodshed and anathemisations are alien to Islam and are the result of
mistaken interpretations of Islamic instructions.

7. He states in the introductory discussions to his book: "The truth is
that I prepared this new reading of the books by *Muhammad ben
Abdulwahhab* prior to September the eleventh, and after that event I was
not very keen to publish it (as it might cause accusations against
Muslims in the course of this event), but as I watched the extremist
Wahhabis constantly holding seminars and conferences to acquit the
leader of this creed, Sheikh Muhammad, and declare him innocent of any
fault, I saw it necessary to unveil the truth so that they deal
even-handedly with the matter and admit the mistakes made by the Sheikh
in issuing verdicts of ex-communication. "[^24]

8. He starts off by saying: *Mohammad ben Abdulwahhab was a reformer not
a prophet!*

He then clarifies: ‘We are situated in the middle of two extremist
groups; some regard him as an infidel, and others treat his sayings and
speeches as prophetic phrases which no one can censure; both are
mistaken.

9. In another part of his speech he says, *"The Sheikh was not unique in
speaking or summoning"* he suggests: *"Some followers of the Sheikh
reckon him as unique in knowledge and erudition, and condemn all the
Islamic countries who did not accept the call of Wahhabism as
territories of infidelity and polytheism, and furthermore, reckon all
the scholars in those countries to be ignorant individuals who know
nothing of Islam!!"* [^25]

He then adds: *"Unfortunately, I found the origins of ex-communicating
Muslims and the basis for regarding their countries as the countries of
infidelity and all their scholars as infidels, in the words of Sheikh
himself, and I will shortly mention the sources for that."*

He then asserts: *"Certainly, the Sheikh and his adherents have not
pursued the right path in this doctrine. Some of the mistakes that the
Sheikh and a number of his followers committed, especially with regard
to the ex-communication of Muslims, entrapped many admirers of knowledge
– either due to extremism or imitation – and as a result many abrasive
acts were recently carried out, (in different parts of the world) and a
group, by exploiting the same reasoning used by the Sheikh created
terrifying events (and embarked upon horrendous killings and still does
so!)"*

10. Mentioning the blunders of the Sheikh by any scholar in the Saudi
kingdom inevitably resulted in indignity and disgrace. Thus criticising
these beliefs became an imperative duty and made me enter this
discussion.

It is obligatory for every scholar and every citizen in the country (of
Saudi Arabia) to do what they can to liberate us from these aggressions
and ex-communications, and abstain from promoting what will only harm
our country and people in the long-term, although (some might think) it
might have short-term benefits. We must cleanse our country and our
religion from the filth of oppressive ex-communication and the shedding
of innocent blood.

At this moment in time, there is not one day that we don’t receive
atrocious news of horrendous aggressions committed in Iraq. Every day
tens, and at times, even hundreds of people are hunted down through car
bombings, and in most cases you notice suicidal motives behind these
operations which reveals that it is the job of those who regard
themselves as Muslims and the rest as infidels whose life and wealth are
permissible to them.

This is the end product of the teachings of the school of the Sheikh who
migrated from the Hejaz to Jordan and from there to Iraq. In his
footnotes at some stage in this chapter the author proposes that the
Westerners, especially the Americans, through destructive political,
martial and economic policies and multi –lateral aids to the tyrant
Israel, have been the originators of these oppressions. In another
section of his sayings he goes on to explain where this unruly
ex-communication, which is causing chaos, even inside Saudi Arabia, has
originated from?! And finally he arrives at the conclusion that the
teachings of the Sheikh and his school of thought are the main causes of
these aggressions.

All that violence; ranging from the aggressions by the *Ikhwan group* in
the Najd region and thereafter in the sacred city of Mecca, to other
aggressive operations and bombings elsewhere in different regions of
Saudi Arabia, are the products of the Sheikh's teachings.

He then adds: *"Since those who created these aggressions and bombings,
are not foreigners who have migrated to the Hejaz from other countries,
if we claim they have all received aspirations from the Sheikh's culture
and teachings, we are not far from the truth, and if one refers to their
statements one would surely confess to this fact."*

### A Summary Of The Book "A Missionary Not A Prophet"

*Hasan Ibn Farhan Maleki, in his book*, *"A Missionary, not a Prophet!"*
is mainly concerned with criticising the sayings and beliefs of the
leader of the Wahhabis on the issue of ex-communication of Muslims and
declaring those who have rejected their sayings, as polytheists and
infidels.

In the first chapter he sets off criticising the book *"Kashf
ul-Shubahat"* in a very lucid manner.

In the second chapter he criticisies his other books on the issues of
Tawheed and Polytheism.

In the third chapter he goes on to the most important issue of
ex-communicating the Muslims. He then reveals a great piece of his
contradictions in a scientific manner.

In the fourth chapter he discusses whether his followers followed him in
excommunicating Muslims with ears and eyes shut, or did they engage in
criticising the Sheikh's thoughts?

And finally in the fifth chapter he criticizing the ideas of those
opposing the Sheikh and separates the extremists from the moderates and
aligns himself with the moderates.

And amazingly he states at the end: "*The summary of the discussions is
that the Sheikh has gone the wrong way on the issue of ex-communication.
Confessing this matter, in the face of the reasons that we possess, is
an easy task for the fair-minded. Neither is Islam destroyed by this
confession nor does the sun rise from the West, (its just that a
fallible human commited a mistake)."* [^26]

This criticism will certainly purify this creed from the horrendous and
inhuman aggressions they have been committing in the name of Islam. The
least that will happen is that it will settle the moderate Wahhbis in
place of the extremist Wahhabis.

### The First Chapter: A Critique Of "Kashf Ul-Shubahat"

*Kashf ul-Shubahat* stands amongst the most popular books by the Sheikh.
*Ibn Farhan* finds thirty three significant objections to it and
criticizes them, especially those regarding the issue of
ex-communication. He expresses his amazement as to how the Wahhabi
scholars disregard all these huge mistakes voiced by the Sheikh and pass
by it so easily.

He then adds: ‘If only some of them had questioned just a few of his
mistakes, I wouldn’t have seen the necessity for writing this book, but
what should I do when everybody kept quiet’.

#### Exaggeration And Overstatement About Saints

*Mohammed ben Abdulwahhab* states in the outset of the book *Kashf
ul-Shubahat*: *"Monotheism (Tawheed) is the religion of the prophets
whom Allah has sent to His servants, the first amongst them is Noah
(‘as) the Almighty sent him to his nation at the time when they had
exaggerated about the Saints."*

Thereafter *Ibn Farhan* remarks: The opening to this assertion is
correct. However, it ends erroneously and it is perhaps a prelude to
ex-communication! The Almighty sent Noah (‘a), to summon people towards
the unitary God and to abandon polytheism, because they worshipped idols
called Wadd and Sowa' and so on…Their problem was not confined to just
exaggerating about the Saints. Exaggeration and overstatement can be the
cause for polytheism (or disbelief), but indeed not every overstatement
is polytheism nor does anyone have the right to shed Muslim blood based
on this excuse!

He then goes on to say: ‘I do not claim that the exaggerations made
about Saints and the great ones of religion or some superstitious
rituals are correct, I claim they are wrong but cannot be termed as
blasphemy’.

Some people criticized the Sheikh saying that those whom he
ex-communicated and went to war against and killed, were Muslims who
established prayer, fasted and performed the pilgrimage. He responded
that since they exaggerate about the dignitaries of religion they are
all disbelievers and are even worse than the polytheists of the era of
paganism. [^27]

*Ibn Farhan* is astounded that the opposers of exaggeration, are
themselves given to unbelievable exaggeration about Sheikh *Mohammad ben
Abdulwahhab* by regarding him pure from making any mistake, calling him
"the patriarch of existence", [^28] a term that they don’t even allow to
be used for the Holy Prophet (S).

And in the last critique (the thirty-third critique), he addresses the
Sheikh and states that on page 70 of his book, the only exception that
he has made on the issue of blasphemy (or ex-communication) is of those
who are "reluctant" (unwilling), meaning those who are forced to make a
blasphemous statement. He has then referred to the Qur'anic verse
*"Except he who was compelled"*. *Ibn Farhan* mentions another party
mentioned in the Quran, who rose in denial of some religious matters
(while they believed in the fundamentals of Islam), due to unawareness
and ignorance, or as a result of incorrect understanding of the Qu'anic
verses and narrated traditions. Those people, according to the Quran and
traditions, are excused and are not considered as disbelievers.

He then concludes: ‘One of the shortcomings of the Sheikh's methodology
lies in his procedure of taking hold of one Qur'anic verse or a single
tradition and leaving aside the rest of the verses and traditions, and
this is a very grave mistake.'

### The Second Chapter: A critique of Al-Dorar ul-Sonniyah

In the second chapter of the book, he questions the Sheikh's views in
*Al-Dorar ul-Sonniyah* and points out **forty** mistakes, including the
statement in this book[^29]: ‘none of the scholars of Najd nor the
judges of that region know the meaning of "لا إله إلا الله" (There is no
God but Allah), and they cannot distinguish between the religion brought
by Mohammad (S) and the religion of *Amr ibn Lahi* (the famous idol
worshipper of the era of paganism); they consider the religion of *Amr
ibn Lahi* superior and even the right religion’. As a result, he
declares all scholars, Jurists and Judges of that region polytheists and
infidels.

*Ibn Farhan* then cites the books written about the scholars and the
jurists of this region to show that Sheikh Mohammad was heading in the
wrong direction when ex-communicating Muslims. Amongst the cases that he
raised concerning exaggeration in ex-communication by this extremist
Wahhabi group, are the following two cases:

1) **Ex-communication of the Shi'a**: Sheikh *Mohammad ben Abdulwahhab*
suggests that whoever doubts the infidelity of the Shia is an infidel.
[^30] *Ibn Farhan* goes on to say: ‘This is while Ibn Taymiah, with all
his exaggerations and hostilities towards the Shia regards them as
Mulsims (even though he considers Shias as the people of forbidden
innovations), but says explicitly that they are not infidels
(disbelievrs).’ [^31]

The author then suggests: ‘It was only after these inhuman and
un-Islamic fatwas that the killing of the Shia, who were the ones who
actually laid the foundations for the most developed doctrine of Tawheed
(monotheism) in Islam, began and continues to this day.

2. The Sheikh states: ‘Whoever curses a companion of the Holy Prophet
(whoever it may be) is an infidel! [^32]

***Ibn Farhan Maleki states clearly*****, ‘*****Mo\`awiyah***
**according to the explicit text of** ***Sahih Muslim***[^33]
**commanded his people to curse Imam Ali (‘as) (and for decades, from
the pulpits, speakers cursed Imam Ali (‘as). In spite of this, did the
Shaikh call** ***Mo'awiyah an infidel*****?** [^34]

This Maleki Sunni scholar states: ‘It has been seen that Sheikh
Mohammad, defends himself thus: *"The enemies claim that I
ex-communicate individuals upon suspicion, I regard* *ignorant
individuals who haven’t been provided with proof as infidels. This is a
great calumny. They intend to break up people from the religion of God
and His Messenger."* [^35]

*Ibn Farhan* states: ‘This very claim by the Sheikh is an implicit
ex-communication in relation to those who have not embraced Wahhabism,
since he means that the religion of God and His Messenger, that they
intend to distance the people from, is the creed of Wahhabism.
Therefore, those opposing Wahhabism, disbelieve the religion of God and
His Messenger.’ [^36]

#### Contradiction In The Words Of The Sheikh

*Ibn Farhan* refers to other explicit sayings of the Shaikh and states:
‘There are many faults and errors imputed to the Sheikh which he wards
off himself, while most of them exist in his sayings! He then mentions
twenty-five cases of these imputations with reference to their source
and evidence, including what the Sheikh denies regarding the following:

He considers the fourfold creeds of the Sunnah as void!

Whoever implores the Saints is an infidel!

1) If he finds the power and ability he will demolish the Tomb and the
Holy Shrine of the Prophet (S)! (And akin to the shrines of the Imams of
the household and other dignitaries in ***Baqee***, he will level it to
the ground.)

He regards the visit to the sepulchre of the Prophet (S) as forbidden!

He regards everybody as infidels, except those who follow him!

He has denied many other statements similar to these, while they are
either found explicitly in his books or heard in his speeches, and this
amazing contradiction surprises anyone who goes through his work with an
open mind.

### The Third Chapter: Pursuing His Path

*Hasan Ibn Farhan Maleki,* in the third chapter of his book states:
‘Unfortunately the students and the followers of the Sheikh followed his
path of ex-communication, and decreed many Arab and non-Arab tribes,
many followers of the Islamic creeds, and a group of famous Muslim
scholars, as infidels. [^37]

They decreed the following:

1) Stating blatantly that all the people of Mecca and Medina are
infidels (who at that time had not embraced the creed of Wahhabism).
[^38]

2) Whoever has accepted the call of ***Mohammad Ibn Abdulwahhab*** but
still believes that his father passed away as a Muslim, is an infidel!
He must be forced to repent. Whoever refuses to repent, must be
beheaded! His wealth will be confiscated by the Islamic government's
state treasury! If he has performed Hajj (pilgrimage) prior to this he
must repeat his Hajj, since it was before accepting Wahhabism and he was
then still a polytheist, [^39]

3) The entire Ottoman Empire was infidel, and whoever did not consider
that government as infidel was an infidel. [^40]

4) The Ash'aries were infidels as they were unaware of the meaning of
the two testimonies;[^41] the Mu'tazelies were also infidels. [^42]

5) The withholder of alms (compulsory purifying tax) was an infidel.
[^43]

6) Those who employed non-Muslims in their offices and homes, those who
neglected many religious obligations and performed many of the religious
prohibitions, knew nothing of the two testimonies except for its
pronunciation, were all infidels and apostates! [^44]

*Hasan Ibn Farhan* after mentioning the twenty seven errors that the
students of the Sheikh and his followers had made in ex-communicating
the Muslims, continues to say: *"After all this overindulgence in the
matter of ex-communication whose like you wouldn’t find anywhere, a
group of the Wahhabi scholars pointed their aggressive ex-communicative
attacks towards Sayid Qutb, Mawduodi, Ikhwan ul-Muslimeen and Hizb
ul-Tahrir. It is true that they were afflicted by immoderation in the
political field, but their immoderation did not by any means reach the
immoderation of Wahhabis in all aspects, be it political, theological,
jurisprudential, cultural or social; fairness is indeed lacking here."*
[^45]

He then adds: "Thinking about the previous statements, is there anything
left of the so called 'holy struggle' programme (and the attack against
Muslims) that the Wahhabis have forgotten to mention?" [^46]

And at the end of this discussion he points out that after *Mohammad Ibn
Abdulwahhab* the surge of ex-communication overtook the Wahhabis
themselves, where by some ex-communicated others and captured their
women! He then mentions several of these incidents with reference to the
book *Al-Dorar ul-Sonniyah*.[^47]

He ends this chapter on a hopeful note and states: ‘The son of the
founder of the Wahhabi creed, *Abdullah Ibn Mohammad*, moved to Egypt
after the collapse of "Darieyah" (a town in the Hejaz), and was
transferred from that closed fanatical environment to a more open
environment where he attained some new awareness, resorted to the school
of moderation, denied the decree of ex-communicating different groups of
Muslims due to religious innovations that his father believed in, and
declared that no one could be ex-communicated unless he or she denied
one of the necessities of religion or acted upon a deed which according
to Muslim consensus is a cause for ex-communication. [^48] [^49]

### The Fourth Chapter: The Muslim Viewpoint

In the fourth chapter he speaks of the opponents of the Sheikh who
ex-communicated him (Sheikh) and all the Wahhabis. He then goes on to
justify their case and states: these kinds of ex-communications are of
no value, they must only be admitted as their fallacy (especially
regarding their ex-communications).

In this chapter, he names twenty two people among the Sunni scholars
most of whom were from Najd and Mecca, and some of the scholars of
Damascus, Iraq, Tunis and Morocco, who all stood against the Sheikh, and
some even wrote books denying the sayings of *Mohammad ibn Abdulwahhab.*
[^50] By doing so, he shows that most of his opposition rose from his
own region or were his own relatives!

The Most Important Allegations Against Wahhabi Leaders!
-------------------------------------------------------

*Ibn Farhan* summarizes the main criticism levelled against the Sheikh
by the prominent Sunni scholars, in four main points:

• Ex-communication of Muslims

• Claiming prophet hood (indirectly not specifically)

• Believing in assimilation in God and in Him being an object,

• Denying the miraculous deeds of the Saints and great ones of religion

He then says: ‘The main allegation is the first one which nobody can
deny.’

Thereafter, he quotes from the famous author of the book "Da'wa
al-munawe'in" (دعوی المناوئين), Sheikh *Ahmed Zaini Dahlan*, that:
***"The Wahhabis regard no one as monotheist, except he who follows
every single word of their sayings!"*** [^51]

He quotes another famous scholar, ***Zahawi,*** who said if somebody
asked him what the Wahhabi creed was and what its objective was, he
would say in reply to both questions: "***Ruling all Muslims in the
world as infidels! This short answer is sufficient for these kinds of
questions."***

*Hasan Ibn Farhan* tries to acquit Sheikh of the other three
accusations. However, the first accusation which he has accepted is not
at all a minor accusation, considering the fact that the holy Quran
strictly prohibits accusing other Muslims of infidelity including those
who only pretend to be Muslims:

*"Do not say to someone who offers you peace 'you are not a believer' so
as to attain the worldly life's enjoyable accessories [and to take
possession of his property]."*[^52]

Considering the explicitness of this Holy Verse, is there any room left
for ex-communicating Muslims?!

The Almighty states in another place:

*"Should anyone kill a believer intentionally, his requital shall be
hell to remain in it [forever]; Allah shall be wrathful at him and curse
him and He shall prepare for him a great punishment."*[^53]

This verse sends a shiver down the spine of any true believer;
intimidated by the fire of hell, and it being an eternal punishment
combined with Divine wrath and vengeance, is a description that has not
been mentioned for any of the great sins – except for homicide.

Describing the Divine punishment as eternal – in view of the point that
this great punishment is specifically for dis-believers – shows that the
killers of Muslims will definitely die faithless, and their eternal stay
in hell is certain.

Now think of the status of those who murdered, on baseless excuses, the
believers who established prayer and fasted and performed all the
Islamic rituals, then captured their women and plundered their
belongings. Not one person, but hundreds or even thousands of people
including men, women, infants, old and young were devastated. And they
call it the religion of Islam and the Mohammadi Tawheed and consider
themselves to be the rescuers! "We seek refuge in Allah." Whereas they
are the referent of this Holy Verse:

*"And Satan has made their deeds seem decorous to them thus he has
barred them from the way [of Allah], so they are not guided."* [^54]

Fortunately, many of the followers of this creed have recently noticed
their mistake and now regard the ex-communication of Muslims as a great
sin, even if they are according to them, the people of innovation.
Hopefully, this will cleanse Islam of aggression and terror.

At the end – for a hopeful ending – we will go over a very important
declaration which was recently written and published by a group of
scholars, jurists and traditionists of Saudi Arabia: This declaration
was published in numerous newspapers, but we quote it from the book
"معجم طبقات المتکلمين" (The glossary of the rankings of theologians).

[^1]: – The beauty.

[^2]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ".

[^3]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that Need to be Rectified"
pages 29 & 30 (with slight summarization).

[^4]: – Isthmus period between death and resurrection.

[^5]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that Need to be Rectified" page
37.

[^6]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that Need to be Rectified" page
68.

[^7]: –المجمع الفقهی رابطة العالم الاسلامی .

[^8]: – صحّة مفاهيم کان الناس قد هاموا فيها وزائلها لبس و ابهام. بحث
دقيق لا يقوم له خبط و خلط و تدليس و ابهام أبدی به العلوی المالکی لنا ما
لم تنله من الحذاق أفهام

[^9]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that Need to be Rectified" page
55.

[^10]: –سباب المسلم فسوق و قتاله کفر

[^11]: –مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that Need to be Rectified"
page 181.

[^12]: – Summaries from مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح" ": "Concepts that need to
be Rectified" pages 194-242.

[^13]: – Summaries from the third part of the book مفاهيم يجب أن تصحّح"
": "Concepts that need to be Rectified" pages 243-318.

[^14]: – يَدخُلونَ فـــي دينِ اللهِ أَفواجَاً.

[^15]: – غلاة.

[^16]: – هلکَ فيَّ رجلان: مُحِبٌّ غالٍ و مُبغِضٌ قالٍ – Nahjul-Balaghah,
short saying 117.

[^17]: – غلاة.

[^18]: – داعية و ليس نبياً.

[^19]: – تکفير.

[^20]: – غلاة وهابي.

[^21]: – کشف الشبهات.

[^22]: – کتاب التوحيد.

[^23]: – الدررالسنية.

[^24]: – داعية و ليس نبياً page 28.

[^25]: – داعية و ليس نبياً page 13.

[^26]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" pages 28 and 29.

[^27]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 33 (with summations).

[^28]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 14.

[^29]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 51.

[^30]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 369.

[^31]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 86.

[^32]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 369.

[^33]: – He asked Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas, ‘How come (in spite of my
command) you don’t curse Ali (’as)? Sa'd answered: ‘Because of three
sentences that I heard of the Holy Prophet (S) regarding the
magnificence of Ali (‘as). (He then mentions the three sentences)
mentioned in 'Sahih Muslim' in the section on 'The Virtues of the
Companions', in the chapter on 'The virtues of Ali ibn Abi-Talib', as
the third tradition. For more information on cursing and damning Imam
Ali (‘as) by Mo'awiyah refer to: تاريخ طبری volume 4, pages 52 and 188….

[^34]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 86.

[^35]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 113.

[^36]: – "A missionary not a prophet!" page 86.

[^37]: – In other words they frequently decreed to the infidelity of
others, and dragged down all Muslims under the blade of infidelity.

[^38]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 9, page 285.

[^39]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, pages 138, 143.

[^40]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 429.

[^41]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 1, page 364.

[^42]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 1, page 357.

[^43]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 10, page 177.

[^44]: – "A l-Dorar ul-Sonniyah" Volume 15, page 486.

[^45]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 117.

[^46]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 117.

[^47]: – "A Missionary not a Prophet!" page 123 onwards.

[^48]: – "Al-Dorar ul-Sonniyah", Volume 10 page 244.

[^49]: – "A missionary not a prophet!" page 125.

[^50]: – "A missionary not a prophet!" page 127-133.

[^51]: – "Da'wa al-munawe'in" page 166.

[^52]: –Surah AL-Nisa 4:94.

[^53]: – Surah AL-Nisa 4:93.

[^54]: – Surah AL-Naml 27:24.


