Lesson 10: The Leaders of Heaven and the Status of Some of the Duties and the Levels of Paradise
================================================================================================

The Leaders of Paradise
-----------------------

With regard to the leaders of paradise, the Noble Prophet (S) says:

“O Abu Dharr! Happy are those who are the standard-bearers on the Day of
Resurrection, who hold the flag in front of people and precede them
towards heaven, those are the same people who take precedence over
others in going to the Mosques early in the morning and at other times
[of the day].”

All human beings belonging to every age desire to take precedence over
others. Of course, this competing and contesting is blameworthy if it is
in connection to the world, but competition and taking precedence over
others with regard to the hereafter is not only free of blame, but also
a sign of man’s growth and seeking prosperity. Because the prosperity of
man depends on having intimacy with Allah and if the believers take
precedence over the others in this regard, it is not out of ostentation
but in order to attain bliss.

Emphasis has been laid on this issue in many instances in the Qur’an; in
one of the instances Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَارِعُوا إِلَی مَغْفِرَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّکُمْ وَجَنَّةٍ عَرْضُهَا
السَّمَوَاتُ وَالأَرْضُ أُعِدَّتْ لَلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord; and a garden, the
extensiveness of which is as the heavens and the earth, it is prepared
for those who guard against evil.”***[^1]

In reality, this *ayat* makes known the call of man’s natural
disposition because his basic nature desires his perfection and wants
him to be more perfect than the others.

Natural Disposition and the Search for Perfection
-------------------------------------------------

Without doubt, man yearns for the ultimate perfection and that is in
intimacy with Allah. It is for this reason that he makes use of every
means and resources in order to attain it. But limited perfections are
not man’s ultimate object of desire because they lose their appeal to
higher perfections, and secondly, man gets satiated after attaining his
desires. It is for this reason that they have said that union [or
attainment] is the grave of love, that is to say man cannot be a lover
of limited beauty and goodness but he naturally is a lover of immaculate
perfection and yearns for Allah.

Man’s deepest desire is a divine want, and if the veils of error were
removed from his eyes and he were able to perceive his Beloved, he would
have intimate acts of devotion, like ‘Ali (*‘a*).

Allah states in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... أَلاَ بِذِکْرِ اللهِ تَطْمَئِنُ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… surely by Allah’s remembrance are hearts set at rest.”***[^2]

The term ‘remembrance of Allah’ [*bi-dhikr Allah*] is a monopoly; that
is to say it is only by Allah’s remembrance that hearts are set at rest
and it removes anxiety and worry away and man is terribly wrong if he
imagines that property, wealth, position and status set his heart at
rest. Of course, the Qur’an does not forbid attaining them, but it
states that they do not set man’s heart at rest.[^3]

It has been said that man yearns for ideal perfection and he makes use
of every means and tools; one of the means of attaining spotless
perfection is prayer as an intimate dialogue between an individual and
his Lord and enlivening the mosques. The Prophet (S) states that happy
are those who take precedence and leadership on the Day of Resurrection.
They lead men towards the Garden of eternal bliss and the others fall
behind them in order to find their way to paradise. They are people who
used to go to the mosques before everyone early in the morning and at
other times of the day.

In order to make this comprehensible to the mind, heed ought to be paid
to this issue that one of the qualities of man’s soul is that he gets
motivated once he sees the others trudging the course of goodness and
welfare. The axiom of yielding to patterns and looking up to role models
has been accepted as an indisputable means of edification of
personality. In truth, the model plays the most fundamental role in
man’s way of life.

If man takes precedence at performing good works, he attracts the
attention of other people and as a result, the others too follow his
lead. This matter (yielding to example) is an object of attention for
youths. The older the people grow, the more they desire to be role
models for other human beings, and this feeling is manifested in their
conduct and performance of responsibilities. As a result, the others too
get inspired to do good works.

It is natural that when one man in a community begins to do something,
the others easily follow his lead. For instance, in a religious school,
the others get encouraged by the conduct of a number of people who take
the lead at going to the noon [*zuhr*] prayers. But if some people do
not take leadership, the others do not pay heed to the time of prayer
and to being in the mosque and/or if they pay heed [at all], do not
firmly decide to undertake fulfilling it. This is an expression of that
same spiritual and psychological truth which has been called yielding to
role models.

If man performs works secretly for the sake of not getting contaminated
by sanctimony, his works are good and praiseworthy, but if a person
openly performs a good work in order to encourage others, not only is
his action free from blame, but very valuable and productive because he
discharges his duties not with the intention of showing off but of
motivating others.

In this regard, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَأَنْفَقُوا مِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ سِرًّا وَعَلاَنِيَةً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and spend benevolently out of what we have given them secretly and
openly…”***[^4]

Some people have said that the purpose of spending secretly in the way
of Allah is for man to keep afar from hypocrisy and the purpose of
spending openly is for inspiring others, therefore there is goodness in
every aspect. The work of both the one who prays secretly for the
purpose of keeping afar from sanctimony and that of one who prays openly
in the mosque in order to encourage others is good. In addition to that,
a person who takes the lead in going to the mosque with a sincere
intention and far from hypocrisy and [his action] results in inspiring
them, his reward is twice as much and he will be the standard-bearer on
the Day of Resurrection because his action has opened the way to the
mosque.

The late Ayatullah Mar‘ashi Najafi, may he reside in Allah’s garden of
eternal bliss, was bound to going to the Holy Shrine [of Qum] early in
the morning before the call to prayer [*adhan*]. During the early days
of our religious education, we sometimes used to succeed at going to the
Shrine early in the morning. Sometimes, snow used to fall and with
complete wonder we used to see the late Ayatullah Mar‘ashi sitting
behind the door with his cloak pulled over his head. This was one of his
high and eminent qualities. How much does such conduct encourage others
to do the same? When the religious students used to see a religious
legal authority sitting behind the door of the mosque early in the
morning, they used to get encouraged to be present in the Shrine early
in the morning.

It is proper for us to cite two *hadith*s with regard to the importance
of being present in the mosque because mention has been made about the
importance of taking precedence when going to the mosque.

The Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Verily, there are attendants for the mosques who are companions of the
angels. When they do not attend the mosques on some excuse, they comfort
them and visit them when they get sick and help them whenever they have
need.”[^5]

In another *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Sitting in the mosque to wait for the time of prayer to arrive is
worship. Also, they said that Allah builds two houses in paradise for a
person whose speech is the Qur’an and whose house is the mosque.”[^6]

The Status and Rank of Some Duties
----------------------------------

In continuation of the *hadith* of Abu Dharr, the Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! Prayer is the mainstay of religion and that which flows on
the tongue in remembrance of Allah is more important. Charity erases sin
and a word which is beneficial for the people is more significant than
charity. Fasting extinguishes the fire and the fast of the tongue is
more superb. And the *jihad* (spiritual struggle) is honor and dignity
and the *jihad* of the tongue is more eminent.”

### a) The Status and Rank of Prayer

The Noble Prophet (S) states that prayer is the cornerstone of religion
and that without it religion crumbles, but its invocations and words are
more important and greater than the rest of the works because entreaties
are a manifestation of the devotion and humility of a believing slave
before Allah and also with those implorations the immensity of His mercy
is demonstrated.

It is because of its delicate role in reforming the spiritual and
religious personality of man that prayer has been set forth as the
foundation and linchpin of religion. In reality, prayer embodies man’s
faith and grants perfection to his spiritual identity. It is for this
reason that the verses of the Qur’an and the *hadith*s of the
Infallibles have been granted praiseworthy importance.

The Noble Prophet (S) states in a *hadith*:

“Prayer is the greatest obligatory duty after knowledge of Allah and is
the first thing which will be asked of a slave on the Day of
Resurrection. If it gets accepted, the rest of the works also get
approved and if it does not get consented to, the rest of the works are
disapproved.”[^7]

In connection with the status of *sajdah* (the prostration), Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*) states:

“If the person performing prayers could perceive the mercy of Allah that
encompasses him, he would never raise his head from prostration.”[^8]

In connection with the role of prayer in the purification of the soul,
edification of character and cleansing the psyche of impurities and
corruption, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“If there were in the house of anyone of you a stream and you washed
yourselves five times in it, would any dirt remain on your bodies? One
of the companions said, ‘No’. The Noble Prophet (S) stated, ‘The
similitude of prayer to a flowing river is that whenever a person prays,
his sins are forgiven in the intermittence of two prayers’.”[^9]

### b) The Status and Rank of Fasting

The Prophet (S) has set forth fasting as a shield against the fire
because it is a means of ascending through the spiritual stations, of
man’s growth, and it is a barrier against the Devil.

Mankind possesses a carnal soul which is always pulling him towards
spiritual decadence and losing his divine personality. It is for this
reason that Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“I am afraid of two things for you, one is obeying the carnal soul and
the other is protracted hopes; because following the carnal soul is an
impediment to right and prolonged hopes cause forgetting the
hereafter.”[^10]

Because Allah has love and affection for His slaves, He has provided
them with the means of making up for the oppression that they have
committed against themselves and has caused them to be driven away from
Allah’s divine presence.

One of those means is fasting which cleanses the soul of the effects of
its ugly works and brings about patience and endurance against hardships
and sins.

Regardless of the importance of fasting and its role in
self-edification, special reward has been designated for fasting on some
of the days and months; amongst them fasting in the month of Sha‘ban and
Rajab discharging of which was resolutely done by the saints [*awliya’*]
of religion and the great scholars.

### c) The Status and Rank of Jihad

*Jihad* and striving in the way of Allah is a cause of honor and dignity
and has a lively role in the protection and preservation of religion and
the people. If it were not for the *jihad* and spiritual struggle,
religion and its beliefs would have been exterminated because
materialists and opportunists, in order to attain their worldly desires,
do not relinquish their hostility and fight against religion.

The spiritual wars of the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah have been the
reason why religion has remained preserved from their danger and we are
benefiting from the fruits of those wars today. It is for this reason
that the ways of life of the holy soldiers and fighters shine and they
have been the object of Allah’s mercy and grace.

With regard to them, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَسْتَوِی الْقَاعِدُونَ مِنْ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ غَيْرُ أُوْلی
الضَّرَرِ وَالْمُجَاهِدُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ بِأَمْوالِهِمْ
وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ فَضَّلَ اللهُ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ بأَمْوَالِهِمْ
وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ عَلَی الْقَاعِدِينَ دَرَجَةً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The holders back from among the believers, not having any injury [or
valid excuse], and those who strive in Allah’s way with their property
and their persons are not equal, Allah has made the strivers with their
property and their persons to excel the holders back a high
degree…”***[^11]

The point which has been emphasized by the Noble Prophet (S) is that
what comes out of the mouth cannot come out of the other limbs and
organs of the body and what is built by the tongue is higher than what
is built by prayer, fasting and the *jihad*, whether what is uttered by
the tongue is in the form of enjoining the right and forbidding the evil
as has been mentioned in the *hadith*s that forbidding the evil and
enjoining the right is higher than the holy *jihad*, or is in the form
of teaching and educating others; because guiding an ignorant man
towards right is higher than any other spiritual striving [*jihad*].

Likewise, they make us understand that performing recommendable works
not only discharging time-consuming and long acts of worship but light
recommendable works can be fulfilled by the tongue too without expending
a lot of capital, effort and time. Therefore, the value of the tongue
ought to be known and protected from pollution and contamination so that
man’s works are not performed in vain.

The Differences of Believers in Their Enjoying the Different Levels of Paradise
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With regard to the different levels of the Garden of eternal bliss, the
Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! The distance between the different levels of paradise is
like that between the earth and the sky. A dweller of paradise looks
above himself and then his eyes meet with a ray of light so bright that
it makes him blind, and he asks what light that is. It will be said to
him that this is the light of your brother so and so. He will protest
that we all used to perform worthy works with brother so and so, why has
he been accorded superiority over me? It will be said to him that
brother so and so had superiority over you in performing good works.
Then, contentment will be placed in his heart and he will become pleased
with his station.”

It is surprising that they do not tell that dweller of paradise that
your brother’s works were more than yours, but tell him that his works
were better; that is to say, the quality of his works was higher and he
used to have an attentive heart during his acts of devotion and prayer
and sincerity. It is natural that man ought to regret when he sees his
friends taking precedence over him. If man lags behind the others in the
world, he can manage to make up for his lagging behind, but there is no
opportunity for compensation and discharging duties in the hereafter,
that is why punishment and regret in the hereafter is more regretful
than anything else, but despite that there is a ground for regret in the
dwellers of the Garden of eternal bliss, Allah does not let them get
afflicted by remorse. This is a well-kept secret whose explanation is
difficult for us.

Now the question which arises is how come the dwellers of paradise do
not get afflicted by remorse despite seeing their friends taking
precedence over them? In this regard, a metaphor has been narrated from
the Prophet Jesus (S) in the Gospel of Barnabas that he stated, “In this
world no short man desires to wear long clothes and no tall man desires
to wear short clothes.”

It can be gathered from this simile that every one in the Garden of
eternal bliss gets contented with what they have earned and do not
expect more than their stations and in reality perceive the rank that
they have attained as befitting to them. When he sees a number of
people, like the prophets (S), residing in a higher station than his, he
conceives their rank as befitting to them and perceives their station as
a long wide dress for his stature.

The dwellers of paradise get freed from ugliness and filth before their
death and in the limbo [*barzakh*], and attain the perfection that they
rightfully deserve. It is for this reason that every person gets
contented with what they have earned and Allah grants him peaceful
contentment.

[^1]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:133.

[^2]: Surat al-Ra‘d 13:28.

[^3]: Shahid Mutahhari, Insan-e Kamil (the Perfect Man), pp. 94-96.

[^4]: Surat al-Ra‘d 13:22.

[^5]: Mustadrik al-Wasa’il, vol. 1, p. 358.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Tafsir Abu al-Futuh, vol. 1, p. 103.

[^8]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 605.

[^9]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 7.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 419.

[^11]: Surat al-Nisa 4:95.


