Lesson 11: The Importance and Role of Fear and Sorrow (1)
=========================================================

This section of the Noble Prophet’s (S) advices is related to fear and
sorrow. It seems that the relationship between this section and the
previous sections lies in the fact that once man has planned to devote
his life to worship and servitude of Allah, which is that same real
perfection, he needs means and tools which can help him prepare better
for his movement towards perfection.

In order for decision and will power to appear in man, special
pre-requisites and basics have to be fulfilled. (In man’s soul
conception and affirmations and spiritual states like feelings and
emotions prepare the ground for will power and decision.) Therefore, if
those pre-requisites are properly used once they are met, or after their
being fulfilled, a suitable opportunity for man’s advancement towards
perfection is said to have been made available.

All too often, man desires something but mere desiring does not cause
him to resolve to take action, but sometimes spiritual states appear
which impel him to take action and advancement; in reality, these
spiritual states bring valuable opportunities into appearance.

Fear and Sorrow and Abstinence from Sin
---------------------------------------

One of the spiritual states which impels man to take action and becomes
a strong incentive for abstaining from sin is fear and sorrow. The two
greatly help man to come to himself, make the most of his time and not
use it in pursuit of vain and futile activities. Of course, not every
kind of fear and sorrow is praiseworthy and motivates man to search and
work. Sorrow which causes man to get affected by dejection and to quit
everything leaving him with neither the vigor to worship nor the energy
to work is blameworthy and likewise fear which causes the termination of
man’s hope and leads to despondency in such a way that man too gets
pessimistic about himself is blameworthy.

Not only do some of the fears and sorrows not inspire man to spiritual
journeying to Allah but become its hindrances and impediments, like the
fears and sorrows which occur with regard to the world; one loses an
amount of money and they are ever after gloomy and sorrowful as to the
cause of their loss. Even in prayer one is thinking about that lost
money! Or fear which one has with regard to losing his property and
opportunities; man fears that he will lose his post and position. These
kinds of fears and sorrows become a hindrance in spiritual wayfaring to
Allah.

Of course, sometimes it occurs that sorrow with regard to issues of the
world is related to Allah, like when an affliction befalls man and they
fear that it might be divine requital. It is natural that this kind of
fear and dread will become a source of motion for them. Or one becomes
heartbroken at losing some [worldly] favors and a cause of their
awakening that they ought not to fall in love with the world. Therefore,
it is likely that fear of losing worldly blessings can indirectly
motivate man to motion in the direction of eschatological and spiritual
perfection.

Allah, the Exalted, states in two verses that once We send prophets
(*‘a*) to the people, We afflict them with hardships and adversities:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا اَرْسَلْنَا في قَرْيَةٍ مِنْ نَبِيِّ اِلاَّ أَخَذْنَا أَهْلَهَا
بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَضَّرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send a prophet in a town but We overtook its people
with distress and affliction in order that they might humble
themselves.”***[^1]

And in another verse, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا إِلی أُمَمٍ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ فَأَخَذْنَاهُمْ
بِالْبَأْسَاءِ وَالضَّرَّاءِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَضَرَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We sent apostles to nations before you, then We seized
them with distress and affliction in order that they might humble
themselves.”***[^2]

It is because of His grace for them that Allah afflicts His slaves with
hardships and problems in order for it to become a cause of alertness
and vigilance for them and awakening from heedlessness so as to acquire
more preparedness for accepting right. Because until man is intoxicated
with pleasure and elation and drowned in prosperity, he lacks the
preparedness to accept right and what is related to the hereafter.

Fear and Sorrow and the Spiritual Ascension and Growth of Man
-------------------------------------------------------------

It has been said that fear and dread with regard to matters of the
hereafter causes spiritual ascendance, perfection and prosperity. In
this regard, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ‌ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَی النَّفْسَ عَن الْهَوَی \*
فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and
forbids the soul from low desires; then surely the Garden—that is the
abode.”***[^3]

With regard to the role of piety in keeping man away from sins and fear
of Allah, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“O creatures of Allah! Certainly fear of Allah has saved the lovers of
Allah from unlawful items gave His dread to their hearts till their
nights are passed in wakefulness and their days in thirst.”[^4]

Elsewhere, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) introduces fear of Allah as a sign of good
opinion with regard to Allah:

“The most fearful of Allah is the one who holds good thoughts about
him.”[^5]

The Difference between Fear and Sorrow
--------------------------------------

Sorrow occurs in circumstances once favor has been divested of man or
when harm is directed at him and causes grief and contrition. It is
natural that this condition is related to a matter which happened in the
past; for instance, man has done an indecent action which resulted in
bad effects, one has said bad words which resulted in the disgrace and
defamation of someone else and is remorseful as a result of it. Or, he
had capital from which he could have benefited enormously but has lost
it. In any case, sorrow and grief overtake man once he loses
opportunities or he is deprived of blessings and/or calamities befall
him.

Fear occurs with regard to the occurrences and matters which will occur
in the future: he fears that an ordeal will befall him, an affliction or
misfortune will be directed at him, and/or a blessing will be taken away
from him. In reality, fear and sorrow are two similar qualities of the
soul whose adjuncts are different; one is related to the past and the
other is connected to future.

For the reason that danger always exists in this world, the being of
fear in man is natural because man is an entity that is prone to injury,
and there is always the possibility of his health, life and ease and
security falling in danger.

The difference between a believer and a unbeliever lies in the fact that
the believer does not have an autonomous opinion about the common causes
[or ordinary means] and believes that everything springs from Allah, for
this reason he fears Allah but a nonbeliever does not conceive Allah,
someone in whose hands all the sovereignty lies, and maintains that
there are autonomous common causes [or ordinary means]. Of course, in
the same way which the believer fears Allah because of conceiving all
the authority in Him, it is only in Allah that he puts his faith for the
reason that he does not believe in an intermediary role other than
Allah.

It has been recorded in a *hadith* that:

“Allah subdues the others for a person who is Allah-fearing and He fills
with fear everyone who is not afraid of Him.”[^6]

Once a believer has gathered that all the means lie in Allah’s hands and
all the sovereignty of the world belongs to Him, he does not perceive
any autonomy for others save Allah but only reveres Allah because he has
been relying on Allah and fears only Him and day by day his faith gets
increased and in the end Allah grants him so much power that he fears
none save Allah and the others get overcome by him. He is inflexible in
the face of falsehood and discharges whatever obligation he has
diagnosed. But people do not fear someone who does not venerate Allah
and they compromise with other people in order to safeguard their
position and try to gratify others.

The natural disposition of man is such that whenever he is happy and
overjoyed with the world and is busy with himself, he lags behind in
paying attention to Allah and spiritual matters. It is for this reason
that in the Qur’an this drunken ecstasy is castigated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِنْ أَذَقْنَاهُ نَعْمَاءَ بَعْدَ ضَرّآءَ مَسَّتْهُ لَيَقُولَنَّ
ذَهَبَ السَّيِّأَتُ عَنِّي إِنَّهُ لَفَرَحٌ فَخُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if We make him taste favor after distress has afflicted him, he
will certainly say, ‘The evils are gone away from me. Most surely, he is
exulting, boasting.”***[^7]

Castigating the world, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“… What is your condition? You feel satisfied with what little you have
secured from this world while much of the next world of which you have
been deprived does not grieve you. The little of this world which you
lose pains you so much so that it becomes apparent in your faces, and in
the lack of endurance over whatever is taken away from you; as if this
world is your permanent abode, and as though its wealth would stay with
you for good.”[^8]

Opposite to this merrymaking and joyousness is sorrow and sadness about
the past and dread in regard to the future which make man inclined
towards obedience, worship and devotion to Allah. It is for this reason
that these two psychological mentalities and emotions have been hailed,
as the import of some of the traditions impart [to us] that Allah grants
favor upon a community amongst whom there is a sorrowful man.
Essentially, people who used to derive benefit from the directions and
the divine invitations of the prophets (*‘a*) and saints [*awliya’*] of
Allah were people who held fear of Allah in their hearts.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... إِنَّمَا تُنْذِرُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ بِالْغَيْبِ
وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلوةَ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You warn only those who fear their Lord in secret and keep up
prayer…”***[^9]

The invitation and instruction of the Prophets (S) are ineffective in
people who do not fear Allah, as Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... سَوآءٌ عَلَيْهِمْ ءَأَنْذَرْتَهُمْ أَمْ لَمْ تُنُذِرْهُمْ لا
يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely those who disbelieve, it being alike to them whether you warn
them, or do not warn them, will not believe.”***[^10]

### The notion of fear of Allah

Man fears something which harms and poses danger for him. Now what is
the purport of fear of Allah, the Merciful, who does not intend to harm
His slaves? It can be said, in general, that in reality man’s fear
springs from danger that will be directed at him and contingently of
someone who will direct that harm at him. When man fears his enemy, it
is basically his foe’s torture and injury which he fears and his fear of
his adversary is by accident.

From the material aspect, when man believes that control of the cosmos
and its causes lies in Allah’s hands, his fear of Allah denotes
apprehension of nature’s wrath and worldly calamities because he knows
that once he becomes an object of Allah’s anger, nature and its material
causes will be wrathful to him and consequently earthquakes and floods
and the rest of the heavenly and earthly tribulations will be directed
at him for the reason that nature’s anger is derived from the wrath of
Allah.

It can be gathered from the Noble Prophet’s (S) sayings in this section
of the *hadith* that sorrow and fear are desirable once its domain
develops from volitional premises and reflection and meditation and
later on stimulate man to move along the path of Allah and perfection;
not that every fear and sorrow ought to be desirable.

Grief and sorrows which crush man [by destroying his self-confidence and
vigor] and impedes him from working and living is not desirable. It
occupies him when he wants to study, and during prayer the worries of
this world hinder him from being absorbed with Allah. These [kinds of]
sorrows and woes are not only undesirable but are robbers.

Some people who are cowards lose their peace of mind and ease if they
perceive a possibility that danger will be directed at them, even if
that likelihood is meager. This kind of fear is worthless. Fear and
sorrow has value when it leads to man’s spiritual progression. With
these expositions, the connection between fear and sorrow and obedience
and devotional servitude to Allah becomes obvious and that all too often
man derives the best benefit from these two states in order to attain
his perfection and bliss.

The World Is a Prison for a Believer and Paradise for an Infidel
----------------------------------------------------------------

For the purpose of bringing about the conditions for fear and sorrow and
clarifying these two, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! The world is prison for a believer and paradise for an
infidel, no believer turns his night into morning save with grief.”

Once this feeling that he is in prison has been enlivened in man, he
does not anticipate merrymaking [in this world] and does not think about
being preoccupied with the pleasures of this world. He [only] derives
benefit from the blessings of this world to the degree of gaining enough
ability for spiritual journeying. He thanks Allah after deriving benefit
from every blessing and attaining every gratification.

In contrast [to the believer], the world is paradise for an unbeliever,
because he can strive to attain his comfort and satisfaction as long as
he is in this world and if luxury and pleasure ever occur for him, it is
in this world and he will be entangled in the requital of Allah on the
Day of Resurrection for the ugly works which he perpetrated in this
world. The punishment and wrath of Allah is so intense that the world,
in spite of all its problems, is [still] paradise for him!

There is a famous narrative that a poor and sickly Jew approached Imam
al-Hasan (*‘a*), who was dressed in costly clothes and mounted on a
horse, and said, “Your grandfather stated that the world is a jail for a
believer and a heaven for a nonbeliever. Now for who is the world a
paradise, for you who are mounted on a horse with magnificence and
glory, or for me who is poor and sick? With all the encumbrances and
hardships, the world is hell for me, not paradise!’

Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) stated, “If you knew what hard punishment Allah has
in store for you, you would understand that the world, in this same
state that you are, is paradise. In contrast, if you would perceive what
stations Allah has kept in store for us, you would understand that
[even] if the whole world were given to us, it would be nothing more
than prison.”

Once the world is a jail for a believer, it is natural that he is
sorrowful because prison is not a place of joyousness.

It is worthy of mention that commendation of sorrow in this *hadith*
does not imply that every sorrow is praiseworthy and that man has to try
to be sad all the time. It is not feasible to deduce such a general and
common connotation [from the above statements in regard to sorrow]. It
is doubtless that every point which is mentioned in such kind of
admonitions is restricted and its scope is limited; but with the help of
research and acquaintance with the words of Allah and of the Infallible
Imams (*‘a*), one ralizes that in what instances comprehensive and
general judgments become limited.

Meditation about Hell Is a Cause of Fear and Sorrow for a Believer
------------------------------------------------------------------

In connection to the reasons for a believer’s sorrow, the Noble Prophet
(S) states:

“With regard to the fact that Allah has given the news that he will cast
man into hell and has not promised him to release him from there, why
ought not a believer to be sorrowful?”

One of the causes of fear and sorrow in man, especially a believer, is
contemplation about the unequivocal promise of Allah that all people
will enter hell and in this connection the Noble Prophet (S) prepares
the ground for sorrow by mentioning this point.

In this regard, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ مِنْکُمْ اِلاَّ وَارِدُهَا کَانَ عَلَی رَبِّكَ حَتْمًا
مَقْضِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there is none of you but shall come to it, this is an
unavoidable decree of your Lord.”***[^11]

A believer has faith in the Qur’an and the explicit judgment of Allah
that he will enter heaven and no one has the guarantee of being taken
out of hell. Yes, those who are an object of Allah’s grace and favor,
and have been successful at discharging Allah’s duties, will be released
from hell but they do not know whether they belong to that group or not.
This very thought is enough for them [to become fearful and sorrowful].
He does not know what his fate will be; for this reason joyousness and
happiness are meaningless to him and this thought and sorrow restrains
him from heedlessness.

This apprehension and anxiety prompts man to come to themselves and
desert merrymaking and partying and ponder about his destination. Of
course, there are also other causes and factors in the world which
result in man’s sorrow and sadness, like being affected by illnesses and
calamities. Or that a man’s rights are violated and they are not able to
get justice done; in this connection, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“A believing man is confronted with illnesses, encumbrances, unforeseen
hardships and oppression, but no one helps him. For this reason, he asks
Allah, the Exalted, for help and reward and compensation.”

Even if the causes and factors which give rise to sorrow are countless,
some sorrow which arises from some of them is not so worthwhile and
plays no role in a believer’s self-building and edification of character
because these kinds of woes also come to pass for others. Sorrow and
grief is very desirable when it arises from a believer’s knowledge that
he is likely not to be released from hell once he enters it.

In continuation, the Prophet (S) states:

“A believer departs from the world in a sorrowful state, but he is led
towards the ease and grace of Allah once he departs.”

As has been said, until a believer is in this world, he is faced with
worries and woes as a result of which he gets sad and grieves and/or
gets despondent when he thinks about his pre-destination and looks at
the shortcomings of his past. Therefore, that time when he leaves this
world which is entirely filled with encumbrances and sorrow towards the
eternal world and the proximity of right is when his sadness and sorrow
comes to an end and that’s when he gets happy and joyous.

“O Abu Dharr! Allah has not been worshiped in the same way as prolonged
sorrow.”

A slave who is always afraid of Allah and has been patient in the face
of hardships has been more devoted to Allah than everyone else.

It is natural that once man was fearful and sorrowful with regard to his
destination, he supplicates and prays to the Divine Threshold and
consequently he cleanses his inside of impurities and sin. Likewise, he
engages in more worthy worship accompanied by more wakefulness and
vigilance and purity of heart is a precondition for the acceptance of
prayer. Therefore, sorrow and grief is itself worship because it makes
man attentive to his position of servitude and the greatness of his
Lord.

Now that the discussion has come this far, there is room for us to cite
some *hadith*s regarding the state and station of a believer at the time
of his death and meeting Allah, the Merciful. It has been recorded in a
*hadith* that at the time of a believer’s death, two angels say to him:

“O friend of Allah! Do not be sorrowful or fearful and receive the glad
tidings of paradise and rejoice. Fear and sorrow will not affect you and
you are not deserving of that. Verily Allah, the Exalted, has willed to
free you from every pain and punishment and make you partake of the
sweetness of Allah’s mercy. Verily, hell is closed over you and you will
never enter hell at all.”[^12]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states;

“My friend and brother, the Prophet of Allah, said to me, ‘A person who
is happily looking forward to meeting Allah and not to be rejected by
Him ought to choose you to be his guardian and a person who gets happily
anxious to meet Allah and for Allah to be pleased by him should love
your son al-Hasan, and a person who is gladly looking forward to meeting
Allah without being fearful must love your son al-Husayn.”[^13]

[^1]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:94.

[^2]: Surat al-An‘am 6:42.

[^3]: Surat al-Nazi‘at 79:40-41.

[^4]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 353, sermon [khutbah] 113, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 887.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 406.

[^7]: Surat Hud 11:10.

[^8]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 350, sermon [khutbah] 111, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^9]: Surat Fatir 35:18.

[^10]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:6.

[^11]: Surat Maryam 19:71.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 21, hadith 205.

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 27, p. 107, hadith 81.


