Lesson 12: The Importance and Role of Fear and Sorrow (2)
=========================================================

The greatest blessing which Allah has granted to us is the gift of Islam
and the guardianship of the *Ahl al-bayt* (*‘a*). Under the auspices of
the guidelines and directives of that Pure Household, colossal treasures
of their advices and knowledge have been transmitted to us with the help
of the strenuous efforts of the great scholars over the past fourteen
centuries. The least gratitude we can express concerning this great
favor is study and research of these invaluable hoards of knowledge and
making practicable use of them and increasing awareness of them. It is
under the auspices of the guardianship of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and
their directives that we get led from the darkness of ignorance and
unawareness to the light of knowledge and awareness; as we read in the
Jami‘ah Supplication:

“Thanks to your leadership and custodianship, Allah made us know the
knowledge and truths of the religion and set right our corrupt worldly
affairs…”[^1]

The luminous advices of the Noble Prophet (S) are a clear example of
their instructions. There is room for us to derive benefit from these
advices and recommendations in order to attain the prosperity of this
world and the hereafter because Islam and its instructions are the best
prescription that secures man’s worldly and eschatological prosperity
and all his material and psychological needs.

Beneficial and Valuable Knowledge
---------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Whoever imparts knowledge which does not cause weeping has
passed on fruitless knowledge, because Allah has thus described the
scholars in the Qur’an, ***‘Surely, those who are given the knowledge
before it fall down on their faces, making obeisance when it is recited
them’*****.”**

Islam is a comprehensive and complete school of thought which, by
inviting man to perfection, aims at training and instructing him in
social and ethical aspects and other prospects. Man attains perfection
once he counterbalances all the academic, ethical and evaluative aspects
and angles. Islam grants the same value to ethical and spiritual issues
to the same extent that it grants to knowledge, expertise, independent
reasoning and Islamic jurisprudence and law and a perfect man thrives
for growth in the academic and jurisprudential aspects as much as he
flourishes in the ethical aspects, too.

Unfortunately, sometimes attending to academic issues prevents us from
paying heed to ethical issues, whose worth is not less than that of
academic matters. In the same way that attending to social issues makes
man heedless of spiritual and ethical issues. Man gets so immersed in
social and official duties that he does not find an opportunity to
engage in himself and probe into his ethical needs. In order for us not
to get proud and heedless, sometimes it is necessary to pay heed to
ethical and spiritual issues, too.

This section of the *hadith*s depends on this point that if Allah has
granted us knowledge, He wants us to pay heed to ethical matters too
because if we only attend to academic issues and get negligent of
ourselves, we will get afflicted by ethical deviations such as laxity
and egotism.

Some values have been mentioned in the Qur’an which unfortunately have
been forgotten in our society [today], even though some people pay heed
to them, but still it is not to the extent of these values finding their
way to the social scene. This is in spite of the fact that the Qur’an
believes those qualities and values to be attributes of devoted
worshippers and the scholars. One of those attributes and qualities is
fear of Allah and the state of supplication and lamentation.

Perhaps the reason for stressing the quality of sorrow and grief and
humility is for the reason of setting the personality of a believer in
equilibrium, especially an intellectual, because knowledge and awareness
have a high station and are the most eminent values for man after piety.
It is natural that the one who has attained knowledge becomes honored
and respected in society and this itself gives birth to pride and vanity
and naturally the academic is faced with the danger of corruption.

The divine law [*shar‘*] of Islam, in order to obstruct the scholar from
egotism and self-importance and setting his personality balance,
recommends him to humility, yielding before Allah and weeping and
wailing, so that the higher he rises in social position, the smaller and
humbler he perceives himself. This is the same thing that Imam al-Sajjad
(*‘a*) requests from Allah on noble moral traits and acts pleasing to
Allah:

“O Allah! Bless Muhammad and his Household, raise me not a single degree
before the people without lowering me to the same extent in myself and
bring about no outward exaltation for me without an inward abasement in
myself to the same measure…”[^2]

With regard to what has been cited, the Prophet (S) states to Abu Dharr
that if your knowledge does not give rise to humility and modesty and
does not bring forth crying in you, know that that knowledge is not
beneficial to you. Knowledge is beneficial and rewarding which adds to
man’s yielding before his Lord. As Allah describes the intellectuals in
the Qur’an that when the divine verses are recited to them, they at once
fall prostrating on the ground and make humble entreaties and
supplications [to their Lord]. This is a sign of man’s submissiveness to
Allah.

Even if it is considered an outward act but still it arises from the
transformation of the heart and inside; until man’s heart has not become
sorrowful and man has not become humble in his heart, the state of
crying does not come about in man.

In continuation of the *hadith*, the Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! Every person can make himself cry because of fear of Allah
and not every person can make his hearts acquainted with sorrow and
force himself to cry because a hard heart is far from Allah; but they do
not perceive this denotation.”

As has previously been mentioned, the crying which has been recommended
in the *hadith*s, one of which is this *hadith*, is weeping as a result
of fear of being deprived of the prosperity of the hereafter and getting
polluted by sin and/or lamenting because of spiritual deprivations and
due to the absence of the Imam of the Age—may Allah hasten his
reappearance—and higher than all these is lamentation because of
deprivation from the beatific vision of Allah [*liqa’ Allah*].

Those who are lovers of Allah and cognition of the divine guardianship
weep as a result of fear of being deprived of the beatific meeting with
Allah, in the same way that Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states in *Du‘a’
al-Kumayl*:

“I am at crossroads O my Allah O my Master! I could bear your fire with
patience, but how can I bear separation from Thee!”

If it is not possible for someone to cry, then at least one ought to
inculcate his hearts with topics that cause sorrow and/or meditate upon
his spiritual privations and reflect upon his sins in order to make his
hearts grieved. If his heart still does not become sorrowful, then he
ought to at least dissemble to be anguished. If sadness does not occur
for someone and he was always overjoyed and pompous, he gets deprived of
Allah’s mercy.

Of course, it is to be taken for granted that every person who has a
state of weeping and wailing is close to Allah, because it is also
possible for the hypocrites to attain this state as a result of causing
and maintaining certain feelings in themselves in order to quickly
become sad and start crying. Opposed to that, it cannot be asserted that
whoever does not get sad and does not cry is stone-hearted and far from
Allah.

Security and Peace in Paradise Are a Product of Fear and Dread of Allah in the World
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Allah states, ‘I do not mix two fears and also two
securities in [any] one of my slaves. If he were secure in this world, I
will scare him in the next world. If he were afraid of me in this world,
I will make him secure in the next world’.”

Being secure from divine machinations is a cause of becoming polluted by
sin because once man perceives himself at liberty to do whatever he
fancies and has no fear and apprehension whatsoever, he has no qualms
about committing sin. It is natural that feeling safe in the world—which
causes being polluted by deviations and sin—goes with insecurity and
punishment; in this regard Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَنْ طَغَی \* واثَرَ الْحَيَوةَ الدُّنْيا \* فَاِنَّ
الْجَحِيمَ هِيَ الْمَأوَی
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then as for him who is inordinate, and prefers the life of this
world, then surely the hell, that is the abode.”***[^3]

The Prophet’s (S) remark in this section is expressive of the fact that
man can do something to bring about fear of Allah in his heart. After
man has comprehended that fear of Allah is desirable and results in the
attainment of the hereafter, the question arises as to how it is
possible to cause fear and dread in oneself? In response to this
question, it can be said that this state arises in man by making some of
the necessary preparations and paying heed to some of the issues:

Sometimes man knows certain things but because they do not pay heed to
those known facts, his faith and knowledge are dormant and faint-colored
and an individual becomes negligent and in the end that knowledge and
belief does not produce its effects. But every time a person pays heed
to the causes giving birth to fear and whenever he tries to pay
attention to that fear, his fear and dread increase and affect his
behavior.

The other point is that man can attain a position where he concurrently
combines sorrows and raptures. Weak people cannot have sorrow and
happiness at the same time. They have either happiness and delight or
sorrow at a time. Once the soul gets stronger and more perfect, it is
possible that at one time, he becomes happy from one point of view and
from the other perspective gets sad and sorrowful, and bit by bit
attains a level where as a result of the perfection of the heart and
soul, he muster in himself kinds of sorrows and raptures in the same way
that the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah used to gather in themselves
different kinds of fears and sorrows and raptures and hopes. People who
have achieved those stations have different spiritual states
simultaneously and can manage to produce the different effects and
conditions in themselves.

The Forgiveness of Sins Is a Result of Fear of Allah
----------------------------------------------------

In connection with the fruits of fear of Allah, the Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! On the Day of Resurrection, the sins of a believing slave
will be shown, he will say, ‘I was scared of the consequences of this
action.’ As a result of this, his sins will get forgiven.”

We have so far understood the importance of fear of Allah and have known
its role in giving aid to man in his journeying towards Allah. In regard
to this matter the Prophet (S) hints at some of the benefits and profits
of fearing Allah in order to produce or strengthen in us the motivation
of bringing about fear. He states that one of the benefits of fear of
Allah is forgiveness and remission of sins.

In general, every individual can have two conditions:

1. At the time of committing sin, he had no fear of the consequences of
his action, and enjoyed deriving gratification from his sins in
relaxation and peace of mind and without any worry and anxiety. Such a
condition results in being encouraged to sin more and as a result
adamant persistence at perpetrating that sin and the end result is the
bad end for man.

2. At the moment of perpetrating sin, he is fearful of Allah and his end
and destination. He fears to die before succeeding at repentance. This
fear and dread causes a decrease of pleasure at the time of committing
sin and consequently leads to repentance and the forgiveness of sins.

It is natural that on the Day of Resurrection, man will be held
accountable for his sins, and if that sin has not been compensated for
and amended, and has not even been repented for, because if he had
repented he would have been forgiven, he will be led towards hell. But
because Allah’s slave was fearful and dreadful in the world, they say:
“O Lord! I was scared of the consequences of my sin at the time of
committing sin.” As a result of this, their sin will be forgiven.
Therefore, if man is afraid of Allah with regard to his sin, the hope is
that he will be forgiven on the Day of Resurrection.

Fear of Allah causes a reduction of sin and man’s wakefulness and
vigilance and is itself a cause of warning against negligence in man at
the time of deviation and error. It is for this reason that the fearful
and dreadful of Allah have been praised and a promise of reward has been
promised for fear of Allah.

With one brief overview at the verses of the Qur’an, we arrive at this
conclusion that the differences of the levels of fear are related to the
levels of man’s knowledge and cognition; that is to say, wise people,
amongst them the Infallible Imams (*‘a*), have a higher level of fear of
Allah and the rest of the people are at a lower level. The Qur’an
recites two adjuncts for fear and dread:

1. Fear of the presence of Allah.

2. Fear of divine punishment.

In *Surat* *Ibrahim*, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنُسْکِنَنَّکُم الأَرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ ذَلِکَ لِمَنْ خَافَ مَقَامِي
وَخَافَ وَعِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most surely, We will settle you in the land after them; this is
for him who fears standing in My presence and who fears My
threat.”***[^4]

In this verse, both fear of Allah and dread of divine punishment have
been mentioned. The highest position of fear is fear of Allah’s
presence.

The deceased ‘Allamah Tabataba’i states, “Fear of Allah denotes dread of
Allah’s punishment that results from unbelief and sin and its requisite
is that man’s acts of worship have been performed for release from
divine retribution, not worship solely for Allah. This is the worship of
slaves who devote themselves to their Master as a result of fear of
punishment.

Likewise, some people devote themselves to Allah out of desire for
divine reward and payment, and this kind of worship has acquired the
name ‘worship of the traders’. But fear of the divine presence is other
than fear of divine retribution. This fear arises from a feeling of
smallness and abjectness in the face of Allah’s greatness and His divine
realm, and is a fruit of humility and lowliness in the face of the honor
and sovereignty of Allah.

“In reality, worship and servitude is [done] as a result of fear of the
divine presence and with the denotation of humility and homage, not
because of fear of divine retribution and/or as a result of coveting
divine reward and payment, and this sincere worship only takes place for
Allah. Therefore, people who fear the divine presence of Allah are the
purified and fearful in the face of the majesty of Allah.”[^5]

Criticizing Dependence on Good Works
------------------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) reproaches a person who performs sin because of
being confident of his good works, and states:

“O Abu Dharr! A man performs good works and by putting his confidence in
it, commits sins and perceives sin as light in comparison to his good
works, such a person gets agitated when he goes to the divine presence
of Allah. Opposite to him is a man who commits sin and is fearful and
dreadful of divine retribution, such a person will have a free
conscience on the Day of Resurrection.”

The criteria of acceptance or lack of acceptance of works cannot be
measured by outward criteria but acceptance and lack of acceptance of
works is connected to conditions which all too often man does not manage
to compute.

Therefore, no one can be sure of the approval of his works. In addition
to that, surety of the acceptance of acts of worship gives birth to
self-conceit in man, to the extent that it is possible to contaminate
himself with venial sins vis-à-vis the good works which he has committed
on the pretext that minor sins are nothing in comparison to the good
works which he has discharged heedless of the fact that firstly
confidence in the approval of his acts of devotion was misplaced,
because oftentimes his works might not be accepted, secondly not paying
heed to venial sins is itself an unpardonable sin. That man feels safe
and assured as a result of reliance on the good works he has performed
and perceives sin to be small and considers it as unimportant as a
result of depending on his acts of devotion is enough to make man an
object of Allah’s wrath.

In contrast to this group, some people are fearful and anxious and
always worried once they commit sin. This group, even if they do not
have a lot of will power to discharge some of the acts of worship, will
be freed from the divine retribution of Allah because of their fear and
dread in regard to sin, and will be in peace and security there. (The
Noble Prophet’s (S) expression in this section has another
interpretation which has previous been mentioned.)

The Noble Prophet’s (S) intention is to direct Abu Dharr’s attention to
the importance of the spiritual states of the heart and how effective
fear of sin is, to the extent that once man commits sin, anxiety, worry
and distress of the heart will result in his forgiveness and remission.
Opposite to this, even if he performs a lot of acts of worship but feels
secure and safe from the repercussions of venial sins, which is proof
that he has regarded sin as light and pays no heed to Who he is
disobeying, he will be afflicted by divine wrath. Therefore, no sin
ought to be considered as minor [or pardonable] and always make effort
to preserve in ourselves fear and dread of Allah so as not to become
self-conceited and deceived by the accursed Devil.

The Role of Paying Heed to Sin in Shunning the Devil
----------------------------------------------------

Higher than what has been said, the Noble Prophet (S) states in the next
sentence:

“O Abu Dharr! Allah’s slave commits sin and as a result of that [sin]
goes to heaven.” I said, “O Prophet of Allah! May my father and mother
be thy ransom! How possible is that?” He stated, “He always perceives
his sin and repents it, seeks refuge in Allah until finally he enters
paradise.”

Sometimes, man commits sin and as a result of that is anxious and
worried and this very fear and dread gives rise to repentance and
seeking refuge in Allah and release from the trap of the accursed Devil.
Consequently, once he gets freed from negligence and cravings of the
flesh, he no longer perpetrates sin and as a result of this enters the
Garden of eternal bliss. Perhaps, if that sin were not committed by him,
this feeling would not have been aroused in him. Of course, the
proximate [or immediate] cause of paying heed to Allah and fleeing from
the accursed Devil is that same repentance, fear and dread of Allah and
sin is a remote [or distant] cause but at any rate that too has become a
factor.

This statement of the Prophet (S) is intended to encourage man to [pay
heed] to this point that they ought to arouse in their souls a feeling
of fear and dread. Fear which results in compensating for past sins and
makes the individual who enters the Garden of bliss not of meager value,
therefore we ought to strive to attain it.

A Study of the Nature of Fear and Sorrow and the Meaning of Fear of Allah
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Up to this section, the discussion has been connected to fear and dread
which has been cited in the *hadith*s. Now is the time to present some
questions and their responses even if these queries are not directly
related to this ethical discussion:

One of the questions pertains to whether having the condition [or state]
of fear is good or bad? If it is good, then why does Allah describe his
saints [*awliya’*] as *‘and there is no fear for him nor shall he
grieve’*[^6]? And if it is bad, then why does the Noble Prophet (S)
encourage others to give rise to this feeling in their hearts? And also
why has he stated that these two are a cause of forgiveness and
remission of sins?

Two responses ought to be given, fear and sorrow are not in themselves,
without taking into consideration their two adjuncts [or attachments],
desirable or reproachable. It cannot be said with generality that they
are either good or bad, but the cause of that fear and the cause of that
sorrow have to be taken into consideration.

Fear of Allah and His retribution is desirable, because it results in
man standing up to perform acts of worship and obedience of Allah and
abstinence from sins and in the end it helps man to better discharge his
duties and with the acquisition of the path to prosperity and bliss,
become a dweller of the Garden of eternal bliss. Opposite to it is
undesirable fear as a result of the world, for the reason that the
origin [or roots] of inclination to the world is not good, worse with
fear of it. The other query concerns what the interpretation of fear of
Allah is.

In response it ought to be said that fear of Allah is a reflection of
dread of ourselves and the actions which man has committed, otherwise
Allah is the source of mercy and compassion. Fear of Allah is because of
His being ‘the One who inflicts intense punishment’ [*shadid al-‘iqab*],
He does not overlook man’s actions and He keeps count of every deed.

The other point whose mentioning is necessary is that in one general
division, three kinds of fear of Allah can be cited:

### 1) Fear of Divine Retribution In Hell

This is the level of ordinary people. In most people dread of the
eternal inferno and divine retribution causes them to discharge their
religious duties and not stain themselves with sin. Of course, it ought
to be mentioned that this stage is very valuable for those who are at
the beginning of growth and perfection and this fear gives fruit to
prosperity and freedom from divine punishment if it is effective in
making man abstain from sin.

### 2) Fear of Losing The Gifts Of Paradise

Some people refrain from sin and discharge their religious obligations
as a result of fearing to be deprived of the blessings of the eternal
blissful Garden, in reality their longing for the Garden of eternal
bliss impels them to obey Allah and shun the Devil. This level is higher
than the previous one.

### 3) Fear Of Being Deprived Of The Beatific Presence And Vision Of Allah [Liqa’ Allah]

This is fear of losing the attention and affection of Allah. There is no
doubt that this level is higher than the previous two levels and is
especially reserved for the elect ones of the divine presence and people
whose companionship is very high and pay no attention to the reward and
retribution of the hereafter; but perceive and pursue things which are
higher.

In order to clarify this level and make our minds perceive it, it is
necessary to cite an example:

Imagine that we have been invited by the leader of the Islamic
revolution and a reception has been arranged for us. It is likely for a
number of the people who have been invited to be worried of missing the
food once they delay. Some say to themselves that today is a festival
and it has been resolved that the leader will offer presents. Their fear
is that they will miss the gifts if they arrive late [at the reception].
The ambition of this group is higher than that of the previous one. It
is not important whether they remain hungry or not, but what is
important is receiving a present from the hands of the leader!

The third group consists of people who only value and cherish visiting
the leader and nothing else. That the leader of the Islamic revolution
will cast a glance at them and smile out of pleasure and happiness at
them is very valuable for them and it is no longer necessary for them to
be given a coin or not.

These levels of love and affection which exist among the people as a
result of the differences in motivation and knowledge are coincidentally
similar to fear of the divine presence.

In a *hadith*, Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) cites these three levels in regard
to worship and servitude to Allah, the Exalted, stating:

“A group of men worship Allah as a result of fear; the worship of this
category of people is that of slaves. Another party prays to Allah as a
result of ardor for divine reward and profit; the worship of this sect
is that of wage-takers. And another group venerates Allah as a result of
love and adoration for Allah; this is the worship of the free and is the
highest worship.”[^7]

The dread of a person who fears Allah is sometimes apprehension of hell
in such a way that if the punishment of hell is gotten rid of, they are
no longer worried. Of course, this stage is very worthy in comparison to
infidelity and disbelief and is a product of belief in Allah, the Day of
Resurrection and faith in the fact that Allah will punish sinful and
disobedient servants. The ambition of a person who has achieved this
level is low and is like slaves who work as a result of fear of their
master’s punishment.

Some people’s fear of Allah is a result of their foreboding that they
will be deprived of the divine blessings of the eternal Garden of bliss.
Even if divine retribution is out of consideration, they apprehend being
expropriated of the divine favors of Allah. Vis-à-vis, those two groups
are a sect which, even if heaven and hell were not existent, they worry
about being the object of indifference and disregard by Allah. The
Qur’an mentions Allah’s disregard to the disbelievers as one of the
greatest divine retributions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَلاَ يُکَلِّمُهُم اللهُ وَلاَ يَنْظُرُ إِلَيْهِمْ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… and Allah will not speak to them, nor will He look upon them on
the Day of Resurrection…”***[^8]

For a person who is conscious [and perceptive], Allah’s contempt is
worse than His retribution. Worse than any punishment for a man is to go
visiting his friend, father or teacher after a long period of time only
to be confronted by their disregard and indifference.

A question is asked here that why were the Infallible Imams (*‘a*) also
afraid of Allah? They were infallible and the control of heaven and hell
was at their disposal, why were they afraid of Allah and how compatible
is this fear with the station of infallibility?

A brief answer is that infallibility connotes quitting sins and
abstaining from what is forbidden and that does not mean that the good
pleasure of Allah too is allotted to the Infallible. An Infallible is a
person who does not sin and does not go to hell, but where is it
explicitly stated that he is the object of Allah’s attention and love?
Dread of being expropriated of Allah’s grace and His good pleasure is
higher than fear of divine retribution.

An elaborate and real response to this query is beyond the reach of our
understanding, because we cannot conceive the station of the Prophet’s
(S) Pure Household and [we cannot] perceive what spiritual states they
had and what they were doing and how their conditions were.

Yes, with reliance on the evidence that exists and in comparison with
our own states, in brief and to the extent of our comprehension, we
perceive a very meager fraction of their states but the reality of the
matter is not apparent to us and is not explicable.

The Simultaneous Appearance of Opposing and Conflicting States
--------------------------------------------------------------

With regard to the previous topics, it can be gathered that once man’s
soul becomes complete, it can have different states simultaneously—such
as [concurrent] pleasure and displeasure.

Our capacity is limited and we cannot manage to gather numerous
transcendental states at the level of perfection. Therefore, the
collection of sorrows and joys gives rise to a medium and intermediate
inner state in us. But once man becomes more perfect, he can cause to
appear in himself two or more conflicting spiritual states, what is more
at the level of perfection.

Fear and hope, with regard to their special factors, appear in the soul
and if the totality of causes are together taken into consideration, it
is possible for them to give rise to a new transcendental state as a
result of their actions and reactions. But if regard is paid to every
factor, from the perspective that it is a source and fountainhead of a
specific inner state, its only fruit is that very spiritual state. For
instance, if we concentrate on the origin of fear, only dread appears in
our souls and once we focus on the source of security, the feeling of
security and peace appears in our souls.

People whose souls have become complete and are in firm control of their
inner states and spiritual conditions become full of tears once they
conceive the divine retribution and/or reflect upon the possibility of
being deprived of the good pleasure of Allah and at that very moment
perceive the grace, mercy and forgiveness of Allah and a state of
happiness and joyousness appears in them. That is to say, with regard to
the causes of fear and security, it is feasible for them to concurrently
emanate two inner states in themselves.

With regard to these issues, it is possible to have a weak awareness and
knowledge in relation to the holy existence of the Noble Prophet (S) and
the Infallible Imams (*‘a*) in the form of a subtle station ‘union of
perfections’ [*jam‘ al-jam‘i*] and that those strong souls can
synchronically be the manifestation of all the beautiful Names and
Attributes of Allah. They pay heed to the mercy of Allah and become
happy and joyous and hope appears in them.

On the other hand, they pay heed to the harsh divine retribution and
punishment, and an inner state of fear and dread appears in them. But in
regard to the physical [or bodily] appearance and emergence of spiritual
states, whichever gains predominance over the other becomes conspicuous
and evident because the body of man lacks the capability of manifesting
those two inner states in a complete way. If fear prevails, tears flow
and once the feeling of hope and joy predominates, the lips fall into a
smile; of course, manifesting these inner states is at their free
disposal.

With regard to the question of why the Infallibles paid heed to divine
retribution in order to give rise to the inner state of fear in
themselves despite that they knew they had not committed any sin and
would never at all commit any sin, in addition to that, Allah has placed
heaven and hell at their free disposal. Therefore, what motivation do
they have for paying heed to the cause of fear? We have previously
provided a response to this query but now we will give another answer.

The sum of capabilities and inner states which exist in man ought to be
the manifestation of devotional servitude to Allah and to be expended in
His way. Man’s being is a mixture of material and transcendental
elements and states; there is in his natural disposition fear and
displeasure and security and pleasure, and joy and gratification, too.

Allah has granted these spiritual and transcendental states to all human
beings in order for them to use them along His path. They ought to be
happy and laugh for the good pleasure of Allah; that is to say, his
joyousness has to be related to Allah in some way. He ought to be glad
for the reason that he has been an object of Allah’s mercy not because
he is deriving pleasure [for] himself.

It has been narrated in some *hadith*s that the Shi‘ahs will be guests
of the Prophet (S) and his *Ahl al-bayt* (*‘a*) and sit at their table
partaking of their food. But still is the gratification which the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) derive the same as that which we derive [from it]? It
has been recorded in a verse in the Qur’an that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَحْمِ طَيْرٍ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the flesh of fowl such as they desire.”***[^9]

Is the pleasure which the Noble Prophet derives from the fowls of
paradise the same as that which we derive?

Of course, the two immeasurable pleasures are different. The Noble
Prophet (S) derives pleasure from the perspective that it is acceptable
to Allah. In any case, the level of derivation of pleasure is related to
the standard of knowledge and affection and love of an individual to
Allah.

This very contrast can be made in relation to the fear of the Noble
Prophet (S) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) with the dread of the rest [of
people]; even if they fear the fire of hell but still their dread
emanates from their perception that it is a sign of Allah’s wrath. They
perceive it as a sign that their Beloved has no love for them; Allah’s
wrath and separation and parting from Him is unbearable for them, it is
for this reason that they are deeply worried and anxious.

[^1]: Mafatih al-Jinan, p. 109, the Islamic Culture Propagation
Publications.

[^2]: Mafatih al-Jinan, Du‘a’ Makarim al-Akhlaq.

[^3]: Surat al-Nazi‘at 79:37-39.

[^4]: Surat Ibrahim 14:14.

[^5]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 19, p. 122.

[^6]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:112.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 236.

[^8]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:77.

[^9]: Surat al-Waqi‘ah 56:21.


