Lesson 15: Wisdom, Foresight and an Angle of the Prophet’s (S) Way of Life
==========================================================================

The Noble Prophet (S) reminds us about the defects of the world and
materialism [or worldliness] and in contrast gives the good news of the
superiority of asceticism and disinclination to the world. It is
something of a miracle that the Noble Prophet (S) mentions issues of
edification of character in one specific field by means of different
expressions and various ways, the result of which is that everyone
benefits from his sayings according to his own understanding and natural
capacity.

Issues are so many and have been expressed in different ethical and
instructional forms that every person can derive benefit from them
according to his own taste and disposition and select the best
provisions of edification of character which suit them. One of the ways
which the Noble Prophet (S) has selected is recommending asceticism and
encouraging people to undertake it and citing the invaluable effects
which result from disinclination to the world.

Wisdom and Foresight Are the Products of Asceticism
---------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! A slave of Allah does not live ascetically save that Allah
stabilizes wisdom in his heart and his tongue overflows with it, and
makes it aware of the defects, pains and quarrels of the world and leads
him to the eternal Garden of bliss in a sound state.”

In this section, the emphasis of the Noble Prophet (S) is that
asceticism and disinclination makes man’s heart ready to accept wisdom
and after that he perceives truths. People who are obsessed about the
world cannot conceive the realities of the world because love of the
world makes man heedless and negligent. In contrast, people who are
disinclined to the world perceive realities because they are superior
over the world and choose the best way after comparing it with the
hereafter.

Asceticism denotes disinclination or lack of desire, as has been
narrated with regard to the brothers of Yusuf (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَشَرَوْهُ بِثَمَنٍ بَخْسٍ دَرَاهِمْ مَعْدُودَةٍ وَکَانُوا فِيهِ مِن
الزَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they sold him for a small price, a few pieces of silver, showing
no desire for him.”***[^1]

Asceticism in the world means that man ought not to be inclined to the
world; if he has some wealth and certain facilities at his disposal, he
thinks about how to use them for the good pleasure of Allah and is not
obsessed with acquisition of possessions. (People like prophet Solomon
(*‘a*) had such a state that they used to eat dry bread in spite of
having so much wealth and a great kingdom and lived in contentment and
frugality.)

In explanation of the sentence, “Allah stabilizes wisdom in his heart”
it is necessary to mention a few points:

1. There is a close relationship between disinclination to the world and
perception of divine knowledge; that is to say, it is impossible to find
a person who in spite of his heart being obsessed with the world, his
soul at the same time is overflowing with divine knowledge and
awareness.

2. Wisdom, which is a product of disinclination to the world, stabilizes
man’s knowledge and awareness and defends against instability of belief
and wavering of the mind. It is possible for man to attain knowledge and
perceive the truth but still his awareness is shaky and unstable because
he has not attained certitude or certainty, which stabilizes and
steadies knowledge in the heart.

Among the basic principles of religion, in addition to the fundamental
principle of belief, the stability of knowledge also has special value
and it is for this reason that seasonal and periodical faith not only
has no value, but also has negative consequences and has been reproached
in various instances in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا رَکِبُوا فِي الْفُلْکِ دَعَوُا اللهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ
فَلَمَّا نَجَّاهُمْ إِلَی الْبَرِّ إِذَا هُمْ‌ يُشْرِکُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when they ride in the ships they call upon Allah, being sincerely
obedient to Him, but*** ***when He brings them safe to the land, lo!
They associate others (with Him).”***[^2]

3. Once wisdom has become steady, it does not remain confined to the
heart but its effects become apparent in speech and works and conduct
too. The words of a person in whose heart wisdom has become stable will
also be wise: he abstains from vain and futile talk and counsels in such
a philosophical and thoughtful way that his words deserve praise and
extolment.

Yes, the tongue is passage for man’s heart and, in other words, the
exudations of a man’s heart are carried out on the tongue because it is
the oozing external part of the jar which is inside him, of course this
oozing out not only appears on the tongue but with the rest of man’s
conduct too.

The other effect of aversion of the world is that the defects of the
world become apparent to man; that is to say, man can witness the
deficiencies, lowliness and inferiority of the world in the case that he
liberates himself from attachment to it, otherwise it is not expected of
the lovers of the world to see the defects of their beloved and darling
(the world), because infatuation with the world blinds man’s eyes from
seeing its defects and deafens man’s ears from hearing its deficiencies,
on the contrary he perceives as beautiful its vileness and supposes his
discreditable conduct which has appeared as a result of excessive
fondness with the world to be fair. This interpretation has been
explained by different expressions in the Glorious Qur’an, amongst them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... زَيَّنَّا لَهُمْ أَعْمَالَهُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We have made their deeds fair-seeming to them…”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... بَلْ‌ سَوَّلَتْ لَکُمْ أَنْفُسَکُمْ أَمْرًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…your souls have made the matter light for you…”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَزَيَّنَ لَهُمْ‌ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and the Satan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them…”***[^5]

The various interpretations are indicative of this truth that falling in
love with the world causes the world and the worldly behavior of man to
manifest themselves as fair-seeming in his perception and the more this
fondness increases, the more beautiful the world and its defects appear
in man’s perception for the reason that the lover does not see the
defects and deficiencies of their beloved. Without doubt, such an
individual only sees the outward deceptive world and is incapable of
perceiving and comprehending its inner side and seeing beyond it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُونَ ظَاهِرًا مِن الْحَيوةِ الدُّنْيا وَهُمْ عَن الآخِرَةِ هُمْ
غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They know the outward of this world’s life, but of the hereafter
they are absolutely heedless.”***[^6]

In contrast, clear-sighted and pragmatic people with regard to the world
see both its good and its bad. This group, in contrast to the first
group which only sees the beautiful appearance and fair-seeming lines
and spots from this venomous snake, also perceives its deadly poison and
fatal fang:

“The example of the world is like a serpent. It is soft to the touch but
its inside is full of venom. An ignorant person who has fallen into
deceit is attracted towards it but a wise and intelligent man keeps on
his guard against it.”[^7]

Yes, the spiritual insight and far-sightedness of divine people is a
hurdle against their getting deceived by the superficial manifestations
of the world and their profound perception of horizons further than
material horizons is their basic difference with materialistic
superficial perceptions of hedonists; in the words of Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*):

“The lovers of Allah are those who look at the inward side of the world
while the other people look at its outward side. They busy themselves
with the remoter benefits while the other people busy themselves with in
the immediate benefits. Therefore, they kill in their hearts those
things which they feared would have killed them and leave here in this
world what they think would leave them.”[^8]

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! If you see a brother of yours living ascetically in the
world, give heed to his words because wisdom is given to him.”

This talk is a continuation of His Holiness’ that Allah establishes
wisdom in the heart of whoever lives ascetically. Therefore, if man were
disinclined to the world, he has attained wisdom and his speech will be
wise when he speaks for the reason that the speech which flows from the
heart of a person who is detached from the world undoubtedly settles in
the heart. An ascetic person has proved by means of his conduct that he
believes in what he says; therefore, expectation of wise talk from him
has to be had. In contrast, a person who is seduced by the world and is
drowned in its gratifications is deprived of wisdom and knowledge and
the depravations of this world have closed his eyes against truths and
consequently his word is unavailing and far from wisdom.

Signs of the Most Ascetic People
--------------------------------

When the discussion reaches here, Abu Dharr gets enamored by ascetics,
for this reason he requests the Prophet (S) to explain the attributes of
an ascetic so that he may embark upon making plans of friendship and
learning wisdom from the ascetic once he identifies him. In response,
the Noble Prophet (S) acquaints the most ascetic person by citing five
characteristics:

### 1. Whoever does not Forget Graves And Decomposed Corpses

The first characteristic of the most ascetic person is that he does not
forget graves and decomposed corpses. The lovers of the world always
have their eyes set on the world and its attractions and mourn over
things which they do not themselves have; but a person who does not pay
heed to the world always sets his sight on graves and the ruins of the
world, because they are the signs of the destructibility and extinction
of the world.

An ascetic is a person who does not forget graves, desolate places, and
ancient and obliterated places. Of course, not in that sense that man
ought to spent their entire time from morning to evening at grave sites
but to go visiting the dwellers of tombs from time to time and take
lesson from them.

People seduced by the world turn their faces away and flee when they
pass by graves fearing lest their feasting and drinking gets overturned.
They get upset when they hear death being mentioned and know it to be a
fault; in contrast, those who have set their attention on the hereafter
always remember the Day of Resurrection and never forget death.

### 2. And Renounces The Adornments Of The World

The second attribute of the most ascetic person is that he renounces
excess adornments in the world. Without the least doubt, man has need of
the facilities of the world and derives benefit from comforts which are
necessary for the continuation of life; amenities such as clothing,
housing, food and embellishments and all too often they play a role in
the perfection of man and for this reason the divine law not only has
permitted but exhorted them too.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ‌ مَنْ حَرَّمَ زِينَةَ اللهِ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَ لِعِبَادِهِ
وَالطَّيِّبَاتِ مِن الرِّزْقِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah which He has
brought forth for His servants and the good provisions?”***[^9]

What ought to be done is to benefit from worldly facilities and
adornments to the extent of need and forsake excessive and extravagant
adornments and give the rest to others, because if he does not content
himself with only what is needed and knows no limits and bounds, he will
not get contented no matter how much he derives benefit from worldly
embellishments and gratifications and no matter how much he adds to the
decoration, luster and beautification [of his house] and continually
changes curtains with more expensive and exorbitant ones and acquires
for himself a modern car because man’s nature is such that it seeks
variety and is never satiated not recognizing any limitations.

With all certainty, such an individual is not an ascetic; an abstinent
person is one who derives benefit from the world to the extent of need.
He contents himself with a protecting roof and does not intend to
acquire a grand building. Or, if he has need of a car, he gets a car
which suits his needs of going to and fro, he does not insist on the car
being definitely modern and luxurious.

In this sentence, His Holiness’ emphasis is on forsaking superfluous
adornments, otherwise embellishments which are a necessity of life
and/or are necessary in the maintenance of individual and family life
are not only not blameworthy but have also been recommended; like man’s
adorning himself for his wife and a woman’s beautifying herself for her
husband, wearing clean clothes, cleaning the hair and face, combing the
hair and perfuming the body. Basically, the status of a believing person
necessitates that he abstains from outward and inward contaminations and
bad smells which cause the aversion of others.

For this reason, Islam emphasizes keeping the body and clothes clean and
beautifying the face and hair. It has been recommended a lot that when
man wants to go to the mosque and/or enter a group of people, he ought
to spray perfume so that the others may enjoy his sweet smell, not a
despicable and abhorrent smell which offends them.

Or, it has been advised that at the time of prayer man should spray
perfume and two *rak‘at*s of a man who has perfumed themselves has more
reward than seventy *rak‘at*s of prayer. What is necessary is for man to
forsake additional adornments which are not rationally wise and are not
beneficial in the direction of man’s perfection and are signs of
hedonism and mammonism and adoration of pleasures of the flesh.

It has been recorded in description of the Noble Prophet’s (S)
characteristics that:

“The Prophet’s (S) habit was to look himself in the mirror and clean his
face and comb his hair. Often times, he used to do so with the help of
water placed in front of him and beside the people of the house, he used
to beautify himself for his companions and used to state, ‘Allah loves
his slave who prepares and beautifies himself when going out of the
house to visit his brothers’.”[^10]

### 3. He Prefers What Is Eternal Over What Is Ephemeral

The third quality of the most ascetic person is that he prefers what is
eternal over what is ephemeral.

If a comparison is made between the short-lived and vanishing pleasures
of the world and the constant and everlasting pleasures of the
hereafter, he wisely opts for the eternal pleasures of the Garden of
bliss overlooking the ephemeral pleasures of this world. He also would
rather bear the hardships and difficulties of responsibilities and
duties than the ease and comfort of the world, because his far-sighted
eyes are set on the future of the world; when moving, he only perceives
the destination and he does not recognize the world save as a bridge for
passage.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَی
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“While the hereafter is better and more lasting.”*[^11]

### 4. And He Does Not Look Forward To Tomorrow

### 5. And Considers Himself Among The Dead

The fourth and fifth characteristics of the most ascetic person are that
he does not count tomorrow as part of his life and considers himself as
living among the dead.

Man has to always perform his duties and never stop striving and
activity. Without the least doubt, a person who has embarked upon
discharging responsibilities cannot be in comfort and luxury and a
pleasure-seeker, because endeavor and activity are not compatible with
luxurious and lazy living.

A person who is obsessed with the world is always after acquiring
facilities for pleasure and ease; when time comes for activity and
endeavor, sometimes lessons and discussion and personal study and the
rest of the duties, his love of comfort dissuades him from activity and
postpones duties to tomorrow and he is not prepared to hurt his comfort
and pleasure-seeking. In truth, procrastination and postponing duties to
the other day is a result of man’s long-term planning for himself and
his hope of attaining them in the future of his life and for this reason
he puts off today’s responsibilities in the hope of tomorrow.

It is natural that attaining those protracted hopes calls for a long
lifespan and it is for this reason that the mammon hopes for a longer
and more protracted life and this results in procrastination and
postponement of works and/or as a result of fear of failure, causes
dejection and stress.

An ascetic person and one who is disinclined to the world discharges his
daily duties [on time] and contrary to a hedonist, he does not count
tomorrow as part of his life so as to put his duties off until then,
because he is not sure of his being alive the following day. He believes
that even if he still had a tomorrow, he will have other
responsibilities to discharge.

Protracted Hopes and Procrastination of Obligations Is a Sign of Weakness of Faith and Weakness of Confidence in Allah
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As has been mentioned, a lot of people have protracted hopes and have
expectations of living long years in this world and their work and
endeavor is for the future and they are always worried about the future
and that which must come to pass. They are distressed that if they do
not go to university, they might not have a job and not have an income
for their daily living. They are anxious about whether their future
lives will be easy or not.

Of course, this nervousness is a result of not having a spirit of faith
and trust in Allah; otherwise, a person who completely relies on Allah
and perceives his graces and blessings has no apprehensions about
tomorrow because Allah, the Exalted, is the Possessor and Owner of
everything. In addition, from where is a person who is nervous about his
future certainly sure that he has a tomorrow?

Islam and religious sciences commend that man has to be engaged in
discharging today’s duties and not to be thinking about tomorrow because
it is not clear whether he will be alive up to the next hour or not. Of
course, apprehending being deprived of the world and future pleasures of
the earth is blameworthy, otherwise if man discharges today’s duties and
makes plans and decisions for possible future responsibilities, this is
not only praiseworthy but is considered a part of religious duties.

Every duty and responsibility is incumbent on a particular day and time
assigned to it: today my prayers are incumbent and I have no
responsibility over tomorrow’s prayers, but if I remain alive until
tomorrow, it becomes incumbent that I recite prayers tomorrow too; it is
the same with rest of the duties every one of which is incumbent in its
own occasion and we do not have any more duties [other than that].

Therefore, being anxious about the future and the end of his worldly
life is irrelevant but apprehension of the definite future and last day
is proper because there is no escaping from tomorrow’s resurrection and
hereafter, even if it were pleasing to some people if there was escaping
from the hereafter.

Allah, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللهَ‌ وَلْتَنْظُرْ نَفْسٌ مَا
قَدَّمَتْ لِغَدٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be careful (of your duty to) Allah, and let every
soul consider what it has sent on for the morrow…”***[^12]

In continuation of the *hadith*, with regard to Allah’s recommendations
to him about forsaking the collection of wealth, the Noble Prophet (S)
states:

“O Abu Dharr! Allah has not sent revelation to me [recommending] so that
I may engage in the acquisition of wealth and has on the contrary
inspired me to thank, praise and adore the Lord for His graces and to be
one of the prostrating slaves and when your death draws nigh, worship
Him.”

If the collection of wealth and saving of money was desirable and would
cause the perfection of man, Allah would have advised the Noble Prophet
(S) to embark upon acquisition and preservation of possessions and
riches. But Allah never at all made such recommendations but to be
engaged in praising, worshiping and supplicating to Allah to the moment
of his death.

Of course, adoration and servitude of Allah has various manifestations:
sometimes worship denotes discharging personal duties and early rising
[for the purpose of worship] and at other times it connotes carrying out
social duties, acquisition of knowledge, teaching, preaching and
propagation of Islamic culture and finally every duty which is incumbent
upon man.

An Angle of the Prophet’s (S) Way of Life
-----------------------------------------

People who have selected the Noble Prophet as the best model and example
ought to try to their best ability to harmonize their lifestyles with
his; it is for this reason that His Holiness explains a niche of
practical way of life and conduct:

“O Abu Dharr! I wear coarse clothes and sit on the ground, wash my hands
after food and whoever does not follow my way and conduct is not from
me.”

The standard of deriving benefit from the material benefits for the
Prophet (S), who has the power of dominion over creation [and] can have
the world at his free disposal, is to the measure of securing his basic
needs. Previously, His Holiness stated that Gabriel [Jibra’il] set the
treasures of the world at the Noble Prophet’s (S) free disposal but His
Holiness abstained from consenting. In this section, he clearly states
his contentment, simple living and social conduct:

On account of the way of life of Allah’s Prophet (S), as the most
eminent creature and bringer of revelation, being the object of
attention of the Muslims and even the non-Muslims, all the practical
conduct and states and even the minute details of his way of life and
social manners were under the close scrutiny of his companions.

It is for this reason that a lot of the details of his way of life have
been narrated by word of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), his companions, the
generation which followed the companions but never met the Noble Prophet
(S) himself and many other people. In addition to that, His Holiness
himself in certain instances has stated a section of his way of conduct
in the same way that in this section he hints at an angle of his
personal conduct so that the followers of His Holiness, by knowing his
natural temperament and conduct, may select him as their role model and
example.

His Holiness states that he wears coarse clothes and does not wear soft
clothes so as to be at ease, he sits on the floor not on fine and
expensive carpets. He was bound to eat with his fingers at the time of
eating food; in addition to that, he used to clean his hands after food.
He used to mount a bare and undecorated donkey and used to carry another
man at the back. From this explanation the humility and peak of
servitude of His Holiness becomes apparent. It is amazing that His
Holiness was this humble and down-to-earth, to the extent that he used
to mount an undecorated donkey and as a result of the extremity of his
humility used to carry another man with him, in an environment where
pomp, arrogance and haughtiness used to reign with injustice.

In contrast, we, the claimers of being his followers, are preoccupied
with wearing good clothes and eating delicious food and finally securing
a comfortable and easy life for ourselves. We covet buying a modern and
luxurious car and desire to derive as much pleasure from the world as
possible.

It is worth mentioning that in this era it is not possible to expect the
people’s ways of life to conform with the time of the Noble Prophet (S)
because the standards of life and the economic conditions of every era
differs to that of another age and the equivalence of scientific and
technological advancements have brought about great leaps in the living
conditions of mankind. What is incumbent is to follow the inviolable
Islamic laws and fundamental postulates and in every time the social
position of [the majority of the] people has to be taken into
consideration and to abstain from pomp, acquisitiveness and pride.

[^1]: Surat Yusuf 12:20.

[^2]: Surat al-‘Ankabut 29:65.

[^3]: Surat al-Naml 27:4.

[^4]: Surat Yusuf 12:18.

[^5]: Surat al-Naml 27:24.

[^6]: Surat al-Rum 30:7.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1141, short saying 115, trans. Fayd al-Islam.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 1287, short saying 422.

[^9]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:32.

[^10]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 6, p. 330.

[^11]: Surat al-A‘la 87:17.

[^12]: Surat al-Hashr 59:18.


