Lesson 17: The Effects of Crying for the Hereafter, the Broadness of a Believer’s Heart and Piousness
=====================================================================================================

Most of the Noble Prophet’s (S) advices which have hitherto been
examined have been rotating on three axes:

1. Abstinence from love of the world and obsession with it.

2. Exhortation of invocation of Allah.

3. Humility and modesty and crying as a result of fear of Allah.

In this section of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) once again
explains the importance of crying as a result of fear of Allah and/or
crying due to intense longing to perceive His beatific vision [*liqa’
Allah*] and he embarks upon elucidating the importance of paying heed to
the hereafter, keeping aloof from the world and curing the inner
conscience and abstaining from sanctimony.

The Effects of Crying for the Hereafter
---------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! The Lord has given me the news [saying], ‘I swear upon My
honor and glory that my slaves will never comprehend the reward of
crying and its value. I have established palaces in the highest levels
of paradise for those who shed tears and no one will share it with
them’.”

As has been mentioned previously, the crying which the Noble Prophet has
recommended is shedding tears as a result of fear of Allah and/or
weeping due to the intensity of yearning to be admitted in the divine
beatific presence of Allah. Even if these two sections of crying are
desirable and play a vital role in awakening man and making heedful to
Allah but still crying as a result of desiring to be admitted in the
divine beatific presence of Allah is higher and calls for deep and
profound knowledge which is not attainable save for a small group [among
mankind], amongst the Infallibles (*‘a*).

Perceiving this fact that the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*) and the
Infallibles are enamored and in love with Allah and there is no pain for
them comparable to the ache of separation and remoteness from their
Beloved, by examining the supplications of the Imams (*‘a*), we
comprehend how much they used to weep and wail as a result of the pain
of separation from their Beloved and how they used to hurt due to their
intense longing to be in the divine beatific presence of Allah.

Supplications which have been narrated from Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) and Imam
al-Sajjad (*‘a*) are a sign of the endless love of the Infallible and
Pure *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) in regard to Allah. With consideration to
these supplications, a section of the unlimited awareness and knowledge
of the Infallibles becomes manifest to us.

Knowledge which caused those of pure birth, of pure breastfeeding and
the models of mankind not to become heedless of the presence of their
Lord even for a single moment and for the reason that they used to
perceive Him as higher than everything and believed that all things are
under His power, they were only enamored by Him and this inner
love-sickness would not for one moment leave them tranquil and calm.
Their supplications and invocations are themselves a sign of the
pinnacle of this love:

In *Du‘a’ al-Kumayl*, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) removes the curtain from his
yearning to attain the divine beatific presence of Allah and believes
that it is harder to bear remoteness from Him than to bear the infernal
hell and addresses his Lord thus:

“O Allah! My Lord and Master! I can bear your punishment, but how can I
bear being separated from Thee?”

And explaining his anguish in the case that he is separated from his
Lord, he continues:

“I swear upon Your glory O my Master! O my Lord! that if you lead me to
hell with a speaking tongue, I will wail and weep so loudly and
sorrowfully and I will shout very much, and like a person who has lost
his beloved, I cry bitterly as a result of remoteness from Thee!”

Imam al-Sajjad (*‘a*) states in the *Du‘a’ Abu Hamzah*:

“I ruined my life with procrastinations of deeds and postponements of
duties and with protracted hopes and now I have reached a stage where I
have completely been driven to despair with regard to edification of
character [and purification of the soul]. Therefore, who is in a worse
and more ruined state than mine? Woe upon me if in this state I get led
to the grave, which I have not made ready for myself and have not made
it fine with good works. Why ought I not to cry when I do not know what
the consequences of my actions are and now my soul deceives me and my
days beguile me regardless that death has cast its shadow on me?”

It is because of the evaluative role of crying in cleansing the inner
conscience of ethical vices and shortcomings that the Noble Prophet (S)
states that the virtue and reward which is derived from crying is more
than what is derived without crying and the people who cry shall attain
stations which other people will not attain.

Abu Dharr asks who the most intelligent man is and the Noble Prophet (S)
states:

“The most intelligent person is the one who thinks about death and
prepares himself for it more than anyone else.”

A person who has selected a course to traverse always sets his eyes on
the destination if he is smart thinker and tries to arrive at the goal
quicker. If a person becomes inattentive along the way, becomes
bewildered and perplexed along the way, he does not arrive at the
destination in sound health. He who knows that the world is only a means
of attaining the hereafter does not get deceived by the material
attractions of the earth and incessantly meditates about death and
prepares himself for it.

Therefore, when his death draws nigh, he goes to Allah with full hands
and overflowing provisions but people who lose sight of the goal have
not prepared produce and provisions for the hereafter setting out on a
long journey without provisions and necessities which is a very hard
job.

The Broadness of a Believer’s Heart and Its Signs
-------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! If the light shines in the heart, it becomes broad and
spacious.”

In the beginning, hearts are dark, then Allah adds His light to them and
hearts become apt to receive that light. Once that light settles down,
the heart’s capacity to broaden increases. To cite an intelligible
example, it is like a dry water-skin which expands when water is poured
inside it and/or like a bladder which the more air they pump in it the
more it enlarges. Therefore, a heart which has been broadened by the
light of Allah has an increased capacity. (The purport of heart is not
the piece of flesh beating in our hearts, but heart in this discourse
denotes a spiritual essence and a place of perception and the station of
faith.)

Perhaps His Holiness’ (S) intention is that the excessiveness of
remembering death and preparedness to meet it keeps the light of man’s
life burning and as a result of remembrance of death, a light is set in
man’s soul which does not let his pure natural disposition get
contaminated by the darkness of sin and it is as a result of that same
light that, in the words of the Noble Prophet (S), broadens and
increases the capacity of man’s soul in this sense that he perceives
beyond this narrow world and concentrates on the everlasting afterworld.

For the reason that such a state is not intelligible to Abu Dharr,
because this is not a matter susceptible to the senses so as to be felt
by the physical senses, he asks the Noble Prophet (S) about the signs of
a large heart. In response, His Holiness (S) cites three signs of this
state:

1. The first sign of a broad heart is longing for the hereafter, in this
sense that man overlooks the transient and perishable world and sets his
eyes on the eternal world of the hereafter. In explanation of the
meaning of ‘*anabah*’ (returning from committing sins and going back to
Allah), the deceased Raghib Isfahani states, “Returning towards Allah
implies going back to Him by means of repentance and good works.”

2. The second sign of a large heart is abstaining from the deceiving
world.

Once a believer concentrates on the everlasting world, he becomes vexed
by this narrow world, which is why he detaches himself from the world
and prepares to depart from it.

The House of Pride [*dar al-ghurur*] is one of the names by which the
world is called in the Glorious Qur’an. Pride denotes deception and
trickery and because adornments and ornaments of the world deceive man
and make him infatuated with it; that is why it is called the House of
Pride.

Explaining the deception of the world, eminent people like ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i, may he reside in Allah’s Garden of bliss, used to state that
man has a natural object of desire, that is to say man’s natural
disposition has a lost treasure it is always trying to find. His primary
destination is becoming close to Allah and in other words, attaining
absolute perfection.

Even if he himself is not conscious of this but unconsciously he still
moves towards absolute perfection. But sometimes he loses his main aim
and as a result of this mistake selects the world as his main goal; in
reality, he has become seduced by the adornments and ornaments of the
world and imagines them to be his lost treasure; that is to say the
world presents itself as the real goal and desirable object of desire
for man.

As a result of this, he attains the world after a life of struggle and
effort only to find out that it was not his natural object of desire and
does not satiate his spiritual needs. For this reason, the world can be
compared to the nipple of a breast-feeder which once put in the mouth of
a hungry child longing for breast milk will make it forget the mother’s
breast and finally realizes that the breast-feeder does not satiate his
need for his mother’s milk.

Yes, the world is nothing more than a mirage and the real object of
man’s desire is life giving water which springs from proximity to Allah
and satiates his natural disposition. Even if he imagines the world to
be his real object of desire—whether it is worldly ostentation in the
form of a house and car or in the form of other earthly pleasures and
attractions—but it has to be understood that with all its spaciousness
and various gratifications and blessings, all are a means for attaining
absolute perfection and the good pleasure of Allah, not the ultimate
goal and natural object of desire.

We conclude that a person whose heart is in chaotic darkness and has not
been enlightened by the light of faith, heedlessness and darkness get
erased from his soul and he clearly discerns the truth and does not fall
into error. He only sets his heart on the hereafter and it is not
possible, even for a moment, to give his heart to the world because he
knows that the world is not the right place to fall in love.

3. The third sign of a large heart is to get ready for death before
handing over his soul.

When man is not obsessed with the world and is always meditating about
the hereafter, he always has to be ready to go back to the eternal Abode
and attain his natural Object of desire. A person who knows that he has
not been created for the world and the world is only a bridge of passage
to the everlasting Abode zealously looks forward to the moment of
gaining proximity to the divine presence of Allah. He impatiently tries
to cross the bridge so as to attain his ultimate goal.

A state of impatience and hurriedness to attain the goal also appears
for man in the world. Along the way as man is traveling in a car to a
city, he wishes to arrive at the destination quicker. When his car
overtakes all the other moving objects on the road, he becomes happy
that he will arrive earlier than the others at the destination. Even if
this is a childish fancy it still has its roots in man’s natural
disposition. When he knows that the destination is another place and he
has no role to play in choosing the course and path, he tries to
traverse the course faster so as to reach the goal which of course is a
reasonable matter.

Therefore, a slave whose heart has become enlightened by Allah’s light
and whose eyes have become opened to the truth knows that the ultimate
goal is the vicinity of the Truth and proximity to the divine presence
of Allah and that the world is nothing more than a means; for this
reason, he employs this means in order to arrive at the destination and
does not become calm as a result of yearning to arrive and longing to
meet the Beloved, to the extent that he forgets the world altogether.

Piousness and Fleeing from Sanctimony and Hypocrisy
---------------------------------------------------

Warning Abu Dharr against hypocrisy and sanctimony, the Noble Prophet
states:

“O Abu Dharr! Fear Allah but do not sanctimoniously manifest your dread
of Allah to the people with the intention of attracting their respect
while your heart meditates about performing sin.”

Hypocrisy denotes man manifesting his outward better than his inside and
making apparent what is contrary to that which is hidden in the inner
soul. That is to say:

*His appearance resembles Abu Dharr and Salman [Farsi],*

*His inner soul resembles Abu Sufyan*.

Sanctimony is considered as hidden polytheism and a sanctimonious person
is called a polytheist.

One of the great graces of Allah concealing man’s sins and faults, as a
result of which He has been called ‘the Hider of Faults’ [*sattar
al-‘uyub*]. In truth, life would become unbearable if the vices of
people were divulged and they perceived the faults of one another. It is
for this reason that Allah’s concealing of defects is a great blessing
for which being thankful is incumbent. Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“If you were to perceive the secrets of one another, you would never
bury one another.”[^1]

In the same way that Allah Himself conceals the faults of the believers,
he does not give permission to the others to reveal the sins of other
people; neither does He Himself discredit a believer nor does He allow a
believer to disgrace himself. Therefore, man has no right to divulge his
sins to other people. It has been recorded in a *hadith* that Allah has
not allowed the believers to demean and debase themselves; naturally
there is no meanness worse than sinning and corruption; it is for this
reason that as soon as a believer sins, Allah sets a covering over that
sin and does not allow the sinner himself to remove the covering from
his sin and gives him the opportunity to repent.

Of course, this is not a general rule, because sometimes on the basis of
His wisdom and in order to discipline people, Allah, the Exalted,
divulges a bit of their sins and removes the covering from their
secrets. Revealing their secrets is a means of training them. That is to
say, in the case that he does not get corrected no matter how much he is
warned and cautioned over his ugly works, the best way to awaken and
train him is to disgrace him a bit so as to prevent him from committing
further vices. Of course, this is an existential matter and is related
to Allah and His control and no man has the right to disgrace others on
the pretext of correcting them.

Therefore, from the Islamic perspective no person has the permission to
disgrace neither himself nor other people; concealing and hiding
personal defects is a duty of all the believers. Sometimes, the
punishment of divulging sins is higher than sin itself and revealing
sins is considered as one of the delicate instances of spreading
corruption:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِي الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِي الدُّنْيا وَالآخِرَةِ وَاللهُ
يَعْلَمُ وَأَنْتُمْ لاَ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely (as for) those who love that scandal should speculate
respecting those who believe, they shall have a grievous chastisement in
this world and the hereafter, and Allah knows, while you do not
know.”***[^2]

Like scandal-mongering, sanctimony and outward adornment too is an ugly
thing; it is unacceptable for man to portray himself as better than how
he actually is. In spite of being a sinner and wrong-doer, he tries to
portray himself as a man of piety, faith, fear of Allah and supplication
and invocation so that the people may accord him respect.

Shaddad ibn Aws and ‘Ibadah ibn Samit narrate that in interpretation of
the *ayat*, ***“Say: I am a*** ***mortal like you; it is revealed to me
that your god is one God, therefore whoever hopes to meet his Lord, he
should do good deeds, and not join anyone in the service of his
Lord”***[^3], the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“A person who prays and fasts out of sanctimony and hypocrisy is a
polytheist.”[^4]

The Intention and Its Role in the Evaluation of Works
-----------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Make an intention for every one of your works, even eating
and sleeping.”

From the viewpoint of edification of character, mentioning this matter
is very important and constructive and in addition, this matter is
founded on a very important scientific and philosophical axiom which
calls for detailed discussion. The value of every work which man
discharges, even worship and adoration of Allah, is related to the
intention: the evaluation of one action performed as a result of two
differing intentions is not the same.

A person who accepts his friend’s invitation positively does a
praiseworthy work, but his action is considered as worship which gives
fruit to reward and profit if he accepts the invitation and goes to the
house of his friend with the intention to please Allah because Allah is
pleased to see the believers accepting the invitations of their fellow
believing brothers [and having good relations].

Or, he is fasting a recommendable fast and one of his friends, ignorant
of this fact, invites him to partake of food; in the case that he breaks
his fast for the sake of pleasing Allah, his action is considered as
worship and gives fruit to divine reward and profit; but if he breaks
his fast for the reason that he is pleased with the food and longs for
it, his action has no reward because it was not done for the good
pleasure of Allah. Therefore, this very eating has divine reward and
profit if it is done for the sake of pleasing Allah and has an
invaluable role in the perfection and spiritual ascendance of man.

Therefore, heed has to be paid to this fact that man can discharge all
his daily works, starting from trivial actions such as sleeping, eating,
looking, and even joking up to the more important actions such as prayer
and fasting for the good pleasure of Allah in the case that they are
discharged in the direction of servitude and obedience of Allah.

Some of the great people used to pause a while before doing anything
they wanted to do until they got sure that their intention was purely
for the good pleasure of Allah and they were certain that the work has
been performed for Allah. Or, if a question was asked of them, they
never responded with haste and before reflecting a little and purifying
the intention in their hearts. Then, they used to give the response for
the good pleasure of Allah.

This point is indicative of the fact that a believer can be so smart and
sharp that he can make every single moment of his lifespan in the course
of Allah and His good pleasure. Therefore, it is as well possible to
have a pure and correct intention in regard to pleasures of the flesh,
actions which both give pleasure and are acts of worship at the same
time.

Man can attain both the pleasures of the world and the gratifications of
the hereafter. In such instances a medium between the world and the
hereafter is possible. It is in cases that there is incompatibility
between two actions that a medium cannot be found, for example between
the obligatory [*wajib*] works and the forbidden [*haram*] actions for
which a medium is impossible. But if man has a divine intention in doing
permissible actions, he attains both the pleasure of this world thereby
increasing his bodily energy and vigor and brings to hand divine reward
and profit. Of course, the divine intention itself has stages and one of
its stages is a firm decision to abstain from sin and quit disobedience
of Allah’s will.

The deceased ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, may he reside in Allah’s Garden of
bliss, used to narrate that whenever Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) woke up to pray
the optional night prayers [*nafilah*], he used to take a cold bath in
order to increase his physical vigor and preparedness.

It is natural for a person such as Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) who from morning to
night was at the battlefront or was busy doing some other social duties
in addition to performing five hundred and/or one thousand *rak‘at*s of
prayer to be exhausted and not to have enough energy and vigor for
waking up at night to pray. It is for this reason that taking a cold
bath increases his energy, vigor and liveliness.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 385.

[^2]: Surat al-Nur 24:19.

[^3]: Surat al-Kahf 18:110.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p. 248.


