Lesson 19: The Greatness of Allah’s Status in the Viewpoint of the Angels
=========================================================================

“O Abu Dharr! Allah has angels who as a result of fear of Him have their
heads permanently bowed [in submission] while standing on their feet up
to the Day of Resurrection. Then they all say, ‘Purity and praise are
for you, we did not worship you as you deserved to be adored.”

We have previously discussed invocation and remembrance of Allah. It has
been said that invocation of Allah ought to be done as a result of
humility, modesty and with the presence of heart; not as a result of
habit and futile utterances of the tongue. Now, the discourse regards
what things play a role in bringing about attention and presence of
heart at the time of invocation of the divine name of Allah. It is for
this reason that the Noble Prophet (S) embarks upon explicating the
point which has excellent effects in bringing about attention to Allah
and perceiving his divine presence at the time of invocation of the name
of Allah.

The Role of Arousing Hope and Fear
----------------------------------

In a natural way, man’s motivation in regard to volitional works is hope
for reward and fear of harm; of course the realm of reward and harm is
very wide: for some people the reward lies in these same worldly
benefits and material facilities and for some people reward and benefit
belong to the hereafter. In the same way, some material and worldly
losses are taken into consideration and for some people losses and
divine punishment of the hereafter are taken into consideration. Higher
than these two types, for the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah, reward lies
in perceiving the presence of Allah and deriving benefit and the
pleasure of Allah and their loss lies in being deprived of that
prosperity and perfection.

Their fear is in respect to being deprived of the beatific presence of
Allah and without the least doubt this fear is more than the fear of
other people in regard to the losses of the world and the hereafter is
higher. Of course, the reality of this issue is not known to us and is
far from our comprehension; we briefly deduce from the *ayat*s [verses
of the Qur’an] and *hadith*s there is such fear as well. (We hope Allah,
the Exalted, will grant us the grace and aptitude to perceive this
meaning by means of deriving benefit from the enlightening words of the
*Ahl al-bayt* (*‘a*).)

For every reason fear of Allah and/or fear of harm which appears by
means of man himself and can be repelled by Allah causes man to attain
deeper attention and in the same way eagerness for reward and profit and
that which Allah grants to His slave, or eagerness for being in the
beatific divine presence also gives rise to more attention and presence
of heart.

Even if for a lot of people fear plays a greater role in arousing and
compelling them to action and freeing them from negligence and making
them perceive the danger and harm. Every person can test himself as to
whether they become more impelled to take action by listening to fearful
news which foretells extra danger and harm for them or hope and reward.

For us endeavor to repel harm is more important than attracting reward.
Perhaps, this very point has become the cause that the Glorious Qur’an
pays more heed to warning and premonition than it does to giving good
news and tidings and the prophets (S) have been introduced as warners.
In some *ayat*s the prophets (*‘a*) have been introduced as both warners
and givers of glad tidings, like the *ayat*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... فَبَعَثَ اللهُ النَّبيّينَ مُبَشِّرينَ وَمُنْذِرِينَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…So Allah raised prophets as bearers of good news and as
warners…”***[^1]

And very few instances are found where the Prophets (*‘a*) have been
introduced as bearers of good tidings [*bashir* or *mubashshir*] but the
title of warners [*nadhir*] has been employed alone in a lot of
instances, like the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَکَادُ تَمَيَّزُ مِن الْغَيْظُ کُلَّمَا أُلْقِيَ فِيهَا فُوْجٌ
سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ يَأْتِکُمْ نَذِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Almost bursting for fury; whenever a group is cast into it, its
keeper shall ask them: did there not come to you a warner?”***[^2]

(Emphasis on the prophets (*‘a*) being warners is because their warnings
leave more effect in the hearts of the people than their glad tidings.)

Fear of Allah is one of the states having a lot of benefits for man,
especially if it becomes a stable habit and as has been mentioned, one
of its benefits and effects is remembrance and deep attention to Allah.
Even if there is no room for delving in this discourse deeper, but still
we will hint at certain issues in order to bring about more
comprehension of the *hadith*s which have been narrated in regard to
fear of Allah and also bringing about a deeper effect of fear of Allah
in the heart and soul.

The Essence of Fear and Dread of Allah
--------------------------------------

One of the questions which are treated is what the reality of fear is
and what causes play a role in giving rise to it and what effects does
it leaves behind? Do fear and awe differ from one another? These
discussions largely involve lexical aspects; in order to comprehend fear
and awe of Allah and the difference between these two, a lot of *ayat*s
and *hadith*s will be discussed. With regard to the application of fear
and awe in the *ayat*s and *hadith*s, there is no considerable
difference to be noticed and in some instances these two have been used
interchangeably.

Once man has perceived and felt the greatness of Allah, a feeling of
self-abasement, servility, humility and modesty appears in him. This
state and psychological reaction has been embedded in the nature of man.
(Of course, this state and reaction is not confined to man, the other
living creatures also have this feeling vis-à-vis those that are
stronger than them.) Usually, this state is also called awe and in
reality fear is employed in place of awe. When man perceives the
greatness of another one, even if he poses no danger and harm to him, he
feels in himself the feeling of humility and lowliness, as if he has
lost his being.

Sometimes, fear denotes fear of harm which is directed at man—usually
fear has been used in this sense—naturally the application of fear in
regard to Allah implies dread of the divine retribution and requital
which are likely to be earned as a result of man’s bad works.

With regard to the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah and people who have
attained higher levels of servitude and obedience of Allah, their fear
sometimes arises as a result of paying heed to the majesty of Allah and
sometimes due to the possibility of being deprived of the beatific
vision of Allah [*liqa’ Allah*] because the beatific vision of Allah and
presence in his divine realm is not a definite and certain matter and is
likely to either disappear or never occur at all.

Therefore, attention to this meaning causes the appearance of fear of
Allah in the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah because the honor of being in
the beatific presence of Allah and being accepted in His divine presence
is the greatest perfection and prosperity and man’s hope is to attain
divine knowledge and the greatest gratification for him is feeling that
he is in the presence of Allah. A bit further than that level, we
perceive how much the happiness of Allah brings pleasure to faith. A
friend who feels that his beloved is happy and pleased with him fears
lest he becomes deprived of that happiness, pleasure and love of his
beloved.

This is the highest kind of fear and dread for a person who has attained
love. Lower than that is fear as a result of divine retribution and
requital of the hereafter which is the meaning intended in most of the
*ayat*s and *hadith*s.

This stage plays an intermediary role for attaining higher levels
because for us who up to now have not attained higher levels of
awareness, this medium level of fear of Allah becomes the cause of our
being heedless to the world and its pleasures and is itself a cause for
abstaining from sins and keeping aloof from worldly contaminations; of
course, this is not a small thing that in man exists an inward cause for
abstaining and fleeing from obsession with the world and sins.

For people who have low objectives, fear of Allah denotes dread of
worldly problems and encumbrances. Fear lest Allah inflicts them with
disease, or lest they lose their dignity and become lowly, and lose the
respect of people and/or fear lest they lose their beloved one. (For
people who have faith in Allah, dread of becoming entangled in problems
and afflictions and dejections is a kind of fear of Allah and in short
is desirable and most of the prophets’ (*‘a*) warnings intend this type
of fear of Allah.)

The Benefit and Status of Fear of Allah
---------------------------------------

This discussion concerns the desirability and benefits of fear of Allah.
What value and benefit has fear of Allah got so as to be so much
recommended that man ought to endeavor to attain the station of fear and
know its course? The reality is that a lot of people have not
comprehended the good qualities and benefits of fear. Even if they know
that a lot of verses of the Qur’an have been revealed in regard to fear
of Allah and that people who are fearful of Allah have been praised but
still they do not know what benefit and gain there is in fear of Allah.
Once mention of the states of fear of the prophets (*‘a*) and the saints
[*awliya’*] of Allah and the front-men of religion is made, they
surprisingly ask as to why ought man to be so fearful and cry so much
that his eyes get damaged and gus face injured!?

It has been narrated in regard to John the Baptist, in whom the station
of fear of Allah had appeared and manifested more than the other
prophets (*‘a*), that he used to cry so much that his eyes and face used
to get injured, to the extent that his mother used to bandage the sores
on his face so as to reduce the pain caused by flowing tears. When man
hears these incidents, he gets amazed that why ought a Prophet of Allah
(*‘a*) to fear so much!? If amongst us a person was in such a state and
fears this much, if we do not say that he is mad, then at least we
affirm that his state is not normal and not natural!

If we look at the verses of the Qur’an with the intention of taking
lesson and admonition, we gather that fear of Allah has been introduced
as a condition for deriving benefit from the admonitions of the prophets
(S) and attaining prosperity.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا تَنْذِرُ مَن اتَّبَعَ الذِّکْرَ وَخَشِيَ الرَّحْمَنَ
بِالْغَيْبِ فَبَشِّرْهُ بِمَغْفِرَةٍ وَأَجْرٍ کَرِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You can only warn him who follows the reminder and fears the
Beneficent God in secret; so announce to him forgiveness and an
honorable reward.”***[^3]

In this *ayat*, Allah advises the Noble Prophet (S) to direct his
calling and guidance at people who fear Allah in the hearts and whose
natural dispositions have not yet been completely contaminated by sin,
wrong doing and obscurities. This type of people benefits from the
calling and directives of the prophets, not that person who has no fear
and dread of Allah perpetrates sin audaciously and without any guilty
feelings at all. Without the least doubt, his heart is dark and is
harder than the rock and there is no aperture in his inner soul for the
penetration of light and brightness.

In another verse, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَی النَّفْسَ عَن الْهَوَی \*
فَاِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِي الْمَأْوَی
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and
forbids the soul from low desires, then surely the Garden—that is the
abode.”***[^4]

Definitely fear is contrasted with hope and optimism, and Allah states,
*“And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord”*, He
does not state that “as for him who hopes to stand in the presence of
his Lord”; this show that fear of Allah results in preventing the
disobedience of the carnal soul and setting foot on the course of
guidance and hope in the mercy of Allah has no effect in this regard.

In another verse, Allah states that after the high station and status of
the people of faith and good works, paradise and its blessings are
especially reserved for those who fear Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَزَاؤُهُمْ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ‌ تَحْتِهَا
الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا رَضِي اللهُ عَنْهُمْ وَرَضُوا
عَنْهُ ذَلِکَ لِمَنْ‌ خَشِيَ رَبَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Their reward with their Lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which
rivers flow, abiding therein forever; Allah is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him, that is for him who fears his
Lord.”***[^5]

In another verse, fear, dread, humility, submissiveness and
self-abasement in the presence of Allah has been mentioned as one of the
most delicate qualities of the scholars of religion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... إِنَّمَا يَخْشَی اللهَ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ الْعُلَمَاءُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…those of His servants who are possessed of knowledge fear
Allah…”***[^6]

In another instance, Allah warns the Muslims against fear of the
oppressors and orders them to fear Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... فَلاَ تَخْشَوْهُمْ وَاخْشَوْنِي وَلأُتِمَّ نِعْمَتِي عَلَيْکُمْ
وَلَعَلَّکُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…so do not fear them, and fear Me; that I may complete my favor on
you and that you may walk on the right course.”***[^7]

In another place, he states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا ذَلِکُمْ الشَّيْطَانُ يُخَوِّفُ أَوْلِيائَهُ فَلاَ
تَخَافُوهُمْ وَخَافُونَ إِنْ کُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is only the Satan that causes you to fear from his friends, but
do not fear them, and fear Me if you are believers.”***[^8]

The Status of the Fear of the Leaders and Saints [Awliya’] of Allah
-------------------------------------------------------------------

A brief look at the invaluable role of fear of Allah and the praise that
has been made in regard to it makes us comprehend why the saints
[*awliya’*] of Allah used to preserve the highest level of this state in
themselves, by studying the states of the Noble Prophet (S) and the Pure
Imams (*‘a*) we come across amazing states which if one or two *hadith*s
had been narrated about them, there was room for man to doubt the
existence of those states but they have not been narrated once or twice,
on the contrary a lot of *hadith*s have been narrated in a successive
way or with unbroken chains of transmission in regard to these states,
to the extent that whenever we remember the personality of Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*), our minds are associated with his weeping and wailing and
implorations and it is not possible at all to imagine Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*)
without having an image of fear of Allah and also it is not possible at
all to remember Imam al-Sajjad (*‘a*) without the state of fear and
dread of Allah. The *Du‘a’ Abu Hamzah al-Thumali* and the rest of his
supplications are delicate cases in point and are indicative of the
existence of his extraordinary fear of Allah which is unimaginable for
us.

It has been narrated in a *hadith* that at the time of performing the
ritual ablution, the state of Imam ‘Ali used to undergo change and his
entire being used to shake. Likewise, it has been narrated in regard to
Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) that whenever he came close to the
mosque, the color of his cheeks used to change and his body used to
tremble at the time of saying the inaugural phrase of prayer *Allah-u
Akbar.* Likewise, the rest of the Infallibles and Fatimah al-Zahra’
(*‘a*) were like this in the presence of Allah.

All this diligence in regard to keeping alive the quality of fear of
Allah in the inner conscience and recommendation to it and manifestation
and appearance of this state in the conduct of the leaders of religion
is because of the invaluable role of fear of Allah in the formation,
perfection and spiritual ascendance of man in his attainment of the
course of direction and servitude. Without doubt, there are various
effects and benefits depending on the levels of fear.

When we examine our psychological states, we gather that there is a
certain limit of fear of Allah in us and we perceive its special
benefits, but when we examine the states of people who have attained
higher awareness and have gone a step further than us in knowledge of
Allah and have attained perfection, we gather that their fear and dread
of Allah was different in form and so were the effects and benefits
different.

Of course, explaining the station of fear of Allah and its nature and
effects is problematic and in order for this topic to become clearer,
mentioning this point that when man perceives a great thing vis-à-vis
himself, it gives him a state under whose auspices he feels that he has
lost his being and does not see his being any more. In other words, when
man feels a greatness, he melts in it; like ice which melts under the
rays of the sun. This melting and forgetting himself is an effect and
special state which appears as a result of perceiving the greatness of
Allah.

With regard to the previous discussions and issues about which books of
ethics and mystics have been written, man attains perfection once he
feels in himself utmost lowliness, self-abasement and humility in the
face of Allah, the Exalted, and His endless majesty. The mystics have
called this state the station of complete denial of the self or the
station of annihilation; in this case man no longer perceives himself
and once he sees himself no longer, he perceives Allah and His
greatness. In technical terms, he comprehends that besides attachment
nothing else exists.

Even if this talk is interesting and admirable but still the truth is
that only a few people have ever attained this station and we have a
long distance with that level. We ought not to think that our problem
will be solved by learning a few terms; our problem will only be solved
by perceiving realities and under the auspices of servitude and
obedience of Allah and following the way of the Infallible and Pure *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*).

We ought to try to take steps along their course and give room to rays
of their attentions, fear and dread of theirs in our hearts, so that as
a result of the capability and aptitude that we have we may draw nearer
to Allah. Attention to those high stations and acknowledgement of their
existence is beneficial to us, on the condition that we ought not to
become proud and not imagine that we have attained those stations.

The Perfection of Man and the Feeling of Humility and Lowliness in Regard to Allah
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Therefore, the perfection of man draws nearer when he melts in the face
of Allah and does not see any autonomy for himself and perceives himself
as dependent and in need of Allah; and the more man sees himself as
dependent and low, the nearer he draws to Allah. The way of attaining
this perfection is that once he perceives the greatness of Allah, a
feeling of lowliness and inferiority appears in him, for people who are
seeking perfection, knowledge and the high levels of servitude, this is
the best way.

For us fear is an undesirable state, but it is interesting that we ought
to know that the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah derive pleasure from their
fearful state and whenever they lose it once again try to recover it.
This state is so desirable and pleasurable to them that they never want
to be separated from it! We do not have the correct perception of that
state and cannot explain it well because we have not attained it. But
what we have gathered from the stories of the saints [*awliya’*] of
Allah is that those who possessed intense love used to derive pleasure
from suffering along the course of love. They derive pleasure from
crying as a result of absence from Him.

Despite that the origin of crying is sadness and sorrow, but because it
is for the Beloved, it is pleasure-giving to them. It is for this reason
that we assert that fear of Allah is desirable and constructive for the
saints [*awliya’*] of Allah and they are not displeased with melting in
the presence of Allah and having a state of fear and awe; at least they
know that this itself is a prerequisite to attaining eternal
gratification beyond which there is no other pleasure.

For this reason the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah and the leaders of
religion used to accord great importance to fear of Allah, because they
believed that it was the best factor for annihilating the rebellion of
the carnal soul and restraining them from the feelings of needlessness
and autonomy and self-sufficiency and egotism. Likewise, this state is
the best method of attaining the stage of annihilation in Allah [*fana’
fi Allah*].

In this regard, what ought to be made clear is that once some people
learn terms such as ‘the station of annihilation and absorption in
Allah’ [*maqam-i mahw wa* *fana’ fi Allah*], they fantasize that they
have become mystics and have attained high positions. It is good for
this group to test themselves and see whether the feeling of fear of
Allah exists in them or not; has there been a night in their lives when
they did not sleep as a result of fear and awe of Allah? Have their eyes
ever been swollen as a result of their crying as a result of fear of
Allah?

It is very easy for man to claim that they have attained annihilation in
Allah and no longer need these states and stations but we ought to
carefully examine as to whether a little bit of the state that had been
attained by John the Baptist (*‘a*) exists in us or not. Has any effect
appeared in us as a result of these states?

A person never becomes a mystic by making claims and learning a few
mystical terms. This is a very long path filled with dangers; to quote
that great man the deceased Ayatullah Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Amoli, may he
reside in Allah’s Garden of eternal bliss, traversing this course is
harder than uprooting a mountain by means of eye lashes [as the tools].

If a person wants to trudge the course of divine awareness, he has to
make himself ready to endure a lot of hardships, ascetic self-discipline
and keeping vigil at night; the path has to be trudged in the way that
travelers have traversed it [before]. We ought to observe how the saints
[*awliya’*] of Allah like Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) and Imam al-Sajjad (*‘a*)
traveled this path.

Fear of Allah and Fleeing from Sin and Obsession with Popularity and Position
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

According to what has previously been discussed, one of the effects of
fear of Allah for people who have attained high spiritual stations is
annihilation or absorption in Allah but for ordinary people, the
greatest produce of fear of Allah is abstinence from sin and forsaking
wrong-doing. When man perpetrates sin, he aspires to bring to hand some
benefit or attain some pleasure and gratification, whether that pleasure
is real or imaginary, whether that gratification is licentiousness or
from the category of acquiring titles and popularity and position.

What can refrain man from such futile urges, which are a cause of sin
and deviation, and free him from the trap of the Devil, is fear of
Allah; attention to the fact that sin produces ominous effects and
deprives him of the eternal and permanent blessings of the hereafter,
makes him entangled in everlasting punishment (without the least doubt,
the more the fear of Allah, the more its effects.)

It has been narrated in *hadith* that if there is fear of Allah in the
heart of man, there will remain no room for love and obsession with
power and position. That is to say a person who fears Allah is not
obsessed with position, does not chase after being beloved by the people
and having a good name and popularity. Ambition for position is the
greatest calamity for man. It has been recorded in some *hadith*s that
the greatest calamity for the believers is love of wealth and position.
Obsession with status connotes seeking position and leadership. The
thing which can remedy love of position, which is the last immodest
quality to exit the hearts of the truthful, is fear of Allah:

Without the least doubt, the mania for fame, love of position and rank
leaves the mind of a person who perceives the greatness of Allah and
comprehends his own minuteness and smallness vis-à-vis Allah and knows
what dangerous repercussions sin has for his world and hereafter.
Therefore, the greatest effect of fear of Allah in us is flight from
becoming tainted by sin. Of course, love of Allah has become stable in
people whose knowledge has become complete and they yearn to reach the
beatific presence of Allah.

It is this very love of Allah and yearning to attain the beatific
presence of Allah that causes them to overlook [anything] other than the
Beloved but this exclusively pertains to the worthy and we have not
attained that position of love of Allah. The only thing which is
attainable for us is strengthening fear of Allah in our hearts, so that
as a result of that we may remain invulnerable to sin and bit by bit
attain the aptitude to love Allah in our hearts and arrive at high
levels of love and divine knowledge.

The Role of Perceiving the Status of the Fear of the Lovers of Allah and the Angels
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that talk concerning fear of Allah and its importance and benefits
has been brought up, the issue arises as to what we ought to do in order
to give rise to fear of Allah in us? One of the best ways to arrive at
this level is to look at the degree of the fear of people who are
beloved by Allah. Without the least doubt, attending to their
[spiritual] states and their boundless fear of Allah is the best way to
motivate us to attain fear of Allah. This is the same method which the
Noble Prophet (S) has pursued in this *hadith*.

Among the most beloved slaves of Allah are the angels. The Gracious
Qur’an, describing these worthy servants of Allah who are pure from any
contamination states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُسَبِّحُ الرَّعْدُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَالْمَلاَئِکَةُ مِنْ خِيفَتِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the thunder declares His glory and praise, and the angels too
for awe of Him…”***[^9]

With regard to what has been mentioned that knowing the majesty of Allah
and paying heed to it give rise to fear and dread of Allah, we find a
fine example of this knowledge in the angels of Allah, as the Noble
Prophet (S) has expressed in this report that a group of them who are in
the divine presence of Allah perceive themselves as small and low and
are humbly standing with lowered heads in fear and dread of Allah since
the beginning of their creation to the Day of Resurrection. Perhaps,
they lack the courage to raise their heads as a result of the intensity
of fear of divine need and worry and anxiety and/or as a result of
attending to the infiniteness and majesty of Allah.

When the angels of Allah who are pure from any contamination and sin are
scared of divine need in this way, they drop their heads before His
majesty and tremble and do not dare raise their heads as a result of
feeling guilty of neglecting worship of Allah, is it not worthwhile that
us who are stricken by sin and have been ensnared into the fetters of
the carnal soul and the deadly trap of the Devil not to raise our heads
as a result of excess shame and embarrassment?

A finer example of the state which the angels have in regard to Allah is
when we find ourselves confronted by a great person; we lose ourselves,
our tongues do not have the ability to speak and involuntarily drop our
heads. Once people who had experienced the greatness of Imam Khomeini’s
personality and knew him completely were in his presence, it used to
seem as though the personality of Imam Khomeini used to melt them like
ice as a result of the excess greatness and awe of Imam Khomeini. They
used to find themselves facing a majestic mountain of knowledge and
power and used to feel they are completely nothing. This is one of the
stages of the servants of Allah.

Allah has angels who even the great angels hardly perceive their
greatness. It has been narrated in a report that the Angel Gabriel
revealed his true image only a few times to the Noble Prophet (S). The
Noble Prophet (S) stated that at the time of his appearance and
manifestation, the Noble Prophet used to witness his light encompassing
the East and West.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) states,

“One day the Noble Prophet (S) was seated and the Angel Gabriel was next
to him. Suddenly, Gabriel looked at the sky and the light from him
reflected in the sky and its intensity was continually increasing until
it attained the color of saffron. Then, Gabriel drew himself close to
the Noble Prophet (S) and the Noble Prophet looked at the sky. Then, he
saw that the light of Gabriel had encompassed the West and East of the
cosmos in entirety and was getting close to the earth.”[^10]

Of course, the rank of the Noble Prophet (S) and his luminousness is
further than that of the Angel Gabriel, but the Noble Prophet (S)
perceived such greatness of Gabriel because his reality manifested
itself on the human nature of the Noble Prophet (S).

[^1]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:213.

[^2]: Surat al-Mulk 67:8.

[^3]: Surat Ya Sin 36:11.

[^4]: Surat al-Nazi‘at 79:40-41.

[^5]: Surat al-Bayyinah 98: 8.

[^6]: Surat Fatir 35:28.

[^7]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:150.

[^8]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:175.

[^9]: Surat al-Ra‘d 13:13.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 292.


