Lesson 1: The Quality of Servitude and the Path to Eternal Bliss
================================================================

The *hadith* which we have put forward as the pivot of our discussion is
one of the most comprehensive and rewarding exhortations of the Noble
Prophet (S)[^1] to one of his most eminent companions by the name of Abu
Dharr. The text of this *hadith* has been recorded in the distinguished
books entitled “*Makarim al-Akhlaq*”, “*Amali Shaykh Tusi*”, “*Majmu‘ah
Warram*” and “*Bihar al-Anwar*”*.* With Allah’s grace we have quoted it
from “*Bihar al-Anwar*”*,* and we will set about explaining and
elucidating it as far as we can.

Abu al-Aswad Du’ili says, “When Abu Dharr was living in exile in
Rabadhah, I went to visit him. While I was there with him, he narrated a
*hadith* to me. Abu Dharr said, ‘Early one morning, I went to see the
Noble Prophet (S) in the Mosque. He was seated with no one present save
‘Ali (*‘a*)[^2]. After being admitted in His Holiness’ audience and
subsequent to greeting him with respect, I availed myself of the
opportunity and presented my humble request to him. I said ‘May my
father and mother be thy ransom! Give me a piece of advice by means of
which Allah will grant me good’.’

“The Noble Prophet (S) kindly stated,

‘O Abu Dharr! What a noble man you are, and you are surely reckoned as
one of our household’…”

The grammatical form ‘*af‘il bih*’ in Arabic functions as an exclamation
phrase [*sighah ta‘ajjub*]; that is to say, it is used when a person is
surprised at something. For instance, they say ‘*ajmil bik*’ to mean
“How beautiful you are!” when they are amazed at the beauty and charm of
someone. Therefore, the meaning of ‘*akrim bik*’ [in the above-mentioned
narration’s Arabic text] is “What a noble man you are!”

The application of the term ‘noble’ [*karim*] by the Prophet (S) on such
a man as Abu Dharr speaks clearly about the eminence, status and rank of
that great companion in the perception of His Holiness (S). In addition,
in order to lay emphasis on the above statement, the Noble Prophet (S)
has included Abu Dharr among his (S) kith and kin, the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*). (The Noble Prophet (S) has stated the same about Salman Farsi,
when he says, “Salman is one of us, the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*).”)

In continuation of the *hadith*, the Prophet (S) embarks upon advising
Abu Dharr:

“I give you advice with the expectation that you will safeguard it and
act upon it; because this counsel consists of all the paths which lead
to good and prosperity. If you put this will and counsel into practice,
the good of both the world and hereafter will become inexpensive for
you.”

The term ‘will’ in the above statement means a piece of advice and
exhortation, not the will [or testament] that is made at the time of
someone’s death. Also ‘*tariq*’ and ‘*sabil*’ both denote road, but
‘*tariq*’ connotes a wide and main route while ‘*sabil*’ means a
subsidiary course.

Two meanings can be inferred from the term ‘*kiflan*’: one is that it
denotes additional and the second meaning is twofold mercy. The Gracious
Qur’an has employed ‘*kiflan*’ in the second sense, that is to say
twofold mercy.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا اَيُّهَا الَّذينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللهَ وَآمَنُوا بِرَسُولِهِ
يُؤْتِکُمْ کِفْلَيْنِ مِنْ رَحْمَتِهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah and believe in
his Apostle: He will give you two portions of his mercy…”***[^3]

Therefore, the purport of the Noble Prophet’s (S) words will be as
follows: If you put my advice into practice, you will attain twofold and
additional good. But the second possibility is that ‘*kiflan*’ connotes
the world and the hereafter, in which case the meaning of the sentence
shall be: If you act upon what I have said, you will have attained the
prosperity of the world and the hereafter for yourself.

Worship and the perception of Allah
-----------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Worship Allah as though you are seeing Him, because if you
do not see Him, He nevertheless sees you.”

If this part of the *hadith* has not been reported recurrently, then at
least it is equivalent to successive narration and has been related by
various channels and mainly by Abu Dharr and with different expressions.
In regard to this meaning, it has thus been narrated in another
*hadith*:

“Goodness means that you ought to worship Allah as if you see Him…”[^4]

Maybe the best advice for Abu Dharr, a man who has been trudging the
path of devotion to Allah for many long years and a person who aspires
to derive optimum benefit from the Prophet’s (S) recipes in order to
attain felicity is to inculcate in him the method of procuring benefit
from worship and open a way in front of him that leads to acquiring the
best fruits from his acts of adoration, and that implies having the
presence of heart during worship.

The means of attaining the presence of heart is practice and exercise
and perceiving the presence of Allah: that is to say man ought to always
perceive himself in the presence of Allah and close to Him, because if
man becomes fond of Allah, never does he get tired of conversing with
Him and listening to His words; for the reason that the more the lover
is in the presence of his beloved and speaks with Him, the thirstier he
becomes for more love.

The reason why we quickly get tired when performing our acts of worship
and why we recite our prayers with haste and with the intention of
quickly embarking upon our daily duties, and the reason why not only do
we not feel any pleasure from worship but reckon that we are trapped in
a cage once prayer takes long is because we do not perceive before whom
we are standing and with whom we are talking! It is possible for us to
discern our status of servitude in regard to Allah and conceive His
lofty position and greatness by means of acquired knowledge, but this
acquired knowledge has not had any effect on our hearts and does not
give fruit to real affinity with Allah.

That which causes real and true connection with Allah is the presence of
heart when we are performing acts of devotion. The only acts of worship
which we are successful at fulfilling only serve to clear us from
religious obligation and we do not derive the kind of benefit which we
ought to gain because our acts of devotion have no life-giving spirit
and are discharged without the presence of heart. Pre-occupation with
worldly affairs is an impediment to rapport with Allah and the presence
of heart during acts of devotion, and that is the problem with which we
are faced.

It is always asked that what ought we to do in order to acquire presence
of heart when performing acts of devotion? Attaining the presence of
heart needs strict exercise and self-discipline. In the beginning, man
has to sit in solitude and contemplate that Allah is seeing him. Some
ethical mentors used to recommend making use of imaginative aspects of
the mind during this exercise; that is to say that if you are in
spiritual retreat in a room and/or are spending your days in a secluded
place, imagine that a man is hidden and is watching your conduct and
that you do not see him.

Is your behavior the same when someone is watching you with when no one
is watching you? Especially when that person is not an ordinary man but
a person you consider as of great importance and believe that your
destiny lies in his hands? You are desirous of being beloved by him and
of him loving you. Can you in this case completely pay no heed to him
and get busy with other matters?

If man, with the help of exercise, conceives this point that he is in
the presence of Allah and that Allah constantly looks at him and even if
man himself does not see Allah, Allah nonetheless sees him, he will bit
by bit attain presence of heart when performing acts of worship and such
kind of worship has a life-giving spirit. This kind of worship will not
only result in clearing us from duty, but will result in spiritual
progress, ascendance through the stations of perfection and nearness to
Allah. Without doubt, Imam ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) words bear witness to this
issue:

“Beware of disobeying Allah in solitude because the Witness of that
situation is also the Judge.”[^5]

It is therefore necessary for people who have not yet had practice to
have presence of heart during prayer to set aside some time during the
course of the day for sitting in seclusion and concentrating on this
point that Allah is seeing them. Of course, there is no doubt that man
is always in the presence of Allah and Allah sees him; as the Noble
Qur’an hints at this reality in several instances, among them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُ خائِنَةَ الأَعْيُنِ وَمَا تُخْفِی الصُّدُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts
conceal.”***[^6]

In his short sayings, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“O people! Fear Allah who is such that when you speak He hears and when
you conceal a secret (in your hearts) he knows it. Prepare yourself to
meet death which will overtake you even if you run away, catch you even
if you stay and remember you even if you forget it.”[^7]

In the first section of this *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) has cited
worship as man’s key to prosperity.

Thereafter, in the following sections, he begins to explain the stages
that worship of Allah consists of. In addition to that, in the first
section of the *hadith*, recommendation has been made with respect to
the quality of worship and the fact that acts of devotion ought to have
a life-giving spirit, and that spirit is the presence of heart, and in
reality, no mention with regard to the origin of worship has been made,
as though that point has been taken for granted.

Worship And Adoration Of Allah Is A Means Of Ascending And Rising Through The Stations Of Perfection For The Believers
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is worthy of mentioning that the nature of man is concealed in
devotion and adoration of Allah and man without worship has no
distinction of freedom of choice over the other animals and only enjoys
existential privileges, without having discharged their right (without
having earned those privileges himself). A person who abstains from
worshiping Allah has in reality closed the road towards human perfection
on himself because attaining human perfection is only feasible by this
means.

If we pay attention to the ways of life of great men, we notice that one
of the inseparable principles of their lives is devotion to Allah. All
the people who had the merit of achieving the status of ‘*Kalimullah*
(the Interlocutor of Allah)’, ‘*Khalilullah* (the Friend of Allah)’, and
‘*Habibullah* (the Friend of Allah)’ only arrived at those lofty
stations by means of traversing this course and undergoing hard and
difficult trials. Not even one individual can be found who attained
[even] one perfection from the volitional perfections of man without
devotional servitude to Allah. In addition to what has been said,
achieving stations such as the stations of contentment, certitude et
cetera et cetera have to be searched for in the adoration of Allah.

Allah in the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْبُدْ رَبَّكَ حَتَّی يَأْتِيكَ الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And serve your Lord until there comes to you that which is
certain.”***[^8]

And with regard to the station of being well pleased with whatever Allah
decrees [*maqam-i rida*], it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ
غُرُوبِهَا وَمِنْ آنَاءِ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْ وَاَطْرَافَ النَّهَارِ
لَعَلَّكَ تَزْضَی
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Bear then patiently what they say, and glorify your Lord by the
praising of Him before the rising of the sun and before its setting, and
during the hours of the night do also glorify Him and during parts of
the day, that you may be well pleased.”***[^9]

The mission of all the Prophets (*‘a*) has been to direct people towards
adoration and worship of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي کُلِّ اُمَّةٍ رَسُولاً أَن اعْبُدُوا اللهَ
واجْتَنِبُوا الطّاغُوتَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly we raised in every nation an apostle saying: ‘Serve
Allah and shun the shaitan…’”***[^10]

One of the subjects on which the Gracious Qur’an lays great emphasis is
that everything in existence is preoccupied with worshiping Allah,
whether they like it or not:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسَبِّحُ لِلّهِ مَا فِي السَّمواتِ وَمَا فِي الأَرْضِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the
glory of Allah…”***[^11]

But this glorification is existential and performs no function in the
perfection of man. What plays a role in the perfection of man is worship
done of his own volition, and in other than this case stones and the
mountains too would attain their ultimate perfection by means of
existential worship.

The importance and value of worship and devotion to Allah reaches an
extent where Allah, the Exalted, states in the Gracious Qur’an that the
ultimate goal of creating the jinn and mankind is worship:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتَ‌ الْجِنَّ وَالإِنْسَ الاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should
worship Me.”***[^12]

In addition to what has been said, the sense of worship is man’s natural
disposition; that is to say, the need for worship has been kneaded and
concealed in the essence of man and this truth that no nation or
community has ever existed that did not engage in worship and adoration
of one kind or another can be inferred from studying the history of
religions and nations.

The stages of worship of Allah
------------------------------

### a) Knowledge of Allah

In continuation of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) embarks upon
propounding the stages of worship:

“Know O Abu Dharr that the first stage of devotion to Allah is knowledge
of Him. Verily, He is the first before whom there is none, He is the One
and the Only, and there is none like Him. He is the Everlasting, the
Eternal. He is the One who created the heavens and the earth and that
which is between them. Allah is the Knowing, the Kind and He is capable
of doing anything.”

In this section, the first stage of worship mentioned is knowledge of
Allah; of course, cognition of Allah has a great deal of stages, but
that which is necessary in worship and adoration of Allah is a general
awareness of Him; man ought to know that Allah exists and He is the
Creator of man and the world. If this stage of knowledge is not attained
by man, the turn does not come for worship and adoration of Allah.

For this reason, this stage of knowledge is prior to worship. Of course,
at the ultimate destination of his spiritual journey towards his
perfection, man reaches the highest stages of cognition and awareness
especially reserved for the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah, and we [the
ordinary people] cannot find our way to its reality and truth. We know
in brief that the ultimate knowledge which the saints [*awliya’*] of
Allah attain at the end of their spiritual wayfaring is very valuable
and high and that it is the last phase of devotion to Allah.

After man has attained the first stage of worship and has perceived that
Allah does exist, it is incumbent to meditate upon the attributes and
effects of Allah in order for that knowledge to become firm, grounded
and constant so that it does not only remain as a mental conception but
is turned into a present and lively awareness that leaves an impression
on man. This stage of cognition and knowledge which goes with reflection
is called ‘medium knowledge’ [*ma‘rifat-i mutawassit*].

Medium knowledge itself has different stages and covers a wide spectrum
and man can attain those stages by way of meditation and reflection on
divine signs and also by means of practical acts of devotion. It has
become clear from what has been said that meditation about the divine
attributes and effects and also knowing Allah better is itself worship
and a kind of volitional deed and that awareness, which is one of the
preliminaries of worship, is attained along with it. (Meditation and
reflection about divine signs is a proximate prerequisite [*muqaddamah
qaribah*] of cognition and attending class and studying books is the
remote precondition [*muqaddamat-i ba‘idah*].)

### b) Belief in the Prophet (S) and acknowledgement of his divine mission

“At the second stage you ought to believe in me and acknowledge that
Allah, the Exalted, has appointed me to be the giver of glad tidings,
the admonisher, the caller towards Allah by His permission and the light
of guidance for all mankind…”

Every one of the attributes mentioned in the *hadith*s and Qur’an about
the Noble Prophet (S) stand in need of explanation and interpretation,
and if our faith in the Noble Prophet’s (S) divine mission becomes
strong and complete, we will not get ensnared in a great number of
doubts. The lack of adequate knowledge and faith in regard to the Noble
Prophet (S) in a lot of Muslims of weak faith results in their getting
entangled in skepticisms and by the passage of time they get deviated
from the correct path and in the end, Allah forbid, they are drawn
towards disbelief; the reason for this is because they have not believed
that whatever the Noble Prophet (S) says is correct.

Some people of weak faith say that the Islamic laws which the Noble
Prophet (S) brought are not binding in our age. These injunctions and
decrees were meant for bringing order to the disorderly state of the
people of the Arabian Peninsula in the age of the Noble Prophet (S) and
there is no more need for Islamic laws in our age!

This [vain] talk is a result of their not having faith in Allah’s
Prophet (S), and if they had faith in the Noble Prophet’s (S) words in
which he stated, “I have been sent to all mankind”, they would not have
placed any limitations of time on his prophetic mission. In reality, it
must be said that all the deviations that appear in religion are a
result of weak faith in both Allah’s Prophet (S) and the fruits of his
divine mission.

### c) Love for the Prophet’s Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)

“The third stage is love for my *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), those whom Allah
has cleansed and purified from every kind of impurity.”

It can generally be said that the greatness of knowing the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) and their high position and loving them reaches an extent where
Imam Khomeini, may Allah be pleased with him, begins his
political-divine will with the Noble Prophet’s (S) saying, “Verily I
leave two priceless things for you, the Book of Allah and my [pure]
progeny…” Perhaps it was surprising to the people of the world that in
his final will the leader of the great Islamic revolution prides himself
on following that Pure and Infallible Household of the Noble Prophet
(S).

We do not know what lies [concealed] in this love and affection for the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and dependence on knowledge and cognition of them
and we may likely construe it to be a simple matter and mistakenly
imagine that we ought to love the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) because they are
the children and relatives of the Allah’s Prophet (S). If it were like
this, they would not have been introduced as being equivalent and the
same with the Gracious Qur’an. Emphasis upon love for the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) is not on account of their being the Noble Prophet’s (S) near
ones, for the reason that the Noble Prophet (S) had several wives and no
such recommendation has been made in regard to any one of them but this
emphasis is because Allah has purified them from every kind of impurity.

Likening the Ahl al-Bayt to Noah’s (‘a) vessel and the gate of repentance for the Children of Israel
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“Know O Abu Dharr! The Honored and Glorified Lord has made my *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) like the vessel of Noah (*‘a*), upon which everyone who
embarked got saved and whoever did not embark got drowned. Likewise,
they are similar to the gate of repentance [*bab hittah*] for the
Children of Israel which provided safety from the punishment to anyone
who entered it.”

The Noble Prophet’s (S) emphasis on love for the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)
and his likening them to the gate of repentance for the Children of
Israel is not a sentimental issue so that some people might mistakenly
imagine that the natural love and affection of the Noble Prophet (S) for
his children and near ones caused him to always make recommendations and
advices about friendship and fondness for them, but these counsels go
beyond natural love and affection and are made as a result of his
believing that the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) are the ship of salvation for
the Islamic *ummah* (universal community of the Muslims) and for the
reason that he is convinced that every person lost and bewildered in the
valley of perplexity will get saved from drowning in the sea full of
turbulence, contortion and deviations, in the same way that Noah’s
(*‘a*) community got saved from divine damnation by embarking upon
Noah’s ship and those who disobeyed, amongst them Noah’s son, perished
and got annihilated.

At the beginning of the Islamic call, when there was no talk about
division and disagreement as yet in the Islamic *ummah*, the Noble
Prophet (S) advises Abu Dharr that the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) are similar
to Noah’s (*‘a*) vessel. Man perishes if he has no connection with them
and if he does not emulate them. In reality, this is an admonition and
advice to the Muslims who succumb to deviations, fanaticisms and
discords that appear at the same time with the Noble Prophet’s (S)
passing away and to a number of opportunists and double-tongued
hypocrites who robbed other human beings of opportunities that the only
people who can save the Islamic *ummah* from danger and collapsing into
aberration, misguidance and deviation are the Pure and Infallible *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*), with ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (*‘a*) at their head.

Thereafter, the Noble Prophet (S) likens his Pure and Infallible *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) to the gate of deliverance [*bab hittah*] for the
Children of Israel (these two similes, the similitude to Noah’s (*‘a*)
vessel and the similitude to the gate of deliverance of the Children of
Israel have been narrated in a great number of *hadith*s by both the
Sunnis and Shi‘ahs and have reached the extent of successive
transmission). When the Children of Israel were afflicted by divine
wrath as a result of their sin and oppression, and when they wandered
for forty years in the wilderness, out of His mercy and as a result of
their penance, grief and turning back to Him, Allah once more opened the
door of repentance for them.

About this, the Qur’an states:

***“…And when We said: ‘Enter this city, then eat from a plenteous
(food) wherever you wish, and enter the gate making obeisance, and say,
forgiveness.’ We will forgive you your wrongs and give more to those who
do good (to others).”***[^13]

Every person who entered the gate, in addition to attaining honor and
prosperity, also got their sins forgiven. The Noble Prophet’s (S)
intention in citing this similitude is to explain this point that in the
same way that the Children of Israel secured their earthly and other
worldly salvation by means of entering the gate of repentance, the
Muslims too will guarantee their worldly and heavenly welfare if they
enter the door of knowledge and cognition of the Pure and Infallible
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and follow them.

The word ‘*hittah*’ literally means spilling and destroying; by saying
this word the Children of Israel were asking for forgiveness and the
destruction of their sins. Allah made it a means of attaining their
forgiveness. But a group among them did not have faith in Allah; they
took Allah’s word for a mockery and according to what has been recorded
in the *hadith*s, in place of the word ‘*hittah*’ they pronounced the
word ‘*hantah*’ which means wheat. Allah sent down upon them His divine
wrath because of their moral corruption and their refusing to repent and
seek forgiveness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبَدَّلَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا قَوْلاً غَيْرَ الَّذِي قِيلَ لَهُمْ
فَاَنْزَلْنَا عَلَی الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا رِجْزاً مِنْ السَّمَاءِ بِمَا
کانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who were unjust changed it for a saying other than that which
had been spoken to them, so We sent upon those who were unjust a
pestilence from heaven, because they transgressed.”***[^14]

The Noble Prophet (S) presented the Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt*
(*‘a*) as the gate whom following and obeying are a cause of worldly and
heavenly prosperity and freedom from eternal retribution, but the people
did not accept his word and instead of the Pure and Infallible *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*), they appointed other people and never used to see any
difference between Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) and the others and they used to
fantasize that in the same way that Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) is the son in law
of the Noble Prophet (S), ‘Uthman, too, was the Noble Prophet’s (S) son
in law!

The other message of this section of the *hadith* is that the most
fundamental stage of worship consists of matters of the heart and inner
deeds; that is to say, no person can derive enough benefit from worship
unless he has knowledge, faith in Allah, love for the Pure and
Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and conviction in the Noble Prophet (S).
For this reason, adoration is not confined to external matters and
outward deeds, but the origin and roots of devotion are inner
conceptions and all acts of worship that spring from the heart.

[^1]: The abbreviation, “S”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam [may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). [ed.]

[^2]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salam, ‘alayhim’us-salam, or ‘alayha’s-salam [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is mentioned after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imams from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [ed.]

[^3]: Surat al-Hadid 57:28.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 65, section [bab] 1, p. 116.

[^5]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 316, wisdom [hikmat] 316, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^6]: Surat al-Mu’min (or Ghafir) 40:19.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1178, wisdom [hikmat] 194, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^8]: Surat al-Hijr 15:99.

[^9]: Surat Ta Ha 20:130.

[^10]: Surat al-Nahl 16:36.

[^11]: Surat al-Jumu‘ah 62:1.

[^12]: Surat al-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^13]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:58.

[^14]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:59.


