Lesson 20: The Prophet’s (S) Description of Heaven and Hell
===========================================================

There are various ways of attaining the station of fear of Allah,
amongst which is contemplation on the spiritual states of the dreadful
and fearful of Allah whom knowing can aid man at selecting them as the
best role models in the course of attaining the state of fear and dread
of the presence of Allah. For this reason, in this section of the
*hadith*, the station of fear of the best of Allah’s slaves, the angels,
has been introduced and in the previous lesson we discussed about it.

Meditation about the Greatness of Creatures
-------------------------------------------

The other way of attaining the station of fear is meditation about the
greatness of creatures. Without doubt, comprehending the greatness,
stability and firmness of creatures leads man to understand better the
majesty and infinite wisdom of Allah and his own incapacity, inability
and indigence [in the face of Allah] and in this case undertake more
diligent endeavor in the direction of attaining perfection and
completion and forsake obeying the appetitive soul. In addition to this,
by knowing the majesty of Allah and his boundless authority and power,
he becomes acutely afraid and apprehensive of disobeying Allah.

By examining in religious texts and *hadith*s and verses of the Gracious
Qur’an the directives about knowledge of the greatness of creatures and
awareness of the majesty of the Creator, we find that Allah and the
saints [*awliya’*] of religion have taken a lot of effort to explain the
greatness of the creatures of Allah. They have set forth with their
clear explications the delicateness, stability, firmness and variety of
creatures and in this way used to incite people to look around
themselves and meditate about the creatures of Allah, ranging from very
small creatures to the big and great creatures.

In his brilliant explanation, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) makes meditation and
contemplation about the infinite power of Allah and the variety of His
blessings known as a means of being led to the correct path and to fear
of Allah:

“Had they pondered over the greatness of His power and the vastness of
His bounty, they would have returned to the right path and feared the
punishment of the Fire; but hearts are sick and eyes are impure. Do they
not see the small things He has created, how He strengthened their
system and opened for them hearing and sight and made for them bones and
skins? Look at the ant with its small body and delicate form. It can
hardly be seen in the corner of the eye, nor by the perception of the
imagination; how it moves on the earth and leaps at its livelihood. It
carries the grain to its hole and deposits it in its place of stay. It
collects during the summer for its winter, and during strength for the
period of its weakness. Its livelihood is guaranteed, and it is fed
according to fitness. Allah, the Kind, does not forget it and Allah, the
Giver, does not deprive it, even though it may be in dry stone and fixed
rocks.”[^1]

Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) narrates a thorough *hadith* that Zaynab the
perfume seller came to the Noble Prophet’s (S) house and asked about the
majesty of Allah, the Exalted. In response to her question, the Noble
Prophet (S) embarked upon comparing the cosmoses and seven skies and the
galaxies and also the minuteness and smallness of every one of them with
the other; one of his statements was:

“This earth and that which is inside it and that which is above it is in
the face of the second sky like a finger-ring that has fallen [or been
lost] in the desert.”[^2]

This relationship also exists regarding every cosmos when compared with
the cosmos above it until we arrive at the seventh sky, which too is
nothing when compared to the Divine Throne.

In order to give rise to wonderful fruits from meditation about the
expansiveness and greatness of the cosmos and to perceive the minuteness
and smallness of man, the scholars of ethics and divine instructors have
recommended that when you want to recite your prayers and attend to the
divine Essence, go to an expansive desert with boundless vastness
because it is in that case that you will better perceive your minuteness
in the presence of His majestic creation.

It is natural that as a result of man being confined to a closed and
confined environment, his imagination of the cosmos is limited to that
same tight environment but once he goes to the expansive desert and
witnesses the mountains and seas, he will have another conception of the
world. It has to be borne in mind that this is just in regard to the
expansiveness and greatness of the world, regardless of the comparison
of the earth with the sky and the first sky with the rest of the skies!

Nowadays, information which has been attained from the galaxies and
stars by means of telescopes and spaceships gives invaluable help to man
in understanding the created world. It is natural that if before worship
man thought a little about the greatness of creation, he would perceive
his smallness better and in this case get closer to Allah, because the
way of getting close to Allah is feeling small and minute in His
presence.

The Indescribable Greatness of the Resurrection
-----------------------------------------------

There is not the least doubt that the last world, among others heaven
and hell, are among the greatest creations of Allah whose conception and
perception are not feasible for us. On the basis of what is gathered
from the verses of the Qur’an and the *hadith*s, in the same way that we
are incapable of perceiving the greatness of Allah, we are incapable of
perceiving the greatness of the Day of Resurrection and its awe and
terror too and we cannot have any conception of it. But paying heed to
and taking a look at the explanation of the Qur’an and *hadith*s in
regard to the Day of Resurrection prepares us better to perceive our
smallness and circumstances in the face of the greatness of the
Resurrection and heaven and hell, which are signs of the greatness of
the Creator.

In regard to dread and terror that prevails over the Resurrection, the
Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَرَوْنَهَا تَذْهَلُ كُلُّ مُرْضِعَةٍ عَمَّا أَرْضَعَتْ
وَتَضَعُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ حَمْلٍ حَمْلَهَا وَتَرَی النَّاسَ سُكَاری وَمَا
هُمْ بِسُكَاری وَلَك‍ِنَّ عَذَابَ اللهِ شَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when you shall see it, every woman giving suck shall quit
in confusion what she*** ***suckled, and every pregnant woman shall lay
down her burden, and you shall see men intoxicated, and they shall not
be intoxicated but the chastisement of Allah will be severe.”***[^3]

The Resurrection plain is so terrifying and horrifying that man becomes
unconscious, such that he has no power to control himself. A mother, for
whom her most beloved one is her child, even worse a suckling baby who
has an intense material and emotional need of her, forgets the baby as a
result of fear and dread.

Once man carefully attends to the concept and purport of the *ayat*s of
the Qur’an, he will comprehend how daunting they are and impel man to
review his opinion in regard to their perceptions and vain activities, a
transformation will occur in man and will forsake that which is an
encumbrance on the path to guidance and prosperity.

But it is regrettable that we seldom pay attention to the purport of
these *ayat*s and content ourselves only with recitation and outward
form of *ayat*s and refrain from contemplating about the meanings and
perceiving their greatness. With regard to what has been mentioned, we
are incapable of perceiving the essence and greatness of the hereafter
and heaven and hell and our conception of the Resurrection, heaven and
hell is similar to the imagination and feeling which arise in the world.

If it is narrated to us about the fire of the hell and its burning, our
imagination of its burning is like the burning we feel when we put our
hands on fire and nothing more. Or, when mention is made about the
blessings and pleasures of heaven, our conception does not go further
than what we have known and felt in the world.

The utmost limit of man’s brain goes so far as to conceive things which
it has seen or their prototypes which it has witnessed, even then after
comparison, and it has no conception and imagination of things which it
has not seen. It is as a result of these very limitations in the
perception and comprehension and activities of the brain of man that
there is no option for explaining the attributes and qualities of the
last world save that they are explicated in forms which are similar to
what man perceives in the world, otherwise he will never at all
comprehend those qualities.

For this reason, it is possible for those qualities to have occurred a
million times for them to reflect and reproduce themselves in the realms
of our worldly comprehension and understanding and be effective,
otherwise if it is beyond the realm of our perception, it will not be
effective in us because it is not perceptible and comprehensible.

In regard to what has been mentioned, effort has been made in the Qur’an
and *hadith*s to explain the majesty of heaven and hell and the
blessings and punishments in the form of examples which people are
acquainted with. In this *hadith* too the Noble Prophet (S) has selected
this same method in order to explain the greatness of heaven and hell.

Describing a Section of the Tortures of Hell
--------------------------------------------

The Noble Prophet (S) explains a section of the punishments of hell to
Abu Dharr stating that if an insignificant amount of it appears in the
world, it will have very destructive and disastrous effects. He also
mentions an example from heavenly blessings which are unbearable for
earthly man. This elucidation is intended at guiding us lovers of the
world and its treasures so that as a result of comparing the world with
the hereafter, we may perceive the minuteness and smallness of the
world.

Even if the last world with all its indescribable largeness and
expansiveness is itself a specimen of the *ayat*s (signs) of Allah and
all have acquired existence with one existential resolution [of Allah]
but are themselves evidence of the majesty and power of the divine
Essence.

The Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! If on that day man had works equal to the works of seventy
prophets, he would count his works as few as a result of that which he
sees.”

We do not even have works equivalent to the works of one believer, what
with having the acts of adoration and works of the Noble Prophet (S) and
what with performing good works equivalent to the worship of seventy
prophets (S). Even if, assuming impossibility, we had such aptitude and
capacity as to perform works equivalent to the works of seventy prophets
(S), we would still not consider it equivalent to a minute particle on
the Resurrection once we see the greatness and expansiveness of that
Day.

The Last Day is so frightening and terrifying that without the grace and
favor of Allah even the works of seventy prophets (*‘a*) will not be of
any avail to us. For this reason, we always have to have hope in the
grace and mercy of Allah and safeguard the outpour of His clemency by
means of supplication and imploration and inward attention to His
expansive mercy. We ought not to rely on our works, because they do not
avail us anything.

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“And if a pail of the pus and filth of hell were poured on the eastern
part of the earth, the brains of the people living on the western part
of the earth would boil.”

In the Gracious Qur’an kinds of food for the dwellers of hell are
mentioned, amongst which is refuse [*ghislin*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَهُنَا حَمِيمٌ \* وَلاَ طَعَامٌ إِلاَّ مِنْ
غِسْلِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore, he has not today a true friend, nor any food except
refuse.”***[^4]

refuse [*ghislin*], which is the drink of the people of hell, denotes
filthy water which remains after washing clothes and utensils. That
water is very fetid and dirty as a result of sucking all the dirt and
smell out of the washed items. In reality, refuse is dirt and
contamination which is a result of the filthy and ugly works of man and
is so smelly, fetid and chocking that if a pail of it were poured in the
eastern part of the cosmos, the brains of those dwelling on the western
part of the world would boil.

Our conception of the boiling of man’s brain is limited to a very
inflamed and burning fire brought close to the head of a human being
until their brain boils and becomes exterminated but no matter how hot
and burning that fire might be, it is not effective when placed at a
distance of ten or more meters. But in the Resurrection, the dwellers of
the eternal infernal hell become so thirsty that they become compelled
to drink boiling and hot water one pail of which if poured on the
eastern part of the earth would boil and wipe out the brains of those
dwelling on the western part of it.

The fire of hell and the punishment of the grave and the Resurrection
are not comparable to the fire of earth and its punishment. The fire of
the world is cold and docile and only burns the surface and is easier to
endure than the fire of the eternal inferno but the fire of hell is pure
and even conscious. It is for this reason that no fire in the world
burns the soul but the fire of hell burns and melts the heart and soul
too in addition to the body. There is no doubt that the fire of hell and
its punishment are a reflection and consequence of man’s works in the
world.

The Reaction of People and Angels in Face of the Clamor and Roar of Hell
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) explains the intensity of the
roaring and clamor of hell stating:

“And when the hell roars, no angel and messenger remains standing save
that they fall on their knees and say, ‘O Lord! Give us redemption!’
Even Abraham forgets his son Isaac and says, ‘I am Your friend Abraham.
Forget me not’.”

Allah in the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقُوا فَفِي النَّارِ لَهُمْ فَيهَا زَفِيرٌ
وَشَهِيقٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So as to those who are unhappy, they shall be in the fire; for them
shall be sighing and groaning in it.”***[^5]

Interpreting this *ayat*, ‘Allamah Tabataba’i states:

“In the commentary of the Qur’an by Zamakhshari entitled, “*Kishaf*”,
‘*zafir*’ denotes air and breathing out and ‘*shahiq*’ implies breathing
in the air. Allah’s purport is that the dwellers of hell take air in
their chests and then release it and because of the hotness of the fire
and the greatness and magnitude of the punishment, raise their voices in
lamentation and wailing and mourning.”[^6]

According to the aforementioned commentary, in the same way that man
breathes in and out, hell too breathes in and out. By breathing out, the
hell takes out the flames and burning heat which embraces all the
dwellers of the inferno and by breathing in pulls the dwellers of hell
back inside. The Noble Prophet (S) states, “Once hell roars, all the
people, even the great prophets of Allah (*‘a*) and the angels residing
in His proximity become fearful and scared and fall on the ground,
forget all the people and things and only think about themselves.

They neither have the ability to move nor the tranquility to remain
calm, that is why they fall on their knees in humility and lowliness and
raise their hands asking for the infinite mercy of Allah and ask Him to
grant them redemption; such that Abraham (*‘a*) forgets his most beloved
son Isaac and says, “O Lord! I am Your friend Abraham. Forget me not and
grant me redemption from this great and deadly event.” This is an
example of the requital of Allah on the Day of Resurrection which would
drive all creatures into fright if it were to appear in the world.

In order to gather more awareness of hell and its tortures, it is
worthwhile to quote a thorough *hadith* from Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*):

“One day when the Prophet (S) was seated, the Angel Gabriel came close
to him in a sad and sorrowful state as a result of which his color had
transformed. The Prophet (S) stated, ‘Why are you sad and sorrowful?’
Gabriel replied, ‘O Muhammad! Why ought I not to be thus when the
breaths of hell have been released today?’ The Prophet (S) stated, ‘What
are the breaths of hell?’

He replied, ‘Verily Allah, the Exalted, created the fire, then let it
burn for a thousand years until it became red. Then, He ordered it to go
down for a thousand years until it became white. Then after that too He
ordered it to burn for a thousand years until the fire became black and
that is the black and dark fire. Therefore, if one hook of the chain of
the burning fire whose height is many inches high were let loose on the
world, the world would melt as a result of its fire’.”

After that the Noble Prophet (S) cried and the Angel Gabriel also cried.
Allah sent an angel to the two of them and that angel said, “Allah sends
His peace upon you and states that He protected you from committing sins
for which you would be punished.”

Heaven Is the Eternal Abode of the Believers and Righteous
----------------------------------------------------------

Without the least doubt, heaven and its blessings are among the greatest
creations of Allah and is allotted to people who traverse the path of
servitude and obedience to Allah and by means of faith and good works
have attained the highest human levels and in the end have got the
capacity of ascending the spiritual realms [or celestial world]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَم‍لُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ... وَلَهُمْ فِيهَا
أَزْوَاجٌ مُطَهَّرَةٌ وَهُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And convey good news to those who believe and do good deeds, that
they shall have gardens in which rivers flow…and they shall have pure
mates in them, and in them, they shall abide.”***[^7]

In another verse, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللهُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ‌ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ
تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَمَسَاكِنَ طَيِّبَةً فِي
جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ وَرِضْوَانٌ مِن اللهِ أَكْبَرُ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ
الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has promised to the believing men and believing women gardens,
beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and goodly dwellings in
gardens of perpetual abode; and best of all is Allah’s goodly
pleasure—that is the grand achievement.”***[^8]

The truth is that man prepares his heaven and its blessings by means of
his righteous deeds and good works. For this reason, the more he
endeavors at servitude and obedience of the Lord, and overcomes the
hurdles by means of ascetic self-discipline and fighting with the carnal
soul, the more he attains abundant and higher blessings; this is a
reality we clearly infer from the *hadith*s and verses of the Gracious
Qur’an. It has been narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) that the Prophet
(S) stated:

“When I was taken around the sky, we entered heaven and there I saw the
angels busy building a palace and were placing bricks of gold and silver
one over the other and sometimes used to put their work to a stop. I
asked them, ‘Why are you working intermittently?’ They replied, ‘We are
waiting for materials and stuffs to be provided to us.’ I asked, ‘What
are your materials?’ They said, ‘The invocations ‘*subhanallah* [glory
be to Allah]’, and ‘*al-hamdu lillah* [praise be to Allah]’, and ‘*la
ilaha illa Allah* [there is no god but Allah]’ and ‘*Allah-u Akbar*
[Allah is Great]’ which is pronounced from the lips of the believer;
once he gets pre-occupied with these invocations we too get busy with
building and whenever he stops reciting these invocations, we stop our
work as well’.”[^9]

The Noble Prophet (S) introduces and elucidates about heaven thus:

“O Abu Dharr! If one of the women of paradise were to appear on a dark
and unlit night, she would enlighten the world more than does the moon
of the fourteenth night [of the lunar month] and the perfume which will
arise from scattering her hair will reach the noses of every creature of
the earth and if one of the clothes of the dwellers of the Garden of
eternal bliss were spread in the world today, every person who would see
that would become unconscious and the eyes of men would not have the
ability to see its radiance.”

It can be gathered from the words of the Noble Prophet (S) that man’s
organs and eyes are in the Resurrection stronger than organs and eyes in
the world: people in the world are so weak and their perception and
comprehension and endurance is so minute that if one of the clothes of
paradise were to appear in the world, no eye would have the capacity to
see and perceive it and every person who sees it would lose his senses
and become unconscious; in spite of the fact that wearing and looking at
that dress is a normal thing.

The truth is that in heaven aptitudes, amongst them the ability to see
and perceive, are very high. The consciousness and perception of
existents having the aptitude to perceive and comprehend, such as man,
will be increased to more than a million times in the hereafter. In the
last world, all things have life and in reality true life exists there
and under its auspices everything has an intellect and a conscience and
the ability to speak; it is for this reason that even the trees and
stones speak:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا هَذِهِ‌ الْحَيَوةُ الدُّنْيا إِلاَّ لَهْوٌ وَلَعِبٌ وَإِنَّ
الدَّارَ الآخ‍ِرَةَ لَه‍ِيَ الْحَيَوَانُ لَوْ كَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a play; and as
for the next Abode; that most surely is the life—did they but
know.”***[^10]

 It is natural that when everything has life, and even the herbs and
stones speak as well, without the least doubt people will also have life
and existence and all the organs of their bodies will be able to speak.
It is for this reason that when in hell the ears, eyes and skin of the
bodies of the dwellers of hell will give evidence about their crimes and
sins, they will say, “How did you provide evidence about our works.”
Those organs will reply thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... أَنْطَقَنَا اللهُ الَّذِي أَنْطَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Allah who makes everything speak has made us speak…”***[^11]

That which has been mentioned in this section in regard to the tortures
of hell and the blessings of heaven cannot be measured by standards of
this world. What is the nature of substances such as the refuse of hell
which are so fetid and dangerous and choking that if a pail of it were
poured on the eastern part of the cosmos would boil the brains of those
living on the western part of it!?  
 Of course, in order for us not to imagine that such a thing is not
feasible and is far from conception, Allah has placed and compressed
energies in some substances such as atomic energy in uranium which if a
small amount of their energy were released, it is so explosive and
destructive that it would wipe out and turn upside down the whole city.

This is just the energy of elements and materials existent in this
world. Now that world whose power and energy is probably a million times
more than the power and energy of this world leaves behind very great
effects which are not perceptible to us.

That which has been mentioned is intended to make us comprehend our
place of abode and circumstances; we ought to know that we have not been
created for this limited world, in which we enjoy limited perception and
conception. Our perception and conscience are limited in a world whose
pleasures are limited too.

We ought to know that whatever is in the world is a pre-requisite for
the hereafter and has a partial phenomenon of that thing which exists in
the hereafter. Gratifications which we perceive in the world are not
comparable to the pleasures of the Last Abode. Calamities and
afflictions with which we are confronted are nothing compared to the
tortures of the next world.

Without the least doubt, comparing the tortures of this world with those
of the Last Abode and also comparing the blessings and pleasures of the
world with the gratifications of the Eternal Abode and explaining the
differences and great disparities between them results in man, to the
extent of his capacity and the ability of his brain, to perceive his
minuteness and smallness and the world in which he lives in contrast to
the Last World and also comprehend the minuteness of the created order
vis-à-vis the Creator.

The other fruit of this comparison and analogy is forsaking pride and
egotism and humility and submissiveness vis-à-vis right. If he derives
benefit from the world, he ought not to take pride in himself and if he
is deprived of a blessing, he should not wish for it because all the
blessings of the world are not worth the value of one apple of paradise.

For this reason, this world is not a place of falling in love. We ought,
by the grace of the directives of the prophets (*‘a*) and the saints
[*awliya’*] of Allah, to perceive the greatness of the Resurrection and
its Creator and by knowing our circumstances endeavor not to be
entangled in pride, egotism, self-admiration and bigheadedness.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 736, sermon [khutbah] 227.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 60, pp. 83-85, Iranian print.

[^3]: Surat al-Hajj 22:2.

[^4]: Surat al-Haqqah 69:35-36.

[^5]: Surat Hud 11:106.

[^6]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 11, p. 21.

[^7]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:25.

[^8]: Surat al-Tawbah (or Bara’ah) 9:72.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 123.

[^10]: Surat al-‘Ankabut 29:64.

[^11]: Surat Ha Mim (or Fussilat) 41:21.


