Lesson 21: The Importance of Meditation and the Need for Preserving Factors which Ward off Negligence
=====================================================================================================

Previous to this, discourse was had in regard to fear and dread and
factors which make them appear in men. It has been said that amongst the
factors which cause fear of Allah to appear in man is paying heed to the
greatness of the Resurrection, the intensity of the tortures of hell and
the value and expansiveness of the eternal Garden of bliss.

The relation of this section of the words of the Prophet (S) with the
previous issues is for the reason that qualities of the soul and the
inner conscience like fear, dread, yearning, hope, love and affection
all come into appearance once man is heedful and his heart is awake and
aware; but if he were heedless, and his attention were weak, the states
either never at all come into appearance and/or appear in a weak and
faint form.

Once man becomes afflicted by negligence and hardheartedness and he
himself gets aware of this ethical vice, there are causes and factors
which help man to emerge from that low condition. Some of the causes and
factors are from the inner conscience of man and some of those factors
are external.

Sometimes, in the external world an event occurs, words are heard and/or
conditions are provided which result in man’s admonition, wakefulness
and emerging from heedlessness. Of course, this effect is in the
category of divine graces and man ought to make the most of these
opportunities and to be thankful, so that the graces and favors of
Allah, the Exalted, may multiply. If these opportunities are not
appreciated and not made use of, the negligence and hardheartedness of
man increases. In this regard, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! Soften your voice [when you are] near corpses or at war
with the enemies of religion and at the time of reciting the Qur’an.”

In this section, the Noble Prophet (S) hints at three ethical,
instructional and security advices:

The Three Recommendations of the Prophet (S)
--------------------------------------------

### A) Speaking Softly At The Time Of Escorting A Funeral

It is very proper for man to speak softly and not loudly; this is a
praiseworthy habit which Luqman, the Wise, recommended to his son:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَاغْضُضْ مِنْ صَوْتِكَ إِنَّ أَنْكَرَ الأَصْوَاتِ لَصَوْتُ
الْحَمِيرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… And pursue the right course in your going about and lower your
voice; surely the most hateful of voices is braying of the
asses.”***[^1]

Even if in ordinary instances speaking softly is desirable, but still in
some cases we ought to speak softer than the common and ordinary
instances and/or adopt quietness; for instance when man wants to
concentrate his thoughts and attention on an event which has taken place
and stop themselves from other deeds. It is natural that one of the
instances which ought to drive man into thought and reflection and from
which he ought to take lesson is at the time of escorting and burying a
corpse. Man has to attend to this fact that this death will one day come
to him.

For this reason, he ought to abstain from talking about worldly affairs
and his attention should be concentrated on his final destination; he
ought to ponder deeper into this fact that his corpse will be carried on
the shoulders of people someday and take lesson from it. It is a pity
that we do not pay heed to this issue and even at the time of escorting
and burying corpses too we do not follow the proper rules of conduct and
do not seek to take lesson. We do this in spite of the fact that it has
been recommended that at the time of escorting a corpse we ought to move
in silence, tranquility, soberness and calm and our attention ought to
only be directed at the corpse, that is why the Noble Prophet states:

“O Abu Dharr! When you are escorting a dead body, busy your intellect
with meditation and humility, know that you too will go back to Him.”

One of the issues which are likely to drive negligence out of man is
witnessing the corpse of a believer which has left the world after a
lifetime of endeavor and deriving benefit from the favors of the world
and pleasure-seeking and his dead body is being taken to the grave.
Without the least doubt, witnessing that sad scene drives man out of
heedlessness because paying heed to the world and its treasures and
encumbrances gives rise to negligence and the thing which concentrates
man’s attention to the hereafter causes wakefulness and abstinence from
negligence.

For this reason, the best cause of wakefulness and keeping heedlessness
at bay is for man to look at objective entities; after a lifetime of
struggle an individual’s life comes to an end, and he gets led to the
last world. Even if man knows that death is certain and everyone dies,
still witnessing a person who has passed away has more effects than
merely knowing.

Opportunities like being present at the burial of believers ought to be
made the most of in the direction of edification of the soul and getting
rid of the carnal desires of the soul and abstaining from distracting
our attention while only concentrating on one’s end. Man ought to
conceive that this is a way we all are destined to trudge, sooner or
later. Therefore, is the transitory life of this world worth striving
for without any anxiety? We ought to think whether we have endeavored
for the hereafter or not.

Meditation and reflection about death, as has been emphasized in the
*hadith*s and Qur’an, is one of the most effective factors which cause
abstaining from the Devil and setting foot on the right path. Man ought
to think that perhaps he may not remain alive an hour more because no
man is certain about up to when he is going to remain alive.

Therefore, in contrast to long and protracted hopes which cause
hardheartedness and heedlessness, paying attention to death results in
abstaining from negligence and in man’s awakening and all too often
meditation and thought transform man’s way of life and his destiny too.

It is natural that once man reflects about his destiny and perceives
himself subdued in the face of the majesty of Allah, a state of
brokenness, lowliness and humility appears in his heart whose effects
also get manifested outwardly in the same way that once a believer
stands to recite his prayers perceives himself in the presence of the
greatness of Allah giving rise to humility and lowliness in him and of
course this is something which has been emphasized and has been
mentioned as the most delicate quality which causes a believer to attain
his prosperity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ \* الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلاَتِهِمْ
خَاشِعُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Successful indeed are the believers, who are humble in their
prayers…”***[^2]

(In contrast, people who do not perceive the majesty of Allah and do not
reflect upon the contents of prayer do not have humility and
submissiveness.)

As we have already said humility takes place in the heart and its
effects become manifested in the organs and members of the body such as
eyes, but at times humility is attributed to certain parts of the body,
as the Gracious Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَخَشَعَتِ الأَصْوَاتُ لِلرَّحْمَنِ فَلاَ تَسْمَعُ إِلاَّ هَمْسًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and the voices shall be low before the Beneficent God so that you
shall hear ought but a soft sound.”***[^3]

Elsewhere, He states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَاشِعَةً أَبْصَارُهُمْ تَرْهَقُهُمْ ذِلَّةٌ وَقَدْ كَانُوا يُدْعَوْنَ
إِلَی السُّجُودِ وَهُمْ‌ سَالِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Their looks cast down, abasement shall overtake them; and they were
called upon to make obeisance; but they shall not be able.”***[^4]

According to what has been mentioned, being present at funerals and
paying heed to the destiny of one who has passed away and also attention
to the scene of the Resurrection and describing its conditions, to the
extent that man is aware, causes humility, submissiveness and abstinence
from negligence. But if man is at that moment indifferent, as if nothing
has taken place, and only thinks about the world and talking to this
person and that other person, transformation does not occur in him.

Once someone dies, some people get busy with thinking about the benefit
and gain which they derive from his death; if he was a teacher, they
pre-occupy themselves with taking his position, if he was a boss, they
become happy at the prospect of occupying his position. Once a doctor
passes away, others are happy that they will take his place.

This is very regrettable and shameful. An event which is supposed to
increase man’s attention to the hereafter and the destiny of life
becomes a cause for man to get more submerged in the world. It is
regrettable that in circumstances where lesson has to be taken and
events which ought to be factors for man to become awake and to distance
himself from illusions and fantasies, some people are afflicted by
negligence and hardness of heart, become more entangled in delusions and
fallacies and that frightening and awakening scene not only does not
awaken them, but also increases the hardness of their hearts. It is for
this reason that the Noble Prophet (S) advises Abu Dharr that one of the
instances which causes fear, humility, lowliness and submissiveness in
man is presence at funerals and burying rites; on the condition that one
is attentive and heedful and abstains from being noisome and paying
attention to this and that person. He only ought to think about himself
and speak softly so as to follow up on his meditation and reflection;
for the reason that speaking loudly and even merely speaking occupy the
heart of man and prevent him from presence of heart:

One day a man in Tehran asked the late ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, may he
reside in Allah’s eternal Garden of bliss, “What ought I to do in order
to have presence of heart during prayer?” In response, ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i said, “Speak less [during the course of your day].” We may
perhaps be surprised about the role speaking has in preventing man from
having presence of heart during prayer (coincidentally, that man was
very talkative).

Without the least doubt, speaking and talking expend the energy [which
is supposed to be preserved] for the mind, the soul and spirit of man,
especially if talking is a custom, like admonishing, delivering speeches
and teaching. When a group of people are listening to the words of a
speaker, he takes care not to make a single mistake; it is for this
reason that he concentrates all his attention on his talking and
refrains from attending to himself. For this reason, speaking less and
also speaking softly results in man becoming more attentive to his inner
self and keeping mental distraction at bay.

In regard to the Noble Prophet’s (S) state at the time of escorting or
burying a corpse, a *hadith* has been recorded stating:

“At the time of escorting and burying a corpse, intense sorrow used to
overcome him and he used to attend more to himself and speak less.”[^5]

### B) Speaking Softly At The Time Of War

Considering the circumstances of the forces and the privacy of military
secrets during military operations and war, the Noble Prophet (S)
recommends speaking softly during war. During war special conditions
arise—especially during planning for military operations and gathering
information about the war zone—which call for utmost precaution and care
at keeping war secrets and not divulging the conditions of your forces
to the enemies.

All too often, speaking and improper movements result in the enemy
becoming aware of the strategy of your operations and in the end the
lives of people and soldiers fall in danger and the design and strategy
to become thwarted and frustrated.

This truth was very much felt by our soldiers during the entire eight
years of war; at times circumstances were so sensitive and dangerous and
their conduct was so fateful that they had to use ways where their
footsteps had not to be heard; in truth, they used to make use of the
principle of attacking while the enemy is unaware.

Another point which can be derived from this advice of the Noble Prophet
(S) is that the sensitivity and importance of war and military
operations demand that the forces use all their capacity and energy in
the direction of advancing military goals. In view of this, with silence
and tranquility and concentration of the senses, they ought to
concentrate all their capacity and energy concealed in their inner
selves and with perfect firmness, decisiveness and steadfastness combat
their enemies and abstain from that which dissuades them from war and
military operations. Bearing this important matter in mind, in his
military recommendations to his son Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah during the
war of Jamal, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Mountains may move from their position but you should not move from
yours. Grit your teeth. Lend to Allah your head (in fighting for Allah,
give yourself to Allah). Establish your feet firmly on the ground. Have
your eye on the remotest foe and close your eyes (to their numerical
majority). And keep sure that succor is but from Allah, the
Glorified.”[^6]

### C) Speaking Softly At The Time Of Reciting The Qur’an

If man finds the grace to be present in sessions of recitation of the
Gracious Qur’an, whether his aim and motivation is to derive benefit
from the Noble Qur’an or reasons other than that, like participating in
sessions of wishing Allah’s mercy for the dead and to expresses
condolences to the remaining people, it is necessary to make the most of
this invaluable chance, embark upon meditation about the *ayat*s (signs)
of Allah and paying heed to their meanings and purports.

Even when the celestial sound of the Gracious Qur’an is being aired on
radio, we ought to delve into deep thought and meditation so as to
derive benefit from the meanings of this eternal, inspiring and guiding
miracle in the direction of edifying and purifying the inner soul and
getting rid of inward ethical vices and establishing invaluable
attributes like humility and lowliness, as the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُتَشَابِهًا مَثَاني
تَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ
تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلی ذِكْرِ اللهِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has revealed the best announcement, a book conformable in its
various parts, repeating whereat do shudder the skins of those who fear
their Lord, then their skins and their hearts become pliant to the
remembrance of Allah…”***[^7]

With regard to the wonderful effects of the Qur’an, if man does not pay
attention to the purports of the verses at the time of recitation of the
Gracious Qur’an and for him there is no difference between the sound of
the Qur’an and the words of others, he gets afflicted by negligence and
his hardheartedness increases.

Considering the importance and gravity of the need to protect the honor
of the Gracious Qur’an and to grant it value, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قُرِیَ الْقُرْآنُ فَاسْتَمِعُوا لَهُ وَأَنْصِتُوا لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the Qur’an is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you.”***[^8]

It is natural that in regard of the fact that Allah has placed the
Qur’an as a means for man’s guidance and his inner transformation and
conversion and concentrating his attention on Allah, now if he does not
pay attention to the sound of the Qur’an and not differentiate between
that heavenly sound from the rest of the sounds and not embark upon
deriving benefit from the divine admonitions and advices, he has done an
ugly deed and has behaved with ingratitude. For this reason, in addition
to this fact that he has lost an invaluable opportunity, his
hardheartedness has also been increased and loses that relative and
limited readiness which he had for guidance.

In order to derive benefit from the Gracious Qur’an, it is necessary to
concentrate our attention and listen to it as if the heavenly sounds of
the Gracious Qur’an are being pronounced by the two lips of the Noble
Prophet (S). In this case, the Qur’an produces fruit in us and we derive
benefit from it in a praiseworthy way.

In sessions of reciting the Gracious Qur’an, like the mourning sessions
during which the Qur’an is recited, listening to it and paying heed to
it is a praiseworthy habit and a lot of recommendation has been made in
regard to it. Unfortunately, we do not observe this good habit. We
engage in conversation with one another during recitation of the
Gracious Qur’an at mourning ceremonies and often times we talk loudly
and without the least doubt a person whose thoughts and mind have been
drawn to conversation and listening to the words of those around him
lags behind at paying attention to the gracious Quran.

In this regard, the Sunnis have excelled more than us; they have set up
special sessions for recitation of the Qur’an and pay praiseworthy
attention to the sound and recitation of the Gracious Qur’an, but on the
other hand some of them participate in those sessions in order to watch
the skills which are being displayed by the reciters of the Qur’an and
to encourage and cheer them by repeatedly saying ‘Allah Allah’. Far from
comparison, these sessions are like concerts where a singer sings and
the rest of the people clap hands for him.

In reality, such people are paying attention to the words and sounds of
the Gracious Qur’an and not to its purports and wonderful effects and
taking lesson from it. Unfortunately, we seldom hold sessions of
recitation and listening to the Gracious Qur’an. The general sessions of
our recitation of the Qur’an are just those same sessions of recitation
for the dead at mourning ceremonies. In these sessions the reciter
recites the Qur’an, but the other people are busy with their own work
and/or talk to one another!

Sometimes, they raise the voice of the loud speaker so high that it
bothers the ears of every listener and for this reason divest them of
the interest to listen to the Qur’an. This is in spite of the fact that
all the aspects have to be observed and the sound of the loud speakers
have to be adjusted to the extent that those present in the session
derive benefit and it ought not to be the cause of their getting
bothered and leaving the recitation session.

It has to be added that both these two methods and customs are incorrect
and insufficient; both the method which we have adopted of not paying
attention to and rarely holding recitation sessions is not right and
both the method which the Sunnis have opted for merely holding
recitation sessions for the sake of displaying their artistic capacities
and not paying heed to the meanings and purports of the verses of the
Qur’an is insufficient.

It is proper to hold general and expansive sessions for recitation of
the Qur’an where the sound and recital is beautiful and also makes
available the opportunity and occasion to explain the meanings and
purports of the Qur’an and to take lesson from it. Verses of the
Gracious Qur’an ought to be recited with a beautiful and sorrowful sound
which gives rise to humility and submissiveness in the listeners and
also causes admonition and wakefulness and self-awareness in them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَمِعُوا مَا أُنْزِلَ إِلی الرَّسُولِ تَرَی أَعْيُنَهُمْ
تَفِيضُ مِن الدَّمْعِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when they hear what has been revealed to the Apostle, you will
see their eyes*** ***overflowing with tears…”***[^9]

The Consequences of Inattention to the Causes of Spiritual Wakefulness
----------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Know that salt is the preserver [or medicine] of
everything corruptible, but once salt itself becomes corrupt, there is
no treatment [or preserver] for it.”

Perhaps, the connection between this sentence and the previous issues is
that all our problems arise from negligence, hedonism and obsession with
material things and they give rise to the corruption of the heart and
soul. Now, there are means and ways of treating these pains and
encumbrances which give rise to vigilance and man’s paying heed to his
destiny. One of those causes is presence in mourning ceremonies and
burying rites and paying attention to death.

When man sees the corpse of a person who is heading to the last world
being carried on people’s shoulders, he visualizes his own death and
delves deep into thought. This transformation of the inside results in
shame and humility, a state of humility and lowliness vis-à-vis right is
brought to life in him. At that time, he becomes afraid of the destiny
which lies in expectation of him.

In regard to taking lesson from the death of other people, Imam al-Sadiq
(*‘a*) states to one of his companions by the name of Aba Salih:

“When you are carrying a corpse on your shoulders, imagine that you are
being carried on other people’s hands and you are requesting your Lord
to return you to the world once again and He too grants your request and
you are returned to the world. Then, take care and observe how you begin
your second life once more.” Thereafter, he stated, “It is surprising
that some people who are deprived of seeing either the previous and
later generations and amongst whom the call of departure and emigration
is continually made are likewise pre-occupied by amusement and
play.”[^10]

In consideration to what has been mentioned, once a factor like salt,
which prevents the corruption of the heart and is medicine for spiritual
pains, becomes corrupt, what thing would remedy it?

Being present at mourning and burying rites ought to plunge man deep
into thought and remind him about his own death, if it becomes a cause
of more reflection about the world and his future and/or at the time of
movement not only does he not take lesson, but with utmost lack of shame
engages in gossiping and back-biting other people; he becomes corrupt
like corrupt salt and after that man becomes afflicted by
hardheartedness and coldness and awakening scenes do not bring about any
transformation in him and no medicine can cure his inner pains. There is
no doubt that recitation of the Gracious Qur’an is a remedy of man’s
inner spiritual pains, as states the Gracious Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يِا اَيُّهَا النَّاسُ قَدْ جَاءَتْكُمْ مَوْعِظَةٌ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ
وَشَفَاءٌ لِمَا فِي الصُّدُورِ وَهُدیً وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O men! There has come to you an admonition and a healing for what is
in the breasts and guidance and a mercy for the believers.”***[^11]

Now once the Gracious Qur’an, which is a cure and paying attention to
its meanings places invaluable truths at the disposal of man, becomes a
means for the world and acquisition of fame, not only is it not a cure
but itself adds to our spiritual pains and becomes a cause of more
obsession with the world and becoming distanced from Allah and the truth
of the Gracious Qur’an.

Reproaching Laziness and Vain Laughing
--------------------------------------

Reproaching futile laughter and laziness, the Noble Prophet states:

“Know that there are two unacceptable traits among you: one is laughter
out of surprise and wonder (laughter that has no cause) and the other is
(deliberate) laziness and idleness which is not a result of
forgetfulness and ignorance.”

The Noble Prophet (S) admonishes the believers that there are two
unacceptable qualities in them which cause more negligence and the
weakening of the state of fear and dread. It is proper for the believers
to undertake curing and remedying these two indecent attributes, one of
which is inopportune laughter. At times, man is encountered by
surprising and laughable scenes in which case he naturally becomes
overcome by laughter, despite that people whose attention is fixed on
Allah only smile when they witness a laughable scene and do not raise
their voices to a boisterous laugh.

When a funny tale was narrated to some great men, or when they were
encountered by a laughable incident, they only used to smile but their
attention was elsewhere and witnessing that incident did not leave the
least effect in them.

Even if the dignity of a believer and his attention to the ultra-cosmos
and to the presence of Allah do not grant him the opportunity to laugh,
if a comical moment occurs, there is no fault with laughing but we ought
to keep aloof from loud and inappropriate laughter because intense
heedlessness has overcome the heart of a person who laughs inopportunely
and loudly on a small pretext.

Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states in a *hadith*:

“Inopportune laughter is a result of ignorance,” and thereafter His
Holiness adds, “Do not laugh to the extent where your teeth become
visible regardless of your indecent actions. And a person who has
performed ugly deeds is not free from nightly afflictions.”[^12]

In this *hadith* Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) clearly states that the boisterous
laughter of a person who as a result of ugly actions has a bleak future
and a dangerous destiny, in such a way that it is likely for divine
requital to befall him at any moment, is inappropriate; such laughter is
admissible for a person who is certain about his future and is not
worried about his destiny. This is in spite of the fact that we notice
that even the Prophet (S) and saints [*awliya’*] of Allah did not have
such surety and only put their trust in the mercy and grace of Allah.

Concerning the effects of excessive laughter on the heart, Imam al-Sadiq
(*‘a*):

“Excessive laughter kills the heart.” Then, he also stated, “Inordinate
laughter dissolves religion in the same way that water dissolves
salt.”[^13]

For this reason, we ought to keep aloof from inappropriate laughter
which has no logical reason. Man ought not to lose his control over his
mouth, tongue, eyes and ears. If he wants to laugh, he ought to see
whether there is a reason for laughing and what the cause of laughter
is, otherwise he ought not to laugh on every pretext imaginable.

It is necessary to mention that having a cheerful face and smiling at
all times is desirable and valuable and one of the social manners of the
believers is to smile in their gatherings and when they meet one
another—no matter how full their hearts may be filled with sorrow,
grief, fear and dread—so that their conduct may not be a cause of
inconvenience and bother for others; as has been recorded in a *hadith*:

“Believers have cheerful and smiling appearances and their sorrow is
hidden in their hearts.”[^14]

This cheerfulness and smiling is different from loud and boisterous
laughter which is not befitting of a believer. A pious believer who is
focused and has faith in the resurrection does not overlook his works
and movements and does not act on the basis of the carnal souls and
appetitive soul.

The second characteristic which the Noble Prophet (S) considers as
indecent for the *ummah* (Islamic community) is laziness and indolence.
Sometimes, man does not discharge a certain duty as a result of
heedlessness, like forgetting to perform some worship; in this case he
has not perpetrated sin. But sometimes he feels lazy to discharge a
known duty consciously; this quality is not worthy of a believer.

It is not acceptable of believers to consciously evade responsibilities.
It is not acceptable of a believer to feel lazy when prayer time is due
and upon hearing the call to prayer [*adhan*] and as a result be absent
at the congregational prayers. This kind of disregard is not expected of
a believer, whether this laziness is in regard to discharging obligatory
duties or recommended ones.

One of the scholars of Yazd by the name of the deceased Haj Shaykh
Ghulam Rida Yazdi was a very earnest man. One day he and I entered the
mosque. When he saw a number of people sitting idly while waiting for
the prayer leader [*imam*] and not performing the recommended optional
prayers, he got angry and said, “Allah’s curse be on the Devil! Are you
scared of being taken to paradise? Stand up and recite the recommended
optional prayers!”

It is very proper that man engages in performing the recommended
optional prayers once man enters the mosque before the congregational
prayers and is not befitting of a believer to be heedless to this
important issue. This matter is true in regard to the rest of the issues
too; sometimes man lags behind in his studies as a result of illness,
but sometimes laziness and seeking comfort prevent him from study and
research. Basically, laziness and pleasure-seeking are great adversities
which stand in the way of man’s growth and advancement and it is proper
that we get rid of them in ourselves.

The Role of Meditation in Worship
---------------------------------

In continuation of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! Two *rak‘at*s (cycles) of conscious and heedful prayer
accompanied by meditation is better than one night of worship with a
heedless heart.”

Taking into account the importance and prominent role of meditation and
reflection, the Noble Prophet (S) states that two *rak‘at*s (cycles) of
prayer performed in a conscious and heedful manner—not that they ought
to be necessarily long—but along with thought have more reward and
effects in the perfection of man than waking up at night and spending it
all in prayer until morning without the presence of heart. Of course, if
man recites his prayers very fast and with a lot of haste, he cannot
perceive his duties and pray in the correct way; as can be inferred from
the *hadith*s, prayer with haste which is devoid of reflection, thought
and heed is like a crow with its beak in the ground; that is to say,
this prayer is not profitable and because it occurs without attention
and is performed so fast that man does not find the opportunity to
perceive the presence of Allah, and to reflect and meditate upon the
context and purports of prayer. What is being asserted is that two
*rak‘at*s of prayer with consciousness and attention are better than
long and repeated prayers without heed and presence of heart.

As has repeatedly been said, man’s spiritual journeying consists of both
academic and spiritual journeying; man’s spiritual ascendancy depends on
his intellect and the increase of his perception. In other words, man
sets foot on the course of ascendancy towards Allah accompanied by
knowledge. His gaining proximity to Allah does not imply changing
places; there is no need for man to move from one place to another, but
his becoming proximate to Allah is dependent on the increase of his
intelligence and attentiveness, the rise and growth of his conception of
the majesty of Allah and His Attributes; the more his awareness
increases, the more he becomes close to Allah.

This kind of spiritual journey is called scientific [or academic]
journeying towards Allah which is attained under the auspices of more
knowledge and its first stage is awareness of the self which gives rise
to knowledge of Allah. In contrast, man lags behind in perfection and
growth to the same extent that he is ignorant.

Prayer is a means of attaining perfection and is meant to make man feel
more nearness to Allah. But if this prayer is devoid of attention and
perception of the status of Allah, the person reciting the prayers is
like a person busy performing exercise and stretches, because he has not
derived any benefit from the context and purport of prayer.

Of course, prayer devoid of attention and presence of heart is better
than sleeping all night long and not praying, or Allah forbid, being
pre-occupied with perpetrating sin and evil doing. The very act of
keeping vigil at night with the intention of prayer, even if that prayer
does not procure complete reward because of being performed without the
presence of heart, is a praiseworthy act but it is proper that prayer is
accompanied by attentiveness and presence of the heart; in which case
his movements become faster and he arrives at the destination faster,
which is proximity [*qurb*] to Allah.

[^1]: Surat Luqman 31:19.

[^2]: Surat al-Mu’minun 23:1-2.

[^3]: Surat Ta Ha 20:108.

[^4]: Surat al-Qalam 68:43.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 264, Beirut print.

[^6]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 62, short saying 11, trans. Fayd al-Islam.

[^7]: Surat al-Zumar 39:23.

[^8]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:204.

[^9]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:83.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 258.

[^11]: Surat Yunus 10:57.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 486, Kitab al-‘Asharah.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 305.


