Lesson 22: The Realm of Right and Falsehood
===========================================

“O Abu Dharr! Right is heavy and bitter while falsehood is light and
sweet. All too often, an hour’s licentiousness results in protracted
sorrow and grief.”

Right and Falsehood and the Instances of Their Application
----------------------------------------------------------

One of the general axioms which is discussed in Islamic culture and has
wide applications is the concept of ‘Right and Falsehood [*haqq wa
batil*]’. In the Gracious Qur’an, right and falsehood have been employed
in regard to objects of worship; in the case that Allah, the Exalted, is
asserted as the right object of worship and the rest of the objects of
worship are known as false:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِکَ بِأَنَّ اللهَ هُوَ الْحَقُّ وَأَنَّ مَا يَدْعُونَ‌ مِنْ دُونِهِ
هُوَ الْبَاطِلُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is because Allah is the Truth, and that which they call upon
besides Him; that is the falsehood…”***[^1]

Sometimes, right and falsehood are treated in the field of beliefs,
opinions and notions and at times they are discussed in the scope of
actions and deeds. One of the issues which the Gracious Qur’an teaches
us is that the world is intertwined with right and falsehood. It can be
asserted that the formation of this cosmos is combined of two elements;
right and falsehood.

Allah is the foundation of right and falsehood which is a parasitical
matter that manifests itself under the auspices of right. On the basis
of the teachings of the Qur’an, this mixture of right and falsehood is
not eternal, a day will come when right will be completely separated
from falsehood and will remain stable and falsehood will be
exterminated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلْ نَقْذِفُ بِالْحَقِّ عَلَی الْبَاطِلِ فَيَدْمَغُهُ فَاِذَا هُوَ
زَاهِقٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! We cast the truth against the falsehood, so that it breaks its
head, and lo! It*** ***vanishes…”***[^2]

Elsewhere, Allah likens falsehood to foam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنْزَلَ مِن السَّمَاءِ مَآءً فَسَأَلَتْ أَوْدِيَةٌ بِقَدَرِهَا
فَاحْتَمَلَ السَّيْلُ زَبَدًا رَابِيًا وَمِمَّا يُوقِدُونَ عَلَيْهِ
فِي النَّارِ ابْتَغَاءَ حَلْيَةٍ أَوْ مَتَاعٍ زَبَدٌ مِثْلُهُ کَذَلِکَ
يَضْرِبُ اللهُ الْحَقَّ وَالْبَاطِلَ فَأَمَّا الزَّبَدُ فَيَذْهَبُ
جُفَاءً وَأَمَّا مَا يَنْفَعُ النَّاسَ فَيَمْکُثُ فِي الأَرْضِ
کَذَلِکَ يَضْرِبُ اللهُ الأَمْثَالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He sends down water from the cloud, then watercourses flow (with
water) according to their measure, and the torrent bears along the
swelling foam, and from what they melt in the fire for the sake of
making ornaments or apparatus arises a scum like it; thus does Allah
compare the truth and falsehood; then as for the scum, it passes away as
a worthless thing; and as for that which profits the people, it tarries
in the earth; thus does Allah set forth parables.”***[^3]

There is a delicate point, which becomes apparent once we pay heed to
the reality of foam, in the comparison between falsehood and foam. Foam
denotes bubbles which appear on top of water: when man looks at a water
basin full of soap foam, he sees bubbles floating and going up and down.
If a person looks at that water basin for the first time, it is the foam
which attracts his attention and he becomes heedless of the water under
that water basin and is the source of that foam. He imagines that
reality is this same foam which appears on top of the water floating up
and down and has various colors, despite the fact that the foam has
acquired its reality from that same water and is itself under the
auspices of water.

The world is synthesized of right and falsehood, but falsehood exists as
a parasitical companion of right. It is possible for falsehood to become
more manifest than right, to have a lot of sparkling, to have a lot of
bloom and thrive, but in the laws [or principles] of nature right is
like water and falsehood is like its foam and does not last long and
becomes exterminated and that which endures is right that is beneficial
to people.

Falsehood, like foam, is manifest for a few moments and after that,
reveals its true reality and truth. Of course, once we measure these
moments with our standards, we think that one moment ought not to last
more than a few seconds or a minute, but a hundred and also a thousand
years are nothing more than one moment for the One who has total
knowledge of the past eternity and the future eternity; His standards
are different from our criteria.

The criteria which we employ in measuring times and immortality [or
continued existence] of things differ from the standards of [Allah] the
Right. The length of times, whether it were a moment, an hour, a year or
a century, does not have any credibility for someone whose perception
conceives right. He perceives what is beyond our sights and conceives
horizons which are very high and enduring and when he takes those
criteria and standards into account, falsehood is not a matter worth
paying attention to and it lacks endurance [or continued existence].

The Visible Appearance of Right and Falsehood
---------------------------------------------

The theme of the Noble Prophet’s (S) words in this section is that right
is heavy and bitter and falsehood is light and sweet. To explain this
sentence, it ought to be said that a believer who is pre-occupied with
the prosperity of the hereafter must take the exigencies of his faith
into consideration, reflect about his spiritual and psychological
perfection and get rid of all the hurdles of the way and attain his aim.

It is natural for a believer who is at the beginning of the journey to
expect everything to be light, easy, pleasant and sweet. He has not made
himself ready to bear hardships and bitterness; it is for this reason
that he is likely to stumble along the way and trespass the bounds of
right and/or if as before he carries on along that way, he is sad and
worried about all the hardships and problems along the path of good and
right.

The question is always asked of man regarding why right is heavy and
bitter and man is confronted by strenuous hardships but on the contrary
falsehood is easy and sweet. Perhaps, this query may arise that, God
forbid, is Allah stingy and does not let His friends derive benefit from
the pleasures and sweetness of the world and places on their shoulders
heavy and hard duties? What prevented Him from making right sweet so
that all the people might become followers of the truth and not be
misguided?

When we compare the life of a believing person with that of an infidel,
we observe that a believer has to endure a lot of problems; we notice
how he has to kill themselves in order to procure one piece of licit
bread, how he has so many problems with his family, mate, children and
neighbors. In contrast, his corrupt and licentious neighbor or relative
has a pleasurable and pleasant life and has no problem whatsoever.

As a result of this comparison, he asks this question, “Why does Allah
who, according to uncountable *hadith*s, loves the believers and has
heaped a lot of praise on them, confront them with these encumbrances
and hardships? Consider how much a believer has to suffer pains in order
to procure the needs of his lives. Once he has made up his mind to
marry, he sometimes has to search for years to find a suitable mate.
Wherever he goes to ask for a girl’s hand in marriage, they feign
disdain and do not give him a wife. But the others easily select wives
of their choice.

This same comparison exists between believing and infidel societies;
when we compare the Muslim people of Bosnia-Herzegovina with their
non-Muslim neighbors, we ask ourselves why the people of
Bosnia-Herzegovina have to endure all these hardships and tragedies. Why
do the unbelievers live in peace in their vicinity and neighborhood and
the Muslim nation has to every moment bear seeing their lives,
properties and families being trampled underfoot and for the callous
Serb nation to prevail over them? If Allah is a Supporter of the
believers, then why does He not help them?

These questions arise in different forms for us and every person has a
response to them suiting his knowledge. But in any case, ambiguities
exist for most of us. Perhaps, the people whose faith is mightier say
that what occurs is based on the expedience of Allah.

There is no opportunity here to embark upon academic issues in order to
give responses to these questions, amongst them the question as to why
right is bitter and why Allah has not made it sweet so that all people
might be inclined to it and not be seduced to falling into perdition and
our aim is to derive practicable results from and strive to make the
matter clear because if an issue does not completely become clear for
man, it does not leave an impressive effect on the heart and/or the
Devil seduces him and by bringing doubts up becomes a hurdle of
effective fruits in the heart and after the clarification of issues and
overcoming the hurdles, there no longer remains any room for doubts and
the Devil’s insinuations.

Man and His Free Will, Volition and Allah’s Temptations
-------------------------------------------------------

Man’s life in the world is founded on choosing the correct path and
traversing the stages of perfection of his own volition. Man’s most
outstanding quality is that he is free and at liberty as regards his
movements and spiritual wayfaring. Allah created existents like angels
which only have an inclination towards right and even if their actions
are volitional, their disposition is still only directed towards right
and adoration of Allah and they have no tendency towards falsehood.
Worship of Allah is sweet and pleasurable for them.

Therefore, the order of nature is not devoid of existents which only
have a tendency towards right and are exclusively preoccupied with
servitude of Allah. For this reason, the will of Allah is dependent upon
His creating an existent whose position is higher and loftier than that
of the angels; that is why He made a human being who in spite of having
an inclination to falsehood and the carnal soul, will trudge the path of
his perfection of his own volition. Man ought to forsake the pleasure of
sin in order to attain eternal prosperity.

If this existent tramples the appetitive soul underfoot and seeks the
path of bliss, he will, without the least doubt, ascend higher than the
angels for the reason that in spite of being faced with two conflicting
dispositions, he of his own choice and volition abstains from his
pleasures and procures the spirit of worship and adoration of Allah.

What has been gathered is that man in the world has two paths in front
of him: one is the way of right and the other is the course of
falsehood. Of course, it ought to be borne in mind that it is not true
that once man selects any one of those two courses, he is compelled to
keep trudging that path.

With regard to what has previously been mentioned—that man is a
free-willed and unrestrained existent—it must be admitted that as this
free-will and volition is existent in the initial selection of the way
and path, so too is it existent in its constancy. For this reason, man
always has the capacity to change his direction and course and he is
endlessly free and at liberty when confronted by the two paths of right
and falsehood. One of those two ways is the course of Allah and the
other is the path of the Devil; one is the course of spiritual ascension
and perfection and the other is the path of decadence and condemnation.

The other point which ought to be taken into consideration is that the
world is a place of tests and trials and naturally it denotes a time
when man is confronted by bitterness and hardships and comes out of the
test triumphant by bearing with patience those hardships.

If spiritual ascendancy and perfection were sweet at first sight for man
and falsehood and decadence were bitter, tests would be devoid of
purport because trials call for man to forsake his desires and wishes
and perform deeds for Allah and in the case that right were to appear
sweet at first sight, man would disincline himself from the bitter
falsehood and incline towards the sweet right for his own sake and for
the good pleasure of Allah.

In the same way, if all falsehood were sweet and the course of right
were devoid of any sweetness and pleasure, a person who abstained from
falsehood and selected the correct path would be deprived of all
pleasures; therefore, it is not true at all that there is absolutely no
gratification along the course of right.

In any case, right is heavy and falsehood is bitter and it is natural
for a person who has chosen the right course of his own volition to
patiently bear all the bitterness and hardships of the path of right. Of
course, Allah’s divine decree is not the same for all people, because
the capacity of all individuals is not of the same manner and not all
human beings have the capability to endure every kind of affliction and
hardship; it is for this reason that Allah has a special divine decree
for every human being; He decrees tribulations and problems for some
people in their youth and for others in their old age. He afflicts one
man with illness and another with poverty. He tries one man by means of
his spouse and the other through his friend. It is not true that a
believer will be guaranteed safety from any hardships and adversities
because in this case he would not attain perfection.

For the reason that the world is a place of trials, a believer ought to
strengthen his faith by means of enduring hard times and prove his
loyalty to divine laws and his contentment with the divine will of
Allah. With all certainty, this is a very hard undertaking, but he ought
to patiently go through all these tribulations because he professes to
be believer. But the infidel has no such affirmation; on the contrary he
has no familiarity with Allah and the truth. He wishes to be at ease in
this transient world and whatever happens later is not a matter of his
concern. If he performs good works in this world at all, Allah grants
him his reward right in this world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ کَانَ يُرِيدُ الْحَيوةَ الدُّنْيا وَزِينَتَهَا نُوَفِّ اِلَيْهِمْ
أَعْمَالَهُمْ فِيهَا وَهُمْ فِيهَا لاَ يُبْخَسُونَ \* أَوْلَئِك لَيْسَ
لَهْمْ فِي الآخِرَةِ الاَّ النَّارُ وَحَبِطَ مَا صَنَعُوا فِيهَا
وَبَاطِلٌ مَا کَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever desires this world’s life and its finery, We will pay them
in full their deeds therein, and they shall not be made to suffer loss
in respect of them. These are they for whom there is nothing in the
hereafter, and what they wrought in it shall go for nothing, and vain is
what they do.”***[^4]

For this reason, people who seek the truth ought to be ready to endure
tribulations and adversities and be content with whatever occurs because
this is the exigency of selecting the right path. If an individual does
not have the capacity to endure hardships, he must select a course other
than the path of right. Advancement, perfection and the super human
spiritual stations are not attainable save by means of perseverance in
the face of tribulations.

The secret truth is that right is bitter and falsehood is sweet and that
the seeker of right ought to choose the right path of his own volition
and be tried for his choice. If it were not like this, no human being
would be tried and without the least doubt this trial is for the purpose
of measuring the standard of faith and piety of individuals and their
disposition to right and the other purpose is also to make clear the
extent to which they prefer the will of Allah over their carnal souls?

Therefore, there ought to be hard and tiresome duties so that man may by
exercising piety and contentment with the will of Allah and patience in
the face of tribulations traverse the course of perfection. If all
duties were easy and simple, all the people of the world would become
Muslims and the prominence and distinction of any person would not
become clear.

It is in the battlefield of adversities, hardships, overlooking the
carnal desires and putting the will and pleasure of Allah first that a
prominent person like Salman Farsi shows himself and in arriving at the
zenith and pinnacle of human perfection, leaves the rest of the people
behind and attains the highest levels of completion and human
ascendancy.

There is room here to relate the story of one of the *‘ulama’* (Islamic
scholars) and great mystics, the late Ilahi Qumshe’i, may Allah be
pleased with him. He was a great and emancipated man. This prominent and
earnest man translated the Gracious Qur’an and did not receive any
payment for doing that invaluable job despite that if he had got the
right of publication, he and his family would have lived in ease and
leisure. He sometimes used to drive himself to the university on a
tripod wheeled machine despite being a university lecturer.

On one of his journeys to the holy city of Mashhad, once he had entered
the holy shrine of Imam al-Rida (*‘a*), it occurred to him that he ought
to ask for the station of contentment [*rida’*] from the Imam (*‘a*).
This is what impelled him to say, “Your Holiness! Your name is al-Rida
(lit. pleasure), and I have come into your house.

Ask Allah to grant me the station of *rida’* (being well-pleased and
content with whatever pleases Allah or is decreed by Him).” When he was
coming out of the holy mausoleum and was heading towards home, he was
accidentally hit by a car as a result of which he got injured and his
bone got broken. The people gathered and arrested the driver, but the
late Qumshe’i addressed them thus, “Leave him alone and let him go free.
This is a gift from Imam al-Rida. I asked him for the station of
contentment and submission to Allah’s decree and I have attained it. If
this accident did not occur, it would not become clear whether I have
attained the station of contentment or not. I have to prove beyond the
shadow of doubt that I am pleased with whatever pleases Allah and am not
sad at all!”

Man and the Two Inclinations towards Right and Falsehood
--------------------------------------------------------

Man has two different attractions in two directions; circumstances have
to be provided in order to clarify to what man is more inclined when
faced with two antagonistic inner attractions towards right and
falsehood. Sometimes, the right deed which he carries out is not opposed
and is not at conflict with his desire and wish; in this case
discharging that work is not difficult.

The problem lies where there is antagonism and disagreement between
these two pulls; the devil commands one thing and Allah orders other
than that, the carnal soul demands one thing and Allah enjoins the
opposite of it. It is in these circumstances that man becomes an object
of trials and the value of deeds becomes apparent.

In this case, the more the allurement towards sin and the more an
individual tramples his carnal soul underfoot and opposes it, the more
he will earn reward and that resistance against the appetitive soul has
more considerable fruits in the perfection of man’s heart and soul.

The value of a youth who in spite of having feelings and strong
instinctive inclinations towards pleasures of the flesh but abstains
from sin which is suitable with his youth is more than the worth of an
old man who forsakes that sin. It is not difficult for an old man to
abstain from that sin because he is not very inclined to that sin. In
this case, the reward of that youth is more and in contrast if that old
man commits that sin, his guilt is more because he was not under any
pressure and was not so inclined to that evil deed. (It is very ugly for
an old man to commit adultery.)

If, Allah forbid, a youth finds himself on the verge of committing sin
such as adultery or fornication and succeeds at prevailing over his
animal instincts and passion, he ascends high spiritual stations and
forsaking that sin brings to hand immense perfection because he has
succeeded at overlooking sin as a result of a lot of inner effort and
intense love for Allah and high faith. It is therefore natural for sin
to be sweet in this world and for right to be bitter so that man may be
tried and thus it will become clear who preferred Allah over everything
else and who preferred right over the carnal soul and who chose to
pursue falsehood instead of right.

Of course, it is self-evident that the nobility and eminence of man is
dependent upon perfection being volitional and a fruit of free-will. He
ought to be absolutely free and at liberty when combating the carnal
soul and perform good works and forsake evil deeds of his own volition
and for the sake of love of Allah and His pleasure.

It has been said that right is bitter and falsehood is sweet; but the
sweetness of sin and the bitterness of sin is meant for ordinary people,
not everyone. Ordinary people, on the basis of their natural
disposition, pursue the desires and wishes of their hearts and duties
which impose restrictions on them are hard and unbearable. In contrast,
falsehood is for them light and easy, because they do not see any
hardships and restrictions in doing it.

It is very easy for man to utter vain and futile words, but once he
decides to say meaningful things, he ought to reflect upon every word of
his speech lest he utters void words and it is misconstrued as gossip,
false accusation or slander and lest he makes fun of and torments
someone. In that case, he meditates about the effects and fruits of his
words. But if he wants to utter futile and vain words, he opens his
mouth and utters whatever empty words he wishes.

The reason why it has been stated that the bridge over hell is thinner
than a hair is because man ought to take the destination and the
provisions of this journey into consideration whatever step he intends
to take and whatever course he sets foot on along that path. He ought to
ask himself whether Allah is pleased with his course or not. He ought to
take the motive and incentive of every work into consideration and guard
over his tongue lest he utters whatever crosses his mind and he must
watch over his eyes to avoid looking everywhere and at everything or
everyone.

Without doubt, observance of all its aspects is very hard and equal to
performing toilsome duties. In contrast, if man intends to do everything
according the futile whims and desires of his heart, he lives easily and
with pleasure and sweetness. Beyond the shadow of doubt, all adversities
of the believer are confined to this world and he will not have any
pains and hardships in the eternal Garden of bliss:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذي أَحَلَّنَا دَارَ الْمُقَامَةِ مِنْ فَضْلِهِ لاَ يَمَسُّنَا
فِيهَا نَصَبٌ وَلاَ يَمَسُّنَا فِيهَا لُغُوبٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who has made us alight in a house abiding forever out of His grace;
toil shall not touch us therein, nor shall fatigue therein afflict
us.”***[^5]

Not only is the eternal Garden of bliss devoid of hardships and
tribulations, and nothing similar to what is in the world exists there
but also even the dwellers of paradise do not feel hunger too but, on
the contrary, feel appetite for food and derive pleasure from it. In
contrast, the nature of this world’s life is intertwined with pain and
hardships and everyone is confronted with adversities and encumbrances
whether he is a believer or unbeliever:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنْسَانَ في کَبَدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly we have created man to be in distress.”***[^6]

This same world is different for the believers and the infidels, the
lovers and companions of right and the lovers of falsehood. Those
obsessed with falsehood enjoy relative ease and comfort and have a sweet
experience from life but in contrast life is bitter for a believer and
lovers of the truth.

Of course, it is not true that the entire course of the lives of
believers and the friends of right are encompassed by bitterness; on the
contrary, the bitterness of the world is for them relative. There are
special pleasures too reserved for the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah. They
too derive pleasure from eating and sleeping, but their tribulations and
encumbrances in the world are more than the adversities of the people of
falsehood.

For the reason that man grows and is nurtured on the laps of nature, he
naturally initially feels the sweetness and pleasures of the natural
cosmos. His sense of taste is more prepared for the perception of
worldly, material and sensual pleasures; it takes long for him to attain
a spiritual experience and disposition. By means of volitional spiritual
journeying along the right course and habituating himself with good
deeds and enduring the tribulations of life and forsaking material
gratifications, man gradually tastes the spiritual pleasures and
sweetness of right. This is a truth which the Gracious Qur’an hints at
too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْتَعِينُوا بِالصَّبْرِ وَالصَّلوةِ وَاِنَّهَا لَکَبِيرَةٌ إِلاَّ
عَلَی الْخَاشِعِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And seek assistance through patience and prayer, and most surely it
is a hard thing except for the humble ones.”***[^7]

Allah states that prayer is a hard and heavy burden for all the people
except the humble ones. Some people wake up early in the morning and get
busy with exercise and work-out and perform heavy duties but feel lazy
when they want to perform two *rak‘at*s (cycles) of prayer. They do not
wake up from sleep in order to pray but arise from sleep to do exercise
often times take up to one hour exercising, running and/or mountain
climbing!

They do so because their sense of taste does not perceive the feel of
prayer. He feels the pleasure and benefit of exercise and he derives
gratification because it has been said that exercise is beneficial and
invigorating for the body. In contrast, his faith is not so strong and
he does not believe nor has faith in the words of Allah, the Noble
Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (*‘a*).

For humble people and men who have known Allah and have believed in Him,
not only is prayer not a heavy and expensive burden, but is easy and
pleasure-giving. Because they have attained spiritual maturity, they
find affection and fondness with Allah during prayer and feel so much
satisfaction from prayer that they do not desire to bring their prayers
to an end.

For them, there is no pleasure higher than prayer and invocation of
Allah; it is for this reason that some of the great scholars have
stated, “If the emperors of the world knew what pleasure lies in prayer,
they would forsake the empires and purse nothing else but prayer.” For
the prophets (*‘a*), the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah and those who have
been trained on their school, right is so sweet and gratifying that they
feel as though they have lost their most beloved person once they go
beyond the bounds of right. They have become so fond of the right path
and doing good deeds and have fallen so much in love with it that once
they quit doing a good work, they feel as though they have lost an item
from which it is not feasible to detach one’s heart. People who have a
habit of keeping vigil at night feel very distressed once they fail to
wake at night to engage in prayer and invocation of Allah.

The General Inclination to Sensual and Worldly Pleasures
--------------------------------------------------------

Taking into consideration the fact that most of the people have an
inclination to sensual and worldly pleasures, the point of discourse is
that what ought man to do in order to remain on the course of perfection
and to have the capacity to fight against materialistic leanings and set
foot on the path of right in spite of feeling the animal instincts and
pleasures of the flesh in himself?

In response to this query, it ought to be said that pleasure-seeking has
been embedded in man’s natural disposition and man’s motivation for
doing deeds is the gratification which he brings to hand. We do deeds
which please us and keep aloof from what is displeasing to us. We
conceive pleasure for ourselves even in the vanity and sin which we do
but the way to forsake it is to reflect upon the fruits, consequences
and encumbrances which result from sin, or meditate upon the pleasures
that are a result of good works.

Even if enduring the hardships of good and right deeds is exhaustive,
but still if the pleasing benefits and fruits of good deeds are taken
into consideration, bearing those tribulations becomes easy for us. In
reality, people have this kind of comparison when performing the hard
and difficult chores of life:

The laborer who embarks upon hard work early in the morning with
motivation and works up to night time in sweat derives pleasure from
enduring all hardships because he is engrossed in thinking about the
fruits of his work. The baker who sometimes bakes bread at fifty degrees
of heat bears all hardships because he earns a wage with which he
procures the needs of his life. When he ponders about the results of his
work and conceives that some of his problems in life will be solved, he
derives benefit from life and he easily bears the pains of his work.

In reality, enduring these hardships is reasonable and all people are
such that once they have compared hardships with pleasures, they do that
which will grant them more gratification. If they earn more profit and
wages from their occupation, in the end they attain more satisfaction.
In truth, they do not directly derive pleasure from the profit and
benefit of their labor, but it is a means by which to derive pleasure;
he procures a house and the amenities of his life with the money which
he earns from his work. For this reason, an intelligent man endures the
hardships of work in order to bring to hand higher pleasure in the end.

An intelligent man keeps aloof from using drugs and his transient
pleasure because he ponders about his long term ill effects. He knows
that he will derive pleasure for a few seconds and feels high, but he
will be miserable for the rest of his life. If we admit that no matter
how sweet and pleasurable sin might be, what consequences and
encumbrances it gives birth to—if in the world we are not with bad
consequences, beyond the shadow of doubt we will be encountered by them
in the hereafter—it is for this reason that we keep aloof from using
drugs. We also forsake sin because we fear lest we are entangled in
eternal divine retribution because of it.

Transient pleasure which results in protracted regrets and entanglements
appears in various forms nowadays. In the past, there used to be only
alcohol which used to intoxicate man and thereafter the ill and
undesirable consequences would become visible; but nowadays different
kinds of drugs have been added to them. A bad friend deceives man by
explaining the pleasure and high which lies in a substance like heroin
and impels him to use it.

Man feels pleasure the first time he uses it, uses it once more and
finally becomes an addict and miserable for the rest of his life. Other
sins too are like this. If we were to reflect upon the entanglements
which the sin we are about to commit gives rise to, we would certainly
keep aloof from it. In addition to the hereafter, a lot of sins have ill
consequences right in this world. Sometimes, one licentious look at a
strange person makes the entire life of a person miserable and a
household crumbles as a result of that licentious look. This is one of
the consequences of sin in this world; the divine retribution and
requital of the next world have not yet been inflicted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَذَاقَهُم اللهُ الْخِزْيَ فِي الْحَيَوةَ الدُّنْيَا وَلَعَذَابُ
الآخِرَةِ أَکْبَرُ لَوْ کَانُوا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So Allah made them taste the disgrace in this world’s life, and
certainly the punishment of the hereafter is great; did they but
know.”***[^8]

Elsewhere, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ فِي الْحَيوةّ الدُّنْيَا وَلَعَذَابُ الآخِرَةِ
أَشَقُّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They shall have chastisement in this world’s life, and the
punishment of the hereafter is certainly more grievous…”***[^9]

Therefore, by comparing the pleasure of sin with its consequences, we
ought to try not to be contaminated by sin; especially before the
attraction of sin affects us and we are not on the verge of sin, keeping
aloof from sin is very easy because once the allurement of sin has had
an effect in us and we have arrived on the verge of sin, it is very
difficult to abstain from it. There was a great man, may Allah have
mercy on him, who used to say that the youths ought to request Allah to
tranquilize the carnal desires because in other than that case
extinguishing them is difficult.

Until man has not gone under the influence of carnal desires and/or
anger, he is peaceful and he is capable of reflecting and making
decisions and self-inspection so that he may have the ability to resist
the temptation to sin. But if he does not pre-decide and pre-meditate,
he does not find the opportunity to think at the time of enticement by
carnal desires or when overtaken by anger because the intellect is put
out once man is enticed by carnal desires.

Besides the carnal desires and anger, the Devil has other means and
forces too for misleading man, some of which are social causes: in the
society, everyone naturally wants to be like the others. This is a
psychological and spiritual cause which appears in man in his early days
of life. Of course, this cause, like the rest of the causes, has both
negative and positive results. What is necessary is to know the bounds
of good and evil and derive benefit from this cause to the correct
extent so that man does not blindly follow and imitate.

Conformity with the others in most cases is a cause of man’s deliverance
from destruction; a lot of youths who had the inclination of being like
their good friend have been pulled to the mosque. So many youths went to
the battlefield under the auspices of this very cause. In the beginning,
they were not so interested in going to the battleground, when they
noticed their friends and the boys in the neighborhood going to the
battlefront; they too got attracted to fighting.

These are the good effects that this cause has. In contrast, in an
environment which is corrupt and depraved, this very cause becomes a
means of getting disposed to sin, especially among adolescents and
youths because adolescents and youths quickly acquire the
characteristics of those around them and do not resist an indecent
environment that much. But the factor of seeking to be like the others
is weaker in those older and they seldom copy the characteristics of
other people.

The role models for youths are either the majority of the community
and/or prominent individuals and/or advanced nations. Once there exists
in most of the people an inclination, a person is after imitating a role
model tells himself that most of the people are normal and not mad;
therefore, their actions are correct. Thereafter, he goes under the
influence of that cause which we have mentioned and follows the majority
of the people. It is for this reason that we see some of the people
under the influence of this cause and they are allured to corruption;
especially if the majority of the community is depraved.

[^1]: Surat al-Hajj 22:62.

[^2]: Surat al-Anbiya’ 21:18.

[^3]: Surat al-Ra‘d 13:17.

[^4]: Surat Hud 11:15-16.

[^5]: Surat Fatir 35:35.

[^6]: Surat al-Balad 90:4.

[^7]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:45.

[^8]: Surat al-Zumar 39:26.

[^9]: Surat al-Ra‘d 13:34.


