Lesson 4:  The Prophet’s (S) Recommendation to Make Good Use of Present Abilities
=================================================================================

Previously, sections of the *hadith* of Abu Dharr have been the subject
of discourse. In those sections, emphasis has been laid on strengthening
faith, making the most of opportunities and appreciating life and
Allah’s graces. Now those same issues will be repeated so as to have a
deeper effect on the hearts of the believers.

When man has believed in Allah, the Exalted, the Day of Resurrection and
divine values, he desires to be spotless before Allah and be the object
of His favor, but this is dependent on him knowing the value of his life
and to also know how to put it to use in order to attain the goal, which
is eternal bliss. In continuation, the Prophet (S) warns man against
being afflicted by heedlessness, sin and deviation, because it is likely
that the hour of death finds him in that state and he gets propelled to
the everlasting world [in a] guilty and conscience-stricken [state].

The Role Of Meditation Upon Death And The Consequences Of Sin
-------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Beware lest your death finds you while in a state of sin
in which case no opportunity remains for compensation and repentance and
for returning to the world, no heirs of yours will extol you for the
inheritance you have left them and Allah, the Exalted, will not accept
the excuse which you will make.”

As has been said before this, the Prophet (S) has articulated some of
the ethical concepts with different expressions and the aim of repeating
these ethical notions is to produce higher effects on the hearts of the
believers.

As you will understand after a short review of the verses of the Qur’an,
a great deal of verses have been repeated in various instances, and even
the exact words have been repeated in some cases, like the blessed verse
*“Which then of the bounties of your Lord will you deny?”* that has been
repeated thirty one times in *Surat* *al-Rahman*. Even if every verse
acquires its own special meaning with every repetition, the role of
every repetition in producing more profound effects on the hearts cannot
be denied. In our daily actions repetition plays a considerable role in
changing behavior and producing either good or bad habits.

It has been narrated that when the Qur’anic verse, ***“And enjoin prayer
on your followers, and steadily adhere to it; We do not ask you for
subsistence, and the (good) end is for guarding against evil;”***[^1]
was revealed, the Prophet (S) used to go to ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) house for
eight successive months and used to state, “Prayer! Allah’s mercy be
upon thee, ‘Allah has willed to drive away uncleanliness from you the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and keep you pure’.”

(If the Prophet (S) used to go to ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) once every day, it can
be inferred that this action was repeated two hundred and forty times,
despite that this action was apparently repeated five times a day.)

The outcome of the Prophet’s (S) statement is that if man does not know
what actions lead him towards prosperity and which ones lead him to
perdition, he gets entangled in sin in the end and if death catches him
while committing vice, he has earned the worst losses for his soul and
he has lost the gem of life and existence, youth and divine gifts in the
way of sin and in return has earned nothing save destruction. It is for
this reason that the Noble Prophet (S) states that you should fear lest
the hour of death comes while you are committing sin and get your soul
in that state. In that case, you forever do not have another opportunity
to make up for your sins and it will remain available in your record,
because no permission will be given to any to return to the world.

With regard to this, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتّی اِذَا جاءَ اَحَدَهُم الْمَوْتُ قالَ‌ رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ \*
لَعَلِّي اَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيما تَرَكْتُ كَلاَّ‌ اِنَّهَا كَلِمَةٌ
هُوَ قَائِلُهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Until when death overtakes one of them, he says: ‘Send me back, my
Lord, send me back; haply I may do good in that which I have left.’ By
no means! it is a (mere) word that he speaks; and before them is a
barrier until the day they are raised…”***[^2]

Man will abstain from sin if at the time of committing vice he thinks
about this point that it is likely for the hour of death to arrive while
he is in a sinful state. Supposing that man too earns a lot of profit in
his illicit businesses and transactions and leaves it as inheritance for
his heirs, will it bear him any good? Are they not going to utilize this
inheritance for their own pleasure-seeking and forget about him? Even
though they were to praise him, what benefit has it got for his
condition? On the other hand, he will meet Allah with all his errors and
offences. Now, what pretexts has he got to present to Allah? He who knew
that what he was doing was prohibited [*haram*] and is contrary to the
orders of Allah and proof had been made complete upon him, what pretexts
is he going to present in the presence of Allah and what response is he
going to give to the fire that will be dropped upon him?

“O Abu Dharr! I have never seen a fire like the fire of Hell, which
[even] the sleeping seek to run away from, and I have never seen
[anything] like Heaven, which is desired by even the sleeping.”

The Need For Appreciating Life
------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Be more miserly with your life than [you are] with your
money and wealth.”

If a person saves money with a lot of difficulty and effort, does he
freely place it at the disposal of other people? For the reason that he
expended a lot of effort for its acquisition, he does not easily lose it
and knows its value. On the contrary, it is likely that without feeling
the slightest loss, man spends hours of his life pursuing vanity. In
other words, it is likely for one to be mean with his money but not be
miserly with his life despite the fact that the value of life cannot be
compared to the value of money.

If the life of a person falls in danger, he is ready to spend many times
all his belongings in order to save his life. Suppose that all gold,
silver and diamond mines were at the disposal of an individual and it is
said to him that he ought to give up all his life in order to stay
alive. Does he not give it up?

Man desires worldly facilities for his own use, now of what benefit are
they if he does not stay alive? For this reason, his life has more value
than all the wealth of the world. Why then are you losing this precious
asset freely? Not only do you lose it freely, but sometimes earn divine
wrath in return for it? If losing money in the free air is not a wise
action, how then can losing life freely in pursuit of transient passions
be wise?

Do not put this invaluable asset at the free disposal of companion,
friend, wife and friends. Do not squander it in vain activities for the
sake of pleasing others, worse is that you should waste it on committing
transgressions and sins. Yes, if for the good pleasure of Allah man
expends his life pleasing others, gladdening his wife and children and
his believing brother and/or on alleviating the needs of a believer, not
only has he not freely lost his life but has earned the good pleasure of
Allah whose value is more than the whole world. But it is not rational
to expend life which is worth the whole world for the sake of amusing
and entertaining this one and that one, because in this instance you
will have lost it freely.

Discharging Duties On Time And Not Being Anxious About The Following Day
------------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Does anyone of you expect something other than wealth
which leads to disobedience, or poverty which results in forgetting
Allah, or sickness which ruins his body or old age which withholds him
from activity, or death which arrives hurriedly, or the arrival of the
seditious imposter, or the approach of the Day of Resurrection which is
more dreadful and bitter.”

These expressions are another emphasis on making the most of
opportunities in the direction of discharging obligations. If man does
not employ the energy and opportunities that are at his disposal to
fulfill his divine duties now, then which opportunities is he waiting
for? These sentences are a warning to people who, when it is requested
of them to discharge their obligations, respond that there is plenty of
time for fulfilling responsibilities.

What day are you waiting for in order to make up for the past and
discharge your duties that you remain idle [today] and put off your work
until later, or get occupied in pursuing vain activities, or Allah
forbid, you get absorbed in sin? For instance, during the period of
poverty and want, man waits for the encumbrances of the period of
poverty to be overcome and become rich and then discharge his duties.
Despite that may be wealth and needlessness may have worse demands than
poverty and lead you to disobedience, because man becomes defiant when
he perceives himself needless.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلاّ اِنَّ الاِنْسَانَ لَيَطْغَی، \* اَنْ‌ رَآهُ اسْتَغْنَی
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! Man is most surely inordinate, because he sees himself free
from want.”***[^3]

Do you during the period of needlessness and wealth wait for the
encumbrances that have been brought about by your money and wealth to be
removed and for the period of poverty and want to arrive so as to
discharge your duties? Do you imagine that the loss of your wealth will
reduce the encumbrances of your work and life and you can hence
discharge your duties with ease? All too often, poverty results in
forgetting goals and perfections and occupies all your time that you
forget about perfection and spirituality.

When you are healthy you imagine that man remembers Allah more during
the period of illness, despite that this has no universality; it is not
always true that man gets busy with invocation of Allah, supplication
and be taking to the Infallibles (*‘a*) when he is sick. Sometimes,
illness gets so predominant on man that it robs him of the vigor to
discharge acts of devotion.

During the age of youth, you tell yourself to let the passion of
youthful pride and mischief get quenched and then you will discharge the
acts of devotion when old age arrives, negligent of the fact that you
will get besieged by the reduction of ability and strength and will not
be able to fulfill your duties. Therefore, when do you intend to
discharge your obligations? When your death arrives? Or, when the
seditious imposter comes?

The term ‘*dajjal* (the seditious imposter)’ denotes the liquid of a
goldsmith and is applied to a very deceptive person too, in the same way
that the appearance of a lying person is deceptively attractive and
entices others to himself by his hypocrisy and dissimulation.

In the *hadith*s, ‘*dajjal*’ denotes wickedness and mischievousness. In
any case, the Prophet’s (S) intention may be one of these two meanings
below:

1. The person who will appear at the end of time and cause sedition and
wickedness.

2. The intention may not be a particular person, but every deceitful and
fraudulent person: people who deceive others by means of enhancing their
appearances and who attract others to themselves by means of their
hypocrisy and dissimulation are instances of the *dajjal* and people who
cause deviations among the people by presenting falsehood as right and
right as falsehood.

The *dajjal* causes truth and falsehood to get so intertwined [with each
other] that separating one from the other is impossible. That is why the
Prophet (S) emphasizes that until you can distinguish right from
falsehood, make the most of the opportunity and act upon what is right
and be bound to its demands and needs, lest a day arrives when you will
be misled and the way of guidance is closed in front of you; this is the
worst occurrence that awaits man, most deplorable and more bitter than
everything else is waiting for the Day of Resurrection.

In this saying, the Noble Prophet (S) warns man about the dangers of the
future and embodies them for him, and mentions this possibility that it
is likely for the problems of the future to be more than those of today;
it is therefore fair for man to make the most of his opportunities
today, and not play for time.

[^1]: Surat Ta Ha 20:132.

[^2]: Surat al-Mu’minun 23:99-100.

[^3]: Surat al-‘Alaq 96:6-7.


