Lesson 5: Castigating the Acquisition of Knowledge for Worldly Goals
====================================================================

The Consequences Of Not Acting Upon Knowledge And Attaining Social Rank By Means Of It
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this section the Prophet (S) has addressed the scholars; His Holiness
urges the scholars to conform their actions to their knowledge and
reminds them about the ill-effects of not conforming conduct to
knowledge.

Even if His Holiness’ statements are clear and need no expounding, but
for the sake of making this issue more transparent so as to make it
clearer in the hearts, we will hint at some of the *hadith*s whose
purport is the same as that of the Noble Prophet’s (S) statements. But
before that we shall be reminded that from the Islamic point of view a
rational man cannot be without responsibilities, but the standards and
limitations of obligations differ. Therefore, an ignorant man and a
scholar equally have responsibilities, even though the burdens of a
scholar are more than those of an ignorant man.

Therefore, for the reason that the ignorant man has obligations too, he
is obliged to learn the divine duties and religious issues of his needs
and not knowing religious issues does not result in man being divested
of religious duties, that is why Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“On the Day of Resurrection, when Allah’s slave who did not fulfill his
duties [in the world] is called for questioning, Allah, the Exalted,
will ask him, ‘Were you aware of your duties and obligations?’ If in
response he says, ‘Yes, I was aware of my duties’, Allah will say, ‘Why
did you not act upon that which you were aware of?’ And if the slave
says, ‘I was an ignorant man’, Allah will say, ‘Why did you not go to
learn your responsibilities so as to act upon them…’”[^1]

The basic difference between a scholar and an ignorant man is that
Allah’s divine proof has fully been presented to him and no pretexts
will be accepted for his not discharging his responsibilities, and he
will [even] be dealt with in a more strict manner than the ignorant.

With regard to this, Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“Seventy sins of an ignorant man will be forgiven before one sin of a
scholar is forgiven…”[^2]

It ought not to be imagined that quitting education is better in order
not to be worse off than the ignorant, because one who fled from
acquiring knowledge and awareness will be asked too [why they did so]
and responsibility will not be divested of him because of his taking
flight from education. In addition to that, why ought we not to be among
those scholars who act upon their knowledge and will get envied in the
hereafter in the same way that other people used to envy them in the
world?

In our sources of *hadith*, a great deal of sections with different
titles have been recorded with regard to the virtue of acquiring
knowledge, to the extent that it has been recorded in some of the
*hadith*s that even the birds of the air and the fish of the sea and the
animals of the wilderness all seek Allah’s forgiveness for a person who
is seeking divine knowledge.

For every reason His Holiness’ sates in this section that a scholar
whose actions are not in accord with his knowledge will be in the worst
position and rank on the Day of Resurrection and will not smell the
sweet scent of paradise. All too often [it occurs that] a person who
embarks upon acquisition of knowledge initially does so with the
intention of serving the religion and discharging his obligations but
encumbrances crop up along the way; However, some people do not have a
divine intention and objective from the beginning.

Not only do they lack sincerity, but have ill-intentions as well, like
acquiring knowledge for the sake of attracting other people’s attention
and respect and acquiring social rank and popularity. It is natural that
right from the beginning such an individual is heading towards deviation
and collapse and consequently gets entangled in the filth of meanness
and misery and will not smell the scent of paradise on the Day of
Resurrection.

It is likely that a person who goes to learn secular knowledge for the
sake of attaining position, opportunity and the acquisition of daily
bread does not get reproached and blamed, but a person who learns divine
sciences, which have been designed for the prosperity of the hereafter,
for the sake of attaining the world deserves to be castigated. In
reality, such an individual believes that the position and status of the
world is higher than that of the hereafter. In other words, he has
believed in the primacy of the world and not that of religion. This
thought is a result of lack of faith in the basic principles and values
of religion and has no end save being driven away from Allah, as the
Prophet states:

“A person whose knowledge and awareness have been increased but [he] has
not become detached from the world has in fact got very far from
Allah.”[^3]

The Consequences Of Acquiring Knowledge For The Sake Of Deceiving Others
------------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! A person who acquires knowledge for the sake of deceiving
people will not smell the sweet scent of paradise.”

Some people not only embark upon acquiring knowledge for the sake of
attaining fame and position but worse than that, they get education in
order to deceive and mislead people.

Up to this section of the *hadith*, mention has been made about the
importance of harmonizing our actions in accord with our knowledge and
purifying the intention: that man ought to conceive of what intention he
has when he embarks upon the acquisition of knowledge and should not let
evil intentions appear in his heart. He ought not to set out gathering
knowledge for the sake of titles such as ‘Hujjat al-Islam’, ‘Ayatullah’,
‘Philosopher’ [*filsuf*] and ‘Interpreter of the Qur’an’ [*mufassir*]
and attracting the people’s respect [and attention].

Maybe people who take the trouble of getting education for the sake of
attaining fame imagine that every person who is more popular among the
people is more beloved by Allah too. This illusion is vain and void. Has
every one who is popular among the people discharged his
responsibilities in order for him to be beloved by Allah and [thus]
attain prosperity? Even if he is very popular among the people, he is
still the most ashamed and disgraced of all people in the sight of Allah
because the criteria of man’s works are knowledge, action and piety. The
standard of judgment is that man ought to be beloved by Allah, not by
the people.

Admitting Ignorance is a Quality of the Divine Scholars
-------------------------------------------------------

In a *hadith*, the Prophet (S) states:

“Every person who learns divine knowledge, which is supposed to be
learnt only for [the good pleasure of] Allah, for attaining worldly
goals and position will not smell the sweet scent of paradise on the Day
of Resurrection.”[^4]

“O Abu Dharr! Whenever they ask you about something which you do not
know, say that you do not know so as to remain safe and do not pronounce
an edict over what you have no knowledge of in order to escape Allah’s
wrath on the Day of Resurrection. (It is not permissible for man to say
that of which he has no knowledge, all too often, that word becomes a
cause of deviation).”

One of the greatest misfortunes which a scholarly man may be afflicted
by is feeling ashamed to admit his ignorance when he does not know
something. This confession is very easy for an ignorant man, but man
evades saying “I do not know” when he is known as an academic. When they
ask him something that he does not know, it is hard for him to let the
question go unanswered because he fears lest the people speculate about
the authenticity of his scholarly credentials if he does not know the
answer to questions.

What wrong is there with saying that I do not know in response to the
people’s questions? Has it been made incumbent upon the people to know
everything? Only Allah knows everything and the others have only used a
drop of His knowledge, as has been stated in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَمَا أُوتِيتُم مِن الْعِلْمِ الاَّ قَليِلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… and you are not given out of knowledge but a little.”***[^5]

The late ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, may Allah be pleased with him, used to
hold class sessions on Thursday and Friday nights which were attended by
a number of his students and philosophical and non-philosophical
discussions were held. If we had any questions to ask, we used to
present them before the class session or along the way [when going back
home after class]. One night along the way I asked him a philosophical
question. He answered, “I do not know.” I asked a second question, to
which he easily replied that he did not know, then after a moment’s
reflection, said, “Can a response be presented in this form?” Then, he
propounded an agreeable and satisfying answer. That night, he stated,
“We ought to compare the things unknown to us with the things known to
Allah. It is in that case that we will perceive that we do not know
anything and the things unknown to us are like the known to Allah,
endless.”

This is the way of those who have been trained in the school of thought
of the Prophets (*‘a*) and the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah, that if they
were not certain about anything, they gave a doubtful response. All too
often, the answers he used to give us were more convincing than the ones
we had, but if he was not certain and fully convinced, he was bound to
initially say, “I do not know.” In reality, this way had been attained
as a result of fighting against the carnal soul and subduing it.

This is the method of people who have spent sixty or seventy years of
their blessed lives along the course of purification of the soul,
teaching and learning. In any case, after we have learnt [only] a few
words and expressions, it is hard for us to say that we do not know when
we return to our cities. We ought to practice and accustom ourselves to
easily admitting ignorance when we do not know something, and if we have
doubts, to say that what we are offering is a possible response. In this
case, we will have freed ourselves from the troubles of the hereafter.

Man’s Biggest Regret On The Day Of Resurrection
-----------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! A group of the dwellers of heaven will glance [down] upon
the inmates of the fire and ask them, ‘What made you enter hell? Despite
that we entered heaven as a result of your teaching and training us.’ In
response, they will say, ‘We enjoined others to perform good works but
we ourselves did not do what we advised others to do’.”

One of the scenes which has been described in the Qur’an is that the
dwellers of heaven are at a higher level above the inmates of the
infernal hell fire and see them and talk to them, as if paradise is
situated at an elevated place and hell is positioned at a low place, and
that is why the dwellers of the Garden are at a higher level.

The Qur’an’s expression is that sometimes the dwellers of heaven address
the dwellers of hell and sometimes the dwellers of hell address the
dwellers of paradise:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَادَی أَصْحَابُ الْجَنَّةِ أَصْحَابَ النَّارِ أَنْ قَدْ وَجَدْنَا
مَا وَعَدَنَا رَبُّنَا حَقًّا فَهَلْ وَجَدْتُمْ مَا وَعَدَ رَبُّكُمْ
حَقًّا قَالُوا نَعَمْ فَأَذَّنَ مُؤَذِّنٌ بَيْنَهُمْ أَن لَعْنَةُ
اللهِ عَلَی الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the dwellers of the garden will call out to the inmates of the
fire, ‘Surely we have found what our Lord promised us to be true; have
you found what your Lord promised to be true?’ They will say, ‘Yes.’
Then a crier will cry out among them that the curse of Allah is on the
unjust.”***[^6]

Yes, as has been recorded in the *hadith*, the dwellers of hell will
address a group of the inmates of the Fire saying, “We attained paradise
thanks to the guidance, teaching and training which you gave us, what
happened to you that you got caught up in Allah’s retribution?” They
will respond with regret and remorse, saying, “We did not discharge what
we enjoined others to do, we invited you to perform good works but we
ourselves did not do what we said. We advised you to fulfill the
recommendable works, but we ourselves did not execute them. We guided
you away from sin and gossip, but we ourselves got contaminated by sin
and gossip. You listened to our words and executed them and earned a
place in that lofty abode, but we got entangled in this miserable and
painful fate in spite of all our knowledge.”

This remorse and contrition is the destiny of people who did not
discharge their obligations. This regret is certainly more painful than
burning in divine retribution, because spiritual torture is more painful
than physical torture. The pain of rejoicing at an enemy’s failure is
more than that of physical torture and burning.

It is painful for man to feel that others found their way to the garden
of bliss as a result of his guidance and he got into the predicament of
hell despite the fact that he could have attained higher heights by
means of his knowledge, and his disciples sit [in heaven] watching him.
They are enjoying the pleasures and comforts of the Garden and he is
being tormented in the Fire. If he did not have any torment, besides
being deprived of the blessings that are at the disposal of his
followers, this would be enough for him.

With due attention to the points which have been mentioned in this noble
*hadith*, we have to initially correct our intention and embark upon the
acquisition of knowledge for [the good pleasure of] Allah and
discharging our responsibilities and execute what we say right from the
outset so as to make this habit firm in ourselves and be able to
discharge our duties as we acquire more information. If at the outset we
build the foundation upon laziness and heedlessness, we initially quit
discharging a work and later on another duty until the habit of
disobedience gets strengthened in us and fighting against the carnal
soul is going to be hard later on.

The Categories Of Scholars In The Words Of ‘Ali (‘a)
----------------------------------------------------

“Scholars are of two kinds; the first kind is the scholar whose actions
match his knowledge and he becomes prosperous.

“The second type is the academic whose works do not correspond with his
knowledge and he falls into perdition and without doubt the dwellers of
hell will be bothered by the bad smell of a scholar without good deeds.
Verily, the most regretful and remorseful of the people of hell is the
person who calls another one towards Allah and the other one accepts the
invitation and obeys Allah and thereafter Allah makes him enter
paradise, while the caller [himself] is taken to the eternal Fire
because of not doing what he said [acting upon his knowledge].”[^7]

In an inspired *hadith*, Allah addresses Prophet David (*‘a*):

“The least punishment which I inflict on a scholar without works (good
deeds) is harder than seventy punishments or requitals, and that is
getting the sweetness of supplication away from him (and after that he
does not derive pleasure from remembrance of me)…”[^8]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 7, p. 285.

[^2]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 27.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 38.

[^5]: Surat al-Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:85.

[^6]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:44.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 34.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 32.


