The Khoja Who Discoverd the Truth
=================================

Over five hundred years ago, some people in India and Iran held a
strange belief about God. They believed that God entered into everything
in the Universe and that everything has the essence of God. The
believers of this originally were Hindus as well as a sect of Muslims.

Among the leaders of this belief were Peer Sadruddeen, an ancestor of
the Aga Khans in Iran as well as one Hindu known as Sahadeva Joshi.

With this belief, they made up a religion which they labelled as Sat
Panth meaning Right Path. The followers of this new path came to be
known as Khojas which is said to be a Sindhi word derived from the word
"KHOJ" meaning to search.

Perhaps it meant that the Khojas are those people who originally made
deep search to find a religious path. It is also said that the word KHOJ
A is derived from the word Khwaja meaning a man of distinction a title
awarded by the Peer to the newly converts to the Sat Panth.

The creed of this new religion is based on incarnation of God i.e. God
entered into some human beings, as believed by Hindus. To nine
incarnations of Hindu God Vishnu, they added Hazrat Ali (A.S.) as the
tenth incarnation.

They believed in him as God as did Alawites - the Nusairies in Syria.
They proclaimed themselves Shias as well, meaning the followers of
Hazrat Ali (A.S.) and his family.

It is mentioned that a Persian mystic by name Ali Itahi had come to
Kutch in India. He took with him some eager Khojas to Iran and
introduced them to the ancestors of the Agha Khans.

It is thought that these firm believers in the new religion and the
close followers of Peer Sadruddeen came to be known as Bawas. After the
death of the Peer, they became the guardians of the religions of the
Khojas. It is these Bawas who preached that the Agha Khans were
incarnation of God and included this belief in the GINANS - the prayer
book read usually in Jamat Khanas.

The Bawas had considerable influence over the Khojas as they also
controlled the various ceremonies concerning marriage and death, etc.
The Khoja faithful who took their lessons from the Bawas came to be
known as Bhagats.

The Khojas were mainly a trading community resident in Bombay, Karachi
as well as lesser numbers in towns and villages of Kutch and Kathiawar
in India. Some of them migrated to Zanzibar and other East African towns
during the years 1850 - 1900 to expand their business. The Khojas in
those days were rather ignorant and simple people.

They became influenced by social traditions of the Hindus, some of
these traditions are still to be seen in marriage ceremonies although
many have disappeared with the times.

Despite being involved and surrounded by peculiar and unlslamic beliefs
and traditions,, historical records show us that the Khojas were deeply
devoted towards Imam Husain (A.S.).

They would spend large sums to commemorate the martyrdom of the Imam.
Those who could afford would regularly travel to Karbala and other Holy
places to pay their homage at the shrines of the Imams.

Sometime during 1860 - 70 A.D., a Shiite Muslim from Madras, India, by
name of Mulla Qader Husain is said to have gone to Karbala on pilgrimage
as well as to stay there for the purpose of acquiring more knowledge in
Shiism.

While there by chance he came into contact with some prominent Khoja
Zuwwars - pilgrims from Zanzibar as well as Bombay. Among them were
Nurmohamedbhai, Mukhi Hashambhai Dossa and Dewji Jamal. On their visit
to him, Mulla Qader would teach them the recitation of Holy Qura'n as
well as Islamic rules about cleanliness, prayers, etc.

Mulla Qader once described to them the merits of Hazrat Ali (A.S.).
Suddenly Nurmohamedbhai said "We Khojas believe that Ali (A.S.) is God"
On hearing this, the Mulla was greatly astonished. On further
discussion, he learnt that "Khojas also believed that Ali was the tenth
incarnation of God and the Aga Khan the forty-sixth incarnation of Aly
or God."

Obviously this belief is in absolute contradiction to the basic
principles of Islamic belief in Tawheed - the Oneness of God. Belief in
any form of human relationship with God such as entering of God into
human body is considered as SHIRK - polytheism. The pure belief in the
absolute Unity of Allah is the foundation of Islam and one who
contradicts it cannot be called a Muslim.

"Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with
Him, and He forgives what is besides this to whom He pleases; and
whoever associates anything with Allah, he indeed strays off into a
remote error." (14:116)

Thus Mulla Qader became deeply concerned about the ignorance of the
Khojas and did his best to correct their beliefs. He took them to the
Mujtahid Sheikh Zainul Abedeen and reported their plight.

The Mulla was invited by Dewji Jamal to accompany him to Bombay and
Zanzibar so as to impart the knowledge of true Islam to the Khojas but
he was not willing to leave Kerbala. Finally at the insistence of the
Mujtahid Sheikh Zainul Abedeen he agreed and left for Bombay where he
first stayed with Dewjibhai.

In Bombay, Mulla Qader started a Madrassa in which he taught the rules
and tenets of true Islam according to Shia Ithnasheri beliefs. Gradually
he also led a congregational prayer which was first attended by 15/20
people later expanding to 50 and more persons.

This had to be done secretly inside a house in order to safeguard the
lives of the faithful who had separated from the main stream of Agha
Khani sect of Ismaili Khojas.

On separation thus of the Khoja community into two different sects of
the Ismailis as followers of Agha Khan and Ithnasheris as followers of
Twelve Imams, there were repeated incidents of trouble between the two
sects. The Ithnasheris were boycotted in matters of business, social
contacts, burial, etc.

So harsh was the friction between the two that at times criminals were
hired to stab the converts and murders took place.

But so firm and staunch were those handful in their faith that they
could not be drawn away from the path of truth they had discovered.
Their courage is indeed worth appreciating and taking lesson from.

Today the Khoja Shia Ithnasheries numbering more than 100,000 are
prosperously scattered throughout the world in India, Pakistan, East
Africa, Madagascar as well as Europe, USA, Canada. They not only
maintain their Islamic traditions but also contribute their time, energy
and money for the propagation of truth.


