Shaddad's Paradise On Earth
===========================

'Aad' was a descendent of Prophet Noah. Thousands of years ago, his
people had lived in the deserts of "AL-AHQAF" around Oman and Hadhramut
in South Arabia. They were strongly built and very tall. They believed
in no God but worshipped idols.

Prophet 'HUD' was sent by Allah to preach and guide them on the right
path. He advised them to worship one God as taught by Islam but they
paid no heed. Allah punished them by stopping rain and drought over took
them for years.

Then some people went to Prophet 'Hud' begging him to pray to Allah for
the rains. The Prophet prayed and instructed them to return to their
villages. Thereafter it rained and people prospered. But never did they
amend their conduct nor abandon their faith in idol-worship. Al last
they were destroyed by punishement from Allah.

When 'Aad' died, he left behind two sons Shaddad and Shadeed. After
some time Shadeed also died and Shaddad became the ruler of his kingdom.
He had appointed several governors in the areas over which he ruled. He
grew so arrogant that he even claimed to be God and compelled his people
to worship him.

Allah sent Prophet 'Hud' to approach 'Shaddad' advising him to correct
his wrong thinking and conduct. In response, he once asked the Prophet
what reward he could expect if he were to put his faith in Allah and
worship One God. He was told that he would have a place in paradise.

Shaddad inquired what sort of place it was. The Prophet described it as
a blissful place where the righteous and true believers in Allah would
after death enjoy the best of every thing. 'Shaddad' responded saying it
was nothing since he could also build similar place or even a better one
on earth.

He then resolved to build a huge and beautiful paradise of his own on
earth. He sent someone to Zohak Tazi - who ruled Iran with request to
purchase all available quantity of gold and silver.

He also sent people around to other places and acquired large
quantities of valuable items including musk and amber etc. He then
gathered all his experts and architects and gave them instructions to
construct a magnificient 'paradise' on earth.

A place with good climate and scenery somewhere in south Arabia was
selected. High palaces and towers with walls inlaid with gold and silver
were constructed. Beautiful pearls and emaralds were spread on floors
instead of sand.

Trees made of gold with branches hanging with musks and amber were put
up in plush gardens. Everytime the wind blew, the sweet scent OT their
perfume would spread around. Pretty women were accommodated there to
beautify the dream setting. All valuable metals and materials were
supplied and it took some three hundred years to complete it.

In those very olden days, people used to live very long. Prophet Noah
had lived for 900 years. Similary Shaddad was informed that he would
live about that long. So he was extremely anxious to enter and live in
his lavish man made paradise before his death.

He gave orders to all people to proceed to the walls of dazzling city
of high and magnificient pillars described in the holy Quran as IRAM
ZATIL IMAD. Then he himself came out of his residence in Hadramont with
his large army for opening ceremony. As he neared the paradise of his
imagination, suddenly he saw a deer with trunk and legs of gold and
silver.

He gave chase to capture it but in so doing he got separated from his
army. Now alone, unexpectedly he was faced with a frightful horseman who
in raised voice said: "Oh Shaddad! You imagined that you will be saved
from death and live for ever after entering this man-made paradise on
earth."

Shaddad on hearing this trembled and inquired who he was. "I am MALAKOL
MAUT" - (the angel of death) came the reply.

"What do you want and why are you obstructing me?" asked Shaddad. "I
have come to take away your soul", he replied.

Shaddad pleaded for sometime at least to be able to enter his paradise
but the angel of death refused saying he had no permission from Allah to
do so. He then fell from his horseback and his soul instantly departed
from his body.

His army heard a deafening and frightening sound from the sky and they
also perished on the spot. None of them could fulfil their ardent desire
of entering the fictitous paradise. The whole decorated structure
crumbled and got buried under the Arabian sands.

What a splendid example of the consequence of one who thought he could
challenge the Might of Allah, who had become arrogant as a result of
this enormous wealth. What a tragedy that he could not even step into
his man- made paradise.

The Holy Quran has truly described such people in these words:

"Nay! man is most surely inordinate,

Because he sees himself free from want." (96: 6-7)


**Ka'aba Against The Might of Elephants**

During the sixth century around 570 A.D., before the advent of Islam,
the part of Arabia known as Yemen was under the rule of the Abyssinian
Christians who had driven away the Jewish Himyar rulers.

The Abyssinian viceroy in Yemen was Abraha Ashram. He was determined to
build great church in San'aa, present capital of Yemen, so as to make it
a leading centre of commerce and place of pilgrimage for the Christian
world. He was convinced that this dream could only be realized if he
could first destroy Mecca which was then a huge centre of commerce and
pilgrimage.

Intoxicated with power and fired by religious fanaticism, Abraha
finally made his vicious plans. Accompanied by a big herd of elephants
and other animals, he led an expedition and marched to destroy the Holy
Ka'aba in Mecca.

The Arabs in those days hardly had any opportunity to see an elephant
in their lives. Hence the army of Abraha is described in history as
'ASHABUL FEEL' i.e. the army with elephants.

Abraha camped his army on the outskirts of Mecca preparing to attack
and destroy the holy Ka'aba. During the course of preparation, his army
stole some 700 camels belonging to Abdul Muttalib - the grandfather of
the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W) The camels were grazing in the open
fields outside the city.

Abraha sent a message to Abdul Muttalib who was the supreme chief of
Mecca, informing him his intention of destroying the Holy Ka'aba. Abdul
Muttalib replied that he would meet Abraha in person and talk to him.
When he approached the invading army's camp, he was received
respectfully and given an honourable seat near Abraha.

As the two men talked, Abdul Muttalib said that he had come to complain
about Abraha's army stealing his camels. Abraha answered, "I have come
to conquer Mecca, your place of worship, and you worry about your
camels?" Abdul Muttalib repiied, "I am the owner and responsible for the
camels so I have come for them. The Ka'aba belongs to God and it is the
concern of the owner of that house whether to save it or not." Abraha,
amazed by the reply, returned Abdul.

Muttalib's camels to him but was determined to attack the city. Abdul
Muttalib advised his people to move into the hills for safety.

As Abraha entered the city a huge flock of tiny birds, like a patch of
cloud appeared in the sky. Each bird had a small pebble in its tiny beak
and dropped it on the invading soldiers. The stones fell exactly on the
men and they were instantly killed and fell prone on the ground.

Abraha was spared but one bird flew above him. The king asked him what
kind of birds had acted so miraculously. Abraha raised his eyes to the
sky and saw the bird and pointed out it to the king; the bird dropped
the stone and Abraha was instantly killed. After the miraculous event,
Abraha's army was found lying on the ground as bits of some withered and
crunched grass rendered useless for any purpose.

Is this event not a clear miracle proving the sanctity of the Ka'aba
and the people who were truly attached to it such as Abdul Muttalib and
the people of his house?

Had he not shown his utmost confidence in Allah as the real protector
of the Holy Shrine and guided his people to safety, they would have
perhaps bowed down to the might and pomp of Abraha and made a truce with
him. Consequently the history of Mecca and the holy shrine as well as
the glory of Islam would have been different.

Another important lesson to draw from this event for men of all ages is
that a man intoxicated with power can prepare armies and armaments
against God's holy plan, but such a man's action will be his own
downfall, he cannot prevail against God.

The Holy Qura'n has in eloquent words described this incident as
follows:


"Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with the companions of the
elephant?

Did He not cause their war to end in confusion, And send down (to prey)
upon them birds in flocks, Casting against them stones of baked clay, So
He rendered them like straw eaten up" (105: 1-5)


