Lessons From the Life of an Ant
===============================

Prophet Sulayman once was sitting on the bank of a lake deeply
engrossed in the beauties of nature around and appreciating the various
forms of Allah's creation on earth.

Suddenly the Prophet's attention was drawn towards an ant creeping
forward with a grain of wheat in its mouth. As it reached near the
water, a tortoise came out, opened its mouth and the ant crept into it.
The tortoise closing its mouth disappeared under the water.

After a while, the tortoise again sprung out of the water and standing
on the bank opened its mouth and the ant came out. But this time it had
no grain of wheat in its mouth. The Prophet became anxious to know what
had been happening under water.

On inquiring, the ant explained that at the bottom of the lake, there
was a stone and underneath it there was another ant who was blind.

Allah had created it there and because of blindness, it could not move
out. I have been appointed by Allah to provide its daily sustenance with
the assistance of the tortoise. Hence I do perform this duty everyday.

Prophet Sulayman in response to his special prayer to Allah was granted
kingdom and was given power over the forces of nature, over the Jinns
and devils and the birds and other living creatures. He was also endowed
with knowledge of their language hence his ability to speak to the
ant.

Let us ponder over one thing. If a tiny creature like an ant living
under a stone at the bottom of a sea is not denied its sustenance, why
should man - the noblest of all creatures ever suspect loss of his
sustenance from Almighty Allah.

Prophet Sulayman's subjects were of various types and they lived
peacefully and co-operatively by his discipline, justice and good
government. Jinns, men and the birds gathered in groups before him. On
their long march out once they came to a lowly valley of ants.

This valley contained huge deposits of invaluable metals like gold,
silver and precious stones. This precious place was guarded by Allah
with extraordinary kinds and sizes of ants. On account of this, none
could approach the place on foot nor mounted.

When the chief of the ants saw the pomp and the glory of the huge army
of Sulayman approaching towards it in the air, it sounded the caution to
all of its kind in the valley to get into their holes lest they get
trampled down and crushed.

Prophet Sulayman smiled at the precaution taken by the ants and ordered
his companions to wait until the ants went into their holes and to be
careful not to cause any harm to the ants when passing through. He
prayed to Allah to make him grateful for His favours and to do good
deeds that please Him and to admit him among His righteous servants.
Addressing the chief of the ants, the Prophet is reported to have
said:

"How could my people hurt you and your like as they are floating in the
air and don't you know that I am the apostle of Allah and would never
act unfairly?"

The Chief of the ants replied:

"Oh apostle of Allah! My cautioning my flock was not for fear of hurt
but to prevent them getting astray and forgetting the glory of Allah
after seeing the glory of your army or your pomp and glamour and be
tempted by them."

That even the humblest creatures of Allah like the ant is endowed with
the necessary wisdom to live and protect its life is apparent from this.
Besides one should not be overtaken by the glory of the worldly pomp of
the rulers and kings as to forget the glory of the creator Allah that is
what the ant teaches us.

On the other hand the prayer of Prophet Sulayman indicates his humility
before Almighty Allah who had bestowed upon him control over the forces
of nature.

That one should utilize God's bounties for righteousness and for good
to others is also the lesson we derive. Despite all his possessions and
glory as the king ruling over a vast empire and having control over
various creatures, Prophet Sulayman used to fast the whole day, weave
baskets and sell them. From the return of his own labour, he used to
purchase loaves and eat them sitting along with the poor.

In one of his sermons in Nahjul Balagha, Imam Ali (A.S.) exhorts people
to ponder over the power of Allah's creation and citing example of the
creation of an ant he says:


"Had they pondered over the greatness of His power and the vastness of
His bounty they would have returned to the right path and feared the
punishment of the Fire; but hearts are sick and eyes are impure. Do they
not see the small things He has created, how He strengthened their
system and opened for them hearing and sight and made for them bones and
skins? Look at the ant with its small body and delicate form.

It can hardly be seen in the corner of the eye, nor by the perception
of the imagination - how it moves on the earth and leaps at its
livelihood. It carries the grain to its hole and deposits it in its
place of stay. It collects during the summer for its winter, and during
strength for the period of its weakness.

Its livelihood is guaranteed, and it is fed according to fitness.
Allah, the Kind, does not forget it and (Allah the Giver) does not
deprive it, even though it may be in dry stone or fixed rocks.

If you have thought about its digestive tracts in its high and low
parts, the carapace of its belly, and its eyes and its ears in its head
you would be amazed at its creation and you would feel difficulty in
describing it. Exalted is He who made it stand on its legs and erected
it on its pillars (of limbs).

No other originator took part with Him in its origination and no one
having power assisted Him in its creation. If you tread on the paths of
your imagination and reach its extremity it will not lead you anywhere
except that the Originator of the ant is the same as He who is the
Originator of the date-palm, because everything has (the same) delicacy
and detail, and every living being has little difference."


**Ghulamhusein and The Game of Chance**

Ghulamhusein was a popular social figure and a keen host of guests
coming to him from distant lands. He lived in Moshi, a beautiful small
town at the foot of Mt. Kilimanjaro in Tanzania.

He was generous and hospitable to one and all. One of his hobbies
during leisure hours particularly on Saturdays and Sundays was to play
the game of cards with his friends. For hours they used to get together
where they enjoyed the game. It was not with the aim of gambling but
rather just for pleasure and pass time.

Once in the midst of a lively game of cards, his servant came to inform
him that a guest of his was seriously ill at the guest house and needed
his immediate attention. He sent the servant back saying he would come
soon.

But he was so much engrossed in the game of cards that he did not feel
inclined to withdraw from it. So he continued to play with keen
interest. After a while, his servant came again to report that the
condition of the guest was deteriorating and needed his urgent attention
as there was no one else to attend.

But Ghulamhusein was so deeply engrossed in the game that he did not
want to be disturbed. As such, again he sent the servant back promising
to come soon.

By the time he could be free from the very mind-captivating game of
cards, the servant came for the third time. But this time he reported
that the guest of. his - a poor traveller from distant lands - had
already died. This news gave a shock of his life to Ghulamhusein.

It convinced him of the evil and harmful effect of such an indoor game.
There and there he vowed never to indulge himself in such a game.

Is this not an eye-opening example of an intoxicating and mentally
distracting game of cards, commonly played today either as a pass-time
or for gambling purposes? Perhaps it also explains the philosophy behind
absolute Islamic forbidance to play or watch such a game, even without
the chance of gaining or losing money. It is meant to be a prevention
rather than cure lest man is one day tempted to use the game for
gambling purposes.

But why do people become interested in such games of chance, be it
cards, billiard ball or chess at casinos and gambling dens? A number of
reasons could be put forward for this.

A mentally active young man happens to look for a time-pass, away from
his usual home or office environment, and, he is misled to believe that
a casino or a billiard club is the best place for this. Or it is
possible that he is tempted by a friend for his company to play a
game.

But more than that, it is the greed and temptation of an easy and quick
chance of making money by gambling. Again he is misled to believe that
he is lagging behind whilst his friend and relatives mint millions of
easy money in the gambling dens.

A gambler often spends hours at the gambling dens at the expense of his
valuable time for his other moral and religious duties towards his God
and family. Should he lose in one game of chance, he is tempted to play
again and again till he recoveres his loss. Should he win and make some
money, he is again tempted to play in order to double and treble his
day's easy earning from the game of chance.

Thus, the mind of a gambler becomes currupt and his aim of life
revolves round money. His goal of life ultimately is to mint money, more
and more. His mind is so much distracted that he is no more able to
concentrate in his normal job or studies. In the temptation of making
more or easy money, his heart is all the time drawn and attached to the
gambling table.

And when the tide turns against him and he incurs losses after losses
in the gambling business, the time comes when he is obliged to dispose
off his personal belongings to pay off the debts. The family life at
home becomes disrupted as a result and he is then detested and looked
down upon by the society and his own family members.

Islam which has come as a total code of life for man, has condemned and
forbidden every game of chance. The following ayats of the holy Qura'n
are a good guidance.

"They ask you about intoxicants and games of chance. Say: In both of
them there is a great sin and means of profit for men, and their sin is
greater than their profit. And they ask you as to what they should
spend. Say: What you can spare. Thus does Allah make clear to you the
communications, that you may ponder" (2:219)

Ithm as used in the Qura'n is interpreted as that sinful condition in
the human intellect and soul whereby he is distracted and kept away from
reaching acts of goodness and perfection. Therefore, what it means is
that drinks and gambling - two of the major sins in Islam - as the
source of great harm to human body and soul.

"The Shaitan only desires to cause enmity and hatred to spring in your
midst by means of intoxicants and games of chance, and to keep you off
from the remembrance of Allah and from prayer. Will you then desist?"
(5:91) It is quite evident from the above verses of Holy Qura'n that the
enmity and hatred in addition to distraction from the rememberance of
Allah and prayers results from gambling and drinking.

The Holy Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.) and his progency have strongly
condemned the games of chance.

Imam Radha (a.s.) has said:

"Allah has described gambling as a filthy and impure act of Satan and
has warned people to keep away from it"

Can a wise man and a true Muslim ever think of going near to Satanic
games of chance and take the risk of ruining his life? Certainly not!!


