Where Music Leads To
====================

Alamgheer was one of the past Moghul kings in India. It is said he was
a devout muslim and staunch upholder of Islamic tenets. He banned all
luxury items in his kingdom including the listening to music. No one
dared do so even privately in his home.

Those engaged in musical provision for their earnings, got together to
discuss what to do. They decided to take out a procession on the streets
of Delhi in protest.

So one day they staged a grand procession taking out a big JANAZA
(coffin) and marched on the streets of the capital. They passed in front
of the king's palace. They raised their voice as well as the JANAZA to
make their amusing protest march conspicuous before the king who was
then sitting on the front terrace.

The king became curious and wanted to know which eminent personality
had died as to be given such a grand funeral. Some leaders from the
procession approached the king and in a lamenting and wailing tone told
him that the coffin was in fact that of 'Music'. Since it was strictly
banned in the country, they were suffering loss of daily income. On
hearing this, the king smiled and said:

"Very good! Dig the grave so deep as to ensure that the dead MUSIC does
not rise again for hundreds of years to come."

Let us ponder over the reasons why Islam has forbidden the playing,
hearing and even the handling of musical instruments.

The Islamic philosoply of life dictates that this worldly life is
transtional and a quick passing one, whereas the life hereafter is
eternal and more important. Therefore Islam has forbidden those things
which distract our attention from this fact and which lead us towards
loose character and overlooking of the moral duties of our life.

A number of these forbidden things in Islam are not only morally but
physically and mentally harmful as proved by a number of modern
scientists. Professor Horst Hecheck of Vienna reports:

"The disharmonies of modern music freguently cause severe psychological
and physical damage to musicians. Doctors and music experts say
complaints range from nervousness, depression and headaches to ulcers
and impotence"

The toxic effect of the musical sound cannot be denied. Some years
before, it was reported in a local newspaper in Daressalaam that a
pregnant Hindu woman was much mentally engrossed in listening to a
moving musical program in a cinema that she delivered a baby on the spot
without realizing what was happening. The newspaper in criticizing the
incident, remarked whether the place was a cinema hall or maternity
home!

A professor of Columbia University in America, Dr. Adler, writes that a
best melodious record of music can badly harm a human body nerves and
the warmer the weather, more the harm. He also proved that music does
upset the human nerves unnaturally causing considerable fatigue. The
shaking effect of music also causes unnatural perspiration.

This research of Dr. Adler on music had such a widespread effect on the
American people that many were led to stop listening to music.

The belief that music was harmful for progressive nation reached a
stage when a resolution to ban it by law was presented with relevent
proofs and arguments in the American senate. But in a nation where
luxury and lust is widespread how many could be expected to vote for
such a ban?

It may be claimed that music has a soothing-effect and as such it is a
good entertainment, but taking into consideration that it causes more
harm than good, it becomes undesirable and one should abstain from it.
Islam, as such, has forbidden music as we can see from the following
Quranic Ayat and the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)

"But avoid the uncleanliness of the idols and avoid vain (false) words"
(22:30) According to the interpretations of all the major sects of Islam
the above mentioned vain (false) words include false utterance and
music.

It is worth noting that the divine instruction to avoid vain words
(music) is in conjuction with the instruction to avoid the uncleanliness
(pollution) of idol. Thus the condemnation of music is along with that
of idol-worship.

The Prophet of Islam had said:

"Two kinds of voices are resented by Allah: the wailing at the time of
a calamity and musical rhythm at the time of rejoicing." (Nafahat
Risaliyya)


**Do Stars Influence Our Destiny?**

Once Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (A.S.) was leaving Kufa - (the then capital
of his caliphate in Arabia) - to go to a place called Nahrawan in order
to quash the rebellion of the Kharijites. One of his companions by the
name Aleef told him not to undertake the journey just then.

Why? Because according to the findings of astrology, it was not an
auspicious moment, and this journey would not end into victory. Ali bin
Abi Talib (A.S.) replied in these words:

(Nahjul Balagah sermon 79)

"Do you think you can tell the hour when a man goes out and no evil
befall him or can warn of the time at which if one goes out harm will
accrue? Whoever testifies to this falsifies the Qur'an and becomes
unmindful of Allah in achieving his desired objective and in warding off
the undesirable.

You cherish saying this so that he who acts on what you say should
praise you rather than Allah because according to your misconception you
have guided him about the hour in which he would secure benefit and
avoid harm."

After replying to Aleef, Ali bin Abi Talib (A.S.) turned towards those
who had gathered there and said:

"O' People! Beware of learning the science of stars except that with
which guidance is sought on land or sea, because it leads to divining
and an astrologer is a diviner, while the diviner is like the sorcerer,
the sorcerer is like the unbeliever and the unbeliever would be in Hell.
Get forward in the name of Allah."

Contrary to the astrologer's advice, Ali bin Abi Talib proceeded at the
same moment to Nahrawan and returned victorious from that war.

Millions of people in the world have the tendency of consulting
horoscopes inorder to seek informatian about the future trends of their
lives which they believe to be under the influence of the movement of
stars and planets.

In our African Society, we have a section of people who frequently
consult the so called MWALIMUS or WITCHDOCTORS to seek the secrets of
their sufferings and to find out the future outcome of their ills.

These people suffer from superstitions, psycholgical fears or imaginary
sicknesses. The MWALIMUS OR WITCHDOCTORS who consider themselves to be
the experts on prediction based on the movement of stars, have some set
imaginary answers and cures to offer and in so doing they go on minting
money from the ignorant people.

How strange it is to suppose that our business, adventures, our health,
our life and death are predetermined by the position of the stars and
planets and are under the influence of their movement? What is
overlooked is the fundamental fact that both man and the heavenly
bodies - the stars - the sun - the moon etc., are under the indisputable
authority of the Creator Allah. Man's desting present and future
well-being is all controlled by Him and Him alone.

It is one of those human weakness of enslaved mentality which tend to
bow down to a body created like himself rather than recognize and have
faith in the full and supreme authority of the Creator Allah.

But why is it that so many people, including the educated and
intelligent, are willing to place their faith on what the astrologers
have to say?

The answer is, that day by day, tremendous vacuum is occuring in the
lives of many who previously truly believed in God. Worldly pleasure and
occupations have so much overtaken their minds that they can hardly
pause to think and recognize the true aim of life and the Supreme Powers
of the LIFE - GIVER.

As such, they become desperate and inorder to find some sort of peace
for the disturbed mind, they doing to anything that may possibly give
them some sort of consolation. Humanbeings, by nature, must have
something in which to believe, and in the absence of a meaningful faith
in God, reliance is place on superstition, occultation, magic,
witchcraft, etc

Astrology does not demand its followers to go to church or mosque nor
perform rituals nor adhere to any moral commandments. All one has to do
is to buy newspapers or books and follow up what is published about the
horoscopes. Or at times. approach an astrologer or a Mwalimu, pay his
fees of a few shillings and seek information about the future.

During the times of Imam Jaffer Al Sadiq (A.S.), discussion and debates
on various sciences in the world (and particularly in Arabia) were at
their peak.

People of different beliefs and religions used to attend discourses by
the Imam. One of those sciences dwelt upon was astrology and the Imam
expressly asked the people not to believe in it.

Abdul Malik bin Aayun was counted among one of the great
traditionalists as well as scholars in Islam. He was also an expert in
astrology; and had strong faith in the effect of the positions and
movements of the stars on daily lives of human beings. He had
accumulated a number of books on this subject and was always referring
to them. Before taking any decision or starting any work, he would make
astrological calculations to find out what guidance and trend he could
get from the position of the stars.

Gradually it became his habit; and not even a small piece of work could
be done without prior astrotogical calculations. Day by day he became
more and more mentally engrossed in basing all his actions on the good
or bad omen of the stars. He became jealous of the people who
accomplished their daily work by having confidence in God and who never
worried about the positions of stars.

Once he explained his trouble to Imam Jaffer Al Sadiq (A.S.) who
expressed his surprise that Abdul Malik had this undesirable habit and
told him: "I command you to go and set fire to all those books"

He went and did as he was told. Thus he released himself from the
burden of mythical and imaginery influence of stars, and then he felt at
ease and quite relaxed in doing all his works by relying on God.

Hasheena state that he approached Imam Jaffer Al Sadiq (A.S.) and said
to him that there lived a man on their Island, who could reveal to them
unknown matters, for example where and with whom stolen goods are lying.
The Imam responded by saying:

"The Holy Prophet (S.A. W.) has said that one who goes to ask about
anything from magician, soothsayer or a liar and believes in what he
says certainly becomes an infidel (unbeliever) and denier of all the
heavenly scriptures revealed by Allah"

The fact is that an astrologer, soothsayer magician or any type of
fortune - teller poses as a divine person, who thinks that he can
forecast one's benefit or harm through the art of astrology thus,
instead of praying to Almighty Allah for warding off calamities and
misfortunes, or offering thanks to Allah for bounties HE has bestowed,
he becomes indifferent and self confident in every matter.

Should he by chance prove successful in some of his forecasts, he would
expect to be praised and be depended upon by more and more people. This
leads to atheism and is against the spirit of the teachings of the Holy
Qura'n in which the Almighty Allah says:

"Say: No one in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen but Allah;
and they do not know when they shall be raised." (27:65)

Thus to approach fortune-tellers, palmists, astrologers and such others
who claim to have power to peep into future and to know of hidden
matters is to display lack of true faith in the Will of Allah, It is
against the teachings of Islam and leads to infidelity.


