The Tragic End of an Oppresive King
===================================

Nadir Shah was King of Persia, a famous conqueror around early
eighteenth century. He conquered India and with little resistance
reached Delhi during 1739. Irritated and angered by some commotion by
the inhabitants, he caused general massacre and set fire to houses in
Delhi. Thousands of people were killed.

During the last night of his fife, Nadir Shah was seeing terrible
nightmares and had lost mental peace and sleep. He would get out of his
bed now and again, returning to it to get some comfort and sleep but to
no avail.

It was terrible torture for the Shah but no one dared to approach him
to find the reason. Only one person could dare to do so and he was
Husainali Muinul Mulk, a trusted friend of the Shah. He approached him
and asked the reasons for his restlessness and lack of sleep.

The Shah said that it was a deep personal secret which he would reveal
to him on condition that he did not tell anyone otherwise the punishment
would be by death.

Nadir Shah then related his secret saying that before he came on the
throne of Iran, he had seen a sensational dream. He had seen two
prominent and gilttering personalities come to him and with much honour,
they took him to a place. There ten more glittering personalities were
seated with much dignity and awe.

The Shah was then ushered before one of them and a dazzling sword was
respectfully tied around his waist. Thereafter one high personage said
to him, "You are being designated for the upliftment and welfare of Iran
provided people are treated well."

Since then, the Shah added he had made progress in every sphere in his
life. Not only had he succeeded in sitting on the throne of Iran but he
also extended domains. Having attacked at the cost of thousands killed,
India also fell and came under his rule.

Revealing his secret further to Husainali, Nadir Shah went on to say
that night he saw a very frightening dream when he went to sleep. He saw
the same two prominent and glittering personalities again but this time
it appeared as if they were not in good mood as in the previous dream.

He saw he was being dragged and made to appear before the same high
personages in whose presence he was previously honoured with the gift of
a dazzling sword and good news about his future. This time in harsh tone
he was asked if such was the way of treating the Muslim masses? The Shah
added that "I was asked to surrender the sword which was removed from my
waist.

Then with my hands tied around my neck, I was dragged from one place to
another. This dream has terribly upset me and I am unable to sleep
tonight,"he concluded. Alas the kingly life of Nadir Shah was destined
to meet its tragic end as a result of his massacres and crimes.

He passed that night restlessly and as the morning set in, he was
killed by his enemies. He departed from this world neither with head
over his body nor with the kingly crown over his head.

The fact is that Nadir Shah had misused the good omen he first received
in a dream. He thought he had become high and mighty and could do
whatever he liked. He had misunderstood, as many of us today do, that
the blessings of kingdom, wealth, power or high status in life are signs
of divine favour. Wordly blessings to man are but temporary means of
testing the strength of faith and action in obedience or disobedience of
God's commands.

Among the sins and crimes which attract severe punishment in this life
as well as in the next is oppression of people.

and they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back. (26:227)


**In Willing Submission To The Will of Allah**

Abu Talha was one of the respected companions of Prophet Muhammad
(S.A.W.) His wife Umme Salim was a woman of strong faith in Allah. They
had a young son who was very dear to them. In particular the father was
deeply attached to him. His name was Salim.

Once young Salim became so seriously ill that his mother lost hope of
his survival. One day she sensed the end was imminent. Lest the dear
father became too much upset on seeing the son die, she requested Abu
Talha to go to the Prophet.

After he had left the house, Salim breathed his last. Umme Salim
immediately shrouded the dead body in a piece of cloth and placed it
inside a room.

Thereafter she went and cooked food for her husband. She adorned
herself with perfume and sat waiting for him to return. When Abu Talha
returned he inquired about the health of his dear son.

Umme Salim replied that he was asleep and it was better not to disturb
him. Both sat down and ate their meal. And then lied down for a short
rest. After "a while, Umme Salim woke up saying she wanted to ask him a
question:

"Supposing someone entrusted us with a thing for some time and after
comes and takes it back from us. Would you be unhappy with him?"
"Certainly not" replied Abu Talha. "A thing on trust to us must be
returned to the owner."

Then Umme Salim decided to reveal what had happened to their son. She
said, "Salim who was on trust to us has departed from this world. Allah
the All Merciful, has decided to take him back from us." So moved was
Abu Talha to hear this said in this way that he exclaimed, "By Allah you
are the mother of the son and as such more deserving to be consoled for
this patience than I." Abu Talha then rose up for ablution and recited
two raka't prayers for the departed soul.

Thereafter he went to the Prophet and related the unusual patience
displayed by his wife over the death of their dear son. The Prophet was
very glad and thanked Allah saying that his Ummat - his people were like
those of Bani Israei. That is there were such people of forbearance and
staunch faith as were to be found among the people of Bani Israel.

The fact is that the death of a dear son should have caused the mother
Umme Salim much grief. Instead she exercised a lot of self-control and
patience so as to console her husband. It shows how deeply faithful and
resigned to the will of Allah she was. What a splendid example of the
power of faith which the Prophet of Islam had described in these
words:

"A person of Iman (faith) in his religion is stronger than a mighty
mountain. That is so because a mountain can be carved out whereas one
cannot cut back any part of the faith of a believer since he holds it
firmly with deep attachment."


