The Chosen Five Dignitaries of Islam
====================================

A MIRACULOUS DISCOVERY OF SIXTY YEARS AGO.

It was in the year 1916 when the First World War was raging. A British
Military patrol party was passing near a village named Ontra, a few
miles from Jerusalem in Palestine. Suddenly the military party observed
a strange light in the darkness of the night.

It was coming from a very old small hillock. The officer-in-charge
ordered digging it. After digging twelve feet deep, they came across a
silverplate about two feet long and one and half feet wide. When the
plate was taken out, its light disappered. The party took the plate to
their Commander Major A.N. Grandell who scrutinised the plate in torch
light and was wonderstruck.

The border of the plate was inset with precious stones and in the
centre of the plate, something was written in gold in some unknown
language. Major Grandell sent the plate to the Commander of the Armies
Lieutt. General D.O.

Gladstone. He in turn sent it to the British Archeological Department.
At the end of the war in 1919, research began into this unique plate. A
committee of experts of ancient languages consisting of British, French,
American and others was appointed.

After many months of strenuous research, it was found that the
inscriptions on the plate were in old Hebrew language used in the Old
Testament (of the Bible.) On 31st January, 1920 the following
translation was submitted:

In Hebrew Language.
Yah Ahmad Maqza
Yah Eli Ansatah
Yah Bahtool Akashi
Yah Hasan Azofata
Yah Hasin ba Rafo
Eli, Eli, Eli,
English Translation.
Reach O' Ahmad
0' Ali, help me
0' Batool, keep an eye
0' Hasan, Be Kind
0' Husain, grant us happiness

Ali - Ali - Ali

After the translation by experts, it was decided that the silver plate
should be kept in the archives of British Imperial Museum for display.
But when the Lord Bishop of England came to know of it, he sent a
directive on 1st March, 1923, that the keeping of this plate in the
museum or any other public place would work against Christianity. The
plate therefore must be kept in Secret Church Chambers. Thus it was kept
and it is still there in the same place.

The above mentioned discovery has been, quoted from "The Wonderful
Stories of Islam" by Col. P. C. Implay, London, page 249, by the Ahmed
Hussein Shah, Advocate, in his book 'The Straight Path'.

The Holy Prophet Mohammad (S.A.W) had said that the first thing to be
created by God before any creation was his LIGHT (NOOR). And that LIGHT
then split to create AHLUL-BAIT, the household members of the Prophet.

They are known as the Holy PANJETAN, the household members of the
Prophet. They are the chosen and top most five dignitaries of Islam.
They are:

1. Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.) (also called Ahmad)

2. Imam Ali (A.S.) (also called Haider) the soul of the Prophet and his
son-in-law.

3. Bibi Fatima (A.S.) (also called Batool) the only beloved daughter of
The Prophet.

4. Imam Hasan (A.S.) (also known as Shabbar) the son of Ali and
Fatima.

5. Imam Husain (A.S.) (also known as Shabbir) the son of Ali and
Fatima.

Their greatness lies not only in being closely related to the Prophet,
being part and parcel of the FIRST CREATED LIGHT of the Prophet, but
also in their supreme sacrifices for the cause of Islam.

God Almighty had chosen them as the of supreme personalities of Islam
and informed all the previous Prophets in advance of their eminently
high position and their sacrifices in the cause of Islam. The previous
Prophets always felt awed, by the names of PANJETAN.

Whenever they became surrounded by any misfortune, they prayed for
God's deliverance with the help of the holy names of these five
dignitaries.

The silver plate inscribed with the holy names of PANJETAN - the holy
five dignitaries of Islam as related above, might have originated from
one of the past Prophets and used for invoking Allah's mercy and
blessing.

These five personalities are those whom Allah has exclusively kept away
from all spiritual and physical impurity for ever. They are those who
have been infallible and sinless from birth to death Ali, Fatima,

Hassan and Husain (A.S.) are those whom the Prophet of Islam had
identified exclusively as members of his House and that they are with
the Qur'an and the Qur'an with them. They and the Qur'an are the supreme
authority in Islam after the Prophet.

Whosoever adheres to both the Qur'an and the People of the House will
be saved from going astray from the straight and true path of Islam. Ibn
Abbas relates the apostle of Allah Said:

"Ali and Fatima and Hassan and Husain are my household members till the
doomsday (qiyamat)"

When asked 'which are the two luminaries?' the Prophet said:

"Hassan and Husain and their father (Ali) is the light of the world and
their mother (Fatima) is the full moon for dark nights"

Abu Huraira said: that the Apostle of Allah looked at Ali and Fatima
and Hassan and Husain and said:

"I am at war with him who wages war with you and am at peace with him
who is at peace with you."


**Allah is The Guide For Every Creature**

Hamid had an inquisitive mind and was fond of learning all about wild
life, how they lived and behaved. He used to obtain different books on
animals and keenly study them. This hobby induced him to go out to the
woods in order to observe animals in their natural surroundings.

One day he accompanied his friend Abdul, Professor of Zoology and
expert on animal life, to a nearby lake. They strolled on the shore and
came over to see storks, with their long legs, calmly standing in the
water to snap up passing fish with their long beaks. Storks thrive on
fish. One of them forlonely stood aside, looking rather sick and unable
to fly.

Both Hamid and Abdul became curious to know what was wrong with that
bird. As they went nearer, the bird tried to flee, but could not do so.
It had a broken leg. Lovingly they caught hold of the bird and examined
its leg. They were amazed to see that its injured leg had a plaster of
dry mud over it.

On removing it they found the leg rather swollen. The bone was either
fractured or broken.

Hamid was amazed to see this phenomenon and wanted to know more about
it. Surely, someone had shown mercy to the bird and had tried to help.
"Is there a doctor around here who attends to sick or injured animals?"
he asked.

"No" replied Abdul. He added, "Before doctors could discover the
benefit of plaster, this bird was already aware of it. It knew
instinctively how to make use of mud to hold fractured or broken bone in
place." The treatment of broken and fractured bones with lime plaster is
well known in medical circles as Plaster of Paris.

Professor Henry Mondoor - a wellknown Zoologist Writes in one of his
books on animal life that animals have amazing ways of curing their
sicknesses. It is from observing such animals that medical experts have
made discoveries about curing certain maladies.

It is mentioned that when a cat catches cold or suffers from headache,
it immediately tries to find a particular herb which when eaten promptly
cures this sickness. If it is not available the cat lies down in one
corner to take complete rest. Alternatively it finds a warm place to lie
down and thus feels better and is then able to move about normally.

No wonder if it is from this experience that doctors today advise
patients suffering from cold to rest at home for some days.

One of the animals in the forest is a fox. it is cunning and has many
enemies. It has to contend with snakes in the forest. When bitten by a
snake, the fox immediately looks for a particular herb which it applies
to the bitten part of its body. That herb makes in ineffective the
poison from the snake-bite.

A deer in the forest normally lives in the area where water is easily
available.

This animal by nature swings and runs from place to place. In so doing,
it sometimes develops excessive acidity which causes it to suffer from
rheumatic pain.

When this happens, the deer is seen to go and stand for quite a time in
a particular furrow of mineral water. Today Sulphur bath or mineral
water is considered a natural cure for rheumatic pains even among human
beings.

Now let us ask ourselves:

Who inspires a stork to use mud plaster for its fractured leg? Who
guides a cat to find a particular herb to cure its cold? Who shows a fox
how to remove poison from snakebite?

On deep reflection, we shall have to admit that it is no one else but
the creator Allah who inspires them how to remedy their ills. It is HE
who inspires the ways of acquiring sustenance and meet the challenges of
survival in this world. On this the holy Quran says:-

"He said: Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then
guided it (to its goal)." (20:50)

However, it must be remembered that it is not good to hurt animals
deliberately. Islam teaches universal charity even towards animals.


