The Value of Sincerity of Purpose
=================================

A story is told of a man who approached three workers who were doing
the same job. "What are you doing?" he asked each one of them separately
and got different answers.

"I am cutting the stones" replied the first.

"I am earning my livehood" replied the second.

"I am building a mosque" replied the third.

Each of the three workers saw himself linked to a different purpose
each, one was to that extent, different from others, although all worked
alike and were engaged in the same task.

Our two hands with which we work are in no sense different from the
hands of any other person. The value of what we do depends upon the
quality of the inner purpose in our heart with which we do our work. A
true Muslim works to earn God's pleasure.

In the words of Imam Khomeini (ra), the ultimate criterian in
evaluating men's deeds is the intent and the purpose of the doer rather
than the external shape of people's acts. Sincerity of purpose and
God-fearing motivation behind a Muslim's deeds were the principle
feature which distinguished his deeds from those of non-believers.

Islamic history provides glaring examples of how Muslims in minority
ultimately triumphed over their enemies in much greater number and
better equipped because of their faith and sincerity of their
purpose.....

Islam has emphasized the purity of intent before every act of virtue.
Hence of the conditions provided for IBADAT (acts of worship) the most
important and the primary one is IKHLAS (sincerity of purpose). Not only
one draws farther from Allah but he is discarded from divine blessings
in acts where purity of intent is lacking. The following ayats in the
Holy Quran provide a good guidance on the subject:

"Say: I am commanded that I should serve Allah, being sincere to Him in
obedience." (39:11)

"And call on Him being sincere to Him in obedience". (7:29) What do we
really mean by IKHLAS - the purity of purpose?

When one embarks upon worship of Allah or does any act of virtue, he is
required to discard all wordly thoughts from his mind and cast his full
concentration towards Allah.

He is expected to feel dependent on none but Allah for all his wordly
needs and put his trust in Him as the primary source of all blessings
and reward. He is desired to throw his full weight in praying for all
his lawful needs from Him. His sole aim for every act of virtue should
be to seek not worldly gains but the pleasure of Allah.

What is the effect and outcome of IKHLAS - the purity of purpose?
Numerous instances can be quoted of the lasting effect and fruitful
outcome of actions and work done with absolute purity of purpose - for
the pleasure of Allah and Him alone. The following story should serve a
good example.

It is related that when Prophet Adam landed on this earth from Heaven,
all kinds of creatures came forward to pay their respects and welcome
him on earth. To each one of them, Adam gave his blessings according to
its qualification.

When a flock of gazelles came forward to pay their respects, he gave
his blessings and patted them by passing his holy hand over their backs.
The lasting effect of this was the growth of navel-bag of musk (a black
substance well known for producing a good perfume).

When they returned home, another flock of gazelle on seeing the gift of
musk asked them where they had got it from. They explained that Prophet
Adam had patted them and passed his holy hand over their backs, in
appreciation of their visit to him. The result was the growth of the
navel-bag of musk.

This second flock of gazelle thought they too should get the gift. With
this aim, they went and offered their salams and respects before Adam.
The Prophet acknowledged and passed his hand over their backs also. But
this time it showed no effect of producing the navel-bag of musk. They
were naturally disappointed.

On their return home, they inquired the reason for this and were told
that it was because of lack of purity of intent and purpose. Their visit
to Prophet Adam was for specific aim of reward of the naval-bag of musk
whereas the first flock had paid the visit solely for the pleasure of
Allah without any thought for reward.

Today the musk producing creatures are the progeny of that very first
flock of gazelles.


LOVE FOR ALLAH AND FOR HIS SAKE ONLY.

Muslims should begin giving Islamic education to their children from
their very tender age.

Ali (A.S.) delighted in company of his children. Once he was sitting in
his house with his two young children, Abbas, his son, and Zainab, his
daughter.

Ali (A.S.) said to Abbas, "Say 'WAHED'" (meaning 'ONE' in-Arabic). The
boy uttered "WAHED". Ali (A.S.) then asked him to say "ISNAIN" (Two).
Abbas replied, "I feel ashamed to utter 'two' from the same tongue which
just said 'ONE'." Ali (A.S.) hugged his son, pleased at such a charming
expression.

Such a reply from Abbas indicated how deeply devoted he was in his
belief in Tawheed - Oneness of God. That true and staunch believer in
one God never likes to even imagine any association with One God.

Zainab then asked, "Dear father, do you love me?", he said, "Yes, of
course, my children are like part of my heart". On hearing this, she
said, "You also love God.

How can two loves be accomodated in one heart of a true believer, the
love of Allah and that of children?" Ali (A.S.) smiled and replied,
"Love God and for the sake of His love, you love His creatures -
children and fellow beings too. I love you for the sake of Allah."

Such deep thinking and words of true Tawheed on Zainab's part, pleased
her father and he gave her much praise and affection.

Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.) once saw a young boy. He was gazing at the
Prophet in such a way as his eyes and face indicated deep love and
reverence. This attracted the Prophet who went and stood near him. He
asked him, "My son, tell me, do you love me?".

The boy replied, "Yes, Oh the messenger of Allah, by Allah I do love
you indeed"

Prophet: "Do you love me to the extent of your two eyes?"

Boy:"I do so more than my two eyes"

Prophet: "Do you love your father more than myself?"

Boy:"Oh Prophet, my love for you is more than that for my father."

Prophet: "Do you love me to the extent you do your mother?"

Boy:"I love you more than even my mother"

Prophet: "Let me see, do you love me to the extent of your own life?"
Boy:"Oh Prophet! Allah witness that I love you, even more than my own
life"

The Prophet was deeply moved at this reply and expressed his affection
for him. Then he asked:

"Tell me, do you love me to the extent you do Allah?"

At this juncture, the boy smiled and said "ALLAH - ALLAH - ALLAH". That
Allah is loved more than anybody else. Neither you Prophet nor anybody
can be loved more than Allah. Even if the Prophet is loved more than
others; It is FOR THE SAKE OF ALLAH.

So moving were the words of the boy that everyone hearing this was much
impressed. The Prophet turned to his companions and said, "You must be
like this boy. Love Allah for all his blessings bestowed upon you. And
love me for HIS sake and obey me."

The Holy Qura'n describing those in love of Allah says:

"And those who believe are stronger in love for Allah ". (2:165)

CONSEQUENCES OF INGRATITUDE TOWARDS ALLAH'S BOUNTIES.

Allah is Rahman, the compassionate and looks after the welfare of all
the creatures in the world. People should all the time thank Him for His
kindness. In the past there existed a thriving town at some place in the
Middle East on the bank of a river known as Baliyan.

These people were blessed with Allah's bounties and were extremely
wealthy. It was the time of ignorance and people lived according to
their whims. Ignorance is a disease and coupled with wealth, it may
corrupt the mind and morals.

Drunk with affluence these people had lost their common sense and
resorted to very lowly and filthy habits. Food was so abundant that they
lost all respect for it and they used bread as sponge to clean things.

Almighty Allah, sent to them Propnet Daniel inorder to preach and guide
them on the right path. But so deeply arrogant and intoxicated they had
become with their wealth, and so busy they were in extravagant enjoyment
of their riches that they would not listen to him.

Prophet Daniel explained and warned them not to treat God's bounties
with ingratitude lest they be punished with His wrath and suffer
shortages of food and absence of rains. In response they jeered at him
and argued that they had enormous surplus grains and foods which often
was left to rot in the fields.

So gross was their negligence and ingratitude towards God's bounties
that even a poor man had no respect for a loaf of bread. Once when a
beggar came to Prophet Daniel to beg for food he gave him a piece of
bread. He threw it away in total disrespect saying that it was useless
as their king used to clean the lowly parts of the body with it.

Prophet Daniel became extremely frustrated and angry. He prayed to
Allah for His wrath and punishment to overtake these people.
Consequently divine wrath descended on them. Rains stopped and not a
drop of water fell for seven years. All their rivers and springs dried
up.

so extremely short of food and water they became that they started
eating the very unclean and stinking pieces of loaves they had thrown
away. They would scramble over a dead animal, they had lost all the
pleasure and peace of mind. Such were the harsh consequences of their
misdeeds and ingratitude.

Shortage of food had become so acute that once two women went to
Prophet Daniel to resolve their mutual dispute. They mentioned that they
had earlier decided that each would slaughter her child in turn and they
would eat its flesh. One of them had already done so but the other woman
was now trying to find an excuse to back out from her pledge and refused
to slaughter her child.

On hearing this story, Prophet Daniel wept at the turn of events and
the pathetic situation of those people. Prophet Daniel deeply moved by
this pathetic situation raised his hands in the supplication to Allah
and prayed for the resumption of rains and His blessings so that those
people may be freed from want and hunger. The wayward people had got
chastisement.

The lessons we derive from the above story are:

1. When people of a place are blessed with extreme wealth and
prosperity they tend to feel independent of Allah and turn their back in
rebellion against His commands. They display ingratitude against His
blessings by misusing them and indulge in extravagant spending in
unlawful enjoyments.

2. As a result of the people's ungrateful and rebellious attitude, they
attract divine punishment in the form of wrath such as lack of rain,
oppression by unjust rulers, natural calamity and disaster, and absence
of mental peace and security.

The holy Quran has drawn our attention on the subject in the following
ayat:

"And Allah sets forth a parable: (Consider) a town safe and secure to
which its means of subsistence come in abundance from every quarter; but
it became ungrateful to Allah's favors, therefore Allah made it to taste
the utmost degree of hunger and fear because of what they wrought."
(16:112)


