Translator’s Foreword
=====================

I thank God the Almighty for the opportunity granted to me to undertake
the preparation of this two volume book - *The Source Of Traditions On
Imam Reza (s)* or *Uyun Akhbar Al-Reza* - after the successful
completion of *An Anthology Of Islamic Poetry Vol.1; Imam Reza’s
Pilgrimage Procedures And Prayers; A Divine Perspective On Rights; The
Complete Edition Of The Treatise On Rights; Mishkat Ul-Anwar Fi Ghurar
Il-Akhbar and The Islamic Family Structure.*  The present work has been
compiled by Sheikh Sadooq and covers the major traditions about the
life, the decrees, the arguments, the writings and the sayings of Imam
Musa ibn Ja’far (s) and Imam Ali ibn Musa Al-Reza (s) . The book mainly
focuses on Imam Ali ibn Musa Al-Reza (s) . However, it covers much of
what happened to his father (s), as that affected him. I have translated
this work from Arabic into English for the interested readers. Regarding
the references to the Holy Quran's verses, I have exactly cited them for
coherency using an available translation of the Quran into English by
Mr. Abdullah Yusuf Ali - may God reward him. The translation of the Holy
Quran that I used is the following:

THE HOLY QURAN
--------------

Text, Translation, Commentary and Notes Large Size (1 Volume)

Abdullah Yusuf Ali (English & Arabic).

First of all, I thank God for His help in granting the health, the
strength, and the sustenance to undertake and complete this tremendously
difficult task. May He accept it as a minor service.

I have relied on many sources of reference materials in completing this
tremendous task. I am indebted to all those sources which I cannot name
one by one. I am also indebted to my dear wife for her careful editing
of the work which has added a lot of value to it. I am also indebted to
Ansariyan Publications for patiently supporting this work and completing
the final typesetting of the book.

I warmly welcome any suggestions made by the readers that might help me
become informed about my errors and shortcomings, and help me improve
future works.

As there are many refernces to the names of the Divine Leaders in this
book, I have listed them in order here so that the reader can refer to
this list whenever needed:

1- Imam Ali (s): The Commander of the Faithful - Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

2- Imam Al-Hassan (s): Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

3- Imam Al-Hussein (s): Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

4- Imam As-Sajjad (s): Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

5- Imam Al-Baqir (s): Muhammad bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi
Talib (s)

6- Imam As-Sadiq (s): Ja’far ibn Muhammad bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali
ibn Abi Talib (s)

7- Imam Al-Kazim (s): Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad bin Ali ibn
Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

8- Imam Al-Reza (s): Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad bin Ali ibn
Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

9- Imam Al-Javad (s): Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad
bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

10- Imam Al-Naqi (s): Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn
Muhammad bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

11- Imam At-Taqi (s): Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Musa
ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)

12- Imam Al-Mahdi (s): Muhammad ibn Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Muhammad ibn
Ali ibn Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad bin Ali ibn Al-Hussein ibn Ali ibn
Abi Talib (s).

I have also listed them in order in the form they appear in Tradition
No. 6-1 recorded on a silvery-white pearl brilliant sheet of paper in
the hands of the Blessed Lady Fatima (s):

1- Abul Hassan Ali ibn Abi Talib al-Morteza (Imam Ali) whose mother is
Fatima - the daughter of Asad ibn Hashem ibn Abd Manaf

2- Abu Muhammad Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Barr, whose mother is (the Blessed
Lady) *Fatima* - the daughter of Muhammad

3- Abu Abdullah Al-Hussein ibn Ali At-Taqi whose mother is (the Blessed
Lady) *Fatima* - the daughter of Muhammad

4- Abu Muhammad Ali ibn Al-Hussein al-Adl whose mother is *Shahr Banu* -
the daughter of Yazd Gird

5- Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali Al-Baqir whose mother is *Umm Abdullah* -
the daughter of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib

6- Abu Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammad As-Sadiq whose mother is *Umm
Farwa* - the daughter of Al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr

7- Abu Ibrahim Musa ibn Ja’far whose mother is a slave maid called
*Hamidah al-Mosaf’fat*

8- Abul Hassan Ali ibn Musa Al-Reza (s) whose mother is a slave maid
called *Najma*

9- Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn Ali al-Zak’ki whose mother is a slave maid
called *Khayzaran*

10- Abul Hassan Ali ibn Muhammad Al-Amin whose mother is a slave maid
called *Susan*

11- Abu Muhammad Al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Rafiq whose mother is a slave maid
called *Samanah* and whose nickname is *Ummul Hassan*

12- Abul Qasim Muhammad ibn Al-Hassan (s) who is the Riser - the Proof
of God - whose mother is a slave maid called Narjis.

May God’s Blessings be upon them all.

**Dr. Ali Peiravi  
 Ali\_peiravi@yahoo.com**
