Chapter Twenty-nine: What Has Been Narrated From Al-reza (s) On the Characteristics of the Prophet (s)
======================================================================================================

 

 

 

29-1 Abu Ahmad Al-Hassan ibn Abdullah ibn Sa’eed Al-Askari narrated that
Abul Qasim Abdullah Muhammad ibn Abdul Aziz ibn Manee’ quoted - in
*Medina al-Rasul* (Medina) - Isma’il ibn Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn Ja’far
ibn Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Al-Hussein (s), on the authority of Ali ibn
Musa ibn Ja’far ibn Muhammad (s), on the authority of Musa ibn Ja’far
ibn Muhammad (s), on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (s),

 

 

 

### 29  
 بابَ ما جاءَ عَنِ الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ فِي صِفَةِ النَّبِي‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ‏

1 - حَدَّثَنا أَبُو أحْمَد الحَسَن بْنِ عَبْدِ اللَّه بْنِ
سَعِيدُالعسكري قالَ أَخْبَرنا أَبُو القاسِم عَبْدِ اللَّه بن مُحَمَّدبن
عَبْد العَزِيز بْنِ منيع قالَ: حَدَّثَني إِسْمَاعِيل بْنِ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ
إِسْحاق بْنِ جَعْفَرِ بْنِ‏عَلِىِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْن‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
بِمَدِينَة الرَّسُول قـالَ: حَدَّثَني عَلِىِّ بْنِ مُـوسَى بْـنِ

on the authority of his father (s), on the authority of Ali ibn
Al-Hussein (s), on the authority of Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s),
“I asked my maternal uncle, Hind ibn Abi Hala, about the looks of God’s
Prophet (s). He was good at describing the looks of God’s Prophet (s).
He said, ‘God’s Prophet (s) was magnificent. His face shined as bright
as the full moon (on the fourteenth night of the month). He was taller
than the medium-sized people and shorter than the thin and tall people.
He had a big head. His hair was neither too curly nor was it too soft
and straight. He (s) parted his hair when it grew long. Otherwise he
left it alone. Whenever his hair grew long, he never let it grow lower
than his earlobes. His complexion was shining brightly. He had a broad
forehead. His eyebrows were long and curved, yet they were hairy but not
attached to each other. Whenever he (s) got angry, the veins between his
eyebrows got swelled up. His nose was slim and slightly raised in the
middle. He possessed an illumination which always accompanied him in
such a way that whoever did not ponder carefully over him thought he (s)
was haughty.

His beard was short but bushy. His cheeks were flat and thin. His mouth
was big[[555]](footnotes.htm#b555), and his teeth were bright white. He
had a thin layer of hair extending from his chest down to his belly
button. His neck looked like a silver jar. He had a balanced build. His
body was strong, and his chest and stomach were in line with each other.
He had wide muscular shoulders. His body was brilliant white. There was
a thin layer of hair from his neck down to his belly button, but his
lower chest and stomach had no hair. However, his upper chest and
shoulders were hairy. His elbows were large, his palms were sturdy, his
hands and feet were rough[[556]](footnotes.htm#b556). His hands and legs
were coordinated and his bones were straight without any crookedness.
The sole of his feet were curved, and his heels were not chubby such
that water passed under his feet and was not blocked.

When he (s) moved he took firm steps. He leaned to one side slightly,
and walked fast but gently as if he was moving fast downhill. When he
turned to the right or left, he turned his whole body around. He lowered
his eyes and looked to the Earth more than he looked up to the sky. He
never stared, and greeted everyone he (s) saw.’

جَعْفَرِ بْنِ مُحَمَّد، عَن مُوسَى بْنِ جَعْفَر، عَن جَعْفَرِ بْنِ
مُحَمَّد، عَن أَبيهِ، عَن عَلِىِّ بْنِ الحُسَيْن‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
قالَ: قالَ الحَسَن بْنِ عَلِىِّ بْنِ أَبي طالِب‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ
سَأَلْتُ خَالِي هِنْدَ بْنَ أَبِي هَالَةَ، عَن حِلْيَةِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ‏
صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ، وَكَانَ وَصَّافاً لِلنَّبِيِ‏ صَلَّى
اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ. فَقَالَ: كَانَ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَخْماً مُفَخَّماً يَتَلألأ وَجْهُهُ تَلالُؤَ الْقَمَرِ
لَيْلَةَ الْبَدْرِ. أَطْوَلَ مِنَ الْمَرْبُوعِ وَأَقْصَرَ مِنَ
الْمُشَذَّبِ، عَظِيمَ الْهَامَةِ رَجِلَ الشَّعْرِ، إِنِ انْفَرَقَتْ
عَقِيقَتُهُ فَرَقَ وَإِلاّ فَلا يُجَاوِزُ شَعْرُهُ شَحْمَةَ أُذُنَيْهِ
إِذَا هُوَ وَفَّرَهُ، أَزْهَرَ اللَّوْنِ وَاسِعَ الْجَبِينِ أَزَجَّ
الْحَوَاجِبِ سَوَابِغَ فِي غَيْرِ قَرَنٍ بَيْنَهُمَا لَهُ عِرْقٌ
يُدِرُّهُ الْغَضَبُ أَقْنَى الْعِرْنِينِ، لَهُ نُورٌ يَعْلُوهُ
يَحْسَبُهُ مَنْ لَمْ يَتَأَمَّلْهُ أَشَمَّ كَثَّ اللِّحْيَةِ سَهْلَ
الْخَدَّيْنِ ضَلِيعَ الْفَمِ أَشْنَبَ مُفَلَّجَ الأَسْنَانِ دَقِيقَ
الْمَسْرُبَةِ كَأَنَّ عُنُقَهُ جِيدُ دُمْيَةٍ فِي صَفَاءِ الْفِضَّةِ
مُعْتَدِلَ الْخَلْقِ بَادِناً مُتََماسِكاً سَوَاءَ الْبَطْنِ وَالصَّدْرِ
بَعِيدَ مَا بَيْنَ الْمَنْكِبَيْنِ ضَخْمَ الْكَرَادِيسِ أَنْوَرَ
الْمُتَجَرِّدِ مَوْصُولَ مَا بَيْنَ اللَّبَّةِ وَالسُّرَّةِ بِشَعْرٍ
يَجْرِي كَالْخَطِّ عَارِيَ الثَّدْيَيْنِ وَالْبَطْنِ مِمَّا سِوَى ذَلِكَ
أَشْعَرَ الذِّرَاعَيْنِ وَالْمَنْكِبَيْنِ وَأَعَالِيَ الصَّدْرِ طَوِيلَ
الزَّنْدَيْنِ رَحْبَ الرَّاحَةِ شَثْنَ الْكَفَّيْنِ وَالْقَدَمَيْنِ
سَائِلَ الأَطْرَافِ سَبْطَ الْقَصَبِ خُمْصَانَ الأَخْمَصَيْنِ مَسِيحَ
الْقَدَمَيْنِ يَنْبُو عَنْهُمَا الْمَاءُ إِذَا زَالَ زَالَ قَلْعاً
يَخْطُو تَكَفُّؤاً وَيَمْشِي هَوْناً ذَرِيعَ الْمِشْيَةِ إِذَا مَشَى
كَأَنَّمَا يَنْحَطُّ فِي صَبَبٍ وَإِذَا الْتَفَتَ الْتَفَتَ جَمِيعاً
خَافِضَ الطَّرْفِ نَظَرُهُ إِلَى الأَرْضِ أَطْوَلُ مِنْ نَظَرِهِ إِلَى
السَّمَاءِ جُلُّ نَظَرِهِ الْمُلاحَظَةُ يَبْدُرُ مَنْ لَقِيَهُ
بِالسَّلامِ.

Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s) added, ‘I asked him to tell me about
the Prophet’s sayings. Hind ibn Abi Hala replied, ‘He (s) was always sad
and was continuously thinking. He was never comfortable. He never spoke
when not necessary. He was careful about when to start and when to stop
talking. He never talked too much or too little. His words were to the
point. He never said vulgar things. He always highly valued other
people’s kindness and affection, even if it was very little. He never
blamed any of them. He neither spoke good of nor spoke bad of the taste
of food. He never got angry about the world. However, when there was a
question of rights, nothing could stifle his anger until he established
the right. He used all of his hand to point to things. He used to turn
around his hands when he was surprised. He used to bring his right hand
close to his left hand, and touch the palm of his left hand with his
right thumb when he spoke. He used to turn his face around when he got
angry. He used to look down when he was happy. Most of the time his
laughter was just limited to a smile. He looked splendid when he laughed
and also his white teeth could be seen.’

Al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib (s) added, ‘I hid this from Al-Hussein
(s) for sometime, and then narrated it for him. However, I discovered
that he (s) had already asked about the Prophet (s). I found out that he
(s) had even asked our father (Ali ibn Abi Talib (s)) about the
Prophet’s way of coming in, going out, sitting and his looks. He (s) had
not left anything out.’

Al-Hussein (s) said, ‘I asked my father (s) about God’s Prophet (s) way
of coming in. He (s) said, ‘Only the Prophet (s) was allowed to go in
and out from his place of entrance. When the Prophet (s) went home, he
divided his time into three portions. One portion was for the Sublime
God. Another portion was for his family, and the third portion was for
himself. He (s) divided his own personal time into two parts - between
himself and the people. First the elite entered and then the other
people. He never withheld anything from them. Regarding the nation, he
(s) preferred the noble ones by giving them a portion of his time
according to their degree of nobility in religion. Some had only one
request, others had two or more. He attended to their needs and pleased
them by saying what would improve their affairs and the affairs of the
nation. He also asked them about their health. He (s) would also ask
those present to inform those who were absent, and to convey to him (s)
the requests of

قَالَ: قُلْتُ فَصِفْ لِي مَنْطِقَهُ. فَقَالَ كَانَ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ مُوَاصِلَ الأَحْزَانِ دَائِمَ الْفِكْرِ لَيْسَتْ لَهُ
رَاحَةٌ وَلا يَتَكَلَّمُ فِي غَيْرِ حَاجَةٍ يَفْتَتِحُ الْكَلامَ
وَيَخْتِمُهُ بِأَشْدَاقِهِ يَتَكَلَّمُ بِجَوَامِعِ الْكَلِمِ فَصْلاً لا
فُضُولَ فِيهِ وَلا تَقْصِيرَ دَمِثاً لَيْسَ بِالْجَافِي وَلا
بِالْمَهِينِ تَعْظُمُ عِنْدَهُ النِّعْمَةُ وَإِنْ دَقَّتْ لا يَذُمُّ
مِنْهَا شَيْئاً غَيْرَ أَنَّهُ كَانَ لا يَذُمُّ ذَوَّاقاً وَلا
يَمْدَحُهُ وَلا تُغْضِبُهُ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا كَانَ لَهَا فَإِذَا
تُعُوطِيَ الْحَقُّ لَمْ يَعْرِفْهُ أَحَدٌ وَلَمْ يَقُمْ لِغَضَبِهِ
شَيْ‏ءٌ حَتَّى يُنْتَصَرَ لَهُ إِذَا أَشَارَ أَشَارَ بِكَفِّهِ كُلِّهَا
وَإِذَا تَعَجَّبَ قَلَبَهَا وَإِذَا تَحَدَّثَ اتَّصَلَ بِهَا يَضْرِبُ
بِرَاحَتِهِ الُْيمْنَى بَاطِنَ إِبْهَامِهِ الْيُسْرَى وَإِذَا غَضِبَ
أَعْرَضَ وَأَشَاحَ وَإِذَا فَرِحَ غَضَّ طَرْفَهُ جُلُّ ضِحْكِهِ
التَّبَسُّمُ يَفْتَرُّ عَن مِثْلِ حَبِّ الْغَمَامِ قَالَ الْحَسَنُ
فَكَتَمْتُهَا الْحُسَيْنَ زَمَاناً ثُمَّ حَدَّثْتُهُ فَوَجَدْتُهُ قَدْ
سَبَقَنِي إِلَيْهِ وَسَأَلَهُ عَمَّا سَأَلْتُهُ عَنْهُ وَوَجَدْتُهُ قَدْ
سَأَلَ أَبَاهُ عَنْ مَدْخَلِ النَّبِيِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ
وَمَخْرَجِهِ وَمَجْلِسِهِ وَشَكْلِهِ فَلَمْ يَدَعْ مِنْهُ شَيْئاً قَالَ
الْحُسَيْنُ‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ سَأَلْتُ أَبِي‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ عَنْ
مَدْخَلِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَقَالَ كَانَ
دُخُولُهُ لِنَفْسِهِ مَأْذُوناً لَهُ فِي ذَلِكَ فَإِذَا أَوَى إِلَى
مَنْزِلِهِ جَزَّأَ دُخُولَهُ ثَلاثَةَ أَجْزَاءٍ جُزْءٍ لِلَّهِ وَجُزْءٍ
لاهْلِهِ وَجُزْءٍ لِنَفْسِهِ ثُمَّ جَزَّأَ جُزْءَهُ بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ
النَّاسِ فَيَرُدُّ ذَلِكَ بِالْخَاصَّةِ عَلَى الْعَامَّةِ وَلا يَدَّخِرُ
عَنْهُمْ مِنْهُ شَيْئاً وَكَانَ مِنْ سِيرَتِهِ فِي جُزْءِ الأُمَّةِ
إِيثَارُ أَهْلِ الْفَضْلِ بِإِذْنِهِ وَقَسْمُهُ عَلَى قَدْرِ فَضْلِهِمْ
فِي الدِّينِ فَمِنْهُمْ ذُو الْحَاجَةِ وَمِنْهُمْ ذُو الْحَاجَتَيْنِ
وَمِنْهُمْ ذُو الْحَوَائِجِ فَيَتَشَاغَلُ بِهِمْ وَيَشْغَلُهُمْ فِيَما
أَصْلَحَهُمْ وَالأُمَّةَ مِنْ مَسْأَلَتِهِ عَنْهُمْ وَإِخْبَارِهِمْ
بِالَّذِي يَنْبَغِي وَيَقُولُ لِيُبْلِغِ الشَّاهِدُ مِنْكُمُ الْغَائِبَ
وَأَبْلِغُونِي حَاجَةَ مَنْ لا يَقْدِرُ عَلَى إِبْلاغِ حَاجَتِهِ
فَإِنَّهُ مَنْ أَبْلَغَ سُلْطَاناً حَاجَةَ مَـنْ

the people who had no access to him (s). He (s) said that on the
Resurrection Day, God will firmly establish the steps of whoever
presents the requests of a needy one who cannot be present before the
ruler. Nothing but these needs were presented to him. He did not accept
any other thing to be presented there. He (s) always entered like the
seeking scout with a full hand and knowing the religion, and left having
guided the people.’’

Al-Hussein (s) said, ‘I asked my father (s) about how God’s Prophet (s)
after he left.’ He (s) said, ‘God’s Prophet (s) kept quiet except about
what was relevant to him. He (s) sought the love of the people and never
drove the people away from himself. He honored the noblest person in
each tribe and appointed him as its head. He avoided the people without
them feeling that they were not welcome. He asked about his companions
and how they were doing. He asked the people about their affairs. He
used to acknowledge good deeds and denounce wicked deeds without any
exaggerations or underestimations. He was moderate. He was never
negligent, fearing that the people might become negligent or get tired.
He never forsook the right. His companions were of the best of the
good-doing Muslims. To him the one who did the most good was the
noblest. Whoever was more sympathetic and more helpful with others had a
higher rank in his opinion.’’

Al-Hussein (s) added, ‘I asked my father (s) about his meetings. My
father (s) said, ‘The Prophet (s) was always remembering God in his
meetings, whether he sat down or stood up. He never held meetings in
public places and admonished against doing so. He always took a back
seat whenever he attended a meeting. He always recommended this. He
always treated his companions equally, so that no one thought that
others were more honored than he is. Whenever he had company, he waited
until they got up and left the meeting. Whoever asked him for something
returned with full hands, or received a gentle verbal response. His
manners were the same with everyone. He was like a kind father for the
people. Everyone was the same in his sight as far as the right was
concerned.

His meetings were meetings of patience, shyness, honesty and
trustworthiness. No one raised his voice there. No one was disrespected.
No one’s faults were divulged. Everyone was humble to others due to
piety.

لا يَقْدِرُ عَلَى إِبْلاغِهَا ثَبَّتَ اللَّهُ قَدَمَيْهِ يَوْمَ
الْقِيَامَةِ لا يَذْكُرُ عِنْدَهُ إِلا ذَلِكَ وَلا يُقَيِّدُ [يُقِيلُ‏]
مِنْ أَحَدٍ عَثْرَةً يَدْخُلُونَ رُوَّاداً وَلا يَفْتَرِقُونَ إِلا عَنْ
ذَوَاقٍ وَيَخْرُجُونَ أَدِلَّةً فَسَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ مَخْرَجِ رَسُولِ
اللَّهِ صَلّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ كَيْفَ كَانَ يَصْنَعُ فِيهِ فَقَالَ
كَانَ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يَخْزُنُ لِسَانَهُ إِلا عَمَّا
يَعْنِيهِ وَيُؤْلِفُهُمْ وَلا يُنَفِّرُهُمْ وَيُكْرِمُ كَرِيمَ كُلِّ
قَوْمٍ وَيُوَلِّيهِ عَلَيْهِمْ وَيُحَذِّرُ النَّاسَ وَيَحْتَرِسُ
مِنْهُمْ مِنْ غَيْرِ أَنْ يَطْوِيَ عَنْ أَحَدٍ بُشْرَهُ وَلا خُلُقَهُ
وَيَتَفَقَّدُ أَصْحَابَهُ وَيَسْأَلُ النَّاسَ عَمَّا فِي النَّاسِ
وَيُحَسِّنُ الْحَسَنَ وَيُقَوِّيهِ وَيُقَبِّحُ الْقَبِيحَ وَيُوهِنُهُ
مُعْتَدِلَ الأَمْرِ غَيْرَ مُخْتَلِفٍ لا يَغْفُلُ مَخَافَةَ أَنْ
يَغْفُلُوا أَوْ يَمِيلُوا وَلا يُقَصِّرُ عَنِ الْحَقِّ وَلا يَجُوزُهُ
الَّذِينَ يَلُونَهُ مِنَ النَّاسِ خِيَارُهُمْ أَفْضَلُهُمْ عِنْدَهُ
أَعَمُّهُمْ نَصِيحَةً لِلْمُسْلِمِينَ وَأَعْظَمُهُمْ عِنْدَهُ مَنْزِلَةً
أَحْسَنُهُمْ مُوَاسَاةً وَمُوَازَرَةً قَالَ وَسَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ مَجْلِسِهِ
فَقَالَ كَانَ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ لا يَجْلِسُ وَلا يَقُومُ
إِلا عَلَى ذِكْرٍ وَلا يُوطِنُ الأَمَاكِنَ وَيَنْهَى عَنْ إِيطَانِهَا
وَإِذَا انْتَهَى إِلَى قَوْمٍ جَلَسَ حَيْثُ يَنْتَهِي بِهِ الَْمجْلِسُ
وَيَأْمُرُ بِذَلِكَ وَيُعْطِي كُلَّ جُلَسَائِهِ نَصِيبَهُ وَلا يَحْسَبُ
أَحَدٌ مِنْ جُلَسَائِهِ أَنَّ أَحَداً أَكْرَمُ عَلَيْهِ مِنْهُ مَنْ
جَالَسَهُ صَابَرَهُ حَتَّى يَكُونَ هُوَالْمُنْصَرِفَ عَنْهُ مَنْ
سَأَلَهُ حَاجَةً لَمْ يَرْجِعْ إِلا بِهَا أَوْ بِمَيْسُورٍ مِنَ
الْقَوْلِ قَدْ وَسِعَ النَّاسَ مِنْهُ خُلُقُهُ وَصَارَ لَهُمْ أَباً
وَصَارُوا عِنْدَهُ فِي الْحَقِّ سَوَاءً مَجْلِسُهُ مَجْلِسُ حِلْمٍ
وَحَيَاءٍ وَصِدْقٍ وَأَمَانَةٍ لا تُرْفَعُ فِيهِ الأَصْوَاتُ وَلا
تُؤْبَنُ فِيهِ الْحُرَمُ وَلا تُنْثَى فَلَتَاتُهُ مُتَعَادِلِينَ
مُتَوَاصِلِينَ فِيهِ بِالتَّقْوَى مُتَوَاضِعِينَ يُوَقِّــرُونَ

They respected the elder ones. They were kind with the younger ones.
They preferred the needy to themselves and safeguarded the strangers.’’

Al-Hussein (s) added, ‘I asked my father (s) about the way the Prophet
(s) treated his companions? My father (s) said, ‘He was always cheerful,
good tempered and easy-going. He was neither stern nor was he very
harsh. He neither yelled nor did he swear. He never found faults with
others. He neither made fun of anyone nor did he praise anyone. He
ignored what he disliked. No one got disappointed with him. Those who
placed hopes in him were never deprived. He never did the following
three things with the people. He never blamed anyone; he never pursued
the people’s minor faults or private affairs; and he only talked about
things which he hoped deserved a good reward. Everyone was silent
whenever he spoke. Others spoke only when he was silent. No one
interrupted others’ words in his presence. When someone was talking in
his presence, others remained silent until he finished talking, then
they continued on. He laughed at whatever made others laugh. He got
surprised at whatever made others get surprised. He was patient with
strangers who did not talk or act properly. Even his companions sought
such people (to assist them). The Prophet (s) used to tell them to
assist needy persons who are trying to fulfill their needs when they see
them. The Prophet (s) never accepted the praise of those weak in faith
or the hypocrites. He never interrupted anyone unless they stopped
talking themselves or the time passed by in which case he would get up
to leave and the talk ended.’’

Al-Hussein (s) added, ‘I asked my father (s) about the silence of God’s
Prophet. My father (s) said, ‘The Prophet’s silence was due to four
reasons: patience, avoidance and caution, testing and measurement, and
thinking. Testing and measurement were done in the form of equally
listening to and looking at different people. His thinking concerned the
lasting and ephemeral affairs. He was patient and perseverant. He never
got angry about anything and lose his temper. He acted with extreme
caution in four situations: doing good deeds so that others follow suit;
abandoning wicked deeds so that others abandon such deeds too;
struggling to improve the affairs of his nation and attempting to do
what was for the good of this world and the Hereafter for all. May God’s
Blessings be upon him and his Holy Household.’’”

الْكَبِيرَ وَيَرْحَمُونَ الصَّغِيرَ وَيُؤْثِرُونَ ذَا الْحَاجَةِ
وَيَحْفَظُونَ الْغَرِيبَ فَقُلْتُ فَكَيْفَ كَانَتْ سِيرَتُهُ فِي
جُلَسَائِهِ فَقَالَ كَانَ دَائِمَ الْبِشْرِ سَهْلَ الْخُلُقِ لَيِّنَ
الْجَانِبِ لَيْسَ بِفَظٍّ وَلا صَخَّابٍ وَلا فَحَّاشٍ وَلا عَيَّابٍ وَلا
مَدَّاحٍ يَتَغَافَلُ عَمَّا لا يَشْتَهِي فَلا يُؤْيِسُ مِنْهُ وَلا
يُخَيِّبُ فِيهِ مُؤَمِّلِيهِ قَدْ تَرَكَ نَفْسَهُ مِنْ ثَلاثٍ الْمِرَاءِ
وَالإِكْثَارِ وَمَا لا يَعْنِيهِ وَتَرَكَ النَّاسَ مِنْ ثَلاثٍ كَانَ لا
يَذُمُّ أَحَداً وَلا يُعَيِّرُهُ وَلا يَطْلُبُ عَوْرَتَهُ وَلا
عَثَرَاتِهِ وَلا يَتَكَلَّمُ إِلا فِيَما رَجَا ثَوَابَهُ إِذَا تَكَلَّمَ
أَطْرَقَ جُلَسَاؤُهُ كَأَنَّمَا عَلَى رُءُوسِهِمُ الطَّيْرُ وَإِذَا
سَكَتَ تَكَلَّمُوا وَلا يَتَنَازَعُونَ عِنْدَهُ الْحَدِيثَ مَنْ
تَكَلَّمَ أَنْصَتُوا لَهُ حَتَّى يَفْرُغَ حَدِيثُهُمْ عِنْدَهُ حَدِيثُ
أُولَيهُمْ يَضْحَكُ مِمَّا يَضْحَكُونَ مِنْهُ وَيَتَعَجَّبُ مِمَّا
يَتَعَجَّبُونَ مِنْهُ وَيَصْبِرُ لِلْغَرِيبِ عَلَى الْجَفْوَةِ فِي
مَسْأَلَتِهِ وَمَنْطِقِهِ حَتَّى أَنْ كَانَ أَصْحَابُهُ
لَيَسْتَجْلِبُونَهُمْ وَيَقُولُ إِذَا رَأَيْتُمْ طَالِبَ الْحَاجَةِ
يَطْلُبُهَا فَارْفِدُوهُ وَلا يَقْبَلُ الثَّنَاءَ إِلا مِنْ مُكَافِئٍ
وَلا يَقْطَعُ عَلَى أَحَدٍ كَلامَهُ حَتَّى يَجُوزَ [يَجُوزَهُ]
فَيَقْطَعَهُ بِنَهْيٍ أَوْ قِيَامٍ قَالَ فَسَأَلْتُهُ عَنْ سُكُوتِ
رَسُولِ اللَّهِ‏ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ فَقَالَ كَانَ سُكُوتُهُ
عَلَى أَرْبَعٍ عَلَى الْحِلْمِ وَالْحَذَرِ وَالتَّقْدِيرِ وَالتَّفْكِيرِ
فَأَمَّا التَّقْدِيرُ فَفِي تَسْوِيَةِ النَّظَرِ وَالاسْتَِماعِ بَيْنَ
النَّاسِ وَأَمَّا تَفَكُّرُهُ فَفِيَما يَبْقَى وَيَفْنَى وَجُمِعَ لَهُ
الْحِلْمُ فِي الصَّبْرِ فَكَانَ لا يُغْضِبُهُ شَيْ‏ءٌ وَلا يَسْتَفِزُّهُ
وَجُمِعَ لَهُ الْحَذَرُ فِي أَرْبَعٍ أَخْذِهِ الْحَسَنَ لِيُقْتَدَى بِهِ
وَتَرْكِهِ الْقَبِيحَ لِيُنْتَهَى عَنْهُ وَاجْتِهَادِهِ الرَّأْيَ فِي
صَلاحِ أُمَّتِهِ وَالْقِيَامِ فِيَما [بِمَا] جَمَعَ لَهُمْ خَيْرَ
الدُّنْيَا وَالآْخِرَةِ.

(The author of the book Sheikh Sadooq said,) I have seen this tradition
narrated by various Sheikhs with different chains of narrations which I
have mentioned in my book Nubowwa. However, I have narrated the one on
the authority of Al-Reza (s) here since this book is about the best of
his (s) traditions. I have included the interpretation of this tradition
in my book Ma’ani al-Akhbar.

 

 

 

وَقَدْ رُوِيَتْ هذِهِ الصِّفَة عَنْ مَشايِخ بأسانيد مختلفة قَدْ
أَخْرَجْتُها فِي كِتاب النُّبُوَّة وَإِنَّما ذَكَرْتُ من طرقي إِلَيْها
ما كانَ فِيها عَنِ الرِّضا عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ لانَّ هذا الْكِتاب
مُصَنِّفُ فِي ذكر عيون أَخْبارِه‏ عَلَيْهِ السَّلامُ وَقَدْ أَخْرَجْتُ
تفسيرها فِي كِتاب معانِي الأخْبار.

 

 

 
