Chapter 57: Music
=================

“To some people music is like food, to others it is like medicine, and
to others like a fan.”
*Alf Lailah wa Lailah*

These prefatory lines, serve as they do to provide a text on the lintel
of the doorway to this subject, reminds one how widely dissimilar is the
attitude of Islamic peoples towards the art and practice of music to
that of others; music is indeed “like food,” since it often sustains
when all else fails. You can scan Greek literature in vain for any such
parallel sentiments. Music in its literal connotation was alien to Greek
philosophy.

Aristoxenus certainly dealt with it, but his approach, devoid of the
slightest hint of philosophic appeal *per se*, was a purely scientific
one.[^1] It is true that the Pythagoreans had given a foretaste of the
Islamic spiritual conception of music, but that was in the dim and
distant past of Greece. What is more in keeping with the Greek
evaluation of this art is to be found in Athenaeus of Naucratis (fl. 200
A. D.), whose utterances are mere entertaining chatter.[^2]

A. The Music in Itself
----------------------

“This art...is the foraging ground of audition, and the pasturage of the
soul, and the spring grass of the heart, and the arena of love, and the
comfort of the dejected, and the companionship of the lonely, and the
provision of the traveller, because of the important place of the
beautiful voice in the heart and its dominating the entire soul.”
Ibn ‘Abdi Rabbihi, *al-‘Iqd al-Farid.*

After reading the prologue to this chapter, one cannot help realizing
how vastly different are the sentiments of Islamic peoples from those of
the peoples of Greece and Rome on the assessment of music. And by music
we mean that art which the noblest minds in Islam believed to be capable
of being informed with and ennobled by *thought*, and in turn to adorn
and enforce *thought*, and to be thus understood and felt. No better
example of that percipience is to be found than one in the utterances of
the Ikhwan al-Safa of the fourth/tenth century of Basrah, the home of
the learning, who spoke of music as “an art compounded between the
corporeal and the spiritual.”[^3]

To these transcendental philosophers “all the arts had bodily forms
except the art of music, whose substance was a spiritual essence.” With
what felicity do the “Brethren” laud that type of music “which softens
the heart, brings tears to the eyes, and makes us feel penitent over
past misdeeds.” How well they knew the value of those soothing melodies
“that lightened the pain of disease and sickness,” and those affecting
airs which “comforted the aching hearts and eased the grief of the
afflicted in times of calamity.” More practical still was their
recognition of those songs “that relieved the toil of heavy work and
wearisome undertakings,” as well as that music which gathered “joy,
pleasure, and happiness...at weddings and banquets.”[^4] Indeed a
veritable ocean of literature in praise of music has flowed down to us
from the Islamic past, whilst poets have sung the sweetest verses in
adulation.[^5]

On the other hand, there have been many pious and honourable men among
the legists *(fuqaha’)* who have considered music a useless pastime
*(lahw)* which sometimes became an urge to commit actions which were
unlawful *(haram)* or abhorred *(makruh)*. Among those who condemned
divine art were some of the most sincere of the Muslims, from ibn Abi
al-Dunya (d. 281/894) in his “Censure of Forbidden Pleasures” *(Dhamm
al-Malahi)*,[^6] to Shihab al-Din al-Haithami (d. 973/1565) in his
“Restraint of Impetuous Youth” *(Kaff al-Ra‘a‘)*.[^7] Nobody can censure
those opponents of music who sincerely believed that it was among the
things prohibited *(muharramut)*, since even Christian Europe linked
“wine, woman, and song” among the “idle pleasures” *(malahi)*.

Yet, strictly speaking, the objections of the purists in religion to
“listening to music” *(al-sama‘)* has no logical *raison d’etre*.
Calligraphy cannot be blamed on account of forgers, nor can accountancy
be condemned because of defalcators. It would be just as illogical to
forbid fruits and viands because of their concomitance with wine and
woman as to censure music owing to its proximity to the latter. Music,
*per se*, is neither good nor evil, although it may accompany both, yet
it cannot be categorized or submitted to predicament.

In spite of all our probing and searching we still do not know the inner
causes of emotion. Al-Farabi (d. 339/950) denied that music inspired a
passion or soul-state.[^8] His guess was that music, whether in the
performer or the listener, was itself inspired by a passion or
soul-state. Ibn Zailah (d. 440/1048) held much the same view. He says,
“When sound *(saut)* is adorned by harmonious and mutually related
composition, it stirs the soul of man...Beginning on a low note and
ascending to a high note, or *vice versa*, according to a *particular*
arrangement and a *known* composition, it becomes related to the
sentiments of the soul of man. As one note *(naghmah)*, after another
changes in the music, one state after another changes in the soul.

One composition will transport the soul from weakness to strength, and
another from strength to weakness...Therefore, the composition which is
possessed of certain sounds is possessed of certain qualities by which
the soul is influenced.”[^9] All that is manifest to the meanest
observer, but no one has yet told us what those “qualities” are. Fakhr
al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1209) states a more “up-to-date” opinion, and
this, in substance, is what he has to say, “In the animal world sounds
come into existence by reason of grief, pain, or joy. Those sounds,
according to these circumstances, are different, being high or low, so,
the law of association, those sounds become bound up with the different
mental states which prompt them. Thus, when those sounds are renewed,
they inevitably call up the related mental states, which may be grief,
pain, or joy.”[^10]

From the purely Islamic point of view, ibn Zailah also raises a point
worth mentioning. He says, “Sound produces an influence on the soul in
two directions. One is on account of its special composition (i.e. its
physical content), the other, on account of its being similar to the
soul (i.e. its spiritual content).”[^11] A Persian mystic, al-Hujwiri
(fifth/11th century), divides those who listen to music into two
categories: those who *listen* to the material sound and those who hear
the spiritual meaning. That ecstatic maintained that those who *heard*
spiritually did not apprehend mere notes *(naghamat)*, modes
*(maqamat)*, or rhythms *(iqa‘at)*, but music *per se*, insisting that
such audition “consists in hearing everything as it is in quality and
predicament.”[^12]

That doctrine takes us to the very core of Sufi teaching in which
“listening to music” under such spiritual control conduces to ecstasy,
which leads to a revelation of the Divine. Did not Schopenhauer suggest
that the world itself is but music realized, and was not that what the
Ikhwan al-Safa had taught a thousand years earlier?

Yet of all the great thinkers of Islam no one has probed to the heart of
the problem with such power of persuasion and solicitude of purpose, and
reached a conclusion of such profundity as al-Ghazālī (d. 505/1111). How
penetrating are his words, “Hearts and innermost thoughts are mines of
secrets and treasuries of precious stones. Within their confines are
jewels which are as sparks contained in iron and steel...And there is no
other way of extracting their secrets except by the flint of ‘listening
to music’ *(al-sama‘)*, because there is no means of reaching the hearts
except through the portals of the ears.[^13] ...Verily, ‘listening to
music’ is a factual touchstone,… for as soon as the soul of music
reaches the heart, it brings out whatever pre-dominates in it.”[^14]
That was also the dominating thought of Abu Sulaiman al-Darani (d. c.
205/820), who averred that “music and singing do not produce in the
heart that which is not in it.”

As our opening lines from the *Alf Lailah wa Lailah* reveal there is
much more in music than its being merely an ancillary to those things
which are unlawful and abhorred, and those who base their objection to
music on the Holy Qur’an and the Hadith must know that they can be
answered by proofs to the contrary from these identical and revered
sources.[^15] Ibn Khaldun (d. 808/1406), the greatest of the
philosopher-historians of Islam, did not touch directly on the question
of *al-sama‘* in the legal aspect. We do not know his reasons for that
apparent neglect, but the fact that he devotes a chapter in his
*Prolegomena* to music is sufficient proof of his attitude, which was
that of the rational man.

To him, man was a social animal who was good by nature.[^16] It follows,
therefore, that man should seek to satisfy certain natural desires in
his leisure hours, such as the need for healthy relaxation, the wish to
acquire knowledge, and the urge to listen to sweet music.[^17] All such
longings were perfectly reasonable, and since man could discern what was
good or evil in those desires, he could, by experience, make such
desires always beneficial both socially and spiritually, provided the
*intention* in those desires were good. If that were the case, the
desires were lawful.[^18]

The Sufi and the *darwish* have eloquently defended their attitude in
the usage of music in their ceremonials by proofs that are unanswerable
by its condemners. Perhaps the most trenchant defence was made by the
brother and successor of the great al-Ghazālī, who was known as Majd
al-Din al-Tusi (d. 520/1126), and this is what he said, “If anyone says
that audition is absolutely unlawful, he has declared forbidden in the
law that about which no statute has come down, since no statute
forbidding audition and dancing has come down in the Book of Allah, or
in the usage of Allah’s Apostle, or in the words of the Companions (of
the Prophet). And he, who declares to be forbidden in the Law anything
which is not in it, has invented something against Allah, and he who
invents anything against Allah is an infidel by general agreement.”[^19]

Yet we, in this work, are primarily concerned with the purely secular
approach, although it may unavoidably include that which is divine. Not
only is the case for secular music unassailable, but the teaching,
acquisition, and practice of it can be proved to be rational since it
affords healthy exercise to the body, mind and emotions. It has been
said that “men die for want of cheerfulness as plants die for want of
light.” And, what can supply that want better than music? Therein is
refreshment for the body, cheer for the mind, and relief for the
emotions, or, more grandiloquently, the repairing of lost energies, the
soothing of chafed sensibilities, and the kindling of finer feelings and
aspirations.

Everybody knows, especially in Islam, the wondrous power of the
“beautiful voice,”[^20] particularly in the reading *(qir’ah)* of the
Qur’an and the chanting of the “call to prayer” *(adhan)*. They give
back musical impressions which not only delight the ear but thrill the
soul, because that chanting harmonizes with the divine message.[^21] And
why should not secular music *per se* do likewise, since there seems to
be a natural alliance between radiant music and moral beauty? Surely
man’s faculties and susceptibilities for the acquisition and enjoyment
of music were not bestowed but that they should be a glory to the Giver
and a joy to the possessor, for they are as essential to the social and
spiritual welfare of man as the influence of the sun and rain is to be
the fruitfulness of the mother earth.

“Get way from evil and sing”

*(Ab‘id al-sharr wa ghanni)*.

Syrian Proverb

B. The Music Lovers
-------------------

“I like the man who cultivates poetry for self-instruction, not for
lucre; and the man who practises music for pleasure, not for gain.”
Ibn Muqlah (d. 238/940)

Since Islam was born among the Arabs and was cradled in the Hijaz, one
must give prior consideration to these two important facets. In the
“Days of Ignorance” *(al-jahiliyyah)* music was practiced in the whole
of Arabia by the matrons of the towns and tribes as well as by
professional singing-girls *(qainat)*. These not only cheered many a
home and encampment, but strengthened the resolve of those in the battle
throng, as we read in the *Hamasah*. Their singing *(ghina’)* was based
on a simple type of song called the *nasb* which was but an improved
form of camel-driver’s chant *(huda’)*. They accompanied themselves on
an instrument of strings *(muwattar)*, although more generally it was a
harp-like instrument *(mi‘zafa)*, a percussion wand *(qadib)*, or a
tambourinte *(mizhar)*.[^22]

In default of the latter they could adapt the perforated skin sieve
*(ghirbal)* for that purpose: this received the approval of the Prophet
later.[^23] When Islam came upon the world of intellectual darkness, the
first male musician to make history was Tuwais (d. c. 88/705). He
accompanied himself on a square tambourine *(daff)*, and when performing
would perambulate along the lines of his audience.[^24]

The wide conquests of the Arab armies, notably in Persia and Syria, had
sent crowds of captives into the towns of the Hijaz. Among these were
singers and players whose alien types of music captivated the people of
Mecca and Medina. The result was that Arab musicians found themselves
compelled to master the new kinds of singing and playing. That was only
one of the many cultural influences which affected Arabian modes of
life, for “when the revelations of the Prophet flashed on the world, a
message was delivered which could not be confined to the Hijaz, the
cradle of Islam. As a result, the banner of the Prophet was planted
eastward at the extremities of Transoxiana, southward by the banks of
the Indus, northward to the shores of the Black Sea, and westward on the
slopes of the Pyrenees.”[^25]

As we march through the pages of the history of music we shall see how
manifold artistic ingredients contributed to Islamic civilization.
Al-Hirah, the capital of the Arab Lakhmids, had already imbibed much of
Persian culture including the lute *(‘ud)*.[^26] The Meccans had used a
rustic type of pandore *(mi‘zaf)* which had a parchment “face” *(wajh)*,
but as the Persian lute *(barbat)* had a “face” of wood, the Meccan lute
was called the *‘ud* (wood). The holy cities of the Hijaz resounded with
strains of music and song,[^27] and the artistic career of the
songstress ‘Azzat al-Maila’ (d. c. 88/705) in the Hijaz attested to that
fact.

At her auditions the greatest musicians, poets, litterati, and the most
distinguished citizens, including ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far, a
cousin-germain of the Prophet, took part. Even Hassan ibn Thabit, the
first poetic extoller of Islam sang her praises.[^28] Among the great
musicians of the glorious days of the Orthodox Caliphs *(al-rashidun)*
were Sa’ib Khathir (d. c. 83/683), Hunain al-Hiri (d. c. 100/718), and
Ahmad al-Nasibi, a kinsman of the poet A‘sha Hamdam (d. 82/701).[^29]

The Umayyad caliphs removed their capital from Medina to Damascus, where
their Courts, with the exception of that of ‘Umar II (d. 101/720), were
thronged with singers and players. Of al-Walid (d. 126/744) it was said
that “the cultivation of music spread not only among the leisured class,
but with the people also.”[^30] Those were the flourishing days of the
great *virtuosi* whose names adorn the pages of Islamic history, notably
ibn Muhriz (d. c. 97/715), ibn Suraij (d. c. 108/726), al-Gharid (d. c.
106/724), and Ma‘bad (d. c. 127/743), usually dubbed as “the four great
singers.”[^31] Such was Islam, the territories of which knew no racial
boundaries, which those four musicians were foreigners by blood, the
first being of Persian origin, the second of Turkish descent, the third
and fourth claiming respectively Berber and Negro extraction.[^32]

Because of such a large-hearted tolerance of racial differences it is
quite explicable why the hybrid and exotic in music became an allurement
and fascination. Through Islam the technical nomenclature in music was
almost wholly Arabic, and that was still the case when the first Persian
treatises on music appeared in the eighth/14th century.[^33] Still, the
Arabs borrowed the Persian *chang* (harp) which they confusedly called
the *sanj* and *jank*. They also adopted the Persian tuning
*(taswiyyah)* of the lute, and the frets *(dasatin)* on the neck of the
instrument.[^34]

When the first of the ‘Abbasid Caliphs, al-Mansur (d. 158/755), built
that wondrous city of Baghdad, it soon became not only the capital of
the vast dominions of the Caliphate, but the cultural centre of Islam.
The early ‘Abbasid period has well been styled “the Augustan Age of
Arabian literature,”[^35] although an even greater encomium could be
justly used in respect of music during that era, if we take the golden
pages of the “Great Book of Songs” *(Kitab al-Ahani al-Kabir)* as our
authority. The first outstanding ‘Abbasid minstrel was Hakam al-Wadi (d.
c. 180/796), a singer and performer who carried all before him.[^36]

Almost as exquisite were the vocal accomplishments of ibn Jami‘ (d. c.
189/804).[^37] He had been taught by the doyen of the Court minstrels,
Yahya al-Makki (d. c. 215/830), the fountain head of the old music of
the Hijaz. Indeed his “book about the Songs *(Kitab fi al-Aghani)* was a
repository of the classical art;[^38] his son Ahmad (d. 250/864) issued
a revised edition of 3,000 songs[^39] Greater still was Ibrahim
al-Mausili (d. 189/804) who outshone all others by his versatility. Nine
hundred compositions stood to his credit, whilst his training school for
singing girls became renowned.[^40]

Fulaih ibn Abi al-‘Aura’ was another favoured singer, being the only one
allowed to appear – professionally – without the customary curtain
*(sitar)* which screened the musicians from the Caliph. Fulaih, with
Ibrahim al-Mausili and ibn Jami‘, compiled a collection for Harun
al-Rashid known as “The Hundred Chosen Songs” *(al-Mi’at al-Saut
al-Mukhtarah)*.[^41] Prince Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi (d. 224/839)[^42] and
his step-sister Princess ‘Ulayyah (d. 210/825)[^43] had both been
carefully trained in music at the instance of Caliph Harun, at whose
Court music received so munificent a patronage that it set the whole
world in wonderment.

Prince Ibrahim possessed a voice with a compass of three octaves, and
was considered the “most proficient in mankind” in that art.[^44] By
that time the impingement of Persian and Khurasanian novelties in music
became quite pronounced. Singing girls from Khurasan were “the rage.”
They performed on a long necked pandore *(tanbur)* which gave an alien
scale, whilst the Persian lute produced a scale that was dissonant to
the Arabian system, as we shall see in Section C. Prince Ibrahim and his
henchmen favoured these exotic ideas, and even applauded the open
violation of the recognized patterns in both the melodic and rhythmic
modes.

This defiance of the old classical procedure divided the Court minstrels
into two camps, viz. the “Romanticists” led by Prince Ibrahim, and the
“Classicists” headed by the chief Court minstrel Ishaq al-Mausili (d.
235/850), the most famous of the musicians of the Muslim world.[^45]
Against those neoteric fancies, Ishaq took a firm stand, and eventually
was able to re-establish the old Arabian scale and modes, which seem to
have been set down in his “Book of Notes and Rhythm” and his “Great Book
of Songs.”[^46]

After the mid-third/ninth century, the Baghdad Caliphate began its
political decline, although music still prospered at its Courts.
Al-Mutawakkil (d. 247/861) gave constant encouragement to that art. His
son, Abu ‘Isa ‘Abd Allah, was an accomplished musician and a composer of
some 300 songs.[^47] Al-Muntasir (d. 248/862) was both a poet and a
musician; the words of his songs have been preserved in al-Isfahani who
devotes a chapter to him.[^48] Another such devotee was al-Mu‘tazz (d.
255/869), whose songs have also been saved for us.[^49] His son, ‘Abd
Allah, was a highly gifted musician who penned a “Comprehensive Book on
Singing” *(Kitab al-Jami‘ fi al-Ghina’)*, the first of its kind,
although Prince Ibrahim too, had written a “Book on Singing.”[^50]

Yet if the Court minstrels did not produce *virtuosi* of the same class
of old, that defect was overcome by their pens, notably by ibn Tahir
al-Khuza’i (d. 300/913) who wrote a “Book about the Modes and the
Reasons for the Songs” *(Kitab fi al-Nagham wa ‘Ilal al-Aghani)*,[^51]
Qurais al-Jarrahi (d. 326/936) in his “Art of Singing and Stories of the
Sinbers” *(Sina‘at al- Ghina’ wa Akhbar al-Mughanniyyin)*, Jahzat
al-Barmaki (d. c. 328/938) who published a “Book of Pandorists” *(Kitaqb
al-Tanburiyyin)*, and the great al-Isfahani who produced “The Propriety
of Listening to Music” *(Adab al-Sama‘)*.[^52]

Turning to the west, we see the same high cultural uplift in Muslim
Spain as in the home of the Eastern Caliphate. After the Arabs and
Berbers had conquered (91/710) the Iberian Peninsula, a vast portion of
the land was held by them until the year 479/1086 and during that
period, especially under the Umayyad rulers, music and all the arts were
cultivated ardently. Singing girls, called *jariyyat*, were in great
demand, and schools for their training had been established.[^53] Yet
those who came from the East were especially favoured, such as the famed
lutanist ‘Afza’ at the Court of ‘Abd al-Rahman I (d. 172/788),[^54]
while al-Hakam I (d. 206/822) was especially proud of ‘Uklun and
Zarqun.[^55]

His chief male minstrels were ‘Abbas ibn Nasa’i and Mansur
al-Yahudi.[^56] Concerts were the “order of the day.”[^57] At the palace
of ‘Abd al-Rahman (d. 238/852), there arrived in the year 206/821 the
world famous Ziryab, who was treated with unheard-of esteem, for he had
been taught by Ibrahim and Ishaq al-Mausili in Baghdad. He was credited
with knowing 10,000 (1,000?) songs by heart, and for being the equal of
Ptolemy in his knowledge of music. It was he who added a fifth string to
the lute, linking it – in the cosmic system – with the soul. The musical
system in al-Andalus was that of the Arabian east, the scale being the
Pythagorean. Zirab’s music school – which had some reputation – was
carried on after his death by his descendants, and was still flourishing
in the days of the “Party Kings,” while traces of it could be found in
North Africa in the eighth/14th century.[^58]

Under ‘Abd al-Rahman III (d. 350/961) we have an anomalous situation of
the Court outwardly condemning music – so as to placate the Maliki
legists who frowned on music – but inwardly patronizing it, since he
encouraged his children not only to dabble in the art, but to rise
virtuosity. One of them excelled on the pandore *(tanbur)* and guitar
*(kaitarah)*,[^59] whilst another, Abu al-‘Asbagh, said that so long as
Allah permitted birds to sing he would do likewise.[^60] In the reign of
al-Hakam II (d. 366/976) concerts became special events,[^61] and under
al-Mahdi (d. 400/1009 orchestras of a hundred lutes *(idan)* and as many
reed pipes *(zumar)* could be heard in the palace salons.[^62] Those
were the brilliant days of ibn ‘Abdi Rabbihi (d. 328/940) who, in his
*al-‘Iqd al-Farid*, gave Muslim Spain some idea of the greatness of the
music of the Eastern Caliphate. He was a veritable treasure-chest of
Andalusian poetry and song.[^63]

We know little of Persian music in those early days save what may be
gleaned from the *Muruj al-Dhahab* of al-Mas‘udi (d. c. 345/956), who
quoted ibn Khurdadhbih (d. c. 300/912).[^64] As we have seen, both
Persia and Arabia borrowed from each other in matters musical, and we
know that Persian as well as Arabian music was being taught at Rayy in
the time of Ibrahim al-Mausili.[^65] Certainly there were several
brilliant writers in music in Baghdad who were of Persian origin,
notably al-Sarakhsi (d. 286/899)[^66] ‘Ubaid Allah ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn
Tahir (d. 300/913),[^67] and Zakariya al-Razi (d. 313/925).[^68] A
famous singer of the Tahirid period was Ratibah of Nishapur,[^69] and so
also was the renowned Rudagi – patronized by the Samanid Nasr II (d. c.
331/942) – a lutanist and harpist, as well as a singer and poet.[^70]

Most of the contemporary poets, such as al-Mi‘mari of Jurjan and
al-Daqiqi of Tus, sang in rapturous praise of music.[^71] Persian music
percolated everywhere, Turkomanian influence also made itself felt. The
Caliph’s praetorian guards at Baghdad and elsewhere were made up of men
of Turkoman race, and they dominated in most things. In such
circumstances it can be well understood how Turkomanian music,
especially on the instrumental side, was highly appreciated. A lute-like
instrument called the *rud* was favoured by them, and an arch-lute the
*shahrud*, invented by Khulais ibn al-Ahwas of Samaraqand about 306/918,
had already spread to Iraq, Syria, and Egypt.[^72]

In Egypt under the Tulunid and Ikhshidid rulers of the third/ninth and
the fourth/tenth centuries, Turkoman influence spread by leaps and
bounds, and music was enjoyed by all. Ibn Khallikan praises the
excellent voice of ibn Tulun when chanting the Qur’an, while his son
Khumarawaih actually adorned his palace walls with pictures of his
singing girls.[^73] The art rose to greater heights under the next
rulers. Al-Mas‘udi delineated a delightful scene at a palace by the Nile
in 330/940 in which the “sounds of music and singing filled the
air.”[^74] Kafur (d. 357/968) was devoted to music and was
liberal-handed to its professors.

What was this music of Islam, enthralling sounds of which charmed all
ears from Bukhara in the east to Cordova in the west? Obviously, there
were linguistic differences and indigenous musical preferences in so
vast a region. Yet Islam, because of its universal outlook, had leavened
some of those diversities. Basically, the scale of all was the
Pythagorean, as we shall learn presently.[^75] Yet Arabic technical
terminology seems to have had dominion everywhere, as one sees in the
term *maqam*. Unmistakably, Baghdad was still the artistic and literary
centre, for even Abu Bakr al-Kativ, who served the Samanid Isma‘il ibn
Ahmad (d. 295/907), saw in Iraq “an ocean of learning and a mine of
culture.”[^76]

If one scans the *nisbahs* of the great men of literature, science, art,
and music who sought Baghdad to win fame and fortune, it becomes clear
what a magnet the “City of Peace” had become to the world of Islam.[^77]
To the Arabic-speaking peoples, vocal music was the peerless art. Part
of that was due to the beauty of the language, *plus* the allurement of
its variegated metres. The outstanding vocal piece was the ode
*(qasidah)*. Within its folds a singer could decorate the melody of each
verse with endless embellishments *(tahasin)*. Less classical, but far
more popular was the ballad *(qit‘ah)*. There were also folk songs of
the *mawal* type, and we know that even the Caliphs enjoyed the simple
songs of the people.[^78]

The accompanying instruments were generally the lute, pandore, flute
*(qassabah)*, or reed pipe *(zamr)*, which played the simple melody,
whilst the rhythmic accompaniment was furnished by a tambourine or drum.
Purely instrumental items were also featured, especially as interludes
between vocal items. When these were combined the performance was termed
a *naubah*.[^79] Although we read occasionally of a hundred or so
performers at Court functions, such events were for special display. The
ideal in ‘Abbasid days when listening to music was what Europe would
term “Chamber music.” Two other instruments, which had independent usage
were the psaltery *(qanun)* and the rebec *(rabab)*. The former was a
special solo instrument, whilst the latter was often used to accompany
the chanted verse of poets, which had been its function in pagan days.

Since Arabic was still the language of the “classes” in Persia, one
imagines in which much has passed from the immaculate and indefectible
in Arabic poetry and song was heard in Iranian lands as late as the
fourth/tenth century, notably under the Saffarids and Samanids. The
Persians, less intrigued by the lengthy Arabic ode *(qasidah)*, produced
a pure love song *(ghazal)* and the quatrain *(ruba‘i)*, one class of
the latter, the *ruba‘iyy taranah*, showing its musical adaptation. The
melodic modes in Persia were far more numerous in different tonal
structures than those of the Arabs and they retained their older
fanciful names such as *‘ushshaq, Isfahan, salmaki*, etc. although most
of them had scalar affinities with the Arabian finger modes *(asabi‘)*.
Their most favoured instruments were the harp *(chang)*, pandore
*(tanbur)*, lute *(barbat)*, double chested lute *(rabab)*, spiked voil
*(kamanchah)*, flute *(nay)*, and tambourine *(da’irah)*.

The Baghdad Caliphate had gone into the protective custody of the
Persian Buwaihids (320 – 404/932 – 1015), at whose palaces – as well as
at those of the Caliphs – music was subventioned with liberality. In
fact, the regime of ’Izz al-Daulah was condemned because of its
infatuation for music.[^80] ‘Adud al-Daulah was more discreetly
interested in the art.[^81] However, the power of the Baghdad Caliphate
– both politically and culturally – was gradually slipping away, and the
centre of Islamic culture passed meanwhile to the Fatimids of Egypt.
Here Amir Tamim, the son of al-Mu‘izz (d. 365/975), was absolutely
appassioned of music,[^82] and no less could be said of al-Zahir (d.
427/1036), who spent fabulous gold on minstrels.[^83]

The Persian traveller Nasir-i Khusrau wrote about the splendour of the
Fatimid military bands a little later.[^84] One of its famous men,
al-Sadafi, better known as ibn Yunus (d. 399/1009), wrote a book the
title of which sparkles with delight. It was called the “Book of the
Unanimities and Felicities in the Praises of the Lute” *(Kitab al-‘Uqud
w-al-Su‘ud fi Ausaf al-‘Ud)*.[^85] Another, great historian,
al-Musabbihi (d. 420/1029), compiled a book of “Selected Songs and Their
Significance” *(Mukhtar al-Aghani wa Ma‘aniha)*.[^86] We still discern
the Turkomanian pressure on Egypt’s music, due to the crowd of men from
the Qirghiz steppes in its army, and that was only one facet of the “new
phase of culture” which arose in Egypt in those days.[^87]

Although Muslim Spain had “advanced with incredible swiftness to a
height of culture that was the envy of Europe,” the break-up of the
central government and the rise of the “Party Kings” halted the progress
of the arts for a time. Yet here and there were some hallowed spots of
culture. Indeed, a few of these “Party Kings” *(muluk al-tawa’if)* ‘made
their Courts the homes of poets and minstrels,” as al-Maqqari testifies.
The last of the ‘Abbasid kings of Seville, al-Mu‘tamid (d. 484/1091),
was not only a distinguished poet, but a singer and a lutanist, as was
his son ‘Ubaid Allah al-Rashid.[^88] The song-poems of ibn Hamdis (d.
527/1132) were the delight of the Sevillians. When the Almoravid Berber
hordes from the Maghrib suppressed the “Party Kings,” music came to be
looked upon as one of the “wiles of Satan,” although the older Muslim
inhabitants took little heed of such rebukes.

Their successors, the Almohades, under the *fiat* of ibn Tumart (d.
524/1130), made decrees against music more stringent, even to the
destruction of instruments. Yet there were many who opposed these
fanatical legists, including ibn Quzman (d. 555/1160), the song-writer
*par excellence*, who chided with puritans saying, “The *faqih* cries
‘Repent’; but how can one be contrite with the air so fragrant, the
birds warbling, the flowers perfuming, and music *(ghina)* from a clever
reed-piper *(zamir)* and a heavenly voice?” Yet, in spite of
fulminations, music and songs were heard on every side.

The newly fashioned *zajal* and *muwashshah* were so easy to set to
melodies that the same tune would be adapted to different words, as ibn
Quzman tells us, and songs spread like the wind in the matter of months
as far afield as Baghdad, as ibn Sa‘id al-Maqhribi (d. 685/1286)
avers.[^89] Among the best known Andalusian composers were Abu
al-Hussain al-Hamrah al-Qarnati and Ishaq ibn Sim‘an al-Qartabi. The
highest in the land were enchanted by the art. Ibn Bajjah (d. 533/1138),
according to ibn Khaqan, “spent his life singing and playing,” whilst a
celebrated physician Yahya ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Bahdabah, wrote *zajals*
for the accompaniment of wind instruments.[^90]

Returning to the hub of Islam, we find that the Saljuq Turks had
irrupted into the land, Baghdad having been entered in 447/1055. Their
rulers took charge of the Caliphs, and they and their later *atabegs*
controlled the world of Islam from the borders of Afghanistan to the
frontiers of Greece. All of them were keen lovers of music, and the
favoured minstrel of Sanjar (d. 552/1157) was Kamal al-Zaman, whose
cognomen indicates his renown.[^91] Further east the Ghaznawids and
Ghurids were patronizing minstrelsy at their courts. Mahmud of Ghaznah
(d. 421/1030) had the poet Farrukhi as his panegyrist, who was also a
“skilful performer on the harp” *(chang)*.[^92]

Among the Ghurids of Afghanistan and Hindustan, especially at the Court
of Ghiyath al-Din ibn Sam (d. 599/1200), music was encouraged
bountifully.[^93] Greater still was the favour shown to the art by ‘Ala
al-Din Muhammad (d. 617/1220), the Shah of Khwarizm, who gave Fakhr
al-Din al-Razi protection.[^94] In Baghdad the chief minstrel of the
Caliph al-Musta‘sim (d. 656/1258) was Safi al-Din ‘Abd al-Mu’min (d.
693/1294). His greater fame is an author notably for his “Book on
Prosody” *(Fi ‘Ulum al-‘Arud w-al-Qawafi w-al-Badi‘)*, but greater still
for his two books on the science of music which brought him world
renown.[^95] In the year 656/1258, the Mughul conqueror Hulagu, invaded
the famous city of Baghdad, the centre of the world of Islam, and
captured it. Ibn Khaldun avers that 600,000 inhabitants were
slaughtered, including the Caliph and his family, and although Safi
al-Din was spared because of his eminence as a musician, scholars and
*litterateurs* were massacred as cruelly as libraries, colleges, and
palaces were destroyed.

These Mughul barbarians, who had become masters from the borders of
Egypt to India, were converted to Islam, and, softened by its culture,
they made music one of the delights of their Courts, and the murdered
Caliph’s minstrel, Safi al-Din, passed into the service of the Mughul
vizier Shams al-Din al-Juwaini. Ibn Taghribirdi tells us that Abu Sa‘id
(d. 736/1335) “cultivated music, played well on the lute, and composed
songs,” and ibn Battutah (d. 778/1377) describes the royal galley at
Baghdad, flanked by boats filled with musicians and singers.[^96] By
this time Persian, not Arabic, had become the language of art and
science in the Middle East, and from Persian works we are able to see
what types of instruments were in vogue.

In addition to the older lute and pandore was a new arch-lute *(mughni)*
and a rectangular psaltery *(nuzha)*, together with a Turkoman viol
*(ghishak)*, whilst the pandore was more particularly described as a
two-stringed *(dutar)* or a three stringed *(sitar)* instrument.[^97] It
was Egypt alone that offered a stubborn resistance to the Mughuls, and
its Mamluk Sultans, like their predecessors, the Ayyubids, favoured
music and song. Here the *muwashshah*, had been popularized by ibn Sana’
al-Mulk (d. 608/1211) in his *Dar al-Tiraz*, and al-Saruji (d. 693/1294)
bettered the instruction as a song-writer, while ibn Mukarram (d.
711/1311) edited a collection of older songs which had wide
acceptance.[^98]

Al-Nuwairi (d. 732/1332) also devoted much attention to the subject in
his *Nihayat al-Arab*.[^99] It was the Sultan Qala’un (d. 689/1290) who
built the hospital *(maristan)* at Cairo, where “music soothed the
wakeful hours to the sufferers.”[^100] An outstanding feature of the
Bahri and Burji Mamluk Sultans was their military bands,[^101] which
opened the eyes of the Crusaders to the value, both tactically and
musically, of martial music.[^102]

Sind had been conquered by Muslim armies as far back as the year 92/711,
but it was with Ghurids of Afghanistan that modern Pakistan had is real
foundation 571/1175 at the hands of Muhammad Ghuri (d. 602/1206). Here,
the powerful *fuqaha’* were able to enforce views in condemnation of
music upon Iltutmish, the Sultan of Delhi (d.633/1235), who, later,
having been impressed by the *sama‘* of the Chishti *darwish*
fraternity, soon abolished that ban against the art, when the plaintive
chanting of its *qawwals* became a distinctive feature throughout the
land, as we know from the *Siyar al-Auliya’*. Secular music was openly
encouraged by Firuz Shah I (d. 634/1236), and the *Tabaqat-i Nasiri*
says that his bounty to musicians led him to be called “a second Hatim.”

Under Balban (d. 686/1287) one evening per week was devoted to audition
of music. The succeeding Khalji Sultans, the first of whom was Firuz
Shah II (d. 696/1295), were all music-lovers. At the Court of the latter
were Hamid Rajah, Nasir Khan, and Muhammad Shah Hutki, all noted
musicians, although the greatest of them all was Amir Khusrau (d.
725/1325), who was “no less notable as a musician than a poet.” He had
served at the Courts of the two preceding Sultans. In his *Qiran
al-Sa‘dain*, he has described the Court music of his time. In the *I‘jaz
Khusrawi*, he tells of the rivalry between the Khurasan and Hindustan
minstrels at Court. It is said that a fusion between Persian and Indian
music was brought about by him, and in the book called *Rag Darpan* many
novelties in music are attributed to him.

Music was still to the fore with the Sayyid dynasty, and Mubarak Shah II
(d. 837/1433) was deeply attached to the art. On the elevation of the
Lodhi Sultans to the throne in 855/1451 there was a change of attitude
towards music. Yet Sikandar II (d. 923/1517) employed four exceptional
performers on the harp *(chang)*, psaltery *(qanun)*, pandore *(tanbur)*
and gourd-lute *(bin)*, only the last named instrument being of
indigenous origin. In the extreme north the kings of Kashmir were ruling
a famed “land of song” since 735/1334. Among the most cultured of them
was Zain al-‘Abidin (d. 872/1467), during whose reign music schools were
established by Persian and Turanian teachers, which won some celebrity.

In the Deccan, one of the kings of Gulbargah named Taj al-Din Firuz Shah
(d. 825/1422) had 700 damsels who were skilled musicians and dancers.
His brother, however, was never absent from the *darwish* ceremonials,
where the religious chant gave him contentment of a different kind. Both
Ahmad Shah I (d. 839/1435) and Ahmad Shah II (d. 862/1457) were
captivated by their Court minstrelsy, and the wife of the latter, says
Firishtah, was without equal in her musical accomplishments. The singers
and dancers of Muhammad Shah II (d. 887/1482) came from Georgia,
Circassia, and Albyssinia. So indulgent was his successor Mahmud Shah II
(d. 924/1518) in his passion for music that minstrels were attracted to
his Court not only from Delhi and Lahore, but also from distant Persia
and Khurasan. Truly, Muslim India was in the forefront in music among
her sister nations.[^103]

Persia was reawakened culturally under the beneficent Muzaffarids. The
renowned Shah Shuja‘ of Shiraz (d. 786/1384) patronized the minstrel
Yusuf Shah and the music theorist al-Jurjani (d. 816/1413). The art was
particularly conserved by the Jalairid Sultans of Iraq. Hussain (d.
784/1382) actually neglected his realm through his abiding love for
music, whilst the greatest living musicians, Ridwan Shah and ‘Abd
al-Qadir ibn Ghaibi (d. 840/1435), were the chief Court minstrels of
Sultan Ahmad (d. 813/1410).[^104] When Timur (d. 807/1405) had
accomplished his world-wide conquests, most of the above kingdoms passed
into the night, and Samarqand became the artistic as well as the
political centre of the Timurid Empire.

During the reign of Shah Rukh, (d. 850/1447) the Court minstrelsy rose
to perfection, and the *fetes* have been eloquently described by ‘Abd
al-Razzaq.[^105] Yusuf-i Andakani was his favoured minstrel for he “had
no equal ... in the seven climes.”[^106] Miran Shah (d. 810/1408), the
brother of Shah Rukh, was also infatuated with music as discoursed by
al-Khatib al-Mausili and Ardashir-i Changi. Baisunghur (d. 836/1433),
the son of Shah Rukh, was devoted to Amir Shahi (d. 857/1453), possessed
of three-fold talents as minstrel, poet, and painter. Under the guidance
of the vizier Mir ‘Ali Shir (d. 907/1501) the rule of the last of the
great Timurid rulers Hussain Mirza Baiqara (d. 911/1506) became the
byword of the cultured world of Islam, and the names of his minstrels –
Qui-i Muhammad, Shaikhi Nayi and Hussain ‘Udi – became a part of
history.[^107]

In Muslim Spain, in spite of the increasing re-conquests by the
Spaniards in the seventh/13th century, the Moors still held that part of
the land known as Granada. Here they were hemmed in from all sides, and
in 897/1492, they were forced to capitulate. Then followed the most
despicable persecutions and ruthless destruction of Arabic literature
which had been treasured for centuries. Moorish music and instruments
were declared *anathema*, although that did not prevent the Moors from
finding solace from their woes in their music. All that the Spanish
priesthood could do was to issue edicts forbidding their congregations
to listen to those *mouriscas* and *aravias* of the Moors.[^108] In the
mid-tenth/16th century, they were not only denied their national
costume, language, and customs, but forbidden the *zumrah* and *lailah*,
i.e. the musical gatherings.[^109]

The whole of the Maghrib – from Morocco to Tunis – had been deeply
influenced by the culture of Andalus, and both the Marinid rulers of
Morocco and the Hafsid rulers of Tunis had encouraged music at their
Courts. Yet more bountiful was the revivification of the art due to the
exodus of the Muslim exiles from Spain. The first of these arrived at
Tlemcen after the fall of Cordova in 633/1236, followed by another to
Tunis at the capture of Seville in 646/1248. Then came refugees to
Tetuan after the submission of Granada in 897/1492, which was succeeded
by an emigration to Fez from Valencia in 943/1526, and finally the
wholesale expulsion of 1018/1609.

These newcomers brought a cultural benefit to the Maghrib, and the
Moriscos became the artistic and literary aristocracy of the land. In
music, one can actually trace the regional variations in classical
Granati or Andalusi art to those immigrants. The Cordovan interpretation
belongs to Algiers and Tlemcen, the Sevillan style is that of Tunis,
while the Granadan and Valencian modes are to be fund in Fez and
Tetuan.[^110]

The Ottoman Turks now became a power in the world of Islam to be
reckoned with. Having settled originally in Anatolia, they soon extended
their power in every direction, and by the year 857/1453 Constantinople
and the whole of the Byzantine Empire were in their hands. After
defeating the Shah of Persia, they took Kurdistan and Mesopotamia into
their hegemony, finally to overrun Syria, Egypt, and Arabia after
crushing the Bahri Mamluks in 922/1517. From that date Turkish music
began to assert itself gradually in Arabic-speaking lands and beyond,
even as far as Tunis and Algiers where Turkish *beys* and *deys* were
masters.

From remote times to *ozan* or bard of the Turkish tribes, with *chogur*
or *qopuz* in hand – they were lute-like instruments – entertained the
people with the *turku* or folk-song. That had not changed, but a new
era had dawned since Constantinople had become – by edict only – the
pivot of Islam, and it was no wonder that artists, musicians, poets, and
literary men should have sought fame and fortune in the new capital, as
well as in the *pashaliks* of Cairo, Damascus, Mosul and Baghdad.
Instrumental music had ever delighted the Turks, and the overture
*(pishrau)* and the decorative “divisions” *(taqasim)*, which had been
constituent parts of the old Perso-Arabian *naubah*, were in great
demand.

The poets sang eloquently of the joy of instrumental music in the
ninth/15th century, notably Nizami of Quniayh and Ahmad Pasha, and
Sultan Murad II (d. 855/1451) enticed the finest minstrels to his Court.
Nor should we allow the influence of the *maulawiyyah* or Jalaliyyah
dervish communities, founded by Jalal al-Din Rumi (d. 672/1273), to
escape our notice, since they hymns *(ilahis)* had a great spiritual
influence. In the next century, the poets Fighani, Fusuli, and Rewani
still continued to rhapsodize on music’s spell. The instruments praised
were mostly of Arabian or Persian origin, although the Turkish *qopuz*
had its share of appreciation.[^111] New instruments came on view.

Quduz Farhadi invented the *qaraduzan*, a lute of three strings, and a
son of Hamdi Chelebi (d. 915/1509) introduced two new pandores called
the *yonqar* and *yaltmah*.[^112] During the 11th/17th century music
took a prominent part in the general cultural improvement, as we know
from a manuscript of Cairo by Mulla Muhammad ibn As‘ad, of the time of
Sultan Ahmad (d. 1026/1617), which contains the lives of the famous
Turkish musicians.[^113] Ewliya Chelebi was famed in those days. His
teacher was ‘Umar Gulshani, who was taught by Ibrahim Gulshani of Cairo
(d. 940/1533). The description of the musical life of Constantinople is
contained in the “Travels of Ewliya Efendi” *(Siyahat Nameh)*; much of
it, based as it is on the *Ausaf-i Qustantiniyyah* (Praises of
Constantinople) composed in the year 1048/1638, gives precise details of
musicians and instruments, guilds and makers, in the great emporium of
the Near East.[^114]

In that century there arose the poet-minstrels *(saz sha‘yrleri)* who
were honoured not only in military but also in religious circles. One
direct influence from outside came after the capture of Baghdad in
1048/1638 by Murad IV, who took back with him to Constantinople the
Court minstrel of the Persian Shah ‘Abbas I, named Shah Quli, whose
performances on the *shashtar* had pleased him.[^115] The late Ra‘uf
Yekta thought that the advent of Shah Quli “opened a new era in the
history of Turkish music.”[^116]

In the Muslim east the ‘Adil Shahs of Bijapur, the first of whom was
Yusuf ‘Adil Shah (d. 916/1511), were revealing themselves as munificent
patrons of musicians. Yusuf ‘Adil Shah had a skill in music almost equal
to that of a professional and even essayed composition. Isma‘il (d.
941/1534) rather favoured Turanian and Persian music at his Court. *Per
contra*, Ibrahim I (d. 965/1557) preferred the arts of the Deccan.
Ibrahim II (d. 1035/1626) is claimed to have written a work on music
called *Nauras* with an introduction penned by Zuhuri, the Persian poet
(d. 1027/1618).

The Qutbi Kings of Golkunda were no less enthralled by minstrelsy.
Sultan Quli (d. 940/1543) brought Persian customs to his Court – which
lasted 40 years – and his military *naubah* sounded at the five hours of
prayer. In those days the Gwlior School of Music was the subject of
conversation. Its renown was due chiefly to Rajah Man Singh (d.
932/1517), and the most famous of its students was Tan Sin, who had been
taught by Muhammad Ghauth. Another of the same circle was Bakhshu, whose
*dhurpads* became the repertory of the best minstrels. When Babur (d.
936/1530) became the first of the Mughul Emperors of Hindustan (India),
most of the preceding dynasties were absorbed. He had been reared in
Courts where music prevailed.[^117]

From the statements in the *Babur Nameh* it would seem that the Emperor
was even a composer, and it is believed that his compositions once
existed.[^118] His son Humayun (d. 963/1556) also encouraged music, and
sincerely believed that the Sufi dance was the complete expression of
the *hikmat-i ilahi*. At Court, musicians had their special days for
audition, and some of them – ‘Abd Allah Qanuni, Muhammad Surna’i, and
the vocalists of Hafiz Dost Muhammad Khwafi and Ustad Yusuf Maudud – are
registered in the *Akbar Nameh*. The Court of the renowned Akbar (d.
1014/1605), as described in the *A’in-i Akbari* of Abu al-Fadl, shows
how important music was both to the policy and the taste of the Emperor.

The musicians were formed into seven groups, 36 of whom are named in Abu
al-Fadl’s work. He was catholic in his choice for not only were
minstrels selected from famed Kashmir and Gwalior, but the best of them
came from Herat and Khurasan, and they were singers, chanters, and
instrumentalists. More than half of these had Muslim names. The Emperor
is said to have himself composed 200 items of music. Among the art
treasures of his day there is one depicting the arrival of Tan Sin at
his Court. Abu al-Fadl tells us of the widely spread net that was cast
to capture the best of vocal music – the *dhurpad* of Gwalior, the
*chind* of the Deccan, the *qual* and *taranah* of Delhi, the *kajri* or
*zikri* of Gujrat, the *bangula* of Bengal, and the *chutkalah* of
Jaunpur.

Jahangir (d. 1037/1627) followed his father in his love of music, has
favoured minstrel being Shauqi, who sang Hindi and Persian songs in way
that “cleared the rust from human hearts.” There is a portrait of him in
Fox Strangway’s *Music of Hindustan*.[^119] Many other musicians of
Jahangir’s Court are mentioned in the *Tuzuk-i Jahangiri* and the *Iqbal
Nameh*. In the first named work is described the military band of this
Emperor. Shah Jahan (d. 1068/1658) made the Court music one of the
glories of his reign. It was he who collected the *dhurpads* of the
Gwalior composer Bakhashu, which numbered one thousand items. On the
wedding of his son, Aurangzib (d. 1119/1707), he expended a small
fortune on music alone.

Alas, when Aurangzib ascended the throne he dispensed with his Court
minstrelsy, to the dismay of the people at large. Fortunately, Bahadur
Shah (d. 1124/1713) reinstated the musicians and raised them to *mansab*
ranks. By this time, owing to internecine strife, the great Mughul
Empire began its political and cultural decline.

Of the state of music in Persia during the 11th/17th century, we know
but little save what the pictorial art reveals, although at the
brilliant Court of ‘Abbas I (d. 1038/1629) the older instrumental art
still held its own.[^120] Four European travellers – Raphael du Mans,
Chardin, Poullet, and later Kaempfer – supply many important details. A
picture of the Court minstrels of Safi I (d. 1052/1642) – actually
portraits – has been preserved.[^121] Persia seems to have been less
troubled by the objections of the legists to *al-sama‘* than was the
case elsewhere. Perhaps they still remembered Hafiz who once said, “When
the harp is sounding who cares about the objector?”

Yet there were some Persians, for example, Muhammad ibn Jalal Ridwi (d.
1028/1619) and ‘Abd al-Jalil ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman (d. 1061/1651), who
replied at length to the legists.[^122] Incidentally, Chardin shows that
the Indian *vina* was used in Persia as the *kingira*,[^123] and even
Mersanne (1046/1636) delineated it in Europe.[^124] Strangely enough, it
is mentioned by the Arabic writer al-Jahiz (d. 255/869), who writes it –
probably a scribal error – as *kinkila*, and it is also specified by
al-Jurjani (d. 816/1413).[^125] By the 12th/18th century, when Nadir
Shah (d. 1160/1747) brought a brief resurgence to Persia’s greatness,
many had disappeared, although the dulcimer *(santir)* found a place.

Iraq and Mesopotomia, now in the hand of the Turks, favoured only the
Turanian art. Baghdad was the centre of this imported culture, and it
spread to Hillah and Basrah. To the north, Kurdish tastes prevailed. The
most artistic centres were those where the Mamluk pashas had control,
and where Georgians and other Caucasians were given preferment, which
meant that quite a new Oriental type of music gained ground.[^126]
Karsten Niebuhr, after visiting Baghdad in that century, gave a fair
description of its music. He noted the use of what he called a *base
continue* by accompanying instruments, although he seems to have meant a
*point d’orgue* or pedal point.[^127] He mentions and delineates three
types of pandore, and the rectangular and spiked viols.

Syria was little better off, as we know from the books of Alexander and
Patrick Russell written the 12th/18th century.[^128] They aver that the
Allepans were “fond of music,” and in their performances the instruments
generally were well in tune, and...kept excellent time.

[^1]: The Harmonics of Aristoxenus edited with translation...By Henry S.
Macran, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1901.

[^2]: The Dieomonophists, Enlish translation by J. E. King, Heinermann,
London, 1 937, 6, Book 14.

[^3]: Kitab ikhwan al-Safa, ed. Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allah, Bombay, 1306 –
07/1888 – 89, 1, p. 84.

[^4]: Ibid., 1, pp. 85 – 87.

[^5]: Al-Nuwairi, Nihayat al-Arab, Cairo, 1925, v. pp. 113 et seq.
Muhammad ibn Isma‘il, Safinat al-Mulk, Cairo, 1892, p. 464.

[^6]: J. Robson, Tracts on Listening to Music, London, 1938.

[^7]: W. Ahlwardt, Verzeichnis der arabischen Handschriften
der...Bibliothek zu Berllin, 1887 – 99, No. 5517.

[^8]: R. d’Erlanger, La Musique arabe, Geuthner, Paris, 1930, 1, p. 39.

[^9]: Kitab al-Kafi fi al-Musiqi, British museum MS., Or. 2361, f. 220v.

[^10]: Jami‘ al-‘Ulum, British Museum MS., Or. 2972, f. 153.

[^11]: Loc. cit

[^12]: Koshf al-Mahjub tr. R. A. Nicholson, Brill,m Leiden, 1911, p.
403.

[^13]: Cf. Cicero, who spoke of the eyes as “windows of the soul.”

[^14]: Al-Ghazālī, Ihya’ ‘Ulum Al-Din, Cairo, 1326/1908, vol. 2, pp. 88,
182.

[^15]: H. G. Farmer, History of Arabian Music, Luzac, London, 1929,
Chap. 2.

[^16]: Ibn Khaldun, Prolegomena, Notices et Extraits des manuscrits de
la Bibliotheque Ntionale, Paris, 1858, 16, p. 155, 17, pp. 42, 363.

[^17]: Ibid., 16, p. 365.

[^18]: Ibid., 17, p. 254.

[^19]: J. Robson, op. cit., p. 93.

[^20]: Ibn ‘Abdi Rabbihi, al-‘Iqd al-Farid, Cairo, 1305/1887, 3, p. 177,
tr. H.G. Farmer, in Music: The Priceless Jewel, Bearsden, 1942, p. 6.

[^21]: Although some urge that one must discriminate between takbirs
(raising the voice) and ghina (singing), the fact remains that purely
secular melodies were used. See “La Qir’ah bi al-Alhan” by M. Talbi, in
Arabica, Leiden, 1958, 5, pp. 183 – 90.

[^22]: H. G. Farmer, A History of Arabian Music, London, 1929, Chap 1.

[^23]: Al-Ghazālī, op. cit., vol. 2, p. 206.

[^24]: Al-Isfahani, Kitab al-Aghani al-Kabir, Bulaq, 1285/1869, 2, pp.
170 – 76; Encyclopaedia of Islam, Leiden, 1913 – 38, 4, p. 983.

[^25]: H. G. Farmer, in the New Oxford History of Music, Oxford
University Press, London, 1956, 1, p. 421.

[^26]: Idem, Studies in Oriental Musical Instruments, Reeves, London,
1932, 1, pp. 91 – 99.

[^27]: Idem, Music: The Priceless Jewel, Bearsden, 1942, pp, 9 – 17.

[^28]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 26, pp. 13 – 20.

[^29]: Ibid., 7, pp. 188 – 90; 2, pp. 120 – 27; 5, pp. 161 – 64.

[^30]: Al-Mas‘udi, Les praires d’or..., Paris, 1861 – 77, 6, p. 4.

[^31]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., pp. 98, 151; 2, p. 127.

[^32]: Ibid., 1, pp. 19 – 29, 97 – 129, 150 – 52; 2, pp. 128 – 48.

[^33]: Kanz al-Tahaf, British Museum MS., Or. 2361, f. 247 5.

[^34]: A. U. Pope, A survey of Persian Art, O. U. P., London, 1938, p.
2790.

[^35]: H. G. Farmer, A History of Arabian Music, London, 1929, p. 99.

[^36]: A.l-Isfahani, op. cit., 6, pp. 64 – 68.

[^37]: Ibid., 6, pp. 69 – 92.

[^38]: Ibid., p. 16.

[^39]: Ibid., 15, p. 63.

[^40]: Ibid., 5, pp. 2 – 48.

[^41]: Ibid., 1, pp. 2, 4 – 6.

[^42]: Ibid., 10, pp. 120 – 32.

[^43]: See Mas‘ud Hassan Shamsi, “Ulayya, a Less Known ‘Abbasid
Pricness,” Islamic Culture, Hyderabad, April 1937.

[^44]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 9, p. 49.

[^45]: Ibid., 5, pp. 52 – 131.

[^46]: Ibn al-Nadim, Kitab al-Fihirist, Leipzig, 1871 – 72, pp. 141 –
43.

[^47]: Al-Mas‘audi, op. cit., 6, p. 191; 7, p. 276; al-Isfahani, op.
cit., 9, p. 104.

[^48]: Al-Isahani, op. cit., 8, pp. 175 – 78.

[^49]: Ibid., 8, p. 178.

[^50]: Ibn al-Nadim, op. cit., p. 116.

[^51]: Al-Isfahani, op, cit., 8, p. 43.

[^52]: Ibn al-Nadim, op. cit., p. 115.

[^53]: J. Ribera, La Musica de las cantigar, Madrid, 1922, pp. 53 – 74.

[^54]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 20, p. 149; alpmaqqari, Analectes aur
l’histoire et la literature des Arabes d’Espagne, Leiden, 1885 – 61, 2,
pp. 97 – 98.

[^55]: Ibn Khaldun, op. cit., 17, p. 361.

[^56]: Al-Maqqari, op. cit., 2, p. 85.

[^57]: Al-Khushani, Historia de la jueces de Cordoba, Madrid, 1914, p.
88.

[^58]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913 – 38, Suppl. vol., pp. 266 – 67.

[^59]: Al-Maqqari, op, cit., 2, p. 396.

[^60]: Ibid., 1, p. 250.

[^61]: Ibn Hazm, Tauq al-Hamamah, Leiden, 1914, p. 29.

[^62]: R. Dozy, Historia de los Musulmanes Espagnoles, Sevilla, 1877, 3,
p. 348.

[^63]: Cairo edition, 1301; see H. G. Farmer, Music: The priceless
Jewel, London, 1942.

[^64]: Al-Mas‘udi, op. cit., 8, pp. 90 – 91.

[^65]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 5, p. 3.

[^66]: H. G. Farmer, Sources of Arabian Music, Bearsden, 1940, p. 22.

[^67]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 8, p. 43.

[^68]: Ibn Abi Usaibi‘ah, ‘Uyun al-Anba’, Konigsberg, 1882 – 84, 1, p.
320.

[^69]: Minhaj Siraj, Tabaqat-i Nasiri, tr. H. G. Raverty, London, 1881
1, p. 153.

[^70]: E. G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia, University Press,
Cambridge, 1, p. 456.

[^71]: Ibid., 1, pp. 458 – 59.

[^72]: R. D’Erlanger, op. cit., 1, p. 42.

[^73]: Al-Maqrizi, al-Mawa‘iz, in Memoires de l’Institut Francais
d’Archeologie Orientale, Cairo, 1906, 3, pp. 217 – 18

[^74]: Al-Ma‘udi, op. cit., 2, pp. 364 – 65.

[^75]: See Section C.

[^76]: E. G. Browne, op. cit., 1, p. 406.

[^77]: Ibid., loc. cit.

[^78]: Al-Isfahani, op. cit., 21, p. 101.

[^79]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913 – 39, 3, p. 885.

[^80]: J. Amendroz and D. S. Margoliouth, The Eclipse of the ‘Abbasid
Caliphate, Oxford, 1920 – 21, 2, p. 234.

[^81]: Ibid., 3, pp. 41, 68.

[^82]: Ibn Khallikan, Biographical Dictionary, Paris-London, 1843 – 71,
3, p. 494.

[^83]: Al-Maqrizi, op. cit., p. 355.

[^84]: Safar Namah, Paris, 1881,pp. 43, 46 – 47.

[^85]: W, Agkwardt, op. cit.

[^86]: Hajji Khalifah, Kashf al-Zunun, Peipsiz, 1835 – 39, 1, p. 367.

[^87]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1913 – 39, 1, p. 223

[^88]: R. Dozy, Scriptorum Arabum de Abbasidis, Leiden, 1846 – 63, 1, p.
394; 2, p. 16.

[^89]: J. Ribera, op. cit., p. 72.

[^90]: Ibid.

[^91]: Mihaj Siraj, op. cit., 1, p. 153.

[^92]: Nazami-i ‘Arudi,Chahar Maqqalah, Lonton, 1910, p. 38.

[^93]: Minhaj Siraj, op, cit, 1 pp. 387 – 88, 404

[^94]: H. G. Farmer, Sources, p. 45.

[^95]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Suppl. vol. pp. 191 – 92.

[^96]: Ibn Battutah, Voyages, Paris, 1853 – 58, 2, pp. 116 – 17.

[^97]: H. G. Farmer, “Persian Music,” in Grove’s Dictionary of Music,
1654, 6, pp. 676 – 82.

[^98]: Idem, “Egyptian Music,” ibid, 2, pp. 891 – 97.

[^99]: Cairo edition, 1344/1925, 5, pp. 1 – 122.

[^100]: S. Lane-Poole, A History of Egypt in the Middle Ages, London,
1901, p. 284.

[^101]: H. G. Farmer, “Table Khanah” Encyclopaedia of Islam, Suppl. Vol.
pp. 217 – 22.

[^102]: Idem, “Oriental Influences on Occidental Music,” Islamic
Culture, Hyderabad, April 1941, pp. 235 – 38.

[^103]: Idem, “Pakistani Music,” Urdu Encyclopaedia of Islam.

[^104]: Journal Asiatique, Ser. 4, 5. 1845, p. 448; Encyclopaedia of
Islam, Leiden 1954, 1, p. 66.

[^105]: Notices et Extraits des Manuscrit de la Bibliotheque du Roi,
Paris, 1843, 14, p. 137.

[^106]: Daulatshah, Tadhkirat al-Shu‘ara, London, 1901. p. 350.

[^107]: Babur Nameh, tr. A. S. Beveridge, London, 1921, pp. 272, 291 –
92.

[^108]: J. Ribera, op. cit., p. 76.

[^109]: H. G. Farmer, in Grove’s Dictionary of Music, 5, pp. 863 – 76.

[^110]: See “Maghribi Music,” Urdu Encyclopaedia of Islam.

[^111]: E. J. W. Gibb, History of ottoman Poetry, London, 1900 – 09.

[^112]: H. G. Farmer, Turkish Instruments of Music in the 17th Century,
Glasgow, 1937, pp. 37 – 38.

[^113]: Tarikh Turki, vols. 2 and 3, dar al-Kutub, Cairo.

[^114]: Narrative of Travels...in the 17th Century by Evliya Efendi,
London, 1846 – 50, 1, pp. 225 – 28, 238 – 40.

[^115]: D. Cantemir, The History...of the Othman Empire, London, 1734,
pp. 248 – 49.

[^116]: Encyclopedie de la Musique, Paris, 1922, p. 2980.

[^117]: Urdu Encyclopaedia of Islam, s.v. “Pakistani Music”

[^118]: Babur Nameh, tr. A. S. Beveridge, London, 1921, 1, p. 422.

[^119]: The Music of Hindustan, Oxford, 1914, p. 83, where he is called
“Numa Khan.”

[^120]: C. Hurt, in A. Lavignac, Encyclopedie de la musique, p. 3073.

[^121]: A. U. Pope, op. cit. p. 2802.

[^122]: British Museum MS., Or. 2361, ff. 2 v., 15.

[^123]: Voyages du Chevalier Chardin, Amsterdam, 1735, 3, pp. 158 – 61.

[^124]: Harmonie Universelle, Paris, 1636 – 37, 2, Traite de instrumens,
p. 228.

[^125]: British Museum MS., Or. 2361.

[^126]: Grove’s Dictionary of Music, 1954, 4, pp. 528 – 33.

[^127]: Voyage en Arabic, Amsterdam, 1776 – 80, 1, pp. 142 – 51.

[^128]: The Natural History of Aleppo, London, 1756, pp. 93 – 96,
edition 1794, 4, pp. 150 – 57.


