Chapter 60: Historiography
==========================

The debt that history owes to the efforts of Muslim writers is generally
recognized by Orientalists, but the consciousness of the value and
significance of the Muslim contribution is rare among Western
historians. Every known sizable collection of Islamic manuscripts
includes a good proportion of historical works[^1] which in itself is a
fair indication of the importance attached by Muslim scholarship to
history. A comparison between the outputs of historical literature by
the Muslims before decay set in and the Islamic civilization began to
decline and the histories written during or before that period by other
peoples will show what great interest was taken by the followers of
Islam in history. A similar comparison in the standards achieved will be
equally illuminating. It would be no exaggeration to say that in the
Middle Ages, history was very much a Muslim science. Their contribution
is even more remarkable in view of the fact that the Muslims had
inherited very meagre traditions on which they raised so glorious an
edifice.

For several decades the Orientalists were not impressed with the Muslim
traditions regarding the magnitude of ignorance in pre-Islamic Arabia.
They saw in them an endeavor to exaggerate the achievement of Islam by
belittling pre-Islamic Arab effort; even the silence of Muslim writers
was suspect. Partly for this reason and partly with the desire to
belittle the success of Islam in uplifting the Arabs, the Orientalists
made strenuous efforts to find proofs of pre-Muslim attainments, but
they did not discover much. In the words of a recent authority, “the
cultural and economic level of the nomad population was, as it has
always been, too low to support any literary effort.[^2] The Arabs did
produce some poetry, a fact mentioned and recognized by Muslim
authorities, but they had little conception of other branches of
lite­rature. They do not seem even to have a word for history. Some of
the earlier writers have used the term akhbdr for history; the singular
form, khabar, is used even today for a report or information.

This has been the meaning of the word in Muslim times; the earlier
meaning of this word is obscure. As the name implies, akhbdr is
generally understood to mean a string, a collec­tion, or, at best, a
connected sequence of reports, and only in the last form does it achieve
the form of a historical narration of events. The origin of the word
tdrikh, which is now generally used for history, is even more difficult
to trace. Its root form perhaps came to be used in the Yaman in the
pre­Islamic days, but, in all probability, it referred to time, not to
history.[^3]3 This significance of the word has not yet been lost;
indeed, the word tdrikh is used more often in the meaning of a date than
of history.

It is obvious that with­out even a proper word for it, the Arabs could
have little conception of history before the advent of Islam. They had a
few stories of what they had considered to have been important or
interesting events and vague, probably untrue, legends of the peoples
who had inhabited the old ruins that were scattered in some parts of the
peninsula. They lacked even a proper epic; indeed, they were a people
with no consciousness of history. The Muslims, therefore, could not have
drawn any inspiration for the development of a tradition of
historiography from the pre-Islamic Arabs.

The Greek sciences made a most significant contribution to Islamic
culture, but in the field of history, the Greek influence is difficult
to trace. No classical Greek history ever reached the Arabs; the Greek
and the Latin annalistic literature has been lost and is not available
even to the modem scholar.[^4] History, however, was a much less
important sector of Greek and Latin scholar­ ship; it was not considered
of sufficient merit to be included in the curriculum of regular studies.
The Muslims adopted the branches of learning that were considered to
possess sufficient importance in the eyes of the Greeks themselves; the
Greek tradition was kept alive in these subjects. One of the reasons for
the loss of classical Greek historical literature may be the fact that
the Arabs showed no interest in its preservation.

The Byzantines had traditions of historiography and it is not beyond the
range of possibility that some of their works came into the hands of the
Arabs through Syrian Christians and converts to Islam. They might have
contributed some techniques, but these techniques could not have been
important.[^5] In any case, the Arabs could not have derived their
historical sense from the Byzantines.

The other two great civilizations with which the Arabs came into close
contact were those of the Iranians and the Hindus. The Hindus never
de­veloped an interest in history. There is little indication of the
Iranians possessing any notable historical literature at the time of the
Muslim conquest.[^6]

It is, therefore, more likely that the Arabs developed a sense of
history as a result of the Prophet Muhammad's mission. Indeed, all
indications point in this direction; hence they need exploration. It
should be remembered that Islam itself claims to work in the context of
history. It fulfils the previous missions of the prophets who had come
before Muhammad.[^7] It seeks to abrogate the excrescences that came to
disfigure truth in the course of time, because the generations that had
gone before had failed to preserve the earlier revelations.[^8] Prophets
had come in various societies at different times and had preached the
same essential truth, but there had grown up errors and
misunderstandings, some deliberate and perverse and others as the result
of folly, and divine revelation had become clouded. Now this basic
belief shows a consciousness of history. It is concerned with the past,
the present, and even the future.

The future comes in because Muhammad being the last of the prophets[^9]
and the bearer of a message of transcendent impor­tance, his mission
will remain effective throughout the future. This conception of religion
is not concerned with the present only. It does not look upon the
present as merely transient, nor upon the past as the sum total of
merely so many transient and insignificant presents. This is borne out
by the fact that the Qur'an draws attention repeatedly to the misdeeds
of previous peoples and their destruction as the result of these
misdoings.[^10] The warning is implicit in the narrative itself, but it
is also given explicitly on many oc­casions. If the past produced all
those disastrous results, or if, conversely, virtuous deeds in the past
were fruitful in producing good results, there is a relationship between
the past, the present, and the future which is significant in fashioning
human life. History, in this manner, achieves great importance in
understanding life.

There is another aspect of Islam that has an important bearing upon
history. Muhammad has 4 unique place in history. According to the Muslim
belief, Muhammad stands, as if it were, on the watershed of time. The
pro­gress that had been vouchsafed to humanity before him was to find
fulfilment in his mission. The previous messages were limited to
particular peoples and their environments and conditions. They had the
special circumstances of these people in view; hence they had contained,
in addition to an emphasis upon the universal nature of the absolute
values, certain teachings that were valid only in the circumstances in
which they were revealed.

The succession of the previous prophets had worked for the completion of
religious belief, for a perfection in the unveiling of the great truths,
and for giving humanity the essence of religious truth, untrammeled by
the need to circumscribe it by a consideration of the transient
environment. Muhammad, thus, represents the culmination of one divine
plan and the beginning of another. The first plan was designed to meet
the differing needs of various segments of the human race, the second
plan for the entire humanity. The very pattern of religious progress
changes after Muhammad, because now there is a universal message to
follow, the essence indeed of all that has gone before.

With this belief about the position of the Prophet in time, it was
natural that the Muslims should cultivate the historic sense.
Christianity also believes in a divine plan of history; indeed, the
Church, encouraged by the power and expansion of the Christian nations,
came to believe strongly that it was the will of God that Christianity
should prosper in the world and in this manner the Kingdom of God should
be ultimately established on earth. Only recently with the growth of
communist States has this belief somewhat weakened. However, even when
the Church held a strong conviction regarding the ultimate triumph of
Christianity and looked upon history as the gradual revelation of the
divine plan, its conception of the importance of the unfolding of the
historical processes was not the same as that of the Muslims.

According to the Christian dogma, Christ is the man-god; he did come at
a particular time in history, but that time has no special significance
because, as God, Christ is eternal, timeless, and infinite. Only for the
time that he was in this world, did he put upon himself the limitations
of a finite human existence. He came to redeem the world and he did it
by paying for it with his own life. In a sense this redemption is the
culmination of religious evolution. It was for this reason that the
earlier Christians saw in every disaster the approach of the end of the
world. Having been redeemed, the world had achieved the goal; there was
nothing beyond it. The further unfolding of history was irrelevant.

The Muslim position was basically different. The Qur'an enjoined that
there should be a body among the Muslims dedicated to the task of
preaching the truth[^11]; indeed, the Muslims themselves were to form a
nation to invite others to accept the truth and to set an example for
the world.[^12] Muhammad was the last of the prophets, but his mission
was to be carried on by the learned among his people. It was for this
reason that he had said that these learned people were to be like the
prophets of Israel; in other words, what had hitherto been achieved
through a succession of prophets was to be accomplished through the
agency of learned men.

This sharp contrast between the destiny of Islam and the earlier
religions was bound to set people thinking about the elements
responsible for this change in the divine plan. How had the world
changed to need a new dispen­sation so radically different, in its
purpose from what had gone before? This question was even more pertinent
since it was not the nature of the truth that had changed; for did not
Islam claim to be all revealed truth, whether it had come before
Muhammad or through him? And what was the truth that had come before?
How far did it conform to the message of the Qur'an?

How much of the truth claimed by the previous religions was
interpolation, and how much of it incidental to the circumstances of
those days and the peoples who; had been its recipients? These were the
questions that arose natu­rally, and all of them are either directly
historical or have historical overtones. They were rooted not only in
natural curiosity, but, as we shall see later, also in theology itself.

In its exhortations for belief and righteousness, the Qur'an does not
depend entirely upon appeal to emotions. It argues and appeals to reason
at innumer­able places. Phenomena of nature, legends contained in older
Scriptures, the impact of ruined cities and buildings upon the
imagination of a sensitive people, and historical events are all pressed
into service. Indeed, there are considerable historical data in the
Qur'an.[^13] The inclusion of these allusions in large num­bers led the
critics of the Prophet to question the relevance of human experience in
the past. They dismissed them as being merely the records of peoples who
had gone before.[^14] The unbelievers implied that what had happened in
the past was of little importance to them. They certainly did not
believe that history had any lessons for them.

The Qur'an, on the other hand, considers the experience of the past
generations and of other peoples to be of vital importance. The
underlying argument is that similar actions and circum­stances produce
similar results. The Qur'an thus lays down one of the first principles
that guided the Muslims in their study of history. They wanted to learn
from the experience of others. Besides, human activity is not an
isolated phenomenon; it is linked with the past as much as with the
future. Being implicit in the very conception of Muhammad as one of the
prophets and the last of them, it found confirmation in the insistence
of the Qur'an on the importance of historical phenomena in the
determination of right and wrong.

If any human action has brought disaster, that action could not be right
except as the vindication of the principle of righteousness itself. And
in judging the results of human activity, the Qur'an does not take into
consideration the individual. It is the sum total of communal activity
which cannot be right if it produces disasters.[^15]

A good man working for the common good in a bad community may suffer,
but he has his other rewards. A bad man in a good community may not
suffer, but he has his other punishments. This is the reason why
prophets and martyrs seemingly failed in bad communities which hurled
themselves into disasters; from a purely worldly point of view they even
suffered grievously, but actually they were saved and the evil-doers
really suffered. And in the stories of the bad communities and the
suffering prophets, there is another implication. The good that the
prophets had sought to achieve might not have been established in their
own times or communities but it ultimately did prevail, and this shows a
continuity of the historical process in which righteousness ultimately
wins.

Apart from their moral and philosophical implications, which helped in
creating a historical sense in the Muslims, the historical allusions in
the Qur'an presented a challenge to the Muslim mind. The Muslims wanted
to learn more about them, and thus began a search for more detailed
information. It is true that with their limited resources and the
condition of human knowledge in their days, the information collected by
the early Muslims was not always accurate. Considerable legendary
material, folklore, and mythology entered into their understanding of
the historical facts mentioned in the Qur’an. A fertile source of
legendary material was the Jewish tradition. The net gain was that
historical curiosity had been aroused. Some of the earlier mistakes were
never corrected, but others were discarded when critical faculties got
sharpened by greater experience and knowledge.[^16]

There was yet another aspect of religion that directly led to the
cultivation of history. Muhammad is a historical figure; he lived in the
limelight of history. His biography has always been considered to be a
cornerstone of Muslim theology[^17] and, therefore, the events of his
life were eagerly sought and col­lected. So long as his immediate
disciples and Companions were alive, this was a simple matter, but as
time elapsed, it was considered increasingly neces­sary to collect all
information about him. Where the believers could not find clear guidance
from the Qur'an, or where there was dispute in the interpreta­tion of
its text, the best authority could be the Prophet's actions and sayings.

Thus, there grew up the tradition of collecting the ahadith, and after
some time when the original narrators had died and there had intervened
several genera­tions so that for every hadith there were several
narrators in succession, it was necessary to submit the reports to
searching criticism. The scholars deve­loped canons of criticism that
have not only endured but have earned the respect of the succeeding
generations for their soundness[^18]

Modern scholar­ship can find fault with some of the traditions that have
been judged to be sound, but the canons of criticism and of testing the
validity of reports are trustworthy even today. This was no mean
achievement and shows not only a keen sense of responsibility but also a
high perception of the criteria which should be applied to any
narration. After all this is the kernel of all methods of historical
research.

A by-product of this search was the compilation of working biographies
of all the better known narrators. In this process those considered
unreliable were branded as such. The biographers made the most careful
and impartial scrutiny, and if they found any trace of deceit or even a
charge of lying in any respect, they exposed the narrator so that the
traditions, in the chain of the narrators in which he appeared, might at
least be treated with extreme caution. As it was a theological and
religious matter and concerned the beliefs of all Muslims, the critics
developed the highest sense of intellectual honesty. Despite these
efforts and precautions, some unreliable traditions have found their way
into the “authentic collections,” but when it is remembered that the
collectors discarded many more traditions than were considered
sufficiently sound to be accepted, it would be clear how well the
criteria were applied.

A remarkable testimony to the historical sense of the Muslims is their
suc­cess in preserving the text of the Qur'an. It really arose from two
of the teachings of the Book itself. The first of these is the doctrine
of the corruption of the previous Scriptures through changes or
interpolations. The other is the promise that the Qur'an shall be
preserved.[^19] According to the Muslim belief, the corruption of the
previous Scriptures resulted in the misguidance of the people to the
extent that the shape of the original faith was changed beyond
recognition. The Muslims had been given the Qur'an, which they were to
cherish and preserve in the original form. They believe in the verbal
sanctity of the Qur'an. This led them to preserve the text. Taking into
consideration the differences in languages in the Muslim world and the
rise of various sects in Islam, this is quite an achievement. The
preservation of the text of the Qur'an could not but have engendered a
respect for the texts of documents of any importance.

It would be seen from this discussion that historiography in the Muslim
world had religious beginnings. It was religion that gave the Muslims
their historical sense, and the requirements of developing a theology
made it imperative for the Muslim theologians to undertake historical
research and to lay down canons of evaluating historical data for
eliminating doubt and error so far as it was humanly possible. It led
them to explore the tradi­tions of religions allied to their own which
had preceded the mission of the Prophet in point of time. Indeed,
historical studies started in Islam as a necessary adjunct of
theological development[^20]. It was necessary, therefore, for the
Muslims to cultivate a religious attitude towards history, which could
not be discarded easily. Indeed, even when history ventured out into the
courts of worldly monarchs, it was not able to overcome some of the
con­ceptions developed in the cloisters of the mosques and the colleges
of theology.

The theologians looked upon their work as an act of worship; hence it
was to be approached with the utmost sincerity. In such work all merit
was lost if any selfish motives were permitted to interfere with its
objectivity. The scholar considered himself to be accountable to God for
every fact that he reported or any opinion that he expressed.[^21]
Indeed in the beginning he was doubtful whether he was justified in
expressing an adverse opinion about anyone.[^22] However, he was
strengthened by the Prophet's example of not hesitating from censuring a
person in the public interest, or from expressing an opinion that would
save others from trouble and hardship.[^23]

In the reporting of facts and the expression of opinions, therefore, the
writer felt himself bound by the ethics of a witness or a judge. He
would not report anything about which he was not certain; he would weigh
all the evidence at his disposal and try to adjudicate fairly upon the
merits of the report and the character of the narrator. He would not be
a party to the perpetuation of a false report. In reporting a tradition
of the Prophet he was conscious of the Muslim belief that the Prophet
had strongly forbidden his followers to ascribe a saying or a tradition
to him falsely. Therefore, he wanted to avoid at all costs any
participation in such an act. The secular historians unhesitatingly
imbibed these ideas and adopted the same attitude in their fields.[^24]

This attitude created high standards of objectivity. Indeed, quite often
objectivity was carried to ridiculous extremes. Not a few books written
by Muslim authors are dry and jejune chronicles of events without any
comments or value-judgments. The authors felt that it was their duty to
narrate the events and that it was the business of the reader to arrive
at his own conclusions. They did not believe that the historian's
function was to narrate the facts as well as to interpret them. Such an
attitude was crippling for a proper develop­ment of history as a social
science. There was, however, a brighter side to this objectivity, a
scrupulous regard for the truth. Even when history was written with a
political objective in view, the facts were not mutilated.

The best examples are furnished by two Muslim historians of the
Indo­-Pakistan sub-continent. Abu al-Fadl wrote the Akbarnameh with the
blatantly clear object of extolling his patron, Akbar.[^25] Mulla 'Abd
al-Qadir Badayuni, on the other hand, wrote his Muntakhab al-Tawarikh,
it seems, to prove to the world that Akbar had strayed away from the
right path. Shorn of the propaganda against Akbar, Badayiini's book is
merely an avowed redaction of Nizam al-Din Ahmad's Tabagati Akbari.
Badaynni has added information about Akbar's lapses from his personal
observation and also from hearsay.

The general effect is pretty damning from the orthodox Muslim point of
view. On closer analysis, however, it appears that Badayuni has
suggested more than his words really convey, and, being a master of
studied ambiguity and innuendo, he is able to create impressions without
taking responsibility for some of the events that he reports. Wherever
he is reporting an incident or a fact that is obviously not correct, he
prefaces it by a vague remark like “It is reported that....” Sometimes
he writes sentences that can be translated in more than one way.[^26]
Such ambiguity, however, occurs only where the author deliberately seeks
to suggest what he does not want to say. This was not done for any fear
of the monarch, because Badayuni's book was kept secret during Akbar's
reign.[^27]

It was Badayuni's regard for the verbal and the literal truth that led
him into these devious paths. He was perhaps not bothered about the
general effect because he was probably convinced, as were several other
men of high repute, of Akbar's heterodoxy. Badayuni left the path of
historical rectitude only in heightening an effect that he considered to
be true. Abu al-Fadl, who approached his task with an entirely different
purpose, is hard put to it where he finds it difficult to justify or
explain away some measure or action of the monarch. He adopts the method
not of ignoring it, but of making a veiled reference to it that a
discerning reader can well under­stand. Abu al-Fadl, his general
panegyrics apart, shows a high regard for truth in reporting events. He
was probably also convinced of the truth of the general theme of his
work, namely, that Akbar was a monarch of unusual ability and that he
was inclined to show remarkable benevolence towards his subjects.

Whatever axes the two authors had to grind are, however, quite apparent
to the reader, but he cannot help being impressed by the pathetic regard
for truth that is so apparent in these works and that is so difficult to
main­tain because of the patently partial approaches of the authors.
These are perhaps extreme examples, but they are by no means unique in
the history of Muslim historiography. Nizam al-Din Ahmad, whose work has
been mentioned above, provides a good example of the extreme objectivity
observed by some Muslim historians, because, living in the midst of such
acute controversy regarding the monarch's religious policies and
attitudes and himself being orthodox in his own religious beliefs, he
does not even as much as mention the topic. He could not have considered
it unimportant, being an observer of good sensitivity, but he left it
out because he did not want to pass value-judgments on matters which he
disliked.

The Muslim monarchs were extremely sensitive regarding the verdict of
the posterity on their deeds. They had the common human weakness of
being desirous of leaving a good name behind them. Historians were,
therefore, courted and patronized. A number of histories have been
written by men who in varying degrees can be called “Court historians.”
In some European circles their works are treated with suspicion, which
is not justified in all cases. We have seen how men of probity have not
twisted facts even when they seemed to mar their own thesis; at worst,
they may have been guilty in some instances of the suppression of some
unpalatable truth or the suggestion of virtues that did not exist. They
could not have invented events.

Their faults can mostly be remedied easily-any hyperbolic praise of a
patron is understood to be merely a matter of form; the pure and
unabashed panegyric can be easily dismissed as being out of
context.[^28]

When a weakling is called a world-conquering hero by a writer, it is
understood that the epithet is only an expression of courtesy conveying
nothing, but a Muslim historian does not invent imaginary victories to
adorn sober history. If a historian misses some event, he knows that
others are likely to mention it and that he will be held guilty by
posterity; therefore, there are few instances of deliberate
misrepresentation by Muslim historians, and these have often been
corrected by subsequent writers or even their own contemporaries.

The historians who had access to monarchs and their ministers were well
informed and to that extent are more reliable. In an age when the
printing press had not made the daily newspaper possible and governments
were not publicity-conscious in the modern sense of the term, the
isolated scholar was hard put to it to collect the necessary data for an
informative book relating the events of a reign. One has only to compare
the bazaar gossip related by European travelers to India with the sober
histories of the period to see how distorted the reports of events did
become once they had left the pre­cincts of the Court and the circles of
persons in contact with the high officials.

A Court historian was in no less desperate a position than a historian
of today who is overwhelmed by the information material issuing from the
publicity departments of modern governments, especially when his own
emotions are also deeply involved, e.g., in a crisis in which his own
nation is concerned. The Court historian had his own reputation at stake
because he intended to write for posterity. The professional code
established by histo­rians could not be transgressed with impunity.

However, not all historians who were otherwise attached to a Court can
be called Court historians. There have existed men of the highest
probity who were attached to Courts and wrote historical works, but they
cannot be termed Court historians. Amir Khusrau enjoyed the patronage of
several monarchs but he was not employed as a historian. Badayuni, while
attached to Akbar's Court, wrote against him. Nizam al-Din Ahmad held a
high office in the government, but the recording of history was not one
of his duties. It is doubtful whether even abu al-Fadl can be called a
Court historian in spite of his great par­tiality for Akbar, because his
official assignments were of an administrative or military nature.

The famous Abmad bin Yabya al-Baladhuri was a nadim of the Caliph
al-Mutawakkil; 'Ata bin Muhammad al-Juwaini was a wazir; other
government officials who were also historians of some eminence include
Muhammad Yabya al-Siili, Sinan bin habit, Abu 'Ali Abmad bin Muhammad
Miskawaih, and Salah al-Din Khalil bin Aibak al-Safadi, to name only a
few. The great ibn Khaldun was a Qadi, but this was not considered so
much of a government office as a religious obligation to be discharged
by those quali­fied for it if they were called upon by the monarch to
assume the responsi­bility.

There were some princes and rulers who took an interest in history and
wrote works of considerable merit. An outstanding example is Isma'il bin
'Ali Abu al-Fide' who, in the midst of the busy life of a statesman and
soldier, found time to write authoritative history. The 'Abbasid prince
Abu Hashim Yosuf bin Muhammad al-Zahir wrote a history of the reign of
his brother, al-Mustansir bi-Allah. Some of the rulers of the Yaman,
like Jaiyas bin Najah (d. 501/1107), al-Afdal al-'Abbas bin 'Ali (d.
779/1377), and al-­Ashraf Isma'il bin 'Abbas (d. 805/1402) were
responsible for historical works.[^29] None of these can be called Court
historians, nor are their works prejudiced because of their high
offices.

Diaries and memoirs are a fruitful source for historical studies.
Indeed, some memoirs are our mainstay so far as the historical
information regarding some areas at certain times is concerned. In this
category come the memoirs of Zahir al-Din Muhammad Babur, whose stormy
life presents not only one of the most exciting studies in history, but
also gives us an insight into the political conditions of Central Asia
after Timur's Empire had collapsed. He is rightly known as the prince of
all diarists because of his frank narration of events, in which he also
discloses his own humane personality, telling us in a most charming
manner his weaknesses and recording his triumphs with­out any bragging.
He hides neither his elation at success, nor sorrow at his defeat.

This chiaroscuro of victory and defeat, of weakness and strength, of
lapses and piety, and of ambition and frustration reveals a sensitive
and lovable personality possessed of artistic sensibilities, all of
which makes the Tuzuk extremely readable in addition to being
informative. To take another example, his great grandson, Nur al-Din
Muhammad Jahangir, also wrote his memoirs. Jahangir had known no
adversity; his tale could not be so thrilling as that of Babur;'
besides, he wrote not as an ambitious adventurer, albeit crowned and of
imperial descent, as Babur did, but as an established ruler of a great
empire. And yet, Jahangir's memoirs do not show any lack of sensitivity.
He is as keen an observer of human character as his illustrious ancestor
was, as artistic in his own manner, being one of the greatest patrons of
art, and an excellent critic and connoisseur. In spite of the inherent
pomposity in the writing of an emperor who knows that his book will be
read by his subjects even in his own lifetime, the book does not lack
obvious sincerity.

These examples can be multiplied from other periods and other lands in
the context of Muslim historiography. The main point is that the
suspicion in which certain Western writers uncritically hold any writer
associated with a Court is not justified. Those who transgressed the
requirements of historical objecti­vity were forgotten and subsequent
scholars and historians did not fail to criticize or even condemn them
for their lapses. In the words of Diya' al-Din Barani, “it is necessary
that the historian be ... known and famous for his truth and just
dealing” and when “he writes of the excellences, the good deeds, the
justice and equity of the ruler or of a great man, he must also not
conceal his vices and evil deeds. ..; the attention of the truthful,
pious, and sincere historian should be directed towards writing the
truth. He should be in fear of answering on the Day of Judgment.... In
sum, history is a rare and useful form of knowledge and its writing is a
great obligation.[^30]

As the writing of history was looked upon as a religious duty, the
highest objecti­vity and impartiality were its criteria in the mind of
the Muslim historian. There were black sheep as well and sometimes the
desire for gain or the fear of a tyrant overcame the sense of
responsibility of the writer, but he generally was relegated to
oblivion.

Muslim historiography took several forms. The pre-Islamic Arabs took
great pride in their genealogies. Like other primitive peoples, they
generally kept verbal records which on some occasions were even publicly
recited. Of course this often resulted in bragging and was a fruitful
source of tribal war­fare and vendetta. The practice of maintaining
genealogies was kept up under Islam as well, and many non-Arab families
seem to have adopted the habit. It is unlikely that in the pre-Islamic
period the Arabs bothered to remember the main events connected with the
life of every ancestor. Some famous anecdotes or events might have been
associated with some outstanding names, but an idea of a connected
family history or biography, however sketchy, of even the better known
men in the family tree was unknown. It is even more improbable that any
of these genealogies were committed to writing in the pre-Islamic
period. The main features of these genealogies were fairly well known
even outside the group of those to whom a genealogy belonged and any
fraudulent claim was soon countered. In a way this was the early Arab
way of remembering their tribal origin, but it had little to do with
real history.

When the Muslims took up historiography, genealogies proved helpful in
understanding the part played by the Arab tribes in Islamic history.
With the growing participation of the non-Arab Muslims in the affairs of
the Islamic world the genealogical pattern came to be discarded in the
greater part of the Muslim world. The origin of the genealogical works
like Zubair bin Bakkar's Nasab-u Quraish was the exaltation of the
Quraish; this was feasible because the ruling dynasties of the Umayyads
and the \`Abbasids were alike Quraish. Baladhuri's Kitab al-Ansab is the
classical example of history being dealt with from the angle of
genealogy. However, with the inclusion of so many non-Arab peoples in
the world of Islam and their rise to power, such treatment became
obsolete. It, however, thrived in the Maghrib, especially in Spain,
because tribal considerations continued to play an important part in the
area and history could be grouped around the activities of some tribes
and clans. Private families, particularly some of the 'Alids and
Hashimites, were interested in keeping a record of their ancestry.

Family histories have continued to be written up to this day. Most
families, however, contented themselves with keeping their genealogies
in tabular forms. Shajarahs were quite common in the Muslim world, but
they cannot be classified as history. The Arabs, however, were given to
tribal fighting which continued for con­siderable time and had the
tendency to be rekindled at the slightest pretext. The memory of a
spectacular or significant victory was kept alive. The battle­ day
tradition occupied an important place in the folklore of early Arabia.
Those who had distinguished themselves in a battle or had inflicted a
humiliat­ing defeat on their adversary continued to brag about it long
after. In fact, scholars are inclined to think that this form of
narration was common to the earlier Semites as well. It is present in
the older sections of the Bible.[^31]

These traditions did not form a continuous narration like an epic; every
anecdote stood by itself and spoke of a single event. In the Bible they
have been grouped into a continuous narration, but each event can be
read separately. It is improbable that any such anecdotes were committed
to writing in pre-­Islamic Arabia.[^32] They were, however, known to the
Arab historians of the Muslim period. They did not find their way into
the Muslim historical literature before the seventh/thirteenth century,
because the earlier historians were doubtful of their historical worth.
They were valuable for philological studies, but not as sources of
history, because they partook of fiction, being generally one-sided and
meant to glorify one side.

Besides, they were not intended to be sober history; indeed, their
original purpose was not the preservation of any historical fact, the
conception of which was unknown to the pre-Islamic Arabs, but to be
sources for entertainment for the listeners when recited. They were,
however, significant in one sense: they created a tradition of recording
a single event.

The narration of single events and their reporting is capable of
independent and impartial treatment, and thus provides us with the raw
material of history. These events can be strung together either
chronologically or on the basis of a period, a locality, or even a
topic. The treatment, however, tends to differ from continuous
narration, because every report is a unit in itself. The line is not
easy to draw and yet it is not difficult to see where the emphasis upon
individual events is, even though they may be connected. This form of
historiography came into vogue among the Muslims fairly early and is
referred to by the name of akhbar. In its singular form, khabar, the
word means a report, an item of news. In the oldest form of Muslim
historiography one comes across small pamphlets written to describe a
single event, like the pre-Islamic narra­tion of single battles.

The simple narration soon gave place to the description of the event
followed by a discussion of the causes which were responsible for its
happening. Even though such a description related to only a single
event, it came closer to the present method of discussing the genesis of
a happening. The single khabar gave place gradually to akhbar, a
collection of several or many khabars. Theoretically, this could be
quite disconnected, but the events or anecdotes came to have a focal
point regarding a place or a subject and in their arrangement showed a
consciousness of chronological sequence. Even in this form the method
had serious handicaps.

A khabar was a well-rounded narrative, but the continuity of a
historical process is difficult to convey in this manner. Any deep
interpretation of facts also is ruled out, because the tendency is to
look upon life as a series of separate incidents without much anxiety to
discover their interaction. Every khabar was told like a vivid short
story, hence it tended to sacrifice clarity and factual­ism for the
creation of effect. This was sometimes achieved by the insertion of a
few verses to drive a point home or to give it a dramatic quality.
Indeed, it was not uncommon for the historian to retreat into the
background and let the chief characters speak for themselves, very much
like a dramatic dialogue.

In this form the facts were lost in the midst of the emotions of the
speakers, who, to ring true, had to be shown saying what, in the opinion
of the historian, they would have felt in the circumstances. Being the
earliest form of historiography among the Arabs, the khabar was
naturally integrated into other forms and was rarely found in its
original and pure shape. It occurs in other works as well and can be
spotted by its vivid style and the insertion of faked or actual
conversations.[^33]

Its most developed form was the mono­graph on some single historical
event. A well-known historian in this style was 'Ali bin al-Mada'ini
(752-830/1351-1417), known only through quotations from his works in
other histories. A list of the books written by him is pre­served in
al-Fihrist. In the sub-continent of India and Pakistan, perhaps Amir
Khusran's Khaza'in al-Futuh furnishes the best example. His
Tughluq-­namah, though written in verse, which is not usual with Khabar
histories, has many of their characteristics.

It would, however, be a mistake to think of all books written on single
reigns as falling into the category of the khabar literature. Its
beginnings were, as has been mentioned, religious because it developed
out of the desire to collect all the information about the life of the
Prophet. The biographies of the narrators of hadith were a by-product.
The biographies of religious and political persons followed naturally.
Some biographies were written for sec­tarian purposes, for instance, the
earlier works on the descendants and sons of the Caliph 'Ali; several
biographies of Husain, Zaid bin 'Ali, and others fall in this category.
Sometimes biographies were written at the request of a noble or a
monarch.

Thabit bin Qurrah wrote a biography of al-Mu'tadid, which was completed
by his son Sinan; this was supervised by the patron himself. Shams-i
Siraj 'Afif's Tarikh-i Firuzshahi is a typical biography of a monarch;
the Sirat-i Firuzshahi partakes of memoirs because it was super­vised by
the monarch. Sometimes the biography of a patron was also a record of
the author's own times and it is not always easy to draw the line
between biography and memoirs. An excellent example is the Nawadir
al-Sultaniyyah w-al-Mahasin al- Yusufiyyah, being the biography of
Sultan Salak al-Din by ibn Shaddad. It achieves a high standard in
depicting the character of the great monarch. Abu al-Fadl's Akbarnameh
can be looked upon as a highly successful biography of a remarkable man
in spite of the author's obvious endeavor to paint the monarch in as
favorable a light as possible.

The success of the book lies in a faithful record of the events of the
reign, which find confirmation in other authorities as well. The
character of the monarch stands out clearly and in spite of the
profusion of the adjectives in praise of Akbar, the panegyrics can be
separated quite easily from what is the sub­stance of the narration,
because these are introduced as much to deliver formal homilies of
praise as to show off the capacity of the author as a master of ornate
style. They are not spun into the texture of the narrative in a manner
to confuse the reader.

A biography sometimes includes accounts of some of the ancestors of the
sub­ject, but their lives occupy a minor place in the book and are
introduced more often to trace the exalted line of descent of the main
character. Sometimes, how­ever, the biography is extended to include
others. In this category would fall the histories of dynasties or
families. There are good examples of dynastic histories; the Tarikh
al-f~hazdni by Fadl Allah Raid al-Din (d. 718/1318) being a history of
Chingiz Khan and his family[^34] may be cited as one.

Another form of the collected biographies was the tadhkirah. Some of the
tadhkirahs dealt with poets, others with Sufis, yet others with
scholars, but they all had the common characteristic of being
collections of short biographies of a number of persons. As a matter of
fact, like other forms of biography, they differed considerably not only
in their subject-matter, but also in the standards achieved. The
tadhkirahs of poets always incorporated some critical material; the best
of these were highly instructive as essays in literary criticism. The
tadhkirahs of the Sufis were extremely popular, partly because of the
growing popularity of the Sufi silsilahs and the great esteem in which
some of the saintly Sufis were held by the populace, and also because of
the Muslim tradi­tion of teaching religious truths through the
biographies of learned and pious personages.[^35]

This was based on the fundamental Muslim thinking that the best way of
understanding Islam was through the study of the life of the Prophet. It
was for this reason that biographies of jurists and scholars also were
not neglected. Apart from monographs on biographies, it became the
fashion to include sections on the biographies of important people in
general histories.[^36] These would include the lives of theologians,
Sufis, physicians, poets, and nobles. The disciples of famous Sufis
sometimes collected their sayings into maljuzat; these consisted of the
more significant utterances of the shaikh with a record of the
circumstances in which they were made.[^37]

In a way this may be considered to be a form of the kabar literature; it
is, however, different in spirit, because the intention here is not to
entertain but to instruct. Some tadhkirahs of the Sufis suffer from the
admixture of supernatural fictions with truth. The defect is generally
found in books written long after the subject of the tadhkirah had died
and legends had grown about his super­natural powers. The writers of the
tadhkirahs were seldom guilty of deliber­ately inventing tales; they
only uncritically incorporated what they had heard. The tadhkirahs are
very valuable because they generally give a picture of the social
conditions of an age in which the general histories seldom devoted
sufficient space to non-political topics.

The chronological order of the development of Muslim historiography has
been transgressed in tracing the growth of the khabar form of
historiography. Long before some of the developments narrated above,
there had grown the annalistic form, in which the events were grouped
around years. The historian took up the years in succession and then
narrated the important happenings of each year. This was an excellent
device for fixing the chronological sequence of events; and in all
probability it gave to history the name of tarikh. It has been mentioned
above that the word tarikh seems to have come into use in the
pre-Islamic Yaman in the sense of fixing a deed in time; in other words,
giving a date to a transaction. The earliest Islamic use is in
connection with the establishment of the era of the Hijrah.[^38]

Thus, apart from the narration pure and simple, which was khabar, tarikh
was properly the assigning of a date to an event and, conversely, the
fixing of an event in time by giving it a definite date. The annalistic
form, therefore, seems to have played an important role in giving the
name of tarikh to history. The greatest name in this form of history is
the well-known Abu Ja'far al­-Tabari, whose famous history was written
in the early fourth/tenth century. This is the first history in the
annalistic form written by a Muslim that has come down to us. Tabari's
greatness is recognized now in all quarters because of his accuracy and
great diligence in collecting data and giving them the form of authentic
history by sifting evidence, which he must have done to achieve the
result.

There are indications that others may have preceded him in using this
form; indeed one 'Umarah bin Wathimah has been mentioned to have written
a history in the annalistic form in the third/ninth century, but we know
very little about the book.[^39] It is, however, reasonable to believe
that Tabari was not the first to use the form, but he is undoubtedly the
greatest among those who have used this method both before and after
him. The tradition, however, was continued and 'Ali bin Yusuf al-Qifti
has mentioned a succession of trustworthy authors beginning with Tabari
and ending with the year 61611219.[^40] The best example in the
Indo-Pakistan sub-continent is the Tarikh-i Alfi composed by a
commission appointed by Akbar.

The annalistic form had serious limitations; for this reason it was not
imitated on a large scale. It made an absolutely reliable chronology
indispensable but where dates could not be determined with absolute
certainty it was useless. Besides, this treatment tends to become merely
a catalogue of facts in the hands of an unimaginative historian. Even at
its best, it leaves little scope for philosophical synthesis or
analysis. Even the inclusion of cultural and ad­ministrative data
becomes difficult; the tracing of the growth of cultural, social, and
administrative institutions is ruled out. The understanding of social or
even political processes is not aided by this form of history.

When this form was combined with the idea that the highest expression of
objectivity lay in a bare statement of the naked fact unadorned by any
illuminating comment or opinion, it became little better than a
chronology in tabular form that many historians found useful to append
to their works. The sub­sequent arrangement of information in decades,
generations (qarun), or cen­turies, may have been derived from
annalistic historiography. In any case, the grouping of biographical
information in accordance with periods of time seems to have been
affected as much by annalist traditions as by other con­siderations like
the convenience of grouping people together by the years of their death.

An outgrowth of these forms was the genre of tabaqat. A tabaqah means a
layer; it generally refers to a generation. The word Barn meaning a
generation preceded the word (tabaqah, but later (tabaqah came to be
used more often until works were called by the names of tabaqah. The
term was originally applied to different generations of the narrators of
Hadith; then it began to be applied more loosely, until it embraced the
succeeding generations of all kinds of men. A history which was named by
its author as tabaqat was meant to give information about various
classes of people; however, the author seldom used the term in this wide
sense and, therefore, only the classes that mattered in the opinion of
the author were included.

Quite often a tabaqat work could limit itself to a single reign. Some of
these are more like tadhkirahs, as, for example, ibn abi Usaibi'ah's
history of physicians or abu Ishaq al­-Shirazi's history of the jurists.
Tadhkirahs and tabaqat of this nature alike gradually adopted an
alphabetical arrangement to make reference easy, so that some of them
came to be biographical dictionaries, often concise and limited to the
barest facts. There were notable exceptions and, as has been mentioned
earlier, many books dealing with poets incorporated critical reviews of
their main works.

The Muslim historians developed many useful mechanical techniques. They
were not averse to putting statistical and other factual information in
the form of tables.[^41] They appended in many places their authority
for a state­ment.[^42] Indeed, with the more careful historians, the
sources of their informa­tion are almost invariably revealed. They
attached bibliographies to their works, utilized official documents and
correspondence, and when they thought that it was necessary to do so,
they quoted the document verbatim. Conse­quently, some important
documents have thus been preserved for us.[^43] They utilized all
official material that was available to them including the more
important decisions of the courts. The Muslim governments kept good
records; the courts also had records of all the cases that came before
them. The his­torians, therefore, had no dearth of official material and
they used it whenever they found it relevant to their subject. They were
aware of the importance of numismatic and epigraphical evidence and used
both frequently.

It has been mentioned that the Muslims look upon themselves as a world
community. Muhammad as a successor to all the prophets of the world came
to fulfil the missions of all of them. The history of the world was,
therefore, a matter of vital concern to the Muslims. A fairly large
number of histories were, therefore, planned as world histories. The
knowledge about the history of the non-Muslim world was fragmentary and
depended upon the accuracy of the local tradition which was not reliable
in most instances.

There were large regions which had no history; it is, therefore, obvious
that the Muslim histories could not be perfect in the recording of the
events of other regions or of the past of the regions where Islam had
domination. The science of archaeology had not been developed; the
methods of deciphering dead languages had not been invented. Because of
these factors some non-Muslim pretenders to knowledge practiced curious
frauds upon Muslim rulers and Muslim scholars.[^44] History based on
traditions and legends cannot be satisfactory; hence we find that the
Muslim accounts of the ancient history of Mesopotamia or of Egypt are
unreliable and fragmentary. The knowledge of the Arabs grew as their
geographers succeeded in accumulating knowledge. Yaqut bin 'Abd Allah
al-Hamawi's geographical dictionary, Mu'jam al-Buldan, seldom fails to
incorporate biographical material of the people of note belonging to a
locality. 'Ali ibn al-Husain al-Masudi is the best example of the
interaction of geographical and historical knowledge; indeed, he
combines the two disciplines in a remarkable manner. Today the works of
the Arab geographers form a good source of history and are
indispensable; even to their contemporary historians they were of
extreme importance.

So far as the world of Islam was concerned, it was a real entity. In the
earlier period before the rise of the 'Abbasids split the Muslim world
into the East and the West, it formed a single polity. Juristically and
theologically, the indivisibility of the Muslim world is an axiom, based
as it is upon the Qur'anic doctrine of the brotherhood of all Muslims
and upon the implied uni­versalism in the conception of the unity of the
Muslim community. It is, therefore, a matter of no surprise that it
seemed only natural to the Muslim historians that they should look upon
the whole of Muslim history as a single entity. Some of the works, thus,
became huge compendiums because they had to treat the various regions
and States which in spite of the theory came to have separate histories.
With the weakening of the 'Abbasid Caliphate, it remained no easy matter
to treat the entire Muslim world in one work. The most outstanding work
that achieved great success in this respect is ibn Athir's Kamil fi
al-Tarikh. It maintains its balance despite the length of the period
which it covers and the large number of countries that it deals with.
Despite its annalistic arrangement, it is not devoid of philosophical
reflections on the happenings of some importance.

However, this trend of writing universal histories could not last long.
For one thing, the distances were enormous and it was not easy to keep
an eye on the happenings of so many corners of the Muslim world. Ibn Air
himself complains; “A man sitting in Mosul cannot but miss some events
happening in the remote corners of the East and the West.”[^45] It must
be remembered that ibn Athir was more successful than anyone else.
Broken into numerous independent States, even though most of these
continued to owe allegiance to nominal Caliphs, the Muslim world could
not, despite the doctrine of the unity of the Muslim world, ignore its
division. It entered the domain of religious thinking as well and there
grew up proponents of legally sovereign States, every monarch exercising
the functions of the Caliphate within his own dominions and enjoying the
prestige of being the Caliph in his territories. The Moghul Emperors of
the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent were an outstanding but not the only
example of the dynasties that accepted this theory of divided Caliphate.
Even before, there had been written dynastic and local histories, but
gradually the new trends brought to an end the tradition of universal
histories of the Muslim world. The intermediate stage was that of the
historian who would begin with the beginnings of the Islamic history and
then trace the developments in the area about which he was writing,
thinking that the Islamic traditions in his own land were a continuation
of the history of Islam. Abu 'Umar Minhaj al-Din 'Uthman bin Siraj
al-Din al-Juzjani's Tabaqati-i Nasiri is a good example. The dynastic
and local histories have already been discussed.

The connection between political science and history was generally
under­stood by the historians. As a matter of fact, the knowledge of
history was considered essential to the work of statecraft. [^46]The
policies pursued by previous monarchs were put forward as object lessons
to illustrate the con­sequences of foolish as well as wise methods. For
this reason many authors included a good deal of information about
administrative measures in their books and summed up their success or
failure. In the sub-continent of India and Pakistan a considerable
amount of space was devoted to the administrative reforms undertaken by
the rulers. Diya' al-Din Barani's Tarikh-i Firuzshahi; Shams-i Siraj
'Afif's Tarikh-i Firuzshahi, the Sirat-i Firuzshahi, and the Futu­hat-i
Firuzshahi.'Abd al-Qadir Badayuni's Muntakhabat al- Tawarikh;'Abd
al­-Hamid Lahori's Padishahnameh; 'Ali Muhammad Khan's Mir'at-i Ahmadi,
to name but a few, are replete with this kind of information.

The most out­standing work, however, is abu al-Fadl's Akbarnameh, of
which the A'in-i Akbari is intended to be an appendix. But what an
appendix it is! It is a virtual gazette of the Moghul Empire and
contains so much economic and administrative data that scholars have not
yet been able to utilize them fully. The administrative institutions,
the policies of the State, the divisions of the population, the
agricultural produce of the various areas, the crafts and industries in
the different parts of the Empire, and a host of other matters have been
recorded. In addition, a considerable amount of cultural material is
included. Compared to al-Biruni's Kitab al-Hind, there is no medieval
book that gives such a sympathetic account of the Hindu faith and
philosophy.

The incorporation of the accounts of alien faiths and cultures is an old
Muslim tradition of Muslim historiography. The great geographers seldom
mentioned an area without giving some account of the religious beliefs
and social customs of its inhabitants. For the non-Muslim times,
whenever, for want of historical information of a political nature, the
Muslim historian felt at a loss to collect much data, he fell back upon
the knowledge of the culture of the people.[^47] The histories quite
often incorporate large sections of the biographies of men noted in some
fields of culture.

Abu al-Fadl's data are mainly based upon al-Biruni so far as Hinduism is
concerned, but his book also contains his own observations and research.
In view of the immediate sources of knowledge available to him and
because of his voracious thirst for knowledge, it is unlikely that he
did not check all that al-Biruni had said, especially when the Emperor
himself was taking so great an interest in Hinduism and abu al-Fadl was
his constant consultant. The fact that abu al-Fadl had so little reason
to differ shows how well al-Biruni had dealt with the subject.

The fact that history had a deep relationship with statecraft was
recognized by the monarch’s themselves.[^48] The Caliph Mu'awiyah is
reported to have spent some time regularly every night in the study of
history; the narrator of this story gives details that show that the
Caliph devoted this time to the study of mundane and secular
history.[^49] These examples can be multiplied ad infinitum. Harun
al-Rashid, the Moghul Emperors of India, the Iranian rulers, indeed,
monarchs of practically every part of the Muslim world and in every age
attached the greatest importance to the study of history. Gradually, a
literature grew up that emphasized only those aspects of history that
had some direct relevance to statecraft. Sadid al-Din Muham­mad
al-'Aufi's Jawami' al-Hikayat wa Lawami' al-Riwayat contains selections
of historical stories and information that illustrate some principles of
politics or administration.

This kind of literature gave place to treatises on adminis­trative
matters pure and simple and on politics and statecraft. Even the latter
were replete with historical anecdotes. Some were written by men of
administrative experience like 'Unsur al-Ma'ali Kaika'us bin Sikandar
bin Qabus' Qabusnameh or Nizam al-Mulk Tfisi's Siyasatnameh; others were
written by professional historians like Diya' al-Din Barani-Fatawa-i
Jahdandari; yet others by saintly Sufis who were interested in securing
the welfare of the people through the instruction of monarchs. In this
last category falls the Dhakhirat al-Muluk by Sayyid 'Ali bin Shihab
Hamadani. The great Ghazali also has a treatise of this nature in his
Nasa'ih al-Muluk. Some were written by obscure writers and to give
importance to their works, they ascribed them to well-known historical
characters, as the Tauqi'at-i Kisra is ascribed to Nushirwan and the
Wasaya-i Nizam al-Mulk to the statesman whose name it bears.

History today is related to sociology and endeavors to find the
relation­ship between economic, social, and political factors and course
of events. Indeed, history is no longer a mere recording of facts; it
seeks to understand the significance of these facts as agents in
fashioning the social and political fabric; it explores the impact of
the past on the present in a more vital and deeper sense. It would be
idle to expect the developments of the fourteenth/twentieth century in
classical Muslim historiography because a good many of the sciences that
are so important in understanding the full significance of historical
processes had not developed until recently. For instance, the science of
economics has made such rapid strides that it can hardly be recognized
to be in the least related to the medieval economic thinking.

Economic relations were neither so widespread nor were they so complex
in a world where rapid means of transport were not known and the impact
of world forces was not felt so quickly as in the world of today. Yet
the Muslim historians were not unaware of these considerations. It is a
truism to repeat that ibn Khaldin's contribution in connecting history
with sociology has been outstanding. He has been highly praised by
modern authors and he has richly deserved this praise. “In the
Prolegomena (Muqaddimah) to his Universal History (Kitab al-'Ibar) he
has conceived and formulated a philosophy of history which is
undoubtedly the greatest work of its kind that has ever been created by
any mind in any time or place.”[^50] “Ibn Khaldin was a historian,
politician, sociologist, economist, a deep student of human affairs,
anxious to analyze the past of mankind in order to understand its
present and future.[^51]“

Ibn Khaldin (732-808/1332-1406), considered simply as an historian, had
superiors even among Arabic authors, but as a theorist on history he had
no equal in any age or country until Vico appeared, more than three
hundred years later.”[^52] So far as ibn Khaldin's own position and
contribution are concerned, it would suffice here to give these
quotations, because a fuller discussion of his work is given in Chapters
XLVI and XLIX of this work. It is true that ibn Khaldin had no peers in
the world of Islam, but it is not correct as has become fashionable to
assert that he had neither predecessors nor successors in what he set
himself to do.

Muslim historians do, in their search for causes, go into fields that
are not merely political and search out causes that are not discernible
on the surface. The Muslim writers had tried to understand the working
of economic laws and were conversant with the Greek works on the
subject.[^53] The writers on revenue in particular brought in economics
and sound finance within the scope of their work.[^54] Of these perhaps
Qudamah bin Ja'far deserves special mention, who in one of his chapters
presents a systematic discussion of political and social sciences.[^55]
He enters into fundamental considerations regarding the social and
economic needs of human beings and the steps taken to meet them.
Observations on political, economic, and social factors are found
scattered throughout the books of ethics, politics, and history.

In the Indo-­Pakistan sub-continent, abu al-Fall among others has
brought in questions of economics and social organization while
commenting upon administrative measures. The most outstanding example is
Shah Wall Allah, who based his philosophy on economic and social
foundations.[^56]

Being confronted with the problem of the decline of the Muslim political
power in the sub-continent of India and Pakistan, he analysed the forces
at work to diagnose the disease from which the polity as well as the
society suffered at that time and came out with his suggestions for
curing their ills, in doing which he explored a wide range of economics,
sociology, history, and politics. He examined the relations subsisting
between the producers and consumers and laid down the dictum that in a
balanced society everyone must contribute to its welfare. Then he
pointed out how some sections of the society had become parasites and,
thus, had upset the balance. This kind of analysis runs right through
his discussions, whether he is discussing social conditions or examining
political and economic ills. He has a historical mind because he brings
in the examples of the great civilizations that had preceded Islam and
draws relevant con­clusions from their fate.

In conclusion one may say that history has been a favorite discipline
with the Muslims. They brought the highest standards of objectivity into
their writings; they showed great enthusiasm for the discovery of true
facts; they produced a vast literature of considerable merit at a time
when even among the civilized peoples there was not much flair for
historiography; indeed, there were cultures of a highly developed nature
that had no place

Jurisprudence in their learning for historiography. At such a time the
Muslims established standards which have not always been improved upon
in the modern world. For instance, contemporary nations have to learn a
good deal in standards of objectivity and in distinguishing between
national glorification and history. The Muslims were able to expand the
scope of history from mere recording of facts into a repository of
political, administrative, and cultural experiences and made fruitful
essays into the analytical field as well. They failed like the political
thinkers of Islam in suggesting the evolution of institutions that would
have enabled greater and more responsible participation of the people in
the affairs of the State, but they did help in making the Islamic
govern­ments beneficent and benevolent at a time when other governments
tended to be arbitrary and even tyrannical.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Biruni, Chronology of Ancient Nations, ed. and tr. E. Sachau, London,
1879; abu al-Faraj, Tarikh Mukhtasar al-Duwal, ed. Salhnni, Beyrouth,
1890; E. Lacoire, Table de Concordance des dates des Calendriers arabe,
Copte, gregorien, israilite, etc., Paris, 1891; Franz Rosenthal, A
History of Muslim Historiography, Leiden, 1952; Firdausi, Shahnameh;
Muhammad bin 'Abd al-Ralpnan Sakhawi, al-I'lan bi al-Taubik\_h li man
Dhamma Ahl al-Tarikh, trans. into English by Rosen­thal; al-Khatib
Baghhdadi, Kifayah, Hyderabad, 1357/1938; Diya' al-Din Barani, Tarik-i
Firuzs\_hahi, Calcutta, 1860-62; Badayuni, Muntakhab al-Tawarikh; abu
al-Fall, .91n-i Akbari; Sajazi, Fawa'id al-Fuwad; 'Abd al-Rahman bin
'Ali at­Jauzi, Muntazam, Hyderabad, 1357-58/1938-39; 'Ali bin Yasuf
al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukama', ed. A. Muller and J. Lippert, Leipzig,
1903; Baihaqi, Tarikh-i Baihaqi; ibn Ateir, Kamil ft al-Tarikh, Cairo,
1301/1883; al-Mas'udi, Muraj al-phhahab, Cairo, 1346/1927; C. Issawi, An
Arab Philosophy of History, London, 1950; Muham­mad bin Sulaiman,
al-Mukhtasar fi 'Ilm al-Tarikh, English transl. by Rosenthal.

[^1]: I C. Broekelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, 2 Vols.,
Weimar, 1898; Berlin, 1902; ibid., Supplementbande, 3 Vols., Leiden,
1937-42; C. A. Storey, Persian Literature, A Biobibliographical Survey,
London, 1935-59; F. Babinger, Die Ge8chithtsschreiber der Osmanen and
Are Werke, Leipzig, 1927 (gives good surveys of the literature discussed
in this chapter). Details of the works mentioned here have not been
given because they are available in these surveys.

[^2]: Franz Rosenthal, a History of Muslim Historiography, Leiden, 1952,
p. 16.

[^3]: e A. Jaussen and R. Savignac, Mission Archeologique en Arabia,
Vol. II, Paris, 1909-14, Minaen Inscription No. 32.

[^4]: Rosenthal, op. cit., p. 66, n. 5.

[^5]: The main argument in favor of Byzantine influence is that some
historical works written before the known Muslim histories show a
similarity in arrangement. The annalistic arrangement, thus, could have
been taken over from the Byzantines. On the other hand, the annalistic
form could be a natural development. The argument against the acceptance
of the view that the Byzantines had any influence is that the Muslim
historians do not mention Byzantine authors, in spite of the fact that
they were fond of mentioning their sources of information.

[^6]: The work that has come down through an Arabic translation is
Khuatainamak, which can hardly be called a history. Other sources of
Iranian history were translated into Arabic towards the second quarter
of the eighth century A.D. None of these was considered important enough
to be preserved in spite of the Iranian tendency to glorify their past.
Firdausi's dhah Ndmeh written in the fourth/tenth century depended upon
legend rather than history. If there had been any sober history
available at that time, more of it would have entered the poem.

[^7]: This is inherent in the Muslim belief, based upon the Qur'an, v,
48; vii, 30, etc.

[^8]: Ibid. v; 68ff etc.

[^9]: Ibid. xxxii, 40, where the Prophet has been called “the seal of
the prophets.” The seal comes at the end of an epistle. There is also a
hadith which says, “There shall be no prophet after me.”

[^10]: Qur'an, e.g., vi, 6; x, 70ff.; xi, 25ff.; xix, 74; xxix, 20ff.;
xxx, 9, 42-47; xxxv, 44, 45, etc., etc.

[^11]: Ibid., iii, 104

[^12]: Ibid. iii, 110.

[^13]: Ibid., xi, 100

[^14]: 14 Ibid. VI, 25; viii, 31; xvi, 24, etc., etc. The Qur'an uses
the word “aadtir” which has generally been considered to mean stories,
because of its resemblance to the Greek word historia (Golius, Lexicon
Arabico-Latinum, Leiden, 1653, column 1171), but this seems to have
little sub: stance in fact, except for the coincidental resemblance.
Several European authors have followed Golius, but opinion has now
changed. Indeed, the Arabs should have been the first to notice the
resemblance and to use the word in the sense of history if there were
any substance in this identification. It is more likely that the word
has been derived from satar (to write); hence asdtir should mean a
record. They certainly do not seem to imply that the Prophet was
reciting to them merely fables.

[^15]: This is obvious from the references to communities like 'Ad,
Thamnd, etc., vide note 10; also Qur'an, xiii, 30; xiv, 36.

[^16]: Many religious thinkers in Islam refer to the Jewish legends
adopted by some mufassirin as Isra'iliyat and disapprove of their use.

[^17]: Muhammad bin 'Abd al-Rahman al•Sakhawi, al-Flan bi al-Taubik li
man Mamma AN at-Tarikh, translated into English by Rosenthal, op. cit.,
pp. 246, 247, 263.

[^18]: 18 Muhanunad bin Sulaiman al•Kafiyaji, al-Muk\_htarar T 'Itm
al•Tdrik\_h, selected passages translated into English by Rosenthal, op.
cit., pp. 189, 190; al-Sakhawi, op. cit., pp. 205ff.

[^19]: Qur'an, VI, 116; the corruption of previous Scriptures finds
mention also at other places, e.g., v, 13.

[^20]: Al-Sakhawi, op. cit., pp. 259, 261.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 299.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 264.

[^23]: Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Kifayah, Hyderabad, 1357/1938, pp. 39ff.;
also, al­Bukhari, Sahih, iv, 121, 126, 142 (Krehl).

[^24]: E.g. Diya' al-Din Barani, Tarikh-i Fireczshahi, Calcutta,
1860-62, pp. 16, 17.

[^25]: Jalal al-Din Muhammad Akbar (1556-1605), third in the line of
succession among the Moghul Emperors of India.

[^26]: His subtle insinuations have, through faulty translation, caused
grave mis­understandings among European writers like Vincent Smith.

[^27]: E.g. passages quoted in Sources of Indian Tradition, ed. William
Theo­dore de Bary, Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 527, 528,
show quite clearly that the authors do not intend the readers to take
all their adjectives seriously. Akbar was certainly not “the ruler of
the world and of all who inhabit it” nor the “origin of the canons of
world-government” and “author of universal conquest.”

[^28]: E.g. passages quoted in Sources of Indian Tradition, ed. William
Theo¬dore de Bary, Columbia University Press, New York, pp. 527, 528,
show quite clearly that the authors do not intend the readers to take
all their adjectives seriously. Akbar was certainly not “the ruler of
the world and of all who inhabit it” nor the “origin of the canons of
world-government” and “author of universal conquest.”

[^29]: O. Lofgren, Arabische Texte zur Kenntnis der Stadt Aden im
iliittelalter, LJpsala, 1936, II, pp. 20, 43-47.

[^30]: Barani, op. cit., pp. 16, 17.

[^31]: “Exodus,” xiv, 30; “Samuel,” I, xvii.

[^32]: Some scholars are of the opinion that no written prose literature
existed in pre-Islamic Arabia, e.g., William Marcais, “Les Origins de la
prose litteraire arabe,” Revue Africaine, LXVIII, 1929, pp. 15-18.

[^33]: A good example is Sultan \`Ala' al-Din Khalji's conversation with
Qadi Mughith, reported by Barani, op. cit., pp. 293-97.

[^34]: Many of the histories written in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent
do not fall into the category of dynastic histories. They generally take
up certain periods of Muslim rule or of a dynasty, but few works are
devoted entirely to a dynasty.

[^35]: E.g., Sheftah's Gulshan-i Be-khar, Azad's Ab-i Hayat, and
Shibli's ini\`r at­'Ajam

[^36]: E.g., Badayiuni in his Muntakhab al-Tawarikh, Abu al-Fadl in his
A'in-i Akbari, etc.

[^37]: E.g., Hasan'Ali Sajzi's Fawa'id at-Fuwad.

[^38]: Al-Sakhawi, op. cit., p. 310; al-Kafiyaji, op. cit., p. 183.

[^39]: 'Abd al-Rahman bin 'Ali al-Jauzi, Muntazam, Hyderabad,
1357-58/1938-39, p. 37.

[^40]: 'Ali bin Y6sufal-Qif¢i, Tarik\_hat-Hukama', ed. A.Muller and J.
Lippert, Leipzig, pp. 110ff.

[^41]: A'in-i Akbari abounds in such tables; Barani gives tables of the
names of officers in each reign, etc.

[^42]: This was derived from the way ahadith were narrated: “A heard
from B who heard from C who heard from D that the Prophet said…..”

[^43]: Some examples are: Baihaqi in Tarikb-i Baihaqi has preserved the
oath of allegiance taken by Mas'ud of Ghaznin to the Caliph; Badayani
has preserved the text of the mahdar recognizing Akbar's authority to
choose an interpretation where the doctors of law disagreed; abu al-Fadl
has preserved the letter Akbar wrote to 'Abd Allah Khan Uzbek of
Transoxiana, etc.

[^44]: When Asoka's pillar was brought by Firuz Shah from Meerut and
erected at Delhi, the Hindu pundits who do not seem to have known Pali
said that the inscription on it prophesied the great success of Firuz
hah as a ruler; also cf. Rosen­thal, op. cit., p. 111.

[^45]: Ibn Aqir, Kamil f al.Tarikh, Cairo, 1301/1883, I, p. 3.

[^46]: This was the reason why historical studies formed an essential
part of a prince's education, e.g., Sinan bin Thabit bin Qurrah quoted
by ibn al-'Adam, Bugjhyat al-Talab, Cairo, MS. Tarikh, 1566, I, p. 137;
ibn Hamdun, Tadhkirah, Bodleian MS. (Ar.) Marsh 316 part 3, 80b, etc.,
etc.

[^47]: The reason has been given by al-Tha'libi, Qhurar, Paris, MS.
(Ar.) 1488, f. 247a, where he says, “The narration of these matters is
like reporting about their kings, because people follow the religion of
their kings, especially the Indians who immolate themselves for the
glory of their kings and some of them even wor­ship their kings.” The
author has explained earlier that historical data regarding India are
difficult to obtain.

[^48]: Ibn Hamdun, op. cit., says, “Genealogy, history, and elements of
jurisprudence, are royal sciences.” Compare Yaqut, Irshad, Cairo, I, p.
27, who says, “the know­ledge of genealogy and history belong to the
sciences of kings ....” bah Jahan made a habit of listening to history
every evening ('Abd al-Hamid Lahori, Padishah­nameh, Bib. Indic&,
Calcutta, I, p. 153).

[^49]: Al-Mas'udi, Murdj al-Dhahab, Cairo, 1346/1927, II, p. 72.

[^50]: Charles Issawi, An Arab Philosophy of History, London, 1950, p.
x, quoting Arnold J. Toynbee.

[^51]: Idem, pp. x, xi, quoting George Sarton.

[^52]: Ibid. p. xi, quoting Robert Flint.

[^53]: M. Plessner, Der ouxovouir.6S des Neupythagoreers “Bryson” and
sein Einfluss auf die islamische Wissenschaft, Heidelberg, 1928, Orient
and Antike, Vol. V.

[^54]: The various books on Kharaj and the A'in-i Akbari of abu al-Fadl
are good examples.

[^55]: Rosenthal, op. cit., pp. 462-63, gives a table of contents.

[^56]: Such material is found in several of his books, especially Hujjat
Allah al. Balighah; an Urdu translation is available, Lahore, 1953.


