Chapter 61: Jurisprudence
=========================

In this chapter it is proposed to bring into relief the philosophical
significance of certain salient points and aspects of Muslim Law,
otherwise known as Fiqh. But before doing so, let us have a tolerably
precise idea of what one under­ stands by law, and in particular what
the Muslim jurists have understood by it.

A - The Law
-----------

Law roughly means the rules of conduct. But not every rule of conduct
forms a part of law. There are things people instinctively do under the
dictates of their normal impulses. These do not concern law, nor are the
concern of law the modes of behavior regarding things which persons do
deliberately but which relate to their private lives, and have no
repercussions on other members of the society or are of rare occurrence.
Men differ enormously among themselves in their capacity for reasoning
and the power of choosing an action out of the various possible
alternatives. Even some matters of general occurrence and those
affecting other persons besides the agent himself do not come under law.
Law does not take cognizance of the behavior of individuals which is
in­finitely varied, for if it did, it would lead to chaos and conflicts
rather than uniformity in behavior.

The cases which fall under law are as follows:

(i) Sometimes certain individuals do things of their own accord and thus
their private initiative sets precedents, customs, and usages if
experience shows their utility, or in case historical reasons create a
halo of prestige and awe around the names of their initiators.

(ii) Sometimes actions are done at the instance of others. For example,
a child may do something or abstain from doing something because its
mother, father, or some other superior directs it to do so. A young
student may behave similarly at the instruction given by his teacher. A
grown-up man may do something at the suggestion of his friends in whose
sincerity and intelligence he has confidence, on the direction of his
spiritual guide, or at the dictates of public opinion. Rules of conduct
are also sometimes determined by the orders of a superior to whom we
delegate powers out of our own free choice, such as an elected or
accepted ruler with or without the power of revoking our decisions. On
other occasions a rule of conduct may arise from a superior's order,
obedience to which is a lesser evil than its disobedience. Such is the
case with prisoners of war, slaves, and the like who must abide by the
order of their master under pain of coercion and punishment.

(iii) A rule of conduct may also be considered to be of divine origin.
Our forefathers in different parts of the world at various epochs have
continuously believed certain individuals possessed of lofty character
to be messengers of God and later generations have inherited this
belief. It goes without saying that of all the superiors' orders those
that proceed from God must remain the most meritorious to obey. God's
orders, according to religious beliefs, are received through the agency
of certain human beings chosen by Him and called by some prophets and
incarnations of God by others. The commandments communicated by such
persons are accepted by those who believe them to be the orders of God,
the Creator and Master who will judge them all on the Day of
Resurrection according to their deeds.

(iv) Lastly, there are deductions from and interpretations of basic
laws, such as lead to new laws.

Muslim Law is a collection of all the four types of rules mentioned
above, viz., rules of customs, orders of superiors, divinely revealed
Laws, and the rules arising from the deliberations of jurists. There is
the Qur'an, which is taken as the uncreated Word of God; there is the
1Iadit\_h and Sunnah (sayings and doings of the Prophet of Islam) which
include not only what the Prophet said or did himself, but also what he
tolerated of the existing practices among his Companions, practices
coming indeed from pre-Islamic habits and customs. Moreover, there are
individual or unanimous opinions of experts and special­ists (jurists),
there are customs which do not go against express laws, and there are
foreign laws acted upon on the basis of treaties, reciprocity, and so on
and so forth.

Whether the legislators of Islam abolished some old customs and
practices, retained and confirmed some others, intact or in a modified
form, or took the initiative of ordaining new rules of conduct-the sole
principle that guided their legislative activity in all these cases was
to “do what is good, and abstain from doing what is evil.” According to
al- Ghazali[^1], this principle of good and evil (husn wa qubh) was
propounded by the Mu'tazilite jurists. Being more rationalist than their
contemporary traditionists, it was the Mu'tazilites who were perhaps the
first to be struck by the curious and repeated stress which the Qur'an
has laid on the rational side of life. To persuade men to abide by the
precepts of Islam, the Qur'an again and again appeals to reason
(tadabbarun, tatajakkarun, ta'qilun, etc.), and repeatedly refers to
ma'ruf and munkar[^2] as the bases of Muslim Law.

Now, ma'ruf means a good which is recognized as such on all hands, and a
munkar is an evil disapproved as such by everybody. It cannot,
therefore, be true that the rules of conduct laid down by the Qur'an and
the Sunnah are arbitrary and merely for the purpose of testing the will
to submit on the part of the Faithful. Evidently, not every man in the
street will be able to understand the underlying principles of each and
every Qur'anic order or injunction. That is the domain of the
specialists of the philosophy of Law. An anecdote will explain the
point. Abu Hanifah, one of the early jurists, had a penetrating mind,
and was also endowed with a sense of humor. Not always being able to
understand the reasons that led this great jurist to hold certain
opinions, stupid people began to accuse him of heresy; according to
them, he legislated by his personal opinion in disregard of the sayings
or practice of the Holy Prophet. Once somebody had the audacity to tell
this to his face.

Abu Hanifah replied: “I never promulgate rules on my personal opinion;
on the other hand, I always deduce laws from the sacred texts of the
Qur'an and the Hadith. Had I relied on my personal reasoning, I would
have ordered that in the act of ablutions, one should pass a wet hand
not on the uppers of a shoe (khuff)-as is ordered by the Prophet-but on
the sole, for that is the part which requires cleansing more than any
other part of the footwear.” In this humorous way, abu Hanifah succeeded
in silencing and even calming the apprehensions of his well-meaning
critic.

The answer was humorous, because abu Hanifah did not refer to the
reasons for not washing the soles of one's shoes for if the sole of the
footwear is moistened and then one stands up for the service of worship,
it is the more apt to get dirty if one prays on the ground, and to soil
the carpet if one prays on one. In other words, a single issue may have
several aspects, but it is the duty of the philo­sopher to give
preference to the more important of such aspects.

However, the principle of the Islamic Law is that its rules must be
based on the good and prohibitions on the evil inherent in a given act.
This was an original contribution of Muslims to the legal science; no
other civilization had thought of it before, as has been admitted by
Professor Ostrorog in his brilliant essay “Roots of Law,” contained in
his book Angora Reform. In fact in expounding the Qur'anic statement,
“Do what is ma'ruf (what is good in the eyes of God and man) and abstain
from what is munkar (what is evil in the eyes of God and man),” the
Muslim philosophers of Law developed an all-embracing system. A brief
expose is all that we can take up here in dealing with a subject which
fills scores of pages in works on Usul al-Filth (the Prin­ciples of
Law).

In this world in which everything is infested with relativity, it is
often impossible to obtain unmixed goods, and sometimes it is even
possible to say that a given act contains neither good nor evil.
Therefore, what seems to be unmixed good will be ordained as an
obligatory rule (wajib); what is unmixed evil will be declared as an
obligatory prohibition (haram); in complex cases, predominance will
decide the preference: a matter of predominant good will be recommended
(mustahab), and one of predominant evil discouraged (makruh), without
going so far as to declare them obligatory to perform or to abstain
from. And in matters where good and evil are equal, or where one is
unable to see either good or evil, Law will leave it to the discretion
and choice of the individual to act or not to act.

This five-fold division of actions giving rise to five rules of
law-order, prohibition, recommendation, discouragement, and
indifference-resembles the cardinal directions of the compass. Even as
we can subdivide the directions and say North, NE, NNE, and so on, we
can also find out intermediary grades between good and evil. The
absolute good will be divine order, obligatory on each person in a group
(fard'ain) or obligatory on at least a few in the group (fard kifayah);
the good with less sure absoluteness will be legal order (wajib), and
practice of it will be enjoined with insistence (sunnat mu'akkadah). The
act with pronounced inclination towards the good will be recommended or
preferred (mandub or mustahab) and the one on the deadline will be
superero­gatory (nafl). Similarly, the evil may be prohibited (haram),
tending to be prohibited (makruh tahrinai), better to shun (makruh
tanzihi) and so on.

It is true that the application of these mathematically perfect rules of
the legal geometry to concrete cases will be affected as everywhere else
by play of the human element, more so in matters of intermediary grades
with subtler points to judge. With regard to such matters the judges and
jurists differ among themselves. Abu Hanifah would say that to eat
prawns is forbidden, but al-Shafi'i would declare it to be perfectly
lawful. Certainly this respective relegation of the prawns as food to
what is good or bad is only relatively so, and the forbidden character
of their consumption has not the same degree of prohibition as, say,
that of wine. Jurists call it deduced prohibition (Haram istinbati) as
distinct from legal prohibition (haram shar'i).

Narrow minds may fail to see this point and enter into quarrels. Here a
case may be cited which seems to be the model to follow in such cases:
abu Hanifah and al-Shafi'i are doubtless two of the leaders (imams) of
Muslim Law, completely independent of each other in legal judgment.
According to al- Shafi'i, the qunut prayer at dawn (fajr) is obligatory,
whereas abu Hanifah suppresses it completely. The story goes that once
al-Shafi'i went to Baghdad (where abu Hanifah lies buried), and during
his stay there he renounced his own view on the qunut prayer. When
questioned, he said: “I continue as firmly to cling to my opinion as
before, yet in the presence of the great abu Hanifah I feel ashamed to
follow my own opinion.” Needless to say that the implication is that
such learned differences do not concern the general public who should
not only follow their leader (imam) but should also be tolerant of those
who are followers of other leaders.

B -Law And Ethics
-----------------

Islam attaches very great importance to ethical values, yet it makes a
distinc­tion between Law and morals. In the books on Filth, one comes
across such expressions: “that is the rule of Law (fatwa), though the
rule of piety (taqwa) requires just the contrary.” The meaning is clear:
the jurist wants to say that there is some difference between human
justice and divine justice. Far from being impeccably perfect, what is
human must fall short of the divine. The juris consult and the judge
decide cases on the basis of facts and evidence produced before them. If
certain important facts, with bearings on the nature of the litigation,
are concealed from the arbiter-no matter intentionally or otherwise-the
decision may be correct de jure but not de facto, the latter being
beyond human possibility, at least in some cases. For this very reason,
the Holy Prophet once said: “Some of you are better pleaders, and I
decide according to facts submitted to me. If I decide in favor of any
of you what is not his due, let him know that I award him only a part of
the hell-fire with which he will fill his belly,' [^3] if he profits by
such a decision based on mistake or the only available material facts.

The law which claims to be based on the good is often hard to
distinguish from ethics. Nevertheless, it may be said that there exists
a measure for differentiating between them. For, the rules of Law in
Islam have a double sanction, namely, the coercive power of the court of
justice (a court may enforce its verdict to get the rightful owner his
due, or, in case it is im­possible, the court may punish the doer of the
injustice), and the divine punishment on the Day of Judgment; but the
rules of piety, the ethical rules, as distinct from the legal
injunctions have only the other-worldly sanc­tion apart from the more or
less effective public opinion.

As Islam inculcates belief in Resurrection and the Day of Judgment, a
true believer prefers a loss here to the divine wrath in the hereafter.

C- Sanctions
------------

As we have just observed, the Muslim Law is more fortunate than its
counterparts in some other civilizations, for it is endowed not only
with the material sanctions enjoined by modern secular States but also
with a spiritual sanction, and this in addition to persuasions both
material and spiritual. The belief in Resurrection and the Day of
Judgment, combined with the mere coercive force of a country's court of
justice, assures a greater observance of the law by its believing
subjects.

It is common knowledge that the Qur'an repeats scores of times the
formula, “Establish service of worship and pay the tax (zakat),”
pronouncing prayer and tax in the same breath. Even a beginner in the
study of Muslim Law knows that zakat has always been included in the
section of liturgical rites ('ibadat) in the manuals of Fiqh. With a
word of explanation of the meaning of the term zakat, even the most
uninitiated may realize the signi­ficance of this seemingly curious
combination of prayer and tax.

Zakat is not almsgiving or charity. Its proper place is in the books on
Law. In the time of the Holy Prophet and his successors, the Muslim
subjects of the Islamic State-we exclude the non-Muslim subjects for the
present paid no tax to the government other than zakat which covered the
entire fiscal system. Zakat al-ard was the land revenue; zakat
al-tijarah was tax on commercial capital as well as on import customs;
zakat al-mashiyyah was im­posed on herds of domesticated animals (ovine
and bovine animals and camels) living on public pastures; zakat
al-ma'ddin on the sub-soil products; zakat al-'ain was imposed on
savings of money, and so on and so forth. Every tax imposed by the
government on Muslim subjects was included in the term zakat; this may
be corroborated from the sayings of the Prophet on the subject of zakt
(as also more or less the equivalent and synonymous term sadaqat).[^4]

Now, reverting to the main point, mention of the service of worship and
payment of tax in the same breath and, consequently, inclusion of the
taxes in the category of liturgical acts (\`ibadat) should not astonish
us. It is in fact deliberate. In Islam one must do everything for the
sake of God. As al-Ghazali has forcefully put it, if you pray or fast
for ostentation, it will be a kind of polytheism, the adoration and
worship of your own self; on the other hand, if you eat delicious food
(with the sole intention of acquiring energy for the performance of acts
pleasing to God), and if you cohabit with your wife think­ing that it is
the performance of a divinely ordained duty, then these mundane
enjoyments constitute real acts of the worship of God ('ibadah). Authors
of the works on Muslim jurisprudence (Fiqh) since very early times have
affirmed that acts of worship of God can relate both to our body and
soul and to our property: if true faith is our spiritual act of worship,
and prayer, fasting, and pilgrimage are the physical expressions of the
same faith, then zakat is no less than our monetary mode of worshipping
God.

A true believer does his spiritual and bodily duties with respect to
God, without being forced to them by an organization (such as the
government); he also pays his taxes to whomsoever they are due, even
when the rightful person ignores his right or finds himself incapable of
having it enforced. Which finance minister of the world would resent
that the subjects of the State should believe that paying the government
taxes is one of his religious duties, such as would bring eternal
salvation in the life to come?

D - Law And Religious Affairs
-----------------------------

We have already made passing remarks, in the foregoing paragraphs that
the subject-matter of Law consists of the practical affairs of men. It
deals with affairs from birth to death, and, to a certain extent, even
with those after death (such as the questions of funeral, payment to the
creditors, execution of the will, distribution of heritage, remarriage
of the widow, etc.).

It will be observed that the Fiqh excludes questions of non-practical
nature, such as beliefs and dogmas and, as already pointed out, those of
piety and charity, which are questions of conscience rather than those
relating to practical affairs properly considered so.

All practical affairs of public nature fall within the purview of
Islamic Law because it prescribes for each of them the degree of
obligation (fard, wajib, mustahab, sunnah, mubah, etc.). Many a question
of politics and ad­ministration too falls under the subject-matter of
the legal science, although some latitude obtains in such matters.

It is perhaps useful to point out a certain resemblance that exists
between the Roman fas and jus on the one hand, and that between the
Islamic Fiqh and Siyasah Shari\`ah on the other. In ancient Rome all
laws were religious (and called fas) and as such depended on the
decisions of the priests; later, the kings arrogated to themselves the
right to decide in certain matters (rules of which were called jus)
which the priests reluctantly conceded, but slowly more and more matters
entered within the competence of jus or civil law of Rome, on which lay
authorities could promulgate rules. The Fiqh is also a religious Law,
in­asmuch as its principal source is the divine revelation, yet the same
Law left a number of points, including certain matters of penal law, to
the dis­cretion of the ruler and his delegates; this was termed Siyasah
Shari'ah. But the nature of relation between Fiqh and Siyasah Shari'ah
was such that the latter could not replace the former or encroach upon
its privileges. For in Islam the “priestly class” does not exist, at
least in the past it was not separate from the class of civil
authorities, the Caliph himself being the head at all religious
functions.

It is to be pointed out that in other civilizations, human affairs are
divided into temporal and spiritual. In Islam the greater part of
spiritual affairs is vested in the hands of the same authorities as have
the charge of temporal affairs. It seems that the Muslims divide their
religious affairs into external and internal. Declaration of faith,
service of worship, fasting, and hajj, although closely related to
spiritual matters, are yet matters concerning the State, and are,
therefore, external affairs. Internal affairs, by which one understands
one's relation with God, form the subject-matter of mysticism and are
left in the hands of spiritual guides who are also considered successors
of the Holy Prophet and, therefore, Caliphs in the spiritual sphere. In
this realm, there are no rivalries. Several Caliphs could and did
simultaneously exist in the Muslim community. On the death of the
Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Ali could not co-exist as Caliphs for external
affairs, yet both were at the same time regarded as Caliphs of the
Prophet in internal or spiritual affairs. As a result of this natural
division of functions, Islam has been able to avoid the possibility of a
tug of war, and the consequent bloodshed, between a king and the chief
spiritual authorities.

It must further be pointed out that the division of spiritual and
temporal powers is perfectly lawful in Islam, and does not upset its
religio-legal system. The Qur'an[^5] lays down that the practice of
former prophets remains valid in Islam, unless expressly abrogated; and
it relates, as a precedent, how in the presence of the Prophet Samuel
and with his approval the Israelites could accept the famous Talut as
king.[^6] The presence of a king and a prophet in the same community
necessarily implies the division of powers, temporal affairs falling
within the competence of the king. It goes without saying that in Islam
the Qur'an is the basis of all rules of conduct, both for the lay
authorities and for the religio-spiritual functionaries.

As to the object of Muslim Law, its comprehensive nature admits of no
doubt regarding the fact that it aspires the well-being both here and in
the hereafter. The Qur'an has condemned those who neglect any of these
two, and approves of those who aspire simultaneously after welfare in
both.[^7]

E - The Chief Sources
---------------------

The life and longevity of a legal system depends much on its sources;
unless these sources are adaptable to changing circumstances, it may not
survive foe long. Let us see if the recognized sources of Muslim Law
satisfy this require­ment of longevity. The chief sources of Muslim Law
may be classified as under.

**Divine Revelation.** This is of three kinds: (a) Recited (matluwww);
(b) non-­recited (ghair matluwww), i.e., not employed in the service of
worship; and (c) a previous revelation. A few details may not be out of
place.

(a) The recited revelation as preserved consists solely of the Qur'an,
which the Muslims believe to be the Word of God, a collection of divine
messages revealed from time to time to the Prophet Muhammad, and
preserved from his very time by the double method of writing and
learning by heart. If the written document has some error due to
inadvertence of the scribe, or even due to an exterior evil such as
effacement, damage to the copy, etc., memory comes to rescue. Similarly,
if one who has learnt a passage by heart, but while reciting it cannot
recall a word, reference can be made to the written document. From the
time of the Prophet down to these days, this double method has
everywhere in the Muslim world been employed to preserve the integrity
and purity of the sacred text, which in this respect is unique in the
world.

(b) The non-recited revelation consists of three distinct things: what
the Prophet said (Hadith), what he did himself (Sunnah), and what he
approved of and tolerated among his Companions such as an ancient
pre-Islamic custom consistent with Islamic norms. For lack of a
comprehensive term, Hadith and Sunnah have been used as co-extensive,
interchangeable, and synonymous terms to cover all the three aspects of
the non-recited revelation. It was quite natural for the community
receiving a messenger of God to treat every message given and every act
done by him as being in conformity with the will and wish of the sender
of that messenger, more so because the Qur'an itself has enjoined that
the practice of the Prophet should be treated as the best model to
imitate and follow.[^8]

The non-recited revelation was both explanatory of and complementary to
the recited revelation. As such it helped to clarify the Law and also to
interpret it.

A number of the Companions of the Holy Prophet put their memoirs on the
subjects of Hadith and Sunnah to writing in the very lifetime of the
Prophet. One such compilation, the Sahifah Sadiqah of 'Abd Allah ibn
'Amr ibn al-'As, is reputed to contain one thousand reports.[^9] The
case of Anas is much more interesting. In later times, when requested by
his pupils, he would bring out a box and show them note-books (majallat)
saying, “That is what I wrote from the sayings and doings of the
Prophet, and also read to him from time to time, so that if there was
any mistake be removed it himself.” Many more Companions prepared their
memoirs after the death of the Pro­phet, yet they were all supposed to
have been based on first-hand knowledge. Later generations compiled the
memoirs of these different authors, always scrupulously mentioning in
each case its source. How careful and honest they were may be realized
from the following fact.

Al-Bukhari's collection of the Hadith is considered to be one of the
most authentic collections. He has cited for each tradition the chain of
narrators, i.e., the sources and the sources of the sources up to the
Prophet. Supposing he uses the clause: “From ibn Hanbal, who from 'Abd
al-Razzaq, who from Ma'mar, who from Hammam, who from Abu Hurairah, who
from the Pro­phet heard. ..,” it would be perfectly legitimate for an
objective and impartial student to be skeptical and to start fresh
investigation by assuming that al-­Bukhari has forged the chain of the
sources and invented the narration. But we possess also his source, the
Musnad of ibn Hanbal, and find that this latter author also cites the
same narration, on the basis of the same sources, and gives exactly the
same wording of the contents of the narration.

Al-­Bukhari is acquitted honorably, but perhaps ibn Hanbal had forged.
But no, we possess fortunately also the Musannal of 'Abd al-Razzaq (now
in press in Hyderabad-Deccan, having been edited by Dr. Yusuf al-Din),
and there the remaining chain of sources is given and the hadith is
recorded in the same words without the least difference. Now say,
perhaps 'Abd al-Razzaq was the falsificator. But we possess his source
also, for in the Jami' of Ma 'mar now being edited by Dr. Fu'ad Sezgin
of the University of Istanbul, the same hadith is found, with a shorter
chain, but with no difference in the wording of its contents. Perhaps
Ma'mar was the forger. But no, his source, the Sahifah of Hammam ibn
Munabbih dictated by abu Hurairah to his pupil, is there to attest his
perfect honesty. We also know that abu Hurairah possessed many books on
Hadith. Even in the absence of these books other chains of transmission
narrate the same with and attest to its truth and there remains no
possibility of its having been falsely attributed to the Holy Prophet.

There is no denying the fact that forgeries in the Hadith have crept in,
due to unscrupulous or dishonest authors, yet the double method of
riwayah (un­interrupted chain of transmission by reporters known for the
integrity of their character) and of dirayah (scrutiny of the contents
and internal evidence) has practically eliminated the chances of forgery
in the more important collections, such as the “Six Canonical
Collections” (Sihah Sittah). If, how­ever, a certain report seems to us
to be incompatible with the dignity of the Prophet as envisaged by our
modern conception that alone would not justify our declaring it to be a
forgery or a falsification. Many a time the context explains what an
isolated phrase does not. A subjective approach must be replaced by an
objective one, and everyone should try to understand things with
reference to their context-not in isolation-and in the light of the
whole system of Islamic Law.

The hadith comprises also the taqrir or confirmation of some of the
customs and practices of the pre-Islamic days. It shows on the one hand
that Islam is a reform of the past and not a complete break with it, nor
an entirely new implantation. It also gives an authoritative
interpretation of the verses of the Qur'an according to which all that
is not expressly forbidden is lawful.[^10] The same notion is stressed
in two interesting sayings of the Prophet, namely:

(i) “The virtues of the days of ignorance (jahiliyyah) will be acted
upon in Islam” (Ibn Hanbal, III, 425).

(ii) “A wise counsel is the lost property of the Faithful (mu'min);
wherever he discovers it, he takes hold of it” (al-Tirmidhi, chapter
“'Ilm,” 19; ibn Majah, chapter “Zuhd,” 15).

What is virtuous or vicious in pagan customs is easy to decide by
reference to the injunctions and prohibitions expressly given in the
Qur'an and the Hadith.

(c) Previous Revelations.-With regard to the earlier prophets the Qur'an
has said: “They are those who received God's guidance; follow the
guidance they received.” [^11]But, unfortunately, most of the ancient
Scriptures have been lost to us, e.g., that of the Prophet Abraham, of
which there is repeated mention in the Qur'an. Some prophets seem never
to have transcribed the divine messages they received. The accusation
made by the Qur'an of the corruption of the previous Scriptures[^12]
considerably reduces the importance of this source.

F-Other Sources
---------------

(a) Private Expert Opinion.-Law in Islam has a divine origin, yet the
exercise of judgment on its interpretation, application, and
implications is human. The Qur'an and the Hadith have approved this
source, and even encouraged it. Individual opinions are termed qiyas,
and the collective ones ijma' (consensus). But the opinions of savants
and researchers are not infallible; hence these same savants have
approved that a qiyas by one could be rejected by another and a better
one suggested. Similarly, an earlier collective opinion can be
superseded by a later one.[^13]

It goes without saying that a right given by the Qur'an and the Hadith
cannot be taken away by any worldly authority.

These private opinions are, however, valid only in so far as they are
not against the revealed Law, the principal source. In this connection
the Holy Prophet has left a principle for the savants to observe. This
principle enjoins that they should aim at facility for the public and
not at difficulty. Once he said: “The Islamic religion is easy. Whoever
will render it hard, he will be defeated thereby.” [^14] The same
principle was repeated in the instructions given to governors: “Provide
facility, don't create hardship, and do not frighten people away from
Islam.” Hence public weal (istislah) is an additional and valid source
of Law.

(b) To the same category should be assigned the rules promulgated by the
government-be they based on the ijtihad of the ruler, or on expert
opinion of the jurists consulted by him-and enforced mostly for
administrative purposes. In theory, this may remain in force during the
reign of a ruler, until it is abrogated by him or his successor. This
kind of legislation is sometimes called al-ahkam al-sultaniyyah. The
fundamental principle holds good, viz., that such official directions
should not go against the revealed Law.

(c) An allied source is a Muslim ruler's confirmation and retention of
pre­-Islamic customs of a territory, mostly at the time of the accession
of that territory to his State. A typical instance is reported by
al-Mas'ndi, who says that after the conquest of Iraq and Iran, the
Caliph 'Umar retained the Sassanian law of land-revenue. He found it
equitable and conforming to social justice. Not so was the case with the
Byzantine laws in force in Syria and Egypt which countries were
conquered at the same time. 'Umar thoroughly modified the Byzantine
laws.[^15] The basic source of this attitude was the Qur'an and the
Hadith. Such “good customs” of foreign origin may even touch private
affairs, such as contractual relations in commerce, industry, etc.

(d) With a small difference, the same source is to be based on the
principle of reciprocity. A classical example is the following. Once the
governor of the frontier town Manbij (Hierapolis) asked the Caliph 'Umar
what tariff should be imposed on traders coming from beyond the
frontiers, and the Caliph replied, “Levy as much as their governments
levy on Muslim subjects going there for similar purposes.”[^16]

(e) Certain laws, particularly those concerning international relations,
both in peace and war, are often regulated by bilateral or multilateral
treaties which were regarded by the Holy Prophet as a valid source of
Muslim Law. An example of such laws is the law of extradition based on
the Treaty of al-Hudaibiyyah.[^17]

(f) Even new customs may gradually take root and add to the body of
Muslim Law. To express slight nuances they are called 'urf, addah,
ta'amul. They are practices and customs limited to localities or classes
of people. Needless to say that society is a living organism, and the
interaction of circumstances, inventions, and progress made in the
material domain profoundly affect our conceptions and, indeed, our
practices. The general principle remains valid: such practices should
not go against the revealed Law.

(g) One sole exception to this general principle is admitted by the
jurists, and they call it “prevalent custom” ('umum al-balwa), which may
abrogate even an existing law. Apparently, the theory of the ijma'
(consensus) plays its role therein. In practice this touches only minor
points of legal rules, mostly the rules deduced by former jurists. It is
unthinkable that such “prevalent customs” could abrogate a law enjoined
by the Qur'an.

G - Particular Sections Of The Law
----------------------------------

Theologians normally discuss four topics: (i) beliefs ('aqa'id), (ii)
acts of worship ('ibadat), (iii) morals (akhlaq), and (iv) social
affairs (mu'amalat). The jurists do not concern themselves with beliefs
and morals and confine their views only to rules regarding acts of
worship and laws regarding social affairs.

Before dealing with Muslim jurisprudence under these two heads, we would
like to make it clear that in Islam acts of worship ('ibadat) do not
mean acts indicating only the relation between the worshipper and God.
In fact, beliefs, acts of worship, morals, and social affairs are all
closely related to one another and, therefore, none of them can be
considered in isolation. Acts of worship, apart from relating the
worshipper to God, directly influence other human beings as well. For
example, although zakat is an act of worship in relation to God, yet it
is intimately connected with society. It is a State tax collected from
and used for the welfare of its members. Similarly, social affairs are
not merely matters of relations between man and man but have direct
bearing on man's relation with God. In Islam there is no matter which
can be considered to be isolated from spiritual values and divinely
ordained laws. Every public affair is a means to the achievement of some
spiritual value. Therefore, it can be safely said that there is no
matter in Islam which is purely an act of worship or a public affair.
Every act of worship is a public affair and every public affair is an
act of worship.

Jurists generally divide jurisprudence into the laws dealing with (i)
acts of worship (\`ibadat), (ii) social affairs (muamalat), and (iii)
crimes (\`uqubat). Under the head “acts of worship” fall prayer,
fasting, pilgrimage, and zakat (the State tax). Under “social affairs”
come socio-political, economic, and financial matters, e.g., sale and
purchase, contract, gift, trust, surety, partnership, and matrimonial
affairs. Penal laws deal with such crimes as murder, theft, adultery,
drinking, etc. It is not possible to deal with every rule within the
space at our disposal, not even with every set of rules. Therefore, we
content our­selves with discussing some select topics and these too very
briefly.

### 1. \`Ibadat

Under this head we deal only with prayer. A prayer or service of worship
in Islam is described by the Prophet as the “pillar of the faith” and
“ascension” (mi\`raj), i.e., a journeying unto the Almighty. In the
words of Shah Wali Allah: “Worship consists essentially of three
elements: (i) humility of heart (spirit) consequent on a feeling of the
majesty and grandeur of God, (ii) confession of the superiority of God
and lowliness of man by means of appropriate words, and (iii) adoption
of bodily postures expressing reverence. As a man can reach the top of
his spiritual evolution only gradually, it is evident that such an
ascension must pass through all the three stages, and a perfect service
of worship would have three postures, to wit, standing up, bowing down,
and prostrating by laying the head on the ground in the presence of the
Almighty-and all this for obtaining the necessary evolution of the
spirit so as truly to feel the sublimity of God and the humility of
man.[^18] At the end, kneeling before the Lord, in the “invocation of
the Divine Presence” (tashahhud), the faithful use the very words of the
dialogue between the Holy Prophet and God during the mi\`raj:

Prophet: “The blessed and purest of greetings to God!”

God: “Peace be with thee, O Prophet, and the mercy and blessings of
God!”

Prophet: “Peace be with us and with all the pious servants of God!”

After this a Muslim affirms his submissiveness and attests the formula
of the faith, then expresses his thankfulness to God for having sent
such messengers as Abraham and Muhammad (both of blessed memory) to
guide him. Thereafter, he asks for pardon and well-being in the two
worlds. On his “return” from the visit of the threshold of God, he
wishes peace to all believ­ers, and with that he terminates his service.

### 2. Mu\`amalat

#### (a) Polity

Islam has not only united prayer and politics in a greater whole by
assigning them both to the same Imam, but it has also dispensed with all
prejudices of color, language, race, birth-place, etc., declaring all
men equal, basing superiority solely on piety, and taking practical
steps to reunify the descendants of Adam and Eve. Allah is not the God
of this or that race, He is the Lord of the worlds, both known and
unknown (Rabb al-\`Alamin). Nationality as based on race, color, or
language is fatal in the long run. It is to be based on the identity of
outlook on life (religion) accessible to any and every individual,
irrespective of race, caste, or color. The common code of Law (the
Qur'an and the Hadith), the common focal point for prayer and hajj
(Ka'bah), and the unity of the Faith­ful under a common Caliph are some
of the means employed for the removal of all class and color
distinctions.

In politics, sovereignty belongs to God, and man is the lieutenant and
vicegerent of God. This notion works power­fully on man. Islam imposes
no particular form of government; the Qur'an never speaks of kingship in
connection with Muslim polity. There is not a single reference to
republic or oligarchy. Yet the first Muslim Government after the Prophet
was a “life-long republic.” The Head of the State did not come to power
by inheritance, but was chosen for life. So the State was neither our
modern republic, nor the hereditary despotic kingship. The oath of
allegiance (bai'ah) was essential even for the recognition of the
Prophet himself; and this automatically excluded hereditary monarchy,
though the Shiites do not hold this view.

It is obligatory on a Muslim ruler to have consultations; right of veto
seems to be a matter left to time and clime. His fundamental duties are
four-fold: cultur­al (propagation of Islam), administrative-executive,
judicial, and legislative. But legislation by government is the least
important of its duties. In Islam, legisla­tion has always remained a
privilege of private savants, beyond the control of the rulers with
their ever-changing whims and fancies and exigencies of the day-to-day
politics. And as we have described above, legislation in Islam is only
for secondary matters; the primary principles have already been laid
down by the Qur'an and the Hadith.

#### (b) Fiscality

As already pointed out zakat is not at all almsgiving or charity, but
the State tax, covering practically the entire fiscal system imposed on
Muslim subjects. It is significant that the Qur'an prescribes no details
as to the income, but gives very precise directions regarding the
expenditure of the State. The implication seems to be that the
government may have a free hand in increasing the revenues, but in
matters of expenditure it sould noth deviate from the principles of a
welfare State. The rates and items of the zakat are mentioned only in
the Hadith. That they are not of a static character, is proved by the
fact that in the time of the Prophet the import of victuals, effected by
caravans of the Nabataeans, coming from beyond the frontiers of the
Muslim State, were subjected to ten per cent of duties, but the Caliph
'Umar reduced them only to five per cent. To ibn Hazm the rates current
in the Holy Prophet's time are, for all later generations, the necessary
minimum and can be increased only in the interest of the community.
Other jurists have resorted to more reverential attitudes. They uphold
the rates of the time of the Prophet as the norm, but allow under the
name of nawa'ib (passing exigencies) enhanced or new taxes.

The expenditure of zakat is much more important. The Prophet of Islam
ordained that the income of zakat is religiously forbidden (haram) to
him, to his family, to his tribe, and to the allies of his tribe. If the
Head of the State is so scrupulous and does not abuse public confidence
in money matters entrusted to his care, subordinates would be the less
tempted to corruption. Further, the Qur'an has ordered that taxes
(sadaqat) should be spent under eight main heads of expenditure. They
are to be levied only for the poor, the needy, the wayfarer, those who
work for the State revenues, and those whose hearts are to be won; also
for freeing the necks, and the heavily indebted, and for use in the path
of God.[^19] According to such a high authority as the Caliph 'Umar,
fuqara' (the poor) are those who belong to the Muslim com­munity, and
masakin (the needy) are from the non-Muslims. It is to be noted that the
sadaqat do not come from the non-Muslims, yet the needy among them are
the beneficiaries of these taxes paid only by the Muslims.

Those who work are the collectors, accountants, and controllers of
expenditure, auditors, and others, embracing practically the entire
administrative machinery of the State.

Those whose hearts are to be won may be of many kinds. The great jurist
abu Ya'la al-Farra' observes: “Those whose hearts are to be won are of
four kinds: (i) those whose hearts are to be reconciled for coming to
the aid of the Muslims; (ii) those whose hearts are to be won in order
that they abstain from doing harm to the Muslims; (iii) those who are
attracted towards Islam; and (iv) those by whose means conversion to
Islam of the members of their tribes becomes possible. It is lawful to
benefit each and everyone of those whose hearts are to be won, be they
Muslims or polytheists.”[^20]

By the term “freeing the neck,” jurists have always understood the
eman­cipation of slaves (which is a duty of the State!) and ransoming
the prisoners of war, be they Muslim or non-Muslim subjects of the
Muslim State.

Aid to those who have heavy debts or great burdens may be given in
different ways. The Caliph 'Umar organized even a service of
interest-free loans.

Expenditure “in the path of God” includes every charitable act, and the
jurists from very early times have not hesitated to mention military
equipment for the defense of Islam as the first item, since Islam
struggles solely for the establishment of the kingdom of God on earth.

As for the wayfarers, one can help them not only by giving hospitality
to them, but also by ensuring them physical well-being and comfort,
providing means of communication, security of routes, and taking all
other measures for their well-being, be they countrymen or strangers,
Muslims or non-Muslims.

These items are wide enough to embrace practically all the requirements
of a welfare State.

#### (c) Contracts

Contracts are of many kinds: matrimonial, commercial, agricultural,
industrial, and so on. When differences arise as to the meaning of the
terms during the execution of a contract, third parties are referred to,
such as arbitrators, judges, and other State authorities. This entails
questions of evidence and proof and capacity of the contracting parties
including the minors, the insane, the absentees, etc. Again, contracts
may be made of free accord or under coercion.

In Islam, contracts require the consent of the parties, or “mutual
free-will” as the Qur'an puts it.[^21] This great principle, common to
all systems of law, is a means to mitigating the rigor of another
principle that men being equal to one another, nobody owes anything to
anybody else. Contracts include among other things the give-and-take of
labor. The give-and-take of labor entails division of labor which has
several advantages: saving wastage of concurrent labour, specialization
for the sake of better production, diminution of preoccupations with the
consequent leisure which is essential for all pro­gress, intellectual as
well as material. If everyone of us were to rely on his individual
resources to procure even the barest necessities of life-food, dress,
lodging, etc.-we should be worse off than most of the beasts.

Custom or usage has taught men the advantages of the exchange of
com­modities. Prices are a technique used to equalize two different
kinds of items. They are subject to variation according to the demand
and supply of goods, and also to the whims of the sellers. Ordinarily,
this latter aspect is a man's private affair; the organization of which
he is a member need not meddle with it. But there is a limit even to
this liberty. Once a merchant was selling his goods in the market of
Medina at a price lower than the one prevalent. (We are not told whether
it was a case of dumping or any other mis­chief.) The Caliph 'Umar
ordered him to leave the public market, or else fix the price as charged
by other merchants. Neither the inherent liberty of each nor the mutual
consent of the parties could deter 'Umar from ordering what he judged to
be right in the interest of social well-being.

Contracts may comprise conditions. There is a huge monographic
literature on the subject, and it is related that abu Hanifah was the
first to compile a special treatise on the conditions of contracts. Here
too mutual consent is not the sole deciding factor; law steps in, and
enjoins that no condition is to be tolerated which violates legal
injunctions of all kinds.[^22] Lesser of the two evils justifies to
interfere in and curtail the inherent liberty of the individual, since
in the long run he too will suffer from the same liberty if left
uncontrolled.

The same principle of public well-being (maslahat 'ammah) has led
legis­lators to declare inadmissible the contracts made by minors or the
insane. Guardians are appointed temporarily or permanently to look after
the affairs of those suffering from legal incapacities.

#### (d) Family Law

Of all the contracts, those of matrimonial relations seem to be the
oldest in human society. Here there is no question of exchange of
commodities, but rather of usufruct. Muslim Law has relegated matrimony
to the level of any other bilateral contract. In pre-Islamic days,
people “sold” their daughters to their would-be husbands. In Islam,
woman has an indi­viduality of her own as independent and complete as
that of man, and is not a chattel even of her progenitive father. For
profound social reasons, and in view of the nature of the fair sex, the
mutual benefit accruing from married life has been thought to be less
favorable to the wife, who is, therefore, considered entitled to a
compensation in the form of a monetary gift settled upon her before
marriage (mater), dowry, and maintenance by the husband. The mater,
which is a sine qua non of Muslim marriage, is the exclusive pro­perty
of the wife, giving no right of share to anybody else, not even to her
father; and she has full legal powers to dispose of her property-mahr or
anything else-the way she likes it (a thing unknown even today in other
systems of law).

The question of polygamy may be briefly treated here. According to the
generally accepted interpretation of the injunctions of the Qur'an, it
may be said that Islam permits polygamy, but which religion does not?
Hindu, Jewish, and Parsi religions allow unlimited number of wives to a
polygamous husband, and even Christianity is no exception! There is not
a word against it in the Gospels and teachings of Jesus Christ; on the
contrary, learned theologians (like Luther, Bucer, Melanchthon, and
others) have deduced that Christ accepted polygamy as a matter of course
as is evident from the way in which he speaks of the marriage of a man
with ten virgins, mentioned in the Gospel according to St. Matthew
25:1-12.

Further, it was practiced in early Christianity, and as late as the time
of Charlemagne (third/ninth cen­tury); even priests could be
polygamous.[^23] The reference here is not to the mundane rules among
Christians and even Muslims to “abolish” polygamy, but to their
religious doctrines only. Islam is the first and only religion which has
put a limit to the maximum number of wives, and has also provided legal
means of prohibiting the practice of polygamy between couples desiring
mono­gamy. Marriage being one of the ordinary contracts, conditions can
be sti­pulated therein.

The lawful conditions are: (i) the husband would remain monogamous for
the duration of the marriage with the stipulating wife, and (ii) the
wife would have the right to divorce her husband at will. Christianity
formally prohibited divorce, and so did the Dharma Sastra. Islam, on the
other hand, permits the right to divorce to the husband under certain
con­ditions, and to the wife under contract, and even without a
contract, by an appeal to a law-court-khul'. It also allows judicial
separation under orders of the court. And if a woman herself does not
demand these rights, it is not for the law to oblige her to do so, since
there may be occasions when poly­gamy may even become necessary. Who
does not know that after the Thirty Years' War, the Kriegstag of
Nuremberg (Germany), in view of the greatly reduced number of the male
population due to war ravages, ordered that thenceforth every man should
contract marriage with two women?[^24]

#### (e) Commercial Contracts

The most important point in this connection is perhaps the prohibition
of interest. Other religions also had done that before, but with little
results. They did not attack the root question, which is: How to supply
interest-free loans to the needy? Islam characterizes the taking of
interest as “a declaration of war against God and His messenger;”[^25]
in our own time Professor Keynes did not hesitate in his numerous
writings to assert that interest more than anything else lies at the
root of all social ills. Islam makes a clear distinction between
commercial gain and interest on loans.[^26]

The difference between them is that one shares in the former (in various
kinds of joint-stock companies) both profits and risks, whereas in the
latter the debtor has to pay a fixed profit even if circumstances have
not allowed him sufficiently to fructify the enterprise. The thesis of
Islam is that one should undertake to participate in the eventual risks
in order to participate in the profits (al-ghunum ma' al-ghunum). One
should certainly take necessary precautions, even create reserve funds
for lean years, but the parties to the contract should be ready to
divide losses as well as gains.

As to non-commercial and unproductive loans, it goes without saying that
private capitalists cannot offer interest-free loans unless they are
most generous and pious. Therefore, it is only a welfare government that
can and must do so. As a practical religion, Islam noticed this human
weakness and, therefore, made it the duty of the government to provide
for interest-free loans to the public in the annual budgets of the
State, as we have mentioned above while speaking of zakat. The same
could also be done on the basis of mutuality.

In fact, interest-free co-operative lending societies have been a great
success, for instance, in Pakistan and Hyderabad-Deccan (India) where
they have existed for over a century. The members participate in the
working expendi­ture, and the circulation of the money gradually paid by
the share-holders satisfies the needs of the members of the society.

The question of co-operative activity for loans naturally leads to the
prob­lem of insurance which has existed in Islam from the time of the
Prophet himself. It was further developed in later times. Under the term
ma\`aqil, the constitution of the City-State of Medina, dating from the
year 1/622, the Holy Prophet laid down that the individual shall not be
required to shoulder two kinds of responsibilities alone: (1) payment of
blood-money in case of homicide, and (2) payment of ransom for prisoners
of war. It was the treasury of the tribe that was to bear these two
obligations.

Should the funds of the tribe, periodically contributed by its members,
be not sufficient at a given moment, the parent tribe and in the last
resort the Central Exchequer must come to aid. In the time of the
Prophet insurance against fire had little importance. Incidents of fire
occurred only in living quarters which were built by the inhabitants
themselves at meagre expense. In later times, marine insurance was
introduced among the Muslim merchant class. The Caliph 'Umar is reputed
to have reorganized the insurance units, and according to al-Mabsut of
al-Sarakhsi, employees of the same governmental department, members of
the same cantonment, etc., began to function as units. In still later
times, we see insurance practiced by guilds of the same profession in a
given locality.

It may be pointed out that unused contributions to such units need not
lie idle; they could be utilized for fruitful commerce to build up
reserves, and eventually profits could be divided amongst the members of
the units. There has been an attempt in recent times of this kind of
insurance among the owners of automobiles of a big city, insuring
against damages both to their cars and to their persons. Islam has not
left this kind of self-help only to a group of capitalists but has
proposed it for everyone as a measure against damages in addition to all
that the government may do.

#### (f) Administration of Justice

As explained above, the administration of justice is a necessary
concomitant of contractual relations in a society. In­expensive, prompt,
and fool-proof-such is the ideal of justice in Islam. In pre-Islamic
days, there was declaration of rights by arbiters, but no provision for
enforcement. The Holy Prophet gave Medina a constitution which made the
execution of judicial awards a central subject leaving it no longer to
tribes, much less to the individuals winning their cases. Further, in
pre-Islamic Arabia there was no law but only the common sense of the
arbiters. There was also inequity in the administration of justice.
Powerful tribes, for instance, paid half of the blood-money, and value
of women was taken as half the value of men. The said constitution
rectified these defects.

Islam established equality not only among Muslims and Muslims, but also
among Muslims and non­ Muslims, and cases are recorded of the classical
period, in which Muslims were executed for having murdered non-Muslims.
Evidence was also demanded from the parties concerned. In the very first
year of the Hijrah, the Qur'an[^27] made it obligatory to have written
documents of contracts. During his audiences, the Prophet would inquire
about the character of the witnesses before admitting their evidence. In
later times, every locality established archives of the entire
population, constantly revising remarks on personal character. Whenever
a man presented himself as a witness, the archives were consulted to
admit or reject his evidence. Further, near relatives were declared
unfit to give evidence in favor of their kinsmen. In almost all cases,
no less than two witnesses were required.

One more peculiarity of administration of justice was the autonomy
con­ceded to non-Muslim inhabitants, the principle being, for instance,
Jewish parties, Jewish Law, Jewish courts, and Jewish judges. In case
parties be­longed to different communities, a Jew versus a Christian or
a Muslim, the conflict of laws necessitated special arrangements; in
most cases parties agreed to go to the Muslim courts.

3. Penal Laws
-------------

The administration of justice described above applies mutatis mutandis
to penal cases. It appears that ordinarily capital punishment was not
enforced unless reference was made to the Caliph (Central Government).

In his celebrated farewell address during the last pilgrimage, the
Prophet chartered human rights under a triple division:
person-property-honor, and affirmed their sacrosanct character once for
all.

Let us refer to two verses of the Qur'an regarding punishment:

(a) ***“Whoever transgresses against you, so transgress against him with
the like of his transgression against you? ...” (2: 194).***

(b) ***“The compensation of an evil is an evil like thereof. ...” (40:
40).***

The wording of these verses implies that punishment is also regarded as
transgression and evil. Although many verses exhort the victim to pardon
the transgressor, yet retaliation, a time-honored institution in human
society, is allowed as a necessary evil, though never beyond the measure
of the original crime and this too perhaps only so long as a suitable
cure for the ailment of criminality has not been found.

The penal law of Islam has certain peculiarities. First, it makes a
distinc­tion between crimes of fixed penalties (hudud), and those which
allow a certain latitude to the judges. The crimes of hudud refer to
person, property, and honor. According to the classical jurists, they
are eight in number: (a) apos­tasy, (b) homicide, (c) illicit sexual
intercourse, (d) false accusation against the chastity of a woman, (e)
alcoholic drinks, (f) highway robbery and theft, (g) war, and (h)
infliction of injuries.

### (a) Apostasy

In all old and most new legal systems treason is awarded capital
punishment. We have seen that Islam has rejected color, language, land,
and similar other accidents and hazards of nature as the bases of
“nationality,” and adopted instead the “identity of outlook on life” as
the foundation to build a world-wide community. Even with its zeal for
religious propagation, Islam admits no compulsion in religion,[^28] but
intends to create a rigorous discipline among those who voluntarily
enter its fold. Such seems to be the explanation of considering apostasy
as a crime. At times one feels that Islam has needlessly provided for
that, since apostasy among Muslims is practically non-existent.

### (b) Homicide and Corporal Damages

In such cases lez talionis is not the only alternative: injured persons
and the representatives of the murdered person have been given the right
to blood-money and appropriate monetary com­pensation. The blood-money
imposed by the Holy Prophet approximately amounts to the maintenance of
a man for thirty years (expected life of the victim if he were not
murdered!). One hundred camels is the traditional blood-money. During
the battle of Badr, when the Prophet heard that the enemy slaughtered
one day nine and the next day ten camels for consumption, he concluded
that they numbered between nine hundred and one thousand combatants. If
one camel suffices for one hundred days, one hundred camels can do so
for about thirty years.

### (c) & (d) Sexual Transgression and False Accusations Affecting the Honor of Women

Consent of the parties of adults in sexual relations, even though
unmarried, gives them no immunity from the operation of the Islamic
penal code. This strictness in Islamic Law at least deters men from
behaving like dogs and asses. Despite this rigor the Prophet of Islam
has been more indulgent than Jesus Christ (as described by the Gospel
according to St. John, 8:3ff.). The Qur'an requires four eye-witnesses
for a sexual crime (as against the normal two), or confession on the
part of the culprit. Islam also intends to purify society of scandalous
talk; if anybody talks of the sexual immorality of a woman, he has to
produce at least four eye-witnesses, otherwise he is himself to be given
eighty stripes and he permanently forfeits his right to give evidence
before a tribunal.[^29]

### (e) Alcoholic Drinks

Though the Qur'an has strictly prohibited the use of intoxicants, it has
prescribed no definite punishment. The Holy Prophet, however, used to
administer forty strokes with his sandals to the intoxicated persons.
The Caliph \`Umar seeing the expansion of the evil in Muslim society
said, “Since intoxication leads to obscene talk and false accusations
against the honor of women, I shall henceforth give eighty strokes.”
(This is the Qur'anic punishment for speaking against the honor of
women.) Non-Muslims including the non-Muslim wives of Muslims are,
however, exempt from this penalty. But if the representatives of the
non-Muslims in a parliament agree on total prohibition, it is to be
enforced on them as well.

### (f) Robbery and Theft

Crimes against property have been provided with severe penalties. As to
the results, it may suffice to refer to a case from con­temporary
history. Who does not know the pillaging of the pilgrims, during the
time of Sharif Husain? When ibn Sa\`ud got power in the Hijaz, he
reinstituted the Islamic sanctions against theft, with the result that
people began to feel that they were given the security of the times of
abu Bakr and 'Umar. In 1359/1939, part of the baggage of a lady pilgrim
was found missing at an intermediary station between Mecca and Medina.

The police were alerted. Even after two weeks of investigation, the
police were unable to trace the thief, but the Sa\`udian Government
ordered payment of the value of the stolen goods to the victim and the
amount was immediately paid. The much maligned punishment of cutting the
hands of a thief is waived in the case of theft committed by the needy
and according to many jurists also in the case of children and the
mentally diseased.

### (g) War

As everybody knows, international law means the rules that govern
relations of States in times of war, peace, and neutrality. If
suppression of theft and robbery requires partial mobilization of the
forces of order and security, foreign invasion requires the same
measures on a larger scale. Hence the inclusion of international law by
Muslim jurists in the section on penal laws, and its treatment
immediately after the section on highway robbery. Apart from its logic,
the important point to note is that international law forms an integral
part of the Islamic Law and is not left to discretion. In the
international law the accused has the same rights of defending his
conduct before a tribunal as, say, a robber who is captured and tried.
An old author aptly says: “Among the happenings of a certain time a war
is like sickness in contrast to peace and security which resemble
health. It is necessary to take steps against warlike activities to
preserve peace as it is necessary to fight against disease.”[^30]

### (h) Infliction of Injuries (Mazalim)

Under this category fall the crimes other than those determined by the
hudud. Judges are given wide latitude for inflicting appropriate
punishment according to the circumstances of each case. Nevertheless,
the ruler has to prescribe certain rules defining the dis­cretionary
powers of the judges.

H - Muslim Contribution To Law
------------------------------

1. However unbelievable it may look at first sight, it is a fact that
the science of law, in its theoretical sense, did not exist in the world
before Islam.

Law did indeed exist in Rome, Greece, China, India, Mesopotamia, Egypt,
pre-Columbian America, and elsewhere, yet it was Imam Shafi'i (b.
150/767) who first thought of the science of law or jurisprudence as
case-law. His book al-Risalah fi Usul al-Filth speaks of the origins and
sources of Law, alt also of the methods of legislation, interpretation
and application of law and many allied topics. Al-Shafl'i gave this
science the expressive name usitcl al-Filth (the roots of Law) in
contradistinction to the general laws of a land, which were named as
“branches” (/uru') shooting out from these roots. Some generations
afterwards, the Muslim jurists created a new science, called
khilafiyyat, i.e., “comparative Law,” restricted to the study of the
different schools of Muslim Law and dealing with the grounds and
consequences of differences amongst the various jurists.[^31]

2. The principle of intention, in spite of much research, has not been
found in earlier laws. This was first introduced by the celebrated
saying of the Holy Prophet: “Actions are (to be judged) by intentions
(inns-ma al-a'mal bi al-niyyat),” quoted by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and all
the other authorities, the echo of which we hear in the celebrated
address of the Prophet given during his last pilgrimage.

3. The idea of ethical value as the basis of legal injunctions is also
unique in the legal history of the world. The credit of initiating it
goes to the Qur'an.

4. International law has existed in the world since times immemorial,
yet in antiquity it was neither international nor law. For, ordinarily,
it was reserved only for resolving disputes of a country with certain
other countries and nations only; Islam extended its scope to the entire
world, without making any geo­graphical and political limitations.
Again, in antiquity it was not considered to be law, but formed part of
a country's political discretion; Islam made it a part of Law. This is
testified by the fact that all books of Fiqh from the very beginning
have dealt with international law under the section named Siyar.
Further, before Islam, the subject was treated in books of politics and
manuals of statecraft like the Artha Sastra of Kautilya, or the Politics
of Aristotle. The Muslims made it an independent branch of Law, and
devoted special monographs to it, the earliest of which is attributed to
abu Hanifah. The works of the pupils of this master, abu Yusuf and
Muhammad al-Shai­bani, have come down to us and have partly been
printed.[^32]

5. The first written constitution of a State in the world, as
promulgated by a sovereign, came from the Holy Prophet of Islam. The
text constituting the City-State of Medina in the first year of the
Hijrah (622) has been pre­served in toto, and comprises fifty-two
articles, dealing with such questions as independence vis-a-vis the rest
of the world, war and peace, administration of justice, legislation,
religious tolerance with regard to non-Muslim subjects, social
insurance, asylum, naturalization, etc.[^33]

6. Lastly, it is interesting to note that the Muslims as a people always
kept legislation (and so also judiciary) separate from the executive.
The develop­ment of Muslim Law as deduced from the Qur'an and the Hadith
has always been the work of private savants and jurists. Tradition has
insisted that the State should not interfere with this work, much less
monopolize it. It is the freedom of juristic judgment which creates
conflicting opinions and alternative solutions, and these provide the
coming generations with raw material for sound judgment. These
conflicting opinions have given rise to different schools of
jurisprudence; yet in one's comparative study of international law in
Sunnite, Sh'i'ite, and Kharijite schools and their sub-schools one is
agreeably surprised that, despite their water-tight divisions, there are
practically no differences of vital significance.

I - Interactions
----------------

Ernest Nys (in his Les Origins du droit international, which has also an
Urdu translation published by the Osmania University) shows the great
in­fluence of Muslim international law, particularly on Spanish
Christian writers, who first inaugurated the study of international law
in modern Europe. Later on, the Dutch Hugo Grotius, who is considered to
be the father of international law, also refers to Muslim practices.
Many savants allude to the Muslim influence on the famous Code Napoleon,
the basis of modern Western legislation. Many provisions of the Islamic
law of inheritance, divorce, etc., are now being adopted by and
necessary modifications made in Hindu Law by the modern Indian
legislature.

Foreign elements in Muslim Law have already been shown in the section on
“Sources.” Far from being the chief determinant of the growth of Muslim
Law, as it is sometimes claimed, Roman law in its influence on Muslim
Law has been of the least significance.[^34] No early Muslim jurists,
except al-Auza'i hailed from an ex-Byzantine territory. All of them were
either the Hi- jazian Arabs or belonged to Persian families which had
lived as Muslims for at least two generations. Even al-Auza'i was not of
Syrian origin for his father was among the captives brought from
Sind.[^35] And, therefore, he could not be suspected of having inherited
any part of the Byzantine traditions.

J - Further Possibilities
-------------------------

A modest yet practical procedure to adapt Muslim Law to present
con­ditions has been suggested in the colloquium recently published by
the “Law Number” of the Karachi monthly Chiragh-i Rah. Muslims should
not remain content with their past, however glorious that past. The
raison d'etre of their existence is their constant struggle to become
the very best community, a model for the whole of humanity-the community
enjoining the good (ma'ruf, interdicting the evil (munkar), and
believing in God.[^36]

“Influence of Roman Law on Muslim Law,” Hyderabad Academy Journal, Vol.
VI, 1943, and Imam Abu Hanifah ki Tadwin-i Qanun-i Islami (Urdu),
Karachi.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Shafi\`i, al-Risalah fc Usal al-Filth (several editions); ibn
al-Qayyim, al-Turuq al-Hikmiyyah; I'lam al-Muwaggi'in; Shah Wali Allah
al-Dihlawi, Hujjat Allah al-Balighah; al-Budur al-Bazighah; Izalat
al-khifa' (in Persian); al-khadri, Tarikh al-Tashri al-Islam (also Urdu
tr.); Ahmad Taimdr Pasha, al-Madhahib al-Arba'ah; 'Abd al-Rahim,
Muhammadan Jurisprudence (also Urdu tr.); D. B. Macdonald, Development
of Muslim Theology, Jurisprudence and Constitutional Theory (also Urdu
translation); Ostrorog, Angora Reform (particularly the Chap. “Roots of
Law”).

[^1]: Al-Mustaf/a, I, 55-56 (ed. Bulaq, 1322 A.H.).

[^2]: Al-Qur'an, iii, 104, 110, 114; vii, 157; ix, 67, 71, 112, etc.

[^3]: Abu Dawud, Aqdiyyah, 6

[^4]: Perhaps it will be useful to remind that Islam in the pre-Hijrah
period had no temporal authority and the Prophet proceeded gradually
from suggestion to recommendation before finally ordering and
prescribing sanctions. In the Meccan period there was neither a fixed
amount, nor a fixed time of the year, nor even an organization to
collect and disburse the taxes; all these measures were taken during the
Medinese period. The sense of the terms with regard to taxes underwent a
profound change when “charity” became a State duty; the Qur'an and the
Hadith retained the old terms, with the advantage that the people were
persuaded to believe that to pay tax to the government was no less
meritorious in the sight of God than charity and almsgiving, and that
zakat was the best kind of charity. The Caliphs retained the same terms.

[^5]: Al-Qur'an, vi, 90

[^6]: ‘Ibid. ii, 246ff.

[^7]: “And there are some men who say: Our Lord, give us a good in this
world and also a good in the next world, and deliver us from the torment
of the fire. Such shall have a portion of that which they have gained”
(al-Qur'an, ii, 201-02). “Seek the abode of the hereafter in that which
God hath given thee and neglect not thy portion of this world ...”
(ibid. xxviii, 77).

[^8]: Al-Qur'An, xxxiii, 21; lix, 7, etc.

[^9]: As to the references and details of this and the following
statements of the paragraph, see Hamidullah, Sahilah Hammam Ibn Munabbih
(both Arabic and Urdu editions), Introduction.

[^10]: Al-Qur'an, iv, 24.

[^11]: Ibid. vi, 90.

[^12]: Ibid. ii, 75, 79; iv, 46; v, 13, 41.

[^13]: Al-Bukhari, Kashf al-Asrar'ala Usid al-Bazdawi, III, 262.

[^14]: Idem, Sahih, Chap. “iman,” section 44.

[^15]: Consult the very interesting book Poll Tax in Islam by Dorman.

[^16]: Abu Yusuf, Kharaj (Bulaq edition), p. 78.

[^17]: See for references and discussion on this point, Hamidullah,
Muslim Conduct of State, Lahore, 1953, pp. 17-38.

[^18]: Hujjat Allah al-Balighah, Vol. I, Chap. “Asrar al-Saleh,” cited
in Introduction to Islam, Centre Culturel Islamique, Paris

[^19]: Al-Qur'an, ix, 60.

[^20]: Al-Ahkam at-Sultaniyyah, Chap. “Zakat.” (The author was a
contemporary of al-Mawardi, and both composed their books with the same
title.)

[^21]: Al-Qur'an, IV, 29.

[^22]: Based on a saying of the Prophet: “Muslims abide by the
conditions they have contracted, except the condition which permits a
Haram (forbidden thing)”; cf. al-Tirmidhi, Chap. “Ahkam,” 17, etc.

[^23]: Edward Westermarck, History of Human Marriage, French tr. Gennep,
Paris, 1943, Vol. V, pp. 54-56; Encyclopaedia Britannica, “Polygamy.”

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Al-Qur'an, ii, 279

[^26]: Ibid., ii, 275.

[^27]: Ibid. ii, 282.

[^28]: Ibid., ii, 256

[^29]: Ibid. xxiv, 4.

[^30]: Hasan ibn 'Abd Allah, Athar al-Uwal fi Tartib al-Duwal, compiled
in 708 H., p. 167.

[^31]: See Hamidullah, “Used al-figh'm tarihi,” in the Islam Tetkikteri
Enstiusu Dergisi, of Istanbul University, II, 1956-57, pp. 1-18. Also
the French tr., Annates of the Faculty of Law of the same University,
1959.

[^32]: Extensive literature has been published in European languages
during the last few decades, references to which can be found in the
bibliography given in Muslim Conduct of State by Hamidullah, Lahore,
1953.

[^33]: It goes to the credit of Wellhausen to have made this
constitution known to the Western world for the first time, under the
title Gemeindeordnung von Medina (published in Vol. IV of his book
Skizzen and Vorarbeiten). For English tr., see Hamidullah, “The First
Written Constitution of the World,” Islamic Review, Woking, 1941. For
Urdu tr., see his 'Ahd Nabawi ka Nizam-i Hukmrdni. A more recent and
detailed discussion and analysis is given in Le Prophete de l'Islam, 8a
vie et son oeuvre, Paris, 1959. For the Arabic text, see al-Watha'iq al
Siyasiyyah.

[^34]: There is now considerable literature in favor of this thesis. For
instance, Nallino's Italian article (English tr. “Impossibility of the
Influence of Roam Law on Muslim Law” in the Voice of Islam, Karachi,
Vol. I); Bousquet, “Le Mystere do la formation et des origins du Filth,”
published in Reveu Algerienne, Alger, July-September 1947, Urdu
translation in Ma'ari f, Azamgarh; see also Hamidullah,

[^35]: Al-Dhahabi, Tabagat al-Huffaz, s.v. “Auzh'i.”

[^36]: Al-Qur'hn, iii, 110.


