Chapter 62: Geography
=====================

Philosophy in the past ages was not merely an academic subject studied
by specialists; it was a living influence which guided men in their
ideas about the universe and it included a variety of fields covering
theology, law, society, and the sciences. To the Muslims during the
Middle Ages philo­sophy and its various disciplines were all-embracing.
Geographic ideas were inseparable from philosophic thinking as they were
basic to a widening of horizons. Indeed, interest in geography is as old
as recorded human history. This had its roots in ancient folklore,
poetry, and travel. The geographical instinct in one form or another
developed early among organized human communities, and the people of the
ancient civilizations possessed a variety of geographic knowledge.

It is well known to historians that the culture of Greece was preceded
by a continuous and composite culture in Western Asia and Egypt and that
this culture in its turn was not the product of the genius of any one
people, but was shaped by an ever-increasing human intercourse and was
the fructi­fication of a long evolution. Thus, Greek geographical ideas
too had a basis in the past and in the experience of other peoples.
Philosophy and poetry formed the tap-roots of the geographic knowledge
of the Greeks. Similarly, in Arab times both Greek ideas and Islamic
philosophy and literature were potent factors in the evolution of
geographic concepts.

Early Greek contributions to geography were as varied as they were
bril­liant. Later on, Alexander's campaigns were of the nature of
geographical exploration under arms. In the course of time the center of
scientific activity shifted to Alexandria. Science and geography
continued to flourish in the Greco-Roman age, though under somewhat
different cultural atmosphere. In fact, the Greco-Roman culture was
subjected to a terrible ordeal. It witnessed one of the greatest
intellectual conflicts in history, the clash between Greek ideals and
the various oriental religions, chiefly Judaism and Christianity.

But before Christianity could triumph, the great geographer Ptolemy (c.
150 A.D.) had accomplished his work of coordinating the sum total of
geographic knowledge up to his time, though a little earlier Strabo (c.
19 A.D.) had contributed even more brilliantly in terms of geographic
analysis. He had also indicated the extent of the knowledge of the
Romans about the land and people of Arabia. Describing Gellus'
expedition in 25 B. C. to Haura on the Red Sea coast to the borders of
Hadramaut, Strabo says that the Emperor Augustus was also influenced by
reports of the wealth of the Arabs and their trading activity in spices,
aromatics, and precious stones, and that he desired either to befriend
or subdue such opulent people.[^1]

By the third century A. D. distinct changes had taken place in the
political, cultural, and religious spheres. The Roman Empire came near
to utter break­down. The legions, never too many for the long frontiers
and made increasingly heterogeneous by local recruiting, lost their
sense of mutual cohesion and failed to check stronger outside attacks.
Many emperors rose and fell like ninepins, un-mourned, unsung. Rome was
sacked by Goths in 410 A.D. By the middle of the sixth century A. D.,
Justinian's final efforts at consolidation of the Roman power had
failed.

The commencement of the middle Ages is important in the history of
science in general and geography in particular. A general retrogression
is witnessed and gradually the so-called “Dark Age” of geography set in.
It is common to begin the middle Ages from Constantine, but Paganism was
tolerated almost until the division of the Roman Empire in 395A.D. The
tradition of pagan literature and science, however, continued much
longer, at least until Justinian closed the school of Athens.

The triumph of Chris­tianity led its adherents to consider scientific
research not only a useless occupation but also a pernicious one.
Alexandria had lost its noble place as the center of scientific
activity, and Egypt for the Christians had become a land of new wonders
as the first home of hermits or desert men or monks; some visitors had
no interest in anything else and dismissed the pyramids as mere
“Granaries of the Kings.”[^2] A sailor turned monk took a hand at
geographical writing and produced the crankiest of books, the famous
Christian Topo­graphy, in 547 A.D.

The main purpose of this erudition was to disprove the pagan notion that
the earth is a globe. Cosmas hailed from Alexandria and had in his
younger days traded in the Red Sea and even beyond. Cosmas' earth was
flat, rectangular, and oblong, twice as long from east to west as from
north to south, and was surrounded by ocean. A high mountain rose in the
north behind which the tiny sun played hide and seek to bring forth days
and nights. Beazley rightly called Cosmas' work a “systematic nonsense.”
Saint Ambrose saw no profit in investigations about the earth. Science,
geo­graphy, and all such pursuits were dubbed as magic art. The
spherical shape of the earth and the existence of antipodes were
favorite subjects of ridicule.

Thus, the geography of the early centuries of the Christian era was a
fascinat­ing mixture. Perhaps it seldom represented the full amount of
contemporary knowledge and was largely made up of traditional elements,
Christian and classical, blended in various proportions. The first came
from a literal reading of the Scriptures and other-worldly attitude of
the protagonists of the Church. It appears that Christianity spread
first through the urban commercial popula­tion round the Mediterranean,
whose lingua franca was Greek. It was only later on that it penetrated
into the hinterland and overspread into the vast rural areas of outer
provinces. Thus, Greek science received a frontal attack in its most
important centers. In this refutation of earlier knowledge, interest in
science and rational geographic concepts could be retained only by a
hand­ful of people in Christendom. Only the Nestorians, the
Monophysites, and some of their adherents kept a semblance of Greek
science preserved.

During the first/seventh century there arose an epoch-making movement
from the depths of the Arabian Peninsula. It was Islam. It brought about
the establishment of one of the greatest empires the world has seen. The
Arabs conquered a large number of peoples who were superior to them in
culture. Nevertheless, the conquerors did not lose their national
characteristics and subjected Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and North
Africa to their ethno­graphical influences.

As soon as early conquests were over and cultural contact was
established with Greek and Indian knowledge, Muslims became imbued with
tremendous curiosity and took up the cause of science with enthusiasm at
different centers of their culture. Early Islamic attitude to science
was one of tolerance, even enlightened interest. It is evidenced by the
continuance of the academy at Jundi-Shaper as a scientific center in the
Muslim Empire. Scientists from this center in Persia were welcomed at
Damascus, the capital of the Umayyad Caliphate. These men were mostly
Christians and Jews.[^3]

Further, the Arabs were traders, travelers, and lawyers, and they had
somewhat positive minds and, therefore, practical sciences appealed to
them. Arabic was suitable for exact and precise sciences and lent itself
more easily to the formation of technical terms. Geography especially
appealed to them because of its utility to serve the needs of commerce,
the division of land, travel through the deserts, knowledge of the
plants and animals, and to find the azimuth of Mecca and the phases of
the moon.

The Arabs had a traditional interest in matters concerning geographical
knowledge. Even before the birth of Christ and after, they were among
the foremost traders and navigators of the Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean,
and Chinese waters. The Arabic language of that period abounds in words
for ships, boats, condition of the sea surface, storms, heavenly bodies,
and commodities of exchange and trade. These activities were greatly
influenced by the geo­graphy of the Arabian Peninsula and its midway
position between the East and the West and the littoral situation of all
its fertile lands in Yamamah, Oman, Bahrain, the Yemen, etc. Even the
Hijaz, though largely arid, lay along the trade-routes from the Arabian
and Red Seas to the Mediterranean world.

Pre-Islamic poetry contains references to navigation and sailings, and
the Holy Qur'an itself abounds in navigational terminology and
descriptions of conditions of the sea and ships and boats used. There
was a close relation­ship between land journeys as well as between sea
voyages and the knowledge of stars and other heavenly bodies. The inland
Arabs with scanty agriculture and nomadic economy were always face to
face with such problems as sources and extent of grazing opportunities,
distribution of desert plants and animals, and the nature of
geomorphological features. Therefore, Arab interest in geo­graphical
matters was a deep one. It needed various stimuli such as extension of
territorial influence, expanded trading opportunities, greater cultural
con­tacts, and a vigorous religious zeal to widen the frontiers of
geographic knowledge.[^4]

Within a century of the advent of Islam, the Arab victories brought them
a rich reward in the conquest of prosperous lands and cultured
com­munities, from the Mediterranean to India and Central Asia. On the
one hand, the Arabs became the heirs to the Hellenistic culture for
which a way was earlier opened by the conquest of Alexander. On the
other, they reached the homeland of Indian culture and Buddhist and
Indian thought. It is rightly assumed that the Arabs became the pupils
of and successors to the Greeks in science and, through their own
efforts and ingenuity perfected it for the future protagonists.

Indian influence in the first instance was the product of a continuing
com­mercial contact via the sea-route from Ujjain, the town of
Brahmagupta (c. 6/628), the famous writer of the astronomical manual
Brahma Siddhdnta. Muslim conquest of Central Asia brought them into
touch with Buddhism and old Greek colonies in the regions of Bactria,
Sogdiana, Farghanah, and Merv.

The establishment of the 'Abbaside Caliphate in 132/750A.D. ushered in
an age of glory, power, pomp, splendor, culture, and prosperity for the
peoples under Muslim rule. Scientific activity took its birth and in
this process the inauguration of translation activity in Baghdad,
systematically organized under a Translation Bureau (Bait al-Hikmah),
was a tremendous step for­ward. The Bureau had a library and permanent
personnel, and translators were commissioned from far and wide.
Manuscripts were even paid for their weight in gold. The main aim was to
make available in the Arabic language the wisdom and the science of the
Greeks and others.

Translations also included works in many sciences by an array of able
translators. Among the sciences which received special attention were
physics, meteorology, mineralogy, botany, astronomy, and geography. The
early phase of trans­lations was concerned more with medical and
philosophical works, but later on mathematical, astronomical, and
geographical subjects received more attention. The Caliph al-Mamum took
active interest in the work of his translators and scientists. Among his
great achievements were the measure­ment of a degree of the earth's arc
on the plains of Sinjar, west of Mosul, and the construction of a world
map. Both the tasks were of great geographi­cal significance and were
accomplished by a team of scientists.

The period of early translations was of great importance to the
developing intellectual and scientific life of Muslim society. The Greek
writers, who influenced the Arab scholars most were not poets,
historians, or orators, but largely the scientists in various fields
such as mathematics, astronomy, medicine, philosophy, and geography. For
instance, the scientific works of Aristotle received far greater
attention than did the writings of Plato and Socrates.

Before the content of Muslim contributions to geography is examined, a
few points must be clarified. The birth of scientific activity under
Islam has indispensable relevance to Muslim geographic thinking. The
passage of Greek science to the Arabs revealed to them Hellenistic
geographic concepts which had received slashing denunciations from
orthodox Christian writers. Therefore, the first task of Arab
geographers was the revival of the older science.

Muslim geographers held Ptolemy in high regard and greatly valued his
monumental work. But he did not escape their criticism, and numerous
improvements in his concepts were suggested. Even Ptolemy was not able
to combine the mathematical with the descriptive and statistical methods
in geography. As regards the latter, Strabo was far more alive and was
more critical in his writings than Ptolemy. These traditions were passed
on to Arab writers and, therefore, quite a number of Muslim geographers
can be categorized under them. But Arab geographers branched out into so
many new directions and were so prolific in their output that a somewhat
broader clas­sification of their contributions is called for. Muslim
interest in geography was stimulated by a variety, of factors such as
environmental, religious or spiri­tual, administrative, political, and
commercial.

Muslim military campaigns were well planned and superbly executed and
the generals and commanders collected much geographical data before
con­ducting their operations. The organization of administration,
collection of revenue, and appraisal of resources of the newly conquered
territories required detailed geographical information. It is said that
the great Caliph 'Umar, hearing of the conquest of new lands, asked a
scholar to describe to him the lands of the earth, their climates and
positions, and the influence which land and climate exert upon their
inhabitants.[^5] Both scholars and religious leaders considered
geography a laudable pursuit, as is borne out by the remark of Yaquit
that as a science geography was pleasing in the eyes of God. Even the
orthodox al-Ghazali believed that the votaries of science will find the
road to paradise easy. Muslim religious interest in the determination of
latitude and longitude of places and in the diurnal movement of the sun
was indispensable both in connection with the time for daily prayers and
the geographical co-ordinates of Mecca. With the expansion of the
dominions of the Muslim Empire, commercial activity increased and
geographical infor­mation of different types became vital for its growth
and development.

Regional geography received early attention and contained an enormous
wealth of details and information. It developed its own traditions, and
the variety in approach to it and the ingenuity of the individual
geographers make many contributions to it a fascinating reading. The
writings of notable travelers, the specialist studies of the
topographers, and the critical works of the socio­geographers lend an
immense variety and color to Muslim geography. There­fore, it may be
convenient to examine the Muslim contribution to geography under the
following headings:

(A) General and Regional Geography.

(B) General Treatises and Scientific Geography.

(C) Mathematical Geography.

(D) Cartography and Map-making.

A - General And Regional Geography
----------------------------------

Muslim interest in general geographical writing developed early. This
class of geographical writing has a wide range and includes some of the
earliest contributions in this field. General geographical descriptions
of the Muslim world were a favorite theme and in view of the needs of
administration and extension of the postal services many works were
written as “Route Books.” Diaries and travel accounts were yet another
category of geographical writing. As a result of the unsatisfactory
basis of descriptions in relation to hypothetical “Climatic Divisions”
in parallel latitudinal strips (a Greek legacy) many Muslim geographers
felt the necessity of describing the dominions of Islam on the basis of
regions of which they possessed more specific know­ledge. It may be said
to be the beginning of a regional consciousness.

Among the earliest known works dealing with geographical matters are
those of 'Abd al-Malik ibn Quraib al-Asma'i and Hisham ibn Muhammad
al-Kalbi. Al-Asma\`i of Basrah (123-216/740-831) wrote on plants,
animals, and the evolution of human society. Al-Kalbi (d. 205/820) was
an authority on the history of pre-Islamic Arabia and it is said that
his work Kitab al­-Nawadir [^6]contained observations on many
geographical topics. Similarly, one of the early treatises on
agriculture was ibn Wahshiyyah's (c.288/900) book on Nabataean
agriculture. Abu Yusuf Ya\`qub al-Kindi (c. 260/873-874), though
primarily a philosopher and physicist, wrote a geographical work called
Rasm al-Ma\`mar min al-Ard (Description of the Inhabited Part of the
Earth).

But the work of Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (d. 236/850) laid the
foundation of Arab geographical science. By writing Kitdab surat al-Ard
(Treatise on the Face of the Earth) he syncretized Greek and Hindu
knowledge. He was a mathematician of great repute and is said to have
collaborated in the degree measurements ordered by Caliph al-Mamun. He
improved Ptolemy's geo­graphy, both as regards the text and the maps.
His scientific attainments are universally acknowledged by the
Orientalists. Another early geographical work which was concerned with
Arabia was that of Arram ibn al-Asbaj al-­Sulami (c. 231/845) who wrote
Kitab Asma' Jibal Tihamah wa Makaniha dealing with the mountains of
Tihamah in Arabia. This work was mentioned by al-Sirafi, and another
book by the same author bearing the title Jazirat al-'Arab was mentioned
by Yaqut in his “Dictionary of Learned Men” (Mu\`jam at-Udabu') [^7]

### 1. The Route Books

After the early geographical writings mentioned above had appeared and
the initial phase of translations had come to an end, an interesting
class of geographical literature was produced which is contained in the
so-called “Route Books” (Kutub al-Masalik w-al-Mamalik). Quite a
tradition developed in the writing of these route books and many later
authors copied the technique of the earlier masters. In this respect,
ibn Khurdadhbih (c. 300/912) blazed a new trail with his famous Kitdab
al-Masalik wa-al-Mamalik (A Book on Routes and Kingdoms). He provided an
excellent summary of the main trade­ routes of the Arab world and also
wrote descriptions of China, Korea, and Japan. The work served almost as
a source for later writers. Unfortunately, only an abridged version of
the book is extant.

Al-Marwazi (d. 274/887) also wrote a route book which was mentioned by
ibn al-Nadim and Ya'qub. Sarakhsi (d.286/899), who was a pupil of
al-Kindi, gave the same title to his geographical work and abu al-Faraj
al-Baghdadi (d. 310/922) compiled Kitab al-Kharaj (Revenue Book) dealing
with land tax and postal services in the context of the geography of the
Arab Empire. Al-Jaihani (fl. c. 280-295/893­907), the learned minister
at the Samanid Court, wrote another revenue book replete with
geographical explanations, and it is surmised[^8] that it was one of the
source materials for al-Idrisi. Abu Zaid al-Balkhi (d. 322/933) produced
another route book along the traditional lines, but his real fame as a
geographer rests on his somewhat more scientific contribution, namely,
Kitab al-Ashkal or Suwar al-Aqalim (Figures of the Climates).

Al-Istakhri (fl. c. 339/950) followed in the footsteps of his senior
contemporary al-Balkhi by writing a similar book and using the technique
of explaining maps by the accompanying text. Ibn Haugal revised and
rewrote Istakhri's book with considerable additional information in
367/977. These three geographers form an important group who combined
their writings of descriptive geography with carto­graphic work and
scientific analysis and, therefore, this category of their work will
receive mention later on.

In Spain, al-Bakri (d. 487/1094) of Cordova used the same technique and
method to write his route book and geographical dictionary notable for
their useful information about Europe and North Africa.

### 2. Books of Countries and Dictionaries

The route books were written from an administrative angle but they
in­variably developed into geographical treatises. They were generally
concrete, accurate, and detailed.[^9] Closely related to the route
books, yet enlarging on their scope and subject-matter, were the large
number of “Books of Countries” and geographical dictionaries and
gazetteers. Among the early writers of such tracts and a notable Arab
geographer and historian was al-Ya'qubi who wrote Kitab al-Buldan (Book
of Countries) in 278/891, giving a wide range of topographical and
economic details and occasionally bringing out the relationship between
physical factors and human activity.

Topographical details about the cities of Kifah, Baghdad, Samarrah, and
Basrah and regional descriptions of many areas in Arabia, Syria, Egypt,
Nubia, and North Africa, are some of the outstanding features of this
book. His pioneer work as a geographer deserves high praise, and it is
not surprising that modern European writers often call him the father of
Muslim geography. Shortly before Ya'qubi an outstanding historical work
with many geographical observations had been written by al-Baladhuri (in
256/869) under the title Futuh al-Buldan (Conquests of Countries). This
work typifies Muslim interest in the history and geography of the newly
acquired territories. Al-Hamadani's “Book of Countries” written in
290/902 was utilized by notable geographers like Mas'ndi and Yaqut;
unfortunately, it is lost. A contemporary of al-Hamadani was ibn Rustah
(fl. c. 291/903); his encyclopedia al-A'laq al-Nafisah dealt with
geographical matters in its seventh volume. He discussed a variety of
topics including the extent of the earth, seas, rivers, climate,
founding of Mecca and Medina, and the regional geography of Iran.

Ibn Rustah's account of the road system of the empire and particularly
of the great Khurasan road remains outstanding for its clear details and
geographic implications. A few years later ibn al-Ha'ik (d. 334/945)
presented his regional geography of Arabia in Kitab Jazirat al-'Arab
dealing with physical features, minerals, races, tribes, and
settlements. He also contributed a semi-geographical work al-Ikhil on
the archaeological aspects of the Yemen. Muhallabi (375/985) was the
author of an outstanding geographical work dealing with the Sudan. It
was the first work of its kind for this remote region and formed Yaqut's
main source for the geography of the Sudan.

An interesting geographical work of the fourth/tenth century written in
Persian was entitled Hudud al-'Alam (c. 372/982) by an unknown author.
It is meant to be a world geography on a regional basis and was probably
written as a preface to a map. Minorsky has produced an excellently
edited and an­notated version of this notable work.[^10]

The western wing of Islam in Spain also produced many contemporary
geographers who wrote route books, books of countries, and works of
regional descriptions. Al-Tariqi (d. 363/973) wrote on North Africa.
Al-Bakri of Cordova (d.487/1094) was a celebrated geographer who
compiled a geographical diction­ary, Mu'jam ma Ista'jam as well as a
route book. These works incorporate fresh material on Central and
Eastern Europe and North Africa. Al-Zuhri of Granada (c.532/1137) was
the writer of a notable work, Kitab al-Jaghrafia (Book of Geography). It
appears that al-Zuhri was able to utilize the work of the team of
geographers of the reign of Caliph al-Mamun. Al-Munajjim (d. 456/1068)
was the compiler of a geographical dictionary which both al-Idrisi and
ibn Khaldun mention as one of their source materials. And there were
many lesser lights who followed these masters in compilation.

But the art of depicting geographical and associated information in the
form of a dictionary attained its highest form from the pen of Ya'qub
Hamawi. His work was done almost at the crossroads of history, shortly
before the Tartar invasion engulfed the eastern lands of Islam. After
considerable travel in his younger days and study in several libraries,
he produced his monumental geographical dictionary known as Mu'jam
al-Buldun in 621/1224. This great work contains a geographical
gazetteer, a regional world geography, and much topographical,
historical, and archaeological information. It deals with geo­graphy in
the broadest manner. His other well-known work Mu'jam al ­Udaba',
dealing with lives of learned men, is also replete with geographical
information. Yaqut utilized a variety of sources including many of those
which are now extinct. His dictionary 'contains a treatise dealing with
geo­graphy in general from many points of view.

### 3. Diaries and Travel Accounts

Travel has always been the easiest and the most natural means of
acquiring and propagating geographic knowledge. In the medieval period
of Islam travel was promoted in many ways. Religio-cultural affiliations
with far-flung parts of the world, curiosity, commercial enterprise, and
above all the urge for pilgrimage excited widespread interest in travel.
Thus, Muslim travel literature in the shape of diaries and descriptions
and experiences of journeys contains a treasure-house of geographical
information.

For Muslims, the pilgrimage to Mecca was not a matter of choice; it was
their positive 1luty within the limits of possibility to undertake it.
Mecca was the ever-present magnet to attract their thoughts and thus
there ran into Arabia a constant stream of visitors from all parts of
the Islamic world. The hay)' every year was a unique international
assemblage by which people from distant lands, diverse environments, and
varied experiences exchanged ideas and acquired knowledge of countries
and inhabitants of the world. It was a tremendous incentive to the
spread of geographical knowledge.

With the spread of Islam and the extension of its political influence,
trade and commerce greatly expanded resulting in the knowledge of new
lands. In the Euro-Asian continent these regions were the Volga-Caspian,
Northern Europe, and Siberia on the one hand and Central and South-East
Asia on the other. The African continent received far more attention
from the Muslims than from their predecessors. The East African coast up
to Madagascar, Egypt, Nubia, Abyssinia, the Sudan, Equatorial Africa,
the Sahara, land of the Niger, and West Africa, all came within the
range of their commercial, cultural, and religious activities.

Travel and commerce walked hand in hand. Each geographical discovery
created new commercial opportunities, and these, with attendant
competition and inherent ambitions, led to more travel and discoveries.
At a later period the Crusades, besides their sordid side, provided for
generations a great and prolonged avenue for contact between the East
and the West for exchange of ideas and cultural assimilation. Trade,
commerce, and travel were promoted and helped the circulation of
geographical information.

Ibn Fadlan went as an envoy of Caliph al-Muqtadir to the Court of the
Volga Bulghar in 309/921 and is credited with the first reliable account
of Russia. He may, in fact, be regarded as one of the earliest Muslim
traveler-­geographers. His Risalah or diary is of great geographic
significance. His description is the earliest reliable account of Russia
and was incorporated into the works of many later geographers including
Yaqut.[^11] Another ex­perienced early traveler was abu Dulaf who hailed
from Yanbu' near Medina. He combined poetic talents with a wander-lust.
After a stay at the Samanid Court at Bukhara, he went to South India
across Tibet with a returning Indian embassy and the journey back was
made via Kashmir, Afghanistan, and Sijistan (c. 331/942). His narrative
of journeys was entitled \`Aja'ib al­Buldun (Marvels of Countries). Abu
Dulaf's geographical impressions of the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent and
the adjoining areas were utilized by Yaqut and Qazwini. Among early
Muslim travelers, al-Idrisi mentioned Sallam who visited the region
north of the Caspian Sea, Armenia, Georgia, land of the Khazars, and the
Ural and Altai areas in the middle of the third/ninth century at the
command of Caliph al-Wathiq.[^12]

With increasing Muslim influence in Indian littoral areas and expanding
commerce in South-East Asian waters and on the Chinese mainland, more
detailed and somewhat accurate geographical information was in demand.
The busiest and flourishing ports on the Arabian coast and Persian Gulf
were Aden, Oman, Suhar, Jeddah, Siraf, and Basrah. Their commerce and
overseas relations were mainly with East Africa, Indian coasts,
South-East Asia, and China. Siraf especially occupied a pre-eminent
position and grew into a port-city of merchants, princes, and
experienced sailors.

One of the early writings on trade and commerce and navigational matters
in these regions was that on the journeys of Sulaiman the Merchant by an
anonymous author (237/851) with the additional comments on it by abu
Zaid al-Sirafi. The work gives us information with regard to duration of
the journey, its various stages, ports of call, nature of commodity
exchange, wind and weather, and conditions of the seas. The descriptions
display an excellent geographical sense and an understanding of physical
and human aspects. Sulaiman's description of the Chinese mainland, its
products and economic resources is realistic. He also mentions the
Chinese use of tea. Interest in the Indian Ocean and its bordering lands
continued for generations and Muslim sailors and travelers wrote on many
topics which encompass geography.

Abu Zaid al-Hasan of Siraf edited accounts of Muslim travelers and
sailors in c. 308/920 in order to supplement Sulaiman's narratives.
According to him, ibn Wahb travelled to China in 257/870 and there were
other voyages in that direction. Abu Zaid's compilation was probably
entitled Akhbar al-Sin w-al­Hind (Information about China and India). It
may be said to be the most important work of its kind before that of
Marco Polo or of ibn Battutah. Besides the Far East, it deals with the
Arabian and the East African coasts. From such voyages and confirming
somewhat earlier traditions also, gradually developed the stories and
fascinating fables around the name of “Sindbad the Sailor” found in the
All Lailah wa-Lailah. Another writer about the trade, commerce,
navigation, peoples, and products of the Indian Ocean area from Arabia
to Ceylon and beyond was Buzurg ibn Shahryar who compiled the
interesting book \`Aja'ib al-Hind [^13] (Wonders of India) in about
342/953-954.

The famous “sea lions” (expert writers on nautical instructions),
mentioned by Ahmad ibn Majid in the second half of the ninth/fifteenth
century, were not mere expert navigators, but also writers on sea
voyages and route books. Muhammad ibn Shadhan and Sahl ibn Aban belonged
to the fifth/eleventh and sixth/twelfth centuries. Perhaps there were
many more such writers; at any rate, later on, their successors were
Ahmad ibn Majid (895/1489), Sulaiman al-Mahri (early tenth/sixteenth
century), Piri Rais, Sidi 'Ali, and al-Sifaqsi (959/1551) who displayed
a remarkable knowledge of the geography of the Indian Ocean.

The scene in the Mediterranean was somewhat different to that in the
Indian Ocean. In the latter, trade, commerce, and adventure were the
impelling factors in Muslim enterprise, but in the former prolonged
political struggle, religious wars, commerce, and pilgrimages were
motivating features behind sailings and voyages. There is record,[^14]
however, of the close co-operation between Muslims and Christians in the
formation of joint partnerships and of commercial treaties, carriage of
passengers in ships irrespective of their religion, and the transport of
products of skilled industry and luxury goods from the Islamic world to
Europe.[^15]

Before mention is made of the well-known traveler-geographers in the
western lands of Islam, those in the east deserve attention. Among these
intelligent globe-trotters and geographers, al-'Mas\`udi (d. 346/957)
deserves pride of place. He was born in Baghdad towards the end of the
third/ninth century. Mas\`udi acquired his knowledge through painstaking
study of the existing sources as well as through extensive travels. His
travels carried him to many parts of Arabia, Levantine coast, Caspian
shores, Asia Minor, Iran, Iraq, India, South-East Asia, East African
coasts, and Egypt. He met common men possessing practical knowledge and
scholars of repute. Mas'udi's acute observations and views depicting a
keen geographical sense are contained in his famous book, Muruj
al-Dhahab wa Ma'ddin al-Jawahir (Meadows of Gold and Mines of Precious
Stones), a historic-geographical encyclopedia written in about 336/947
and revised ten years later.

It seems to be an age of great travelers, as not many years later ibn
Hauqal (fl. c. 332-367/943-977) com­pleted a travel of thirty years
which excited his interest in geography. His meeting with the celebrated
geographer al-Istakhri was significant, as at the latter's request he
re-wrote his geography and revised the accompanying maps. Ibn Hauqgal
called this improved version, Kitab al-Masulik w-al-Mamalik (Book of
Roads and Provinces), and added maps of each country to this remarkable
treatise. .

Yet another outstanding geographer and traveler was al-Maqdisi or
al-­Muqaddisi, a native of Jerusalem. He travelled through many Islamic
lands except perhaps Spain, Sijistan, and Sind. By all standards he was
a careful observer and had an inborn geographical sense. On the
culmination of his travels he wrote his famous geography Ahsan
al-Taqasim fi Ma'rifat al-Aqulim (Best of Divisions as Regards Climates)
at Shiraz in Fars in 375-376/985-986. His writings reveal much original
information and are an attempt at analysis of physical and human
factors. His sources include several earlier geographers like
Khurdadhbih, Jaihani, Balkhi, Hamadani, and Jabiz. But he subjects his
authorities to considerable criticism.

The tradition of travel and that as a medium for geographical work
con­tinued. One of the junior contemporaries of al-Biruni was Nasir
Khusrau from Balkh, where he was born in 394/1003. Starting his travels
from Egypt, he visited a large part of the Middle East including the
Hijaz, Palestine, Syria, and Iran. Earlier, he had travelled in
India[^16] and lived at the Court of Sultan Mahmud. His travel diary,
the famous Safar-Nameh, was written in Persian. He gives the best
account of Jerusalem before the Crusades, and his description of Egypt
is of high geographic value. Shaikh 'Ali al-Harawi (d. 611/1214) wrote a
travel book dealing not only with the frequented places of pilgrimage in
the eastern part of the Islamic world, but also of Byzantine Empire,
North Africa, and Abyssinia. He was in Jerusalem in 569/1173 when it was
in Christian hands. He visited the Christian parts of the world on
several occasions.

The western world of Islam produced several traveler-geographers who
also made journeys to the east to perform the pilgrimage to Mecca.
Al-Mazini al-Andalusi (d. 565/1169) was an intrepid traveler who came
from Granada and journeyed through Spain, North Africa, Egypt, Iraq,
Khurasan, and Russia. He travelled in the Volga region and in Hungary
and gave information unobtainable elsewhere, such as the Russian trade
in fossil bones or ivory.[^17]He was the writer of at least four
important geographical works.[^18]

Another celebrated geographer ibn Jubair of Valencia (d. 625/1217) wrote
a valuable account of his journey to the east. His accounts throw an
interesting light on the geography as well as the commercial activity
and culture of the Muslim communities of the Mediterranean lands. Ibn
Jubair's writings were a source book for many later Muslim geographers
and historians. His Rihkah (Travel Account) remains one of the best
works of its kind in Arabic literature.[^19] Ibn Jubair's fellow
townsman al-'Abdari (fl. c. 688/1289) commenced a memor­able journey to
accomplish the pilgrimage.

Starting from Mogadore on the West African coast of Morocco he made the
journey both ways by land and thus crossed North Africa twice. His
travel geography al-Rihlah al-Maghribiyah contains valuable
topographical information.[^20] Al-Mausili wrote 'Uyun al-Akhbar (a book
of travels) at Ceuta after his travels through Syria, Pales­tine, and
Egypt during 537-585/1142-1189.

Though al-Idrisi was an all-round geographer and his proper place is
among the writers of scientific geography, his travels were an
indispensable part of his geographic experience. He was born at Ceuta in
493/1099 and educated at Cordova. His travels covered a vast compass
stretching from Muslim Spain and North Africa to Christian Europe as
well as other parts of the Islamic world. Rich in experience and mature
in his outlook, al-Idrisi settled down at Palermo in Sicily at the Court
of his worthy patron King Roger II. He died in 562/1166. His famous
geography Nuzhat al-Mushtaq fi Ikhtiraq al-Afaq (known as al-Kitab
al-Rujari), written shortly before 549/ 1154 is the most elaborate
description of the world of medieval times. According to Sarton[^21],
al-Idrisi was the author of another geographical work entitled Raud
al-Uns wa Nuzhat al-Nafs (Pleasure of Men and Delight of Soul), a kind
of a route book which the author compiled for William I, King of Sicily,
in 557/1161. This geographical work was said to be larger than the Kitab
al-Rujari but unfortunately it has been entirely lost.

Abu al-'Abbas al-Nabati of Seville and his pupil ibn al-Baitar of Malaga
were biographers and they travelled in Spain, North Africa, and along
the shores of Red Sea with the purpose of scientific exploration in
connection with their work.

Ibn Said al-Maghribi was another indefatigable traveler, profoundly
interested in geography. He was born near Granada in 611/1214 and died
in Damascus in 674/1275. His Kitab al-Jaghrafiya embodies the experience
of his extensive travels in the Muslim world, and the geographical
infor­mation and views in it added to al-Idrisi's knowledge. He also
gives an account of parts of northern Europe including Iceland. Ibn Said
visited Armenia also and was at the Court of Hulagu from 654/1256 to
664/1265.

Half a century later, in 704/1304, was born ibn Battutah, one of the
out­standing travelers of all times. Starting from his home town,
Tangier, in 726/1325, when he was barely twenty-two years old, he
travelled in Africa, Asia, and Europe for thirty years. His journeys
included several pilgrimages to Mecca and travel to and residence in
many parts of the Middle East, India, Ceylon, Maldives, Bengal, China,
North Africa, Spain, and the lands of the Niger. The extent of his
wanderings is estimated at about 75,000 miles[^22] without allowing for
deviations, a figure which surpasses Marco Polo's travels. Ibn
Battutah's dictated accounts of his experience to ibn Juzaiy at the
Court of Sultan abu 'Inan at Fez constitute his Rihlah (Travels). The
book contains references to the economic and human geography of the
areas visited, trade, commerce, ports, navigation, and numerous physical
facts with occasional analysis of causes and effects. His memory was
astounding and geographical sense remarkable. Ibn Battutah died in Fez
in 779/1377. In the western world of Islam, the tradition of travel
leading to geographic writings was handed down to ibn Khaldun who was
born in Tunis in 733/1332 and died in 809/ 1406. Much of his well-known
writings as a geographer, historian, and sociolo­gist was based on his
travels in Spain and North Africa. The scientific significance of his
“Introduction to Universal History” (Kitab al-'Ibar) will be discussed
later.

In the East, Muslim travel-cum-geographical accounts from the eighth/
fourteenth century to the tenth/sixteenth century are represented by
Hafiz Abru, \`Abd al-Razzaq Samarqandi, abu al-Fadl'Allami, and Amin
Ahmad Razi of Rayy. Hafiz Abru wrote his regional geography in Persian,
entitled Zubdat al-Tawarikh, which was modelled on the earlier Arabic
classical style. Barthold[^23] has a high opinion of the material in it
relating to the author's time. 'Abd al-­Razzaq was born in Herat in
816/1413 and died there in 887/1482. He travelled to India and enjoyed a
diplomatic career; on his return he wrote an excellent diary Mafia'
al-Sa'dain wa Majma' al-Bahrain in Persian. In the generations that
followed the advent of the Europeans into the Indian Ocean, Muslim
interest in geography and travel was not dimmed. Abu al-Fadl, born at
Agra in 958/1551, was a leading light at the Court of Akbar the Great.
His A'in-i Akbari written in Persian remains an outstanding geographic
contribution of his age, a parallel to which is hard to find in the
contemporary West.[^24] Amin Akimad Razi of Rayy visited India in
Akbar's time and later in 1002/ 1593 produced his Halt Iqlim (Seven
Climates), an exhaustive geographical dictionary in Persian. Another
contemporary author who wrote at Damascus in 1007/1598 on the basis of
personal travels was al-'Ashiq, the writer of Manazir al-'Alan
(Description of the World).

B - General Treatises And Scientific Geography
----------------------------------------------

The climax of Muslim geographical contribution is represented by the
formulation of geographical theories and the compilation of treatises in
which attempts were often made to assemble facts and put forward
theories. Indeed, their level and scientific value are unequal; none the
less, the attempts as such are interesting and praiseworthy. The later
half of the fourth/tenth century was productive of many such efforts and
it would not be too much to assert that such abundant activity in
science and geography had never occurred before, not even in the best
days of Alexandria. The “Keys of the Sciences” (Mafatih al-'Ulum) of
al-Khwarizmi, the “Encyclopedia” (Fihrist) of ibn al-Nadim and the
“Tracts of the Brethren of Purity” (Rasa'il Ikhwan al-,safa) remain the
monumental examples of these efforts.

Throughout the ages arm-chair geographers have made mistakes which have
been easily recognized by practical men. Ptolemy was no exception and so
were many Arab literary geographers, but, on the other hand, many Muslim
geographers, rich in their personal experience and deep in learning,
pointed out flaws in the works of their predecessors. Mas'udi,[^25] for
example, is well known for such criticism as sprang from his universal
outlook, and al-Biruni, Maqdisi, abu al-Fida', and others expressed
opinions contrary to established notions.

In their geographical writings, new methods were evolved and new shape
was given to traditional treatment. The arbitrary division of the then
known world on the basis of “climates” originated by the Greeks was
quite often copied by Muslim geographers. But the careful and discerning
ones like al-Istakhri, al-Balkhi, Maqdisi, and several others found this
method unsatisfactory and somewhat confusing and felt that these
divisions in geo­metrical strips, more or less along the latitudes, were
without consideration of the geographical factors. The need of some
other method of treatment was realized.

Al-Istakhri initiated a regional approach to his descriptive geo­graphy
by selecting either geographical units or political divisions closely
corresponding them. His own words explain his technique:[^26] “I do not
take the 'seven climates' as a basis for the division of the earth
because the geometrical shapes, even though correct intrinsically, lead
to great con­fusion; so I have resorted to the study of the earth
country wise.” In fact, most of the leading Muslim geographers of the
fourth/tenth century on the basis of their writings would have done
credit to any period.

Arab regional geography developed a tradition of its own by describing
the physical environment of an area as well as its people and their
cultural and social activities, though sometimes the treatment of
cultural matters led to rather deterministic generalizations, reflecting
on people's characters and peculiarities. Surprisingly enough, many
modern geographers, historians, and sociologists are not immune from
this weakness; they often build their cultural theories on foundations
of sand. The method and technique of geographic descriptions of diverse
lands evolved by al-Istakhri, ibn Hauqal, al-Maqdisi, al-Mas'udi, and
others was later adopted by al-Qazwini, abu al­-Fida', and ibn Khaldun,
especially the last named who, by his analysis and interpretation,
anticipated modern sociology and human geography.

A few examples of scientific geographical writing deserve mention. The
tracts produced by the Ikhwan al-Safa (Brethren of Purity) had
consider­able geographical information and views. Theirs was a
rationalist approach to many problems. Their secret association was
founded at Basrah in about 373/983. This encyclopedic effort by several
anonymous writers, many of whom were interested in scientific geography,
is noteworthy. Their treatises include numerous references to the then
current geographical concep­tions and attempt to explain them for
popular understanding. Among their physical treatises meteorology
receives much attention, and explanations are offered for the occurrence
of rain, the march of seasons, and layers of the atmosphere[^27]
Geological processes are explained and attention is devoted to
weathering and denudation. Plant-geography, distribution of animals, and
a general consideration of ecological conditions does not escape their
notice.[^28]

The influence of physical environment on human activity and animal
behavior and their relationship with health and material well-being were
subjected to somewhat critical analysis by several fourth/tenth-century
writers on geography. Al-Jahiz (d. 254/868) of Basrah had a real
interest in the natural and anthropological sciences. In his “Book of
Animals” (Kitab al­hayawan), besides writing on a variety of subjects,
he interestingly tackled questions of evolution, struggle for existence,
and adaptation. Abu Zaid al­ Balkhi writing in 309/921 was a maker as
well as an interpreter of maps. His remarkable work Suwar al-Aqalim
(Figures of Climates) was a critical study based on maps. A few years
later Mas'udi (d. 345/956) used his vast experience and critical
abilities remarkably well in dealing with geographical matters. Mas'udi
has often been designated[^29] as the Muslim Pliny, but he displayed far
greater critical ability and scientific curiosity[^30] than Pliny in his
description of earthquakes, waters of the Dead Sea, geological
phenomena, navi­gational problems, and ebb and flow of tides.

He also made the first mention of wind power and windmills in Sijistan.
Another work of al-Mas'udi's, Kitab al-­Tanbih w-al-Ishraf (Book of
Indication and Revision), sets forth his views on evolution. Akhbar
al-Zaman contains discussion on the origin of seas, cycle of river
erosion, etc. Al-Maqdisi (375/985) was yet another scientifically minded
geographer who derided the arm-chair conceptions of some of his great
predecessors[^31] and took upon himself the task of writing a geography
of the Islamic world based on travel and observation. The result was one
of the finest geographical treatments of regions and provinces of the
Muslim domains in medieval Arabic literature.[^32] He stressed the point
that geography was a subject of great usefulness and was, therefore, of
interest to people in all walks of life. “The Model City” (al-Madinal
al-Fadikah) of al-Farabi (d. 339/950) is a fine sociological study of
urban conditions of his time in which he envisages better future
town-planning.

Ibn Sina (370-428/980-1037) expressed views and expounded ideas on
almost all subjects with equal clarity. He made a profound study of
various physical questions. His views on the origin of mountains and
valleys have a flare of modern concepts and his treatise on minerals
remained one of the chief sources of geological knowledge in Western
Europe until the Renaissance. Ibn Sina's al-Urjuzat al-Sina'iyyah
(Cantica) displayed an excellent under­standing of human and
environmental factors. But ibn Sina's contemporary abu Raihan al-Biruni
(363-440/973-1048) who has his place among world scientists of all times
was a traveler, philosopher, mathematician, astronomer, geographer, and
encyclopedist.

Sarton rightly remarks[^33] that his critical spirit, toleration, love
of truth, and intellectual courage were almost without parallel in
medieval times. His works were written in Arabic, partly in Khwarizm,
the town of his birth, and largely in Ghazni and India where he spent
the rest of his life. Through the patronage of Sultan Mahmud and his two
successors Mas'ud and Maudud he was able to visit India, learn Sanskrit,
and acquire knowledge of Indian sciences. His Kitab al-hind (Book of
India), written in 421-22/1030, provides numerous instances of his
geographical concepts covering such matters as the origin of the plains
of Northern India, nature of rainfall, commercial activity, roads,
frontiers, and boundaries.[^34]

Among his many other writings the “Chronology of Ancient Nations”
(al-Athar al-Baqiyah) was written at Khwarizm in 391/1000, “Canon
Masudicus” (al­Qdnun al-Mas'iidi) at lhazni in 421/1030, and the “Book
on Mathematics” (Kitab al-Talhim) like the one on stones [^35](Kitab
al-Jamahir fi al-Ma'rifat al-Jawahir) towards the later years of his
life, during the reign of Sultan Maudud. Al-Biruni was truly a
scientific geographer and discussed all matters from a critical point of
view.[^36]

Yet another contemporary was ibn Sa'id al-Qartabi al-Andalusi
(420-463/-1070) who lived and worked in Toledo. Though he was a leading
astronomer and historian, he tackled geographical problems
scientifically. His Tabaqat al- Umam paid special attention to the
history of science. The ethno­graphical and sociological views expressed
by him in this work were based on environmental considerations. A few
generations later, al-Idrisi, with a background of Andalusian education,
extensive travels, and cultural contact with Christendom, produced his
elaborate geographical works. His work can be said to be the most
notable example of the fusion of ancient, Arab, and medieval geography.
He was critical of Ptolemy's ideas. Ibn Jami described Alexandria and
discussed its climate.

'Abd al-Latif's book on Egypt may be considered to be one of the most
important topographical works of the Middle Ages. In this work attempts
at analysis on the basis of known facts and theories are discernible
though they are not necessarily geographical. A1-Zamakh­shari's (d.
539/1144) Kitab al-Amkinah w-al-Jibal w-al-Miyah was a worthy
geographical dictionary. Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi s main work was a
geographical treatise entitled Kitab al-Jaghrafiya. Though it was based
upon Ptolemy and al-Idrisi, it contained many facts which had been
discovered since then and included the geographical co-ordinates of
every important place. His extensive travels and long residence in the
east and later the patronage of Hulagu gave him the opportunity to
become a connecting link between his predecessors and the mathematical
geographers led by Nasir al-Din al-Tusi at Maraghah. Some of his ideas
were derived from al-Hasan al-Marrakushi (627/1229).

A notable writer of scientific geography was Zakariya al-Qazwini
(600-682/ 1203-1283). He is noted for his two works,[^37] namely,
'Aja'ib al-Makhluqat wa Ghara'ib al-Maujudat (Cosmography, or Marvels of
Created Things) and 'Aja'ib al-Buldan (Marvels of Countries). A later
enlarged edition of his geo­graphy was called Athar al-Bilad. Qazwini's
works exerted a deep influence upon the Arabic-speaking people as well
as on those reading Persian and Turkish. Muhammad ibn Mahmud al-Tusi
also wrote a cosmography in Per­sian. A notable treatise on commercial
geography was written by 'Abd al-­Rahman ibn Nasr under the title
Nihayat al-Rutbat al-Zarifah.

In the seventh/thirteenth century, abu al-Fida' al-Ayyubi (b. 672/1273)
was an outstanding geographer who had thoroughly assimilated the earlier
geo­graphical contributions, especially those of Ptolemy, al-Idrisi, and
ibn Said. His main geographical work Taqwim al-Buldan displays extensive
knowledge and balance in the selection of information. Abu al-Fida's
geographical work has earned high recognition among modern European
geographers.[^38] The geographical work of Hamd Allah Mustaufi, Nuzhat
al-Qulub, written in 741/ 1340 in Persian is a comprehensive geography
of the Islamic world. Iran and Central Asia receive special treatment,
changes in the course of the Oxus are mentioned, and descriptions are
given of the hot springs and oil-wells of Baku and the islands of
South-East Asia.[^39] His historical work, Tarikh-i Guzideh (Select
History) also contains useful geographical interpretations. A
contemporary of Mustaufi was al-Dimashqi (d. 728/1327). His
cosmographical work, Nukhbat al-Dahr fi 'Aja'ib al-Barr w-al-Bahr, was
in the traditional style, but is remarkable for its knowledge about the
Coromandal Coast of South India.[^40]

Ibn Khaldun's “Universal History” (Kitab al-'Ibar) with its masterly
Pro­legomena raised the art of geographic interpretation to new heights
and made him the forerunner of modern human geography and sociology. He
not only wrote a critical history but combined ethnography and geography
with it.[^41] Ibn Khaldun recognized different types of habitats and
explained the influence of environment on human development. He marked
the rise and growth of cities and noted examples of bad siting leading
to rapid decay.[^42] He also gave a critical appraisal of the industrial
and agricultural resources of Anda­lusia.

Though the ninth/fifteenth and the tenth/sixteenth centuries witnessed
epoch-making geographical discoveries and the frontiers of knowledge of
the European people were rapidly widened, yet the scientific traditions
of Muslim geography did not cease abruptly. The Turkish school of
geography achieved much by way of prolific writing as well as scientific
treatment. Some of these works are al-'Ashiq's Manazir al-'Alam
(Descriptions of the World) written at Damascus in 1007/1598, Haji
Khalifah's encyclopedia, Kashf al-Zunun, and Auliya Chelebi's travel
book, Tarikh-i Saiyah. Before an evaluation of Muslim geographical
conceptions is made and its influence on European mind and thought
briefly indicated, two other aspects of their work may be briefly
outlined, namely, mathematical geography, and map-making and
cartography.

C - Mathematical Geography
--------------------------

Muslim astronomical and mathematical work extends over several centuries
and is enormous in its content and commendable in quality. Here only a
brief outline is presented in so far as it concerns geographical
matters, i.e., latitudes, longitudes, eclipses, and tides; shape, size,
and the movements of the earth; and the general mathematical
implications in geodetic work.

Historically, Muslims devoted early attention to astronomy and
mathema­tics; the first period of translations led to contributions in
these fields. Eventually certain centers and areas developed strong
traditions of their own. For example, Baghdad in particular and Iraq in
general got an early start in this respect. But later on, with the
decline in the influence and prestige of Baghdad, many other parts of
the eastern world of Islam became centers of mathematical work and its
application in associated fields. The Ghaznawids, Buwaihids, and Mongol
princes patronized these sciences. Similarly, works and traditions in
North Africa from Egypt to Maghrib and in Andalusia achieved their own
characteristics.

The Indian, Iranian, and Greek influences played their part in
stimulat­ing early attempts. Al-Fazari's Kitab al-Zij (Tables) reflects
strong Indian influence. The first series of regular observations with
accurate instruments were conducted at Jundi-Shahpar during the first
half of the third/ninth century and were utilized by Ahmad al-Nahawandi
and others. Ya'qub al-­Kindi's works and those of others such as Yahya
ibn Mansur, Sanad ibn 'Ali, and al-Marwarzuri were concerned with the
preparation of astronomical tables. Earlier, Ptolemy's Almagest had also
been translated by al-Nairizi.

But the outstanding event in the field of mathematical geography was the
measurement of a degree, under the orders of Caliph al-Mamun, to
determine the size of the earth, in latitude 36° north.[^43] An
observatory was built on the plain of Tadmur (Palmyra) for geodetic as
well as astronomical work. On the Caliph's instructions two degree
measurements were made near Tadmur and Raqqah under the supervision of
the sons of Musa ibn Shakir. The result of these two measurements was
the calculation of the earth's circumference as 20,400 miles and the
diameter 6,500 miles[^44] respectively.

A large map of the world was also drawn. The three sons of Musa ibn
Shakir, besides being men of means, were practical scientists. One of
their books was concerned with the measurement of the sphere and the
trisection of the angle. Besides al-Khwarizmi and al-Kindi, the great
astronomer abu Ma'shar of Balkh (d. c. 272/836) was especially
interested in celestial phenomena. Al­-Mahani (fl. 240-254/854-868)
studied the eclipses of the sun and the moon and also the conjunction of
the planets.

In later generations, particularly under the patronage of the Buwaihid
Court, a great deal of astronomical and mathematical work was done and
the making of observations with better designed and perfected
instruments became common. A glorious period in this respect was the
time of 'Adud al-Daulah and Sharaf al-Daulah, when measurements and
observations relating to equinoxes, solstices, eclipses, and the form of
the earth were undertaken. Ibn al-'Alam, al-Razi, al-Kuhi, and abu
al-Waft' were among the leading lights of this wonderful age.

In the course of time, Cairo also developed into an important center fo
work in mathematical geography. The Caliph al-'Aziz (365-386/975-996)
founded an observatory near Cairo and al-Hakim continued to patronize
it. Ibn Yunus (d. 399/1009) was a great mathematician and astronomer and
ibn al-Haitham a notable physicist. In point of time, al-Biruni's work
again needs a mention here, for his monumental work “Canon Masudicus”
was written in 421/1030. He was a great mathematical geographer and
devoted himself to many problems, including the accurate determination
of latitudes and longi­tudes, geodetic measurements, simple method of
stereographic projections, earth's shape, axis and rotation, and laws of
hydrostatics. Al-Biruni's con­temporary, ibn Sina, the celebrated
philosopher, produced treatises on astro­nomical instruments, earth's
position in the universe, and heavenly bodies.

In North Africa, Tangier, Ceuta, Fez, and Morocco became centers of
scientific work relating to mathematics. An outstanding scholar and
practical geographer was al-Marrakushi, the writer of Jumi' al-Mabadi
w-al-Ghayah (The Uniter of the Beginning and the End) which is
considered to be one of the greatest scientific contributions of the
seventh/thirteenth century. It includes terrestrial co-ordinates of 135
places of which thirty-four were conducted by the author himself.
Al-Marrakushi was fully conversant with scientific methods and made use
of many instruments. In Spain, mathematical geography flourished like
the other sciences.

Among outstanding votaries was Maslamah al-Majriti (d. 398/1007) of
Madrid who made a synopsis of al-Battani's tables. His works were
translated into Latin under Alfonso. Al-Zarqali (420/1029-481/1088),
besides being well up in theoretical ideas, was a maker and designer of
many instruments and astrolabes. He also became well known in Europe
through profuse Latin translations of his treatises. The philosophers
and rationalists Jabir (Geber), ibn Aflah (d. 535/1140), ibn Rushd
(Averroes) (d. 595/1198), and ibn Bajjah (Avempace) (d. 533/1138) were
all interested in the mathematical side of geography.

In the eastern Islamic lands, in later generations, the Saljuq period
was productive of much scientific work in mathematical geography,
particularly the reign of Jalal al-Din Malik Shah (r.
465-485/1072-1092). The Mongol princes turned out to be great patrons of
scientific activity. Hulagu Khan (d. 664/1265) had many mathematicians
at his Court and a great observatory was set up at Maraghah on the
shores of Lake Uruniyeh, fifty miles from Tabriz. Nasir al-Din Tusi was
the leading light. The Maraghah astronomers were greatly interested in
geography. For example, al-Tusi's Tadkirah (History) in its third
chapter deals with geodetic matters and seas and winds. Qutb al-Din
al-Shirazi s (634-711/1236-1311) Nihayat al-Idrak is devoted to
astro­nomical, meteorological, and geographical questions. Al-Qazwini
and al-­Watwat also wrote on cosmogeographical and geographical matters.

### 1. Instruments and Their Use

The work in the field of mathematical geography would not have been
possible without instruments and observatories. Therefore, it is not
surprising to find the mathematicians and geographers working in
observatories and using self-made as well as standard instruments and
devices. Some of the common needs and requirements included measurement
of distance between two points, determination of latitude and longitude,
levelling and measure­ment of heights, geodetic measurements, and
co-ordinates of Mecca. An account of the instruments devised, developed,
and used will be given in the next chapter on “Mathematics and
Astronomy” of this work.

### 2. Determination of Latitudes and Longitudes

Muslim efforts in the measurement and determination of latitudes and
longitudes were considerable. They contrived methods as original as the
results which were often accurate. The view that the work of Muslim
geographers and astronomers in no way surpassed the Almagest of Ptolemy,
is undoubtedly without any basis.[^45]

The early Arab astronomers, al-Khwarizmi, al-Farghani, Habash al-Hasib,
and al-Battani, made use of Indian and Greek methods of finding
latitude. But better techniques soon began to be employed. The sons of
Musa ibn Shakir at Baghdad determined the city's latitude, accurate
within a minute, and ibn Yunus at Fustat (near Cairo) did remarkably
accurate work. He drew attention to the fact that while reckoning
latitude from the shadow of the gnomon, errors up to 15 minutes crept in
as the shadows were cast from the upper edge of the sun and not from the
central point.

Ibn al-Haitham (355­430/965-1038), known in Europe as Alhazen, wrote a
notable work on the calculation of latitudes. He recommended the method
of taking a fixed star for the precise determination of the altitude of
the pole, and he was fully aware of the errors due to refraction.
Al-Biruni suggested the method of determining latitude by reference to
the relation of the circumpolar stars to the sun. But in the measurement
of longitude, he advocated as well as demon­strated the use of the
terrestrial calculation. By this method he presented a correction in the
distance in longitude between Alexandria and Ghazni.

The difference in longitude between Baghdad and Ghazni found by
al-Biruni by the terrestrial method was remarkably accurate. Qanun
al-Mas'udi, Kitab al-Hind, and Kitab al-Tafhim are the repositories of
calculations. Other almost exact calculations were those of the three
sons of Masa ibn Shakir at their observatory in Baghdad, of al-Mahani at
Surra Man-Ra'a, of ibn Yunus at al-Muqattam, and of Ulugh Beg at
Samarqand. An outstanding correction as a result of Muslim calculation
was the elimination of the Ptole­maic exaggeration of about 17 degrees
in the length of the Mediterranean.

### 3. The Earth's Shape, Size, and Movements

Opinion on the sphericity of the earth was divided in the early Middle
Ages. Cosmas' fantasies were opposed to it, while St. Augustine
reluctantly conceded the globular shape, but vehemently rejected the
concept of people inhabiting the antipodes. Muslim geographers and other
scientists had a firmer belief in the sphericity of the earth as they
continued to support, in general, the Eratosthenian theory of climate.
Probably, the majority held the idea of an earth globe floating in
space. Outstanding examples of Muslim experiments based on belief in the
sphericity of the earth and the measure­ment of a degree were those
conducted by the geodetists of al-Mamun in the plains of Sinjar, and
al-Biruni's measurement of 56 miles 0' 50” 6” for a degree conducted in
India was remarkable for its accuracy.[^46] Early Muslim opinions on the
question of the earth's shape are summarized by the geographer ibn
Rustah in his famous treatise “Work of Costly Treasures” (c. 291/903).

As regards the movements of the earth, the position was somewhat
different. The question whether the earth was at rest or not, was not
discussed in Europe either in the early or later Middle Ages. Generally,
the earth was assumed to be at rest in the center of space. Al-Biruni,
assuming the vague Babylonian and Indian conceptions, believed in the
turning of the earth on its own axis. He also believed in the movement
of the sun round the earth, though he did not reject the suggestion of
abu Said Sinjari regarding the possible movement of the earth round the
sun.

In the second half of the seventh/thirteenth century the question of
rotation was taken up by 'Umar al-Katibi al-Qazwini (d. 676/1277), who
was connected with the Maraghah observatory and prepared an edition of
the Almagest. His work Hikmat al-'Ain contains argument for the
heliocentric theory. Un­fortunately, he finally rejected the idea of the
circular motion of the earth and, therefore, failed to anticipate Kepler
and Galileo. Among others, who took up this question, was Qutb al-Din, a
pupil of Nasir al-Din Tusi. His semi-­geographical work, Nihayet
al-Idrak, contains a discussion of these questions. Thus, Muslim
mathematical geographers often expressed doubts on Greek and Ptolemaic
concepts about the earth. Sarton[^47] rightly emphasizes that the doubts
expressed in Arabic writings were not sterile as they eventually paved
the way for the Copernican reform in 950/1543.

D-Cartography And Map-Making
----------------------------

Muslims inherited the Greek and Babylonian traditions in map-making. In
the past, there had existed a close relationship between extension of
maritime activity and navigation and the development of cartographic
skill.

The Arab and Muslim knowledge of the seas far surpassed that of their
predecessors. It encompassed familiar areas from the Mediterranean to
the Atlantic and from the Red Sea, Arabian Sea, and Persian Gulf to the
Indian Ocean and the Pacific. Their extensive sailings on these waters
were not merely naval expeditions, but were made in pursuit of an
extensive commercial and maritime activity in which the crossings of the
Mediterranean formed but a small part. This necessitated the use of sea
charts, coastal information, and knowledge of wind and weather.
Therefore, one class of Muslim map­making was devoted to these
objectives, while geographers and others made many maps to depict land
information and the political and regional com­position of the Islamic
world as well as of the then known inhabited areas.

On the whole, Muslim map-making and cartography generally advanced the
older knowledge and techniques. The traditions of Roman cartography were
poor. Even Ptolemy had made a fundamental error in underestimating the
earth's size. He had accepted the figures of Posidonius (1 degree = 500
stadia) on the basis of which Europe and Asia were supposed to extend
over one-half of the surface of the globe, while their extension covered
only 130 degrees. He had also estimated the length of the Mediterranean
to be 62 degrees instead of 42 degrees. The Muslim geographers had
corrected this error, but European cartography persisted with this
mistake up to the end of the tenth/sixteenth century.[^48]

Muslim geographers constructed celestial and terrestrial globes and
studied the problem of projections. Their maps were superior to those of
Ptolemy, and it became a somewhat general practice to draft maps to
accompany the geographical treatises. This is borne out by many
examples. Al-Khwarizmi's Kitab Surat al -Ard was written in explanation
of maps which might have been based on Syriac versions of Ptolemy. The
world map, prepared at the behest of Caliph al-Mamun and embodying the
collaboration of no less than seventy experts, can be considered to be a
notable example of scientific map­making. Unfortunately, this map is not
extant. It has also been suggested[^49] that there was a collection of
maps of Iran including a pre-'Abbasid world map, which may very well be
called “Iran Atlas.” In order to indicate the possibility of such a
series of maps, it may be pointed out that ibn al-Faqih mentions a map
of Dailam which was made for Hajjaj ibn Yusuf, and al-Baladhuri notes in
his Futuh al-Buldan that a petition to Caliph al-Mansur was supported by
a map of the canals of the Basrah area.

In the evolution of Muslim cartography, the Balkhi School represents a
distinct advance. Al-Balkhi's atlas included, besides a map of the
world, maps of Arabia, the Indian Ocean (Baler Fars), Maghrib, Egypt,
Syria, the Mediter­ranean Sea, and several other parts of the Islamic
world. This atlas was devoted to the geographic description of the areas
covered by the maps and also presented a division of the world into the
so-called “Climatic Zones.” Konrad Miller in his Mappae Arabicae
fittingly calls it “An Islam Atlas.” It is most unfortunate that the
fruits of Balkhi's effort have been lost and only the copied material by
al-Istakhri and ibn Hauqal has been handed down to posterity. A follower
of these traditions was al-Maqdisi who explained the basis of the
drawings of al-Istakhri and then made his own regional maps of the
world, using symbols and a color scheme for physical features which made
his maps almost similar to modern maps. [^50]

Al-Biruni made a round map of the world in Kitab al-Tafhim to illustrate
the position of seas, and in al-Athar al-Baqiyyah (Chronology of Ancient
Nations) he discussed methods of celestial and terrestrial projections.
Al-­Idrisi s fame as a map-maker has found universal recognition. He is
said to have made seventy maps of climatic divisions, a celestial
sphere, a globe of silver, and a world map on a silver plate with great
cartographic skill. His maps give a better representation of the western
world of Islam than that of the eastern. His cartographic effort
influenced his European contemporaries and successors in many ways. In
later generations, al-Qazwini and al-Wardi made maps based on the
lingering traditions of the Balkhi School. Two celestial globes were
made by 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in Cairo in about 432/1040; a bronze
globe was made by ibn Hula of Mausil in 674/1275. Mahmud Kashghari, in
his Diwan Lughat al-Turk, made a world map in 734/1333.

Finally, a brief mention of the Arab sea charts, navigation manuals, and
the early development of the portolani (European sea charts) is relevant
to the subject. The most extensive Arab navigational activity was from
the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf to the various parts of the Indian
Ocean along East Africa and South-East Asia. Sailing ships were exposed
to the hazards of wind and weather and were directly influenced by the
sub­tropical and equatorial changes in meteorological conditions. The
monsoons were a great factor in these sailings. Therefore, it is not
only a fair guess but has a basis in fact that safe sailings were
conducted with the accumulated experience of generations of seamanship
as well as sea charts and instruments. As regards instruments, the
compass may be considered fairly certain, and the greatly perfected
astrolabe was also put to use. In the East, the peak of Muslim
navigational achievement was reached on the eve of the Portuguese
incursion into these waters. In the West, the Mediterranean sailings
were most common. There are also on record some attempts to probe into
the mysteries of the Atlantic.

The dream to reach the riches of India and China by sailing round Africa
was an ancient one, but the Muslims' mastery of North Africa, their
dominion in the Iberian Peninsula, and the urge to spread Islam and
commerce to yet newer lands, revived a new interest in the venture. The
sailors and navi­gators of Muslim Spain were the first in the field, the
Genoese sailors came after them. The Portuguese maritime activity took a
still later place in history. Among Muslim writers, al-Mas'udi and
al-Idrisi have mentioned the attempts of their co-religionists.
Al-Mas'udi mentions in his Muruj al-Dhahab the venture into the Atlantic
before 346/957 by Khashkhaf of Cordova, and al-Idrisi relates the story
of the Maghrurin (the deceived ones). These sailors were eight cousins
who set out from Lisbon (before 439/1147) and sailed westward for about
eleven days, then in a southerly direction for twelve days when they
reached the inhabited Isle of Sheep (Jazirat al-Ghanam); after further
navigation of twelve days they landed on another island where they were
made prisoners. It may be a fair surmise that the first island was the
Madeira and the second the Canaries.

To turn once again to the East, there were successive generations of
pro­fessional Muslim pilots and writers of nautical instructions
throughout the fourth/tenth to the sixth/twelfth century. The pilots
(mu'allim or musta'mil al-markab) and “Lions of the Sea” acquired great
fame from the first half of the sixth/twelfth century onward. To this
period belong Sahl ibn Aban, Mubammad ibn Shadhan, and Laith ibn Kablan.
Later, Ahmad ibn Majid wrote Kitab al-Fawa'id fi Usul al-Bahr in
895-896/1489-1490 and Sulaiman al-Mahri produced his ' Ulum al-Bahriyyah
in the early tenth/sixteenth century. Shihab al-Din Ahmad ibn Majid was
an expert sailor as well as a writer of nautical instructions and his
role in guiding Vasco da Gama's ship across the Arabian Sea in 904/1498
is well recognized. According to Barros, ibn Majid showed the Portuguese
admiral a map of the whole coast of India indicating meridians and
parallels. He also expressed no surprise or sense of admiration on
seeing the Portuguese navigational instruments and is said to have
commented that Muslim sailors in the Indian Ocean possessed more
efficient devices and instruments. In fact, ibn Majid and al-Mahri may
be regarded among the early modern writers on nautical matters. Their
know­ledge of the geography and meteorology of the Red Sea and the
Indian Ocean was extensive.

Between 867/1462 and 896/1490, ibn Majid wrote thirty nautical texts. Of
these, the most important work was Kitab al-Fawa'id. The book is a
com­pendium of knowledge relating to the principles of navigation both
theoretical and practical. It deals with matters connected with the
origin of navigation, use of magnetic needle, routes across the Indian
Ocean, latitudes of harbors in that ocean, the China Sea, regional
description of large islands, monsoons and their dates, and banks and
reefs of the Red Sea. This work was of great use to those engaged in
navigation and preceded the European navigation in Eastern waters.[^51]

Sulaiman al-Mahri was a younger contemporary of ibn Majid. He wrote five
treatises on sailing instructions. Of these the third was entitled al-'
Umdat al-Mahriyyah fi Dabt al-'Ulum al-Bahriyyah. This work deals with
nautical astronomy, sea-routes in the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean,
monsoons, and some outstanding voyages.

One of the main cartographical achievements of the Middle Ages was the
preparation of sea charts which were extensively used by seamen and
sailors in the Mediterranean and the Black Sea, from the end of the
seventh/thirteenth century onward. These are known as “portolani” and
were largely produced by the Genoese, Pisans, and Italians. The
languages used in these early Western maps are Latin, Catalan, Italian,
or a sort of Mediterranean lingua franca composed of various Romance
elements.[^52] Their origin appears to be debatable, though many Western
scholars stick to a single source theory, namely, European Christian.
Perhaps the Western portolani owed their development to sailors and
cartographers in their own area. But it is almost certain that the Arab
pilots, guiding ships across the Indian Ocean and South-East Asian
waters, must have very keenly felt the need of such maps. In the form in
which Western portolani have been handed down, it is not possible to say
which ones were earlier.

But as related above, Muslims had been actively engaged in navigating
the extensive and dangerous Eastern seas up to China and across the mesh
of islands in South-East Asia since the third/ninth century onward; they
had sea charts as mentioned by al-Maqdisi in the later part of the
fourth/tenth century. While writing about his extensive sea journey over
the Indian Ocean, he says[^53] that he was often in the company of
ship­masters and pilots and other experts who had long experience of
sailings in these areas and possessed a detailed knowledge of wind and
weather and the physical and commercial geography of these seas and
their adjoining lands. He adds that he had seen in their possession
sailing charts, directories, and nautical instructions, many of which he
himself utilized to compile his own work.

Marco Polo also refers to the Arabs' use of sea charts and maps. It is
said that Qutb al-Din Shirazi, the geographer of the Itkhans of Persia,
used one such map to mark the progress of the Mongol envoy to
Christendom. Indeed, it is quite conceivable that the early portolani
were made after centuries of experience before their Mediterranean and
Atlantic samples came to be drafted. It is, however, true that the
number of Muslim portolani is small as compared with the Western ones.

As a criticism of the quality of Muslim cartography it may be admitted
that often it overemphasized decoration at the expense of accuracy. But
it will be well to remember that contemporary Western cartography was
most rudimentary by comparison and the latter mappae mundi were a
mixture of fact and fancy. Much has been written in recent years to
throw light on the achievement of Muslim map-makers. The labors of
Konrad Miller, Prince Youssouf Kamal, and Kramers have been very
rewarding and have presented Muslim cartography in a new light.[^54]

E - Influence Of Muslim Geography
---------------------------------

The question of the extent of the influence of Muslim geography on the
European mind is an interesting one. Usually it is claimed that the
develop­ment of medieval European as well as that of early modern
geography was somewhat independent. This view appears to be untenable
and is rather out of date, as its basis is emotional and it disregards
the inevitable links of history. Moreover, a brilliant galaxy of
European scholars including many Orientalists, through their painstaking
researches into the sources of modern science, have produced
indisputable evidence of the transmission of Muslim science to European
communities. Here it is possible to present only the main points of the
transmission of Muslim geographical knowledge and concepts to the West.

Even during the first half of the fifth/eleventh century, necessary
conditions for scientific work did not exist in the Latin West, or for
that matter in the whole of Christendom, as they did in the Islamic
world. It was only Jewish thought which was moving forward due to direct
contact with Muslim culture and under the stimulus of its progressive
impulses. No doubt, some Christians in the Muslim world did contribute
to these efforts.

There were two important sources of the transmission of Muslim science
and geography to Latin Europe and other areas in the West. The points of
cultural and physical contact in Spain, Italy, Sicily, and the Aegean
Islands were strengthened by intermixing of people during the prolonged
period of the Cru­sades. Secondly, as an earlier translation activity at
Baghdad had paved the way for a fruitful synthesis, so the numerous
translations of Arabic works in Spain, Italy, and Sicily proved to be
harbingers of scientific advance.

Latin geography before the early sixth/twelfth century was on a much
lower level than the Muslim. It was too simple and childish. This remark
applies especially to those writers who were not influenced by Arab
ideas and continued to follow the Roman and early medieval traditions,
e.g., Henry of Mayence, Guido, and Lambert of Saint Omer. On the other
hand, those who showed a somewhat better geographical sense like Herman
the Dalmatian, Bernard Sylvester, and William of Conches had been
influenced by Arab ideas.

The major proportion of European geographical writings of sixth/twelfth
century in the West consisted of Latin and other Christian pilgrim
literature, though there were also a few other contributions. John of
Wurzburg was a German pilgrim in the late sixth/twelfth century, Joannes
Phocas was a soldier turned monk who wrote of castles and cities from
Antioch to Jerusalem, and Richard the Lion-hearted was a crusader king.
Sigurd, King of Norway and a crusader, made a remarkable journey to
Palestine and back between 501/1107 and 505/1111. The outward journey
was a fighting cruise through the North Sea, the Mediterranean, and the
Aegean waters. He fought the Muslims around Spain and visited the
cultured Court of Roger H of Sicily before his return home by an
overland route through Europe. His saga is somewhat geographical in its
content and bears traces of contact with the Orient.

Pedro Alfonso made a sketch-map of the world clearly derived from Muslim
models, copying the seven climates and putting south on the top. Henry
of Mayence compiled a treatise in 504/1110 which included a map. A
geographic encyclopedia was prepared in 513/1119 by Guido who was
probably an Italian geographer. Lambert of Saint Omer compiled another
encyclopedia with maps; in this work he propounded his belief in the
sphericity of the earth. Herman the Dalmatian in 538/1143 prepared his
cosmographical compilation, which included astronomical and geographical
information, and Bernard Sylvester produced his De Mundi.

Nearly all the above-named writers and their contemporaries who dealt
with geographical matters were steeped in patristic and Latin
traditions. But by the middle of the seventh/thirteenth century, a
distinct change was perceptible, as by that time the full impact of the
translations was evident in the more readily available Arab knowledge in
Europe. Scholars were not only aware of it, but were beginning to feel
the need of it. The new knowledge, of which Muslim geographical
information and notions were an indispensable part, began to work as a
great stimulus to new ideas in the Latin world.

Henceforward, the level of geographic thinking and writings was
definitely raised. Vincent of Beauvais, Albert the Great, Roger Bacon,
and others were all sufficiently influenced by Arab knowledge of
geography and its associated fields.[^55] Joannes Sacrobosco (John of
Hollywood), the English astronomer and mathematician, wrote his Sphaera
Mundi in about 631/1233. This work was slavishly based upon al-Farghani
and al-Battani; it became immensely popular in the West, was translated
several times, and remained in use in schools up to the
eleventh/seventeenth century. William the Englishman in 629/1231 mainly
interpreted al-Zarqali and al-Bittani. Vincent of Beauvais, the French
Dominican scholar who died in 663/1264, compiled an encyclopedia. It was
a monumental work and much of its geographical and geological
in­formation was derived from Arab sources.

Albert the Great (d. 679/1280) was another outstanding Dominican
intellectual and prolific writer. He knew neither Greek nor Arabic, but
acquired vast knowledge through Latin trans­lations, seriously studied
Muslim thought, and was considerably influenced by their geographical
ideas. Roger Bacon's Opus Majus is replete with geographical
references[^56] to Arab sources. Gossuin of Metz or Walters' L'image du
monde, written in about 644/1246, was derived from existing sources
largely based on Muslim knowledge.

Konungs Skuggsja is an outstanding geographical and encyclopedic
treatise in Old Norwegian written by an unknown author between 614/1217
and 659/1260 or about 647/1247. The author was either a priest or a
Court chaplain and a good deal of his material was based upon the
accounts of returned crusaders and pilgrims. It displays good
geographical sense, particularly in physical geography. He believed in
the sphericity of the earth. The work is not entirely without Arab
influence. The travel accounts of the Englishman Sir John Mandeville,
though verging on the fantastic, are a rehashing of common Arab
knowledge in geography.

The fact remains that gradually most of the basic and current
geographical ideas of the Muslims were passed on to the West. These were
with regard to the size of the earth and its sphericity, oceans,
geological processes, climate, vegetational and zoological
distributions, knowledge of new lands in Africa, Far East, and Central
Asia, techniques of cartography, and uses of instru­ments.[^57] All this
knowledge in various degrees of assimilation is depicted in the leading
geographical works and forms the background of the so-called mappae
mundi, and also in some of the maps of later generations preceding the
Columbian era, viz., the Psalter map (c. 597/1200), Hereferd map (c.
679/ 1280), the world map of Marino Sanuto (721/1321), the Borgian world
map (c. 854/1450), Este world map[^58] (e. 854/1450), Fra Mauro's Africa
(864/1459), and the diagrams of L'image du Monde (885/1480). Though
these maps were far from being real maps and mirrored more the shadows
of patristic and tra­ditional notions, yet acquaintance with Arab
cartography and geographic information is revealed in them.[^59]

On the whole, the period from the sixth/twelfth to the ninth/fifteenth
century was a period of transition and compromise, a time of absorption
and fusion, because it was during this period that the conflicting
Muslim and Christian cultures were brought most closely together. The
result was the creation of the core of new Europe. This was essentially
Graeco-Arabic-Latin. After the invention of the art of printing in the
second half of the ninth/ fifteenth century, many Graeco-Arabic
scientific works were eagerly and repeatedly printed. In fact, the
influence of Arab science remained paramount in Europe, till, towards
the middle of the tenth/sixteenth century, Copernicus published his
revolutionary concepts, and experimental science emerged. But Arab
science as a factor in European thinking lingered on much longer, almost
up to the eve of the Industrial Revolution.

The lesson of history is clear. In the ages following the voyages of
Columbus and the intellectual ferment at the end of the Middle Ages,
Europe surged forward to penetrate through the barriers of ignorance and
acquired a cultural and material leadership. But Europe learnt its
lessons from those who were at one time masters of the world. The
Muslims were its cultural ancestors in the domain of science,
geographical knowledge, discovery, and world commerce.

Bibliography
------------

### Some Texts and Translations

Abu al-Faraj Qudamah, “Kitab al-Kharaj,” Bibliotheca Geographorum
Arabi­corum, Vol. VI, ed. and tr. M. J. de Goeje, Leiden, 1889; abu
al-Fadl 'Allami, A'in-i Akbari, English trans. by H. S. Jarrett,
Calcutta, 1894; abu al-Fida', Tagwim al-Buldan: Glographie d'Aboulfbda
(French translation and commentary by J. T. Reinaud), Paris, 1848;
al-Baladburi, Futuh al-Bulddn, tr. P. K. Hitti, Part I, New York, 1916;
al-Balkhi, Suwar al-Agdlim (Figures of Climates), ed. and tr. Le Strange
and Nicholson, Cambridge, 1921; al-Biruini, Kitab al­Hind (al-Biriini's
India), tr. E. Sachau, Keann Paul, London, 1914; “Chapter on Pearls in
The Book on Precious Stones,” tr. F. Krenkow, Islamic Culture,
Hyderabad, Vol. XV, 1941; al-Istakhri, Kitdb al-Ma8dlik w-al-Mamdlik
(Abridged Oriental Geography), tr. Sir W. Ousley, London, 1800; Bacon,
R., Opus Mains, tr. R. B. Burke, 2 Vols., Philadelphia, 1928; Buzurg ibn
Shahryar, Kitab 'Aidib al-Hind (Libre des Merveilles do L'Inde), par Van
der Lith, P. A., Traduction Francais par L. Marcel Devis, E. J. Brill,
Leiden, 1883-86; Cosmas, I, Christian Topography, tr. McCrindle, Hakluyt
Society, 1897; Hamd Allah Mustaufi, Nuzhat al-Qulub, Eng. trans. by G.
Le Strange, Gibb Memorial Series, London, 1919; Hudud al-'Alam (The
Regions of the World) (Anon.), ed. and tr. V. Minorsky, London, 1937;
ibn al-Qifti, Tdrik al-Hukamd', ed. Julius Lippert, Leipzig, 1903;
al-Balkhi, Fars Namah, tr. G. Le Strange, London, 1912; ibn Battutah,
Travels in Asia and Africa, tr. and selected by H. A. R. Gibb, London,
1929; ibn Jubair, Rihlah Ibn Jubair (Travels), ed. De Goeje, Gibb
Memorial Series, London, 1907; ibn Khaldim, Muqaddimah (Prolegomena);
ibn Khurdadhbih, “Kitab al-Masalik w-al-Mamalik,” in Bibliotheca
Geographorum Arabicorum, Vol. VI, ed. M. J. de Goeje, Leiden, 1889;
Maqdisi (al-Muqaddisi), Ahsan al-Tagasim ft Ma'rifat al-Agdlim (Best of
Divisions for the Study of Climates) English tr. G. S. A. Ranking and R.
F. Azoo, 4 Parts, Calcutta, 1897-1910; al-Mas'iidi, Muruj al­Dhahab
(Meadows of Gold), Baghdad; also English trans. (unfinished) by A.
Sprenger, London, 1841; Amin Ahmad Razi, Haft Iqlim, English tr. 'Abd
al­Magtadir and Mahfaz al-Haq, Calcutta, 1918-39; Sulayman al-Tajir and
abu Zaid Sirafi, Akhbdr al-Sin w-al-Hind (Voyage de Sulayman sini de
remarques par Abu Zayd Hasan), Traduction par Gabriel Ferrand, Paris,
1922; Yegnt al­Hamawi, Mu'jam al-Bulddn, ed. F. Wustenfeld, 6 Vols.,
Leipzig, 1866-73; Mu'jam al-Udaba', ed. Margoliouth, Gibb Memorial
Series, 1907; Zain al- Din $haikh (al-Ma'bari), Tuhfat al-Mujdhidin,
English tr. M. Hussain Nainar, Madras, 1942, also by M. J. Rowlandson,
London, 1833.

### General

Nafis Ahmad, Muslim Contribution to Geography, M. Ashraf, Lahore, 1947;
“Muslim Contribution to Geography during the Middle Ages,” Islamic
Culture, Hyderabad, July 1943; “Muslim Contributions to Astronomical and
Mathematical Geography,” ibid., April 1944; “The Arab's Knowledge of
Ceylon,” ibid., July 1945; Ahmad Zaki Validi, “Islamic and the Science
of Geography,” ibid., October 1934; Zia al-Din, Ahmad, The Mathematics
Student, Aligarh, Vol. X, No. 1, 1942; T. Ar­nold and A. Guillaume
(Eds.), The Legacy of Islam, Oxford, 1931; J. L. N. Baker, A History of
Geographical Discovery and Exploration, Harrap, 1937; Syed Hasan Barani,
al-Biruni (Urdu), Aligarh, 1927; W. Barthold, Mussulman Culture, English
trans. by Shahid Suhrawardy, Calcutta, 1934; C. R. Beazley, The Dawn of
Modern Geography, 3 Vols., 1897-1906, London and Oxford; Bird Hubert,
Arab Navigators, Musta'mil al-'Arabi, 21 August 1943 (B. B. C. Talk),
London; C. Brookelmann, Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur, 2 Vols.,
Weimar, Berlin, 1898-1902, also Mathematics and Astronomy
Supplementbdnde; H. E. Burton, Discovery of the Ancient World,
Cambridge, 1932; Carra de Vaux, Les Penseurs de l'Islam, 5 Vols.,
1921-26; Sir A. Cunnigham, Ancient Geography of India, ed. S. Majumdar,
Calcutta, 1924; H. C. Darby, “A Note on an Early Treatise on the
Astrolabe,” Geographical Journal, No. 2, February 1935; B. Datta and A.
J. Singh, History of Hindu Mathematics, Lahore, 1933; R. E. Dickinson
and 0. J. R. Howarth, The Making of Geography, Oxford, 1933; Donaldson,
“The Uses of the Astrolabe,” Islamic Culture, Hyderabad, January 1945;
Sir H. N. Elliot and J. Dawson, The History of India . . ., Vol. I,
London, 1867; M. A. Enan, Ibn Khaldun, Lahore, 1941; Encyclopaedia
Bri­tannica, 13th Edition; Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4 Vols., London,
1908-36, also Supplement, 1934-38; G. Ferrand, Introduction a
l'astronomie nautique Arabe, Paris, 1928; E. Gibbon, Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire, Vol. III, London, 1900;'At&' al-Hakim, History of Arab
Mathematics (unpublished thesis), Calcutta University, 1946; J. Hell,
The Arab Civilization, English trans. by Khuda Bakhsh, 2nd. edition Sh.
Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1943; P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs,
London, 1937; A. Hozayen, “Some Arab Contributions to Geography,”
Geography Magazine, October, 1932; C. Huart, History of Arabic
Literature, Heine­mann, London, 1903; Shaikh'Inayatullah, Geographical
Factors in Arabian Life and History, Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1942;
W. W. Jervis, The World in Maps, Phillips, London, 1936; Jurji Zaidan,
'Ulum-i'Arab, trans. in Urdu by Aslam Jairajpuri, Aligarh, 1907; J.
Keane, The Evolution of Geography, Edward Stanford, London, 1899; G. H.
T. Kimble, Geography in the Middle Ages, Methuen, London, 1938; G. Le
Strange, Lands of the Eastern Caliphate, Cambridge University Press,
1905; Baghdad During the 'Abbasid Caliphate, Oxford, 1924; Palestine
Under Muslim Rule, A. P. Watt, London, 1890; R. Levy, The Sociology o f
Islam, Vol. II (H. Spencer Trustees), London, 1938; A. Mess, Die
Renaissance des Islams, Heidelberg, 1922, also trans. by Khuda Bakhsh,
Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1937; Max Meyerhof, “Transmission of
Science to the Arabs,” Islamic Culture, Hyderabad, Vol. XI, 1937;
“Aconite from Al-Beruni's Kitab al-Saidanah,” ibid., Vol. XIX, October
1945; M. H. Nainar, Arab's Knowledge of South India, Madras University,
1942; Sulaiman Nadawi, 'Arab-o Hind ke Ta'allugat (Urdu), Hindustani
Academy, Allahabad, 1930; “'Ilm al-Jaghrafiya w-al-'Arab,” al-Did',
Azamgarh, September 1932, January 1933; “]?id' al-Din Humayuni
Asturlabi,” Ma'drif, Azamgarh, August 1933; Ard al-Qur'an (Urdu), 2
Vols; “Arab Navi­gation,” Islamic Culture, Vol. XV, Hyderabad, October
1941; A Geographical History of the Qur'dn, Calcutta, 1936; A. P. Newton
(Ed.), Travel and Travel­lers of the Middle Ages, London, 1926; De Lacy
O'Leary, Arabic Thought and Its Place in History, Routledge & Kegan
Paul, London, 1922; How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs, Routledge &
Kegan Paul, London, 1949; H. St. Philby, “Nagehah Bardari Sharq-i Wusta”
(Persian), Rozgdr-i Nau, Vol. IV, No. 4, B. B. C., London, 1945; E.
Raisz, General Cartography, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1938; J. T. Reinaud,
“Introduction Ganerale a la Gdographie des Orientaux,” Geographie
d'Aboulfeda, Vol. I, Paris, 1848; G. Sarton, Introduction to the History
of Science, 3 Vols., Carnegie Institute of Washington, Baltimore,
1927-48; C. Schoy, “Geography of the Muslims of the Middle Ages,” The
Geographical Review, Vol. XIV, New York, 1924; L. Sedillot, L'Histoire
des Arabes, 2nd ed., Paris, 1877, Chap. IV; Shibli Nu'mani, al-Mdmun
(Urdu), Azamgarh, 1926; D. E. Smith, History of Mathematics, Vol. II,
Ginn & Co., New York, 1925; E. G. R. Taylor, “Some Notes on the Early
Ideas of the Form and Size of the Earth,” Geographical Journal, Vol.
LXXXV, January 1925, London; L. Thorndike, History of Magic and
Experimental Science, 6 Vols., New York, 1923-41; H. Yule and H.
Cordier, The Book of Sir Marco Polo, 2 Vols., John Murray, London, 1903;
W. Vincent, Commerce and Navigation of Ancients in the Indian Ocean, 2
Vols., London, 1807; Prince Youssouf Kamal, Monumenta Cartographica,
Africae et Aegypti, Leiden,; S. M. Ziauddin Alvi and S. Ali Muzafer,
“Arab Geography in the Ninth and Tenth Centuries, A.D.,” The Indian
Geographical Journal, Madras, Vol. XXII, 1947.

[^1]: Baker, A History of Geographical Discovery and Exploration, p. 26.

[^2]: Thomson, History of Ancient Geography, p. 360.

[^3]: Max Meyerhof, “Science and Medicine,” The Legacy of Islam, p. 314

[^4]: Sulaiman Nadawi, \`Arbon ki Jahazrani (Urdu), p. 165.

[^5]: C. Schoy, “The Geography of the Muslims of the Middle Ages,” The
Geo­graphical Review, Vol. XIV, No. 2, 1924, p. 258, (quoting Mas'udi).

[^6]: Sulaiman Nadawi, Ard al-Qur'an (Urdu), Vol. I, p. 16.

[^7]: Nafis Ahmad, Muslim Contribution to Geography, p. 19.

[^8]: Ibid. p. 23.

[^9]: Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. I, p. 587.

[^10]: 10 Minoroky (Ed.), Hudud al-'Alam, Preface, p. vii.

[^11]: Brockelmann, Gesch. arab. Litt., Vol. 1, p. 227.

[^12]: Ziauddin Alvi and Ali Muzafer, “Arab Geography in the Ninth and
Tenth Centuries A. D.,” The Indian Geographical Journal, Vol. XXII, No.
3, p. 144.

[^13]: Nafis Ahmad, “The Arab's Knowledge of Ceylon,” Islamic Culture,
July 1945, pp. 227-29; also \`Aja'ib al-Hind, pp. 156-57 and pp. 265 et
seq.

[^14]: Kramers, “Geography and Commerce,” The Legacy of Islam, pp.
97-103

[^15]: Ibid. pp. 104-05.

[^16]: Nafis Ahmad, Muslim Contribution to Geography, p. 36

[^17]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. II, Part I, p. 300.

[^18]: Nafis Ahmad, Muslim Contribution to Geography, p. 37.

[^19]: Wright, Travels of Ibn Jubair, p. 14.

[^20]: Cheneb, Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 67.

[^21]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. II, Part I, p. 410.

[^22]: Gibb, Ibn Boosts, Introduction, p. 9.

[^23]: Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. II, p. 213.

[^24]: A'in-i Akbari, tr. Jarret, Preface, p. 1.

[^25]: Sulaiman Nadawi, 'Arbon ki Jahazrani, p. 121.

[^26]: Kitab at-Masalik w-al-Mamalik, ed. de Goeje, Leiden. p. 2.

[^27]: Levy, The Sociology of Islam, Vol. II, pp. 370-94

[^28]: Ibid. pp. 291-96.

[^29]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 620.

[^30]: Muruj, tr. Sprenger, pp. 270-78.

[^31]: Maqdisi, pp. 2-3.

[^32]: Le Strange, the Lands of the Eastern Caliphate, p. 13.

[^33]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 707.

[^34]: Sachau, Al-Biruni'a India, Vol. I, p. 210 and Vol. II, pp. 152-53

[^35]: F. Krenkow, “Al-Biruni,” Islamic Culture, Vol. XV, No. 4, 1941.

[^36]: Nafis Ahmad, Muslim Contribution to Geography, pp. 29-35.

[^37]: Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. II, pp. 841-44.

[^38]: Reinaud, “Introduction Generale a la Geography des Orientaux,”
Geographic d'Abduljeda, Paris, 1848.

[^39]: Nuzhat al-Qulub, Chap. XX.

[^40]: Nainar, Arab's Knowledge of South India, p. 19

[^41]: Muruj, tr. Sprenger.

[^42]: Muqaddimah, tr. Franz Rosenthal, Vol. II, Chap. IV, Sec. 5.

[^43]: Naillino, Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 498.

[^44]: The degree near Tadmur was measured and computed at 56.2/3 miles.
But the measurements were in Arabian miles and one Arabian mile is equal
to 6472.4 English feet. Hence the circumference of the earth, 20,400
Arabian miles, is equal to 24,847.2 English miles which is remarkably
near the actual figure.

[^45]: Schoy, op. cit., pp. 263-68.

[^46]: Ibid. p. 269.

[^47]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 674.

[^48]: Raisz, General Cartography, p. 21.

[^49]: Kramers, Encyclopedia of Islam, Sup., p. 65.

[^50]: Maqdisi (Constantinople MS.), p. 8.S

[^51]: G. Ferrand, Introductions a t'astroniomic nautique, p. 228.

[^52]: Sarton, op. cit., Vol. II, Part II, p. 1047.

[^53]: Maqdisi, Ahaan al-Tagdeim, p. 14.

[^54]: Monumenta Cartographica Af ricae et Aegypti.

[^55]: Beazley, Dawn of Modern Geography, Vol. II, p. 8.

[^56]: Roger Bacon, Opus Majus, Vol. I, p. 318

[^57]: G. Ferrand, op. cit., p.225

[^58]: Kimble, Geography in the Middle Ages, p. 197.

[^59]: Keane, The Evolution of Geography, p. 48


