Chapter 63: Mathematics and Astronomy
=====================================

A - Introduction
----------------

It is generally recognized that human knowledge took its organized and
systematic form with the Greeks. It is equally well known that the
Greeks inherited a considerable body of knowledge from their Eastern
predecessors, especially the Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese, and
Indians.

The histories of science and culture, written by some Western writers,
however, show a gap between the period of the Greeks and the
Renaissance. They give the impression that the history of science was
blank for nearly one thousand years, and scientific knowledge made a
sudden leap, taking a millennium in its stride. These histories ignore
the fact that the intervening ages from the first/seventh to the
eighth/fourteenth century constituted the era of the Arab and other
Muslim peoples.

The latest researches of Muslim and non-Muslim scholars are bringing to
light the work of the Muslims in the various branches of knowledge
throughout the Middle Ages. These researches are, however, scattered in
various journals and books which are not easily accessible to the
average educated person. Two good works of reference published are the
Encyclopedia of Islam and George Sarton's Introduction to the History of
Science. On a thorough study of the information available on the
subject, one is struck by the magnitude as well as importance of the
contributions made by the Muslims to the various branches of science,
especially to mathematics and astronomy.

The magnitude of these achievements is so vast that it is giving rise to
another tendency among the historians of science. It is incomprehensible
to them that the Arabs who were so backward and ignorant in the
centuries preceding the advent of Islam could have become so enlightened
and scholarly in such a short time after adopting the new faith. One of
the great exponents of this line of thought is Moritz Cantor who has
written an encyclopedic history of mathematics in the German language.
The chapter on the Arabs in Cantor's book begins as follows:

“That a people who for centuries together were closed to all the
cultural influences from their neighbors, who themselves did not
influence others during all this time, who then all of a sudden imposed
their faith, their laws, and their language on other nations to an
extent which has no parallel in history-all this is such an
extraordinary phenomenon that it is worthwhile to investigate its
causes. At the same time we can be sure that this sudden outburst of
intellectual maturity could not have originated of itself.”

Laboring under this fixed idea, Cantor proceeds to attribute almost
every­thing done by the Muslim scholars to the Greeks and other nations.
We must confess that this kind of argument introduces an extremely
dangerous principle in historical research, and can be employed only by
one who is predisposed to demolish an exalted and established
reputation. If Cantor had really investigat­ed the cause of the “sudden
outburst of intellectual maturity” of the Arabs, he would have realized
that it was primarily due to the revolution caused by Islam in the whole
outlook of the people. We have elsewhere described the attitude of Islam
towards knowledge.[^1] By making it incumbent upon the believer to
acquire knowledge and by enjoining upon him to observe and to think for
himself, Islam created an unbounded enthusiasm for acquiring knowledge
amongst its followers. The result of this revolution can be best
described in the words of Florian Cajori, who says in his History of
Mathematical Notation: “The Arabs present an extraordinary spectacle in
the history of civilization. Unknown, ignorant, and disunited tribes of
the Arabian Peninsula, untrained in government and war, are, in the
course of ten years, fused by the furnace-blast of religious enthusiasm
into a powerful nation, which in one century extends its dominion from
India across northern Africa to Spain. A hundred years after this grand
march of conquest, we see them assume the leadership of intellectual
pursuits; the Muslims become the great scholars of their time.”

It is under this stimulus of the Islamic injunction for acquiring more
and more knowledge that the Arabs and other Muslim peoples turned to the
learn­ing of the various branches of knowledge, preserving and improving
upon the heritage left by preceding civilizations and enriching every
subject to which they turned their attention. In the following pages we
give an account of their contribution in the domain of mathematics and
astronomy. It may be pointed out that this is only a brief chapter in
the general history of Muslim philosophy. The account will, therefore,
be of a descriptive nature, shorn of all technicalities and confined to
some of the fundamental ideas put forward by the Muslim peoples in the
fields of arithmetic, algebra, geometry, trigo­nometry, and astronomy.
It is neither possible nor desirable to give here an exhaustive account
of the work done by each and every Muslim scholar. We have restricted
ourselves to important contributions of the prominent Muslim
mathematicians and astronomers.

B - Arithmetic
--------------

The Arabs started work on arithmetic in the second/eighth century. Their
first task in this field was to systematize the use of the Hindu
numerals which are now permanently associated with their names.
Obviously, this was an immense advance on the method of depicting
numbers by the letters of the alphabet which was universal up to that
time and which prevailed in Europe even during the Middle Ages. The
rapid development in mathematics in the subsequent ages could not have
taken place without the use of numerals, particularly zero without which
all but the simplest calculations become too cumbersome and
unmanageable. The zero was mentioned for the first time in the
arithmetical work of al-Khwarizmi written early in the third/ninth
century. The Arabs did not confine their arithmetic to integers only,
but also contributed a great deal to the rational numbers consisting of
fractions. This was the first extension of the domain of numbers, which,
in its logical develop­ment, led to the real, complex, and hyper-complex
numbers constituting a great part of modern analysis and algebra. They
also developed the principle of error which is employed in solving
algebraic problems arithmetically. Al­Biruni (363-432/973-1040), ibn
Sina (370-428/980-1037), ibn al-Sam$ (d. 427/1035), Muhammad ibn Husain
al-Karkhi (d. 410/1019 or 420/1029), abu Said al-Sijzi (c. 340-c. 415/c.
951-c. 1024) are some of the arithmeticians who worked on the higher
theory of numbers and developed the various types of numbers, such as:

Tamm (perfect numbers), i.e., those which are equal to the sum of their
divisors, e.g., 6 = 1 + 2 + 3.

Muta\`ddilan (equivalents), i.e., two numbers, the sum of the divisors
of which is the same, e.g., 39 and 55: 1 + 3 + 13 = 1 + 5 + 11.

Mutahdbban (amicable numbers), i, e., two such numbers in which the sum
of the divisors of one equal the other, e.g., 220 and 284:

1+2+4+71+142=220

1+2+4+5+10+11+20+22+44+55+110=284.

(iv) Muthallathat (triangular numbers), e.g., the numbers 1, 3, 6, 10,
15, 21, 28, 36, 45, which are the sum of the first one, first two, first
three, first four and so on, natural numbers.[^2]

The Arabs also solved the famous problem of finding a square which, on
the addition and subtraction of a given number, yields other
squares.[^3]

The extent of their knowledge of arithmetic can be gauged from the fact
that al-Biruni was able to give the correct value of 1616-1.[^4]

C - Algebra
-----------

The ancient mathematicians, including the Greeks, considered the number
to be a pure magnitude. It was only when al-Khwarizmi (d. 236/850)
conceived of the number as a pure relation in the modern sense that the
science of algebra could take its origin. The development of algebra is
one of the greatest achievements of the Muslims, and it was cultivated
so much that within two centuries of its creation it had reached
considerable proportions. The symbolical process which it idealizes is
still called “Algorithm” in modern mathematics. Al-Khwarizmi himself
formulated and solved the algebraic equations of the first and second
degree, and discovered his elegant geometrical method of finding the
solution of such equations. He also recognized that the quadratic
equation has two roots. Ibrahim ibn Sinn (296-335/908-946) worked on
geometry, especially on conic sections. His quadrature of the parabola
was much simpler than that of Archimedes, in fact the simplest ever made
before the invention of the integral calculus in the
eleventh/seventeenth century.[^5] Abu Kamil huja' al-Misri developed the
algebra of al-Khwarizmi, and determined the real roots of quadratic
equations and their interpretations. Al-Khazin (d. c. 350/961) solved
the cubic equation by employing the conic sections.[^6] Abu al-Wafa'
(al-Bizjani) (329-388/940-998) investigated and solved algebraic
equations of the fourth degree of the type x4 = a, and that of x4 + ax3
= b. AI-Kuhi (fl. c. 378/988) investigated the solvability of algebraic
equations. Abu Mahmud al-Khujandi (fl. 382/992) proved that the
so-called Fermat's problem for cubic powers, i,e., x3 + y3 = z3, cannot
be solved by rational numbers. Ibn al-Laith, who was a contemporary of
al-Biruni, solved the problem which leads to the equation: x3 + 13.5x +
5 =10x8, and founded geometrical methods for solving cubic equations.
Al-Biruni introduced the idea of “function,” which, since the time of
Leibniz (eleventh/seventeenth century), has become the most important
concept in modern mathematics. Abu Bakr al-Karkhi, who is considered one
of the greatest Arab mathe­maticians, wrote a book on algebra, called
al-Faihri, in which he developed approximate methods of finding
square-roots; the theory of indices; the theory of surds; summation of
series; equation of degree 2n; the theory of mathematical induction; and
the theory of indeterminate quadratic equations.

The next important figure is ibn al-Haitham (c. 354-431/c. 965-1039),
who is recognized as the greatest physicist and expert on optics of the
Middle Ages, and who solved the algebraic equation of the fourth degree
by the method of intersection of the hyperbola and the circle.

Then came 'Umar al-Khayyam (c. 430-517/c. 1038-1123), who has recently
become the most glamorous figure of the fifth/eleventh century on
account of his poetry, but who, according to Moritz Cantor, has better
claim to im­mortality as a very great mathematician. He made what was
for his time an uncommonly great progress by dealing systematically with
equations of the cubic and higher orders and by classifying them into
various groups according to their terms.[^7] He described thirteen
different classes of cubic equations. He investigated the binomial
expression for positive integral indices, i.e., in modern terminology,
the expansion of (1 + x)n, when n is an integer. The next significant
advance on this problem was made by Newton (eleventh/seventeenth
century) when he proved the binomial theorem for any rational number. As
stated by Cantor, Khayyam has a very exalted place in the history of
algebra.[^8]

At about this time, Muslim scholars founded, developed, and perfected
geometrical algebra, and could solve equations of the second, third, and
fourth degree before the year 494/1100.

Moritz Cantor, who is by no means partial to the Muslims, remarks that
“the Arabs of the year 494/1100 were uncommonly superior to the most
learned Europeans of that time in the mathematical sciences.[^9] He goes
on to relate the story that in the seventh/thirteenth century, Frederick
II Hohen­staufen sent a special deputation to Mosul to ask Kamal al-Din
ibn Yunus (d. 640/1242), the mathematician of a college later on called
after him the Kamalic College, to solve some mathematical problems.
Kamal al-Din solved these problems for the Emperor.[^10] One of the
questions solved by him was how to construct a square equivalent to a
circular segment.

D -Geometry
-----------

In the subject of geometry, the Arabs began by translating the Elements
of Euclid and the Conics of Apollonius, thus preserving the work of
these Greek masters for posterity. This task was satisfactorily
accomplished in the early third/ninth century. Soon after this they
launched on making fresh discoveries for themselves. The three brothers,
Muhaammad, Ahmad and Hasan, sons of Musa bin Shakir, may be regarded as
pioneers in this field. They discovered a method of trisecting an angle
by the geometry of motion, thus connecting geometry with mechanics. That
this problem is not solvable by means of the ruler and compass alone,
has been well known from the time of the Greek mathematicians. The
brothers also worked on the mensuration of the sphere and on the
ellipse.

In the fourth/tenth century, abu al-Wafa', al-Kuhi, and others founded
and successfully developed a branch of geometry which consists of
problems leading to algebraic equations of a degree higher than the
second. Al-Kuhi solved the problems of Archimedes and Apollonius by
employing this new method. Abu Kamil Shuja' al-Hasib al-Misri
investigated geometrical figures of five and ten sides (pentagon and
decagon) by algebraic methods. This co-ordination of geometry with
algebra and the geometrical method of solving algebraic equations, like
the application of geometry to algebra by Thabit bin Qurrah, a Sabian
astronomer of the court of the Caliph Mu'tadid, was the anticipation of
Descartes' great discovery of analytical geometry in the
eleventh/seven­teenth century. Abu Said al-Sijzi “made a special study
of the intersections of conic sections and circles. He replaced the old
kinematical trisection of an angle by a purely geometrical solution
(intersection of a circle and an equilateral hyperbola)”.[^11]

Abu al-Wafa developed the method of solving geometrical problems with
one opening of the compass, and of constructing a square equivalent to
other squares. He made many valuable contributions to the theory of
poly­hedra, which is even now considered to be a very difficult
subject.[^12]

Ibn al-Haitham, known in Europe as Alhazen, also made many discoveries
in geometry. His famous book on optics contains the following problem,
known as Alhazen's problem: from two points in the plane of a circle to
draw lines meeting at a point of the circumference and making equal
angles with the normal at that point. This problem leads to an equation
of the fourth degree, and ibn al-Haitham solved it by the aid of a
hyperbola inter­secting a cirele.[^13]

The later Muslim mathematicians developed the geometry of the conic
sections to some extent, but their great contribution was connected with
the appraisal of Euclid's postulates. It is well known that in each
science or logical system (such as the Euclidean geometry), the
beginning is made with some fundamental concepts (like points and lines)
and a few assertions or statements, called “postulates,” which are
accepted without demonstration or proof, and on the basis of which
further statements (called theorems) are established. Now it is
recognized that some of Euclid's postulates are quite self-evident. For
instance, no one questions the validity of the statement that the whole
is greater than a part or that equals added to equals result in equals.
But the same cannot be said about Euclid's parallel postulate. Fakhr
al-Din Razi (d. 606/1209) made a preliminary critique of Euclid's
postulate, but it was Nasir al-Din Tusi (d. 673/1274), who, in the
latter half of the seventh/thirteenth century, recognized the weakness
in Euclid's theory of the parallels. In his efforts to improve the
postulate, he realized the necessity of abandoning perceptual space. It
was in the thirteenth/nineteenth century that such studies, continued by
Gauss, Bolyai, Lobachevsky, and Riemann, resulted in the discovery and
development of the various non-Euclidean geometries, culminating in the
Theory of Relativity in our own time.

E - Trigonometry
----------------

Trigonometry, both plane and spherical, was developed to a great extent
by the Arabs. Al-Khwarizmi himself compiled trigonometric tables, which
contained not only the sine function, as done by his predecessors, but
also that of the tangent, for the first time. These tables were
translated into Latin by Adelard of Bath in 520/1126.[^14]

Al-Battani (d. 317/929), known in Europe as Albategnius, devoted a whole
chapter of his book on astronomy to the subject of trigonometry. He used
sines regularly “with a clear consciousness of their superiority over
the Greek chords. [^15]“The previous works contained only the full arc,
but al-Battani remarked that it was more advantageous to use the half
arc. Cantor considers this “an advance in mathematics which cannot be
appreciated highly enough.”[^16] Al-Battani completed the introduction
of tangents and cotangents in trigono­metry, and gave a table of
cotangents by degrees. He knew the relation between the sides and angles
of a spherical triangle which we express by the formula:[^17]

cos a = cos b cos c + sin b sin c cos a.

Abu al-Wafa's contribution to the development of trigonometry is well
known. Most likely he was the first to show the generality of the sine
theorem relative to the triangles. He introduced quite a new method of
constructing sine tables, the value of sin 30' being correct to the
eight decimal places. He knew relations equivalent to the present ones
for sin (a ± b), and to

2 sin' 2 =1- cos a,

sin a = 2 sin cos 2.

He specially studied the tangent; drew up a table of tangents,
introduced the secant and the cosecant in trigonometry, and knew those
relations between the six trigonometric lines which are now often used
to define them.[^18]

Al-Khujandi is considered to be the discoverer of the sine theorem
relative to spherical triangles. This sine theorem displaced the theorem
of Menelaos[^19]

Ibn Yunus (d. 400/1009) made considerable contributions to trigonometry,
and solved many problems of spherical astronomy by means of orthogonal
projections. He discovered the first of those addition-subtraction
formulae which were indispensable before the invention of logarithms,
namely, the equivalent of

cos a cos b =1/2 (cos (a - b) + cos (a + b)]

He also gave a formula for the approximate value of sin 1’.[^20]

Kushyar ibn Labban (fl. c. 361-420/971-1029) took an important part in
the elaboration of trigonometry. For example, he continued the
investigations on the tangent, and compiled comprehensive tables.[^21]

Al-Zarqali (fi.c.420-480/1029-1087) explained the construction of the
trigonometric tables, and compiled the Toledan Tables, which were
translated into Latin by Gerard of Cremona and enjoyed much
popularity.[^22]

Al-Hasan al-Marrakushi (fl. c. 661/1262) introduced in 627/1229 the
graphic method in trigonometry and prepared the tables of trigonometric
functions.

Nasir al-Din Tusi wrote on plane and spherical trigonometry as a subject
independent of astronomy.

Baba' al-Din (954-1032/1547-1622) gave in his book trigonometric methods
for calculating heights and distances as well as for the determination
of the breadth of a river.

F - Astronomy
-------------

The Arabs claimed astronomy to be their own special subject. Indeed even
at the beginning of Islam, they possessed sufficient astronomical
knowledge to be able to use the position of stars in their wanderings
and agriculture. But it was only in the second/eighth century that the
scientific study of astro­nomy was begun.[^23] From this time up to the
eighth-ninth/fourteenth-fifteenth century the contributions of Muslims
to astronomy were so numerous that they can be dealt with adequately
only in a separate volume. Here we sum­marize only some of the most
important facts.

First of all let us take the observatories. Western historians have
pointed out that before the advent of Islam, only one more or less
well-known obser­vatory existed in Alexandria, and even that was not
doing much work. In the course of a few centuries, the Muslims erected
innumerable well-equipped observatories all over their vast empire. Some
of these observatories are as follows:

(i) The solar observatory built by al-Mamum in Iraq in 214/829.

(ii) The Ispahan observatory built by abu Hanifah al-Dinawari (d. 282/
895).

(iii) The Khwarizm observatory built by al-Biruni.

(iv)The Baghdad observatory of Thabit ibn Qurrah.

(v) The Baghdad observatory built by Caliph al-Mustarshid, where the
well-known astronomer Badi' made his observations.

(vi) The observatory erected by ibn Sina.

(vii) The al-Raqqah and Antakiyah (Antioch) observatories where
al­-Battani made observations from 264/877 to 306/918.

(viii) The banu Musa observatory at Baghdad.

(ix) The Sharaf al-Daulah observatory where al-Saghani and al-Kuhi made
their observations.

(x) The Tabitala observatory where abu Isbaq worked and made
ob­servations.

(xi) The Buzjan observatory associated with the name of abu al-Wafa'.

(xii) The ibn A'lam observatory built at Baghdad in 351-352/962-963.

(xiii) The Egyptian observatory where ibn Yunus produced his famous
almanac.

(xiv) The Mamnni observatory, associated Bataihi (d. 519/1125).

(xv) The Maraghah observatory erected by Nasir al-Din Tusi in 658/ 1259.
It is said that several kinds of instruments were installed in this
observatory, and that a library containing four hundred thousand volumes
was attached to it.

(xvi) The observatory of Taqi al-Din.

(xvii) The Kashmir observatory.

(xviii) The Firuzshahi observatory.

(xix) The Samarqand observatory erected by Sultan Ulugh Beg Mirza in
823/1420.

An account of these observatories lies scattered in various books, such
as: Khuldsah Tarik al-'Arab; Tamaddun-i 'Arab; Kitab al-Kitaf
w-al-Athar; Sharh Chaghmani; Jami' Bahadur Khani; Mu'jam al-Buldan;
Iktifa' al-­Qunu'; Fuwat al-Wajnat; Raudat al-safa; Wafayat al-A'yan;
Kashf al-Zunun.

Next to the observatories come the astronomical instruments; and the
books on history record a large number of instruments constructed by the
Arabs and other Muslim peoples. Work on astronomy of such magnitude
could not be carried out with the rough instruments existing at the
time. They had, therefore, to concentrate all their practical skill on
devising elaborate instruments for making various observations. These
have also been described in the books mentioned above. We shall confine
ourselves to the enumeration and description of some important
instruments.

(i) Libnah, built on a square base, served to measure the declination,
latitude, and distances of the stars.

(ii) Halqah I'tidal (Meridian Circle), fixed in the plane of the
meridian, and devised to determine the distances of the heavenly bodies.

(iii) Dhat al-Autar, constructed by Taqi al-Din, served as an.
alternative for the Meridian Circle which was useful during night as
well as day.

(iv) Dhat al-'Alq (the Astrolabe) was one of the most important
instru­ments. It consisted of two circles, one of which represented the
ecliptic and other the celestial meridian.

(v) Dhdtal-Samt w-al-Irtifa' (Alt-azimuth) consisted of a semi-circle
and bad the diameter of an equi-surfaced cylinder. Taqi al-Din has
mentioned it in his work, to have been constructed by Muslim
astronomers.

(vi) Dhat al-Shu'batain.' It had three faces on one base and served to
determine the altitude of the heavenly bodies.

(vii) Dhat at-Jaib consisted of two faces and was used for the
determination of the altitude.

(viii) Al-Mushabbah bi al-Natiq constructed by Taqi al-Din and used for
determining the distance between two stars.

(ix) Tabaq al-Manatiq constructed by Ghiyath al-Din Jamshid and used for
determining the position of the stars, their latitudes, distance from
the earth, and movement. It was also useful for obtaining data relating
to lunar and solar eclipses.

(x) Zarqalah constructed by Shaikh Isbaq ibn Yabya, generally known as
al-Naqqash al-Andalusi (the Spanish painter). It was a very useful
instrument for observing the movement of the heavenly bodies.

(xi) Dhat al-Kursi constructed by Badi' of the Astrolabe (Badi'
al-­Asturlabi), as described by 'Abd al-Rabman al-Sufi.

(xii) Al-Alat al-Shamilah constructed by al-Khujandi and used for
deter­mining the latitudes.

(xiii) The several types of quadrants as described in Kashf al-Zunun.

(xiv) Asturlab Sartani Mijnah, the transit instrument described by
Muhammad ibn Nasr and Mansur ibn 'Ali.

(xv) Al-Jaib al-Gha'ib consisting of a semi-circle the circumference
being divided equally.

(xvi) Suds-i Fakhri, a sextant associated with the name of Fakhr
al-­Daulah Dailami.

Now we shall describe briefly the investigations carried out by the
Muslim astronomers. Although the work of regular observations and
construction of astronomical instruments was started as early as the
second/eighth century by Ibrahim al-Fazari (d. c. 180/796), the most
brilliant period of Muslim astronomy commenced in the early part of the
third/ninth century in the observatories constructed by the Caliph
al-Mamiin (198-218/813-833). The observatory of Baghdad under Yahya bin
abi Mansur (d. c. 216/831) made systematic observations of the heavenly
bodies and found remarkably precise results for all the fundamental
elements mentioned in Ptolemy's Alma jest, such as the obliquity of the
ecliptic, the precession of the equinoxes, the length of the solar year.
After recording these observations, Yahya compiled the celebrated
“Tested Tables.”[^24] He was also the author of several works on
astronomy.

Under the orders of al-Mamun, the Muslim astronomers carried out one of
the most delicate and difficult geodetic operations, the measuring of
the arc of the meridian. The mean result gave 562/3 Arab miles as the
length of a degree of meridian, which is a remarkably accurate value,
for the Arabic mile is 6,473 ft. This value is equal to 366,842 ft.,
exceeding the real length of the degree between 38° and 36° latitudes by
2,877 ft.

Habash al-Hasib was an astronomer under al-Mamun and al-Mu'tasim; he
compiled three astronomical tables, including the famous “Verified
Tables.” Apropos of the solar eclipse of 214/829, Habash gave the first
instance of a determination of time by an altitude which was generally
adopted by the astronomers.[^25]

'Ali bin 'Isa al-Asturlabi was a famous maker of astronomical
instruments. He took part in the degree measurement ordered by al-Mamun,
and wrote one of the earliest Arabic treatises on the astrolabe.[^26]

Al-Marwarrudhi was one of those who took part in the solar observations
made at Damascus in 217-218/832-833.[^27]

The three sons of Musa bin Shakir made regular observations in the
obser­vatories in Baghdad between 236/850 and 257/870.[^28]

Al-Farghani was one of the most distinguished astronomers in the service
of al-Miman and his successors. His famous work, Kitab fi Harakat
al-Sama­wiyyah wa Jawani' 'Ilm al-Nujum (Book on Celestial Motions and
the Com­plete Science of the Stars), was translated into Latin in the
sixth/twelfth century. It exerted marked influence on European
astronomy. He accepted Ptolemy's theory and value of the precession but
was of the view that it affected not only the stars but also the
planets. He determined the diameter of the earth to be 6,500 miles, and
found the greatest distances and also the diameters of the planets.
[^29]

Al-Mahani (d. between 261/874 and 271/884) made a series of observations
of lunar and solar eclipses and planetary conjunctions during the years
239-252/ 853-866; these were later used by ibn Yunus.[^30]

Al-Nairizi (d. c. 310/922) compiled astronomical tables, made systematic
observations, and wrote a book on atmospheric phenomena. He wrote a
treatise on the spherical astrolabe which is very elaborate and is
supposed to be the best Arabic work on the subject.[^31]

Thabit ibn Qurrah published solar observations, explaining his methods.
He revised the theory of the movement of the sun.[^32] To the eight
Ptolemaic spheres, he made the addition of a ninth one (primum mobile)
to account for the imaginary trepidation of the equinoxes, which was,
however, later found to be an erroneous theory.[^33]

Al-Battani was one of the greatest astronomers of the Middle Ages. He
wrote many books but his main work, the famous De Numeris stellarum et
motibus, exerted great influence in Europe up to the time of the
Renaissance. From 264/877 onwards he made astronomical observations of
remarkable range and accuracy. His tables contain a catalogue of fixed
stars for the year 267-68/880-81. He investigated the motion of the
sun's apogee and found that its longitude had increased by 16° 47' since
the time of Ptolemy. This implied the discovery of the motion of the
solar apsides, and of the slow variation in the equation of time. He
determined many astronomical coeffi­cients with remarkable accuracy, and
corrected the previous values of the precession of equinoxes and the
obliquity of the ecliptic. He proved the possibility of the annular
eclipses of the sun. He did not believe in the trepida­tion of the
equinoxes, although the followers of Copernicus at a much later date did
believe in it. Modern astronomy has shown that the Copernicans were
wrong.[^34] He determined the moon's nodes and discovered the wobbling
motion of the earth's orbit.[^35]

Ibn Amajur (abu Qasim 'Abd Allah) together with his son abu al-Hasan
'Ali made many observations between 272/885 and 321/933 which were
recorded by ibn Yunus. They produced many astronomical tables, including
the table of Mars according to Persian chronology.[^36] Abu al-Hasan
discovered that the moon's distance from the sun is not constant as
assumed by Ptolemy.[^37]

Al-Kuhi was the leading astronomer working in 378/988 at the Sharaf
al-Daulah observatory.[^38]

'Abd al-Ralrman al-Sufi (291-376/903-986) was one of the most eminent
Muslim astronomers. His chief work, Kitab al-Kawdkib al-Thabitah
al-Musawwar (Book of the Fixed Stars Illustrated), is regarded as one of
the three master­pieces of Muslim observational astronomy, the other two
being one by ibn Yanus and a work prepared for Ulugh Beg.[^39]

Ibn al-A'lam (d. 375/985) has been praised for the accuracy of his
observa­tions; his tables continued to be very popular for at least two
centuries.[^40] He determined the stellar motion by observing that the
stars traverse one degree in seventy solar years.[^41] He also
determined the latitude and longitude of many stars,[^42] and measured
the greatest declination of the planet Mer­cury.[^43] He found that the
earth is spherical and may, therefore, be supposed to be inhabited
everywhere. [^44] He discovered the satellites of Jupiter, discussed the
motion of the sun-spots, and determined the eccentric orbit of the
comets.[^45]

Abu al-Wafa' al-Buzjani determined accurately the obliquity of the
ecliptic in 344/955, and calculated the variation in the moon's motion.
There is a difference of opinion about his discovery of the third
liberation in the moon's motion. Some of the older writers believed that
he discovered the third liberation and that Tycho Brahi rediscovered it
in the tenth/sixteenth cen­tury.[^46] But Sarton remarks that abu
al-Wafa' did not discover this variation, but simply spoke of the second
part of the evection, which is essentially different from the variation
discovered by Tycho Brahi.[^47]

Al-Khujandi made astronomical observations, including a determination of
the obliquity of ecliptic, in Rayy, in 384/994.[^48]

Maslamah ibn Ahmad al-Majriti (d. c. 398/1007) edited and corrected the
astronomical tables of al-Khwarizmi replacing the Persian by the Arabic
chronology. He wrote a treatise on the astrolabe and a commentary on
Ptolemy's Planisphaerium both of which were later translated into
Latin.[^49]

Ibn Yunus has been described by Sarton as the greatest Muslim
astronomer. A well-equipped observatory in Cairo enabled him to prepare
improved astronomical tables, called al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi,
completed in 398/1007. They describe observations of eclipses and
conjunctions, old and new, and im­proved value of astronomical constants
(obliquity of the ecliptic 23° 35'; longi­tude of the sun's apogee 86°
10'; solar parallax reduced from 3' to 2'; precession of the quinoxes
51.2” per annum), and give an account of the geodetic measure­ments made
under al-Mamun's orders.[^50] He is specially noted for his method of
longitude determination. As time difference is equivalent to longitude
difference, the determination of local time at the same instant at two
stations widely separated in longitude is sufficient. But there were no
telegraphs or radio signals to give simultaneity. Ibn Yanus proposed and
used a signal from the moon-the first contact of a lunar eclipse. In
this way he corrected many errors in longitudes in Ptolemy's
geography.[^51]

Al-Biruini is regarded by Western historians of science as “one of the
greatest scientists of all times whose critical spirit, toleration, love
of truth, and intellectual courage were almost without parallel in
medieval times.”[^52] He made accurate determination of latitudes and
longitudes and also other geodetic measurements. He discussed in his
book Qanun al-Mas'udi for the first time the question that the earth
rotates around its axis. The translation of the relevant Arabic passages
is as follows: “When a thing falls from a height, it does not coincide
with the perpendicular line of its descent, but inclines a little, and
falls making different angles. When a piece of earth separates from it
and falls, it has two kinds of motions: one is the circular motion which
it receives from the rotation of the earth, and the other is straight
which it acquires in falling directly to the centre of the earth. If it
had only the straight motion, it would have fallen to the west of its
perpendicular position. But since both of them exist at one and the same
time, it falls neither to the west nor in the perpendicular direction,
but a little to the east.” This book of al-Biruni, viz., al-Qanun
al-Mas'udi, was written in 42211030, and gave the true explanation of
the rising and setting of the heavenly bodies as being due to the
rotation of the earth, thus pointing to the error in the geocentric
conception of the solar system. The heliocentric doctrine was not
entirely unknown to the Arabs, who knew that the earth revolved round
the sun and that the orbits of the planets were elliptic.[^53] It should
be noted that Copernicus gave the scientific formulation and detailed
working out of the heliocentric theory some three centuries later.

Al-Zarqali was “the best observer of his time. He invented an improved
astrolabe called safihah; his description of it was translated into
Latin, Hebrew, and many vernaculars. He was the first to prove
explicitly the motion of the solar apogee with reference to the stars;
according to his measure­ments it amounted to 12.04” per year (the real
value being 11.8”).” He edited the planetary tables called the “Toledan
Tables.” [^54]

'Umar Khayyam was called to the new observatory of Rayy in 467/1074 by
Sultan Malik Shah Jalal al-Din Saljuqi to reform the old calendar.
Moritz Cantor remarks that the calendar prepared by 'Umar Khayyam,
called al­Tarikh al-Jalali, was more accurate than any other proposed
before or after his time. Its date was 10th Ramadan 471, i.e., 16th
March 1079. The modern interpretation of Khayyam's calendar is that
eight intercalary days should be introduced in thirty-three years,
resulting in an error of one day in about 5,000 years. The Gregorian
calendar leads to an error of one day in 3,330 years.[^55]

Chingiz Khan erected a magnificent observatory at Maraghah near Tabriz
far surpassing any built by his predecessors. Nasir al-Din Tusi was the
greatest genius of this institution. He was quite original and
independent, and criticized Ptolemy quite severely, “paving the way for
the overthrow of the geocentric system.”[^56]

Ulugh Beg, grandson of Timur, established an observatory at Samarqand,
Turkestan, in 823/1420, which was best equipped. A great work produced
at this observatory was an independent star catalogue, known as the
“Ulugh Beg Tables,” based entirely upon new observations, the first in
about sixteen hundred years, i.e., since the time of Hipparchus, second
century B.C. The positions were given to the nearest minute of arc, and
attained a high degree of precision for that period. Instruments used in
this observatory are considered the best made up to that time.[^57] It
is said that his quadrant was so large that its diameter was equal to
the height of the St. Sophia Church in Con­stantinople. This work on
astronomy is regarded as one of the best books of the Muslim
astronomers. It was written in 841/1437, and from it one can have a fair
account of the knowledge possessed by the Muslims in the ninth/fifteenth
century. The first part deals with the general principles of astronomy.
The latter part contains the practical methods of calculating the lunar
and solar eclipses and the construction of the tables and their
applications; a list of the stars; the motion of the sun, the moon, and
the planets; and the terrestrial latitudes and longitudes of the big
cities of the world.[^58]

The Mughuls inherited their fondness for astronomy from Ulugh Beg.
Farishtah remarks that Humayun was a keen astronomer and spent a good
deal of time in its pursuit.[^59] An observatory was founded in Delhi
under the orders of Muhammad Shah in 1137/1724, which was in the charge
of the well­known mathematician Mirza Khair Allah. By this time the West
had made great progress in astronomy as in other branches of knowledge,
and therefore a commission consisting of the ablest men of the time was
sent to Europe to study the new methods followed there and new results
obtained through the then latest researches. The commission brought back
with it some telescopes and other instruments and a few books prepared
in Europe. The King of Portugal also deputed a European astronomer to go
to Delhi with the commission. But when his data were checked at the
Delhi obser­vatory, local people detected errors and made corrections in
his tables and calculations of the lunar and solar eclipses. This is
ascribed to the fact that the instruments made in Europe at the time
were of a smaller size than those available in the Delhi
observatory.[^60]

The Nizamiyyah observatory was erected at Hyderabad Deccan in the
thirteenth/nineteenth century, and was the biggest institution of its
kind in the East. It contained a sixteen-inch refracting telescope, a
transit instrument, a Meridian circle, and a good deal of other
equipment essential for a modern observatory. Its unique position was
recognized by international organizations, and it had an important share
in the preparation of the International Catalogue of Stars. After the
establishment of the Osmania University, it became a constituent unit of
that University.

The influence of the Muslims in this field is traceable from the many
Arabic names and words that have become an integral part of the
astronomical sciences. A long list of such words can be compiled, but it
would be sufficient to mention a few: almanac (al-munakh), almacantar
(al-muqantarah), nadir (nadir), zenith (samt al-ras), algol (al-ghul),
altair (al-ta'ir), aldebaran (al­dabaran), fomalhaut (jam al-hut), denab
(dhanab), vega (waqi'), and the various names of Muslim astronomers
given to the craters of the moon.[^61]

Bibliography
------------

Encyclopaedia of Islam; Moritz Cantor, Geschichte der Mathematik; G.
Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. I, Baltimore, 1927;
Heinrich Suter, Die Mathematiker and Astronomen der Araber and ihre
Werke; al-Batten, Iktifa' al-Qunu; Tamaddun-i 'Arab; arh Chaghmani; Carl
Rufus, “The Influence of Islamic Astronomy in Europe and Far East,”
Popular Astronomy, May 1939; Qhhulam Husain Jaunpuri, Jami' Bahadur
Khani; Muhammad Abdul Rahman Khan, “Names of Thirteen Muslim Astronomers
Given to Some Natural Features of the Moon,” Islamic Culture, Hyderabad,
Vol. XXVII, No. 2, April 1953.

[^1]: Vol. I, Chap. VIII.

[^2]: Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 124.

[^3]: Moritz Cantor, Geschichte der Mathematik, Vol. I, p. 752.

[^4]: George Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. I, p.
707.

[^5]: Ibid. p. 632.

[^6]: Heinrich Suter, Die Mathematiker and A8tronomen der Araber and Are
Werke.

[^7]: Cantor, op. cit., p. 775.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 776.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 778.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 665.

[^12]: Ibid. p. 667.

[^13]: Ibid. p. 721.

[^14]: Ibid. p. 563.

[^15]: Ibid. p. 603.

[^16]: Cantor, op. cit., p. 737.

[^17]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 603.

[^18]: Ibid. p. 667.

[^19]: Ibid. p. 668.

[^20]: Ibid. p. 717.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid. p. 759.

[^23]: Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 498.

[^24]: Ibid.

[^25]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 565.

[^26]: Ibid. p. 566.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. 1, pp. 498 et sq.

[^29]: Sarton,-op. cit., p. 567.

[^30]: Ibid. pp. 597-98.

[^31]: Ibid. p. 599.

[^32]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Vol. I, p. 498

[^33]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 599.

[^34]: Ibid. p. 603.

[^35]: Iktifa' al-Qunu', p. 243.

[^36]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 630.

[^37]: Tamaddun-i 'Arab, p. 420.

[^38]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 665.

[^39]: Ibid. p. 666.

[^40]: Ibid.

[^41]: Sharh Chaghmani, p. 23.

[^42]: Iktife' al-Qunu', p. 248.

[^43]: Ghulam Husain Jaunpuri, Jami' Bahddur Khani, p. 596.

[^44]: Ibid. p. 668.

[^45]: Ibid. p. 628.

[^46]: Khulasah Tarikh al-'Arab, 243.

[^47]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 666.

[^48]: Ibid. p. 668.

[^49]: Ibid.

[^50]: Ibid. p. 716.

[^51]: Carl Rufus, “The Influence of Islamic Astronomy in Europe and Far
East,” Popular Astronomy, May 1939, pp. 233-38.

[^52]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 707.

[^53]: Tamaddun-i 'Arab, p. 425.

[^54]: Sarton, op. cit., p. 758.

[^55]: Ibid. p. 760.

[^56]: Carl Rufus, op. cit., pp. 233-38.

[^57]: Ibid.

[^58]: Tamaddun-i 'Arab, pp. 422-24.

[^59]: Tarikh Farishtah, p. 213.

[^60]: Ghulam Husain Jaunpuri, Jami' Bahadur Khani.

[^61]: Muhammad Abdul Rahman Khan, “Names of Thirteen Muslim Astronomers
Given to Some Natural Features of the Moon,” Islamic Culture, Vol.
XXVII, No. 2, April 1953, pp. 78-85.


