Chapter 64: Physics and Mineralogy
==================================

The Muslims contributed enormously to exact sciences such as
mathematics, astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, and zoology since
they had succeeded in acquiring the knowledge of the sciences which had
developed before the advent of Islam.

Abu Yusuf Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Kindi[^1] was the first Muslim
scientist-philo­sopher. His pure Arabian descent earned him the title
“The Philosopher of the Arabs.” Indeed, he was the first and last
example of an Aristotelian student in the Eastern Caliphate who sprang
from the Arabian stock. His principal work on geometrical and
physiological optics based on the optics of Euclid in Theon's recension
was widely used both in the East and the West until it was superseded by
the greater work of ibn al-Haitham. He was the first Muslim to write in
Arabic a book on music in which he designed a notation for the pitch of
notes. Al-Kindi's three or four treatises on the theory of music are the
earliest extant works in Arabic showing the influence of Greek writings
on that subject. Of al-Kindi's writings more have survived in Latin
translations than in the Arabic original.[^2]

An observatory was opened by the three sons of Musa ibn Shakir
(236-257(850-870) in their house at Baghdad. The Buwaihid Sultan Sharaf
al-Daulah (372-379/982-989) instituted another in his palace at Baghdad
where 'Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi (d. 376/986), Ahmad al-Saqhhani (d.
380/990), and abu al-Wafa' (d. 387/997) carried out their astronomical
observations. At the Court of another Buwaihid, Rukn al-Daulah
(320-366/932-976) of al-Rayy, flourished abu Ja'far al-Khazin of
Khurasan who ascertained the obliquity of the ecliptic and solved a
problem in Archimedes which led to the discovery of a cubic equation.
Other astronomers made a systematic study of the heavens in Shiraz,
Nishapur, and Samarqand.[^3] Banu Musa published a work on the balance.

'Utarid ibn Mubammad al-Hasib wrote a book on lapidary which is reckoned
among the oldest Arabic works on this subject; abu Zakariya al-Razi
quoted from 'Utarid in his famous book al-Hdwi. Al-Razi the Iranian was
one of the greatest medical men of the Middle Ages. He was an expert
chemist and physicist.

Al-Hakim the Fatimid was personally interested in astronomical
calcula­tions. He built on the Muquttam an observatory to which he used
to ride before dawn. The intellectual lights of his Court were 'Ali ibn
Ydnus (d. 400/ 1009), the greatest astronomer Egypt has ever produced,
and abu 'Ali al­Haitham (Latin Alhazen), the principal Muslim physicist
and student of optics. The latter was undoubtedly the foremost physicist
of the Middle Ages. His researches into geometrical and physiological
optics were considered to be the most important and useful up to the
time of Renaissance. His expla­nation of the vision and functions of the
eye was far in advance of the ideas of the ancients. The chief work for
which he is noted is one on optics, Kitab al-Manazir, of which the
original is lost but which was translated into Latin in the
sixth/twelfth century. Almost all the medieval writers on optics in the
West based their works on ibn Haitham's Opticae Thesaurus. In this work
he opposed the theory of Euclid and Ptolemy that the eye sends out
visual rays to the object of vision, and presented experiments for
testing the angles of incidence and reflection. In certain experiments
he approached the theoretical discovery of magnifying lenses which were
manu­factured in Italy centuries later.[^4]

Ibn al-Haitham was the greatest Muslim physicist and one of the foremost
opticians of the world. He found out the law of refraction in
transparent bodies; laws of reflection of light; spherical and parabolic
aberrations; and the law of refraction which later came to be known as
Snell's Law. He discussed the magnifying power of a lens, refraction of
light in the earth's atmosphere, and beginning or termination of
twilight when the sun is 19° vertically below the horizon. He tried by
these means to estimate the height of the homo­geneous atmosphere. He
gave a better explanation of vision, though he erroneously assumed the
lens of the eye to be the organ of sight. Later on ibn Rushd corrected
this error and showed that sight is the function of the retina. Ibn
al-Haitham explained the vision of a body by the aid of two eyes and the
more magnified appearance of heavenly bodies when near the horizon than
when vertically higher.

Muslim scientists evinced much interest in the determination of specific
gravity of bodies. At Ghaznah in eastern Afghanistan lived abu al-Raiban
Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Biruni (363-440/973-1048), considered one of the
most original and profound scientists that the medieval world produced
in the domains of physical and mathematical sciences. Al-Biruni found
accu­rately the specific gravity of eighteen different precious
substances and metals. He realized that the velocity of light was
enormously greater than that of sound. Al-Biruni developed the
mathematical part of geography, improved mensuration, and determined
quite accurately the latitude and longitude of a number of places; he
devised easy methods of stereographic projection. He showed how water
flows in natural springs and how it comes out in artificial wells, and
explained these facts in accordance with the laws of hydrostatics. His
observations led him to the conclusion that the Indus Valley was at one
time a part of the sea which became solid by the deposit of alluvial
soil.

The most illustrious name in Arabic medical annals after al-Razi is that
of ibn Sina (Latin Avicenna) (370-428/980-1037). Al-Razi was more of a
physician than ibn Sina, but ibn Sina was more of a philosopher. In this
physician, philosopher, philologist, and poet, medieval Arab science
culminates and is, one might say, incarnated. Ibn Sina wrote on the
theory of numbers. For accurate measurement of distances he invented an
apparatus involving the same principle as our modern Vernier. He made a
masterly study of a number of physical subjects like motion, contact,
force, vacuum, infinity, light, and heat. Ibn Sina expressed his views
on all the information that could be gathered in physics
philosophically. He showed that however great the velocity of light may
be, it must be limited. He did valuable research in music also, but his
principal subject was medicine for which he earned the title of Shaikh
al-Ra'is.

Jalal al-Din Malik Shah patronized astronomical studies. He established
in 467/1074 at Rayyan observatory where there was introduced into the
civil calendar an important reform based on an accurate determination of
the length of the tropical year. To this task of reforming the Persian
calendar he called to his new observatory the celebrated 'Umar
al-khayyam. Umar al-Khayyam was born between 430/1038 and 440/1048 at
Nishapur where he died in 517/1123. He is known to the world primarily
as a Persian poet. Very few people realize that he was a first-class
mathematician and astronomer as well. The researches of al-Khayyam and
his collaborators resulted in the production of the calendar named,
after his patron, al-Tarikh al-Jalali, which is even more accurate than
the Gregorian calendar. As men­tioned in the preceding chapter, the
latter leads to an error of one day in 3,330 years whereas al-Khayyam's
leads to an error of one day in about 5,000 years. 'Umar al-Khayyam
performed experiments to find the specific gravity of various
substances.

The attraction of iron by natural magnet was known to the Greeks;
magnet's acquiring a definite direction when suspended freely was known
to the Chinese. But it appears that this property was first utilized by
Muslims in their marine navigation. Muhammad al-'Aufi was the first to
mention it in his Jawami'. The directive position of the magnetic needle
was known to the Chinese from a very long time, but they used it only
for geomantic purposes. Most probably Muslim sailors were the first to
employ it in navi­gating their ships as is evident from Chu Yu's account
of sailing vessels using it between Canton and Sumatra.

Nasir al-Din Tusi's most brilliant pupil Qutb al-Din Shirazi (634-711/
1236-1311) wrote Nihayat al-Idrak fi Dirayat al-Aflak which is largely a
development of the former's Tadhkirah, a work on astronomical topics; it
also contains valuable discussions on geometrical optics like those on
the nature of vision and the formation of the rainbow. He was the first
scientist to give a correct and clear explanation of the formation of a
rainbow. The primary bow was explained by him to be due to two
refractions and one internal reflection, and the secondary to two
refractions and two internal reflections of solar rays in minute
spherical drops of water suspended in the air; essentially the same
explanation was given by Descartes in the eleventh/ seventeenth century.
The colours of the rainbow for their correct interpre­tation had to wait
Newton's experiments on the dispersion of light.

Kamal al-Din Farisi (d. 720/1320) was a famous pupil of Qutb al-Din and
under his inspiration wrote Tangih al-Mandzir (a commentary on ibn
al­Haitham's classical work on optics, Kitab al-Mandzir), which was
published with notes by the Da'irat al-Ma'irif, Hyderabad, in 1928-30.

Muslim scientists were deeply interested in Archimedes' works on
mechanics and hydrostatics. In these subjects they determined the
density of a number of substances. Sanad ibn 'Ali, al-Biriini, 'Umar
al-Khayyam, Muzaffar al­Asfuziri[^5] and several others did some work on
these branches of physics, but the most important work was done by 'Abd
al-Rahman al-Khazini in his Mizan al-Hikmah, written in 618/1221 and
considered among the master­pieces of the Middle Ages. In this work
al-Khazini discussed mechanics, hydrostatics, and physics in a masterly
way. He gave tables of specific gravities of liquid substances (on the
lines adopted by al-Biruni) and detailed studies of the theory of
gravitation (universal force directed towards the then considered centre
of the universe, i.e., the centre of the earth); weight and buoyancy of
air; rise of water in capillary tubes; aerometric measurement of
densities and the temperature of liquids; theory of the lever; levelling
by balance; and measurement of time.

The Muslims took keen interst in clocks to find out the correct times
for prayers. Their artisans acquired great mastery in this work, as may
be judged from Harun al-Ras\_bid's presenting Charlemagne with a
water-clock in 192/807.

Bibliography
------------

George Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, 3 Vols. 1927-48;
P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, 1949; Encyclopaedia of Islam; Sir
Thomas Arnold and A. Guil­laume (Eds.), The Legacy of Islam, 1931.

[^1]: See Chapter XXI.

[^2]: P. K. Hitti, History o/ the Arabs, 1958, passim, pp. 370f.

[^3]: Ibid. p. 376.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 629

[^5]: G. Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. 11, p.
216.


