Chapter 50: Arabic Literature, Poetic and Prose Forms
=====================================================

A. Poetry
---------

Let us imagine an Arab Bedouin riding his camel on frequent long
journeys across lonely desserts. While the rhythmic beating of the
padded hoofs on soft sand breaks the stillness of the air, the rider is
sunk deep in recollections of his own past. As he feels excited to share
his mood with his “two companions and fellow-travellers,” there is
nothing more natural than that he should start chanting in unison with
the movement which has the sole possession of his entire perception.
This unsophisticated outpouring of one’s heart in response to an
occasional urge took the form of *rajaz* – the simple iambic alternation
of *harakah* (moved or vocalized) and *sukun* (quiescent consonant)
corresponding to the alternation in the lifting and lowering of the
camel’s feet. (Cf. the *khabab* in which the pattern of alternation
corresponds to the pace of the horse.)

The observation of the effects of the “song” induced a deliberate
practice to beguile the man and quicken the animal. As the practice grew
and attracted talent, formalities accumulated by common taste and
general acceptance, giving rise to the *art of poetry*. The art was not
slow to create for itself forms much more varied and complex than the
original *rajaz*. About the middle of the second/eighth century when
al-Khalil scrutinized the structure of Arabic poetry according to the
quantitative measure suggested to him by the different tones on the
rebound of the smith’s hammer (just akin to the camel’s tread) he
admirably reduced it to a system of prosody consisting of 16 material
forms.

Some foreign influence is not precluded from the development of some of
these standard Arabic forms, all of which, of course, did not, and could
not, have an equal measure of antiquity or popularity. What is
remarkable is that this system of prosody sufficed to serve as the hard
core of future indigenous development as well as assimilation of foreign
models up to the present day.

By the quarter of the fifth century A.D. when we get our first yet full
acquaintance with Arabic poetry, myriads of tribes hailing from
different quarters of the country had commingled sufficiently at
commercial co-literary fairs, e.g. that of ‘Ukaz, religious such as at
Mecca, and cultural as that at Hirah, to evolve a common language and
widely appreciated norms and forms of artistic composition, though,
naturally enough, they exhibited peculiarities of usage of speech. This
common literary medium which developed out of the North Arabic,
coinciding with the steady decline of the economic, political and
cultural influence of the South, was leavened mainly in Hirah with the
accompaniments of material and religious civilization as augmented with
currents – Judaic, Christian, and Graeco-Roman – from the opposite end
of the Northern Desert.

Generally speaking, it was precise to finesse so far as Bedouin life and
environment were concerned, but lacked the facility for conveying
abstract ideas and general concepts. However, it possessed, by the very
nature of its being a compromise between various dialects, an immense
wealth of synonyms together with ample resources of rhyme and assonance
inherent in its schematic morphology. Thus *saj’* (rhyme) came to be the
first and natural form of artistic composition prompted by the instinct
for symmetry and balance in the structure of short, compact sentences
especially designed for intonation and oral transmission without being
committed to writing.

The *saj’* existed before metre; the evolution of metrical forms only
pushed it to the end of a verse under the name of *qafiyah*. It is
sometimes overlooked that the *qafiyah* constituted an essential element
– and not an additional, far less artificial, embellishment in the
structure of Arabic poetry. In other words, verse without *qafiyah* has
been unknown in Arabic during its infancy as much as in its youth and
old age. As we shall see later, so long as there was healthy
development, any tendency on the part of the *qafiyah* to rigidity and
monotony was checked in due time by adequate adaptation to the
requirements of the theme (*vide* the evolution of *muzdawij* and
*musammat*).

In the period of decadence it was snot sheer conservatism but a deep
realization of its essential worth, which caused artificiality to be
preferred to freedom. The positive function of the *qafiyah* in laying
down rails, so to say, for the movement of thought, is demonstrated by
the spontaneous rush of the imagination of the audience to the end –
almost the entire later half – of a line ahead of actual recitation by
the poet.[^1] Such a thrilling experience of effective communion between
the poet and his audience is in no way rare wherever Arabic poetry (or
Persian or Urdu poetry for that matter) is recited even today. This is
quite apart from the practical utility of the *qafiyah* in helping
memorization as alluded to before.

In the sociological fabric of the pre-Islamic time the poet occupied a
very high and influential position. The popular mind was impressed so
deeply with the efficacy of his art that it believed him to be in
communion with some super-natural source vaguely identified with a
jinnee or a devil. But the conception about his art was the same as
about the skill of a horseman, it had to be consecrated entirely to the
cause of the solidarity and the ascendancy of the tribe. The poet had a
task irrevocably assigned to him, which was to act the spokesman and the
counsel on behalf of the tribe.

Hence, he was expected to specialize in a knowledge of the tribal saga
supporting the cause for his clients and against their rivals.[^2] In
short, poetry was appreciated primarily as a weapon of offence and
defence in the struggle of tribes against tribes; its function was to
commemorate the glories of the poet’s own tribe, exalt its achievements
in war and peace, and embolden it against the other tribes by holding
them to scorn. There was little room for the personality of the poet to
detach itself even for a while from the interests and the fortune of the
tribe.

Naturally enough, the motifs of pre-Islamic poetry sprang fundamentally
from the spirit of the *jahiliyyah* – the ignorance of a moral code of
conduct characterized by a strong sense of tribal solidarity based on
blood kinship, and highly volatile passions cramped within stinted
sympathies and primary selfish impulses.[^3] Thus, the two oldest kinds
of verse were the *hija’* (satire) and the *fakhr* (self-glorification)
with the keynote of the *hamas* or desperate pursuit of unbridled
aggression. True, the *nasib* (erotic verse) also must have had an
independent form in the oldest time but all the same it could not have
occupied a position other than the subsidiary one which is assigned to
it in the scheme of the *qasidah*. After all, the theme of love had no
bearing on the security of the tribe. The very reason that its interest
was human and universal, i.e. not peculiar to the tribe, was enough to
render it inconsequential.

Leaving aside the *hija’*, which has throughout maintained its
independent form, the *fakhr* in its kindred form of *madih* (eulogy)
came to assume the pivotal position in the structure of the *qasidah*,
which was devised especially to rope in the *nasib* and many other minor
forms of occasional verse to sub-serve it. This “loose-knitting” of the
diverse kinds into a rigidly conventional structure seems to have come
into vogue not long before our earliest acquaintance with Arabic poetry,
i.e. about 125 years before Islam.[^4] The order in the composition of
the *qasidah* is invariably as follows. First comes the *nasib* by way
of a prelude, second, the *madih* as the main part, and third, the
*khatimah* (epilogue) which is most didactic. A certain proportion was
observed particularly between the first two parts on the principle that
the *nasib* should neither over-shadow the *madih* nor pass without
fulfilling its function of catching the ear of the audience for the
latter.

### The Nasib

Usually the poet pictures himself as confronting, in the course of his
journeys to and from, the remains of the encampment which once had been
the scene of his love. This gives him the opportunity to depict with
remarkable pathos the scene of the separation and recollect in moving
terms the charms of the beloved and the pleasures of her company in the
past. The physical charms are dwelt upon with much gusto and not a
little sensuousness. The discreteness of the Arab mind is amply shown in
concentration on the individual parts of the body one by one.

To take just one typical instance, the Arab poet has a long breath in
expatiating on the saliva – its purity, coolness, freshness, and
fragrance like that of “early morning rain collected in a clear stony
pond” – which nectar he would suck, draught after draught, with the zest
of a drunkard in order to convey the meaning of the simple word “kiss.”
A life free from hard work is idealized for its effect in promoting
feminine delicacy and untarnished complexion. To stay behind the
curtains, well protected from the rigours of the weather, and jealously
guarded in the manner of “the delicate shell of an egg under the
feathers” was the vision which enthralled the heart of a young damsel.

Qualities of heart, particularly modesty, gentleness of manners,
friendliness towards neighbours, and mirthful coquetry in the company of
the lover, are also highly appreciated but only as adjuncts of physical
beauty. Having perforce to suffer long spans of solitude due to
unsettled life, the Bedouin acquired high sensitivity to any stimulus to
his memory.[^5] Hence addresses to the natural surroundings associated
with the exploits of the past and outbursts of sympathetic response to
the cooing of the dove and the like are an ubiquitous feature. Further,
it was the relish for musing which earned for the image of the beloved
*(khayal* or *taif)* a special place in Arabic poetry.

The poet’s feeling of love for the beloved is expressed only in general
terms such as the comparison of his own heartache to that of “a
she-camel who has lost her young.” For the rest, the pursuit of love is
only reminiscent of “the hot chase of a game.” The only relieving
feature is that of the Arab lover insists on a response to his love, and
that without any trace of cringing. He would start taking pride in his
own qualities so as not to leave any doubt about his deserts for the
esteem of the beloved, but in the end he would not mind warning bluntly
that although he relishes coquetry he cannot brook any affront to his
dignity. That is why in describing the union he would take care to
mention the yielding, passive and tacit though it may be, on the part of
the beloved.

Incidental to the journeying of the poet in quest of love and fortune
comes the description of the animals and the natural scene. It has been
said that the camel occupies the same place in Arabic poetry as the cow
in the *Rg-Veda*. The horse, no less indispensable for the normal
pursuits of life including war, comes next. Though the description came
soon afterwards to sound jejune even to the townsfolk of Baghdad, one
cannot help being moved even today by the tenderly feeling shown to the
two animals which equals to, sometimes even exceeds, that reserved for
the members of the household.

To bring out certain points of comparison in the riding beasts, the poet
turns to the wild animals, among which the pride of place goes to the
wild ass, the wild cow and the ostrich. The subject of wild life is
frequently enlivened with fine thrilling scenes of flight and chase. The
natural scene is, of course, is dominated by clouds, thunder, lightning,
rain and the mirage, not to speak of the desert and the mountain
valleys.

### The Madih

The *nasib* formed only a prelude to catch the ear of the audience, the
main theme being the *madih*. Though in the form of personal eulogy, it
is really a concentration of the pride in the tribe. The particular
patron to whom the verses are addressed is a mere peg on which to hang
the ideal that united the tribe as against other tribes. The so-called
virtues constituting this ideal are, in addition to the *hamas* already
noted, the over-powering passion for vendetta, loyalty to friends and
allies (and not to any moral law or civic organization), and hospitality
to guests. The pride in valour was so all-engrossing that the dictates
of prudence always needed a special and somewhat diffident, pleading.

But, as a rule, the Bedouin considered it below his dignity to try
strength with an unequal foe, which is reflected in his acknowledgement
of merit on the other side. Those who refused to be restrained by the
collective interest and initiative of the tribe in practice of these
same virtues were designated the *sa‘alik*, i.e. disowned outlaws, whose
production bears the exceptional feature of defiance of tribal authority
and extra hardihood. Hospitality and generosity were characterized by
the same excesses as courage and aimed only at achieving prominence over
other tribes. With the transition from tribal into some kind of State
organization as, for example, at Hirah, the panegyric tended to be more
and more personal and acquired features of flattery.

### The Khatimah

The didactic epilogue was devoid of any depth of thought and merely
embodied lessons learnt from practical experience in the particular and
limited milieu. Religion sat very lightly on the pagan Arab, some
occasional references to pre-Islamic ritual only prove that it was
treated as part of an inherited tribal custom[^6] without symbolizing
any moral ideal. The absence of religious thought and feeling is fully
confirmed by the total lack of reasoning of any kind whatsoever.

Death is frequently mentioned as a stark fact, but it only stimulated
bravery, rather rashness, on the battlefield, on the one hand, and a
sort of hectic hedonism in the intervals of peace, on the other. It is
in this context that the poetry of Jewish and Christian poets and such
pagan poets as were influenced by their thought (e.g. Zuhair and the
Hanifs) assumes a distinctive character. The idea of submission to a
Supreme Power controlling man and the universe, a life after death
involving moral retribution, and a spirit of peace and respect for the
rights of others (the very anti-thesis of *hamas*) stand out as streaks
of early morning light in the surrounding darkness.

Such poetry flourished mostly in Hirah and the oasis towns like Yathrib
and al-Ta’if, which were also the centres of material civilization.
Hence truly religious thought and emotion are found side by side with
exhilarating pictures of urban refinement in luxury as in the poetry of
‘Adiyy b. Zaid. It is noteworthy that the Romans and Christians were
throughout, from the beginning down to the ‘Abbasid period, the
purveyors not only of wines but also of the etiquette of
wine-drinking.[^7] Anyhow, wine-drinking had become a common habit. On
the other hand, artistic music and dancing, so far as they are mentioned
in pre-Islamic poetry, are mere clichés propularized by individuals who
had occasions of frequenting centres of high life under Persian and/or
Roman influence. Both these arts were neither indigenous to nor common
in the Arabian Society of the days before the Islamic conquests.

The *qasidah* presented a series of thoughts moulded in self-contained
verses strung together in the most impressive form of a single metre and
*qafiyah*. A thought running into more than one verse was a rarity and
regarded somewhat as a weakness of the poet. But one wonders whether the
outward unity which was so perfect as to invite the charge of monotony
from the uninitiated possessed also a similar unity of thought and
ideas.

The fact is that there was enough of coherence internally within the two
main parts, viz. the *nasib* and the *madih*, though the appreciation of
it depends upon a certain degree of familiarity with the pattern of life
and the train of thought and feeling generated by it. It was only the
transition from the first to the second part which was rather abrupt,
either lacking a link altogether or depending upon one which was clearly
artificial and weak. It is, however, untrue to say that the Arabs were
not conscious of it; on the other hand, they were throughout applying
their ingenuity to *husn al-istitrad* (grace of digression).

Similarly, there is no doubt that the ideas as well as the modes of
expression were stereotyped, but the primary reason for it is to be
sought in the physical existence of the Arab Bedouin which was
characterized, above all, by little variety. The pre-occupation with a
hard and meagre subsistence in a monotonous natural scene contributed to
averseness to all serious reflection and to poverty of theme. At the
same time the totalitarian demands of tribal loyalty left little room
for indulgence in personal experience or individual reaction. As soon as
thought was quickened by spiritual impulses from Judaism and
Christianity and the monotony of life was relieved by the encroachment
of Aramaean and Persian material civilizations, the structure of the
*qasidah* proved accommodating enough to change.

In addition to *hija’*, there was one more form of artistic poetry,
namely, the *ritha’* (elegy), which maintained its position
independently of the *qasidah*. Although this form too had its own
clichés and was dominated by the spirit of *hamas* and the passion for
vendetta, yet the element of strong personal emotion running through it
is often genuine and highly remarkable. It is this reliability of the
personal element which brings to the fore the strength of the lament of
the sisters as compared with that of the wives, which is again a
projection of the all-powerful importance of blood kinship.

The tradition has concerned itself only with the preservation of
artistic poetry;[^8] unconventional pieces prompted by events of
everyday life were allowed to lapse. Yet a number of them noted for wit
and humour *(al-mulah)* are available for enjoyment on informal
occasions.

### Islam and Poetry

Wherever the ideals of the *jahilliyyah* suffered a decline owing to the
growth of a sense of justice and corporate life under some kind of civic
and political organization, there was left little scope for
self-glorification at the expense of others (i.e. *hija’*, *fakhr*, and
*hamas*). Al-Jumahi makes an interesting point when he attributes the
paucity of poets and the meagreness of poetry in the tribe of Quraish
already before the advent of Islam to a sense of respect for the rights
of others as exemplified by the incident arising out of the lampooning
by ibn al-Zib‘ara.[^9]

Thus, pre-Islamic poetry being so dependent on tribal wars for its
impulses and motives, Islam was bound to make the ground slip under the
feet of the poets. As soon as the faithful renounced all pride
*(al-nakhwah)* and blind partisanship *(al-‘asabiyyah)* in favour of a
universal egalitarian brotherhood and organized their life under a
government by-law, which guaranteed mutual rights and obligations,
eliminating resort to force, and treated satire as punishable libel, the
poets naturally felt that their day was over.

Unable or unwilling to appreciate any ideal of morality, they turned
their invectives against the person of Muhammad and aligned themselves
actively on the side of his opponents. It was such poets, and not poets
or poetry in general, who were denounced in the Qur’an as incapable of
leadership due to lack of moral thinking and purposeful activity.[^10]
Severe penalties had also to be meted out to a number of them such as
Abu ‘Azza, al-Nadr b. al-Harith and Ka‘b b. al-Ashraf – all of whom had
played a part as active competitors while using the art of poetry as an
additional weapon directed especially against the person of Muhammad,
whose kindness they were not loth to exploit whenever they found
themselves helpless.

But the reason for the vehement pique and chagrin of the poets against
Islam went much deeper. The ideals of the *jahiliyyah* were not the only
thing involved, their art itself was threatened with dislodgment from
the position or supremacy enjoyed theretofore. Was there not the Qur’an
held up as a challenge to artistic composition? It is quite
understandable that the Arabs should be completely at a loss to place
the Qur’an in any of the categories of artistic composition known to
them. They would call it *al-shi‘r* (poetry) when their own poetic
production was so palpably different from it both in form and content.

Only poetry had been known to exercise such sway over the minds of the
people as the Qur’an did. If it were not poetry it could only be grouped
along with the utterances of a soothsayer *(kahin)* or a person in
trance *(majnun)*. This equation, however, had an ostensibly disparaging
intent inasmuch as such utterances were seldom held in high esteem as a
piece of art. The allusion was only in their enigmatic character in
which the people deciphered fortune and prophecy. When at last they
turned to the content, they gave unmistakable proof of their
*jahiliyyah* outlook on finding the Qur’an to be merely a bundle of “the
stories of the ancient peoples” *(asatir al-awwalin)*.

Soon they propped up one of them, al-Nadr b. al-Harith, to draw the
people away from the Qur’an with his skill in reciting the stories of
Rustan and Isfandiyar. As a matter of fact, the form of the Qur’an is
derived from a familiar pattern, yet it represents a new class by
itself. It is prose composed of short, compact sentences which, when
read together, sound as balanced counter-parts *(mathani)*, The endings
*(fawasil)* of them having a distinguishable cadence free from the
shackles of a regular *saj‘*. It bewildered and dismayed the Arabs that
this form which, in contrast with the familiar pattern of the
soothsayers, tending to simplicity rather than artificial encumbrance,
should soar to such height of inimitable perfection as to constitute a
challenge to poetry.

The same is true of the diction employed in the Qur’an: it is clear and
easily intelligible *(mubin)*, yet pure and elegant. But whatever the
elegance of form and diction, the uniqueness of the Qur’an lay
particularly in its content, the reflection on the world of nature as
distinguished from an aesthetic worship of it, the search for a goal of
life and an ideal of morality in human conduct, in short, the awakening
of the forces of good in the nature of man to set limits to, and
control, the evil in himself. It was this content which made the Qur’an
the prototype of an entirely new class of literary composition. In later
times it was an aberration of the pre-Islamic taste which exalted the
excellence of the word over and above that of the content.[^11]

It is quite easy for us to realize the dismay of the poets whose
production, when judged subsequently by the standards of the Greek
philosophers, was found to be nothing but an exhortation of lewdness,
only two qualities of character, namely, bravery and generosity, were
such as could be said to be harmless to the youth. But the Prophet
appreciated their art much more than they realized. He could not taboo
poetry; rather, he would listen eagerly to the verse of Umayyah b. Abi
al-Salt and many others. He was not even indifferent.

On the other hand, he adopted the way of active patronage and guidance
to make clear the demands for adjustment. As an example, let us take the
case of Ka‘b b. Zuhair. The ode which brought him the *burdah* (mantle)
as a prize is in the traditional style. It opens with erotic verses
lamenting separation from the beloved, Su‘ad, and recalling her physical
charms, not excluding the intoxication of the saliva compared to wine.
The *madih* puts a new aspect in so far as the glorification of the new
ideal is concerned.[^12] But the poet did not yet know how to restrain
his passion for satire; he had to make amends for suppressed expressions
on the Ansar.

Thus, the only demand made by orthodox Islam on the poets was to avoid
the proud and gleeful recounting of adventures of sinful pleasure such
as abound in the verses of the “Vagabond Prince,” and to refrain from
indulging in tribal pride or exaltation of force regardless of moral
rectitude.[^13] Within these ordinary limits of decency and peaceful
life the old literary traditions were to survive and grow. It has
particularly to be noted that erotic interest in woman or even the
mention of wine as a symbol of joyful experience was lawful pursuit, and
not in renunciation, of sensuous pleasure. As the examples of Dabi‘ b.
al-Harith and al-Hutai’ah would prove, only the satire and the libel
were sternly put down.

### Development of the Ghazal

The detachment of poetry from the passions and the fury of tribal
antagonism as well as the absence under the Orthodox Caliphate of that
corruptive patronage which draws talent away from the universal human
interests to flattery of personages, conduced inevitably to
concentration in the theme of love in poetry and song. These arts were
cultivated in the Hijaz by the sprightly and intelligent youth from
among the nobility of the *Ansar* and the *Muhajirin*, who were
precluded from playing their part in politics and government and were at
the same time pampered with frequent accessions to their already vast
hereditary fortune in the form of largesses on behalf of the Umayyads.

Thus frustration, leisure, and opulence all combined to turn the
creative genius to art and amusement. The peculiarly Islamic institution
of rehabilitating the prisoners of war as members of the households of
the conquerors, instead of segregating them in penal camps, has always
had far-reaching consequences, in the field of cultural inter-change but
never were such consequences so great as in the case of the conquest of
Persia. Suffice it to say that it was the new Persian element in the
households of Mecca and Medina which for the first time introduced
artistic music and dancing in the very heart of Arabian society.[^14]

In the special traditions of the people and the time, there was no music
and dancing without poetry. Therefore, poetry underwent a highly welcome
and profound change both in form as well as content. Whereas in the
*jahiliyyah* period the motif of aggressive self-glorification often
made some of the more militant tribes positively to discourage the
*ghazal*, it now came to be the main theme catering to the refined
aesthetic taste and tenderly feelings of the new society. Naturally
enough, the erotic prelude came in hand for development as an
independent form, which, by the way, marked the beginning of the
breaking up of the “loose unity of the *qasidah*.”

The development of the independent form of the *ghazal* took two
distinct and parallel lines. First, the licentious *(al-ibahiyy)*
*ghazal*, best represented by ‘Umar b. Abi Rabi‘ah (d.c. 101/719),
flourished in the towns and faithfully reflected the high life obtained
there. As compared with the pre-Islamic *nasib*, this *ghazal* is an end
in itself. The poet is no longer a warrior made essentially of hard
stuff, who snatches a few moments of respite to devote to the hot
pursuit of a woman. Rather, he is an amiable and amorous youth entirely
devoted to the cultivation of his feeling of love and desire for soft
dalliance without being distracted by any thought of tribal security and
personal safety.

The description of physical charms is no more a mere description; it is
rather a fine aesthetic appreciation of beauty. Still more remarkable is
the shifting of the focus inwards and the transformation of the union
into an exchange of feeling and sentiment.[^15] And both the lover and
the beloved are endowed with sharp wit, humour, and the mood for sport.
In short, the qualities of the mind and the longings of the heart come
to the fore and find unimpeded expression. Special delight is taken in
the evasion of social restrictions and the celebration of clandestine
visits while the congregation at the time of the *hajj* is brought in as
the connoisseur’s opportunity for the enjoyment of beauty from near and
far.

The second kind of *ghazal* was born of the ideal of Platonic love
cultivated in the desert. The chastening influence of the restraints of
Islam on the simple-living Bedouins had the remarkable result of
originating the conception of love shorn of all tinge of bodily lust –
an ideal conception thoroughly unknown to the pre-Islamic Arab. This
ideal is enshrined in the highly subjective verse centring on the
popular stories of Majnun-Laila and Jamil-Buthainah. They may or may not
have been real historical personages; what really matters is that they
do represent a type of idealistic lover who regards any touch of lust as
desecration of love, beauty, and art. No wonder that the physical charms
are over-shadowed by a *tete-a-tete* between two hearts full of deep
pathos.

### Vilifying Ghazal

It has already been noted that the lover-poets of the towns were really
men of frustrated political ambitions. Their impotent rage against the
rulers would not be held back even when they sought to beguile it with
art. Rather it is highly interesting to note that it should turn the
artistic form of the licentious *ghazal* into an instrument for
vilification and political vendetta. Taking the typical example of ibn
Qais al-Ruqayyat (d.c. 80/699 – 700) one finds him mentioning Umm
al-Banin, the wife of Walid b. ‘Abd al-Malik, as the object of his
flirtation. His aim was no other than to leave the Umayyad monarch
smarting with anger, even though sometimes he adroitly contrived in the
verse itself to absolve the innocent lady of guilt.

Apart from political vendetta, it became a commonplace with the poets to
give rebirth to *hija’* in the form of *ghazal* by mentioning the ladies
and the female relations of their enemies in shamefully amorous terms.
How unrelated to truth all this was, is illustrated by the incident of
Umm Ja‘far. When she could not keep patience over al-Ahwas, a Medinese
poet, mentioning her in his verses in order to bring her people into
disrepute, she caught hold of him one day in the market-place and
demanded of him the money which, she made out, he owed to her. As the
poet swore that he did not know her at all, she remarked, “Of course,
you do not know me, yet you mention many things about me in your
verses.”

It is no surprise that State authority was sometimes invoked against
such poets in the same way as it was invoked in the case of the direct
*hija’* of al-Hutai’ah and others. At the same time there is evidence to
show that at least the high-class ladies aspired to have their charms
sung by the poets in the same way as in our own days they would feel
proud to see their photographs in newspapers. It must, however, be
remembered that, on the whole, “licence” was confined to a disregard of
social conventions relating to contacts between the two sexes;
otherwise, obscenity was guarded against in all good taste.

In regard to form, it is enough to remind ourselves that the lover-poets
of Mecca and Medina produced for the first time a lyric verse especially
designed to be set to music. With this purpose they naturally referred
such metres as were short and characterized by an easy flow, though they
continued to rely mainly on the old tradition itself. Consequent upon
the development of natural, humanistic interests, all artificiality
about the language and pompousness was shed and simple unaffected
expression in familiar words and soft tones came to be aimed at. To
some, though very limited, extent, continuous verse also came into use
for such purposes as the reproduction of dialogues in love-poetry.

It so happened that the merits of the Umayyad poetry set out above
received little appreciation owing to the pre-occupation of the scholars
with such pre-Islamic poetry as might be helpful in the study and
preservation of the idiom of the Qur’an. With regard to its
appreciation, the time factor alone was the prime importance; hence the
prejudice in favour of the pre-Islamic verse became stereo-typed and all
pervading. It was ibn Khaldun who first realized that, linguistic
research apart, the intrinsic artistic merits of the Umayyad poetry were
definitely far superior to those of the pre-Islamic poetry.

And the reason for it was that those who lived under Islam benefited
from the model of high class speech provided by the Qur’an and the
Hadith; hence, their literary taste improved a great deal beyond that of
the pre-Islamic people. That this improvement should have taken a
generation to manifest itself fully in poetry (and also in prose), was
quite natural and should not stand in the way of tracing it to its
origins in Islam. The depth of thought, the richness of imagination, the
paramountcy of content, the search within for the feelings of the heart,
and the consciousness of the restraint of reason, and its Holy Book, and
these general qualities are perceptible in the post-Islamic production
even where the themes are un-Islamic.

It was perhaps this un-Islamic element such as the “licence” in *ghazal*
and the lampooning in the *naqa’id* which, in addition to the
necessities of linguistic research, turned the attention away from the
contribution of Islam to the literary production of the Umayyad period.
Ibn Khaldun further tells us that some of the learned scholars of his
time had to acknowledge their dormant impression of the superior merits
of the post-Islamic production, as if it were to their own surprise, but
were unable to give any reason for it.[^16] No wonder that the view of
ibn Khaldun should remain unattended until it found an echo in Taha
Hussain, although the latter’s judgment seems to have been the result of
the application of the modern standards of literary criticism in the
West.

If one were to look for the dominating motif of poetry in Islam itself,
it will be found in the verses of the Kharijites. Their production
represents a characteristic regimentation of the pre-Islamic qualities
of hardihood, courage, and sacrifice in the service of the ideology of
Islam. Just because it is as true of life as the poetry of the
pre-Islamic age, the new spirit, ideals, and sentiments are clearly
discernible. Yet it symbolizes, according to the cultural milieu of the
Kharijites, the purely ancient Arab tradition as mellowed by the Islamic
Puritanism.

Most interesting is the survival without any loss of attraction of the
erotic theme in a society where even the “talk” of wine or a mere hint
of laxity in relationship between the two sexes was an unpardonable
offence. Equally notable is the spirit of martyrdom which would not
allow virility to be impaired by a relish of tragedy and pathos for
their own sake.

While under the Islamic influence poetry was set on its course of
development along natural, humanistic lines, the corruptive patronage of
the Court stepped in to revive the old tribal antagonism and buy off
unscrupulous, though talented, poets to act as its propagandists. Thus
the trio – Farazdaq, Jarir, and al-Akhtal – attained high fame in the
field of panegyrio and lampoon. They couched praise for the Umayyads as
well as invectives against their opponents in the true form of the
*qasidah* with its carefully chosen diction and high-flown style. The
Christian al-Akhtal, who, by the way, was considered to be free to revel
in wine without offending Muslim piety, was also remarkable for his
willingness to step in where a Muslim, irrespective of his alignment,
feared to tread, namely, the satire against the Ansar. The counter
offensive from the other side showed a much more genuine feeling of
devotion not only to the House of the Prophet but also to the ideal of
justice and public weal popularly associated with it.

The contrast between the settled life in the towns and the Bedouin ways
of the desert has throughout been a powerful factor in Arab thought and
history. Islam, with its marked predilection for congregational
activity, accelerated as never before the process of drawing emigrants
from the desert, who flocked into the towns to enlist in military
service, State organizations, and economic activity. This created
nostalgia in the mind of some poets who introduced a new theme, viz. the
comparison of new life, including the charms and manners of the damsels
of the towns, with the old ways of the desert.

Even in regard to the *qasidah*, though its conventional form remained
intact, the new pattern of society changed the modes of thought and the
manners of expression sufficiently to render the purely Bedouin
tradition a mere curiosity. This curiosity had its last protagonist in
Dhu al-Rummah (d. 117/755). It is somewhat in the same spirit that the
oldest and the simplest form of *rajaz* were employed in long *qasidahs*
pedantically over-loaded with rare vocabulary.

### The ‘Abbasid Era

With the advent of the ‘Abbasids the corruptive patronage of the Court,
which siphoned poetic talent into the *madih*, expanded to such an
extent that only a few could keep themselves free from it just because
they were consciously determined to do so. Curiously enough, as the
Caliphate declined it only led to a multiplicity of such centres of
patronage and thus the servility of the poets went on increasing further
and further. At any rate, the growth of luxury and the enrichment of
culture from foreign sources were bound to seek an outlet in new forms
and modes of poetry.

Fortunately the traditional *qasidah* did comprise within its orbit a
large number of themes concerned with peaceful enjoyment or warlike
activity, which, in their developed form under the Empire, now claimed
separate treatment. All that required was to salvage the various themes
from regimentation by all the engrossing passion of tribal solidarity as
signified by the supremacy of the *madih*. This process, which started
with the development of the *ghazal* under the Umayyads, took its full
course in the following era until all the topics treated incidentally in
the old tradition branched off into independent kinds.

### Further Development of the Ghazal

It will be remembered that Islam, not being a monastic religion, regards
woman not as a taboo but as one of the three things dearest to the
Prophet. Thus, the theme in itself, far from offending the moral sense,
was particularly compatible with Islam’s bold affirmation of nature.
Significant is the use in the Qur’an of this very imagery of woman and
wine for the conveyance of an idea of the highest bliss in the heavens.
It must, however, be admitted that a certain degree of licentiousness
has actually attended upon the development of the *ghazal* from the very
beginning.

Towards this element of licentiousness the early Islamic society adopted
an attitude of practical toleration as apart from official recognition;
it was only the personal scandal which was generally condemned by the
people and sternly curbed by the State. This tolerant attitude is best
embodied in an incident at the Court of Sulaiman b. ‘Abd al-Malik. Once
when al-Farazdaq recited to the monarch such verses of his as amounted
to a confession of adultery, the monarch perhaps could think of no
better way of expressing his appreciation than to embarrass the poet
with the threat of legal cognizance and penalty.

But calmly the poet asked him, “The sanction behind the penalty?” “Of
course, the Qur’an,” replied the monarch, whereupon the poet retorted,
“All right, the Qur’an itself assumes my innocence when it says of the
poets that they ‘celebrate in speech what they do not practice!’”[^17]
Truly, there is much more than wit in the argument of the poet; it gives
pointed cognizance to the fact that a poet relies mainly on his mental
experience. Practical experience has no essential bearing on art;
rather, it is a matter of personal character.[^18]

In the words of Nuwas, one can safely and effectively “talk of fire
without burning one’s mouth.” Thus cultivation of the erotic verse,
including the licentious *ghazal*, originated and flourished vigorously
under Islam in public circles. But as soon as it was transferred to the
royal palace it suffered from the same servility to the over-indulged
baser instinct of the patrons as the *madih* in relation to their
inflated sense of vain-glory. At the palace the poet was promoted to the
position of boor, companion who shared the privacy and the intimacy of
the patron, and enlightened, diverted, and amused him with appropriate
citations, impromptu compositions, and ready wit.

It is legitimate to link this institution with the life of the
pre-Islamic poet, al-Nabighah, at the court of Hirah, but one has to
take note of the steadily increasing dissoluteness and sexually
exhibitionism which began with al-Walid II and reached its climax in Abu
Nuwas.[^19] This exhibitionism was designated separately as *al-khala‘ah
al-mujun* and was relished only in the company of intimate friends as a
source of enjoyment. From the palaces it percolated down to public
circles and was preserved only for the sake of witticism and elegance of
language – obliquity it was condemned outright as obscene and in sheer
bad taste.

### Bohemianism

In public circles the joys of life were idealized in terms overtly
disdainful of moral restraint under the pressure of another set of
circumstances in which national and political rivalries played a
significant part. It has been noted above that in the initial stage
licence in poetry was treated apart from the personal character of the
poet. But gradually the poet’s own guilty conscience and the general
social approbation caused him to introduce in poetry itself some sort of
defence of his own promiscuous way of life. This involved an active
propagation of the disregard of social and moral values, scorn for the
religious preceptor, an invidious lack of faith in after-life and at the
same time a somewhat philosophical justification for the excesses from
God’s quality of “forgiveness.”

Even this development left the larger section of society unalarmed; it
was taken merely as an exercise of wit and humour. Soon, however, there
was a further development in the peculiar atmosphere of Baghdad which
was torn by Persian-Arab rivalry – a rivalry fanned by the alignment of
the Persian element with the ‘Abbasids. In Baghdad certain types of
literary Bohemians, mostly Persians, organized themselves into cells or
clubs where wine, women (those of a low status, of course) and poetry
full of sarcasm for the orthodox way of life were zealously enjoyed.
From apologetics it now passed into the phase of active glorification of
practical libertinism.

And all this was done in a spirit of arrogant demonstration of the
intellectual refinement and cultural superiority of the Persians so much
so that *zarf* (quickness of wit) came to be proverbially associated
with this class of proud libertines – *zindiqs* as they were
called.[^20] Although it is very doubtful that many of these Bohemians
were genuinely devoted to Zoroastrianism or Manichaeanism as against
Islam, it is a fact that some of them were bold enough to mention the
names of Zoroaster and Mani as the Bacchul-like patrons of libertinism
as against the restrictions on pleasure symbolized by Islam.

Anyway, there is little doubt that this cultural arrogance was linked
with the aspiration to greater and greater political control, which made
the ‘Abbasids closely watch and suspect their own supporters. While the
public were left speculating as to the cause of the sudden downfall of
the Barmakids, a methodical *zindiq*-hunt was set afoot, the verses of
the poets were incriminatingly dissected at ceremonial trials and the
guillotine applied to the partners in the widespread net of
conspiracy.[^21] Thus the poetry of Bashshar (d. 168/784) came to be
typical of that pursuit of refinement and culture which is associated
with the enjoyment of woman and wine and their celebration in arts and
song enlivened by wit, humour, and sarcasm on social and moral
restrictions.

Before we pass on it has to be added in regard to these libertines that
their fund humour and sarcasm was not exhausted in their engagements
with the opponents, their unprincipled levity often caused them to
exercise the same resources against one another. Hence, most of them
have the reputation as satirists as well.

### New Features of the Ghazal

A few special features of the new *ghazal* under the ‘Abbasids have to
be noted. First, there was the addition, almost substitution, of the
male for the female object of love. It must be admitted that it almost
amounted to a common social vice attributable to Persian influence.
Secondly, a refined taste in similes and metaphors and the subtlety of
imagination in general are also traceable to the same source. Thirdly,
though gleeful descriptions of wine were quite old in Arabic poetry, the
subject came now to be cultivated as an independent art. As with the
theme of beauty so with that of wine; it is no longer a mere description
of the transparency of the glass, the colour of the wine, the various
stages of brewing, and the haggling of the wine-seller over its price,
nor is wine-drinking a mere appurtenance of nobility.

The emphasis now is on the inner sensation of abandonment and revelry
experienced by the drunkard. Lastly, one has to take account of the
special characteristic of Islamic society which causes even renegades of
the type of Abu Nuwas to be over-taken by remorse and pious reflection
in old age. Hence, *al-shaib w-al-shabab* (old age and youth) developed
into a recurring and semi-independent theme closely associated with the
*nasib*. It is characterized by recollections of the pleasures which are
no more than reach or capacity – a feature inherited from pagan poetry.
Under the influence of Islam it was complemented with a desire to make
amends for the erroneous ways of the past.

### Moral, Philosophical and Mystic Poetry

It would be a very lopsided view indeed if we imagined the ‘Abbasid
society to be merely that which is pictured by the boon companions of
the *elite* and the Bohemians of the metropolis. Religion and morality
had their own devotees and champions in no way negligible either in
numbers or in importance. In the very nature of things, however,
religion, as apart from religious sentiment, could not be cultivated in
poetry. Morals formed a fit theme for poetical art. They also had a
precedent in the so-called wise sayings of the pre-Islamic poets, though
these latter were entirely devoid of any element of reasoning in them.

Abu al-‘Atahiyah (d. 213/828) introduced moralizing verse characterized
by thought and reflection but it was because of this very new basis that
it came in for reserve and suspicion. Also, it inevitably involved
criticism of the prevalent modes of society. Abu al-‘Atahiyah sometimes
appears as the spokesman of the down-trodden masses bringing to the
notice of the Caliph their economic plight and difficulties. Most
unfortunate of all, the entire theme was permeated with a mood of
pessimism which persisted and was steadily augmented by the influx of
philosophical ideas and monastic tendencies.

Philosophical poetry reached its highest achievement with Abu al-‘Ala’
al-Ma‘arri (d. 449/1057), who made a frontal attack on all religions as
such and exalted reason in opposition to revelation. Yet he remained the
pessimist *par excellence*. His eclecticism also centred on the austere
as exemplified by the particular features of Indian philosophy proved no
more delectable in verse than religion. Even though Abu al-‘Ala’ was a
master of literary arts, his philosophical poetry remained a simple
statement of judgment and argument unclothed in poetic imagery; hence,
it provided enough justification for denouncing it as “no poetry at all”
(ibn Khaldun).

His resort to jugglery with words is also a further proof, if proof were
needed, of his woeful failure to devise a truly poetic form for the
presentation of his philosophical thought.[^22] That is why his poetry
seldom achieved any high degree of popularity, though he was, and has
throughout been, highly respected as a scholar. It is wrong to attribute
this to the prejudice against the anti-Islamic ideas contained in it.
Had it been so, the production of the libertine poets would not have
fared any better.

The true reason is that Abu al-‘Ala’s poetry was bare of essential
poetic appurtenances. In the words of an Arab critic, the art of poetry
consists in making a thing appear beautiful: the intrinsic beauty of the
thing or the idea would not make up for any crudity of presentation. The
libertine poets were accomplished masters of this art of presentation;
hence, unlike Abu-‘Ala’, they were widely enjoyed but seldom respected.

In contrast with philosophy, mystic ideas belong essentially to the
theme of love and naturally command for their expression all the
paraphernalia of love and poetry. The high sentimentalism of the mystic
poets was enough to ensure for them a strong popular appeal, in
consequence of which they came in for persecution while Abu al-‘Ala’, a
lone voice, was left comfortably alone. Again, we have to note that,
significantly enough, the popularity of mystic poetry survived all
questioning of the orthodoxy of its contents and even the attacks on the
person of the mystics.

But the excessive sentimentalism of the mystic poetry centring on the
beatific vision is such as to have a lamentably adverse effect on the
search for clear, practical ideal of life and the urge to realize it
through activity. The passivity of an intoxicated visionary, as opposed
to the ardent activity of a devoted missionary, formed the keynote of
it.

### Formal Panegyric

Apart from the lighter side of the life in the privacy of the palace,
which was shared and recorded by the *nadim*-poet, there were many
formal occasions and official assemblies at the Court when the emphasis
was on decorum and dignity. On such occasions it was the strictly
conventional form of the *madih*, the *qasidah*, which was in vogue. In
view of the rigidity of its forms had already noted, it is no surprise
that it required the highest skill to handle it with success. In any
case, the monotony of the stereo-type could only be made up with
hyperbole and rhetorical tropes of all kinds. Some pedantic display of
logic and philosophy was also introduced as a novelty.

As these formal panegyrics were designed in the manner of the party
press of our own day to exalt the powers that be in the eyes of the
public, naturally enough they were replete with references to the
political ideology – often bound up with specific religious belief and
dogma – of the ruling dynasty as, for example, the claims of the
‘Abbasids *vis-a-vis* the ‘Alids. But, while there were scores of those
who for sordid gain served as mere trumpeters, there was no dearth of
those who spoke from conviction. And in fairness it must be said that
the conscientious objectors on the side of the opposition were given a
long rope only if they had the courage to forgo the patronage of the
Court.

It was also in this traditional form fit for themes of grandeur and no
levity that the incidents of the wars were pictured. They came to be
particularly relished by the Bedouin spirit of the Hamdanids under the
shadow of the Crusades. Another theme cognate with it was that of the
prison-poems *(al-habsiyyat)* best represented by Abu Firas (d.
357/968). They are an impressive blend of nostalgia for home, pathos of
suffering, and indomitable courage.

### Complaint against Time (Shakwah al-Zaman)

Perhaps the most depressing aspect of the poetry of these times is the
common expression of dissatisfaction with one’s lot and a feeling of
insecurity in respect of life, property, and position. As undeserving
people enjoy wealth and power and real merit is neglected, nay
persecuted, consolation is sought in the acceptance of this state of
affairs as the “way of the world” – the decree of fate beyond the
control of man.

There was no such dominant note of despondency and helplessness when the
pre-Islamic poet occasionally bemoaned the inscrutability of fate
*(jadd)* and the failure and his hard struggle *(jidd)* to bring him the
coveted reward. Even in the early days of Islam fate did not appear to
be so arbitrary: when there was dissatisfaction it was directed against
*persons* – tyrants and other dynasties. It is only in the late ‘Abbasid
period that the complaint against “Time”[^23] became almost a fashion,
so much so that the poets simulated it in the same way as they simulated
love.

### Personal and Occasional Verse

It was characteristic of the progress of culture that poetry be sought
after as the medium of the communication of thought and feeling
occasioned by the vicissitudes of personal relations and small incidents
in everyday life. The pre-Islamic poet also had frequent occasions to
address his *“ibn al-‘amm”* (cousin) in reprobatory terms, but his
utterances were deep-rooted in the actual matter-of-fact struggle for
existence. The *ikhwaniyyat* of the period under review constitute a
branch of cultivation of elegance. The difference is the same as between
an actual fighter and an amateur sportsman.

The topics range over estrangement, effort at reconciliation, and
tickling and teasing through wit and humour. These categories, however,
appear to be sham when compared with the impressive genuineness of the
pieces relating to incidents in everyday life as, for example, the one
attributed to a *literatus* who was compelled to part with his
collection of books in a time of adversity. This kind of poetry
concerning the unaffected, natural gushing forth of some poignant
feeling or passion aroused by the actual facts of life reached its full
development in Spain in general and in the verses of al-Mu‘tamid in
particular.

A strong element of genuine enthusiasm and personal acrimony is also
evoked by the rivalry among the diverse national groups: the Arabs, the
Persians, the Turks, the Romans and the Negroes. Pride-cum-satire was
the popular form of championing one nationality against the other on the
basis of ethnology, history, mental qualities, and cultural
achievements. This must be distinguished from the aspect noted above
which concerned the exaltation of a particular kind of social and
cultural life.

### Descriptive Poetry

Beauty no longer remained confined to nature: there were high mansions,
fortified castles, exquisite mosques, and public buildings, and, above
all, public and private gardens, aqueducts and boat-houses – all
claiming attention from the artist and the poet. Even the starlit sky
and the cloudy horizon were endowed with a new charm. To the Bedouin
they gave only a simple impression of awe and induced a mood of little
good cheer; to the Baghdadi who went out for a stroll in the evening
they catered to his desire for the enjoyment of beauty. Thus, the
descriptive poetry of this period, which often monopolizes the larger
part of long *qasidahs*, is almost something new.

It is exhilarating indeed to find roses being compared to cheeks and
tall cypress to the slim stature of damsels rather than *vice versa* as
of yore. Flowers in particular were the craze to the tasteful and the
elegant, which even used them as symbols of moods and sentiments in
their exchanges of love.[^24] No surprise that the description of
flowers *(al-zahriyyat)* should grow into a semi-independent branch of
poetry in which al-Sanubari (d. 334/945) distinguished himself in the
East.

Yet there is nothing comparable to the poetry of Spain so far as high
sensitivity to nature is concerned. There the poet not only describes
and enjoys nature but also shows himself to be in communion with it.
Another branch of descriptive poetry which attained semi-independent
form was *al-tardiyyat* (venery poems). It also reflected an ample
measure the trappings of luxury and civilization around an old
traditional interest.

### Panegyrics on the Prophet (al-Mada’ih al-Nabawiyyah)

As we have seen earlier there was no time lost in celebrating the
achievements of the Prophet and composing panegyrics on him in the
traditional form and style of the *qasidah*. When the Umayyads fanned
political partisanship by employing the poets to denounce their rivals,
it evoked a new spirit of selfless devotion to the cause of the ‘Alids,
which found its most forceful exponent in al-Kumait. It soon became a
panegyric on the family on the Prophet which was characterized, apart
from legal arguments in favour of the ‘Alid claims, by a good deal of
symbolism of pathos and suffering drawn from the incidents of history.

A concomitant theme of high general interest was the condemnation of
tyranny, oppression, and mis-rule coupled with the ferent hope of return
to ideal conditions at the hands of the virtuous Imams. The two sides
carried on the old bout right through the ‘Abbasid period during which
the ‘Alids continued to be in the wilderness of opposition. In later
times when the political controversy lost a good deal of realism and
turned into mere sectarian ritual, this kind of poetry was taken over
into the circles of the Sufis, who concerned themselves particularly
with its content of loyal sentiment and tragic pathos.

These Sufi composers, it will be remembered, were seldom men of high
literary attainments nor did they care to examine facts and rely on them
alone. Rather they would introduce all sorts of superstition which would
feed sentimentalism. A famous example of this kind is the
pseudo-*Burdah* of al-Busiri (d. 694/1294 – 95) which, though not devoid
of literary elegance, is typical of superstitious belief and is esteemed
primarily for its supposed magical properties.

The framework of these panegyrics being that of the traditional
*qasidah*, the essential prelude of erotic verses was there. It was,
however, observed as a convention that in this particular context “love’
should be characterized by restraint and dignity rather than “licence.”
For example, it was specifically disallowed to mention a male object of
love or to refer to the hips or the charm of the naked shin among the
physical attractions. It will be seen that this only confirms the thesis
advanced earlier that erotic interest in woman (without licence) was no
offence to Muslim piety.

Still later when originality became rarer the form and the theme of the
panegyric on the Prophet were used for the demonstration of one’s skill
in rhetorical tropes, such *qasidahs* were designated the *badi‘iyyat*.
That kind of play with words is, of course, beyond the purview of poetry
proper.

### Adaptation of Metre and Diction

It was indicated at the very beginning that the metrical forms handed
down by the pre-Islamic poets continued to hold their own throughout the
classical period. We have only to review the adaptation of these forms
to the demands of new developments in theme and style. First, there was
the preference of short, flexible metres and then, with the dethronement
of the *madih*, the tendency to short pieces devoted to single or
closely allied themes.

However, the only departure from the tradition with regard to the
*qafiyah* was the adoption from the Persian of the *muzdawaj*, i.e.
tanzon with each verse having a separate rhyme for its two hemi-stitches
(instead of the whole poem having a single rhyme for the endings of each
verse). This was the form attributed to the Zoroastrian scriptural
psalms which the *zindiq* poets were charged with reciting in secret.
And obviously this was the form best suited for the epic which, because
of its length, made it well-neigh impossible to sustain one single
rhyme-ending.

But though the form of the epic narrative *(al-sh‘r al-qasasiyy)* was
found, the Arabic poets failed to achieve anything remarkable in the
field from an aesthetic viewpoint. The early pioneers, ibn al-Mu‘tazz
and al-Khuraimi, were tolerably good in picturing national calamities
but unfortunately it was now reduced to a mere mnemonic versification of
the chronicles of kings and dynasties without anything of genuine poetry
about it.

No sooner did the need to please the vanity of the patron disappear than
the diction tended to be unaffected, soft, sweet, and naturally fit for
the theme and content. Abu al-‘Atahiyah, himself a pitcher-seller,
succeeded particularly well in employing the simple language of the
common people without any loss of standards. On the other hand, this
trend towards the natural and the unaffected suffered some degeneration
at the hands of the libertine poets like Bashshar, who did not mind
effeminacy and the verbatim reproduction of the idiom of the sporting
women in the private company of lovers.

### Strophic Verse

It is quite understandable that the need for strophic verse should arise
as soon as music and dancing were introduced in Arabia consequent upon
the Islamic conquest of Persia. Al-Khalil has left behind a few verses
which are like a formula for the rhythmic beating of the feet.[^25]
Further, the attempt to evolve an artistic form for the special purposes
of music and dance took the direction of adaptation of the old tradition
rather than a complete innovation.

The full length poem was divided into parts consisting of two or more
verses, each part having a different single rhyme for its several
hemi-stitches but all the parts followed by the repetition of a
particular verse with a rhyme of its own and thus held together as if by
a string (Ar. *simt*; hence the device called *al-tasmit*). This
evolution must have taken place at a very early period since it is
ascribed without certainty to Imru’ al-Qais. It was the same device
which was employed to take greater liberties with rhyme (and also metre)
in Spain under the name of *al-muwashshah* (from *wishah* meaning
girdle).

Later, when the colloquial dialect was fully admitted to this form it
came to be known as the *zajal*. Thus, it came to be an artistic form
just free enough to be within easy comprehension and unsophisticated
taste of all, yet devoid of none of the essentials of traditional art.
From Spain it was brought to Egypt and the East and achieved a high
degree of popularity. There were still more spontaneous forms of
strophic verse in which the street vendors and the like moulded their
cries but in all cases the *qafiyah* was fully relished and the variety
of it in different strophes was compensated with the uniformity of the
refrain in between them.

B. Prose
--------

The earliest specimens of Arabic prose coming down to us from the
pre-Islamic times fall into the following categories:

1. Proverbs

2. Oracular sayings

3. Orations and

4. Accounts of battles and stories of love, adventure, and
entertainment.

Except for the last category the form in vogue was unmistakably
epigrammatic and high condensed, consisting of short, cadenced and
loosely rhymed sentences. This form was quite in conformity with the
morphology of the language and the peculiar temperament of the Arab,
particularly in view of his reliance on memory alone for preservation
and transmission. No surprise that whatever did not conform to this
requirement of form was simply allowed to go by the board.

The oracular sayings were almost lacking in any content whatsoever. If
the oracle excelled in anything it was mere adroitness in ambiguity. The
most remarkable from the viewpoint of the content were, of course, the
proverbs, of which the few highly suggestive words often symbolized a
whole story deep-rooted in the simple Bedouin life. Hence, they were
early recognized as a source, second only to poetry, for the knowledge
of the history, manners, customs, and superstitions of the Pre-Islamic
Arabs. In subsequent periods also, there was a remarkable curiosity to
pick up pithy and suggestive lines and phrases from poetry and prose and
to pass them round in speech and writing. Thus, the stock of proverbs,
which in Arabic include idioms and phrases in common use, never ceased
increasing and receiving variety from the changes in the pattern of
life. Often they mirrored the experiences, complimentary and otherwise,
of contacts between the various nationalities.

The orations were designed for actual needs arising out of war-like
tribal activity or communal social relationships. Though prose, however,
exquisite, was always rated as a lesser form of art, there is no doubt
that oration had sufficiently developed into a recognized literary
medium. It would also be justified to assume that sermonizing for its
own sake, as, for example, on wise conduct and good behaviour had come
into vogue.

The evening get-together in the courtyard, generally under the auspices
of some generous dignitary, is the age-old manifestation of the Arab
instinct for communal social life. The importance of this feature in the
hard, matter-of-fact life in the inhospitable desert cannot be
over-emphasized. It is also quite understandable that the main diversion
on this occasion should be a round of talks on events and anecdotes
bound up either with historical curiosity or common interest in love and
adventure.

The contents of this *samar* can be easily be distinguished as (a) the
narratives of the battles of the Arabs, (b) stories of love and
adventure of Arabian provenance, and (c) stories borrowed from foreign
sources. Some traces of the beast-fable have also been found scattered
here and there. Nevertheless, pure fables were seldom flair of the Arab
mind even in subsequent times. Naturally enough, this evening talk was
couched in simple informal language with emphasis on content rather than
on elegance of word, and the way in which it has been recorded by the
scholars of early Islam can at best be described as quotation from the
speech of the narrator.

### Influence of the Qur’an and the Hadith

The unique position of the Qur’an as the first book in Arabic has
already been noted. It, for the first time, made Arabs fully aware of
the potentialities of prose as an artistic form. Still more important in
another way was the normative influence of the Hadith. It is certainly
wrong to assume that the influence of the Qur’an was in any way
circumscribed by its claim to inimitability because even an unattainable
ideal is always potent enough to set the direction of effort in the
future. But, of course, there was an air of formality about the Qur’an.

On the other hand, the Hadith represented the model of effortless,
everyday speech – simple, terse, to the point, efficacious of purpose,
and interspersed with flashes of vivacity and humour. The most important
general contribution of both the Qur’an and the Hadith was to drive home
the primordial need for setting an aim and a purpose in speech and
composition and making both the content and the word fit and conform to
the same. The new outlook on literary beauty as related to a definite
purpose represented a radical change from the old tradition of aimless
talk – “the wondering into every valley” (Qur’an) – and gave birth to a
mental discipline which is the hallmark of the orations and the
epistolary compositions of early Islam.

The official correspondence of the early Caliphs and their addresses on
different occasions of war, legislation, and administration are all
marked by a simple and direct style of flowing naturally from high
concentration on purpose and thus surpassing all art. Yet they show all
the dignity of authority. It will be remembered that orations and
epistles were the two branches of literary composition which were
especially favoured in early Islam by the needs of administration as
well as congregational activity and social life. They only underwent a
portentous change at the hands of the Persian secretaries, who
introduced in the Arab chanceries all the fanfare of the Sassanian Court
by way of pompous language and grandiose style.

### Early Works on Adab (Belles-Lettres)

The early literary activity (apart from poetry) concerned itself mainly
with compilation and narration rather than personal creation. The
scholars and the students were content with collections of texts and
explanations of important pieces of poetry, proverbs, orations, sayings
of prophets and wise men, historical narratives, and witticism – all
considered to be the necessary equipment of polite education and moral
instruction. These collections were like packets in which the knowledge
of their compilers was lumped together without any systematic
arrangement or classification, the compilers themselves contributing
only a few comments here and there. Only ibn Qutaibah (d. 276/889 – 90)
introduced some order into the invaluable chaos.

The beginning of original production was closely bound up with an
interest in man and his natural surroundings. Curiously enough, this
interest was roused by the rivalry among the various nationalities
within the ‘Abbasid Empire. The political and social conditions of the
time promoted interesting, even though acrimonious, discourses on the
characteristics – physical, temperamental, and cultural – of the peoples
of different lands as exhibited in their current behaviour and past
history. Al-Jahiz (d. 255/868 – 69), one of the first Mu‘tazilites to
study the Greek naturalists endowed these discourses with the superb
literary form of *causerie* or short tract characterized by a
combination of erudition and artistic skill with the spirit of reliance
on facts of observation and history rather than on speculative
deductions.

Thus, highly scientific data, worthy of a Darwin, relating to the
processes of adaptation between man and nature, came to form the theme
of high literature and art. Al-Jahiz’s “Book on Animals” *(Kitab
al-Hayawan)*, a fine specimen of the wedlock between art and science, is
a definite gain to literature and a high compliment to the general
culture of the time. Only one is left wondering whether science would
not have prospered better by an early separation from its charming
companion.

### Popular Anecdote

Beyond the circle of scholars and students the interest of the common
people lay in the anecdote couched in simple, unsophisticated language.
They sought light entertainment by listening to stories of love or
adventure or a blend of both. Apart from the pre-Islamic lore, the wars
of Islamic conquest lay handy for the purpose and were especially suited
to satisfy at the same time religious fervour, national pride, and the
instinctive love of adventure. There is ample evidence to show that the
conquests were actually the subject of a saga which, however, could
enter the books only surreptitiously.
Two other streams contributed to the fund of anecdotes in the early
Islamic period: first, the South Arabian lore in which the Umayyads took
particular interest as part of the glorification of the Arabs, and,
secondly, the Jewish religious lore which was widely and
indiscriminately drawn upon the *qassas* (religious sermonizers). None
of these stories, however, could find artistic presentation because the
regard for historical truth prevented their incorporation in book form:
the dangers which were guarded against are illustrated by the
corruptions that evaded detection and are found today here and there.

Even when they were collected in book form at a very late period and
they continued to be regarded below the dignity of a scholar. Of course,
the stories of love which are not liable to be mixed up with religion
and history were given freer admittance to the literary circles, but
even these (e.g. the story of the ideal love of Majnun or the profane
love of Waddah al-Yaman) were recalled only with reference to poetry and
seldom took any definite artistic form in prose. Whatever form these
popular stories possess has only been achieved effortlessly through
common repetition.

### Story Cycles

The indigenous stories of love alluded to above were simple incidents
which could not keep the attention of the *samar*-hungry audience for
any considerable time. As town life grew, the need was felt for cycles
of stories or stories within a story, separate yet inter-connected with
a string plot which would keep the curiosity on its edge for as long as
“Thousand and One Nights.” This need was met, in the first instance, by
import from Persia, which had long been known to be the store-house for
such stories.

The Persian *afsanah*, the prototype of the Arabic story cycles, had
passion, wonder, and surprise as the keynotes of its content, it is the
quest for the wonderful and the surprising which brings in super-natural
elements and magic to heighten the effects of adventure, and treachery
and moral depravity to enhance love. This element of wilful selection
and exaggeration of the unusual in actual life should not be over-looked
in making any sweeping generalizations in regard to the state of
society. The over-tone is particularly deceptive in regard to historical
personalities as, for example, Harun al-Rashid, who though he indulged
in luxury and sensuous pleasure in private life, would never allow any
lapse from dignity and moral propriety in public.

It was perhaps in the original core of *Hazar Afsanah* itself that
popularly idealized historical personalities were woven into the texture
with a view of imparting a touch of reality to the fiction. Yet it is
remarkable that this particular branch, as contrasted with that of
*Kililah wa Dimnah*, was successfully cultivated at Baghdad and Cairo.
The anonymous *maddahs* went on dressing up the borrowed material and
augmenting it with their own creation until the whole stock was moulded
into a more or less fixed but sufficient polished form.

The professionals, whose job was gradually reduced to vocal performance,
often to the accompaniment of simple instrumental music, circulated and
transmitted the stock by oral tradition among themselves until it was
redacted in book form in about the ninth/15th century. The form and the
content of these story cycles would be better appreciated if it is
constantly kept in view that they were never meant to be read; they were
recited to an audience seeking mental relaxation rather than
intellectual satisfaction. They were designed simply to amuse and not
popularize or criticize any particular view of society. Rather, the
surmise is that they were secretly helped into circulation by the powers
that we interested in turning the attention of the masses away from
political and social problems.

Hence, all the emphasis is on the tempo of action to the subservience of
everything else. Further, in the very nature of circumstances, the style
and the diction could only be such as were regarded elegant and
interesting by the standards and taste of the common people. It really
reflects very well on the common culture of those days when people could
learn how to appreciate and enjoy elegance of language in their ordinary
social surroundings without necessarily studying at school. But after
all the story cycles never regarded as a piece of literature *(adab)*
and were never read and taught by scholars as such. It was only in the
West that the scholars thought it worthwhile to devote time to the *Alf
Lailah wa Lailah*.

The *Siratu ‘Antar*, another notable work of the same class, bears the
impress of conscious art, its texture being loose-rhymed prose
embroidered with some 10,000 verses. In point of content, a hero of the
pre-Islamic times is made to live through 500 years of Islam down to the
Crusades, personifying in himself all the chivalry of the famous knights
of Islamic history as well as the legends of the Persian epic. It sprang
into popularity in the tense atmosphere of the Crusades and represents
fully the peculiar temperament of the time.

### High-class Fiction

It will be seen from the preceding two paragraphs that the imagination
of the Muslim masses, like that of the masses of any other people, was
strongly tempted to dramatize history and to develop the hard core of
facts in fabulous stories. But such a pursuit was totally barred to a
Muslim scholar by his high sense of intellectual honesty and academic
responsibility cognate with the sanctimonious regard for religious
purity. As fiction was disdained and frowned upon by the cultured, it
was condemned and relegated to the circles of the common people.

Pure fiction, which posed no danger of distortion to valuable fact, was
quite welcome in literary circles. But, again, *literati* were earnest
people who would relish a fable only if it had some moral import in the
manner of the stories of the Qur’an. It will, however, be observed that
the reliance of the Qur’an on the known incidents of history, rather
than fables, to point a moral is highly significant as being in full
accord with the peculiar temperament of the Arab. Not that the Arab was
weak in imagination; he only considered it somewhat childish to invent
fictitious tales, which is best evidenced by the clear absence of a
mythology even in the pre-Islamic days.

He was indeed very fond of moralizing but would do so only through
direct, pithy, and pointed proverbial sayings supported by illustrations
from real life. The style of the Qur’an in this respect stands in sharp
contrast with that of the sacred books of India, which seek to convey
the truth mainly through fables. Thus, it was only when highly cultured
Persians consecrated themselves to the service of Arabic that the
treasures of the Indo-Persian tradition were transferred into this
language. As these were mere translations, their contents do not belong
to Arabic: only the use of the artistic form of Arabic for this kind of
composition was a notable innovation.

The rendering of the *Kalilah wa Dimmah* by ibn al-Muqaqffa‘ was
designed to be read by the educated class who relished it for its
moralizing on the conduct of private and public affairs. It was warmly
appreciated as a novelty and versified more than once, but the attempts
at imitation of the model failed to achieve any considerable measure of
success. Thus, pure fiction too, like the fanciful encrustment of
history and religion, fell to the lot of the common people who indulged
in it for sheer amusement.

The unproductivity of the Arab-Islamic milieu, so far as high-class
fiction is concerned, has only to be viewed by the side of unparalleled
success in the preservation of the religious texts, the scrupulous
eschewing of the subjective element in historical annals, and the
evolution of a full-fledged science for establishing the authenticity of
a text with reference to the character of the narrator. In short, the
learned and the scholarly devoted themselves to checking the rampancy of
the imagination of the unlettered rather than giving free reins to their
own fancy. Further, the authority of the *Shari‘ah* left no need for any
emotional pleading or intellectual canvassing by dramatization of social
problems; hence the absence of the story or the novel except for
literary and philosophical themes.

### Literary Epistle (Risalah) and Rhetorical Maqamah

The extra-ordinary interest in linguistic studies provided a scholar in
early Islam with a vast fund of vocabulary and usage as well as a sense
of elegance and beauty in expression. He, however, waited for events and
occasions in actual life to put his knowledge and skill to use; hence,
the absence of any prose form than the oration and the epistle. The
disputations on the merits of the various nationalities and different
classes of people brought into vogue for a while the short topical
essay. But the natural, forthright style soon started soaring high at
the hands of the Persian scribes until it became thoroughly inflated and
encumbered.

To this encumbrance the Christian scribes further added the
embellishment of *saj‘*, and the over-played art degenerated into
tiresome gymnastics. There was, however, some expansion in the range of
the epistlecum-essay writing, which opened up a welcome outlet for
literary skill. Tracts on the rules of good conduct were very popular,
some of which on Persian model were meant especially for kings, while
others were addressed to all classes. Similarly, there was a plethora of
manuals of instruction through which all men of consequence were eager
to communicate their wisdom.

But the most important branch conducted merely for the sake of pleasure
was “letters” addressed to fellow-scholars and patrons touching upon
purely academic and literary problems. Pride and rivalry helped to
impart zest to such a pursuit. The style was high-flown and ornate with
the obtrusive aim of pedantry. A further development of this tradition
of the literary epistle *(al-risalah)* was the *maqamah*, which
represents perhaps the first attempt to invent a loose framework of
picaresque romance for the display of one’s literary knowledge and
skill.

The idea must have been suggested by the presence of a real character in
the Arabicized Persian society of the time – a witty and somewhat
unscrupulous prodigy of letters, devoid of patronage from high-ups and
loth to engage himself in any lucrative work, thus compelled to shift
for himself by roving from town to town and “begging” by the public
display of feats of improvisation on the interesting and instructive
situations of life. The emphasis is, no doubt, on the exhibition of
linguistic virtuosity but there is throughout a vein of witticism which
is sometimes employed for parodying society, manners and peoples.

As this form came to be the dominant one in Arabic prose, a large
variety of it depicting incidents and situations concerning particular
classes such as the *‘ulama’* and the lovers, was successfully attempted
in every age. It has throughout remained a typically indigenous product,
especially suited to the equipment and training of the Arabic scholar as
alluded to above.

### Development of the Story for Literary Theme

The significance of the *maqamah* lay in the Arabic scholar at last
condescending to create out of imagination the framework of a story,
however short and undeveloped, with a view to displaying his profuse but
pent-up literary skill. For the newly released fancy Abu al-‘Ala’
al-Ma‘rri borrowed the wings of the popular traditions relating to the
Prophet’s Ascension *(al-mi‘raj)* to the heavens. His *Rislat
al-Ghufran* is really a *maqamah* cycle under the overall covering of a
*risalkah*. The story is no more than a frail show-case to display the
author’s store of knowledge, just a device to string together a series
of expositions of problems and judgments relating to the poetry,
literature, and grammar.

As the author was also a philosopher and a critical observer of beliefs
and practices, he brought out the witticism characteristic of the
*maqamah* for an audacious burlesque of contemporary state of learning
and society, which imparted a unique quality to the work. The state
excelled only in pedantry and artificial beauty. Yet the review of the
entire field of literature, beliefs, morals, and manners in the course
of an imaginary flight remained the high watermark of the traditional
Arabic scholarship.

### Story for the Philosophical Theme

The philosophical romance of ibn Tufail (d. 580/1184) entitled *Hayy Bin
Yaqzan* is a complete surprise in Arabic literature in more ways than
one. Here for the first time we have the plot as the main concern of the
author. Sufficient attention is also paid to characterization and
setting. The style is sub-ordinated to the theme. It will be recalled
that the general body of Muslim philosophers had been confronted with a
two-fold problem: the capability of reason to attain to reality unaided
by revelation, and the identity of reality notwithstanding the
difference in the source and the categories of knowledge imparted by
religion.

Soon intuition, the *tertius gaudens*, achieved a lasting victory over
both. On the one hand, it established its claim to be the essence of
religion and, on the other, it was recognized as the higher form of
philosophy. The importance of the latter development, which was by far
the greater victory, has not often been fully appreciated. It was a
momentous step indeed to accept intuition as part of a man’s natural
equipment, cognate with reason, for the “realization” of truth. Anyway,
it was for the purpose of explaining all these points together that the
philosophers conjured up the vision of a Solitary Man, cut off from all
knowledge of religion yet attaining to a vision of God through the
proper use and development of his faculties alone.

### Historical Writing

The Arabic historian was solely concerned with the preservation of
authentic records. He would not digest the facts and attempt at their
reconstruction and interpretation of the reader. The merit of a
historian like al-Tabri (d. 310/922 – 23) lay only in the extent and
variety of his information, his own personality could be discerned only
in the indication here and there and a preference for one of the several
versions of a particular event. This self-imposed restraint on the part
of the historian, like the similar scruples of the *adab* producer,
betokened only high devotion to truth nurtured by the traditions of
religious sciences.

As a matter of fact, it proved to be a valuable asset in eliminating, so
to say, the middlemen and enabling all posterity to get a purely
objective view of the past. Even when the annalistic framework was not
strictly adhered to and the method of topical historiography was
initiated by al-Mus‘udi (d. 345/956 – 57) the style continued to be
dominated by reporting. However, this deliberate suppression of the
personal element contributed to the lack of any prose for historical
writing. Such development had to wait until the beginning of the
eighth/14th century when ibn al-Tiqtaqa produced his book *al-Fakhri*.

Keeping in view the fact of its being an innovation, the success
achieved was remarkable. A lucid and fluent yet brilliant style is
applied to carefully selected facts combined with appropriate comments.
But again, this admirable example was not sufficiently followed up.
Rather the main development from which ibn al-Taqtaqa revolted
consciously, had already proceeded far on the lines of the transference
and application of the epistolary style – grand and verbose, as already
noted – to historiography. It was fortunate indeed that this style was
carried to palpable absurdity quite early by al-‘Utbi (d. 427/1035 –
36).

It was decisively rejected by the Arab taste only to find favourable
development in Persian. Court patronage of the historians also brought
in the need for flattery and exaggeration, but it must be said in
fairness that historian did not absolve himself totally of regard for
truth in the manner of poets. On the whole, the style of the official
amanuenses and the Court historians of the late ‘Abbasid period belongs
to the same *genre*.

The best examples of Arabic historical prose, both in regard to form and
content, are the private memoirs of personal experiences of war and
peace like the *Kitab al-I‘tibar* of ‘Uthman ibn Munqidh (d. 584/1188 –
89), and the accounts of travels. In the latter class of works one finds
not only observation and effective narration but also the author’s own
appraisal of personalities and events in the light of history and
contemporary society. Generally, the style is simple and natural and
even where art is displayed, as in the case of ibn Jubar (d. 614/1217 –
18), it is not over-played at the expense of the content. Al-Ghazālī’s
*al-Munqidh min al-Dalal* forms a class by itself – an auto-biographical
account of mental conflict and spiritual quest written with such
simplicity and naturalness as defy all art.

### Influence on the West

Looking in retrospect over the entire field of Arabic prose and poetry,
the general reader will not fail to be struck particularly with a few
features which stand out prominently. First, there is the perfect
symmetry, so characteristic of all Muslim art, the unfaltering rhythm,
and the regular rhyme which at once give the general impression of
order, system, and exquisiteness in the construction of the verse.
Secondly, there is the entire scheme of romantic love as embodied in the
tradition of the *ghazal*. It is not fully appreciated, especially among
the Muslims who take it as a matter of course, how much the Islamic
outlook on woman and sex relationship has to do with the sentimental
romantic love.

Love as an art can only flourish in a society where the company of woman
is sublimated into a virtue. A further condition for the growth of
romanticism is the recognition of certain ethical rules for courtship, a
certain idealization of restraint. Such restraint is only symbolic of
awe for the independent will of a separate individuality (best
exemplified in the economic rights of women in Islam) coupled with a
tenderly appreciation – so different from lustful exploitation – of the
frailty and delicacy of the feminine constitutional and sentimental
make-up.

In the blind fervour of the extremist revolt against the denial of human
rights to women in the West, the last basis of all chivalry and romance
is much liable to be forgotten. Anyway, it was these two features – the
exquisite form and the romantic content – of the Andalusian poetry which
impressed the troubadours of Provence so deeply. Needless to say that
lyrical poetry of romantic love had a special development in Spain so as
to become unique even in Arabic. In the same way the strophic verse
blossomed in Spain as nowhere else. The tradition, however, goes back to
the Umayyad *ghazal* with Islam intervening between it and the frank
hedonism of the *jahiliyyah*.

Turning to prose, one finds Arabic offering, at its best, aphorisms,
apologues, popular fables characterized by the spirit of adventure, and
picaresque romance *(maqamah)*. Actually, these were the very
curiosities which achieved a ready success in medieval Europe through
oral transmission and book translation. It was not very appropriate
indeed that works like the *Arabian Nights*, which were meant only for
recital in the marketplace, were read in book form in Europe.

This was bound to produce certain revulsion at a later period when they
were to be devoid of the finer elements of literary art. Anyhow,
“orientalism” – a touch of the fabulous, the wonderful, and the exotic –
entered the thought processes of the European writers and poets. Still
more important is the percolation of some of the higher devices resting
on characteristically Islamic traditions like the *mi‘raj* into the
*Divina Commodiai* and the Solitary Man into *Robinson Crusoe*.

Bibliography
------------

Ibn Khaldun, *Muqaddimah*; Jurji Zaidan, *Tarikh al-Adab al-‘Arabiyyah*;
Ahmad Amin, *Fajr al-Islam, Duha al-Islam*, and *Zuhr al-Islam*; Taha
Hussain, *Hadith al-Arbu‘ah*, Parts One and Two; Zaki Mubarak,
*al-Mada’ih al-Nabawiyyah*, Cairo, 1935; H. A. R. Gibb, “Literature,”
*The Legacy of Islam*.

[^1]: Note the definition by ibn Qutaibah of a born poet as “the one who
indicates to you the end of a verse in the very beginning of it, and the
qafiyah in the fatihah (opening word) itself.” Al-Shi‘r w-al-Shu‘ara’,
Cairo, 1367/1947, 1, p. 36.

[^2]: It was perhaps an account of this special knowledge that he was
called sha‘ir, i.e. the “kenner,” who knew better than others. There is,
however, another view which traces the word to its Hebrew counter-part
meaning “chanting” and “singing.” Anyhow, the poet only knew and sang
whereas the authority for taking decisions and giving judgments rested
with another class known as the hukkam. Fajr al-Islam, p. 56.

[^3]: The schooling of the impulses through hudud Allah (limits of the
Sacred Law) pinpoints the difference between the jaahiliyyah and Islam.

[^4]: Consistently with the Arab habit of ascribing long, gradual
developments to particular persons, the innovation of the qasidah is
said to have originated with Muhalhil b. Rabi‘ah (c. 500 A.D.), whose
very name bears testimony to his contribution. Al-Jumahi (Tabaqat,
Cairo, 1952, p. 24) dates it from the time of ‘Abd al-Muttalib and
Hashim b. ‘Abd Manaf.

[^5]: There are touching stories of lovers who would intercede with the
hunters to have the gazelles set free because of the resemblance of
their eyes to the eyes of the beloved; cf. Raghbat al-‘Amil, 7, p. 39.

[^6]: The stock phrase attributed in the Qur’an to the pagans in defence
of their ways that “they found their forefathers practising them”
faithfully exposes their lack of thought and reasoning.

[^7]: Vide al-Ma‘arri, risalat al-Ghufran, ed. Bint al-Shati, p. 246.

[^8]: Al-Jumahi, op. cit., p. 11.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 197; see also p. 217 where the same reason is adduced
for the meagreness of poetry in al-Ta‘if and ‘Uman.

[^10]: Qur’an (26:224) et seq. There is an exception in favour of those
who are devoted to righteous belief and good deeds.

[^11]: The example of the Qur’an illustrates the principle of novelty in
literary form. In order to achieve the paramount purpose of
communication and effect, novelty must always be embedded in
familiarity.

[^12]: The verses of ibn al-Zib‘ara are much more explicit on the
subject of renunciation of the old and devotion to the new ideal, vide
al-Jumahi, op. cit., pp. 202 – 03.

[^13]: An excellent example of the change of values in this respect is
provided by the hija’ of al-Najashi which was taken by ‘Umar to be a
eulogy, vide ibn Qutaibah, op. cit., 1, p. 290.

[^14]: Up until the days of ‘Umar, Arabian music was nothing but
intonation of voice in the manner of a camel-driver reciting his songs
(vide al-Aghani, 8 p. 149, quoted in Fajr al-Islam, p. 120). This
accounts most plausibly for the absence of reference in the Qur’an to
music and dancing while the symbolization of wine is so common-place.

[^15]: Vide al-Jahiz quoted in Duha al-Islam, 1, p. 15.

[^16]: Ibn Khaldun, Maqaddimah, Chap., 6 (49).

[^17]: Ibn Qutaibah, op. cit., 1, p. 451.

[^18]: In all Islamic literature some of the best wine songs have been
produced by those who never tasted it. After all, does an actor actually
experience death before he successfully acts the scene on the stage?
Even the poets who waxed eloquent on the properties of the saliva
safeguarded the chastity of the lady-love by saying at the end that they
knew of it just as one knew of the water in the cloud by the flash of
lightning.

[^19]: It is only an exuberance of popular fancy which has foisted with
mujun of Abu Nuwas on the company of Harun al-Rashid. Ibn Khaldun has
noted the incongruity of it with the restraint and dignity of the
bearing of the great monarch.

[^20]: Any exact parallel is to be observed in our own day: Is it not
that wine-drinking, ballroom dancing, and cabaret shows are associated
with the superiority of the cultural taste and the intellectual
refinement of Western provenance?

[^21]: It is not merely a sentimental reaction but a perfectly
reasonable attitude that the liberties taken by Iqbal’s “love in the
presence of God be denied to one who talks of God from the atheistic
viewpoint. A verse of Hafiz ridiculing formalism in religion will be
appreciated by the Muslims, who would legitimately resent the same being
quoted in the context of an anti-God movement. Also, significant are the
words in which al-Mahdi interceded with his father, al-Mansur, on behalf
of Muti‘ b. Iyas. He pleaded that Muti‘ was only a fasiq (libertine) and
not a zindiq, i.e. not committed to over-throwing the existing order.

[^22]: In our own time Iqbal succeeded eminently where Abu-‘Ala’ failed
miserably. Iqbal’s employment of the traditional language of the
mystics, which sometimes misleads even great scholars to take him for a
mystic, is a device to make his ideas appear beautiful. Such a popular
and familiar literary medium is all the more essential when the ideas
are novel and unfamiliar.

[^23]: This is the “abuse of time” which is expressly prohibited by the
Prophet. Only he would curse the stars who believe him to be a passive
object under their blind inexorable influence. Islam, on the other hand,
stands for man’s active and dominant role in setting the pattern of life
through the instrumentality of the process of time as ordained by God;
cf. Iqbal, Asrar-i Khudi.

[^24]: See the interesting treatise on elegant manners by al-Washsha’
(Leiden, 1887).

[^25]: Vide Risalat al-Ghufran, p. 183.


