Chapter 65: Chemistry
=====================

Alexandrian Alchemy.-With the advent of Islam, the Arab tribes, many of
them still nomadic, were united into one nation. Their conflicts with
the neighbouring peoples which used to end as skirmishes bringing
immediate defeat on the scattered tribes, now changed into regular wars
often crowning them with success. What that meant can be realized from
the fact that within a hundred years of the Prophet's death, which
occurred in 11/632, Islam had spread from Spain in the West to Sind in
the East. As an advancing nation the Arabs came in contact with
different races, and when Egypt was conquered, during the regime of the
Caliph 'Umar, in 21/641, they came to know the Hellenized Egyptian
culture as it then existed. Its centre was Alexandria, founded by
Alexander in 332B.C.

Very soon it became an emporium of international trade attracting
merchants from all over the world. Above all, the Greeks had migrated
there in numbers, giving rise to a mixed culture of Egyptian and Greek
origin. The Egyptians used idols in their temples and chapels,
preferring those of bronze, particularly when they were gilded. The
artisans of Alexandria excelled in this craft, and the manufacture of
gilded bronze statues apparently became a lucrative industry.

From gilding bronze some of the artisans began to dream of making gold
itself and devoted their main attention to achieve this end. Thus arose
alchemy, not found before either in Egypt or in Greece. It was existing
when the Arabs acquired Egypt and was one of the elements of Alexandrian
culture which diffused into Arabian civilization.

There are several treatises and even books which suggest that Greek
science, which flourished between 300 B. C. and 200 A. D., subse­quently
passed on to the Arabs who functioned as its intermediate preservers
delivering it to Europeans during the Middle Ages. Such is the accepted
origin of alchemy.

It now becomes necessary to offer a brief sketch of alchemy as it was
founded at Alexandria. The oldest existing manuscript on alchemy is not
prior to about 391/1000. But it is supposed to be a copy of a work
originally written in about 100 A. D. During this early period alchemy
was a semi-secret science pursued by a few obscure persons. As
Taylor[^1] says, “although the earlier alche­mists wrote in Greek, they
were not Greeks, but in all probability Egyptians or Jews. They were not
Christians.” And what did they call their art? This knotty problem is
conspicuous by its absence in Taylor's book. When Wilson[^2] came to
review it, he supplied the missing information on “the derivation of the
Greek name of the art.” “The word unmistakably goes back to the craft of
the foundryman and metal-worker.

First, there is the Greek verb cheo (xiw), to melt and pour, as in the
casting of a bronze statue, then its derivative chump, an ingot of cast
metal, and finally from this another derivative chumeia, the art of
preparing metal ingots. This in time became a technical term for the
artificial preparation of the precious metals, but at first, as in
Zosimus, about 300 A.D., it acquired a qualifying phrase, the chumeia of
silver or gold. Before the Arabic period, however, chumeia could stand
alone to denote the art of transmutation.

Also before Arabic times, about 81/700 or earlier, it seems to have been
confused with chemia, apparently a Greek derivative of the Egyptian word
chem, meaning black. The reasons are obscure but the fact of the
confusion is hardly to be questioned. Later, the Arabs took over both
spellings, chumeia and chemia, prefixed their own definite article al,
and handed the word on to the Europeans in about the sixth/twelfth
century.” Thus kimiya is the Arabicized form of the dual word
chumeia/chemia.

The Greek and Arabic Terms Compared.-Now it is even more important to
know what the Arabs received under the name kimiya from the
Greek­speaking alchemists-to know what the word chemeia signifies and
how the Arabic word kimiya compares with it in meaning. Gildemeister[^3]
explains that “kimiya with the Arabs primarily is not an abstraction (or
the science of alchemy) but the name of a substance, of an agent, by
which transmutation of metals is brought about, thus of the
Philosophers' Stone, or rather of preparations made out of it. It is
thus a synonym of ilcsir which likewise signifies a transforming agent.
By contrast chumeia is never used by the Greeks in any other sense than
transmutation of metals.”[^4]

There are two synonyms in Greek, chemeia and chumeia. Gildemeister
refers to the use only of the latter, apparently taking it as identical
with the former. In Arabic there are two terms kimiya and iksir, the
latter not being represented in Greek literature. In fact, iksir occurs
far more in Arabic than the word kimiya. Iksir or al-iksir has been
Europeanized into elixir which has come to mean as an agent for
prolong­ing life. According to Taylor,[^5] “the alchemy of China was
primarily concerned with the prolonging of life”; he adds[^6] in this
connection that “it is very probable that the Arab alchemists received
some information about it. It is certainly notable that the idea of the
elixir as a medicine prolonging life was present amongst the Arabs and
not known to their Greek-speaking predeces­sors.”

P. Kraus[^7] published a voluminous work on Jabir. Its reviewer[^8]
correctly noticed that “as to the origin of all those theories, Kraus
maintains that not much of Jabir's alchemy can be traced to the extant
fragments of Greek alchemistic literature, and that there are certain
features in his alchemistic knowledge which are definitely unknown in
classical antiquity.” There has prevailed so much prejudice in favour of
Greek that even the word “elixir,” absent in Greek and therefore
inconceivable as a loan-word in Arabic, has been given a Greek root.
Iksir has accordingly been said to have come from the Greek word ksiron,
meaning dry, and has been made to connote dry powder, while elixir means
essence, spirit, or fluid. How the Arabs coined their word from Greek
cannot be explained. All this tends to show that the primary source of
Arab alchemy lies somewhere away from Alex­andria.

The Urge to Pursue Alchemy.-There were two types of seekers after
lon­gevity. First, the ascetic who was his own grocer, cook, and doctor
and to whom infirmity of old age meant lingering death. The second was
represented by a prince who had wealth and power and desired long life,
only to enjoy his possessions fully. Though for different reasons, the
Sufis, the nearest to ascetics, also indulged in alchemy. In fact,
Wiedemann[^9] remarks that “the study of alchemy has had one undesirable
result inasmuch as the representatives of the mystic movement in Islam
studied alchemy, e.g., ibn al-'Arabi.”

This, however, was expected, and the converse is also true, for about
the master of alchemy, Jurji[^10] states that “later tradition makes
Jabir ibn Hayyan the first Sufi.” Kraus[^11] explains how Jabir, the
alchemist, became interested in Sufism. He writes, “Alchemy is never
practised by Jabir for the object of accumulating wealth and acquiring
the power of gold. Its real mission is to bring about salvation.” And
how was this possible? He continues to say that “Salvation in the
Manichaean sense means to oppose in all spheres of life the fatal
mixture of light and darkness and to free the light from dark particles.
The Manichaean natural history, especially alchemy, aims at the great
work of salvation.”

Let us now turn to the wealthy and the worldly class. According to
Martin,[^12] “Emperor Ts'in-She-Hwang (B. C. 220), the builder of the
great wall of China, is the earliest historical sovereign who became a
votary of alchemy.” There are a few more Chinese emperors who believed
in alchemy; a couple of them had to pay with their lives for trying
alchemical drugs. In the life of Chingiz Khan it is stated that he sent
for a Taoist priest all the way from China to Central Asia, where he was
encamped, to discuss if life could be prolonged for ever.

Khalid, the Umayyad Prince (40-85/660-704).-There is a sub-class among
the well-to-do who would like to enjoy as sport the transmutation of a
base metal into gold. Such a motive on the part of a young prince can be
easily imagined and one such prince appears to have been Khalid, son of
the Caliph Yazid I and grandson of Mu\`awiyah. In the Arabic literature
on alchemy, compiled about 377(987 by the famous bookseller al-Nadim, it
is stated, as translated by Fuck,[^13] that “Khalid was the first Muslim
for whom medical, astronomical, and (al)chemical writings were
translated into Arabic. ...” He wrote a number of treatises and books.
Al-Nadim also saw the following four of his books: (1) The Book of
Amulets, (2) The Great Book of the Scroll, (3) The Small Book of the
Scroll, and (4) The Book of the Testament to His Son on the Art.

Introduction of Alexandrian Alchemy.-When Khalid wanted to learn alchemy
at Damascus, his capital, he sent for a teacher from Alexandria, a
Christian monk named Marianos, a pupil of another alchemist, also of
Alex­andria, named Stephanos, who lived in the reign of the Byzantine
Emperor Herkleios I (610-641 A.D.). That the best available teacher of
alchemy at the time was a monk is in full harmony with what has been
said of alchemy and of Sufis here. A monograph of over fifty pages has
been devoted to Khalid by Professor Ruska,[^14] the famous German
historian of alchemy.

The Oldest Alchemy and How it Reached the Muslim World.-A series of
authors have established that alchemy is indigenous to China. Among the
older writers may be mentioned Martin,[^15] while the best historical
evidence has been offered by Dubs.[^16] From China alchemy reached
Alexandria by the sea-route. In South China, the name of the dynasty
that built the Great Wall is pronounced Ts'in, which became Tseen, the
Arabic name for China. Likewise, the South Chinese term, kim-iya,
Gold-making Juice, became the loan-word lcimiya, upon which
Schneider[^17] has published the most recent communication. It is
probable that the word kimiya, instead of having been borrowed direct
from the Chinese, was taken over from Arabic into Greek, being
Hellenized there as chemeia. This is how it was written, but very
probably its pronunciation was similar to that of kimiya. The
pre-Islamic Arabs, bring­ing silk from South China, all along the
sea-route, also imported Taoism and alchemy as the cults of immortality.
To the pagan mind alchemy made a special appeal and this explains how it
came to be imported. Some of the Arab alchemists of the type of what we
call fakirs must have settled at Alexandria where it gradually spread
mainly among monks and other ascetics. We have just seen that even
centuries afterwards this character did not change for it was the monks
who brought Alexandrian alchemy to Damascus.

Another way in which Chinese alchemy reached the Islamic world was via
land-route. In Christianity one church tried to suppress another; and a
community, speaking Syriac and calling themselves Nestorians, sought
protec­tion from outside and established an academy at Jundi-Sbapiir, in
South­West Persia. The Nestorians migrated even up to China so that
there must have been contact between the Nestorians of China and those
of Persia. As an impact of Christianity upon Zoroastrianism there
resulted the religion of Mani. The Manichaeans with their philosophy of
dualism were close to the alchemists as they also believed in a similar
doctrine. Briefly, Nestorian and Manichaean Persia was in intimate
contact with China and was responsible for a fresh influx of Chinese
alchemy. The Jundi-Shapur academy was by no means dead during the reign
of Harun al-Rashid to which period Jabir also belonged. When Kraus and
others notice that there was much in Jabir that was not found in Greek
alchemy we have to turn to Chinese influence in Persia at that time.

The Beginning of Classical Islamic Alchemy.-The Umayyads ruling from
Damascus had become very unpopular. There were plots to replace them by
the 'Abbasid dynasty. Such agents were active as far east as the
province of Khurasan in Persia. One such emissary was Jabir's father,
Hayyan, a druggist by profession. Jabir was born at Tds, in Khurasan,
about 104/722, during the family's sojourn in Persia. When Jabir was a
mere boy, Hayyan was arrested for his activity and had to pay with his
life. Khurasan being the border province was a centre of foreign
cultures like Mahayana Buddhism and other schools of mysticism. It may
be pointed out in this connection that it was again at Tus, in Khurasan,
where Imam Ghazali, one of the great Muslim mystics, was born. Above
all, we find in Jabir one of the first persons to be formally called a
Sufi and the first among Muslims to be recognized as the master of
alchemy. Both alchemy and Sufism appear to come from the same source and
to have long remained together. Some of those who have written upon the
history of Sufism have noticed that in its early stages it flourished
only where Neo-Platonism was found. Likewise, writers on the history of
alchemy have also observed its earlier co-existence with Neo-Platonism.

While Sufism and Neo-Platonism can be directly and easily connected with
each other, as pertaining to the same system of thought, it requires
inquiring into what alchemy originally was in order to admit that
alchemy did not develop from one craft to another, from gilding to
gold­making, but was a kind of applied mysticism. The Sufis wanted
immortality in the next world by spiritual exercises; the alchemists
wanted it by virtue of drugs in this world. This motive at once becomes
evident by a study of Chinese alchemy which represents its earliest
phase. Instead of associating Islamic alchemy with Alexandrian
Neo-Platonism it is more fruitful to connect it with Manichaeism and
with schools of mysticism influenced by Chinese mysticism.

Khurasan, rather than Egypt, was the centre from where Islamic alchemy
got its real initiation. Between Khalid ibn Yazid and Jabir bin Hayyan
was a period of seventy-five years. Historically, the political power
shifted from Damascus to Baghdad. At this latter centre the so-called
Persian influence, but really Chinese-Manichaean doctrines, rapidly
promoted Islamic alchemy. Those who compare Greek alchemy with that of
Jabir notice an obvious difference between the two. If comparison is
made between the doctrines and achievements of Muslim alchemists with
those of China, the difference is very much less. In so far as even the
alchemy of Alexandria is Chinese, though a degenerated form of it, it
still has features enough for it to stand comparison with that of China.

With Jabir begins a school of alchemy much nearer to its original
source, with its centre at Tus, instead of at Alexandria. The first
feature to be noticed here is that the ideal seems to be not to make
gold but to prepare panacean drugs. Jabir's reputation as a physician
grew after the services he had rendered at the Court of Harun al-Rashid.
His alchemical writings on the contrary were misunderstood even by a
savant like ibn Khal­dun[^18] who remarked that they read like puzzles.

The effect of the chemical mysticism, which was alchemy, was
demonstrated in the form of life-saving iksirs; the theory of applied
mysticism was obtained from other systems of mysticism, such as Sufism
and Manichaeism. The existing literature shows that alchemy proposed to
make gold only and this seems to be true of Greek alchemy. The Arab
alchemists, like the original Chinese masters, worked upon their
preparations for making everything everlasting. When the omnipotent
substance, iksir or kimiya, was applied to a base metal it became
rust-proof and fire-proof, which meant it changed into gold. The same
agent could also convert an ordinary stone into a permanent diamond.
These features are not revealed in treatises on the history of alchemy
and must be clearly pointed out.

Imam Ja'far al-Sddiq (81-148/700-765).-It will now be apparent how Jabir
would venerate a master of mysticism like Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq, the
sixth Imam, who lived like an internee at Baghdad. Of all the Imams he
was the greatest mystic. He was deeply interested in alchemy and even
composed treatises on the subject. Importance is attached to him here
mainly because Jabir speaks of him as a Master and also because of the
fact that alchemy and Sufism both aim at immortality. Since Jabir was
both a Sufi and an alchemist, he could have received initiation from the
Imam at least as a mystic. Ruska[^19] has edited a treatise attributed
to the Imam and discussed his position in the history of alchemy,
devoting an introduction of sixty pages to the problem.

Jabir ibn Hayyan (104-200/722-815).-Our knowledge of Jabir's life is
very sketchy. He was born at Tus, in Khurasan, about 104/722. He became
an orphan while yet a boy and was brought up in the tribe of his father,
Azd, which lived in South Arabia. Then we suddenly find him as a man of
middle age active as a physician at the Court of Harun al-Rashid and as
a companion of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq. His special patrons were Harun's
viziers, the Barmakids, who really introduced him to the Court. When the
Barmakids fell into disfavour in 188/803, Jabir, then over eighty years
old, returned to Kufah where he used to live before coming to Baghdad.

The early life of the man, say from twenty to thirty-five, must have
been spent in the pursuit of alchemy probably at Tus. If he had merely
been born there he would have hardly been called al-Tusi. Another
designation of his, al-Sufi, also sets us inquiring as to where he
acquired proficiency in this field. With Tiis as a common centre for
both Sufism and alchemy, the search is reduced to the minimum. When he
left Baghdad immediately for Kufah, as an old bachelor, he could have
hardly found people with whom he was familiar. Without relatives and
surviving friends his life must have been that of a stranger and he must
have migrated from Kufah to Tao where Sufism and alchemy were very much
at home. According to one source, he died at Tus, in 200/815, which
appears most probable, at the ripe age of ninety-three.

Two centuries after his death some houses in a part of Kufah where Jabir
used to live were demolished. The house which he used to occupy was
found to contain a mortar of solid gold weighing two pounds and a half
which went to the royal treasury of the time. This archaeological
finding gives much reality to the personality of Jabir with his
many-sided features. Those who have been prejudiced in favour of Greek
culture have nourished myths such as given by Thompson,[^20] who writes
that “Jabir is said to have been either a native of Mesopotamia or a
Greek who afterwards embraced Muhammadanism.” The fact that this theory
originated from Suidas, who lived in the fifth/eleventh century, and
continued to appear as late as 1351/ 1932, when Thompson published his
book, indicates the persistence of pre­judice in favour of the Greek
origin of alchemy.

The existing literature on the history of alchemy seems to be devoted
mainly to textual criticism rather than to the subject proper. Hence, as
late as 1353/ 1934 Hopkins[^21] recorded that “the fundamental work of
fact-finding has been so difficult and time-consuming that no real
history of alchemy has yet appeared.” The same judgment continued to be
repeated, when Taylor[^22] wrote in 1371/1951 that “it may at once be
said that alchemy still remains an unsolved problem.” And both these
remarks apply even more forcibly to Muslim alchemy. We have not been
told as yet what the Muslim alchemists were after and particularly what
was meant by kimiya and iksir; whether they were identical or whether
there was a subtle difference between them.

What the Europeans of the Medieval Ages got as alchemy was the system
developed by the Arabs immediately before them so that observations upon
the alchemy of any of these two apply to either. “Paracelsus taught,” as
worded by Thompson,[^23] “that the object of alchemy was not to make
gold, but to prepare medicines.” He is the founder in Europe of
iatro-chemistry, but it is being maintained here that this has always
been the character of alchemy and is best illustrated by the popularity
Jabir enjoyed among his contemporaries. The fact that Jabir could
indulge in the use of a golden mortar and yet live the life of a
vegetarian, bachelor, and a Sufi-ascetic shows how he was not concerned
with the making of gold as a source of wealth. The other observation is
from Liebig. Chickashige[^24] writes, in this connection, that “the long
history of alchemy clearly shows, as Liebig remarked, that alchemy was
never anything else than chemistry proper to its own genera­tion.” If
instead of “chemistry” and “iatro-chemistry” as above we use the more
familiar and precise term, pharmaceutical chemistry, then both Liebig
and Paracelsus would be expressing the same idea. Here again, Jabir's
career fully confirms the remarks of Parcelsus and Liebig.

Among those who spared no energy to study the writings of Jabir may be
mentioned the late Dr. Holmyard. He observes that “Jabir ibn Hayyan has
many claims to be considered the first to whom the title of chemist may
legitimately be applied.”[^25] Hopkins[^26] is even more eloquent in his
tribute when he states that “... if all that has been deduced from the
writings of Geber (the Europeanized name of Jabir) is true, he was one
of the greatest single constructive influences in science, particularly
in the science of metals, that the world has ever seen. Perhaps he
should be ranked with Lavoisier for instituting a great revolution in
the attitude of the educated people of his time towards the study of
chemistry, especially in their attitude towards experi­ments.

Whereas, since the days of Aristotle, to soil one's hands with labour
has been considered, except in Egypt, despicable and proper only for
slaves, it is related that Geber had some success in teaching his
friends at Court that laboratory methods are necessary and the only
foundation for exact and reasonable science.” Respect to practical work
which Jabir must have preached is confirmed by the converse having
continued to exist even after­wards. Fuck[^27] explains that “al-Nadim
had no high opinion of Alchemy or of its adepts.

Of a contemporary alchemist who was credited with having been
successful, he tells us that he never found him otherwise than in
straitened circumstances and dirty by reason of the chemical work he was
in the habit of doing.” We can now appreciate the wealth of praise due
to Jabir. Hopkins rightly showers praises upon Jabir, the Master, who
infused into his people a spirit for experimentation which raised the
status of Muslim alchemists so much above others that later historians,
like Schneider,[^28] could admit that “it is certain that no other
people have pursued alchemy with so much per­sistent zeal as the Arabs.”
The special urge on the part of the Arabs to devote to alchemy would be
apparent from what follows.

Kimiya.-Man's earlier medicines came from the plant world; herbalism was
then the system of medicine. From this developed the notion that herbs
could even make man immortal. The Aryans idealized the soma plant, the
Iranians called it homa; the Chinese believed in the mushroom chip; and
the Hebrews in the tree of life. Late in this period must be reckoned
the belief in a gold-making-plant juice or kim-iya in the Hakka dialect
of South China, the original of the Arabic term ki-miya.[^29]

How Kimiya worked.-The ancient religion of man was animism. Every
substance, including trees and stones, was believed to have a body and a
soul, and to be alive potentially. The soul was a highly refined matter,
like a perfume, and it came from the sun. It was more of energy than
matter, like light, which, according to some physicists, has a
corpuscular nature. The soul in turn was an emanation of the cosmic
positive energy, called yang, in Chinese, meaning light, while in the
universe there was also negative energy, called yin, meaning darkness.
Matter was frozen yin energy, and it was difficult to convert matter
into energy.

Matter and spirit could form only a temporary union or mixture. But if
matter received the impact of an energizing principle it was changed
into reactive negative energy which would then unite with the positive
energy, and the result would be a real compound or a permanent union.
Even a drop of the gold-making juice was taken to be bubbling with yang
energy so that if a coin of copper was heated with it its ineffective
soul was expelled and the material body or copper was transformed into
negative energy, and it combined with the soul or positive energy from
the plant juice to make the resultant gold. Here the donor is
exceptionally rich in yang energy and the ultimate transmutation of
metal is due to it.

Further, the donor belongs to the plant world. In countries like China
and India, with their rich flora, alchemists did depend upon fresh herbs
for the transformations they wished to bring about. This being denied to
an alchemist like Jabir, he exploited mainly, if not entirely, minerals
and metals instead; hence the importance given to inorganic raw
materials and metals in the works of Arabian alchemists. Instead of
kimiya, inorganic pre­parations called iksirs were used.

Ruh.-It is necessary to describe how the minds of the alchemists worked
in preparing a simple substance such as rich (soul, spirit, or essence).
Every substance, they must have felt, has a soul which remains like a
tenant tem­porarily in the substance, the container of the soul. On
heating the soul can be made to leave the body; on distilling the soul
can be recovered more or less concentrated in the distillate. Thus a
rose gives out its soul or ruh. The flower is now a dead body and the
soul is its perfume or essence. When such an essence or rult is taken as
a drug it temporarily strengthens the body of the user, like
blood-transfusion or an injection of glucose. The donor here gives only
one of the two elements; the material body, the flower, is discarded.
When the soul of the flower is introduced into the body of an­other
receiver it is like the temporary transmigration of the soul which must
repeat at every stage if the soul is not to disappear in space.

Iksir.-Transmigration implies that the soul and the body do not come
from the same source, the two are not permanently united, the balance
be­tween the positive energy contained in the foreign soul and the
potentially negative energy existing in its present container is not
ideal. All that is re­quired is to convert the body into negative energy
and reunite with it the soul previously separated from it. This is a
regular art. For example, take common salt. It does not sublime. Now, if
re-crystallized and mixed with alcohol, just as roses were mixed with
water, and the mixture distilled, the essence of common salt evaporates
along with the volatile vehicle, alcohol. The distillate is added again
to the residual salt in the distilling vessel and the process of
rectification is continued. A stage comes when all the salt becomes
fluid, leaving no solid residue. This is the iksir of common salt.

The body, the material vehicle, has by now been converted into reactive
energy, negative in character, and its soul, as the positive energy, has
combined with it into an inseparable whole. Salt is a mixture of a
material body, or of potential negative energy, and a soul, the positive
energy. Its iksir contains a permanent union or compound of positive
energy coming from the soul and reactive negative energy or the
transformed material body.

Technically, two processes were most necessary: distillation in the
first instance, to isolate the soul, the essence, or the positive
element, and calcination, to purify the material vehicle, in order to
convert the potential energy into the reactive negative element. Melting
of metals is a very minor operation. In the case of an active
gold-making plant juice, calcining of copper is limited to gentle
heating. In the case of iksir of common salt no separate calcining is
necessary, repeated distillation incorporates it. It is clear by now
that rids or spirit contains one element only, the positive. Iksir
contains two, the positive element and the negative one. Each of them
belongs to the same substance and as such must necessarily contain
enough quanta of both to balance like exact opposites or rather like
exact supplements.

When iksir results, the substance becomes a spirituous preparation,
sublimable, volatile, atomized, or potentized. Now being all energy, it
represents a permanent union, inseparable for ever. When taken as a drug
it makes the patient like itself, tending to become permanent.
Naturally, according to the original substance, the total energy content
in different cases differs and iksirs also vary in their pharmacological
properties. In any case an iksir is stronger than the spirit or rich.
Whereas kimiya is a natural substance, iksir is an artificial one. To
meddle with the gold-making juice in any way would be to destroy its
virtues, whereas iksirs can be pro­duced only by chemical processes,
above all by distillation and calcination.

Because substances like common salt are made to distil along with
alcohol, such heterogeneous mixtures as contained alcohol were probably
called “elixirs” by European alchemists of the Middle Ages. It will be
apparent why Jabir talked mostly, if not solely, of iksir and not of
kintiya, its synonym. How iksir has been made to come from the Greek
word, kseron, merely meaning dry, cannot be explained. By constitution
iksir was taken to be the purified body with its soul returned to it. It
was a revived body and a returned soul, where the two, on becoming
identical, represented a third substance.

The picture was essentially the same as that of man after resurrection.
The soul would return to the dead body which would revive and
henceforward remain immortal. But the revived person would be a regular
mutation, his body feeling neither thirst nor hunger. He would be like a
spirit or ghost with a body no longer composed of matter. Iksir
represents such a substance, material to look at but in fact become
energy, and, what is important, also a donor of energy.

Whatever the substance iksir may have been, its uses mainly decide its
virtues. Jabir prepared iksirs from one substance after another and as
an indefatigable worker could not avoid studying the properties of
inorganic acids into which he tried to dissolve his metals to purify
them, instead of melting them alone or along with other metals. In India
the metals were never purified by the use of inorganic acids but mainly
by calcining them with boiled extracts of herbs. In order to have
substitute a plant extracts or organic acids Jabir prepared inorganic
acids not for their own sake but for making iksirs. His experiments
spread over a wide range of substances. The preparations resulting from
them must have maintained Jabir's enthusiasm and made him a master.
Holmyard,[^30] a chemist and an author of standard text-books on
chemistry, after a careful study of Jabir, rightly states that “like
painting which reached its highest pitch of perfection while still in
its infancy, Islamic alchemy never surpassed the level it attained with
one of its exponents, Jabir ibn Hayyan.” We can represent him as a noble
soul, seeing diseases all over, finding no herbs to treat them with, and
so taking with a vengeance to minerals as the only source of supplying
remedies. Enthusiasm born under such circumstances, incorporating the
personality of the worker and the poverty of the country reacting upon
it, resulted in the achievement with which the world today remembers the
name of Jabir.

Those who do not know what iksirs mean, certainly not mere powders,
cannot imagine the deep urge for or high aim in making them. At every
stage we have to remember that Jabir was an ascetic-bachelor and a
mystic-Sufi; acquisition of wealth or making of bullion gold could never
have been his motive. In the absence of the right perspective much
energy has been wasted in trying to separate historical data from
Jabirian legends. What is still required is to isolate alchemy proper
from Jabir's writings. Writers on alchemy, rather on Alexandrian
alchemy, have rightly attached full importance to the early record of
the word chemeia.

Likewise, in dealing with the history of Muslim contribution to alchemy
we feel that the introduction of the word iksir played an even more
significant role. Jabir apparently used it for the first time and
demonstrated its claims. Paracelsus is credited with having founded
iatro-chemistry or having taught that the real aim of alchemy was to
prepare medicines and not to make gold. Jabir would have been surprised
to hear that alchemy was anything but that, and his iksirs anything but
highly potent, we may say, omnipotent and multipurpose drugs. Kraus[^31]
has translated from Arabic into German a text revealing what iksir can
prove to be; an extract from it has also been rendered into English by
Holmyard.[^32] Harun al-Rashid’s ministers belonged to the Barmakid
family.

One of them, Yahya, was much devoted to a lady in his harem. She fell
ill. The case ultimately became so hopeless that Jabir was sent for. The
report” as coming from Jabir himself maintains: “I had a certain elixir
with me, so I gave her a draught of two grains of it in three ounces of
vinegar and honey and in less than half an hour she was as well as ever.
And Yahya fell at my feet and kissed them, but I said, \`Do not do so, O
my brother!' And he asked about the uses of the elixir and I gave him
the remainder of it and explained how it was employed, whereupon he
applied himself to the study of science and persevered in it until he
knew many things.” Having demonstrated such a dramatic achievement it is
impossible for any sane person to have found interest in making gold
instead. Jibir's alchemy consisted only in preparing iksirs or
wonder-drugs which were more precious than gold.

The Philosophers' Stone (Hajr Mukarram).-The preparation which marks the
zenith of alchemical achievement is the Benevolent Stone (hair mukar.
rang). The alchemists called themselves philosophers or Ilakima as
opposed to physicians or,tabibs. The Alchemists' Stone was correctly
paraphrased as the Philosophers' Stone. This is the genesis of the term.
In the historical survey of the chemical arts of China by Li,[^33] we
read that “Chin-tan, an alchemical term in Chinese, first appearing in
Pao-p'u tzu (a work composed about 317-332 A. D.), comes to refer to a
drug or elixir which was prepared by the alchemists for prolonging life
and transmuting metals. It reminds us of the Philosophers' Stone because
this was considered to have the same effect as Chin-tan.... The language
of the ancient alchemists is very hard to understand [a con­fession
recalling the judgment of ibn Khaldun upon Jabir]. It is supposed that
Chin-tan may have consisted of mercury, sulphur, lead, etc., a com­pound
or mixture prepared in accordance with a theory not unlike that of
Jabir, who supposed that every metal contained mercury and sulphur.” The
admission seems to be to the effect that the theory, that metals are
com­posed of mercury and sulphur, did exist in China but in a vague
form.

Taking the simpler notion first, with Jabir all metals including gold
were composed of mercury and sulphur. Davis[^34] states that, “for the
Chinese alchemists, positive yang was lead instead of sulphur; negative
yin was mercury.” Jabir died in about 184/800. The Chinese alchemist,
Chang Po-tuan,[^35] living later in 373-475/983-1082, still maintained
the ancient Chinese theory that “our fellow workers must be able to
recognize true lead and mercury.” It is, there­fore, clear that Jabir
borrowed a theory as known to the Chinese but improved upon it, keeping
mercury as the one element and changing the other from lead to sulphur.

The surprising feature of the Sulphur/Mercury theory about the origin of
metals is that it has not been challenged by experimenters who have
melted metals, calcined them, and even sublimated at least arsenic and
mercury compounds. That they should have believed that iron consisted of
sulphur and mercury, and that even gold consisted of the same elements,
has received no explanation so far. The primitive man accepted blood as
the life-giving principle and further believed that its red pigment was
the real agent. Thus redness was taken to be the active principle so
that any red substance could generate blood. Of all red substances
cinnabar was the nearest approach to blood in colour.

When it was established by actual synthesis that cinnabar consists of
mercury and sulphur, its elements came to be considered to be the
elements of all metals. Animism assumed that even metals were living
things, having a soul as well as a body. When negative energy freezes it
becomes matter and the body of the metal consists of it. The soul is
represented by the positive element, one which is sublimable so that it
can permeate the material body. Lead is not volatile, sulphur is; hence
the Lead/Mercury theory was essentially defective and the justification
of the Sulphur/Mercury modification.

Further, lead and mercury do not produce a red compound, while sulphur
and mercury do. But if Jabir's theory is a modification of a previous
Chinese theory, how is it that in its original form it accepted lead and
mercury as the elements of metals? What was required as the end-product
was redness, and theorizing depended upon this result. Lead heated by
itself oxidizes in the air to red lead or minium. Likewise, mercuric
oxide is obtained as red, orange, or yellow powder, consisting of minute
crystals. Thus, the Chinese theory was, indeed, properly conceived, but
it failed to include a spirituous element like sulphur, while lead
obviously was not.

Alchemy as a philosophical system is based on a dualism, postulating
that everything consists of two elements, of light (yang in Chinese) and
darkness (yin). When the metals were ascribed their constitution,
sulphur and mercury came to be taken respectively as positive (yang)'and
negative (yin) elements. And the realistic basis of this theory, as has
been explained, came from the actual knowledge of what constituted
cinnabar and the identification of cinnabar with blood. When the cosmic
forces, yang and yin, are in perfect balance, it means yin exists as a
negative creative energy and not as frozen matter, while yang naturally
always remains spirituous; the result of their union is like that of two
substances, identical in nature but oppositely charged, like positive
and negative electricity.

The resultant is everlasting. Pure sulphur and pure mercury are imagined
to be existing as energy, even though they may not appear to be so, and
their resultant, when ideal or when the two are per­fectly balanced,
means an everlasting union, which is gold. According to another tenet of
animism, like makes like; gold, the everlasting metal, as a drug makes
the consumer also immortal. Gold remaining in mines for millions of
years loses this property of donation, its negative element, mercury,
having become less spirituous or more material; hence gold, as a drug,
must be freshly pre­pared.

Better still it must be in a stage prior to its becoming gold, so to
say, in a nascent stage when it is the iksir of gold, a ferment-like
substance which will convert any metal into gold. This is the
Philosophers' Stone, converting matter into energy, energizing the
material or the negative element until it comes to the same level as its
positive or spirituous element.

We, thus, see that rich or spirit consists of only the positive element,
the soul; and iksir consists of two elements, the positive element and
the purified material element sublimated into reactive negative energy.
Philosophers' Stone is double iksir; it consists of sulphur as a
substance, which has a body and a soul (or failing sulphur, its
substitute, say lead), and mercury as a substance, likewise with two
elements of its own, its body and soul. In all, there are two purified
bodies and two souls returned to their respective bodies.

The question now arises that if there are four elements compounded to
form a fifth substance, why not another which is double that of the
Philo­sophers' Stone. There are only four cosmic elements-heat, cold,
dryness, and humidity. The body and soul of sulphur and the body and
soul of mercury represent all these four cosmic elements; hence, between
themselves, mercury and sulphur fully represent the cosmic force, the
highest imaginable.

We have seen that Islamic alchemy was almost non-existent at Damascus.
Baghdad produced its first two masters without whom there would perhaps
have been no alchemy in the Islamic world. If alchemy at Damascus meant
an importation from Alexandria, alchemy at Baghdad was an importation
from Khurasan, which in turn was really an importation from China. Now
two sub­stances used by Jabir reveal the alchemy which he borrowed and
upon which he improved. Ammonium chloride has played a very important
role in al­chemical preparations to which Stapleton[^36] devotes a
special monograph.

From Holmyard[^37] we learn that Jabir's “is one of the earliest Arabic
mentions of sal-ammoniac which for a time was imported from inner Asia.
Jabir, how­ever, knew how to prepare it from organic matter.” Inner Asia
is a vague term which makes it difficult for the reader to locate the
actual source of the product. However, Stapleton[^38] explains that the
Arabic word, nushadar, for sal-ammoniac, is a loan word-from Chinese.
The origin of the product is thereby assured.

Another substance Jabir used is what he named khar sini. Holmyard[^39]
comments, “Muslim writers say that it was used in China to make mirrors.
According to Laufer, it was an alloy composed of copper, zinc, and
nickel, known as pai-t'ung in Chinese, or white-copper.” Khar is salt
and a loan-word in Arabic. It cannot be made to express any metal or
alloy. An alloy compar­able with pai-t'ung is called bidri in India,
consisting of copper, lead, and zinc in the ratios of 1:1:16. To give it
a dark surface, sodium sulphate is used. A similar salt may be used for
giving a metallic white surface to a different alloy of copper and zinc.
In fact, it is easier to give it a metallic shine than to make it dull
black. This salt of Chinese origin further points to the source of
Jabir's alchemy.

Jabir being a mystic incorporates numerology into his alchemy, a fact
discussed by some writers, above all by Stapleton[^40] According to him,
the square with the nine cells was found as a motif near Nineveh as
early as 4000 B.C. But in China also from at least the seventh century
B.C., if not actually from the eleventh century B.C., the nine rooms of
the square of the Imperial Temple had assigned to them the first nine
numbers arranged in the actual order of these numbers in the simplest
Magic Square. Even Jabir's numerology can thus be safely classed as
Chinese in origin.

The Emerald Table of Hermes.-Among Jabir's writings, Holmyard first
discovered in 1342/1923 the Arabic original of the famous Latin work
bearing the above name. It deals with the phenomenon of change in
nature, a typical Taoist idea, couched in phrases like those used in the
following quotation from it: “That which is above is like that which is
below and that which is below is like that which is above.” Such
mystical statements are more deco­rative than illustrative in any other
context.

Turba Philosophorum.-A Latin work of this title was very popular with
European alchemists. It contained many names which were cited by Jabir
in one of his books. On that account Ruska, in 1352/1933, proved that
there should be an Arabic original of the Turba and this was confirmed
by Stapleton by indicating that a fourth/tenth-century authority, ibn
'Umail (see later) quoted passages from it. Plessner having studied the
problem exhaustively says, as quoted by Holmyard,[^41] that “it is the
three-fold result of the cosmo­logical discussion, the Qur'anic
Creator-God, the unified world, the four elements (heat, cold, dryness,
and humidity) that gives the discussion its clear direction towards the
chief subject of the Turba, alchemy.” From the contents of the two
classical works of medieval alchemy, the Turba and the Emerald Table,
incorporated in Jabir's writings, the reputation he enjoyed in the
Middle Ages can be easily visualized.

Al-Razi (c. 251-313/865-925).-Engaged as he was in preparing elixirs,
Jabir was called upon as a consultant to use them when ordinary drugs
had proved ineffective. On the contrary, abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariya
al-Razi, an account of whose philosophy has been given in Volume I
(Chapter XXII) of the present work, was a physician by profession. At
the age of thirty lie went to Baghdad, where the achievements of Jabir
must have been narrated almost as miracles. Al-Razi could not but have
been inspired by the tradition existing at Baghdad in favour of Jabir's
elixirs. At Baghdad he decided to become a physician. As a Muslim
alchemist he comes next only to Jabir. His fame in the medical world
became so high that he was consulted when a hospital at Baghdad was
being extended and ulti­mately became its chief physician.

Holmyard unwittingly remarks that “like the majority of physicians of
medieval times, Razi was led to the study of alchemy.” In fact, alchemy
has been nothing else but pharmaceutical chemistry and the physicians of
those times had to prepare their own medicines. When Razi decided to
become a physician he was probably attracted by the reports about
elixirs. In other words, he became an alchemist first and a phy­sician
afterwards. Among his writings only one book dealing with alchemy has
reached us. It is entitled “The Book of the Secret of Secrets”
translated into German by Ruska.[^42] “Stapleton,” says Holmyard'[^43]
“places Razi on an intellectual level with Gallileo and Boyle.” There is
an illuminating article on al-Razi and alchemy by Heym,[^44] where we
read[^45] that “bodies are com­posed of invisible elements and of empty
space that lay between them. These atoms were eternal and possessed a
certain size.” The statement reminds us of the modern explanation of the
structure of crystals.

Razi accepted Jfibir's Sulphur-Mercury theory of the constitution of
metals but Heym says that “in the same way the attribute of salinity
enters into Razi's scheme.” He com­ments at the same time that “without
doubt it is here [with Razi] that the origin of the popular conceptions
of alchemy with its three elements-mer­cury, salt, and sulphur-can be
found which reappears later in Europe and plays such an important part
in the history of Western alchemy.” Without mentioning Razi's name,
Thompson[^46] writes, “This Sulphur-Mercury doctrine was accepted by
most alchemists until about the twelfth century, when the theory was
extended by the addition of a third elementary principle, to which the
name “salt” was given.

It was believed to be a basic principle which gave solidity and
resistance to fire. Mercury was considered to be the connecting link
between the spirit and the body, and the element on which depended blood
and life.” The source of the Sulphur-Mercury-Salt theory not mentioned
in Thompson is revealed by Redgrove,[^47] who writes that “Isaac
Hollandus appears to be the earliest known writer who makes mention (c.
1063/1652) of the famous Sulphur-Mercury-Salt theory.”

Thompson places the theory in the twelfth century; Redgrove, makes it
seventeenth century; while Razi, the real author of it, lived in the
third/ninth century. An explanation can also be offered as to how an
alchemist of Holland came to be credited as the pro­pounder of this
modified theory. Heym writes that “in Europe throughout the Middle Ages
until the seventeenth century, Razi's works on medicine were still part
of the curriculum at Dutch Universities.”

It has been casually indicated that alchemy as a system of thought is
based on dualism which characterizes Manichaeism and which was at its
best in China. At any rate, al-Razi was so much influenced by dualism
that Heym says, “al-Razi was also called a Manichaean,” though he gives
a different explanation for this appellation of his. Where Razi
continued the tradition of Jabir, which rightly made an appeal to the
judgment of Hopkins, was his love for practical work. Heym states that
“even though al-Razi in his alchemy was not strictly empirical in our
sense of the word, his great work mentioned above is a book of
experiments; it is a book of practical alchemy.... There it can be said
that al-Razi is the creator of a new alchemy for he seems to be the
first to have transformed theoretical alchemy into a new strictly
scientific system. Or, to be more definite, al-Razi transformed alchemy
for the first time into a new and strictly scientific system.” To a
practising physician and to one who was not a mystic like Jabir, it was
practical phase of alchemy, which was inorganic pharmaceutical chemistry
of the age that naturally appealed most.

Ibn Sinn (370-428/980-1037.)-Europeans in the Middle Ages had Latinized
the names Jabir into Geber and Razi into Rhasis or Rhazes, and these
easily passed on as those of their own masters in science and medicine.
The greatest medical authority of the Muslim world was abu 'Ali Sina
whose name was likewise adapted as Avicenna. Muslim physicians call him
the Shaikh, meaning the Prince of Physicians. His career shows nothing
revolutionary like that of Razi. He studied medicine in the routine way
and became proficient enough to treat patients even by the age of
sixteen. Being a genius he was called by one prince after another from
Bukhara to Iran and served them even as a vizier. Enjoying Court life in
every sense of the word, luxury above all, he could have hardly found
time to experiment as a pharmacist. In his classic entitled the “Canon
of Medicine,” some seven hundred and fifty drugs are mentioned, but they
are all simples or individual drugs, vegetable, animal, and mineral in
origin. None of them are of the class of high potency or synthetic
inorganic chemicals, or iksirs. In his writings alchemy is discussed but
critically. As a physician he did not use any iksir; it is out of
question that he could have believed in a substance changing base metals
into gold.

Ibn 'Umail (250-300/864-912).-In a short contribution on the subject
such as this we have to be strict in selecting the representatives of
Islamic alchemy. In doing so we have dealt with authors whose works were
translated into Latin during the Middle Ages. These are, so to say, the
masters who served as progenitors of European alchemy. Now, Davis[^48]
has tried to prove by the common contents and even the common
illustrations of the works on the subject that the alchemy of medieval
Europe is almost identical with that of China. To connect European
alchemy with that of the Chinese, it becomes necessary to place Islamic
alchemy as the real connecting link between the two. It would at once
explain a continuity of thought and give a complete sketch of the
evolution of alchemy. As depicted at present, there seem to be at least
two different systems of alchemy isolated and uncon­nected. For this
reason we wish to mention one more author whose work was translated into
Latin and printed in 1032/1622. He is ibn 'Umail. Stapleton[^49] and his
colleagues have edited 'Umail's three Arabic texts and also the Latin
translation in 1032/1622, along with copious notes which together make
the presentation a model of scholarship. When we compare 'Umail's
treatise with an original European work on alchemy, Splendor Solis, a
classic in itself, by Solomon Trismosin,[^50] composed about 990/1582,
we get the impression that the contents and even the style of
presentation are the same in both the works. The influence of alchemical
literature in Arabic on medieval European writers becomes thereby quite
evident.

Our present contribution will serve its purpose better if we indulge in
offering in modern phraseology what these alchemists were actually
after. It is a problem of science to explain how one form of energy is
converted into an­other, e.g., heat into light. Likewise, a far greater
problem, but of the same category, is to explain how matter changes into
energy and vice versa. Ibn 'Umail, like a typical alchemist, expresses
this as follows: “Turn bodies into non-bodies and non-bodies into
bodies.” Iksir was the energizing principle which could sublimate matter
into energy. This was with regard to technique only. The aim was to
energize the human body to make it immortal. When the soul is
strengthened and the body merely reconditioned and not thoroughly
purified, life is only prolonged. The agent that purifies the human body
can purify the body of a base metal as well. With a purified body man
mutates into an immortal being capable of flying about in the air, as
Davis[^51] has clearly emphasized. With the purified body a base metal
mutates into an everlasting form which is gold. Alchemical improvement
ended in the per­manency of form. Thus, the active agent behaved in one
and the same way, converting impure body into sublime energy, resulting
in man's immortality and in the synthesis of gold. This is what ibn
'Umail actually meant.

Jildaki (d. 762/1360).-The last authority we propose mentioning here is
Jildaki. One of his works, “End of Search,” has been the subject of
detailed study by Dr. M. Taslimi of Teheran-a study which was accepted
as a thesis for Doctorate by London University in 1954. Unfortunately,
the thesis has not yet been published. But Holmyard[^52] summarizes it
by saying, “That there is a great deal of similarity between the ideas
contained in the quotations of Jabir given in the 'End of Search' and
those found in the Latin works of Geber but the correspondence is not
sufficiently close to establish a definite affiliation.” Our problem has
been to find how, from author to author, alchemy has actually
progressed. After al-Razi or at the most after 'Umail we find repetition
of what had been said before in different words and with other
illustrations. No wonder that Holmyard justly observes that “after
Jildaki there is no outstanding figure in Muslim alchemy.”

Alchemy in Other Islamic Countries.-No writer to our knowledge has
spoken of alchemy by Muslims outside the schools of Damascus and
Baghdad. What about the impact of local schools of alchemy upon Muslims
living in India, Burma, Indonesia, and elsewhere? Dr. Maung Htin
Aung,[^53] Vice-Chancellor of Rangoon University, speaks as follows:
“Some members (of the Burmese Science) association may (be) also (among
those who) consider the Burmese alchemist to be a charlatan and an
impostor. But I will plead with you to spare him a sigh. Of all the
religious cults that existed in Burma before the advent of Buddhism,
alchemy was the noblest. Like modern science, Burmese alchemy aimed at
the conquest of nature, and discovering for suffering humanity a way to
preserve the human body in its vigour and beauty.” Jabrian alchemy was
certainly that and it is impossible to think that any two systems in­
corporating such ideas did not fuse.

Bibliography
------------

F. Sherwood Taylor, The Alchemists, 1951; J. W. Wilson, “Review of
Taylor's The Alchemists,” Btn. Hist. Med., 1951, Vol. XXV; J.
Gildemeister, “Alchymie,” Z. D. M. G., Vol. XXX; P. Kraus, “Jabir ibn
Hayyan,” Memoires del'Inst. Egypte, Cairo, 1945, Vols. XLIV and XLV; J.
A. Or. Soc., Vol. LXV; “Islamic Dogmatic Theology and Manichaeism,” at-
Urwa, Bombay, 1947, Vol. I; “Studien zu Jabir Ibn Hayyan,” Isis, 1931,
Vol. XV; E. J. Holmyard, “Islam and Chemistry,” Islamic World, Lahore,
1928, Vol. VI; Alchemy, Pelican Book Series, 1957; “Alchemy in Medieval
Islam,” Endeavour, 1955, Vol. XIV; J. Ruska, Arabische Alchemisten, I,
Chalid Ibn Yazid Ibn Muawiya, Heidelberg, 1924; Arabische Alche­misten,
II, Gaf ar Alsadiq, Heidelberg, 1924; Al-Razi's Buch Geheimnis der
Geheim­nisse, Berlin, 1937; “Die Alchemie des Avicenna,” Isis, 1934,
Vol. XXI; H. E. Stapleton, “Salammoniac, A Study in Primitive
Chemistry,” Mem. As. Soc. Bengal, 1905, Vol. I; “Probable Sources of the
Numbers on Which Jabrian Alchemy was Based,” Arch. Int. Hist. Sci.,1953,
Vol. XXII; H. E. Stapleton and others, “Three Arabic Treatises on
Alchemy by Muhammad Bin 'Umail,” Mem. As. Soc. Bengal, Vol. XII; E.
Wiedemann, “al-Kimiya,” Encycl. of Islam, Vol. II; E. J. Jurji,
Illumination in Islamic Mysticism, 1938; W. A. P. Martin, “Alchemy in
China,” Hanlin Papers, 1880; J. W. Fuck, “The Arabic Literature on
Alchemy according to al-Nadim,” Ambix, 1951. Vol. IV; H. H. Dubs, “The
Beginnings of Alchemy,” Isis, 1947, Vol. XXXVIII; W. Schneider, “Uber
den Ursprung des Wortes 'Chemie',” Pharm. Ind., 1959, Vol. XXI; Ibn
lihaldim, The Mugaddimah, tr. F. Rosenthal, 1958, Vol. III; C. J. S.
Thompson, The Lure and Romance of Alchemy, 1932; A. J. Hopkins, Alchemy,
Child of Greek Philosophy, 1934; Masumi Chikashige, Alchemy and Other
Chemical Achievements of the Ancient Orient, 1931; K. C. Schneider,
Geschichte der Alchemie; reprinted, 1959; Li Ch'iao-p'ing, The Chemical
Arts of Old China, 1948; T. L. Davis, “The Chinese Beginnings of
Alchemy,” Endeavour, 1943, Vol. II; Chang Po-tuan, “Essay on the
Understanding of the Truth,” tr. T. L. Davis and Chao Yun-ts'ung, Proc.
Am. Aca. Arts & Sci., 1939, Vol. LXXIII; G. Heym, “al-Razi and Alchemy,”
Ambix, 1938, Vol. I; H. S. Red­grove, Alchemy, Ancient and Modern, 1922;
E. Darmstaedter, Die Alchemie des Geber, Berlin, 1922; Maung Htin Aung,
“Burmese Alchemy Beliefs,” J. Burmese Res. Soc., 1955, Vol. XXXVI.

[^1]: F. Sherwood Taylor, The Alchemists, 1951, p. 28.

[^2]: J. W. Wilson, “Review of Taylor's The Alchemists,” Ban. Hist.
Med., 1951, Vol. XXV, No. 397.

[^3]: J. Gildemeister, ' Alchymie,” Z.D.M.G., 1876, Vol. XXX, No. 534.

[^4]: Ibid. p. 538.

[^5]: F. Sherwood Taylor, op. cit., p. 68.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 71.

[^7]: P. Kraus, “Jabir ibn Hayyan,” Memoir” del' Inst. Egypte, Cairo,
1945, Vols. XLIV and LXV.

[^8]: J. A. Or. Soc., Vol. LXV, 1945, pp. 68-70.

[^9]: E. Wiedemann, “al-Kimiya,” Encycl. of Islam, Vol. II, p. 1010.

[^10]: E. J. Jurji, Illumination in Islamic Mysticism, 1938.

[^11]: P. Kraus, “Islamic Dogmatic Theology and Manichaeism,” al-Urwa,
Bombay, 1: 34, 1947.

[^12]: W. A. P. Martin, “Alchemy in China,” Hanlin Papers 1880, p. 234.

[^13]: J. W. Fuck, “The Arabic Literature on Alchemy according to
al-Nadim,” Ambix, 1951, Vol. IV, No. 81.

[^14]: J. Ruska, Arabische Alehemisten, I, Chalid Ibn Yazid Ibn Muawiya,
Heidel­berg, 1924.

[^15]: W. A. P. Martin, op. cit., p. 234.

[^16]: H. H. Dubs, “The Beginnings of Alchemy,” Isis, Vol. XXXVIII, p.
62.

[^17]: W. Schneider, “Uber den Ursprung des Wortes 'Chemie',” Pharm.
Ind., Vol. XXI, p. 79.

[^18]: Ibn Khaldun, The llugaddimah, tr. F. Rosenthal, Vol. III, 1958.

[^19]: J. Rusks, Arabische Alchemisten, 11, Galar Alsadiq, Heidelberg,
1924.

[^20]: C. J. S. Thompson, The Lure and Romance of Alchemy, 1932, p. 59.

[^21]: A. J. Hopkins, Alchemy, Child of Greek Philosophy, 1934, p. v.

[^22]: 22 F. Sherwood Taylor, op. cit., p. 16.

[^23]: C. J. S. Thompson, op. cit., p. 168.

[^24]: Masumi Chikashige, Alchemy and Other Chemical Achievements of the
Ancient Orient, 1936, p. 1.

[^25]: E. J. Holmyard, “Islam and Chemistry,” Islamic World, Lahore,
1928, Vol. VI, p. 116.

[^26]: A. J. Hopkins, op. cit., p. 137.

[^27]: J. W. Fuck, op. cit., p. 84.

[^28]: K. C. Schneider, Oeschichte der Alchemie, reprinted, 1959, p. 82.

[^29]: W. Schneider, op. cit., p. 79.

[^30]: E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy, Pelican Book Series, 1957, p. 116.

[^31]: P. Kraus, “Studies zu Jabir ibn Hayyan,” Isis, Vol. XV, p. 22

[^32]: E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy, p. 70.

[^33]: Li Ch'iao-p'ing, The Chemical Arts of Old China, 1948, p. 16.

[^34]: T. L. Davis, “The Chinese Beginnings of Alchemy,” Endeavour, Vol.
II, pp. 154-57.

[^35]: Chang Po-tuan, “Essay on the Understanding of the Truth,” tr. T.
L. Davis and Chao Yun-ts'ung, Proc. Am. Aca. Arts & Sci., 1939, Vol.
LXXIII, p. 104.

[^36]: H. E. Stapleton, “Salammoniac, A Study in Primitive Chemistry,”
Mem. As. Soc. Bengal, Vol. I, No. 2, p. 41.

[^37]: E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy, Pelican Book Series, 1957, p. 78

[^38]: H. E. Stapleton, op. cit., p. 41.

[^39]: E. J. Holmyard, “Islam and Chemistry,” Islamic World, Lahore,
1928, Vol. VI, p. 78.

[^40]: H. E. Stapleton, “Probable Sources of the Numbers on Which
Jabrian Alchemy was Based,” Arch. Int. Hist. Sci., Vol. XXII, p. 59

[^41]: E. J. Holmyard, Alchemy, p. 83.

[^42]: J. Rusks, Al-Razi's Buch Geheimnie der Geheimnisse, Berlin, 1937.

[^43]: E. J. Hoimyard, “Islam and Chemistry,” Islamic World, Lahore,
1928, Vol. VI, p. 87.

[^44]: G. Heym, “Al-Razi and Alchemy,” Ambix, 1938.

[^45]: Ibid. Vol. I, p. 184.

[^46]: C. J. S. Thompson, op. cit., p. 69

[^47]: H. S. Redgrove, Alchemy, Ancient and Modern, 1922, p. 54.

[^48]: T. L. Davis, op. cit., p. 154.

[^49]: H. E. Stapleton and others, “Three Arabic Treatises on Alchemy by
Muham­mad Bin 'Umail,” Mem. Asia Soc. Bengal. Vol. XII, No. 1.

[^50]: E. J. Holmyard, “Alchemy in Medieval Islam,” Endeavour, 1955,
Vol. XIV, p. 117.

[^51]: T. L. Davis, op. cit., p. 154.

[^52]: E. J. Holmyard, “Alchemy in Medieval Islam,” Endeavour, 1955,
Vol. XIV, p. 117.

[^53]: Mating Htin Aung, “Burmese Alchemy Beliefs,” J. Burmese Res.
Soc., Vol. XXXVI, Part 2, p. 91


