Chapter 66: Natural History
===========================

A
-

Inasmuch as the sciences studied in any traditional civilization, that
is, one based upon a divine revelation, depend upon the metaphysical and
religious bases of that civilization, Muslim sciences have always echoed
and reflected the central Islamic doctrine of unity (tauhid). Just as
the Islamic religious and moral sciences have begun from and returned to
the idea of divine unity, the natural sciences have tried to discover
the interrelation of all created beings. It is a general feature of all
medieval cosmological sciences[^1] that they seek to express the
“unicity of all that exists.” Especially in the Muslim natural sciences
this goal has been central, and the idea of the unicity of nature and
the interrelatedness of all parts of the universe has remained as a
complement to and necessary consequence of the oneness of the Creator.

Since the most legitimate and meaningful way of studying a science is
with respect to its ultimate aim and from the point of view of those who
have cultivated it, we shall best understand the Muslim sciences if we
keep in mind that their primary aim, unlike that of the modern natural
sciences which are only analytical and quantitative, has been to arrive
at the unity lying behind the veil of multiplicity of natural forms by a
synthetic and qualitative study of nature.[^2]

This search for unity is clearly manifested in a general science like
natural history. As studied by the Muslims, natural history covers a
large number of fields and includes not only such subjects as geology,
botany, zoology, and anthropology, but also cosmogony and sacred
history[^3] Natural history means essentially the history of nature in
the vastest sense of the word, and because Muslims have never separated
the spiritual and the mundane, they have usually written natural history
within the context of sacred history as is seen so clearly in the
universal histories like those of Tabari and Mas'udi. The many allusions
in the Qur'an to natural phenomena and the fact that the verses of the
sacred book as well as the phenomena of nature are called ayat (signs)
signify that in the Islamic perspective there is a fundamental affinity
between the divine and natural orders and indicate, therefore, the
legitimacy of connecting sacred history with natural history.

The question of the “signs” of nature leads to another basic feature of
Muslim natural history. Most Muslim scientists have sought to study
nature in order to observe “signs” of the Creator in it, to witness
directly the “vestiges” of God in His handiwork.[^4] This is a feature
which seems most irritating to some modern scientists who aim to
discover only the immediate and the material causes of things. But from
the point of view of Islam, no science can be considered legitimate
which does not ultimately consider things in reference to their divine
origin and which does not take into account the transcendent cause of
all finite beings. The marvels and wonders of nature and the moral and
spiritual lessons drawn from plant and animal life mentioned by the
Muslim natural historians, which many modern historians have ridiculed,
have been from the point of view of Islam itself the most beneficial and
basic elements of natural history because they have led the reader to a
recognition of the divine agent present in nature.

The Islamic perspective is in a way very practical. The sciences which
this perspective has nourished and matured are all in a sense useful,
that is, they correspond to a basic need of man as envisaged in Islam.
They may, like agriculture, medicine, and the sciences of history and
society, be useful in the limited sense and fulfil man's physical and
social needs. Or, like logic and theology, they may be useful in
preventing people from being misled by false reasoning. Or, finally,
like the esoteric doctrines of Sufism, they may be useful in quenching
the thirst for spiritual realization of the few, who seek God here and
now. But Islam has never considered simple curiosity or intellectual
pas­sion either a virtue or a basic need of man and for this reason has
never legitimized a science based only on curiosity.[^5] The desire of
natural historians to learn moral and spiritual lessons from the
phenomena of nature is, there­fore, legitimate from the point of view of
Islam because it is spiritually meaningful and fulfils a need, whereas
finding the weight of a certain leaf of a tree to be so many grams is
from this point of view a secondary and un­important inquiry unless it
leads to higher knowledge. The modern criticism of Muslim natural
historians on this point is, therefore, unjust and based on a
misapprehension of their point of view.

There is yet another aspect of Muslim natural history which is difficult
to understand from the modern point of view. It is the description of
strange animals and plants and magical properties of nature which the
medieval authors seem to have recorded so credulously. One finds similar
accounts in ancient books like Pliny's Historia Naturalia. The creatures
described in these texts, which appear strange today, are of several
types. One type is of strange animals, especially sea animals, which
could certainly have existed but later became very rare or extinct and
the description of which, therefore, seems fantastic now for they can no
longer be observed. Another type is of animals and plants like the
dragon, unicorn, and mandarine, which originally had symbolic meaning
only, but the symbolism of which in certain cases was so forgotten that
they came to be erroneously described as living creatures.[^6]

As to the apparent frequency of “strange” phenomena within nature and
the innocence with which medieval authors recorded them, it must be
noted that the minds of those people were not as “hardened” as those of
the moderns, and that nature in turn then was not taken to be so “dense”
and “coagulated” and far separated from its psychic aspect as now.[^7]
Therefore, while reading ancient and medieval texts it should be kept in
mind that just as the people of those ages, like the people of certain
parts of Asia, Africa, and America today, regarded nature from a point
of view different from that of modern science, nature also revealed an
aspect of itself to them different from that which it reveals to those
moderns whose mental constitution is no longer capable of receiving
nature's more subtle elements. There is, of course, much misinformation
due to narrative and exaggerated style characteristic of the poetic mind
of many Muslims. But on the whole most of the contents of Muslim natural
history can be understood in terms either of direct observation of
physical realities or of symbolism, i. e., the description of the subtle
aspects of nature the reality of which is not in any way affected
because the modern quantitative sciences refuse to consider it from
their own peculiar point of view.

B
-

Types of writings which contain material on natural history,
particularly on plants and animals that form the centre of our interest
in this chapter, are quite diverse. Muslim authors have rarely had a
taste for over-specialization so that one finds a discussion of the
plant and the animal kingdoms not only in scientific texts but also in
literary, historical, philosophical, and theological works. More
specially, the sources for natural history include the writings of
historians, geographers and travellers, physicians, alchemists,
philosophers, encyclopedists, cosmographers, moralists, theologians, and
Sufis, and, of course, authors writing specifically on the subject of
natural history.

The Tarikh al- Reful w-al-Muluk, the universal history of Tabari, the
Kitab al-Buldan, the book of countries of Ya\`qubi, the Kitab al-Bad'
w-al-Tarikh of Maqdisi, the Muruj al-Dhahab and Kitab al-Tanbih
w-al-ishraf of Mas\`udi, the Tarikh-i Jahan-gusha of Juwaini, and the
geography of abu 'Abd Allah ibn al-Idrisi, all dealing with history and
geography, contain valuable sections on natural history. Moreover, they
provide, on the one hand, the perspective of time in the light of which
Muslims have viewed the life of all creatures, a time stretching between
the creation and the final annihilation of the universe on the Last Day,
and, on the other, they mention the geographical setting, the seven
climates, and other terrestrial conditions which form the matrix of
natural history.[^8] They demonstrate, further, how closely the study of
plants and animals is bound up with that of the other parts of the
universe, both terrestrial and celestial,[^9] and how the history of
nature is intrinsically related with the history of man as well as with
sacred history.

Another source for the knowledge of natural history comes from the many
books of travel which survive from that period of Islamic history when
the Muslim world was still more or less united and travelling from one
place to another was easy. The accounts of the travels of abu al-Hasan
al-Maghribi, ibn Jubair, Biruni, Nasir Khusrau, and ibn Battutah, to
mention a few names, provide a wealth of information on plants and
animals which these men observed themselves or the accounts of which
they heard from others. The interpretation which they gave to their
observations varied greatly, depending on their knowledge and experience
as travellers. One often finds simple description as in the case of
Maghribi, or detailed physical observation and inference based upon it
as in the case of Biruni, or philosophical and metaphysical reflection
upon natural forms as is found in the writings of Nasir Khusrau.

Besides these land travellers, there were several ocean travellers like
Sulai­man the Merchant, who in the third/ninth century journeyed by sea
to the coast of China and described many of the wonders of the Indian
Ocean and the Chinese coast, and Shihab al-Din ibn Majid, Sulaiman ibn
Mahri, and Phi Ra'is, who in the ninth/fifteenth and tenth/sixteenth
centuries travelled extensively through the Mediterranean Sea and Indian
Ocean and gave a detailed description of these areas. The accounts of
sea animals found in books of natural history and the fables of the sea
encountered so often in Arabian Nights, Sindbad Nameh, and other
collections of stories, both Arabic and Persian, were originally taken
from the accounts of the sea travels of merchants, adventurers, and
occasionally military men who roamed the then known extremities of the
world.

Another source of natural history, considered from quite another aspect
of our subject, is medicine. Muslim medicine, the heir both to the Greek
and to the Indian science of medicine, has always had a general theory
of living beings; nearly all medical treatises have included in their
introduction a general treatment of the constitution (mizdj) of animals,
which provides a major source of information for the internal structure
of animals and the functioning of their organs [^10]Moreover, since much
of the treatment of diseases in Muslim medicine is based on plants,
medical books have usually contained sections on pharmacology treating
of the medical properties of plants. In fact, one may say that, apart
from the metaphysical and philosophical study of plants and animals,
most of Muslim research in botany and zoology has been in the service of
pharmacology, agriculture, medicine, and animal husbandry. The important
medical treatises like 'Ali al-Tabari's Firdaus al-Hikmah (The Paradise
of Wisdom), Muhammad Zakariya Razi's al-Hdmi (Continens), and ibn Sina's
Qdnun (Canon) contain important chapters on zoology and botany.

Alchemy, a subject closely allied to medicine and botany in ancient
times and later identified more with the study of the mineral kingdom,
has also much to contribute to natural history. In Chinese alchemy we
find a close link between the elixir and the plant life; certain modern
scholars have even suggested that the Arabic word kimiya itself, from
which the English word alchemy is derived, comes from the Chinese
Chin-Ia, meaning the gold­making juice of a plant.[^11]Whatever the
validity of this theory may be, there is no doubt that plant and animal
symbolism has a major role to play in alchemy as the writings of so many
alchemists like Jabir ibn Hayyan or in the Western world Flamel and
Basil Valentine demonstrate. In Muslim alchemy certain authors like
Jabir have written specific treatises on plants and animals dealing with
their hidden and “occult” qualities[^12] Authors writing on the esoteric
sciences (al-'ulum al-gharibah), like Jabir, Shams al-Din al-Buni, and
Jildaki have all written treatises dealing with the psychic and symbolic
aspects of both plants and animals and their influence on man's
physical, psychic, and spiritual life.

The philosophers have also treated plants and animals in their general
consideration of the world of “generation and corruption,” to use the
termino­logy of Aristotle. It must be kept in mind that medieval
philosophy is based upon the idea of hierarchy and the chain of Being
which begins from the One and through the angelic and intellectual
orders descends to material manifestations, to rise once again through
the mineral, plant, and animal kingdoms to the origin of all things. The
philosophers, especially the systematic Peripatetics (Masha'iyun),
therefore, have always entered into a discussion of plants and animals
from the point of view of their place in the great chain of being. We
find examples of this type of discussion not only in the Peripatetics
like Farabi, ibn Sina, and ibn Rushd but also in the philosophers of the
Illumi­nationist (ishraqi) school like Suhrawardi Maqtul and Mulla
Sadra, and in Sunni and hi\`ah theologians like al-Qhazali and ghwajah
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi. The most detailed and profound scientific account
of plants and animals in these philosophical treatises appears in ibn
Sina's Shifa' (Sulfcientia), the greatest encyclopedia of philosophy and
sciences ever written by one man. Here, ibn Sina deals not only with the
place of plants and animals in the cosmic hierarchy but also with their
morphology, genesis, and growth. Sections seven and eight of the Shifa'
on natural philosophy (Tabi\`iyat) are among the most important pages of
medieval natural history.

Writings similar to the Shifa in the universality of their
subject-matter, but not so strictly systematized, are a number of
encyclopedias which have been popular from the very early centuries of
Islam. We find an early example of these in the Book of Treasures of Job
of Edessa written at the end of the second Islamic century.[^13] More
important works are the Rasa'il of the Ikhwan al-Safa containing a
wealth of information on plants and also on animals drawn from Indian,
Persian, and Greek sources and integrated into a vast metaphysical and
philosophical panorama.[^14]

Also of great importance for natural history is the encyclopedia of
Mustaufi Qazwini entitled Nuzhat al-Qulub (Delights of the Heart),
written in Persian in the eighth/fourteenth century, which includes
sections on plants and animals.[^15]

Other works of this kind include the Kitab al-Await (Book of Primordial
Knowledge) and al-Nuqayat al-Usud al-Muhimmah li 'Ulum Jammah (the
encyclopedia of sciences) of 'Abd al­-Rahman al-Suyuti, the
ninth/fifteenth-century historian, and the Kashf al-­Zunun (The Clearing
of Doubts) of Haji Khalifah dealing mostly with scholars of all types
including scientists of the medieval period. All these encyclopedias
contain some sections on plants and animals while some like the Nuzhat
al- Qulub and the Rasa'il have large chapters devoted specifically to
natural history.

Works on cosmography are in a way similar to encyclopedias, but usually
they do not cover as many subjects. Moreover, they are concerned more
directly with the creation of the world and its subsequent development
as well as with the wonders of nature. This genre of writing became
popular especially during the later centuries, the most famous examples
being the \`Aja'ib al-Makhluqat (The Wonders of Creation) of abu Yahya
Zakariya al-Qazwini and the Nuhbat al-Dahr (Choice of the Times) of
Shams al-Din al-Dimashqi, both written in the seventh/thirteenth
century. These works represent a combination of natural history and
mythology and provide an excellent example of the attitude of the Muslim
mind, which takes nature to be as displaying at every turn the power and
wisdom of the Creator.

To mention all the sources for natural history, one should include the
moral, theological, and Sufistic texts in which the life and qualities
of plants and animals are studied with the aim of learning a moral and
spiritual lesson from them. Such use of natural history, particularly of
the life of animals, is very frequent in Oriental literature as for
example in the Kalilah wa Dimnah,[^16] the Shah

Nameh of Firdausi, the Thousand and One Nights, and the Gulistan of
Sa'di. Likewise, in certain theological texts animals are discussed in
the light of their moral virtues. The famous Kitab al-Hayawan (Book of
Animals) of at­Jaliiz is above all a theological and moral discussion
about animals.[^17] In Sufi writings also, plants and animals are
discussed in the light of their cosmic qualities and in relation to the
initiate's (salik's) journey through the cosmos. In these works plants
and animals appear primarily in the light of their symbolic aspects
which represent realities of a universal order. The Mathnawi of Maulanaa
Jalal al-Din Rumi is particularly rich in this respect. There is also
the Mantiq at-tair (Conference of the Birds) of Farid al-Din \`Attar in
which the whole spiritual quest of the Sufi disciple for the divine
presence is presented in the language of thirty birds, each symbolizing
a particular spiritual type.

Finally, among writings dealing with natural history, there are works
devoted almost exclusively to plants and animals, [^18]constituting
perhaps the most important sources of our knowledge of natural history.
We mention here a few of these texts. These works concern agriculture,
pharmacology, and botany, all dealing with plants, and zoology and
animal husbandry.

In agriculture, the Filahat al-Nabattyyah (Nabataean Agriculture) of ibn
Wabshiyyah is the most influential of all Muslim works on the subject.
Written in the third/ninth century and drawn mostly from Chaldaean and
Babylonian sources, the book deals not only with agriculture but also
with the esoteric sciences, especially magic and sorcery, and has always
been considered to be one of the important books in Arabic on the occult
sciences. [^19] The agricultural section of the work was systematized
and elaborated by ibn 'Awwam in the sixth/twelfth century in his Kitab
al-Falaltalt (Book of Agriculture) which is perhaps the most important
Muslim work on agriculture. Ibn \`Awwam describes over five hundred
plants and fruit trees mostly from the point of view of their
agricultural properties. These two works contain the experience of
centuries of agriculture by the people of the Middle East and offer a
great deal of descriptive material on the life of plants and animals.

In botany itself, early Arabic poetry has much descriptive material to
offer. There were also many early works of a systematic nature most of
which have now been lost. One of the most important of these early books
was the Kitdb al-Nabdt (The Book of Plants) of abu Hanifah al-Dinawari
(the celebrated third/ninth-century historian and scholar) of which only
fragments have survived.[^20] Among later writings in which pharmacology
and botany proper are combined, the most famous works are the Kitab
al-Adwiyat al-Mujradah (The Book of Simple Drugs) of abu Ja'far
al-Ghafiqi'[^21] the writings of the seventh/thirteenth-century
Andalusian author, ibn al-Baitar, the best of all Muslim botanists,[^22]
and the Hadiqat al-Azhar fi Sharh Maziyat al-'Ushb w-al­'Aqqar (Garden
of Flowers in the Explanation of the Character of Herbs and Drugs) of
the tenth/sixteenth-century Moroccan author, Qasim al-ahhassani.

In zoology, the Manafi' al-Hayawan (The Benefits of Animals), by abu
Sa'id Bakhtishu', and the treatises on various wild and domestic animals
by Asma'i are among the earliest works on animals. To this early period
belongsalso the Kitab al-Hayawan (Book of Animals) of al-Jahiz, the
celebrated Mu'tazilite theologian and philologist. Being one of the most
famous works of Arabic literature, this book, written in the third/ninth
century, combines the account of the life of animals with tales,
anecdotes, theological discussions, and frequent quotations from Arabic
poetry. The sources of this book include the Qur'an, the Hadith, and
Arabic poetry, especially pre-Islamic poetry, which last contains many
descriptions of animals that al-Jahiz often quotes to refute Greek
authors, personal observations of Aristotle, and information collected
from various travellers.

Hayat al-Hayawan (Life of Animals) of Kamal al-Din al-Damiri, written
five centuries after al- Jahiz, came to be acknowledged as the most
important Muslim work on zoology, especially on animal psychology. It
was based to a large extent upon the book of al-Jahiz as well as on the
writings of the inter­vening encyclopedists and cosmographers already
mentioned. Al-Damiri's is the most comprehensive work of its kind in
Arabic literature and has, there­fore, been taught and studied
extensively since the date of its composition.

C
-

The philosophical point of view in terms of which plants and animals
have been studied by the great majority of the above-mentioned authors
is nearly the same and is one derived mostly from the Greeks,
particularly from Aristotle. According to this view, the universe is
divided into two parts: the heavens and the world of change or
generation and corruption; the latter occupies the sublunary region.
This region is made of four elements, fire, air, water, and earth,[^23]
arranged in concentric spheres with fire at the highest and earth at the
lowest sphere. These elements combine in various ratios and when a
correct proportion is reached, one of the faculties of the world-soul or
nature, as some authors have called it, joins them together into a
nexus[^24] and by this wedding, minerals, plants, and animals come into
being, each having been brought about by the coming into play of a new
faculty of the world-soul or, as some have called it, a new soul.
[^25]All the kingdoms of nature are, therefore, united in having been
made of the same four elements and given life by souls or faculties
which belong to the same single power called the world-soul or nature
running through all the arteries and veins of the universe.

As minerals, plants, and animals lie in the hierarchical order of Being,
they also come into existence by means of causes which are dependent
upon other orders of creation, although these causes may appear to be
hidden.[^26] The causes are the four already mentioned by Aristotle,
namely, the material, the formal, the efficient, and the final. The
material cause for plants consist of the four elements; the formal
cause, the set of planetary influences symbolizing various cosmic
intelligences and forces which are instrumental in sublunary changes;
the efficient cause, nature or the world-soul; and the final cause,
which last is their use by animals as food.[^27] The causes for animals
are the same except that their final cause is their use by man.[^28]

The plants have the powers of the mineral soul (rise \`aqdiyyah) as well
as those of the vegetative soul (al-nafs al-nabatiyyah) which is
possessed of the three faculties of feeding (ghadha'iyyah), growth
(namiyyah), and reproduc­tion (muunllidah).[^29] The animals in turn
possess all the faculties of the mineral and vegetative souls as well as
the powers of motion (muharrikah) and comprehension (mudrikah). The
animal faculties may be summarized as follows[^30]:

The classification of plants and animals is closely allied with the
study of their faculties and is based in certain cases upon the
hierarchy of the powers of the soul mentioned above. Muslim authors have
followed several principles of classification, some drawn from
Aristotle, especially in the case of animals, and some devised by them
independently.[^31]

The plants have been divided usually into trees, shrubs, grass, and
those intermediate between trees and shrubs and shrubs and grass. A most
extensive discussion of this division is found in the seventh section of
the Tabl'iyat of the Shifa' where each type is clearly defined; for
example, the tree is defined as a plant which stands on its stem or
trunk, the shrub the stem of which spreads over the earth, and the grass
or herb that which has no stem. Ibn Sina divides plants also according
to the climates of regional territories in which they grow, that is, of
the desert, of the semi-tropical regions, etc.

In Mustaufi Qazwini's Nuzhat al-Qulub a distinction is made between
trees of which only the leaves and fruit are renewed yearly and the
seed-bearing plants of which everything changes every year except the
roots. The trees are divided into those that bear fruit and those that
do not [^32] Furthermore, the seed-bearing plants are divided into the
four classes of aliments (aqhdhiyah): (i) those which are daily used for
food and create one of the four humours (akhlat)-cold, warm, dry, or
moist-that soon becomes a part of the body; (ii) medicines and spices
only a little of which can be eaten for medical purposes and which are
mostly cold and wet; (iii) perfumes (mashmumat) which have a good odour
and are derived mostly from flowers; and (iv) miscellaneous plants in
which the qualities of aliments and medicines are present but in a
lesser degree.

Most authors dealing with the classification of plants also treat of
their morphology. We find an extensive treatment of this kind in the
Shifa' where ibn Sina divides the parts of plants into primary and
secondary organs. The primary or essential organs are root, trunk,
branches, bark, wood, and pith or core and the secondary organs, fruit,
leaves, and blossoms. In a somewhat different manner, the Ikhwan al-Safa
divide the plant into nine parts-root, vessel, branch, bough, leaves,
colour, fruit, shell, and germ­and hold that only perfect plants possess
all the nine of them.

Both ibn Sina and the Ikhwan make continuous comparison of plants with
the animal world; in the case of the Ikhwan as well as in the case of
many later authors comparison is also made with the celestial bodies so
as to draw at­tention to the symbolic correspondence existing between
various cosmic orders.[^33]

In their comparisons of plants with animals, Muslim authors were quite
aware of the presence of male and female parts of plants which in most
cases are united in the same plant but which in higher plants like the
palm become differentiated. Ibn Sina draws an analogy between seeds of
plants and eggs of birds each of which has a centre that is the source
of life and a periphery which provides food for the new generation.
Likewise, he compares the growth of the branch of a tree from the trunk
with the birth of a new generation in the animal world.

In the classification and description of plants, one can hardly fail to
men­tion ibn al-Baitar, the greatest of the Muslim botanists. Basing
himself on al--Ghafaqi and other previous authors like Dioseorides and
Galen and making many observations of his own, he described extremely
carefully over 1,400 plants from Andalusia, his homeland, as well as
from the rest of the Islamic world. Furthermore, in the Kitab al-Mughni,
following the example of ibn Sina's Qanun, he gave the medical uses of
these plants. The influence of ibn al­Baitar was felt everywhere within
the Islamic world from Morocco to India. Three centuries later, the
Moroccan botanist, al-Ghassani, was to give the best classification of
plants found anywhere in Muslim literature, drawing mostly upon the
information accumulated by ibn al-Baitar.

In the study of animals, like that of plants, interest evolved around
the constitution of plants and their classification and description. The
tempera­ment (mizdj) of animals including man was studied in the light
of the qualities and nature of which the other kingdoms are possessed.
Their relation with the bodily humours may diagrammatically be
represented as follows.[^34]

The animal constitution has been understood in terms of the equilibrium
of the four humours each of which is connected with a particular
internal organ. The organs in turn have been studied in the light of
their function of preserving internal equilibrium. Likewise, the effect
of plants both as food and as medicine upon animals has been considered
with respect to their nature, that is, coldness, moisture, etc., which
the two kingdoms share in common. This is one example of the underlying
unity in terms of which the diversities of nature have been understood.

In the classification of animals, as in that of plants, several
principles have been followed, some of them based upon Aristotle's works
on animals. Al-Jahiz, in his Kitab al-Hayawan divides animals according
to how they move. There are, according to him, four classes of animals:
those that walk, which include men, quadrupeds, beasts of prey, and
insects; those that fly, which include wild birds, hunting birds, and
gnats; those that swim; and those that crawl. The Ikhwan al-Safa give
several types of classification. One type is similar to that of
al-Jahiz, and divides animals into those living in the air like birds
and insects; those living in the sea, like fish, crabs, frogs, and
snails; those living on land like the quadrupeds; and those dwelling in
the earth like worms.[^35] Another classification is according to the
perfection of the senses, that is, the lowest animals having only the
sense of touch; grubs and others having the senses of touch and taste;
marine animals and certain land creatures occupying dark places having
the senses of touch, taste, and smell; insects having all the senses
except sight; and finally perfect animals having all the five senses.

Many Muslim authors have followed Aristotle in classifying animals
ac­cording to the manner of their reproduction. We find a simplified
version of it in the Rasa'il of the Ikhwan where animals are divided
into three classes: those that are most complete, which conceive their
young, suckle them, and foster them; those which do not perform such
functions but leap at the female and lay eggs and hatch them; and those
which do none of the above things and come into being in putrefaction.
More elaborate classifications of the same type are found in the
writings of ibn Sina, ibn Rushd, and many later com­mentators of the
shifa which contain a detailed discussion of animals.

A rather general definition of animals including the jinn[^36] and men
is given by Qazwini in his 'Aja'ib al-Makhluqat. He divides animals into
seven classes. First, there is man who possesses a rational soul (nafs
natiqah) and whose body is a miniature model of the universe, a
microcosm, each part of which has a spiritual meaning and purpose. For
example, he stands erect because of his spiritual aspiration to
transcend physical existence, and his head is round because of the
perfection of the spherical figure. The second type is of the jinn who
are composed of fire and appear in many forms. As Qazwini writes, God
created angels from the light of fire, jinn from its blaze, and devils
from its smoke. The jinn occupied the earth before the coming of man,
that is, the fall of Adam, and had their own religion and prophets; but
because of corruption God sent angels to purify the earth, and they were
dispersed to remote islands. Satan or Iblis is himself from this species
of animals.[^37]

After the jinn come the beasts of burden like the horse, then cattle
like cows, then wild beasts, then birds, and finally insects and
reptiles. Qazwini has further a section on “strange” animals which are
primarily mythological and symbolical and finally a chapter on angels,
their forms, functions, and colour.[^38]

In the description of animals, there is no book in Muslim writings that
is as complete as Damiri's Haydt al-Hayawan in which he is concerned
with the traits, instincts, and psychology of animals and their use,
medical and spiritual, for man. Following ibn al-Baitar, by whom he was
influenced, he classifies animals alphabetically and then gives their
description drawing on Aristotle, the natural historians, theologians,
esoteric writers like Shams al- Din al-Bfmi, Arabic poetry, and the
Qur'an and the Hadith. In his description he often refers to the
symbolic character of animals, like the royal quality of the lion, and,
as is characteristic of similar descriptive works of natural history,
intertwines the spiritual as well as the physical study of nature.[^39]

In discussing the classification and morphology of plants and animals a
comparison may be made between the traditional concept of gradation and
the modern notion of evolution. There is no doubt that many Muslim
authors like Biruni and the Ikhwan were quite aware of the meaning of
fossils and of the fact that during other periods of the history of the
earth flora and fauna of a different kind existed on the earth.
Moreover, the idea of the gradation of Being or the passage of the One
Spirit through all the realms of nature has been expressed by many
philosophers and Sufis.[^40]

Some thinkers, especially the Masha'i philosophers, envisage, like
Aristotle, the gradation of fixed spheres, while the Ishraqi
philosophers connect, like Plato, this gradation of spheres with the
conception of archetype belonging to the transcendent “world of ideas.”
There is yet another school of thinkers (al-Jahiz, the Ikhwan al-Safa,
ibn Miskawaih, Jalal al-Din Rumi, etc.), what­ever their persuasion
otherwise, who believe in the continuous self-develop­ment of Being from
stage to stage-a position nearest to the present-day theory of
evolution.

The tradition of Muslim natural history upon which we have touched
briefly has had a past going back to the first Islamic century. During
this long history it absorbed much of the Greek and certain of the
Indian and Persian sciences and created a science which was in every way
superior to what had preceded it, except the biological studies by
Aristotle. This tradition was to develop as a properly Muslim science,
that is, one based upon the particular genius of the Islamic perspective
which is centred upon unity. This tradition is manifest in Muslim
natural history in many ways, for example in the vision of the unity of
nature and interrelation of all things, which Muslim natural historians
asserted so often in affirming the presence of the signs of God in
nature and in the study of plants and animals for the purpose of seeing
divine wisdom therein.

This tradition, especially that part of it which preceded the
seventh/thir­teenth century, was to have a profound influence on Latin
Christianity and on the formation of the science of natural history in
medieval times. It is well known how much seventh/thirteenth-century
authors like Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon were indebted to it and how
even during the Re­naissance men like Paracelsus and Agrippa were
constrained to draw largely on Muslim sources. In the Orient, this
tradition has continued until the present century although in a much
weakened form after the ninth/fifteenth century. Scholars in India and
Persia as well as those in the Maghrib have continued to study nature as
the unified handiwork of God in order to discover His wisdom, to see
“His sign upon the horizon” as the Qur'an states, and to learn spiritual
lessons from it. Only in following this spirit has this tradition of
natural history been able to be an integral aspect of Muslim learning
and remain in harmony and conformity with the spiritual and intellectual
perspective of Islam.

Bibliography
------------

E. G. Browne, Arabian Medicine, Cambridge, 1921; D. Campbell, Arabian
Medicine, 2 Vols, Kegan Paul, London, 1926; B. Carra de Vaux, Les
penseurs de l'lalam, 5 Vole., P. Geuthner, Paris, 1921-27; Fr.
Dieterici, Die Naturschauung and Naturphilosophie der Araber im zehnten
Jahrhundert aus den Schriten der Lautern Brider, Verlag der
Nicolai'schen, Berlin, 1861; H. Eth6, Die Wunder der Sch6pfung, Leipzig,
1868; ibn al-Qifti, Tarikh al-Hukamd', ed. A. Miller and J. Lippert,
Leipzig, 1903; ibn Qutaibah, The Natural History Section from a 9th
Century “Book of Useful Knowledge”: The 'Uyun al-Akhbar of ibn Qutaibah,
tr. L. Kopf, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1959; ibn Sins, Kitdb al-Lhi/a'
(Tabtiyat), lithograph edition, Teheran, 1882; A Treatise on the Canon
of Medicine, Incorporating a Translation of the First Book by O. C.
Grunner, Luzac and Co., London, 1930; Ikhwan al-Safa, Dispute between
Man and the Animals, tr. J. Platts, W. H. Allen & Co., London, 1869;
Raea'il, 4 Vole., Cairo, 1928; A. 'Isa Bay, Tarikh al-Nabat 'ind
al-'Arab, Cairo, 1944; P. Kraus, Jabir Ibn Hayyan, 2 Vols., Imprimerie
de l'Institut Francais d'Archeologie Orientale, 1942-43; L. Leclere,
Histoire de la Medicine arabe, Paris, 1876; Traitls des simples par ibn
al-Beithar, Notices et Extraite, Vols. XXIII, XXV and XXVI, 1877 and
1883; B. Lewin, The Book of Plants of Abu Hanifah al-Dinawari, A. B.
Lundeguistska Bokhandeln, Upsala, 1953; Mas'iidi, Meadows of Gold and
Mines of Gems, tr. Sprenger, W. H. Allen & Co., London, 1841; A. F.
Mehren, Manuel de la cos­mographie du moyen-dge, Copenhagen, 1874;
Geschichte der Botanik, Verlag der Gebruder Bombtrager, Konigsberg,
1856; A. Mieli, La science arabe et son role Bans l'evolution
scientifique mondiale, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1939; A. Mingana,
Ency­clopaedia o f Philosophical Sciences as Taught in Baghddd in c. 817
A. D., or Book o f Treasures of Job of Edesaa, Cambridge, 1935; Mustaufi
Qazwini, Nuzhat al-Qulub, Shirazi, Bombay, 1311/1893; E. Nordenskiold,
History of Biology, Kegan Paul, New York, 1946; A. Qazw1ni,
Cosmographie, ed. F. Wustenfeld, Gottingen, 1848-49; G. Sarton,
Introduction to the History of Science, 3 Vole., Baltimore, 1927-48; E.
Wiedemann, “Beitrage zur Geschichte der Naturwissensehaften,”
Sitzungsbe­ richte d. phys. w. med. Soc., Erlangen, 1904-29.

[^1]: By cosmological sciences we mean all sciences dealing with the
cosmos, includ­ing the natural sciences. The traditional sciences
should, properly speaking, be divided into the metaphysical, dealing
with God and supracosmic realities, and the cosmological, dealing with
beings in the cosmos. See T. Burckhardt, “Nature de la perspective
cosmologique,” Etudies Traditionelles, Vol. XLIX, 1948, pp. 216-19.

[^2]: See Seyyed Hossein Nasr, introduction to the section on “Muslim
Sciences” in the Mentor Foundations of Scientific Thought. Vol. II,
Signet Books, New York, (in press). In his famous 'Aja'ib al-Makhlugat
(The Wonders of Creation), abu Yahya Zakariya al-Qazwini writes that the
presence of divine wisdom in every atom of the universe and in all forms
of multiplicity is itself a proof of divine unity, and quotes the famous
verse “un g kull-i s\_hai'in lahu ayatun ta\`dullu 'ala annahu wahidun”
(that His sign exists in all things is a proof of His unity).

[^3]: But in this chapter we are concerned only with botany and zoology.

[^4]: The medieval Christian scientists had a similar aim in view when
they sought to observe the vestigio dei in nature.

[^5]: Our argument does not seek to make knowledge subservient to
action. Know­ledge is always superior to action in the Islamic
perspective as is indicated by such sayings of the Prophet as “One hour
of meditation is better than a thousand works of charity,” or “The ink
of the scholar is more valuable than the blood of the one who fights the
Holy War.” What we wish to show is that in Islam a mental activity for
its own sake, divorced from the spiritual and religious needs of man on
the one hand and from his social needs on the other, has never been
encouraged.

[^6]: Many medieval authors, especially certain alchemists, were quite
aware of animal and plant symbolism and were conscious of what they were
writing.

[^7]: It is difficult for many to conceive of the possibility that
nature and its laws may not have always been the same, but there is no
logical or scientific reason to prove that they have been uniform. In
fact, this uniformity is one of the assumptions upon which the
historical aspects of modern science are based. On the other hand,
sacred texts and metaphysical doctrines point to the “cyclic” change
both in nature and in man's psychic and mental structure. R. Guenon, The
Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times, Luzac & Co., London, 1953,
and F. Schuon, Les Stations de la Sagesse, La Barque du Soleil, Paris,
1958, pp. 119ff.

[^8]: For general information regarding these and other authors whose
names are to follow, see G. Sarton, Introduction to the History of
Science, Vols. I to III, Williams and Wilkins Co., Baltimore, 1927-48;
A. Mieh, La science arabe et son role dons l'evolution scientifique
mondiale, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1939; B. Carra de Vaux, Les penseurs de
l'Islam, Librarie Paul Geutbner, Paris, 1921-27, Vols. II and IV. Among
the texts mentioned above, the Muruj al-Dkahab (Prairies of Gold)
translated into English by Sprenger, W. H. Allen Co., London, 1841,
especially offers useful material on the historical and geographical
framework of natural history.

[^9]: Muslim natural historians not only divided the earth into several
climates, each with its own flora and fauna in conformity with its
particular terrestrial con - dition, but further assigned each climate
to a particular planet which acted as the archetype and “guardian angel”
for that particular climate. For an example of this astrological theory,
see the Rasa'il of the Ikhwan al-Safa, Cairo, 1928, I, pp. 116ff. and P.
Duhem, Le systeme de monde, Vol. 11, A. Hermann et fils, Paris, 1914,
pp. 267ff.

[^10]: Regarding the internal constitution of animals, perhaps no book
is so masterly and complete as ibn Sind's Qanun. See the introduction to
ibn Sins, A Treatise on the Canon of Medicine, Incorporating a
Translation of the First Book, by 0. C. Groner, Luzac & Co., London,
1930; also ibn Sina, Poeme de la medicine-Urgdza f't-tibb, Societe
d'edition “les Belles Letters,” Paris, 1956.

[^11]: See S. Mahdihassan, “Chemistry, a Product of Chinese Culture,”
Pakistan Journal of Science, 1957, Vol. IX, No. 1; also his “Alchemy, in
Its Proper Setting, with Jinn, Sufi and Suffa, as Loan-words from the
Chinese,” Igbal, 1959, Vol. VII, No. 3.

[^12]: See P. Kraus, Jabir Ibn Hayyan, 2 Vols., Imprimerie de l'Institut
Francais d'Archeologie Orientale, Cairo, 1942-43.

[^13]: A. Mingana, Encyclopaedia of Philosophical Sciences as Taught in
Baghdad in c. 817 A. D. or Book of Treasures of Job of Edema, Cambridge,
1935.

[^14]: An interesting section of the Rasa'il dealing with the discussion
between man and animals has been translated into English as Dispute
between than and the Animnals, by J. Platts, V. H. Allen Co, London,
1869.

[^15]: See J. Stephenson, “The Zoological Section of the Nuzhat
al-Qulub,” Isis, 1928, Vol. NI, pp. 285-316.

[^16]: This famous book of tales about the animals is the Sanskrit
Panchatantra translated into Pahlawi and later into Arabic by ibn
Muqaffa'. Various versions of it in Arabic and Persian like Anwar-i
Suhaili of Husain Wa'iz Kashifi have remained very popular throughont
the centuries.

[^17]: This genre of writing has continued to recent times. A work
called Insan ua Haiwan (Men and Animals) by Haji Mulls Isma'il Sabziwhri
written during the last century, treating of the moral and spiritual
qualities of animals, is still widely used by Persian preachers in their
sermons.

[^18]: By “exclusive” we do not mean so strict a limitation of the
subject as is found in a modern text-book on botany or zoology. Muslim
sciences have been too closely united to permit a complete separation of
one subject from another so that in nearly every book dealing with
plants and animals there are references to other sciences as well as to
philosophy and theology.

[^19]: Ibn Khaldum in referring to this book writes that “people learned
the sciences of sorcery from the work and developed its manifold
branches” (Muqaddimah, tr. F. Rosenthal, Pantheon, New York, 1958, Vol.
III, p. 156). Many Western historians have refused to believe that ibn
Wahshiyyah could know anything about the Babylonian civilization and
therefore consider his claim to be a forgery.

[^20]: M. Hamidullah, “Dinawari's Encyclopaedia Botanica (Kitab
al-Nabat) in the Light of Fragments in Turkish Libraries,” Melange F.
Koprulu, pp. 195-200. See also B. Lewin, The Book of Plants of Abu
Hannah al-Dinawari, A. B. Lunde­guistska Bokhandeln, Upsala, 1953,
introduction, in which is discussed the influence of this early work on
the later Muslim botanists.

[^21]: This sixth/twelfth-century Maghribi botanist lies given some of
the most detailed descriptions of plants found anywhere in Muslim
botanical literature.

[^22]: His two most important books are the Kitab al-Jami' ft al-Adwiyat
al-Mufradah (The Complete Book of Simple Drugs), dealing with the
classification of plants, and Kitab al-Mughni fi al-Adwiyat al-Mufradah
(The Sufficient Book of Simple Drugs), dealing with the medical
properties of plants.

[^23]: These are not elements in the modern sense but rather the
principles. They are to the sensible substances of nature what the
geometric points and lines are to points and lines actually drawn on a
piece of paper.

[^24]: The union of the soul, which in Muslim cosmology lies above the
cosmic spheres, with a certain combination of the elements in the
sublunary region is also considered to be ad extra and not as in a
compound. As the combination of elements attains more harmony and
greater equilibrium, it becomes purer so that the combination naturally
attracts the soul to itself. In the minerals the elements are not as
perfectly balanced as in animals so that they attract a lower soul unto
themselves.

[^25]: Although minerals have been considered by many Muslim authors to
be trans. mutable into one another, plants and animals have been
considered to be unchangeable. Each plant, according to the Ikhwan
al-Safe, for example, has a chyme (kaimii8) formed from a particular
combination of elements which always reproduces the same plant as each
animal has a sperm which propagates the same species.

[^26]: “Although plants are obvious and visible creations, the causes of
their exist­ence are hidden and veiled from the perception of man. It is
what the philosophers call 'natural forces; what the Lari'ah calls 'the
angels and troops of Allah appointed for the nurturing of plants, the
generation of animals and the composition of minerals,' and what we call
'partial spirits.”' Ikhwan al-Safe, Rasa'il, II, p. 130; also R. Levy,
The Social Structure of Islam, Cambridge, 1957, p. 490.

[^27]: We are following here the teaching of the Ikhwan, but these views
are shared by most Muslim authors writing on this subject.

[^28]: The Ikhwan have a most interesting section in their Rasa'il in
which the animals dispute with man over his right to use them for his
own ends. They refute all of man's claims of superiority by
demonstrating their own spiritual and bodily qualities and virtues. It
is only by realizing that there are among men a few sages and saints who
in their spiritual realization fulfil the purpose of the whole of
crea­tion that animals finally agree to submit to man. See the Dispute
between Man and the Animals

[^29]: The most thorough discussion of the vegetative and animal souls
appears in the sixth part of the Tabi\`iyat of the Shila' of ibn Sina
where he deals in detail with all the faculties of plants and animals
and their functions. Cf. J. Bakos La psychologie d'Avicenne, Editions de
l'Academia Tschechoslovaque des Sciences, Prague, 1956. Ibn Sina and
also most other authors writing on the faculties of the vegetative and
animal souls derived many of their ideas from the De Anima of Aristotle.
The Ikhwan, however, enumerate the faculties somewhat differently: as
attraction, fixation, digestion, repulsion, nutrition, formation, and
growth.

[^30]: For a summary of ibn Sind's views on the souls and their
faculties, see E. Gilson, “Les sources greco-arabes de l'augustinisme
avicennant,” Archives d'Histoire Doctrinale et Litteraire du Moyen Age,
Vol. IV, 1929, pp. 5-149.

[^31]: In general, the Muslims depended more upon the Greeks in the
study of ani­mals than that of plants. Whereas Aristotle's works on
animals were studied extensively, the botany of Theophrastus was nearly
ignored. Muslim authors had already created a science of plants drawing
their terminology mostly from the Qur'an and Arabic poetry before the
first important Greek text on plants, that is, the famous work of
Dioscorides, was translated into Arabic.

[^32]: See the botanical section of the Nuzhat al-Qulub, irazi, Bombay,
1311/1893, pp. 87 ff., where sixty-nine fruit-bearing trees and
sixty-six fruitless ones are describ­ed in alphabetical order. Qazwini,
like many other Muslim natural historians, gives not only the
description of a tree, the quality of its fruit and its wood and the
location where it is found, but also its medical uses, its nature, that
is, whether hot or cold, dry or moist, and its appearance in literature
and sacred books. As for seed­ bearing plants, Qazwini follows a similar
procedure, describing altogether 280 kinds, each class arranged
alphabetically.

[^33]: The famous scientist and compiler, Biruni gives a good example of
this astrological correspondence. He writes: “The various organs of a
plant are distri­buted to different planets. Thus the stem of a tree is
appropriated to the Sun; the roots to Saturn, the thorns, twigs, and
barks to Mars; the flowers to Venus; the fruit to Jupiter; the leaves to
the Moon; and the seed to Mercury” (Elements of Astrology, tr. R. Ramsay
Wright, Luzac & Co., London, 1934, p. 236). The correspondence between
plants or animals and the planets is not to show astral “influences” as
is done in contemporary astrology which is only a residue of the real
subject known by the same name in medieval times. It is to show rather
that the physical world is a symbol of the intelligible world, that
there is an analogy between the archetypes symbolized by the planets and
their earthly shadows which are the physical forms.

[^34]: This is a schematization of ideas presented in ibn Sina's medical
poem as well as in the Qanun to which we have already referred.
Pathology based on the doctrine of humours is a heritage from the
Hippocratic tradition of medicine as systematized by Galen.

[^35]: Mustaufi Qazwini in the Nuzhat al-Qulub follows a somewhat
similar pro­cedure dividing animals into those living on land, in sea,
and in air, and sub­dividing each of the classes according to its more
specific features

[^36]: They may be said to symbolize psychic forces.

[^37]: A similar account is to be found in the Rasa'il of the Ikhwan

[^38]: We see in Qazwini's writings a good example of the blending of
the natural and supernatural order to which we have already referred.
His description of the colours and forms of animals and angels served as
an inspiration for later Persian miniaturists

[^39]: Damiri also interrupts his discussion of animals at several
places in order to write about Islamic history, prayers based on the
divine names, the science of jafar (symbolism of letters), and other
subjects.

[^40]: A beautiful expression of this doctrine appears in the Mathnawi
of Maulana Jalal al-Din Rami. See Book IV, verses 3637 to 3647 of the
text of Mathnawi ed. R. A. Nicholson, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1929.


