Chapter 67: Medicine
====================

A – Introductory
----------------

It was not until nearly a hundred years after the conquest and
consolidation of their empire that the Muslims turned their minds
towards creative pursuits. It is remarkable in this context to find how
quickly they directed their activities to productive ploughshares and
prolific pens. Soon the Muslim Empire extended from Andalusia to the
Indus, and its various parts vied with one another in producing
intellectual giants in every branch of art and science. Nearly half a
century ago Fonahn[^1] enumerated no less than one hundred and fifty-one
works on Persian medicine alone during this period and Max Meyerhof[^2]
says that “the treasure-houses of Islamic science are just beginning to
be opened. In Constantinople alone there are more than eighty mosque
libraries containing tens of thousands of manuscripts.

In Cairo, Damascus, Mosul, Baghdad, as well as in Persia and India there
are other collections.... Even the catalogue of the Escorial Library in
Spain which contains a part of the wisdom of Western Islam is not yet
complete.” The subject of Muslim medicine is so vast that in the
following pages only a bird's-eye view of it can be given.

For a proper appraisal of the Muslim contribution to medical science it
is important to ascertain its position in Arabia at the birth of Islam.
The country, as everyone knows, was at the time torn by internecine wars
and family feuds. Ignorance was abysmal and education non-existent. The
city surgeon (jarrah) cauterized wounds, sustained in war, or applied
obscure ointments as healing balms, and the village apothecary
administered simples for simple ailments. People generally were living
under most unhygienic con­ditions. Such was the dismal medical
background when the Prophet of Islam started preaching. Early in his
career he said that knowledge was of two kinds, that of religions and
that of the bodies (i.e., of medicine). Inspired by the Qur'anic
injunction,[^3] he preached moderation in all walks of life. Realizing
the miserable lack of medical facilities, he advocated prophylactic
measures as is evident from the following.

Sa'di,[^4] the great Persian poet, philosopher, and traveller, relates
the story of an eminent Persian physician who was sent by the Persian
king to the Prophet to minister to his own as well as to his followers'
needs. For a long time after the physician's arrival in Mecca no one
called on him or sought his treatment. Driven by ennui he approached the
Holy Prophet and complained of his forced odium. The Prophet's reply
was: “These people do not eat until they are hungry nor drink until
thirsty and then cease eating while a desire for food still remains.”
That must be the reason for their perfect health, said the physician.
But medicine was not the Prophet's mission. He had dedicated himself to
the moral and spiritual uplift of humanity at large. Winwood Reade[^5]
says, “Muhammad's career is the best example that can be given of the
influence of the individual in human history. That single man created
the glory of his nation and spread his language over half the earth.

The words which he preached to jeering crowds are now being studied by
scholars in London, Paris and Berlin ... and in obscure villages
situated by obscure streams.” According to Browne,[^6] the Prophet's
biggest miracle was that he brought unity among the fighting Arabs with
the result that they adopted one goal; and soon the Arabs as one nation
became rulers of half of the civilized world. Care of the sick and
wounded was but one facet of the Prophet's humanitarian personality. As
pointed out by Wasti, the so-called Tibb-i Nabawi is not, therefore, to
be confused with any medical treatise as such.[^7] The book is not
taught in any recognized medical Yunani institution (as remarked by
Browne), nor is it credited by Hakims and scholars of Arabian medicine.

The only known physician in Prophet's time was al-Harith ibn Kaladah, an
Arab Jew who later embraced Islam. He had studied medicine at
Jundi­-Shapar school of medicine in Persia. He used to be consulted at
the time of dire necessity, and he mainly advised moderation. Among the
surgeons of this time the last known was ibn abi Ramsiah of the tribe of
Tamim.

The Arabs adopted their medical theory chiefly from the Hippocratic and
Galenic systems, though there were plentiful translations from Syriac,
Persian, Indian, and Egyptian authors as well. The Hippocratic system,
as is well known, is based on the humoral theory, i, e., the four
humours of the body: blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy. This system
served the Arabs and Persians for five hundred years as it had served
the Greeks and Romans for a thousand years before that. The Persians
carried the humoral theory a step further by identifying the four
humours with the four elements of nature, i, e., air, fire, earth, and
water. Browne[^8] however, defines Arabic medicine as one which has been
presented in Arabic and considers that a large portion of it has been
derived from the Greeks, though contributions have also been made by
Indians, Persians, and scholars of other countries. He further states
that during the period between the downfall of the Greeks and the
Renaissance of Europe, the Arabs kept up the medical traditions and
subsequently Europe was benefited by their treasure of learning.

Wasti[^9] remarks that the Arabs not only translated the old medical
books but also prepared their abstracts, commented upon them, enriched
them, and improved upon them. In his support Cumston [^10]states, “It
has been regarded for a long time that the Arabs slavishly copied the
Greeks, rather they stood in the way of progress in medicine. But this
is a wrong conception, because when the Arabs came into the field, Greek
medicine had completely vanished and everywhere charm and magic were
practised. At that moment the Arabs not only saved the Greek knowledge
from destruction but popularized Greek medicine by commenting and
improving on it and subsequently created a taste for scientific learning
in Europe. Even if the Arabs had only restricted their activities to
collecting and translating Greek medical books into Arabic and had
transmitted this knowledge to Europe again, it would not have been a
mean achievement. But they stepped further and wrote original books.”

While the Greeks surpassed all other peoples in their achievements in
anti­quity, the Muslims did so in the Middle Ages. Their works written
in Arabic were, in Sarton's words, “the most original, the most valuable
and the most pregnant.” Arabic became a most progressive and scientific
language from the middle of the second/eighth to the end of
eleventh/fifteenth century. In the contemporary West there were hardly
any names as glorious as those of 'Ali al-Tabari, Ahmad al-Tabari,
al-Razi (L. Rhazes), 'Ali ibn al.'Abbas (L. Haly), ibn al-Baitar, abu
al-Qasim al-Zahrawi (L. Abulcasis), and ibn Sina (L. Avicenna). In fact,
this was precisely the period which is known as the dark age of the
West.[^11]

The spread of Greek traditions was stifled in the West by the extreme
Roman utilitarianism which was followed by the theological expediency
and later by a theological domination which seemed for a long time to
destroy every hope of genuine scientific revival. After the birth of
Islam, the Arabs on the other hand were fired with the zeal for
knowledge. The following sayings of the Prophet exhibit the importance
he attached to the seeking of knowledge:[^12]

1. Seek ye knowledge from the cradle to the grave.

2. To seek knowledge is the duty of every Muslim man and woman.

3. Seek ye knowledge even if it be in China.

4. The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of the martyr.

5. He who leaveth his home in search of knowledge walketh in the path of
God.

6. He dieth not who seeketh knowledge.

In medicine the Arabs translated Hippocrates, Galen, and Dioscorides.
Cumston says that the Arabs extracted the most important material from
Greek writings and placed it in relief, leaving aside everything that
was super­fluous.[^13] One has merely to read Galen and afterwards ibn
Sina in order to see the difference. The former was obscure, the latter
perfectly clear; order and method reign in the latter, which in the
former we seek in vain.

Khairallah, in evaluating the contribution of Muslims to medical
sciences, enumerates the reasons which militated against their work. For
instance, most of the Arabic books and manuscripts have been lost; a
bare one per cent has been salvaged so far. The Mongol hordes carried
death and destruction in their wake, and the fanaticism of European
conquerors in the south-west of Europe destroyed the largest part of
Arabic writings. Fortunately, most of the classics have survived. Many
of the books that have come down to us have been distorted and mutilated
either by bad copying or by spurious editions. “Repeated copying from
copies and alterations and additions inserted by various teachers helped
in their distortion so that one rarely sees two copies of the same book
that read alike.”[^14]

The manuscripts that have come down to us have not been studied with
care and diligence. They require a thorough study before we can arrive
at a fair estimate of Muslim contribution to medicine. The Latin
translations from Arabic were often careless. Many of the Latin
translators claimed as their own what they had only translated. Campbell
believes that “the Latin translations failed to convey the true
con­ception of Arabian medicine to the medieval scholastics”[^15]; and
Browne says that “it must be said once for all that no just idea of
Arabian medicine can be derived from the imperfect renderings of
standard Arabic books.”[^16]

B – Collection And Translation Of Books
---------------------------------------

Before proceeding to examine the contribution of different Muslim
scholars to medicine, a word might here be put in about the translators
who laid the cornerstone of the edifice built by the subsequent authors.

The task of translating from foreign languages, e. g., Greek, Syriac,
Pahlawi, etc., into Arabic was more difficult than would appear at first
sight; but for the princely patronage and philanthropists' munificence,
it might well have been impossible. In this connection the names of
al-Mansur, Harnn al-Rashid, and al-Mamun in Baghdad, of Zangi in
Damascus, of Sahib al-Din in Cairo and of 'Abd al-Rabman III and Hakam
in Andalusia illuminate the pages of history. Their generosity and
fair-mindedness made no distinction between Christians, Jews, Sabaeans,
and Muslims. Their boundless bounty and complete lack of bigotry
gravitated men of letters to their capitals.

But the immensity of the task of translation can be judged from the fact
that the vehicle of the new Muslim civilization was the language which
had never been used before for any scientific purpose and yet it was in
this very language that every bit of knowledge had to be translated for
proper assimilation. This necessitated the creation of a philosophic and
scientific terminology which did not exist. The collection of
manuscripts was carried on by the Muslims at that time with fervid zeal
in every corner of the civilized world. Arab conquerors sometimes made
the acquisition of manuscripts a part of the peace treaty. Thus, when
Harun al-Ras\_hid conquered 'Ammilriyah and Ankara, he collected all the
manuscripts he could find,[^17] and al-Mamfin sent a special mission to
the Byzantine Emperor to collect manuscripts.[^18] On several occasions
books were sent and accepted as appeasing presents.[^19]

After collecting all available manuscripts from Greece, Asia Minor,
Egypt, Syria, Persia, and India, the Caliphs, princes, and rich men
appointed able men to study, edit, and translate the manuscripts, but
before translation, several copies were thoroughly studied, compared,
and edited. Ibn al-Ash'ath divided each of Galen's books into sentences,
paragraphs, chapters, and divisions-a thing that was never done
before-in order to facilitate the acquisition and understanding of
Galen's teaching.[^20]

According to Khairallah, two methods of translation were adopted. The
first was that of ibn al-Batriq and 'Abd al-Masih Na'im al-Himsi who
under­took literal translation. This was obviously unsatisfactory as
there were many words which had no Arabic equivalent; besides the whole
construction and syntax were different in the different languages. The
second method was that of Hunain ibn Ishaq and al-Jauhari, who would
read the whole sentence or paragraph, get its meaning or sense, and then
put it in proper Arabic.[^21] According to al-Nadim's Fihrist, Khalid
ibn Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah was the first to encourage Greek philosophers in
Egypt to translate works on medicine. He died in the beginning of the
second/eighth century.

The early translations were made by Christians, Jews, and Sabaeans under
the patronage of Muslim rulers. The first man to translate a medical
work into Arabic was Masarjawaih (b. 61/680), a Jewish physician from
Basrah. But the credit of being the greatest translator of medical works
goes to a renowned Nestorian physician of remarkable scholarship, Hunain
ibn Ishaq, who died in Baghdad in about 264/877. He was assisted by
Ishaq, his son, Hubais\_h al-A'sam, his nephew, Yabya ibn 'Adi, 'Isa ibn
Yabya, and others. Other translators of repute were abu Yabya ibn
al-Batriq (d. a.191/806), Thabit ibn Qurrah (d. 289/901), a Christian
from Ba'labakk.

The work of these translators and a host of others covered many subjects
besides medicine. This great intellectual activity in due course brought
its results, for gradually every large city developed a library which
contained reading-rooms, quarters for translators, and meeting-places
for scientific discussions. Such were Bait al-Hikmah (House of Wisdom)
in Baghdad and Dar al-Hikmah (Hall of Wisdom) in Cairo. The library at
Cordova had over a quarter of a million volumes. The library of Nuh ibn
Mansur, ruler of Bukhara, contained books on all subjects together with
their indices. Ibn al-Matron, the famous phy­sician of Salah al-Din, had
a library of 10,000 manuscripts. Ibn al-Tilmidh, author of the best
known pharmacopoeia of his time, had 20,000 manuscripts in his library.
The well-known medical historian al-Qifti had a library worth more than
50,000 dinars. Every large hospital possessed a library of its own.[^22]

C - Hospitals
-------------

The hospital at Jundi-Shapdr in Persia was the first and foremost to
in­fluence the Arabs. Al-Harith ibn Kaladah, a relation of the Prophet
practising during his time, was an alumnus of this hospital. Small
hospitals for the blind and lepers were built during the Umayyad period,
but they were little more than segregation camps. Proper hospitals,
however, came to be built during the 'Abbasid period. Those at Baghdad,
Damascus, and Cairo were the best known at the time. Besides the
hospitals for the lepers and the blind, there were asylums for the
insane and ambulatory clinics to minister to the needs of far-flung
places where there were no physicians. Prisons were not forgotten and
physicians looked after prisoners since they were considered to be a
State charge. First-aid stations were established near mosques where
large numbers congregated. The army had its physicians, and field
hospitals attached to the armies were carried on camel-back. Female
nurses used to serve in the field hospitals.

General hospitals were established not only at Baghdad, Damascus, and
Cairo, but also at Mecca, Jerusalem, Aleppo, Harran, and several cities
in Andalusia. Patients in such hospitals were admitted on the sole
criterion of their condition without prejudice to colour, creed, sex, or
social status. Al­Mansiir Qalawun, the ruler of Egypt, dedicated the
hospital erected by him for the benefit of “the king and the subject,
the prince and the soldier, the great and the small, the freeman and the
slave, for men and for women.”[^23] Foun­dations (auqaf) were created to
support the hospitals and were administered by high dignitaries with the
utmost care. Issa writes in his Histoire des bimaristans al'epoque
Islamique:[^24] “The furniture, bedding, and clothing at the Mansiiri
hospital at Cairo, rivalled in their luxury and perfection those that
adorned the palaces of the Caliphs and the princes. The nourishment
consisted of flesh of fowl and mutton, and each patient was given the
quantity of food that the state of his health permitted.”

Sometimes musicians and singers were brought to hospi­tals to entertain
the sick and convalescing patients.

The conditions prevailing in hospitals in those days can best be
described in the words of Usaibi\`ah[^25] “Abu al-Hakam, the dean of the
Nari hospital of Damascus, used to make the rounds of patients every
morning, find out their condition and consider their affairs. With him
were his assistants and orderlies and all that he wrote down as orders
for the patients regarding medicine and diet were carried out on time
and without delay.

After finishing his rounds he used to go to the citadel and treat
whoever was sick among the nobility and government officials. He would
then come back to the hospital and sit in the large auditorium, read his
books, and prepare his lectures. Nur al-Din had installed in the
hospital a large library with a collection of books and manuscripts
placed in book­cases in the main hall. Several physicians and students
used to come and sit at his feet. He taught the students and discussed
medical topics and interesting cases with the physicians.” Usaibi\`ah
continues: “Patients were examined in an outside hall and those who did
not need hospital treatment were given prescriptions which were prepared
at the hospital pharmacy.

Those who needed hospital treatment were registered and admitted. They
were given a bath and made to put on clean hospital clothes, their own
clothes being taken away and stored. They were kept at the hospital
until completely cured. On their discharge from the hospital they were
given a suit of clothes and some money to defray immediate and necessary
expenses outside the hospital until they were able to work.” Usaibi'ah
proceeds: “A pharmacy under a competent and registered pharmacist was
attached to every large hospital. It was well stocked with syrups, all
sorts of drugs and drug preparations, fancy porcelain, and rarities.
Pharmacists were licensed and registered and in each large town an
inspector kept constant watch over pharmaceutical preparations and
chemical products.

“Attached to large hospitals were medical schools where students
gathered in the main hall and reviewed their studies and copied medical
manuscripts which were compared and corrected by the teachers. The
teachers lectured to them from the books of Galen and later from al-Razi
and al-Majflsi until the advent of ibn Sina's Canon which eclipsed them
all.”[^26]

Several books were written on hospitals and hospital management.
Un­fortunately, most of them have been lost. A1-Razi wrote a book on Sif
at al­Bimaristan and Zahid al-\`Ulama' wrote Kitdb al-Bimaristan. The
first regular hospital was built by Haran al-Rashid in Baghdad in
170/786, but a bigger and more up-to-date hospital was founded in
368-3691978-979 by \`Adud al­Daulah. In Damascus there was the al-Nuri,
built by Nur al-Din Zangi; one was built by Salah al-Din at Jerusalem
and another at Cairo. Qalawun built the al-Mansuri at Cairo. Besides
these there were hospitals in Mecca, Medina, Harran, and other notable
towns. In Andalusia there were over fifty hospitals in Cordova alone,
besides those at Granada, Seville, and Toledo.

It will be seen from a brief description of the conditions obtaining at
the time in hospitals that in many respects they were better than those
prevailing even today. The Arabs may not have been the first to build
hospitals but they were certainly the first to improve upon them. They
started to give regular instruction in hospitals and to have out-patient
departments. They were the first to have regular inspection over the
administration and finances of the hospitals, the first to examine and
license physicians, and the first to have regular pharmacies attached to
hospitals. They went further by examining and licensing a physician for
the practice of a speciality. The interest of Muslims in building
hospitals was not limited to the Arab period; it continued throughout
the ages.

D - Physicians And Surgeons
---------------------------

Let us now come to the most important part of our narrative, namely, the
great authors and practitioners of the medical science whose theory and
practice enlightened the path of scientific research and whose fame is
indelibly imprinted on the pages of history. Here again, needless to
say, we shall have to confine ourselves to the selection of a few of
these geniuses.

The first great name amongst Muslim physicians is that of abu Bakr
Zaka­riya al-Razi. He was a prolific writer and is said to have written
no less than 117 books dealing with all the different branches of
medicine. Of al-Razi's works, al-Hawi (Continens), running into twenty
volumes, is undoubtedly the most important. This work was translated
into Latin by Faraj bin Salim in 678/1279 and printed at Brescia nearly
two centuries later. Al-Razi did not actually write this book; he left
notes on his original observations, extracts from other peoples' works,
and clinical notes of his medical experience. All this material was sold
by his sister to ibn al-'Amid, the vizier of Rukn al-Daulah, who got the
drafts of those rough notes properly arranged in book-form by the noted
physicians of his time including al-Razi's own pupils. 'Ali ibn 'Abbas
(Haly Abbas) was of the view that during his time only two copies of the
book were in existence. He regarded al-Hawi the repository of medical
knowledge concerning hygiene, diseases, their symptoms, and treatment
with medicine and diet, al-Razi's sources being Hippocrates, Galen, and
all the physicians that preceded him. E. G. Browne translated some of
its clinical notes into English and Max Meyerhof published the text and
translation of some more.

Relatively speaking, the most important of al-Razi's minor treatises is
Kitab al-Judari w-al-Haabah. It deals with smallpox and measles. It was
translated into Greek and Latin and printed in several European
countries. This work is particularly significant because it is the first
to give a clear description of smallpox as a disease and also the first
to give a symptomatic distinction between smallpox and measles. Al-Razi
was the first to include in the pharma­copoeia the white-lead ointment,
later on known in the Middle Ages in Europe as Album Rhases, and the
first to use mercury as a purgative. He was also the first to use
“animal gut as a ligature for surgical operations and was the first to
recognize the reaction of the pupil to light.”[^27]

The next great physician was 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majfisi known in the
West as HalyAbbas. Either he himself or his father was originally a
Zoroastrian; hence the name al-Majfisi. He was a Persian by birth and
flourished during the period of 'Adud al-Daulah and died in 384/994.
After al-Razi and ibn Sina his is the greatest name in the Caliphate of
Baghdad. His most famous work is the medical encyclopedia called the
Kitab al-Maliki (Liber Regius). Sarton regards this work as more
systematic and concise than al-Razi's al-Hawi and more practical than
ibn Sind's Qanun by which it was superseded. Half of the book deals with
the theory and half with the practice of medicine.

Most important parts of it relate to dietetics and materia medica. He
made some original clinical observations and was the first to give close
description of the capillary circulation long before Harvey. He says
that during relaxation (diastole) the pulsating vessels (arteries) that
are near the heart draw air and thinned blood from the heart by suction,
because during their con­traction (systole) the arteries empty
themselves of blood and air, so that when they relax, air and blood is
sucked to them to fill them. Those that are near the skin draw air from
outside. Those that are in the middle, between the heart and the skin,
have the property of drawing the thinnest blood from the non-pulsating
vessels (veins).'

That is because the veins have pores com­municating with the arteries.
The proof of this is that if an artery is cut, all the blood that is in
the vein is emptied through the cut. He was also the first to give proof
of the motion of the womb during parturition and to show that child does
not come out by itself, but it is the movement of the womb that pushes
it out.[^28] In al-Qifti's words al-Maliki was the splendid work and the
noble treasure of the theory and practice of medicine admirably
arranged. It had been one of the most popular texts on medicine until it
was replaced by ibn Sind's Qanun.

Al-Majusi gives a remarkably well-worded advice to the physicians. He
says that the patient should be treated if possible with diet, not with
drugs. If he can be treated with simple drugs he should not be
administered compound ones, nor indeed strange or unknown ones. With
regard to the relation between the physician, the patient, and the
disease, he says that they are three. If the patient co-operates with
the physician they would become two against one and would be able to
beat the disease, but if he does not listen to the physician nor follow
his direction, he and the disease would be two against one, i.e., the
physician; one can hardly beat two. He states that all physicians agree
that the preservation of health is more important than the cure of
disease and quotes Hippocrates that the curing force of disease is
nature itself.[^29]

Al-Majusi's surgical technique is no less remarkable. His lucid
description of the surgical operation for the removal of tubercular
glands is a fine specimen of his art. He says: “Cut the skin
longitudinally down to the gland. Retract the skin with hooks. Dissect
slowly and gently, freeing the gland from the tissues around it. Take
care not to cut any vessel or puncture any nerve. If a vessel is cut,
ligate it, lestt the haemorrhage obscure the field and prevent you from
carrying out a proper and thorough operation.” After removal of the
gland, put your finger in to feel for any small glands that might be
left. If there are any, remove them too. When all the glands are
removed, suture the incision.

Al-Majusi recognized the gravity of cancer and says that medicines do
not help in curing the disease. He advises removal of the whole area
affected by cutting at a distance from the growth so that none of its
roots are left. He advises that after removal blood should not be
stopped from running but that the surgeon should see that the diseased
blood is drained off.[^30]

The famous physician who succeeded 'Ali ibn 'Abbas in the Muslim world
was abu al-Qasim Khalaf ibn 'Abbas al-Zahrawi (d. 404/1013). He took his
name from his birthplace al-Zahra', the famous suburb of Cordova. He was
Court physician to the Caliph al-Hakam II. His fame chiefly rests on
surgery for he was admittedly the greatest of all Muslim surgeons. He
wrote one of the biggest medical encyclopedias, al-Tasrif, in thirty
sections. One of the topics discussed in this work is the preparation of
medicines by sublimation and distillation. It’s most important part is,
however, surgical wherein he “introduces and emphasizes such new ideas
as cauterization of wounds, crushing stone inside the bladder, and the
necessity of vivisection and dis­section.”[^31] He also deals with
obstetrics and the surgery of eyes, ears, and teeth and gives a
description of surgical instruments.

The surgical part of al-Tasrif was translated into Latin by Gerard of
Cre­mona, and various editions of it were published at Venice, Basel,
and Oxford from the ninth/fifteenth to the twelfth/eighteenth century.
For centuries it was used as a text-book in surgery in the universities
of Europe such as Salerno, Montpellier, and other schools of
medicine.[^32]

The man who is described by one Orientalist as “the most famous
scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places and
times” and by the other “the greatest man that this world has ever
seen”[^33] is abu 'Ali al-­Husain ibn'Abd Allah ibn Sina. William Harvey
puts him in the same category as Aristotle and Cicero. At the age of
eighteen he cured the Samanid Amir of Bukhara and as a result was
appointed Court physician and given per­mission to use the royal
library.

Ibn Sina's greatest medical work was the Qanun (Canon) used as “medical
Bible for a longer period than any other book,”[^34] an encyclopedic
work of about a million words covering the entire medical knowledge,
ancient as well as contemporary. In many ways he resembled Galen. Before
ibn Sina's Qanun, the best work on medicine was al-Razi's al-Hawi but,
according to all com­petent authorities, that work was superseded by the
Qanun. Ibn Sina analysed for the first time pathological and
psychological phenomena and made acute observations about the
differential diagnosis of medastinitis and pleurisy, infectious nature
of phthisis, skin diseases, sexual ailments and perversions (including
love-sickness), diseases of the nervous system, and transmission of
diseases through water, food, and soil.

Ibn Sina is the first to write a careful description of meningitis and
differ­entiate between primary and secondary meningismus. He also gives
a full description of the various types of diseases which cause
jaundice. He differen­tiates between facial paralysis of central origin
and that of local origin. He de­scribes apoplexy as being caused by
plethora. He gives a clear description of the symptoms of pleurisy and
its differential diagnosis. The signs of pleurisy, he says, are:
continuous fever; stitch in the side which many times does not appear
except after a deep breath; shortness of breath; see-saw pulse; and
cough, usually dry in the beginning, but may be wet and with
expectoration from the start. He says: In as much as pleurisy might
resemble hepatitis and pneumonia, we must differentiate between them.
The difference between pleurisy and hepatitis is that in the latter the
pulse is wavy, the pain is dull and heavy and not pricking, the face is
yellowish, the urine thick and the stools “livery.” There is heaviness
in the right side over the liver region and no stitch in the side. The
difference between pleurisy and pneumonia is that in the latter the
pulse is wavy, the shortness of breath more marked, the breath hotter
besides other symptoms?[^35]

The Qanun is divided into five major sections. Briefly stated, the
contents of these sections are as follows. The first section deals with
definitions, ele­ments, humours, temperaments, and spirits; anatomy
(bones, muscles, nerves, arteries, and veins); diseases, their causes
and symptoms; hygiene and pro­phylaxis; and general treatment. The
second section deals with simples, in an alphabetical order. The third
section gives a description of diseases from the head downwards,
including the anatomy of the organs-head, brain, nerves, eyes, ears,
nose and mouth; tongue, teeth, lips and gums; throat, chest, and lungs;
heart, breast, oesophagus and stomach, liver, and gall­bladder; spleen,
intestines, male and female genital organs-and general diseases. The
fourth section deals with fever, prognosis and crisis; swellings and
ulcers, surgery, fractures and dislocations, poisons, skin diseases, and
cosmetics. The fifth section deals with compound drugs and therapeutics.

Several commentaries on the Qanun are extant, the best known being by
ibn Nafis under the title al-Mu'jiz. In the Asian part of the Muslim
world, the Qanun held the sway, but in Spain it was played down by ibn
Zuhr and ibn Rushd. It was translated into Latin by Gerard of
Cremona[^36]

Another unique book by ibn Sina is the Urjuzah fi al-Tibb, which is a
medical poem that sums up the medical knowledge of the time. It was
meant to facilitate the study of medicine. With their wonderfully
tenacious memories the Arabs were able to memorize it. Its first part
deals with the theory of medicine and hygiene, and the second with
treatment. Another of his well­known books is al-Shifa'. Usaibi'ah
credits him with having written nineteen medical and ninety non-medical
books [^37]

The illustrious “Shaikh,” by which name ibn Sina is generally known
throughout the Muslim world, died at Hamdin in 428/1037. He reigned
supreme for more than six centuries not only in the Muslim world but
also in Christendom. His theories, as propounded in the Qanuu, are still
widely respected in the Orient by Hakims and form the cornerstone of the
history of medical teaching in the Occident.

In Egypt flourished ibn al-Haitham (Alhazen of the West), “the greatest
Muslim physicist and one of the greatest students of optics of all
times.”[^38] He was born in Basrah but migrated to Egypt in the time of
Caliph al-Hakim. “He was also an astronomer, mathematician, physician,
and he wrote com­mentaries on Galen and Aristotle.” He corrected the
Greek misconception about the nature of vision and taught, for the first
time, that light does not “exude” from the eye but enters it. He also
taught that the retina was the seat of vision and that the impressions
made upon it were conveyed along the optic nerve to the brain forming
visual images on symmetrical portions of both retinas.

In Spain there was a most famous family of physicians whose contribution
to medicine was no less remarkable. Translations from the works of this
family are found in the libraries of Western universities even to the
present day. We are referring to the ibn Zuhr family that drew its name
from their ancestor Zuhr. The first great physician of the family was
abu Marwan 'Abd al-Malik (d. 470/1077-78). He was renowned as a
diagnostician. His son abu al-'Ala' (d. 525/1130-31) was even a greater
physician than him. He was first attached to the Court of Seville but
was later raised to the rank of a vizier when that kingdom was conquered
by Yusuf ibn Tashifin. He wrote several medical works, viz., Kitab
al-Khwass (Book of Properties), Kitab al-Adwiyah al-Mufradah (Book of
Simple Drugs), Kitab al-Idah (Book of Explanation), Mujarrabat
(Personally Tested Prescriptions), Kitdb Hall Sukiek al-Rdzi 'ala Kutub
Jalinus (Resolution of al-Razi's Doubts regarding Galen's Works), Kitab
al-Nukdt al-Tibbiyyah (Book on Principles of Medicine). The last
mentioned work among other things specially deals with climatological
and anthropological conditions prevailing in Marrakush and with
deontological guidance. He also wrote a treatise in refutation of
certain points in ibn Sina's work on simple drugs.

The most illustrious member of this family was abu Marwan 'Abd al-Malik
ibn abi al-'Ala' Zuhr (d. 556-557/1160-1161) known in Latin works as
Avenzor. His supremacy as a physician was acknowledged not only in the
Muslim world but also in Christendom. His medical theory had strong
empirical tendencies. He may justly be said to be the greatest clinician
of Islam after al-Razi. Only three of his at least six works are now
extant.

1. Kitab al-Taisir fi al-Muddwat w-al-Tadbir (Book of Simplification on
Therapeutics and Diet), written at the request of ibn Rushd, is the most
im­portant of them all. It deals elaborately with pathology and
therapeutics and at the end gives a comprehensive collection of recipes.
In this work ibn Zuhr makes acute clinical observations about
mediastinal tumours, intestinal phthisis, pericarditis, scabies,
pharyngeal paralysis, and inflammation of the middle ear.

2. Kitab al-Aqhdhiyah (Book on Eatables).

3. Kitab al-Iqtisad dealing with therapeutics, psychotherapy, and
hygiene.

Ibn Zuhr is said to be the first physician to have described the
itch-mite. He advocated artificial feeding through the gullet and
rectum.

Ibn Zuhr's son abu Bakr Muhammad ibn al-Malik was a successful
phy­sician and his daughter and the daughter of that daughter were
capable mid­wives. Medicine went into the family down to six
generations. Ibn Zuhr's influence through Hebrew and Latin translations
upon Western medicine lasted till the end of the eleventh/seventeenth
century. The translations of Taisir like ibn Rushd's Kulliyat saw
several editions.

The great Spanish philosopher ibn Rushd (Averroes) was a contemporary of
ibn Zuhr. His greatness as a physician was eclipsed only by his
greatness as a philosopher. His most important medical work Kitab
al-Kulliydt fi al­-Tibb (Latin Colliget) was a veritable encyclopedia of
medicine. As mentioned above, the Latin translation of this work went
through several editions in Europe. It was also translated twice in
Hebrew. It had seven parts (books) dealing with anatomy, physiology,
pathology, diagnostics, materia medica, hygiene, and therapeutics. He
was the first to discover that no person can get smallpox more than
once. He is also said to be the first to understand the working of the
retina.

Ibn Tufail, ibn Rushd's predecessor in philosophy, was also a renowned
physician; he wrote two books on medicine, neither of which is extant.

Another name worth mentioning in connection with the development of
medicine in the Muslim West is that of ibn Baitar. He was born in Malaga
and travelled all over Spain, North Africa, Egypt, Syria, and Asia
Minor. He was a botanist rather than a pharmacologist. Most of his work
was done in Egypt where he was appointed chief inspector of pharmacies.
His two chief works, al-Mughni fi al-Adwiyah al-Mufradah and al-Jami' li
Mufradat al-­Adwiyah w-al-Aqhdiyah, embodied all the Greek and Arabic
literature on botany and materia medica as well as the author's own wide
experience and research. He describes more than one thousand and four
hundred drugs from the vegetable, animal, and mineral kingdoms, three
hundred of which are novelties. The book is arranged alphabetically.
Usaibi\`ah[^39] describes the thoroughness of his teacher's methods;
Usaibi\`ah was not only al-Baitar's pupil but also herborized with him
in Syria. His book al-Adwiyah al-Mufradah was translated into Latin,
Simplicibus, printed in twenty-six editions during and after the
ninth/fifteenth century, and was used in the formation of the first
London pharmacopoeia issued by the College of Physicians during the
reign of James I. Some parts of its Latin version were printed as late
as 1172/1758 at Cremona.[^40]

\`Ala' al-Din abu al-Hasan \`Ali ibn abi al-Hazm, better known as ibn
al­Nafis, flourished during the first half of the seventh/thirteenth
century. Born in Damascus, he spent most of his life in Cairo where he
practised medicine and became dean of the Mansuri hospital. He wrote
several books, the most important being al-Mu'jiz and Sharh Tashrih
al-Qanun. In describing the anatomy of the pulmonary vessels, ibn Nafis
also described for the first time the pulmonary circulation and declared
three centuries before Servetus that blood is aerated in the lungs. In
his description of the anatomy of the heart he gives the nearest
description in those times of the coronary circulation. He says that ibn
Sinn's statement that the blood which is in the right side of the heart
is to nourish the heart is not true at all, because the nourishment of
the heart is from the blood that goes into the vessels that permeate the
body of the heart.[^41]

In this' section we have briefly touched upon the works of the great
authors who have contributed so largely to the development of the
various branches of the medical science. There are a host of others who
played an equally important role. They live in history. We have also
been unable to deal with the veterinary science, especially hippology,
of which the Arabs were so fond and in which they displayed so great a
mastery.

Arab biblio-biographers, like al-Qifti, ibn abi Usaibi\`ah, and ibn
Khallikan, have done a magnificent job in collecting the works of
various authors, but it is a fact that scores and scores of manuscripts
are still lying unexplored in libraries and mosques, palaces and museums
and are awaiting careful examination; these may open fresh sluice-gates
of knowledge regarding Muslim contribution to medical and other
sciences. The need for more texts and more translations, more especially
of those works which were composed after the Mongol hordes broke in upon
Persia and Baghdad, is vey great indeed for the present renaissance of
the Muslim world. The task is not easy; in fact, it is superhuman.

E - Influence
-------------

Muslim physicians, more particularly some of those who lived in Spain,
contributed largely to the Renaissance in Europe. But in the matter of
Muslim influence upon European medicine no names are greater than those
of al­-Razi and ibn Sina. Within a century and a half of the death of
ibn Sina his works reached Spain and Sicily where they began to be
translated. It was from these centres of learning that Arab science
spread to the other parts of Europe. The spread of Arab science in the
West was mainly due to the fact that the Eastern Caliphs were in
constant touch with the rulers of Europe.

Harun al-Rashid sent an ambassador to the Court of the Roman Emperor. It
is even said that Charlemagne came to Palestine incognito in order to
consult the Arab physicians about his health. The medical scholars of
the universities of Western Europe like Montpellier and Bologna
particularly specialized in Arab learning and were responsible for the
propagation of the teachings of al-Razi and ibn Sina. Montpellier had an
immense library.

All the translations made by Constantine the African and Gerard of
Cremona were housed in this library at a time when the Paris University
library hardly contained more than a score of medical works. From these
centres the teachings of the Arabs spread to all medical schools in
Europe. From the sixth/twelfth to the eleventh/seventeenth century
al-Razi and ibn Sina were considered superior even to Hippocrates and
Galen.[^42]

Bibliography
------------

Ibn abi Usaibi\`ah, \`Uyun al-Anba' p Tabagat al-Atibba', Wahabiyyah
Press, Cairo, 1300/1882; al-Qifti, Tdrikh al-Hukama', Sa\`adah Press,
Cairo, 1326/1908; ibn al-Nadim, al-Fihrist, Rahmaniyyah Press, Cairo,
1348/1929; Sir Thomas Arnold and A. Gillaume (Eds.), The Legacy of
Islam, London, 1942; Edward G. Browne, Arabian Medicine, Cambridge
University Press, 1921; A. Castiglioni, A History of Medicine, 2nd ad.
rev. & enlarged, trans. from the Italian by E. B. Krumhaar, New York,
1947; L. Clendening, A Source-Book of Medical History, New York, 1942;
E. G. Coppola, “The Discovery of the Pulmonary Circulation: A New
Approach,” Bull. Hist. Med., Jan.-Feb. 1957, Vol. XXXI, No. 1, pp.
44-47; Charles G. Cumston, An Introduction to the History of Medicine,
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., London, 1926; Omar A. Farrukh, Arab
Genius in Science and Philosophy, 2nd ed., trans. by J. B. Hardie,
Washington, 1934; A. R. Ghani, “Medieval Muslim Science: A Handlist of
Indo-Pakistani References,” Pakistan J. Sci., 1954,Vol.VI,No. 1, pp.
49-53; B. L. Gordon, “Arabian Medicine in the Post-Koranic Period,” J.
Michigan State Med. Sec., Sept. 1956, Vol. LX, No. 9, pp. 1109-16; C. H.
Haskins, Studies in the History of Medieval Science, Cambridge, Mass.,
1924; P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, Macmillan,. London, 1937; ibn
Jubair, Rihlah Ibn Jubair (The Travels of Ibn Jubair), Saadah Press,
Cairo,

A History of Muslim Philosophy/1908; Dr. Issa, Hi8toire de-8 bimaristans
a l'epoque Islamique, Cairo; Amin A. Khairallah, Outline of Arabic
Contributions to Medicine and Allied Sciences, American press, Beirut,
1946; Lucien Leclerc, Histoire de la medicine arabe, 2 Vols., Leroux,
Paris, 1876; M. Meyerhof, “Sultan Saladin's Physician (Ibn Jami) on
Transmission of Greek Medicine to Arabs,” Bull. Hist. Med., Vol. XVIII,
July 1945, pp. 169-87; Aldo Mieli, La science Arabe et son role dane
l'evolution scientifique mondiale, Brill, Leiden, 1938; De Lacy O'Leary,
How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs, London, 1951; Osler, Evolution of
Modern Medicine, Yale University Press, 1921; G. Sarton, Introduction to
the History of Science, 3 Vols., Baltimore, 1927-48; Sayyid 'Ali Ahmad
Nayyar Wasti, Tibb al-'Arab (Urdu translation of E. G. Browne, Arabian
Medicine, with explanatory notes and comments), Lahore, 1954; W. Winwood
Reade, The Martyrdom of Man, Walts & Co., London, 1872; ibn Sina,
al-Qanun fi al-Tibb, 3 Vols., Cairo; al-Razi, Kitab al-Hawi fi al-Tibb,
Parts I, II, III and IV in Arabic, Osmania Oriental Publication Bureau,
Hyderabad Deccan, 1374-76/ 1955-57.

[^1]: Fonahn, Zur Quellenkunde der persischen Medizin.

[^2]: Max Meyerhof, “Science and Medicine,” The Legacy of Islam, 1942,
p. 311

[^3]: Qur'an, vii, 31.

[^4]: Sa'di, Gulistan, Vol. III, p. 6.

[^5]: Winwood W. Reade, The Martyrdom of Man, Walts & Co., London, 1872,
p. 214.

[^6]: E. G. Brown, Arabian Medicine, Urdu translation with commentary by
Sayyid \`Ali Ahmad Nayyar Wasti, p. 15.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 13.

[^9]: Ibid., pp. 164-66.

[^10]: C. G. Cumston, An Introduction to the History of Medicine,
London, 1926, p. 185.

[^11]: G. Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science, Vol. I, pp.
16-17.

[^12]: A. A. Khairallah, Outline of Arabic Contributions to Medicine and
Allied Sciences, p. 43.

[^13]: Cumston, op. cit., p. 191.

[^14]: Khairallah, op. cit., pp. 54ff.

[^15]: Campbell, Arabian Medicine, Vol. I, p. xii.

[^16]: E. G. Brown, Arabian Medicine, p. 113.

[^17]: Ya'qubi, Vol. II, p. 436.

[^18]: Usaibi'ah, Vol. I, p. 187

[^19]: Ibid., p. 163.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 246.

[^21]: Khairallah, op. cit., p. 41.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 40.

[^23]: Maqrizi, Vol. II, p. 406.

[^24]: Issa, Histoire des bimaristans a l'epoque Islamique, p. 20;
Khairallah and Haddad, “A Study of Arab Hospitals in the Light of
Present-Day Standardization,” Bull. Amer. Coll. Surg. Sept., 1936;
Khairallah, op. cit., p. 63.

[^25]: Usaibi'ah, Vol. 11, p. 153.

[^26]: Ibid. p. 243; Khairallah, op. cit., p. 65.

[^27]: Cyril Elgood, A Medical History of Persia, p. 203.

[^28]: P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, p. 365.

[^29]: Khairallah, op. cit., p. 28

[^30]: Al-Majusi, Kitab al-Maliki, Vol. II, p. 467, see Khairallah, op.
cit., p. 118.

[^31]: P. K. Hitti, op. cit., p. 577.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: G. Sarton, op. cit., Vol.1, p. 709.

[^34]: Sir W. Osler, Evolution of Modern Medicine, 1922, p. 98.

[^35]: Ibn Sina, al-Qanun ft al-Tibb, Vol. II, pp. 240-41.

[^36]: Khairallah, op. cit., pp. 124-25.

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: G. Sarton, op. cit., Vol. I, p. 721.

[^39]: Usaibi\`ah, Vol. II, p. 133; cf. Khairallah, op. cit., p. 154,
also P. K. Hitti, op. cit., p. 576.

[^40]: M. M. Sharif, Muslim Thought, Its Origin and Achievements, p. 63.

[^41]: Cf. Khairallah, op. cit., pp. 129-30.

[^42]: C. Elgood, op. cit., pp. 205ff.


