Chapter 51: Arabic Literature, Poetic and Prose Forms
=====================================================

A. Grammar
----------

The intellectual activity of the early Muslims stemmed directly from
their devotion of religion. The Arabs had throughout been sensitively
proud of their language; contacts with foreigners were regarded by them
as derogatory to pure Arabism. However, before Islam any corruption of
the dialect was but a social drawback; after Islam, any lapse from the
norm inevitably led to distortion of the sacred text with dire
consequences both in this as well as in the next world. Curiously
enough, it was Islam itself which brought about the commingling of the
Arabs with the non-Arabs on a vast and unprecedented scale.

In the very second decade of the Hijrah the Arabs were carried on the
crest of a wave of military conquests across the bounds of their
homeland to settle down in the neighbouring countries of Iraq, Persia,
Syria, and Egypt. At the same time there was a large influx of aliens,
mostly prisoners of war, into the principal towns – Mecca and Medina –
of Arabia itself. Before long, there appeared for the first time in
history a considerable and growing number of neophytes seeking
initiation into Arab society with a conscious effort to learn, imbibe,
and serve that new religious culture which was only couched in Arabic
and had its prototype in Arab milieu.

Naturally enough, the inaptitude of these neophytes in the use of the
Arabic tongue excited the laughter of the younger folk in Arab
households, it also shocked the elders as it amounted to inadvertent
profanity and distortion of the Qur’anic verses.[^1] The corruptive
effects on the new generation of the Arabs – the townsmen among them –
were no less disconcerting; the daily usages marked a sharp decline from
the Qur’anic idiom. Thus, there is little doubt that about the middle of
the first century of the Hijrah the Muslims were squarely face to face
with their foremost literary problem, viz, the need for the preservation
of the Qur’an.

The Arabs needed reinforcing their own natural way of speech with a
discipline of conscious effort; they were also eager, in keeping with
the true spirit of Islam, to pass on to the myriads of non-Arabs, who
daily swelled the ranks of the faithful, not only the religion and the
practices of Islam but also the language as a key to a first-hand
knowledge of its primary source or sources.[^2] Actually, however, only
a few of the Arabs concerned themselves with those branches of studies
which involved the use of the method of *qiyas*, i.e. analogy and
deduction.[^3]

Such creative intellectual activity was notably flair of the non-Arab
inhabitants of Iraq, which province occupied a unique position in the
incipient literary life of Islam. It is worthwhile recalling that the
province had been the cradle of ancient civilizations and the nursery of
cultural currents from the Hellenes, including those relayed from the
important academy of Jundi-Shapur; hence, the mental attitudes of its
inhabitants bore the stamp of philosophical scientific discipline. Still
more remarkable was the spirit motivating the political relationship of
these “intellectuals” with their proud and unlettered masters, the
Arabs, and their peculiar religious and cultural propensities towards
Islam and the Arabic language.

In contrast with Syria and Egypt, it will be seen that the *‘Ajmis* of
Iraq were from the very beginning determined to assert their own
individuality, albeit only within the pale of Islam and on the ground of
Arabs’ own devotion to the Arabic language. Even the Sh‘ubiyyah
movement, the outburst of an outraged sense of superiority of the
Persians over the Arabs, involved no resilience from loyalty to the
language of the Qur’an. It was a clear parallel to early Shi‘ism, which
was calculated to work out the political ascendancy of the Persians but
only under the supreme and authoritarian over-lordship of the House of
the Arabian Prophet.

Basrah and Kufa, the two cantonments of the Arabs, provided ideal
conditions for fruitful contact between the Arabs and the non-Arabs. Of
particular importance were the proximity of the two towns to the
northern Arabian desert, long regarded as the preserve of the linguistic
norm, and the market-place of al-Mirbad – on the outskirts of Basrah –
was no less a close-by rendezvous of the *A‘rab* (Bedouin Arabs of the
desert) and the *literati* until the former, becoming aware of the
demand, themselves came to offer their linguistic materials to the
*elite* of Iraq and western Persia.

According to the classical tradition, it was Abu al-Aswad (Zalim b.
‘Amr) of al-Du’ali (or Dili), a poet, warrior, and teacher died (69/688
– 89) at the age of 85), who took the first step to stem the tide of
growing laxity and error in the use of the Arabic tongue. He was an
active partisan of ‘Ali in politics and actually fought against
Mu‘awiyah at Siffin. It is, therefore, no surprise that he should take
pride in claiming that the rudiments of Arabic grammar were confided to
him by ‘Ali. This assertion can safely be dismissed as only an instance
of the too frequent attempt to trace all learning to ‘Ali, the “Gateway
of the City of Knowledge.”

It is also true that Abu al-Aswad himself cannot be credited with having
worked out the fundamentals of Arabic grammar as such.[^4] But it is
reasonably certain that he did institute something which, to later
historians of the development of grammar, appeared to be the genesis of
it. Let us examine what it was actually. Until the time with which we
are concerned, the Arabic script, originally taken over from the
Syriac-Nabataean writing, remained without a system of *i‘rab*, i.e.
vowel-marks. Nor was there any established practice as to the *i‘jam*,
i.e. diacritical marks, to distinguish letters of similar shape. Of
course, there was no urgent need for either so long as the main
dependence was on memory and writing was regarded as a mere casual
help.[^5]

In context of the new demands made by the change in the social pattern,
the alert and acute mind of Abu al-Aswad realized the inadequacy of the
written consonantal letter to evoke the correct unmarked vowel, which
had ceased to come natural as of yore. He, therefore, must have been the
first to conceive the idea of introducing some further aid to make the
people “know and observe correct speech.” It appears that at the first
innovation was opened Ziyad b. Abihi, the Governor of Basrah, with whose
sons Abu al-Aswad might have discussed it. After some time, however, all
conceded that it was absolutely needed and Abu al-Aswad went forward to
lay down the following system:

1. the vowel “a,” the pronunciation of which needs a full upward opening
*(fathah)* of the mouth, to be marked with a dot above the letter,

2. the vowel “i,” the pronunciation of which needs a little downward
movement *(kasrah)* of the mouth, to be marked with a dot below the
letter,

3. the vowel “u,” the pronunciation of which needs a rounded closing
*(dammah)* of the lips, to be marked with a dot in front of the
letter.[^6]

This system of dots is to be seen in one of the oldest copies of the
Qur’an dated 77/696, now preserved in the National Library at Cairo. The
text on parchment is in black, while the vowel dots are in red, in
accordance with the usual practice. It has been noted that a similar
system of dots was in use in the writing of Syriac, and, though Abu
al-Aswad’s contacts with the Syrians are not expressly alluded to, it
stands more than probable that having realized the urgency he turned
round and took the cue from his compatriots of the Syrian Christian
Church.[^7]

It is also possible, as some reports make out, that Abu al-Aswad went a
step further to propound some broad distinctions in the main parts of a
sentence such as the subject and the predicate. On the whole, however,
his contribution was merely to focus attention on the usage of vowel
endings as the distinctive characteristic of Arabic. Hence, observation
of vowel endings was designated *al-‘Arabiyyah*, i.e. the art of speech
in the correct and characteristic Arab way. The use of vowel-endings
itself was known as *al-i‘rab*, i.e. rendering into the proper Arabic
way.[^8] The *al-‘Arabiyyah* was undoubtedly an embryonic form of Arabic
grammar.

The emphasis on *al-‘Arabiyyah* grew in proportion to the need for
saving the Qur’an from being consigned to antiquity. So far the method
used was mere *talaqin*, i.e. putting the particulars in the mouth of
the student. Only the necessary terms and signs for indicating the
different vowels in speech and writing had been devised. As yet there
was no *ta‘lil* or reasoning on the basis of general principles
governing the incidence of the *i‘rab*. But certainly the *i‘rab* was
under intense and searching observation, from which it was not a far
step to collecting a number of analogous examples and inducting from
them some rules for general guidance.

This was the beginning of the discovery of the logical structure of the
language which, in the words of Sarton, was as much a scientific
discovery as, for example, the discovery of the anatomical structure of
the human body. This scientific discovery, the *Nahw* proper, reached
the proportions of a separate branch of study at Basrah with ‘Abd Allah
b. Abi Ishaq al-Hadrami (d. 117/736) and his student, Abu ‘Amr ‘Isa b.
‘Umar al-Thaqafi (d. 149/767). Both the teacher and the student were
non-Arab clients (the latter being the client of none other than Khalid
b. al-Walid) who relished putting the Arabs to shame on the score of
incorrect speech. They had a reputation for boldness in *‘ilal
w-al-qiyas*, i.e. induction of causes from an array of analogous
examples.

Even in the first flush of discovery, they were so confident of the
principles arrived at that they did not mind criticizing on their basis
the ancient model poets such as al-Nabighah, not to speak of the
contemporary al-Farazdaq. When the latter composed a vitriolic satire
against his dogmatic critic, ibn Abi Ishaq would only retaliate by
pointing out a grammatical mistake even in the satirical verse.[^9] The
student elaborated the method explicitly, as in discovering principles
which held well generally and in listing the deviations as *lughat*,
i.e. exceptional usages. And it was he who embodied the results in two
books said to have been the first on the subject.

It must be noted that *al-lahn*, i.e. incorrect speech, which gave
stimulus to the thought of Abu al-Aswad, had by the turn of the
first/seventh century assumed alarming proportions. It had percolated to
the ranks of the *elite* of the Court and the administration as well as
the circles of the learned such as the traditionists and the jurists.
But the deterioration, as far from inducing an attitude of toleration,
gave rise to a strong reaction against what was regarded almost as a
sin, and there was a determined effort not so much to preserve the
purity of the Qur’anic text as to make the ordinary speech conform to
the standards of its idiom.[^10] It was at this very time that
*al-Nahw*, the science of “the proper way of speech of the Arabs” (ibn
Jinni), was fully recognized as an independent branch of study and the
term *al-nahwi* became widespread in popular parlance.[^11]

The Basrah School reached its perfection in the following age, which
produced such giants as al-Khalil and Sibawaihi. Al-Khalil b. Ahmad, a
truly versatile genius of Arab descent (al-Furhudi/al-Farahidi,
al-Azdi), whose contribution alone would outweigh the achievement of the
host of non-Arabs, was born in 100/718 – 19 and died sometime between
170/786 and 175/791. There can be no greater testimony to his powers or
originality than the discovery of Arabic prosody without any previous
pattern, taking his cue merely from the rhythmic beats of the smith’s
hammer.

No surprise that after benefiting from the teachings of ‘Isa b. ‘Umar,
he should have been able to elaborate the framework of Arabic grammar, a
framework within which *al-i‘rab* could be explained and reasoned out.
But al-Khalil cared neither for fame nor for material gain; it is said
of him that he lived in a state of abject penury while his students made
a fortune with the learning imbibed from him. It fell to the lot of his
Persian student Sibawaihi,[^12] who also had direct contact with ‘Isa b.
‘Umar, to complete the work of al-Khalil and to arrange and produce his
findings in concrete book form.

Sibawaihi (Abu Bishr ‘Amr b. ‘Uthman b. Qanbar), a native of Shiraz who
died at the young age of about 40 years in the last quarter of the
second century of the Hijrah, really proved to be another genius for
comprehensiveness, if not so much for originality. His *Kitab* has
throughout the ages been regarded as the final word on Arabic grammar
and has become proverbial for its unique position in the field. Those
who followed Sibawaihi right down to the present time could only comment
upon, remove obscurities, arrange and rearrange the materials furnished
in the “Book” without adding much to it.

It has been a vexed question as to whether the main concepts of Arabic
grammar are an indigenous growth or they are traceable to some external
pattern. Modern scholars have stumbled upon casual resemblances such as
those with the Indian *Praticakhyas*, but they offer no secure ground
for any assumption of borrowing. It must be remembered that the Arabic
grammar is concerned mainly with the *i‘rab*, which is a peculiarity of
the Arabic language and was actually realized and proudly asserted to be
so by the early grammarians.

Hence, it is no less misleading to make much of the similarity between
the division of a word in *“ism,”* *“fi‘l,”* and *“harf”* in Arabic and
the analogous categories in Syriac or Greek. Obviously, the Arabic
grammarians had to chalk out and proceed on their own lines and, in
fact, they have given us a fair idea of how they applied their efforts
on the problems, which was peculiarly their own. As hinted earlier, they
began by observing the various positions of the words in a sentence and
the particular *i‘rab* taken by them in those positions.[^13] These
rules went on developing in the direction of reducing further and
further the number of exceptions which would not admit of their general
application.

What helped the people of Iraq in this undertaking was a flair of
*‘ilal* and *qiyas*, which was exhibited in an equal measure in
grammatical and literary studies as well as in *Fiqh* and
jurisprudence.[^14] This flair certainly bears the impress of Hellenism.
Nevertheless, it remains a mere conjecture that the early Muslims took
over anything specific from Greek sources in grammar, in the same way as
it is a mere wishful thought that *Fiqh* is indebted to anything
specific in the Roman Law.[^15]

The cornerstone of Arabic grammar is the correlation of the *i‘rab* of
the different parts of a sentence based on the theory of an *‘amil*,
i.e., an efficient cause supposedly resident in one of the parts and
governing the whole. The earliest trace of it is perhaps in the *Kitab
al-‘Awamil* of al-Khalil – a work known to us only by its title. But
there is no reason to suppose that al-Khalil diverged in any way from
the general line pursued thitherto by ‘Isa b. ‘Umar and others. Unless,
therefore, this *‘amil* theory is proved to have been formulated on a
familiar pattern, the indebtedness of Arabic grammarians to any external
source will remain highly problematic.

There is, however, yet another development of Arabic grammar which is
clearly and directly traceable to Greek influence. The most notable and
lasting effect of the assimilation of Greek logic and philosophy in the
‘Abbasid period was a general tendency to remould into logically defined
systems almost all the nascent branches of learning, which until then
lacked a rigid order. So far as Arabic grammar is concerned, the
development took place when a Mu‘tazilite Mutakallim and a *nahwi* were
combined in the person of Abu al-Hassan “Ali b. ‘Isa al-Rummani (d.
384/994).

Actually, the process reached its culmination in al-Rummani so as to
justify his being credited with that highly conventional logical
reasoning which has since formed such a notable feature of Arabic
grammar. This new development is amply borne out by a saying that out of
the three contemporaries the words of al-Sirafi (Abu Sa‘id al-Hassan b.
‘Abd Allah) were thoroughly understood without a teacher, those of Abu
‘Ali (al-Hassan b. Ahmad) al-Farisi were only partly so, whereas those
of al-Rummani were not intelligible at all.[^16] Even though Abu ‘Ali
al-Farisi, who, according to solve the above testimony, was himself
partly affected by the innovation, is reputed to have commented that if
*Nawh* be what was expounded by al-Rummani, then he had nothing to do
with it, and *vice versa*.

Undoubtedly, al-Rummani, did not bring out a new system of grammar, he
only applied the methods and the jargon of Aristotelian logic to the
adumbration of those nebulous conceptions which, in the simple language
of the old tradition as represented by al-Sirafi, were easily
comprehended by the average student. There was a similar transformation
in Arabic rhetorics, too. Further, it will be noted that by this time
the Arabs had acquired some familiarity with Greek grammar, which
warranted their indulging in a comparison of its merits with those of
Arabic grammar. By the latter was considered to have already possessed a
separate entity with a different development.

While the general trend to Basrah was to go ahead with the formulation
of general rules, there also developed a reaction against the scant
attention paid to the angularities of actual usage, which, however, came
to the fore only when Abu Ja‘far (Muhammad b. Abi Sarra ‘Ali)
al-Ru’asiyy took it over as the basis of the rival school of Kufah
founded by him in the latter half of the second/eighth century. The
Kufans would assiduously collect such instances as violated the general
rules of the Basrans and would treat them not as exceptions but as the
basis of another general rule opposed to that of the Basrans.

This school achieved a meteoric rise in importance under the favour of
the ‘Abbasid caliphs. Two of its very influential representatives at the
Court were: (a) al-Kisa’iyy (Abu al-Hassan ‘Ali b. Hamzah), the Persian
student of both al-Khalil and Abu Ja‘far al-Ru’asiyy, who came to be
regarded as the compeer of Imam Abu Yusuf under Harun al-Rashid, and (b)
al-Farra’ (Yahya b. Ziyad), the Dailamite, who was appointed tutor to
al-Mamun’s sons and was designated as *Amir al-Mu’minin* in the realm of
*Al-Nuhw*.

Ultimately, however, Baghdad proved a veritable crucible for the gradual
fusion of the two schools through inter-change. From the end of the
third/ninth century onwards there flourished at the metropolis scholars
who were free from prejudice for or against any particular town or tribe
and were actuated by sheer academic interest and reasonableness.

Just one more development may be noted. Abu ‘Ali al-Farisi, who has been
mentioned above, had an illustrious student called ‘Uthman b. Jinni (d.
296/1002),the son of a Greek slave, regarded as the last of the
philosopher-grammarians. But ibn Jinni did not help in clothing the
*‘amil* theory with the armoury of logic; rather he submitted the
*‘amil* theory itself to the scrutiny of reason. The result was a
scathing attack on the false notion that one particular word in a
sentence governed the whole.

The hint dropped by ibn Jinni was picked up in far distant Spain by “ibn
Madda’,” the Zahrite Qadi of Cordova under the Muwahhids, who in his
*al-Radd ‘ala al-Nuhat* attempted something in grammar akin to
al-Ghazālī’s *Tahafut* in philosophy. However, his attack, though not
lacking in flashes of brilliance, remained a cry in wilderness as no
alternative formulation of Arabic grammar on a basis other than the
*‘amil* theory was ever achieved, far less accepted.

To sum up, the inspiration for Arabic grammar came from religion; the
need for it was created by the commingling within Islam of the Arabs and
the non-Arabs. The methods of observation and induction yielded the
discovery of the main body of “laws” in the working of language. The
only snag was that the laws of language are not so uniform and immutable
as the laws of nature. The older school of grammarians at Rasrah
suffered from an immature pedantry which was aggravated by the desire of
the non-Arabs among them to outdo the Arabs.

At a very early time ‘Isa b. ‘Umar had the temerity to boast in the
presence of the Arab philologist, Abu ‘Amr b. al-‘Ala’, that he (‘Isa b.
‘Umar) was a greater master of Arabic than Ma‘add b. ‘Adnan, the
progenitor of the Arabs! And both ‘Isa b. ‘Umar and Abu ‘Amr b. al’Ala’
exhibited a tendency to prefer such readings of the Qur’an as, in their
opinion, were more a consonance with the general rule of grammar.[^17]
This authoritarianism on the part of the “wisdom of the school seeking
to improve upon the facts” (Noldeke) was checked by the rise of the
rival school of Kufah. Rather, the latter erred on the other extreme. It
is said of al-Kisa’iyy that in his avid search for the unusual and the
exceptional he would not pause to test the reliability of his sources.

Nonetheless, a relieving feature of the situation was that dogmatism
always felt compelled to bow before actual usage, as typically
exemplified in the contest between Sibawaihi and al-Kasa’iyy at the
Court of Harun al-Rashid.[^18] Ultimately, Baghdad provided the
necessary atmosphere for the gradual shedding of prejudices and the
engagement of all in a joint effort to erect a common edifice large
enough to accommodate the conflicting viewpoints on most, if not all, of
the established usage. The final success was vitiated by sporadic
attempts as putting possible constructions on actual usage.

This tendency was decried at the very start by ‘Isa b. ‘Umar,[^19] but
it reappeared prominently later on and is justly parodied by Abu
al-‘Ala’ al-Ma‘arri in his *Risalat al-Ghufran*.[^20] The instruments of
Aristotelian logic helped to hammer out the crudities of enunciation and
adumbration. Finally, there was an attempt to rebuild the entire system
on a simpler basis other than the *‘amil* theory, which, however, did
not fructify. On the whole, the Arabic grammar remains a magnificent
achievement – religious in spirit, linguistic in material, scientific in
methods, and logical in form – which has been eminently successful in
preserving the Qur’an and keeping its idiom unchanged yet alive
throughout the centuries.

B. Lexicography
---------------

The preservation of the Qur’an involved the institution of such
disciplines as would effectively safeguard not only the authentic
rendering of the text but also the warranted understanding of its import
against error, corruption, or ignorance overtaking those for whom it was
“plain Arabic” at the time. The former purpose was achieved through
*al-‘Arabiyyah*, which later on developed into a full-fledged science
under the name of *al-Nahw*. The next concern was naturally the meaning
conveyed by the text. In the beginning, there could have been little
difficulty about it in the same way as about the vocalization of the
text which was just a matter of natural aptitude.[^21]

However, with the lapse of time and the changes in the social pattern,
uncertainties began to creep in around words and expressions which had
gradually assumed an air of rarity. Obviously, the way to clearing such
doubts and uncertainties was to search for the occurrence of those words
and expressions in the speech of the Arabs elsewhere.[^22] In doing so,
care had to be taken that the citations should faithfully reflect the
idiom of the time of the Prophet during which the Qur’an was revealed.
That is to say, either the citations should belong to the period
contemporary with, or immediately antecedent to, the Qur’an or be called
from the current usage of those whose social pattern had continued
unchanged and who, therefore, could be relied upon to have preserved the
idiom from the time uncorrupted and untainted by the extraneous
influences.

Consequently, a zealous hunt was afoot to collect and preserve as much
of pre-Islamic poetry, proverbs, and orations as could be salvaged from
the memories of the people together with the current idiom of the
*A’rab*, i.e. the people of the desert impervious to influences from
outside. The method of collection was identical with that of the
collection of the Hadith.

The end of the first/seventh century witnessed the rise of a band of
scholars especially noted for their profundity in the field of
*al-lughah* (Arabic usage) with its ancillary branches of *al-sh‘r*
(poetry), *al-akhbar* (historical annals), *al-ayyam* (accounts of
tribal wars, and *al-ansab* (genealogies). The most prominent name among
these scholars is that of Abu ‘Amar b. al-‘Ala (70/689 – 154/770), an
Arab nobleman of Basrah and an associate of ‘Isa b. ‘Umar. His
collection of Arabic philology, when piled up, touched the ceiling of
his asceticism towards the end of his life. Yet he continued to be the
primary source of knowledge for the next generation.

While the process of collecting the vocabulary and the illustrations of
its diverse uses was still going on, the genius of al-Khalil, whom we
have mentioned before, burst with the idea of arranging and fitting the
vocabulary into the orderly scheme of a lexicon. Actually, al-Khalil is
known as the author of the first Arabic lexicon called the *Kitab
al-‘Ain*, but the authorship is a bit disputed. This much, however, is
certain that even if the actual compilation was not exclusively or
partially the work of al-Khalil, the idea of a lexicon and the scheme
thereof were first conceived by him. Let us now examine what the scheme
is like.

Al-Khalil starts with (a) reducing all words to their roots, i.e., the
radical letters *(al-usul)* which form an immutable kernel in
contra-distinction to those that are added *(al-zawa’id)* in the course
of derivation and inflexion. Next (b) he classifies the roots according
to the number of letters comprised in them: 2, 3, 4, and 5. Each class
of words is then arranged in a separate part and even within each class
special treatment under distinctive heading is resorted to in the case
of words containing one or more of the vowels, double letters, or a
*hamazah*.

The above framework is in line with al-Khalil’s attempt at a computation
of Arabic vocabulary, which is a further proof of his originality. The
quest he pursued on the same structural basis in a mathematical way. By
multiplying the 28 letters of the alphabet by 27 (28 minus one, to drop
out double letters) he got 756 forms of the bilateral (there being no
uni-literals in Arabic). Dividing this number by two, he had 378
combinations irrespective of the order of the two letters. Taking these
bi-literal forms as one unit and adding a third letter to them, he
worked out the number of tri-literal forms and so on.

It will be observed that the above method yielded the theoretically
possible combinations of letters, all of which are not in actual use
*(musta‘mal)*. Consequently, al-Khalil had to mention each and every
possible combination and indicate if any specific forms were unused
*(muhmal)*. A further peculiarity, which made reference so difficult
wand cumbersome, was that in the arrangement of the lexicon he concerned
himself merely with combination of letters and mentioned all the forms
yielded by a change of order of the letters under one and the same
heading. For example, under MY one will find both MY and its reverse
*(maqlub)* YM.

Within the above framework, intrinsically scientific but practically
unhandy, the order was according to the opening letter of the alphabet
in the words. But the order of the alphabet observed by al-Khalil was
not free from novelty; the grouping was according to the part of the
mouth, from down the throat right to the lips, which produced sound.
This novelty has been aptly noted and the similarity between it and the
practice of the Sanskrit lexicographers has aroused a good deal of
speculation. There is no doubt that the present day arrangement, based
on grouping of words according to the shape of the letters in writing,
was the one in common use even at that distant date, though the Arabs
were also familiar with the order according to the *abjad* system, which
was originally taken over from the Syriac (and Hebrew) along with the
art of writing.[^23]

The phonetic-physiological system of al-Khalil was neither common at the
time not did it achieve popularity afterwards. But any significance
which its similarity to that of Sanskrit might suggest is whittled down
by due consideration of the fact that in all probability it developed
indigenously out of the practice of the recitation of the Qur’an. With
the emphasis on recitation it was but natural the phonetics should
receive special attention and that there be a grouping of letters on
that basis. Actually, evidence does not want that the linguists did
engage themselves in such a study; there were some differences too
between the Basrans and the Kufans as to the order of the alphabet on
the basis of phonetics.[^24] Moreover, al-Khalil also paid some regard
to the frequency of the letters in use. Otherwise, *‘ain* would not have
come first in order.[^25]

No doubt, the general lexicon of al-Khalil represented an idea much in
advance of his time. For the following century or so no one dared
imitate, far less improve upon, his scheme. In the meantime, however,
much valuable work was done in the form of small tracts comprising
words, synonyms, and cognates with their fine shades of meaning grouped
around particular subjects. Typical of such subjects are: *al-ibil* (the
camel), *al-matar* (the rain), *al-silah* (the weapons), and the like.
Similarly, special features of the Arabic usage were also singled out
for monographic treatment: (a) *al-muthallathat*, (b) *al-maqsur
w-al-mamdud* (c) *al-itba’ w-al-muzawajah*, (d) *al-ajnas*, and (e)
*al-nawadir*.

Some philologists wrote running commentaries (concerned merely with the
meaning of selected words and phrases supported with illustrations from
other sources) on the Qur’an and the sayings of the Prophet under such
captions as *Gharib al-Qur’an, Gharib al-Hadith, Majaz al-Qur’an, Ma‘ani
al-Qur’an*, etc.

1. Al-Asma‘i (Abu Sa‘id ‘Abd al-Malik b. Quraib), an Arab of Basrah, was
born in 122/739 or 123/740 and died in about 217/832. He amused Harun
al-Rashid with his stock of interesting anecdotes about the life of the
*A‘rab*.

2. Abu Zaid (Sa‘id b. Aus) al-Ansari was another Arab of the Basrah who
reached Baghdad during the time of al-Mehdi and died about 215/830, then
over 90 years of age. He was not inhibited by partisanship and eagerly
learned from al-Mufaddal and other Kufans. By common agreement, he is
regarded as thoroughly trustworthy, though his pedantry is often a
source of amusement.

3. Abu ‘Ubaidah Ma‘mar b. al-Muthanna, *a maula*, said to have been of
Persian Jewish descent, was born in 110/728 at Basrah where he spent
most of his life. He was patronized by the Baramikah and was summoned to
Baghdad by Harun al-Rashid to read his works to him. While rendering
yeoman service to the Arabic philological studies, he collected the
*mathalib* or the vices of the Arab tribes and caused such offence to
tribal pride that at his death nobody attended his funeral.

4. Ibn al-A‘rabi (Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ziyad) was the son of a
Sindian slave and the foster-child of the famous Kufan philologist,
al-Mufaddal al-Dabbi. His prodigious memory was a storehouse of Arabic
philology and folklore. Remarkably enough, he relied on his own
independent sources and questioned not without success the authority of
al-Asma‘i and Abu ‘Ubaidah. He died about 231/845.

The special treatises referred to above naturally swelled to a
considerable extent the volume of material which lay ready at hand for
incorporation in a general lexicon. Another such lexicon was produced,
rather dictated mostly from memory, by ibn Duraid (Abu Bakr Muhammad b.
al-Hassan, born at Basrah in 223/837 and died 321/933) who enjoyed the
patronage of the Mikalids of Fars. Though ibn Duraid claims that his
work is much easier for reference than that of Khalil, the fact is that
there is little improvement so far as the scheme, particularly the
break-up of the vocabulary into structural categories, is concerned.

Even the irksome device which jumbles up all the orders, forward and
reverse, of a combination of letters under one and the same heading,
continues to be there. Only the phonetic order of the alphabet is
discarded. Much of the confusion was caused by the nebulous state in
which *al-tasrif* (etymology) happened to be at that time. There was so
far no clarity as to the roots of words, particularly those containing a
vowel, a double consonant, or a *hamazah*. Similarly, lack of clarity as
to the distinction between *al-usul* and *al-zawa’id* caused the
different categories to be mixed up. As a matter of fact, it was this
uncertainty which made it expedient for ibn Duraid to insert a
miscellany here and there, apart from the *nawadir* or peculiar usages
and expressions listed under appropriate captions at the end.

There is indeed one important point of difference which is indicated by
the very name, *Jamharat al-Lughah*. Ibn Durain included in it only the
familiar and the useful and eschewed the obsolete and the discordant.
This was the beginning of a process of subjecting to criticism and
sifting out the useful and the dependable from the large mass of
material left behind by the early scholars, who were concerned with
collecting and recording whatever they came across. At the time when the
mistakes were being corrected, an attempt was also made to supply the
omissions in the works of the early authors.

These, in short, are the new features noticeable in the lexicographical
productions of the fourth/tenth century. Particularly notable in this
respect is the *Tahdhib*, whose author, Abu Mansur Muhammad b. Ahmad
al-Azhari (d. 370/980), a student of ibn Duraid, was urged to wanderlust
in the desert for the collection of *al-lughat*. Incidentally, he fell
captive into the hands of a Bedouin tribe; this provided him with
desired opportunity. Equally important is *al-Muhit* of al-Sahib b.
‘Abbad, who died in 385/995.

The culmination of the critical activity of the fourth/tenth century
aiming at authenticity and comprehensiveness, was reached in the *Sihah*
of al-Jauhari, Abu Nasr Isma‘il b. Hammad (died about 398/1007), a
native of Farab who settled down at Nishapur. The very name *Sihah*
reminds one of the *Sihah* of al-Bukhari. It has already been hinted at
that the method of collecting *al-lughat* was essentially the same as
the one applied to the collection of the traditions, only a higher
degree of stringency was observed in the case of the latter than the of
the former.

This aptly illustrated by the example of al-Asma‘i who is held to be
trustworthy in regard to hadith, but he risks conjectures in matters
pertaining to the *lughat* and even embellishes anecdotes for the sake
of amusement.[^26] Anyway, it is worthwhile to note that even the
nomenclature of the hadith such as the *mutawatir* and the *ahad* was
applied to the *lughat* and the degree of reliability of any particular
usage determined accordingly. In the beginning it was not uncommon even
to mention the *isnadi* or the chain of narrators and to discuss the
personal character and reputation of the transmitters.[^27]

Thus, a compendium of the *Sahih* was sought to be arrived at in the
field of *lughat* parallel to a similar, though much more scrupulously
worked out, effort in the field of religious tradition.[^28] It has,
however, to be noticed that the *Sihah* suffered grievously from an
unfortunate circumstance: the author was overtaken by a fit of
melancholy which rendered him incapable of revising the manuscript.
Further, due to the absence of any authentic copy of the text, a good of
corruption also set in. All this necessitated a re-examination of the
work in glosses and commentaries by later writers.

The work of al-Jauhari was still more remarkable in another way. In it
the entire vocabulary was integrated (instead of being split up into
structural categories) and arranged in alphabetical order with the first
reference to the last letter and a second reference to its combination
with the first. This new scheme at once became popular and was highly
appreciated as particularly suited to a language in which the endings of
the words and a unique importance for the purposes of rhyme (*qafiyah*
and *saj‘*). Apart from the merits of this integrated scheme, the
development and standardization of *al-tasrif* (etymology) at the hands
of al-Mazini (Abu ‘Uthman Bakr b. Muhammad, d., 249/863), ibn Jinni, and
al-Rummani during the course of the fourth/tenth century removed a good
deal of the confusion which marred the works of al-Khalil and ibn
Duraid.

We have now reached a time when the Arabic vocabulary was supposed to
have been exhaustively collected and the meanings of words established
with reasonable certainty. Henceforth, efforts were directed at
collecting the material scattered in the previous works either (a) in
the form of large comprehensive dictionaries or (b) in concise handy
volumes designed for the ordinary student. Naturally, the latter often
dispensed with illustrations and citations. The most important works of
the former category are:

1. *Al-Muhkam* by the blind Spanish scholar, ibn Sidah (Abu al-Hassan
‘Ali b. Ahmad?, d. 460/1068), was held in great esteem for
comprehensiveness and absolute reliability. But perhaps the author did
not like innovations; hence, he went back to the earliest model of
al-Khalil for its arrangement.

2. *Al-‘Ubab* (incomplete) was composed by Radi al-Din Hassan
al-Saghani, born in Lahore in 570/1174. He settled in Baghdad where he
dedicated his work to ibn al-‘Alqami, the minister of al-Musta‘sim,
whence he was sent out twice as ambassador of the ‘Abbasid Caliph to the
court of Iltutmish at Delhi.

3. The *Lasan al-‘Arab* was compiled by ibn Mukarram/ibn Manzur (Jamal
al-Din Muhammad), who was born in 690/1291 and died at Cairo in
771/1369. It is expressly based on the works of ibn Duraid, al-Azhari,
al-Jauhari, and ibn Sidah.

Of the latter category, the work which achieved a high degree of
popularity in the *Qamas* of Majd al-Din al-Firuzabadi (Muhammad b.
Ya‘qub) who died in 816/1413. It draws upon *al-Muhkam* and *al-‘Ubab*.

Yet another work which deserves special mention is the *Asas
al-Balaghah* of the well-known Mu‘tazilite al-Zamakhshari (Abu al-Qasim
Jar Allah Mahmud b. ‘Umar, born 467/1074 and died 538/1143). The author
was a native of Khwarizm who spent a long time in Mecca and Baghdad. He
realized that the mere recording of meanings was an insufficient guide
to the practical use of words. He, therefore, would give the occasions
and the contexts in which the words were employed. What is still more
remarkable is the arrangement of the *Asas*, which is in the
alphabetical order with reference to the first (and the second and so
forth) letter of a word. That is to say, its arrangement is exactly the
same as has come into vogue in modern times since the impact of Western
literary influences.

It is interesting to note that the early trend towards compiling
treatises dealing with the words grouped around particular subjects did
not die with the appearance of the general lexicons; it had an
uninterrupted development on parallel lines. The greatest work of this
kind is *al-Mukhassas*, the vocabulary is grouped under the subject
headings, e.g., the hair, the eye, etc, which are classified into
“books” such as that on “human body.” Even if the position of
*al’Muhkam* is not wholly unsurpassed, that of *al-Mukhassas* is
definitely so.

Once the framework of a general lexicon was fixed, the running
commentaries on the rare and difficult words in the Qur’an and/or the
Hadith were also brought under that form.[^29] Similarly, no time was
lost in extending the facility and the benefits of a general dictionary
to the other specialized branches such as zoology, botany, biography,
geography, bibliography, and finally the encyclopaedias *(al-mausu‘at)*.
It may be observed in this connection that interest in language and
literature, which the scheme of a lexicon was originally designed to
sub-serve, seldom disappeared in any of the works, however specialized
and limited the scope of their treatment.

It would, for example be really odd to conceive of a zoologist or a
geographer who was not familiar with the references in the Qur’an and
the hadith or who would be unable to recall poetry, proverbs, and pith
sayings concerning animals or towns. This all-pervading interest in
humanities is perhaps the most valuable asset of Islamic culture.

In conclusion, it will be recalled that the early philologists were
fully conscious of the sanctity of their tasks; they showed themselves
to be scrupulous in method and honest in purpose. But the scope of the
linguistic studies was bound in the course of time to extend beyond that
was strictly relevant to the Qur’an and the Hadith. As the bounds of the
sacred faded into those of the profane, the common failings of vanity,
mere guess or conjecture or even unguarded reliance on genuine
misunderstandings contributed to the interpolation of the spurious.

Also, as these studies came to be held in high esteem and patronized
with abundant monetary gifts, the veterans in the field were sometimes
tempted to window-dress faked rarities in their shop. But the probe into
their personal weaknesses, so characteristic of Islamic religious and
literary tradition, and the severe tests subsequently applied to their
statements served to a large extent to clear the chaff from the grain.
On the same way it is impossible to claim that the entire vocabulary and
the usage were exhausted, yet there is no gainsaying the fact that an
enormous part of them was actually encompassed.

The charge that the Arabic philologists concerned themselves too
exclusively with the idiom of the Qur’an and showed no interest in
contemporary deviations from the same, tantamount to questioning their
objective or purpose, which has been steadily confirmed throughout the
ages. In regard to the scheme and the arrangement of a lexicon, the
early pioneers proceeded on the basis of a scientific etymological
analysis of the structure of the vocabulary. Practical convenience was
achieved later in the superbly original plan of al-Jauhari, which
remains the one especially suited to the genius of the language. Even
the model which has become so popular in modern time is traceable to
al-Zamakhshari.

Bibliography
------------

Al-Suyuti, *al-Muzhir*; Yaqut, *Mu‘jam al-Udaba’*; ibn Khallikan,
*Wafayat al-A‘yan*; ibn Kahldun, *Muqaddimah*; Hajj Khalifah, *Kashf
al-Zunun*; Jurji Zaidan, *Tarikh al-Adab al-‘Arabiyyah*; Ahmad Amin,
*Duha al-Islam*, Part 2, Chap. 6; *Zuhr al-Islam*, Part 2, Chaps Three
and Four.

[^1]: This is amply borne out by the different versions of what prompted
Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali to turn to grammar.

[^2]: It is noteworthy that Abu al-Aswad al-Du’ali, who showed himself
genuinely anxious to help the non-Arabs learn Arabic and Islam, did so
in spite of his jealousy of their prosperity and influence. There was
not the slightest trace of any tendency among the Arabs to sit
Brahman-like over the treasures of religious knowledge.

[^3]: This applies equally to grammar and to al-ra’i in the realm of
Fiqh.

[^4]: Encyclopaedia of Islam, “Abu al-Aswad.”

[^5]: In the Islamic literary tradition, the written book long continued
to serve merely as an aide memoire – a copy of what was preserved in
memory and not vice versa.

[^6]: It will be remarked that the other synonyms such as nasb, jarr,
and raf‘ also refer to the same varied movement of the mouth. Closely
parallel to the Arabic terms are the Persian equivalents: zir, zabar,
and pish.

[^7]: The Syrian Christians of the west had another Greek alphabet (five
altogether: Y, E, H, O, A), instead of the dots, were used as vowel
marks. At some later date, not exactly ascertained, the Arabs also
replaced the dots with letters of their own alphabet albeit in an
abbreviated form: ے from ٲ, ﻴ from ى (somewhat doubtful), and ﻮ from ﻮ.
Obviously, the change must have been necessitated by the use of dots for
diacritical marks along with their use for vowel marks. The diacritical
marks are said to have been brought into somewhat systematic use at the
behest of al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf, the Governor of Iraq, by Nasr b. ‘Asim (d.
89/708), who, remarkably enough, is also reckoned as one of the founders
of Arabic grammar. For some time the two kinds of dots were
distinguished by the different colours of the ink. The replacement of
the vowel dots with abbreviations of ا, ى, and ﻮ is sometimes ascribed
to al-Khalil b. Ahmad, which is supported by the title Kitab al-Naqi
w-al-Shakl among his works.

[^8]: Al-Syuti, al-Ashbah w-al-Nazash’ir, Hyderabad, 1359/1940, 1, p.
76.

[^9]: Al-Jumahi, Tabaqat, Dar al-Ma‘arif, Cairo, 1952, pp. 16 – 17.

[^10]: J. Fuck, al-‘Arabiyyah (Arabic translation), Cairo, 1951, pp. 26
,65, 74.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 30.

[^12]: The reading “Sibuyah” is not supported by comparison with
“Niftawaihi,” which the latter is in no doubt because of its occurrence
in the rhyme of a verse. Vide ibn Khallikan, Wafayat, “Ibrahim b.
Muhammad b. ‘Arafah.”

[^13]: Cf. Fuck, op. cit., pp. 11 – 12.

[^14]: What distinguished the Fiqh of Abu Hanifah was exactly the same:
the probing into the “efficient cause” (‘illah) governing a number of
given instances and then applying the same to unforeseen circumstances.
The people of the Hijaz were extremely chary of such reasoning and it is
no mere chance that they came to be notorious for their ignorance of
grammar. It is remarkable that the opponents of Abu Hanifah, who wanted
to run down his school of Fiqh, thought it necessary to make fun of the
application of his methods of grammar. Cf., Fuck, op. cit., p. 65.

[^15]: M. Hamidullah, “Influence of the Roman Law on Muslim Law” – a
paper read before the All India Oriental Conference, December 1941.

[^16]: Yaqut, Mu‘jam al-Udabi’, “‘Ali b. ‘Isa.”

[^17]: It must be pointed out that it was merely a choice from among the
various current readings; there was no attempt to “correct” the Qur’an
in line with usage elsewhere. As pointed out by Wolfensen, it is an
entirely wrong and unscientific approach on the part of some Western
scholars to judge and criticize the Qur’an on the basis of pre-Islamic
poetry. Apart from any religious sentiment, the Qur’an is the oldest and
most reliable book. Other sources, though relating to anterior times,
are posterior to it in point of actual compilation. Turikh al-Lughat
al-Simiyyah, Cairo, 1926, pp. 169 et seq.

[^18]: The reference is to what is known as “al-Mas’alah
al-Zunburiyaah.” When Sibawaihi challenged al-Kisa’iyy on a point of
grammar, the matter had to be refereed for decision to the Arabs. It is
alleged that the Arabs were bribed to save the face of the royal tutor.
The incident affected Sibawaihi so deeply that perhaps it caused his
death pre-maturely.

[^19]: Once when al-Kisa’iyy began giving the various grammatically
correct readings of a particular phrase, ‘Isa b. ‘Umar rebuked him
saying, “I want the actual way in which it is spoken by the Arabs,”
Yaqut, op. cit., “‘Isa b. ‘Umar,” last paragraph. This tendency is to be
compared with the hiyat – permissible tricks for evading the Law – in
which some of the legists exhibited their acumen.

[^20]: Al-Ma‘arri contrives to bring the grammarians and the poets in
the heaven together when the latter protests at the former’s purely
speculative interpretation of verses, e.g. p. 152 of the Risalah, ed.
Bing al-Shati, Cairo.

[^21]: In the words of Abu ‘Ubaidah introducing his Majaz al-Qur’an,
“The Qur’an was revealed in clear Arabic language and those who heard it
recited by the Prophet had no need of asking for its meaning...”

[^22]: Cf. the saying attributed to ibn ‘Abbas, “When you be in doubt
about any rare expression of the Qur’an, seek it in poetry.” Al-Suyuti,
al-Muzhir, ed. Muhammad Ahmad Jad al-Maula and others, Cairo, 2, p. 302.
It was in consideration of this that linguistic studies were regarded an
obligation on a par with the obligation of prayer; cf. the verses
(ibid). Ibn al-Qatta’ (al-Af‘al, Hyderabad, p. 3) went so far as to
declare that anyone who decries the poetry of the Arabs is a sinner, and
the one who runs down their language is an infidel (kafir).

[^23]: It was in that original source that numerical values were
assigned to the letters in that order, which is still adhered to in
Arabic and other Islamic languages for purposes of chronograms. The
assertion by later Arab philologists that abjad, hawwaz, etc., were the
names of the inventors of the art of writing (al-Suyuti, op. cit., 2,
p., 342) should be taken merely as a recollection of the old borrowing.

[^24]: In Duraid, Jamharat al-Lughah, Hyderabad, cf. the Preface; cf.
also al-Suyuti, op. cit., 1, p. 85.

[^25]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., 1, p. 90.

[^26]: Cf. Ahamd Amin, Duha al-Islam, Cairo, 1952, 2, p. 301. Abu
‘Ubaidah once ridiculed al-Asma‘i’s extreme cautiousness in the
interpretation of the Qur’an by asking him whether he was sure of the
meaning of al-khubz (bread). Cf. Yaqut, op, cit., “Ma‘mar b.
al-Muthana.”

[^27]: Al-Suyuti, op. cit., 1, pp. 118 et seq.

[^28]: Just because the sciences of al-Hadith and al-lughah were
recognized as twins, the highest academic title for the learned in
either was the same, al-hafiz. Ibid., 2, p. 312.

[^29]: Cf. Kashf al-Zunun 2, pp. 1204 – 06.


