Chapter 52: Arabic Literature: Theories of Literary Criticism
=============================================================

In this account of the Arab contribution to the theories of literary
criticism, the term “Arab” is used in a wide sense to include all the
Arabic-speaking peoples, and the writers who used Arabic as their
cultural medium, regardless of their racial origins.

Literary criticism is also broadly used to cover the whole field of
literary appreciation, analysis, judgment, and comparison on the
practical as well as the theoretical side. In this broad sense,
*Balaghah* – which concerns itself with the study of the figures of
speech and the stylistic aspects of literature in general – may be
included under literary criticism, at least of the golden era of the
early centuries of Hijrah, although, generally speaking the relation
between the two is a matter of controversy.

The period covered by our treatment is likewise a fairly long one. It
extends from the first/seventh century to the present time, and it
corresponds to the Islamic era in the history of Arabs. For, although
the Arabs achieved a high measure of perfection in their poetry two
centuries before Islam, they did not reach the mature stage of
theorizing about literature and its excellence until their minds were
stirred and stimulated by the call of the new religion that arose in
their midst. The fact that the miraculous sign of the religion of Islam
came in the form of a “Clear Arabic Book” was destined to play an
important role in Arabic language and literature, and consequently in
the enrichment of Arabic literary criticism.

From early times, the Arabs were noted for their literary excellence.
Poetry and oratory were the chosen forms of their artistic expression.
As early as the second half of the sixth century A.D. when Arabic poetry
was in its flowering period, some rudimentary forms of practical
criticism could be observed. These were preserved by narrators, and
later recorded by the early authors of the general studies of the Arabic
language and literature. Some time before Islam there grew a number of
marketplaces in the Hijaz where people of different tribes used to
assemble for trade as well as for literary contests.

Names of recognized arbiters in those contests, such as that of
al-Nabighah al-Thubyani, and their judgments and criticisms were handed
down to posterity by the *rawis* (transmitters). Naturally, very little
explanation or justification was offered for such judgments, and very
often one verse or one poem would be given as a ground for a high praise
of a poet or for a comparison between two contestants in the
marketplace. Some of the Prophet’s Companions were known for their
appreciation and sound judgment of pre-Islamic poetry. The Second Caliph
‘Umar, for instance, was reported to hold that al-Nabighah was the
greatest of the *Jahiliyyah* poets, and when he was asked the reason for
this pronouncement, he answered, “Al-Nabighah never used redundant
words, always avoided the uncouth in poetry, and never praised a person
except for true merit.
By the end of the first/seventh century Arabic culture had spread
outside Arabia in various directions with the spread of Islam. The mind
of the new Muslim community was getting ready for a general intellectual
awakening. The first to reap the benefit of those efforts were the
religious fields on one side and the linguistic and literary on the
other. Some scholars busied themselves with the explanation of the
Qur’an and the understanding of its challenge of miraculous literary
excellence. Others concentrated on tracing pure linguistic usages of the
Arabic language and standardizing its grammar and syntax. Some directed
their efforts to collecting pre-Islamic poetry and preserving it against
loss.

The stage was now set for the beginning of a golden era in authorship
which lasted several centuries. The critical problems raised by the Arab
authors during this period can be summed up under the following main
headings:

1. Literary aspect of the Qur’anic *i‘jaz* (eloquence of discourse), and
the extent to which literary could aid in discovering the secrets of
that *i‘jaz*.

2. Unique and sometimes obscure usages of the Qur’anic style.

3. Authenticity of literary texts transmitted by the *rawas* from
pre-Islamic and early Islamic times.

4. Classification of the Arab poets, both Islamic and pre-Islamic.

5. Merits and demerits of the ancients and moderns in Arabic literature,
and controversies between traditionalists and innovators.

6. Claims of meaning and expression to literary excellence.

7. Originality and imitation, and the phenomenon of plagiarism.

8. Nature of speech and articulation.

9. Meaning and essence of literary excellence, in structure,
signification, effectiveness, and formal beauty.

10. Definition of the figures of speech.

11. Standards for the comparison between rival poets.

12. Norms of excellence in the chief poetical arts, such as panegyric,
satire, and elegy.

13. Linguistic aspects of literary art.

These various problems of literary criticism were treated sometimes
separately in a specialized fashion, and sometimes together in manuals
or textbooks. The stylistic aspects in particular received a large share
of the Arab authors’ attention, and the researches around them grew
until they formed a separate critical branch under the name of
*Balaghah*. This was mainly the outcome of the Muslims pre-occupation
with problems of the Qur’anic exegesis and *i‘jaz*. Greek writings on
rhetorics which were translated into Arabic as early as the third/ninth
century also contributed to the growth of the science of *Balaghah*. In
fact, that science dominated the Arabic critical field all through the
later centuries of Islam from the seventh/13th to the 12th/18th.

The above enumeration of the different aspects of Arabic literary
criticism will indicate the immensity of its wealth, and the difficulty
of separating the Arab contribution in this field from their
contribution to the development of Arabic language and literature in
general. Many a general book on literature, such as the *Kitab
al-Aghani* (Book of Songs) by Abu al-Faraj, would also claim a place
among the books of literary criticism. The same can be said by the
unique excellence of the Qur’an.

But the following survey of the main features of Arabic literary
criticism we shall limit ourselves to singling out some of its
outstanding landmarks and making a brief halt at each of them.

1. On the early grammarians, philologists, and literary critics of the
first stage in Arabic authorship was ibn Sallam (d. 231/845). His book
*Tabaqat al-Shu‘ara’* is representative of the critical attainments of
his period. Criticism, he maintains, needs long training and experience,
and a critic must be an expert on his subject and well versed in the
practice of his art. In other words, taste alone does not meet the
requirements of criticism, and must be supplemented by experience and
long study. He also adds that poetry, like the sciences and other arts,
needs its own special technique and culture. He was aware of the
established truth that abundance of practical study is worth more than
all academic knowledge.

The second point stressed by ibn Sallam in his book is the importance of
verifying the poetical texts and of ascertaining their origin. This is
the first step in textual criticism and must be taken as its foundation.
He directed a violent attack on the manner in which some Arab
chroniclers accepted and narrated ancient poetry, and, therefore,
questioned the authenticity of many of their texts.

The other important point in ibn Sallam’s book is the division of poets
into classes. With regard to time, poets were either Islamic or
pre-Islamic. He tried to classify the poets of either era according to
the abundance and excellence of their poetry. In his classification he
also took into consideration the place of origin.

Although ibn Sallam failed to support judgments he passed on poets and
poetry by analyzing the texts or describing the qualities of each
particular poet, yet it must be admitted that Arabic criticism was taken
by him a step further, especially as regards questions of verification
and classification of poets. What we miss in his book, however, is
criticism in the sense of a discerning study and a methodical approach.
The first attempts at methods are not to be found earlier than the
fourth/tenth century.

Al-Jahiz (d. 255/869), who was one of the leading Mu‘tazilites and
writers of the third/ninth century, tried in his book *al-Bayan
w-al-Tabyin* to give a picture of criticism in pre-Islamic times and the
first/seventh century. The criticism of that period, he maintained, was
elementary, but, to a marked degree, sound and convincing, as it
emanated from genuine practical literary taste. The critics of that
period, according to him, managed to discover a number of defects in
poetical craftsmanship and to give valuable practical advice to orators
and poets.

Al-Jahiz’s book was an echo of the intellectual life of the Arabs of the
third/ninth century. At that time the mosques of Kufah and Basrah were
not only places for worship and administration of justice, but also
schools for the teaching of language, grammar, Hadith, and
jurisprudence, as well as platforms for narrators to relate to the
assembled audiences the story of the Prophet’s life and conquests.
Leaders of theological schools and religious divisions used to go there
for dialectical discussions, and a large number of people attended them
in quest of knowledge.

Anyone who spoke in the mosque had to possess the ability to express
himself clearly, to attract and persuade the audience. Thus, a new kind
of study came into being to show the qualities an orator needed, and to
point out the defects of different speeches. Observations on effective
and defective public speaking contained in al-Jahiz’s book can be
grouped under the following headings:

(1) Correctness of pronunciation and defects caused by deformities of
the vocal organs.

(2) Proper and improper employment of language and harmonious and
disharmonious use of words.

(3) Syntax and the relations between words and their meanings, clarity,
conciseness, suitability of expression to different occasions and
audiences, and of speech to its intended objective.

(4) The appearance of the orators and the agreeableness of their
gestures and mannerisms.

Another third/ninth century literary celebrity was the writer ibn
Qutaibah (d. 276/889), and the author of many books on literature and
Qur’anic usages. In one of his books, *al-Shi‘r w-al-Shu‘ara’*, he urged
people to form independent judgments and use their own power of
appreciation. He attacked the philosophers’ approach to criticism and
their use of logical method in the appreciation and analysis of literary
texts. One of the critical problems he raised was that of the division
of poets into those who deliberate upon, revise, and perfect their
poetical works, and those who depend on the spontaneity and easy flow of
their poetic inspiration.

He also opposed the tendency always to give preference to the ancients
just because they were ancients. Literary talent, he argued, was not
confined to any particular period. A modern poet might easily surpass an
ancient in literary creativeness and workmanship.

The contribution of the poet Prince ‘Abd Allah ibn al-Mu‘tazz (d.
296/908) to the development of Arabic criticism and his influence on it
were of a different character. He made a study of *badi‘* which was
considered in his days an innovation in the poetical art, and set out to
prove that it was not a new creation at all. His book *al-Badi‘* was the
first attempt at a systematic treatment of the figures of speech, which
he divided into three main categories: (1) the metaphor which is the
pillar-stone of poetry, (2) artifices connected with the form only and
not with the essence of poetry, such as assonance *(tajnis)* and
anti-thesis *(mutabaqah)*, and (3) the dialectical style which takes the
form of a logical argument *(al-mabhath al-kalami)*.

By quoting copious examples from the Qur’an, the Hadith, the speeches of
the Prophet’s Companions, and the language of the Bedouins, ibn
al-Mu‘tazz tried to show that the use of the figures of speech was
inherent in the nature of poetry, and that the Arabs practised the art
long before the time of Bashshar, Muslim ibn al-Walid, and Abu Nuwas.
These modern poets of the ‘Abbasid period did not invent the art but
simply extended its use until it was thought a new creation. It is an
open question whether ibn al-Mu‘tazz was influenced, in his *Badi‘*, by
Aristotle’s writing, especially the *Rhetorics* translated into Arabic
during the third/ninth centuries.

But the treatment of ibn al-Mu‘tazz has the unmistakable stamp of
originality, and the subject seems to have begun to interest Arab
critics in the second/eighth century as an Arabic literary phenomenon.
The influence, if any, might be sought in the prominence given to
metaphor and in the attempt at definition and division of literary
artifices.

But the real disciple of the philosophical sciences and the author who
manifested Aristotle’s influence very clearly was Qudamah ibn Ja‘far (d.
337/948). His book *Naqd al-Shi‘r* is perhaps the first Arabic book to
carry in its title the word *naqd* which is the Arabic equivalent of
criticism. It is conceived and planned in the Aristotelian fashion of
logical divisions and definitions. The author begins by defining poetry
as regular speech with metres, rhymes, and meanings, proceeds to explain
and justify this definition on logical grounds, and then adds words as
the fourth element constituting poetry.

Out of the relations between these four simple elements he creates four
complex ones, which evolve out of the harmony between them. He points
out those earlier Arab authors have neglected the critical side of the
studies of the poetical art, and directed their energies to the less
important aspects, namely, prosody and linguistic considerations. His,
then, was an attempt to create a real science of criticism and set the
norms of excellence for the principal categories of Arabic poetry.

2. Arab contribution to literary criticism assumes clearer and mature
forms in the fourth/tenth century. On the specialized side we meet with
al-Baqillani (d. 403/1012), who gives a scholarly account of the
Qur’anic *i‘jaz*, al-Amidi (d. 371/981), who leaves us the best
classical Arabic comparison between two great poets, representatives of
two schools of poetical art, and al-Qadi al-Jurjani (d. 366/976) the
writer of the earliest critical treatise on a great Arabic figure in the
literary history of the Arabs. On the general side, at least two
contributions must be mentioned here. The first is that of Abu al-Faraj
al-Isfahani (d. 356/956), the writer of *Kitab al-Aghani* (The Book of
Songs), and a unique book of its kind in the literatures of the world.
And the second is that of Abu Hilal al-‘Askari (d. 365/1004), who
attempted to give a complete systematic manual of Arabic rhetorical and
critical principles as they were known at the time.

Now, to take the general contributions first. The “Book of Songs is a
literary encyclopedia, in 20 volumes, dealing essentially with lyrical
poetry which was set to music and singing by the musicians and singers
of the early centuries of Islam. But around this theme the author
collected a large amount of critical and biographical information of a
great number of Arab poets. The critical aspect of *al-Aghani* has
received the attention of modern academic research. The wealth of
narratives and biographical data contained in the book has been a boon
to modern Arabic play and story writers.

Al-‘Askari made the two arts of poetry and prose the subject-matter of
his treatment and tried to systemize and enlarge upon the earlier
general attempts of al-Jahiz, ibn Mu‘tazz, and Qudamah. The two Arabic
rhetorical conceptions of *fasahah* and *balaghah* received at his hands
satisfactory definitions, the first being connected with elegance and
purity of style, and the second with communicating and conveying the
desired meaning in a convincing and effective manner. Long chapters on
distinguishing the good from the bad in speech, on the nature of
literary art, and on the technique of composition and good description,
with copious examples of excellent poetry and prose, occupy about half
the book. The rest is an enumeration and elucidation of literary
artifices, the number of which al-‘Askari raised to 35, which is more
than double the number given earlier by ibn al-Mu‘tazz.

Al-Jurjani’s treatise on *i‘jaz* takes its place among Arabic critical
books on account of its attempt at applying the critical conceptions to
reveal some of the secrets of the Qur’anic literary excellence. In doing
this the author subjected some of the highly esteemed Arabic poems to
severe test of criticism to show the fallibility of human products. The
Qur’anic *i‘jaz*, he maintained, was something more than and above that
which critical standards could explain, something that could be felt
more than known by the expert and cultured reader or listener. This
theory of *i‘jaz*, peculiar to Muslim culture, we meet again in a
different setting when we come to ‘Abd al-Qahir al-Jurjani.

The two treatises which exemplify Arabic criticism proper in its
methodical form are those of al-Amidi and al-Qadi, Al-Jurhani referred
to earlier. Al-Amidi’s *Muwazanah* (Comparison) between Abu Tammam and
his disciple and kinsman al-Buhturi is the first systematic treatment of
its kind in Arabic criticism. The author collects the common meanings
between the two poets and, on the basis of a rigid comparison between
each pair of words of similar meanings, decides which is more poetical
in that particular context. He takes account of the supporters of each
poet, reproduces the reasons given by them for their stand, and brings
into relief the faults and plagiarisms of each of the two great poets.

Although the subject of al-Amidi’s study is a particular case of
comparison, and the features it concentrates on are the artistic and
poetic ones only, it claims a high value because of its success in going
beyond the particular comparison to a more general comparative study. It
adopts the method of adducing comparable examples from the poetry of the
forerunners of the two poets, thus enlarging its scope and claiming for
it a larger share of critical accuracy. It exhibits the traditional
literary models and reveals its author’s wide knowledge of Arabic poetry
and his cultivated analytical literary taste. It also gives one of the
best practical accounts of the phenomenon of plagiarism, which greatly
occupies the attention of Arabic critics, permeates a good deal of their
comparative studies, and to some extent, colours their judgments of
literary values.

Another valuable contribution in the fourth/tenth century to methodical
criticism is the “Arbitration” *(Wasatah)* of al-Adi al-Jurjani between
al-Mutanabbi, the famous Arab poet of the eastern Arab world of Islam,
and his antagonists. Al-Mutanabbi, by his arrogant personality, wide
ambition, and forceful poetry, created adversaries as well as staunch
supporters wherever he went. Many grammarians, linguists, critics, and
rival poets, shared in finding faults with his poetry and revealing
plagiarisms, which, they claimed, he committed against previous masters
of Arabic poetry, while others hailed him as the greatest Arab poet that
ever lived.

Many treatises were written about him. The situation called for a
sympathetic arbiter, and al-Jurjani tried to play the role. His
introduction to *Wasatah* contains a good deal of theorizing about
literature. An example of this is his interesting, and almost modern,
analysis of poetical ability into four component factors: Natural
aptitude, intelligence, acquaintance with and memorization of past
models, and practical training. These, he maintained, were factors of a
general nature, applicable to all humanity, and not confined to a
certain age or generation. Another example is the discussion of the
influence of environment on poetry, with illustrative examples from the
poetry of Bedouins and city dwellers.

All the different aspects of al-Mutanabbi’s poetry, viz, his
philosophizing tendency to complication, occasional leaning on previous
poets, the system of building up his poem and the use of *badi‘*, all
received a masterly analysis at the hands of al-Jurjani. The book
succeeds in giving a general picture of literary criticism in that
period. It abounds in opinions of critical scholars and recalls many
famous comparisons held between poets, both post and contemporary. In
short, the *Wasatah* of al-Jurjani along with the *Muwazanah* of
al-Amidi represents the peak of practical Arabic criticism and
illustrates the Arabs’ mature efforts in that field of literary study.

3. The claims of the Arab contribution of the theories of literary
criticism is still to be reached in the fifth/11th century at the hands
of ‘Abd al-Qahir al-Jurjani (d. 471/1078), the author of the two
well-known critical books: *Dala’il al-I‘jaz* and *Asrar al-Balaghah*.
The first book, although primarily concerned with explaining the secrets
and signs of the Qur’anic *i‘jaz*, faces the wider issue of literary
excellence in general and reaches a fundamental theory of structure,
while the second searches deep into literary images and discovers, in
the form of a psycho-literary theory, what the author takes to be the
real secret of eloquence.

Each of the two volumes advances a thesis, explains it, discusses its
applications indifferent rhetorical species, and answers any adverse
criticism which it might arouse. They survey the field of Arabic
literary criticism in the author’s time, point out the lack of true
scientific thinking, and the pre-occupation of authors with the
non-essentials in literary art, and try to lay the foundations for a new
science which would satisfy both the objective and the subjective
aspects of literary appreciation. A modern reader of the two books feels
inclined to presume that ‘Abd al-Qahir thought of literary composition
in terms of its two-fold division of structure and beauty.

But it is also possible that when the author wrote his first book he was
mainly occupied with and guided by the thesis that eloquence is a
product of correct structure and signification. At a later stage, and
perhaps owing to other cultural influences and maturation of thought, he
found that an important aspect of literary art, namely, its impact on
the reader or the listener, still called for a separate and fuller
treatment. The starting point in his line of thinking in *al-Dala’il*
was the consideration of the place of words and meanings in the art of
expression. Some of the ancients, e.g. al-Jahiz, had considered
eloquence to be mainly dependent on the quality of the verbal elements,
that is, the words.

But, argued ‘Abd al-Qahir, words in themselves do not make language.
They do so only when organized in a system of construction according to
the requirements of the meaning. The important element in literary
composition, then, is structure, and the essence of structure of
meaning. Once meanings are defined in the intellect in their proper
order, their verbal expressions follow faithfully in a determined
fashion. A literary composition achieves its end if it is properly
suitably constructed. It becomes vague, obscure, complicated, and
generally defective when the verbal element does not harmonize with the
meanings, or when the meanings themselves are not clear and coherent in
the mind of the speaker or the writer.

Hence, it follows that our main concern in rhetoric should be with
techniques of structure, such as junction and disjunction, mention and
omission, definitiveness and in-definitiveness, etc. Our chief
occupation here should be the study of the characteristics of meanings
in construction, which is a combination of language and grammar. This
new technique was ably and effectively applied by ‘Abd al-Qahir to the
study of the Qur’anic composition, and consequently to the analysis and
appreciation of specimens of the highest literary models, and it yielded
a complete system which later authors turned into a definite rhetorical
branch, namely, the science of meanings *(ma‘ani)*.

In this analysis of the *Dala’il*, ‘Abd al-Qahir found himself
repeatedly resorting to the process of introspection, and suggesting
that the best way to discover the secret of literary excellence is to
look inwardly into oneself and find out what impressions, satisfactions,
emotions, and excitements the whole composition leaves on one’s soul. It
appears as if this aspect of literary art directed ‘Abd al-Qahir, in his
second book *Asrar al-Balaghah*, to go deeper into the aesthetic side of
literature and find out the secrets behind the felling of enjoyment
produced by beautiful literary works. Thus, the field of research was
transferred to the laws of human thought.

What goes on in our minds and souls when we hear a beautiful literary
passage? Why do such artifices as alliteration and assonance please us?
And, why do such phenomena as superfluity and obscurity of expression
displease us? What is the secret behind the aesthetic effect of a good
metaphor or a cleverly conceived compound simile? Which is more
appealing to our taste – the spontaneous and easy flowing poetry of
al-Buhturi or the deep and meditative poetry of Abu Tammam? And why? If
we can refer such questions to some inherent characteristics in our
perceptions and conceptions, in our cognition and imagination, we can be
assured of a solid foundation for a study of literary appreciation.

In this part of his inquiry ‘Abd al-Qahir shifted the emphasis from
constructing the meaning to communicating it in an effective and
pleasing manner. The new domain of his study becomes the variety of ways
and means for expressing the meaning in an artistic fashion. In this he
showed himself to be clearly aware of the fact that literature is part
of a wider field, namely, art. Occasionally, in his analysis and
argumentation he would appeal to other fine arts such as painting and
sculpture. His approach in this second inquiry gave later authors the
basis for creating the two separate rhetorical sciences, the science of
exposition *(bayan)* and that of embellishment *(badi‘)*.

Put together, the results of his two inquiries could be summarized as
follows:

(a) Excellence in literature should be judged from the quality of the
structure of the meaning expressed and its pleasing effect on the mind
and soul of the reader (or listener) rather than from its verbal
aspects.

(b) The beauty of metaphors lies in the fact that they give to style
novelty, vigour, and movement, and that they bring out the hidden shades
into a perceptual relief.

(c) Composite comparisons by similitude please the human understanding
for a variety of reasons: all abstract to the concrete, and from what is
known by reflection to what is known intuitively or through
sense-perception; man naturally enjoys seeing different things unified
by links of similarities and the enjoyment is enhanced when the
discovery is reached after a reasonable amount of intellectual activity
– if the intellectual activity involved is too little or too exacting,
the enjoyment is diminished or marred.

The functions of the intellect are thinking, reflection, analogy, and
inference, and all these are exercised and perceiving relations between
different things; the rhetorical figures are the embodiments of all
these considerations.

In assessing the value and place of ‘Abd al-Qahir’s contribution to the
theories of Arabic criticism, we must bear in mind two considerations:
the first is that certain Arab scholars of the flourishing period of the
third/ninth and fourth/tenth centuries did anticipate ‘Abd al-Qahir in
some aspects of his theory. Al-Jahiz, for example, discussed at length
the art of oratory from the point of view of its relation to the
audience and expressed, though briefly, the idea that good speech
affects the heart in a variety of ways. Al-Qadi, al-Jurjani also showed
his interest in the psychology of literature and, as mentioned earlier,
analysed in a psychological fashion the poetical ability into natural
and acquired elements.

The second consideration which has been explored by modern research is
that ‘Abd al-Qahir must have been acquainted with the Arabic versions of
Aristotle’s *Poetica* and *Rhetoric* where the First Master probes the
affective side of literature both in his treatment of tragedy and in his
exposition of the art of metaphor. These various probable anticipations,
however, did not diminish the claim of our later Arab author to
originality. It is to his lasting credit that in the sphere of a
literary study he tried to harmonize the rigour of scientific thinking
with the spontaneity of literary taste, and succeeded in this to a
remarkable degree.

4. We do not come across another great figure in the study of rhetoric
during the fifth, sixth, and seventh centuries A.H., like ‘Abd al-Qahir,
nor even a vigorous follower of the founder of the science to develop
further his ideas and widen the scope of their application, yet during
this period much wa added to the wealth of Arab contribution to literary
criticism, mostly in general comprehensive surveys. One of the great
minds of that period is ibn Rashiq al-Qairawani (d. 436/1044), the
author of a standard book on the art of poetry entitled *al-‘Umdah fi*
*Mahasin al-Shi‘r wa Adabih*. It is one of the fullest treatments of the
technicalities of Arabic poetry and its principal kinds.

Another fifth/11th century critic is ibn Sinan al-Khafaji al-Halabi (d.
466/1073), the author of *Sirr al-Fasahah*. Ibn Sinan’s chief
contribution is in the domain of linguistic criticism where he deals
with the sounds of the Arabic language, their classifications, and their
characteristics. Al-Zamakhshari of Khwarizm (d. 538/1144), the Qur’anic
commentator, deserves a special mention here because of his consistent
application of the rhetorical approach to the explanation and
interpretation of the Qur’an. His book *al-Kashshaf* claims a high place
among the Qur’anic commentaries.

He is also the compiler of *Asas al-Balaghah*, an Arabic dictionary,
which is unique in its attention to original and metaphorical usages of
the Arabic language. A later author and critic, Dia’ al-Din ibn al-Ayhit
(d. 637/1239), left us a most valuable and interesting book on the two
arts, of the writer and of the poet, entitled *al-Mathal al-Sa’ir*. He
dealt with the literary art in two sections: one on verbal expression
and the other on meaning, and managed to include under these two
headings all the artifices and figures of speech which previous authors
since the beginning the third/ninth century had been exploring, defining
and illustrating.

He also restated the problems of word and meaning, plagiarism, and norms
of comparison in a masterly manner, exhibiting searching, analytical
power and independence of thought. Moreover, he invented a practical
method for the training of the undeveloped literary talent, which relied
on the two factors: the natural aptitude and the nourishing of the
ability on classical models. The method is explained in detail, and
illustrated from the history of literature as well as from the personal
experience and literary works of the author. Ibn al-Athir was so
convinced of the of the originality and applicability of his method that
he claimed for himself the title of *mujtahid* of Imam in the same way
as the founders of Muslim schools of jurisprudence, Malik and
al-Shafi‘i, for example, were regarded by posterity.

We may end this series of the great minds with Yahya ibn Hamzah
al-‘Alawi (d. 729/1328), one of the Imams of Yemen and the author of
*al-Tiraz al-Mutadammin li Asrar al-Balaghah wa ‘Ulum Haqa’iq al-I‘jaz*.
The author criticizes books on the subject of literary criticism for
being too detailed and thus tedious, or else too brief and consequently
insufficient. He acclaims ‘Abd al-Qahir as the founder of the science
but confesses that he knew of his two books only indirectly through
references to them in the writings of other scholars. He mentions some
of the authors with whose books he was acquainted, including ibn
al-Athir.

The motive for writing his book, he indicates, was to help his students
understand al-Zamakhshari’s approach to the Qur’anic exegesis and
*i‘jaz*. According to al-‘Alawi, the Arabic literary sciences are four:
the science of language which deals with the significance of separate
words, the science of grammar which deals with words in composition and
predication, the science of syntax which deals with the morphology of
single words and their conformity to regular patterns in the Arabic
language, and lastly, the combination of the two branches of *Fasahah*
and *Balaghah* which are called *ma‘ani* and *bayan* respectively, and
which are the highest of the literary sciences.

After a long introduction, the book proceeds to deal theoretically with
the cardinal questions in the rhetorical sciences, such as truth and
metaphor, kinds of truth, kinds of significance, divisions of metaphor,
linguistic sounds, single words and compound words and their
characteristics, and requirements and examples of excellence in the
various literary artifices.

But here we seem to have reached a parting of the ways between rhetoric
and criticism. The separation is supposed to have been started by Abu
Ya‘qub al-Sakkaki al-Khwarizmi (d. 626/1228), the author of *Miftah
al-‘Ulum*. He is credited with the delineation of the boundaries of
literary sciences in the manner referred to above which al-‘Alawi must
have followed in *al-Tiraz*. In the third division of these sciences,
al-Sakkaki puts *‘ilm al-ma‘ani* and *‘ilm al-bayan* conjointly, the
first dealing with the characteristics of speech composition by virtue
of which they conform to the requirements of the occasion, and the
second with the different ways of expressing the meaning to complete the
desired conformity.

By this division al-Sakkaki seems to have carried a logical conclusion
the distinction which ‘Abd al-Qahir indicated between questions of
speech structure and composition and those of signification and
effectiveness. To this dual division, al-Sakkaki appended a small
section on the special aids to speech beautification, which later became
the domain of a third separate science, namely, *badi‘*. This process of
narrowing the critical field to *Balaghah* and of demarcating its
sciences was completed and standardized a century later by al-Khatib
al-Qazwini (d. 739/1338) who condensed al-Sakkaki’s *Miftah* into a
textbook called *Matn al-Talkhis*.

Bibliography
------------

Ma‘mar ibn al-Muthanna Abu ‘Ubaidah, *Majaz Gharib al-Qur’an*, Cairo;
al-Hassan ibn Bishar al-Amidi, *al-Muwazanah baina Abi Tammam
w-al-Buhturi*, Cairo; Abu Hilal al-‘Askari, *al-Sina‘atain*, Istanbul;
Abu Bakr al-Baqillani, *I‘jaz* *al-Qur’an*, Cairo; Abu al-Faraj ‘Ali ibn
al-Hussain al-Isfahani, *Kitab alp-Aghani*, Cairo; Abu ‘Uthman ‘Amr ibn
Bahr al-Jahiz, *al-Bayan w-al-Tabyin*, airo; ‘Abd al-Qahir al-Jurjani,
*Asrar al-Balaghah*, Cairo; *Dala’il al-I‘jaz*, Cairo; Ahmad Mustafa
al-Maraghi, *Tarikh ‘Ulum al-Balaghah*, Cairo; al-Marsfi, *al-Wasilah
al-Adabiyyahi*, Cairo; al-Khatib al-Qazwini, *Talkhis al-Miftah*,
Calcutta, Cairo; Abu Ya‘qub al-Sakkaki, *Miftah al-‘Ulum*, Cairo; Sa‘d
al-Din al-Taftazani*, al-Sharh al-Kabir*, Constantinople; *al-Sharh
al-Saghir*, Cairo, Calcutta; Garcin de Tassy, “La Rhetorique des Nations
Musulmanes,” article in *J. Asiatique*, summarized from *hada’iq
al-Balaghah* by Amir Shams al-Din Faqir al-Dihlawi; al-Qadi Abu
al-Hassan ‘Ali ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Jurjani, *al-Wasatah bain
al-Mutanabbi wa Khusumah*, Cairo;

T. A. Ibrahim, *Tarikh al-Naqd al-Adabi ‘ind al-‘Arab*, Cairo; Dia’
al-Din ibn al-Athir, *al-Mathal al-Sa’ir*, Cairo; ‘Abd Allah ibn
al-Mu‘tazz, *Kitab al-Badi‘*, London, Cairo; Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah ibn
Muslim ibn Qutaibah, *Mushkil al-Qur’an*, Cairo; al-Hssan ibn rashiq,
*al-‘Umdah*, Cairo; Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Sallam, *tabaqat Fuhul
al-Shu‘ara’*, Cairo; ibn Sinan al-Khafaji, *Sirr al-Fasahah*, Cairo;

Muhammad Khalafallah, *Min al-Wijha al-Nafsiyyah*, Cairo; “Badi‘”
(article in *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, new ed.); “Qur’anic Studies as an
Important Factor in the Development of Arabic Literary Criticism”
(article in Alexandria University Faculty of Arts *Bulletin*, 1952);
“‘Abd al-Qahir’s Theory in his Secrets of Eloquence” (article in
*Journal of Near Eastern Studies*, 1955, U.S.A.); M. Mandur, *al-Naqd
al-Manhaji ‘ind al-‘Arab*, Cairo; Sayyed Nauful, *al-Balaghah
al-‘Arabiyyah fi Daur Nashatih*, cairo; Qudamah ibn Ja‘far, *Naqd
al-Sh‘r*, Cairo; *Naqd al-Nathr*, Caior; I. A. Richards, *The Philosophy
of Rhetoric*, London; J. Barthelemy Saint-Hilaire, *Rhetorique
d’Aristote*, Paris; George Saintsbury, *A History of Criticism and
Literary Taste in Europe*, London; Gustave von Grunebaum, *Arabic
Literary Criticism in 10th* *Century A.D.*, London; M. Zaghlul Sallam,
*Athar al-Qur’an fi Tatawwar al-Naqd al-‘Arabi*, Cairo; *Dia’ al-Din Ibn
al-Athir wa Juhud fi al-Naqd*, Cairo.


