Chapter 53: Persian Literature
==============================

A. Persian Literature of Early Times
------------------------------------

The earliest remnant of the Aryan languages of Iran which antiquity has
bequeathed to us is the language of the Avesta, the sacred book of the
Zoroastrian religion.

For About 900 years the people of Iran had no script in which they could
write the Avesta. So they continued to learn it by heart and thus
communicate it from generation to generation right from the seventh
century B.C. to the third century A.D.

A special script was at last invented for this book in the third century
A.D. The Avesta written in this particular script has been known as the
Zend Avesta. At times it has been just mentioned as the Zend. The French
scholar Anquetil du Perron who was the first to have studied it in India
at the end of the 12th/18th century, introduced it to the West. For a
considerable time it continued to be known as the Zend language in
Europe. At present, however, the more accurate term of “Avestic
language” is in vogue. The script in which the Avesta was recorded
should be known as the “Zend script.”

Much as been speculated on the origin and times of Zoroaster, and
different theories have been advanced in this respect from the earliest
times. What appears to be most authentic at present, however, is that
Zoroaster preached his religion between 660 and 583 B.C. in the
north-eastern zone of the Iranian plateau in Central Asia. It is
plausible that he sprang from the Median stock, lived in the north-west
of the present day Iran, and from there he travelled east to Central
Asia. Of the extant languages and dialects of the Iranian plateau Pashto
or Pakhto has the closest affinity with the Avestic language.

This lends support to the view that the Avestic language was spoken in
the north-eastern regions of the Iranian plateau in the seventh century
B.C. The Avesta is a massive work, a major portion of which has been
destroyed and forgotten owing to the vicissitudes of time and the
domination of Iran by foreign nations. What remains today of this book
was compiled in the early days of the Christian era. It comprises 15 out
of the 21 original parts and if the extinct parts were proportionate in
volume to those present about one-fourth of the book may be said to have
perished.

From the philological point of view, the extant parts of the Avesta were
not written in one period of history. On the contrary, its composition
may be divided into three sections. The Gathas, which are composed in
poetry, doubtlessly constitute the earliest part of the book. The Avesta
is a collection of the Canon Laws and decrees of the Zoroastrian faith
which were formulated in different ages. The last of these is
contemporaneous with the rise of the Achaemenian power in the sixth
century B.C. Possibly when Old Persian, i.e. the language of the coins
and inscriptions of the Achaemenians, was current in the western and
southern regions of the country, namely, Media and Parsa, Avestic
happened to be the language of the eastern or at any rate of the
north-eastern provinces of Iran.

Philologically speaking, the Avestic language runs parallel to and is
contemporaneous with Sanskrit and, apparently, the origin of both these
languages can be traced back to yet another ancient language which was
perhaps the original language of the Indo-Iranian Aryan stock.

The language of the coins and inscriptions of the Achaemenians, ever
since they came to power in the middle of the sixth century B.C., is
distinctly Aryan in character and is known as Old Persian. This language
is also contemporaneous with Avestic, and the growth and development of
the two dates back to the same age. There are reasons to believe that
when Avestic was passing through the early stages of development in the
eastern provinces of the Iranian plateau the Old Persian language was
also making headway in the west and south-west of Iran.

With the establishment of the Achaemenian Empire the people of Iran
suddenly found themselves to be the neighbours of various Semitic
nations of western Asia including the regions of western Iran. The
Semitic languages made an inroad into the country and their influence
was so strong that the Aramaic language and script were officially
adopted by the Iranians. The Achaemenian kings were men of liberal views
and they guarded full freedom of belief to their subject races as well
as liberty to develop their own languages. That is why the cuneiform
Achaemenian inscriptions are recorded not only in Old Persian but also a
parallel translation of the same runs of Syriac, Elamite, Nabataean, and
Aramaic languages.

The establishment of the Achaemenian Empire saw the people of western
Iran divided into two main groups, namely, the Medes and the Persians
(“Parsis”). It appears certain that either they spoke the same tongue,
i.e. Old Persian, or their languages had very close kinship with each
other. We find no traces of the Median language in the Achaemenian
inscriptions. Apparently, if the Medes had spoken a different language,
the Achaemenian emperors who had employed the Syriac, Ealmite, and
Nabataean languages in their inscriptions would certainly not have
ignored Median. Moreover, a couple of words of this language and the
names of the Median chiefs that have come down to us suffice to
establish the close affinity of Median with Old Persian.

From 330 B.C. when the Macedonians conquered Iran, Greek became the
official language of the country and continued to enjoy the status for a
long time. Right down to the Christian era Greek is the only language to
be seen in the Seleucid and Parthian writings. Needless to say that
during this span of three and a half centuries the Iranian languages
continued to flourish. Old Persian, however, is an exception, which
gradually went out of use. We can witness definite marks of decay in the
Old Persian writings of the later Achaemenian period in contrast with
those of the earlier one.

At the dawn of the Christian era we find two languages in the Iranian
plateau running parallel to each other. One of these grew and developed
in the eastern regions. This has always been called “Dari” by the
Iranians. The other which flourished in the western parts of the country
was known as “Pahlawi.” These two languages have come down to our own
times. Many dialects of “Dari” still continue to exist in the eastern
regions of the Iranian plateau as far as the Chinese frontiers: the most
important of these are spoken in the Pamir region.

The Pahlawi language has lived in the form of verse known as
“Fahlaviyyat,” in the books written in Persian on the art of poetry and
in dialects spoken in the north, south, and west of the country.

The above-mentioned two languages have very intimate relationship and
these have apparently stemmed from the same origin. A number of Aramaic
words, however, entered Pahlawi and these have been known as “Huzvaresh”
or “Zuwarishn.” These words found their way also into books of
lexicography. In the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent these have been
erroneously given the name of the “Zend and Pazard” language. “Dari” was
too far away to receive the impact of the Aramaic language. On the
contrary, it accepted the influence of the eastern languages such as
Tukhari, Sughdian, and Khwarizmi.

At first the Aramaic script was adopted for both the languages. Later,
however, a change took place and certain Aramaic letters were put
together in Pahlawi to form what later came to be known the Pahlawi
script.

The Orientalists did not fully grasp the significance of these subtle
technical differences and they have been treating old Pahlawi and Dari
as one language. Consequently, they have been employing the terms
Northern Pahlawi or the Parthian Pahlawi for the later language. In
recent times, however, some of them have defined it as the Parthian
language whereas Pahlawi itself has been referred to as the Southern or
Sassanian Pahlawi.

The number of the extant pre-Islamic works of these two languages is
very small. The most important ancient work in Dari consists of the
Manichaean texts and translation of parts of the Avesta into old Dari
known as “Pazand.” The contemporary Dari has also been employed in some
of the inscriptions of Sassanian kings.

Both Dari and Pahlawi possessed literature of their own before the
advent of Islam. This literature, unfortunately, has not come down to
us.

The history of the earliest Iranian dynasties during the Islamic period
begins from the year 205/820. The dynasties which sprang up in the
eastern regions raised the structure of their national politics on the
basis of language. Since the language of these tracts was “Dari,” the
literature produced in it was bound to outshine Pahlawi literature.

In 429/1038 the Saljuq Turks poured out of Turkestan to invade Iran.
They gradually conquered the whole country. Since they hailed from the
east and their officials also belonged to this region, it was natural
that they should adopt “Dari Persian” as their Court language, which
they carried to the farthest corners of Iran. Consequently, in the first
quarter of the fifth/11th century, Dari had attained the status of the
common literary language of the whole country. It gained supremacy in
other regions also where Pahlawi had been the popular spoken language
until then.

From this date Dari became the undisputed literary language of Iran and,
like many other dialects prevalent in the country, Pahlawi was reduced
to the status of a dialect. The last vestige of Pahlawi in the form of
inscriptions and coins in Tabaristan in the north of Iran date back to
the middle of the fifth/11th century.

The first specimens of Pahlawi literature which belong to the early
centuries of the Hijrah consist of a number of books of religious nature
which the Iranian Zoroastrians had written with the specific object of
preserving their Canon Law. These books were taken to the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent when the Zoroastrians migrated there. European scholars
have been publishing their texts since the last century. Amongst these,
certain books are claimed to have belonged originally to the pre-Islamic
Sassanian era. There is ample evidence, however, to prove that these
were composed during the Islamic period.

What is now known of Pahlawi literature is confined to these very books
and treatises. They suggest that Pahlawi literature had, at any rate
towards the end of the Sassanian period, flourished on a vast scale. It
is an undeniable fact that, while during the 400 years which immediately
preceded the Saljuq period, Dari had been recognized as the literary
language of the country; Pahlawi had flourished on the north, south, and
west of the present day Iran. Of this only a specific form of verse
known as “Fahlaviyyat” has come down to us, the quatrains of Baba
Tahir-i ‘Uryan of Hamadan being its most remarkable specimen.

B. The Beginning of Modern Persian Literature
---------------------------------------------

The present day language of Iran is the latest evolutionary of “Dari”
and is known as “Farsi” or the Persian language. The people of Iran
themselves, however, have always employed the word “Persian” for
whatever languages have flourished in the country. In the past the two
languages under discussion which flourished simultaneously have been
known as the “Dari Persian” and the “Pahlawi Persian.”

The Persian language of today, namely, Dari, originated, as mentioned
above, during the Muslim period in the east of Iran. The important
centres of this language were the cities of Tranoxiana and Khurasan, to
wit, Samarquan, Bukhara, Balkh, Merv, Herat, Tus and Nishapur. These
centres extended even to Sistan. This explains why the most eminent
poets of this language down to the Saljuq period hailed from these
particular cities. Gradually, Dari expanded from Khurasan and
Transoxiana to other parts of Iran, so that by the Ghaznawid period it
had extended to Gurgan, Damghan, and Rayy, and by the Saljuq era it had
travelled as far away as Adharbaijan, Isbahan, and Hamadan.

In the province of Fars it did not achieve the status of a popular
language even in the days of Sa‘di and Hafiz. That is why these two
great poets have revelled in the mastery of this language and in the
expression of their poetic genius through it. Both of them also composed
verse in the Pahlawi dialect of Fars, popularly known as the Shirazi
language.

The rules of prosody of Arabic poetry were formulated by Khalil ibn
Ahmad. These were assiduously observed by the Iranian writers in their
Persian works. Considerable literature was produced on the subject both
in Iran and in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. Consequently, the same
Arabic names were retained for Persian metres and rhymes, so much so
that even the same Arabic word *afa‘il* was employed for purposes of
scansion. Metres can be classified into three groups, i.e. metres common
to both Arabic and Persian, metres which were the outcome of the Iranian
genius and did not exist earlier, and metres which were, on the reverse,
typical of and exclusive to Arabic poetry.

Amongst the exclusively Persian metres the most well-known is the one
employed in the quatrains of Baba Tahir ‘Uryan of Hamadan. In the
pre-Islamic times right up to the Achaemenian period the only verse
known was the blank verse. Specimens of poetry preserved in the Avesta
and Old Persian are all composed in blank verse. This type of poetry was
also in vogue in Pahlawi and Dari, the two languages so closely related
to each other.

The forms of Persian verse have also an independent character and they
have not always followed the Arabic pattern. The *“mathnawi,”
“tariji‘-band,” “tarkib-band,” “musammat,” “muthallth,” “murabba‘,”
“mukhammas,” “mustazad,”* and *“ruba‘i”* are all exclusive to Persian
poetry, and they have originated solely in the Persian genius. Persian
verse has also influenced Urdu and Turkish poetry. Similarly, the rhymed
verse and many figures of speech own their origin to the creative genius
of the Iranian mind. *“Muwashshah”* and *“mulamma‘”* are also Persian in
origin.

C. Different Epochs of Persian Poetry
-------------------------------------

The oldest extant specimens of Persian verse date back to the middle of
the third/ninth century. But these fragments are not sufficient to
afford us a true picture of the contemporary Persian poetry. What
emerges beyond doubt, however, is the fact that the Tahirids (205/820 –
259/872) and later the Saffarids (254/867 – 296/908) played a worth role
in ushering in a new era of Persian literature.

Throughout the fourth/tenth century Persian literature continued to
flourish with remarkable success at the Samanid Court and in the vast
regions lying between the Chinese frontiers and Gurgan on the Caspian
Sea. The court of Nasr bin Ahmad, the Samanid ruler, is especially
famous for the large number of poets associated with it. Since then the
current of Persian literature has flowed continuously.

Modern Persian poetry, in its earliest stages, was characterized by a
note of realism. The realist school held its own for 200 years until the
end of the fifth/11th century. The greatest Iranian poets of this school
who flourished during the fourth/tenth century were Rudaki (329/941),
Shahid Balkhi (325/937) and Daqiqi (341/952). Early in the sixth/12th
century it gave way to naturalism. Meanwhile, the Iranian Sufis had
discovered in poetry a most suitable vehicle to disseminate their
philosophical message to the people. Sufism or Islamic mysticism had
become popular in Iraq in the middle of the second/eighth century. In
the earliest stages it merely laid emphasis on piety and godliness and
no elaborate system had yet evolved.

Kufah and Basrah were the earliest centres of this movement. Later,
however, Baghdad stole the limelight and became associated with great
names in mysticism. From Baghdad it spread out in two directions, viz,
North Africa and the “Maghrib” on the one side and north-east of Iran,
that is, Khurasan and Transoxiana on the other. In the West it came to
be linked up with Greek thought, especially with Neo-Platonism and with
certain Israelite doctrines. In the East, especially in Khurasan and
Transoxiana, it developed kinship with the teachings of Manichaeism and
Buddhism which had enjoyed wide popularity in these regions for
centuries. From here it travelled to India and developed in what may be
called the Indo-Iranian school of mysticism.

This latter school gained immense popularity and through Iran it spread
to Western Asia and even to North Africa. It still continues to exist in
the entire Islamic world from the borders of China to Morocco. The great
mystics of Iran chose Persian for imparting their noble thoughts to all
classes of people. That is why most of the books of the Indo-Iranian
school of mysticism were written in Persian prose or verse and the
language of mysticism in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent has always been
Persian. Symbolism inevitably enjoys profound importance in the mystic
cult. For fear of opposition at the hands of the devout the mystic poets
were constrained to express their views and beliefs in the language of
symbols.

They were, thus, destined to contribute to the special school of
symbolism in Persian poetry. The earliest amongst the great Sufis to
compose verse in this fashion is the celebrated poet Abu Sa‘id Abu Khair
(357/967 – 440/1049). Sana’i (437/1046 – 525/1131), Farid al-Din ‘Attar
(627/1229), and Maulana Jalal al-Din Rumi (604/1208 – 672/1273) may be
considered the greatest of the symbolists among the poets of Iran.
*Hadiqat al-Haqiqah* of Sani’i, *Mantiq al-Tair* of ‘Attar and the
*Mathnawa* of Rumi may be regarded as the most important books of
mysticism ever written in Persian.

On account of this great tradition Persian poetry produced during the
whole of this period in Iran and the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent is
steeped in mysticism. The recital of this kind of verse in the
assemblies of prayer and devotion among different sects of Sufis, at
times to the tune of music and occasionally to the accompaniment of
dance, has been regarded as one of the most important observances of the
mystical creed. Even men who did not belong to any school of mysticism
had to compose, whether they liked it or not, their poetical works,
especially their “ghazals,” in a mystical strain.

Mystic poetry of Iran and the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent forms a
subject that requires a very elaborate discussion. In fact, it is one of
the most profound literary and philosophical themes of all times. The
Iranian mystics, apart from expounding the fundamental doctrines and
essential principles which have deep academic and philosophical
significance and are the especial concern of those wholly steeped in
mysticism, have also instructed the common folk on what is popularly
termed as generosity and manliness *(futuwwat)*.

This teaching mainly consisted of certain moral precepts and aimed at
inculcating amongst the common mass of people the feeling of manliness,
courage, forgiveness, and generosity, and might be compared with the
institution of knighthood or chivalry prevalent in Europe in the Middle
Ages. Many books were produced on this subject in Arabic and Persian and
these have been known as books of generosity and manliness *(Futuwwat
Nameh)*. This particular institution travelled from Iran to all the
Islamic countries as far away as North Africa and the “Maghrib” and is
still lives in many parts of these lands.

It may be pointed out that mystical verse in the Persian language has
provided the civilized humanity with the most cosmopolitan type of
poetry, and this branch of Persian literature excels all other kinds of
poetry both in sweep and charm.
In the pre-Islamic Iran epic poetry and national sagas had always
enjoyed wide popularity. In the Islamic period this tradition was not
only maintained but it also received further impetus. Initiated by a few
earlier poets it found its culmination in Firdausi’s (411/1020) great
classic *Shah Nameh*, which remains to be one of the most outstanding
epic poems of all times. He completed its first narrative in 384/994,
and the second in 400/1010. In this field, as in many others, Persian
literature is immensely rich. A number of epic poems were composed in
successive ages in Iran and in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent, and this
tradition was maintained until a century and a half ago.

Amongst the most important of these are, chronologically speaking,
*Garshasp Nameh* of Asadi (465/1073) which was completed in 458/1066,
*Wis-o Ramin* of Fakhr al-Din Asad of Gurgan (middle of the fifth
century A.H.) and the quintet *(khamseh)* of Nazami of Ganjeh who
remained devoted to its composition from 572/1176 to 599/1202. Nizami’s
style in epic poetry won especial favour both at home and in the
Indo-Pakistan sub-continent and a number of poets wrote under this
unique influence, amongst the most notable of them being Amir Khusrau of
Dhelhi (651/1253 – 725/1325), Khwaju-i Kirmani (689/1290 – 763/1362),
and Jami (817/1414 – 898/1493).

This typical epic style has left a deep impress on the Turkish language,
and many Turkish poets have imitated it, some of them merely translating
the same contents into their own language. Amongst these may be counted
the epic poems of Mir ‘Ali Sher Nawa’i (844/1440 – 960/1500) composed in
the Chaghata’i, i.e. the eastern dialect of Turkish, and the epics of
Fuzuli of Baghdad (970/1562) in the Azari, i.e. the western dialect of
the Turkish language.

Among the other chief characteristics of Persian poetry are the
composition of philosophical verse and the introduction of philosophical
generalities in poetry composed in simple language. We have it on the
authority of the oldest specimens of Persian poetry that poetry and
philosophy had forged a close link together ever since Persian poetry
originated in Khurasan and Transoxiana. The most important book on
practical philosophy to have gained immense popularity amongst Muslims
in general and the Iranians in particular in the early Islamic period
was *Kalileh wa Dimneh* which was at first translated from the original
Sanskrit work *Panchatantra* into Pahlawi and presumably brought to Iran
in the sixth century A.D. in the reign of Khusrau Anushirwan (Nushirwan
the Just).

It was translated from Pahlawi into Syriac about the same time. In the
early Islamic period the famous Iranian scholar ibn al-Muqaffa‘ rendered
it from Pahlawi into Arabic. It was later versified by Rudaki, the
greatest poet of the Samanid period and one of the great names in
Persian poetry in its whole history of the last 1200 years. Only a few
couplets of this long poem have survived.

Another book which dealt with practical philosophy like *Kalileh wa
Dimneh* was the famous work *Sindbad Nameh*. This was also rendered into
verse by Rudaki. That is why his name has been prefixed with Hakim or
philosopher since old. This also suggests that there was a considerable
element of philosophy in this poetical works. Another great contemporary
of Rudaki, namely, Shahid Balkhi, was known as one of the famous
philosophers of his time. He had also entered upon a controversy with
yet another famous physician-philosopher Muhammad bin Zakariya Razi and
composed some treatises in refutation of his views.

Afterwards, many Iranian poets expounded valuable philosophical themes
in their works and were known as philosophers. Kisa’i of Merv was one of
them. Firdausi and ‘Unsuri also enjoyed the title of Hakim or
philosopher for having introduced philosophical themes in their works.
The great poet Nasir Khusran (394/1004 – 481/1088) expounded
philosophical thought in all his poetical works in addition to a few
books of philosophy that he wrote in Persian prose from the Isma‘lite
point of view. The Isma‘ilites of Iran always attached great importance
to the Persian language in disseminating and inculcating amongst others
the philosophy of their own sect. That is why they were even known as
the “educationists” or “Ta‘limites.”

The poets of this sect always introduced an element of philosophy in
their works. Amongst the eminent Iranian philosophers and thinkers,
Persian verse has been ascribed to Abu Nasr Farabi (d. 339/950), ibn
Sina (d. 428/1037), Khuwaja Nasir al-Din Tusi (597/1201 – 672/1274),
Imam Fakhr al-Din Razi (554/1159 – 606/1209), Afdal al-Kashani (d.
615/1218), Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi Maqtil (d. 587/1191), Jalal al-Din
Dawwani (830/908 – 1426/1502 – 1503), Mir Sayyid Sharif Gurgani (740/816
– 1339/1413), Mir Muhammad Baqir Damad (d. 1041/1631), Sadr al-Din
Shirazi, i.e. Mulla Sadra (d. 1050/1640 – 1641), and Haji Mulla Hadi
Sabziwari (1212/1295 – 1797/1878).

One can say that there was hardly any philosopher in Iran who did not
express his beliefs in poetry. Some of them like Afdal al-Din Kashani
composed a considerable amount of verse. Philosophical thought also
found expression in the quatrains of the famous scholar and philosopher
‘Umar Khayyan (d. 517/1123 – 1124). The collection of these quatrains
forms today one of the most famous books in the world, and has been
translated into almost all the civilized languages including many
dialects of Pakistan and India. One of the most important features with
which we are confronted in Persian literature, irrespective of prose or
poetry, is the effort on the part of the Iranian philosophers to affect
Plato, Aristotle, Plotius, the Stoics, Zeno, and scepticism as well as a
part of the philosophical teachings imparted in Alexandria and Edessa,
and the fundamentals of Islam. Some of them harmonized mysticism with
philosophy and divine law, and in this field Persian is decidedly the
richest language in the world.

In the eighth/14th century Hafiz, the great immortal poet of Iran, while
following the naturalist school which had reached its highest point of
glory in Rumi’s poetry (606/1200 – 691/1292) had laid the foundation of
impressionism in Persian poetry. This school did not find its roots in
Iran for about a hundred years and it was only at the end of the
ninth/15th century that a few great Persian poets lent it a new charm
and colour. This was the time when the Mughul dynasty had reached the
height of its power and splendour in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent.
Persian enjoyed the status of official language of the Mughul Court. All
notable men of the sub-continent had fully imbibed Persian culture in
all walks of life.

Every year a large number of Iranian intellectuals and artists would
travel to the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent either to settle down there
permanently or to make it a temporary home. These scholars introduced
this school of poetry in India where it won immense popularity. It found
its highest expression at the Courts of Jalal al-Din Akhbar (r. 963/1556
– 1014/1605) and his successors, namely, Jahangir (r. 1014/1605 –
1037/1628), Shahjahan (r. 1037/1628 – 1068/1658), and Aurangzib (r.
1069/1658 – 1118/1707). Under the patronage of these Courts, rich and
exquisite works of poetry were produced. There are a large number of
poets who attained eminence in this style, popularly known in Iran as
the Indian School of Poetry.

Among them ‘Urfi (963/1556 – 999/1591), Naziri (1023/1614), Zuhuri
(1024/1615), Talib Amuli (1036/1627), Qudsi (1056/1646), Kalim
(1061/1651), and Sa’ib (1012/1603 – 1083/1672) had been attracted from
Iran and they provided both stimulus and schooling in numerous
well-known poets of the local origin. The most brilliant amongst this
galaxy of poets were Faidi (953/1546 – 1004/1596), Abu al-Barakat Munir
(1055/1645 – 1099/1688), Ghani (1072/1661), Nasir ‘Ali (1108/1696),
Ghanimat (1107/1695), Ni‘mat Khan ‘Ali (112/1709), Bidil (1134/1722),
Nur al-‘Ain Waqif (1191/1776), Siraj al-Din ‘Ali Khan Arzu (1169/1756),
Ghalib (1213/1798 – 1285/1868), ‘Ubaidi Suhrawardi (1306/1889), Shibli
Nu‘mani (1274/1857 – 1332/1914), Girami (1345/1926) and many others. The
literary tradition bequeathed by them still lives in the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent.

The last great poet of the Persian language in the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent was Muhammad Iqbal (1289/1873 – 1357/1938) who infused a
new life in Persian poetry, rejected the impressionist school that had
preceded him, and revived the symbolist traditions with magnificent
results.

In Iran a new movement in poetry made itself manifest at the end of the
12th/18th century which promised pastures anew. As a consequence, most
of the poets returned to naturalism. The tendency to revitalize and
revivify Persian verse and to bring it closer to Western poetry is
distinctly visible in Iran. There are even attempts at going to such
extremes as surrealism. The younger Iranian poet is, however, passing
through a period of transition and has yet to determine his final
attitude. Nevertheless, one comes across exquisite pieces of poetry
produced by some of the poets and poetesses of the younger generation.
This augurs well for a great future. It is not unlikely that a new
school of poetry will emerge before long.

One who wishes to study the evolution of Persian poetry and its
different schools and styles in minute detail will perforce have to make
a deep study of the works of quite a few hundred poets of Iran,
Afghanistan, Central Asia, Pakistan, India, and Turkey – men who
selected this language as their medium of expression and stuck to the
Iranian tradition of poetry.

It may be observed that all the important poets of Persian language,
whether they were of the Iranian or Indo-Pakistani origin, or whether
they hailed from certain Central Asian and Caucasian regions formerly
treated as parts of Iran, were Muslims. Only with regard to Daqiqi, the
celebrated poet of the Samanid period, it has been contested by a few
scholars that he belonged to the Zoroastrian faith. Be even this cannot
be taken for granted. In the eight/14th century, however, a Zoroastrian
poet Bahram bin Puzdhu rendered two books of the Zoroastrian religion
into verse, namely *Zartusht Nameh* and *Arda Viraf Nameh*.

D. Persian Prose
----------------

Modern Persian is today one of the richest languages in the world. It
retains a link, close or distant, with all the Aryan languages in the
East as well as those in the West. It, thus, bears a close resemblance
to all these languages in respect of grammar, syntax, and composition.
However, on account of the deep attachment of the Iranian scholars to
Islamic learning and sciences on the one hand and to Arabic language on
the other, Persian became progressively richer and vaster language.

In the middle of the first/seventh century when the people of Iran
embraced Islam, the Arabic language gained a complete hold on that
country. It came to be looked upon not only as the language of religion
but also one of arts and letters. During the early period of the
‘Abbasid Caliphate when a strong movement was launched to produce
scientific and literary works in Arabic, the Iranians played a very
important role in it. They were also conspicuous in rendering
translations of Pahlawi, Syriac, and at times even Greek works. They
also composed a large number of original works in Arabic. After this
Arabic became so widely popular and gained such an immense hold on Iran
that the most important books in the field of Arabic grammar and
lexicography were written by the Iranians.

Many of the Persian poets composed Arabic verse and some of their works
have been acknowledged amongst the finest and most exquisite specimens
of Arabic poetry. The Iranian philosophers adopted Arabic as the medium
of their expression from the very beginning. Only a few of them ever
attempted to compose their philosophical works in Persian. Books
produced in Iran on the subjects of astronomy, mathematics, and medicine
was mostly written Arabic. Some of the Iranian historians also selected
Arabic as their vehicle of expression. Most of the religious literature,
including jurisprudence *(Fiqh)*, Hadith, and commentary on the Holy
Qur’an, were also produced in Arabic.

From the earliest period the Persian language had imported Arabic
elements. Especially in the domain of technical terms Persian was
completely overwhelmed by Arabic. Incidentally, the Iranians have given
special meanings to many Arabic words which have also passed into Urdu
in their changed Persianized sense. The overwhelming influence of Arabic
on the Persian language is traceable in different epochs of Iranian
history.

However, we find that some of the great scholars of Iran like ibn Sina,
Nasir Khusrau, Afdal al-Din Kashani, and Abu Raihan al-Biruni have at
times shown in their Persian works a tendency to coin fresh Persian
words instead of employing the current technical and scientific Arabic
terms. Certain other writers have also shown a tendency to employ new
compound epithets of purely Persian origin in their works. The
outstanding specimens of this trend in the Indo-Pakistani Persian
literature are visible in *A’in-i Akbari* of Abu al-Fadl.

The excessive use of Arabic words in Persian prose started in the
fifth/11th century. *Kalileh wa Dimneh* which was rendered into Persian
by Nasr Allah b. ‘Abd al-Hamid from the Arabic version of bin
al-Muqaffa‘ may be regarded as the first specimen of this type of
writing. Amongst other books written in this style may be enumerated
*Marzban Nameh* of Sa‘d al-Din of Varavin, *Tarikh-i* *Wassaf, Tarikh-i
Mu‘jam*, and *Durrah-i Nadirah*, the last being the work of Mirza Mehdi
Khan, the historian of the Court of Nadir Shah. But the number of such
books is very small. In fact, 99 Persian books out of 100 have been
written in simple and direct style and they have always reflected the
contemporary idiom, except where a writer has deliberately digressed
from the natural style to employ Arabic phrases, a tendency which had
been regarded as a kind of literary treat.

As a result of the systematic development of Persian poetry and use of
symbolism, Persian prose evolved a new style in which the writer would
lay the highest emphasis on allusions, metaphors, and rhetorical
devices. We notice the name trend in the recent prose styles of some
European languages. This is exceedingly sophisticated style of Persia
prose in which the content was obscured by vague rhetoric and long
repetitious sentences reached its zenith in the ninth/15th and
tenth/16th centuries. It also penetrated into the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent where we find in *Seh nathr-i Zuhuri* and *Rasa’il-i
Tughra-i Mashhadi* its most outstanding specimens.

This style won remarkable popularity in the field of Court documents,
royal commands and decrees, and official correspondence. The tradition
passed on to the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent and found its finest
expression in *Manshaat-i Abu al-Fadl Allami*. It also found its way to
Turkey and during this period the official correspondence of the Ottoman
Caliphs was wholly conducted in the same style as that in Persian. The
“Court style” originated in Iran in the sixth/12th century, enjoyed a
large, uninterrupted era of popularity and found its best specimen in
*Manshaat-i Mirza Tahir Wahid* composed in the 11th/17th century. It
was, however, dealt a fatal blow by Mirza Abu al-Qasam Qa’im Maqam
Farahani (1193/1779 – 1251/1835) whose prose was distinguished for the
simplicity and purity of its style.

The contemporary Persian prose has a highly simple, facile, and elegant
expression. It has freed itself from the conventional ornate and
abstruse style. Today it has drawn itself far closer to the idiomatic
and colloquial Persian expression than ever before.

During the long history of Persian prose a very large number of books
have been written in all branches of knowledge such as jurisprudence,
commentary on the Holy Qur’an, scholastic theology, mysticism,
philosophy, medicine, mathematics, astronomy, arts, ethics, tales and
fables, and even such subjects as handicrafts. However, a majority of
prose works in Persian have always been confined to history and
practical ethics. That also explains why all books on the history of the
Indo-Pakistan sub-continent during the Islamic period have been produced
in Persian. On this very account some knowledge of Persian may be
regarded as an essential pre-requisite for learning history of some of
the Asian countries. In fact, Persian literature may be divided into
poetry and history as its two main component parts.

E. Persian Grammar and Lexicography
-----------------------------------

For a long time the Iranians paid no heed to Persian grammar since they
were no strangers to the rules of their mother tongue. The only
expositions of Persian grammar in the past consisted of brief notices
which some of the grammatical works started in right earnest when during
the Mughul rule in India Persian became the literary as well as the
Court language of the subject were for a considerable time confined
mostly to the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent alone.

In the field of Persian lexicography as in grammar, not much interest
was shown in the past. The works produced contained a rather limited
number of uncommon words employed in poetry. When a proof was required
regarding the authenticity of a certain word, it was furnished from the
couplets in which it had been used.

It is quite apparent that at first the necessity for such dictionaries
arose in the western parts of Iran where Dari was not the language of
the people. The first dictionary to have ever been produced in Persian
was compiled by Qatran Urumawi, the famous poet who lived in Tabriz and
died in 465/1075. This book is now extinct. After him Asadi of Tus, who
also lived in Adharbaijan and died in the same year as Qatran, completed
his famous dictionary which is the oldest extant work on the subject.

As mentioned earlier, the Saljuqs had carried their official language,
Dari, right into Adharbaijan in the wake of their conquests. Since the
people of this province spoke Pahlawi, they found it difficult to
understand meanings of certain words which were familiar to Dari but did
not exist in Pahlawi. Hence, the urge to compile these works in
Adharbaijan.

The most important role in the compilation of dictionaries was
undoubtedly played by lexicographers of the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent.
During the Mughul period the Court language of the Empire was Persian.
People, for whom it was not the mother tongue, stood in need of books
for guidance and help. In the 11th/17th century special attention was
paid to this work, though dictionaries had been in the process of
compilation since a hundred years earlier.

For a long time the works of the Indo-Pakistani lexicographers or those
of the Iranian scholars who had migrated to the sub-continent continued
to be the most authentic source of reference even for the Iranians
themselves. The most outstanding of these books are *Farhang’i
Jahangiri* of Jamal al-Din Inju, *Farhang’i Rashidi* of ‘Abd al-Rashid
of Thatta, *Burhan-i Qati‘* of Muhammad Hussain Tabrizi, *Asif
al-Lughat* of ‘Aziz Jang Bahadur, *Bahar-i ‘Ajam* of Tek Chand Bahar,
*Chiragh-i Hidayat* of Siraj al-Din ‘Ali Khan Arzu, *Ghiyath al-Lughat*
of Muhammad Ghiyath al-Din, *Farhang-i Anand Raj* of Muhammad Padshah
Shad, and *Mustalihat al-Shu‘ara* compiled by Varasteh.

The number of lexicographical works compiled in the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent exceeds 100 of which the oldest, viz. *Adab al-Fudala’* of
Qadi Khan Badr Muhammad of Delhi, was completed in 822/1419. In other
words, the period during which these works were diligently and
assiduously produced extends to about 500 years.

The necessity of compiling such dictionaries was also felt in Turkey
where Persian enjoyed the status of a literary language at the Turkish
Court of the Ottoman Caliphs and many a Turkish scholar produced
literary works and composed poetry in Persian, so much so that even some
of the Turkish emperors composed poetry in the language. As a
consequence, a few dictionaries, to wit, *Lughai-i Halimi, Lughat-i
Sha‘uri, Dasinah-i Kabir* and *Lughat-i Shah-nameh* of ‘Abd al-Qadir
Baghdadi, were edited in Turkey. But as against the dictionaries
produced in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent in which the meanings of
words were also explained in Persian, in Turkey the meanings and
explanations were given in Turkish. The Iranians themselves, therefore,
have not been able to utilize these works.

To no other area of the world does the Persian language and literature
owe so profusely as to the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. Not only have
the scholars there written hundreds of very useful books on subjects as
varied and diverse as history, lexicography, grammar, mysticism,
biographies of poets, and commentaries on certain Persian texts, and
have preserved and jealously guarded many books lost to posterity in
other countries and even in the Persian language. There is hardly any
big city in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent where a number of Persian
books have not been published. The number of such published works stands
at 2,000.

F. Influence on Persian Literature
----------------------------------

The history of modern European powers in the East dates back to the
Renaissance period. Iran was one of the earliest countries to have come
into contact with the West. At first it was the Christian missionaries
who set foot on Muslim lands with a view to propagating their religion.
They were, thus, introduced to the rich treasure of advanced sciences
that had accumulated there through centuries but were unknown to the
West. They learnt the Arabic and the Persian languages in order to
acquaint themselves with the rich philosophical thought and the subtle
beauties and artistries of Persian literature. At first works of Persian
classics were rendered into Latin and soon after these were published in
some other prominent European languages such as French, English, German
and Italian.

The earliest Persian work to have translated into a European language
was *Gulistan* of Sa‘di. Gradually, the works of Firdausi, Hafiz, ‘Umar
Khayyajm, Nizami, Jami, Jalal al-Din Rumi, Farid al-Din ‘Attar, Nasir
Khusrau, and others were translated. These eminent stars on the
firmament of Persian literature are now regarded in all Western
countries as amongst the great immortals of world literature. It was the
dissemination of their thought which provided stimulus to numerous
European poets and writers of the 13th/19th century to take inspiration
from Persian writers. This influence was at times fully revealed in
their works and at others was reflected in their thought.

One of the earliest amongst them was Dante, the Italian poet, who was
inspired to write his *Divine Comedy* in which he describes his
spiritual flight into heavens and the next world under the influence of
Iranian literature. Next, it was the great German poet Goethe who was
thrilled by the sheer beauty of Persian literature through German
translations of Persian poetry, and who had even pursued for some time
the study of Persian language in order to have a fuller appreciation of
its literature. He even dedicated to it one of his works *West-ostlicher
Divan*, and gave to a section of this book the title of “Kitab-i Hafiz.”

The well-known English poet Edward Fitzgerald also published a small
collection known as *Rub‘iyat-i ‘Umar Khayyam* which he claimed to have
translated from the Persian collection of Khayhyam’s quatrains.
Actually, however, not all these quatrains are by Khayaam himself; some
of these are the work of other Persian poets. As such, this collection
reflects the thought of a number of Iranian philosophers.

Many of the European poets and writers who acquainted themselves with
the thought of Persian poets through translations in Western languages
have produced delightful works associated with Persian literature.
Mainly, however, they have come under the spell of Khayyam, Sa‘di and
Hafiz.

Bibliography
------------

Maneckji Nusservanji Dhalla, *Ancient Iranian Literature*, Karachi,
1949; Ali Asghar Hikmet, *Glimpses of Persian Literature*, Calcutta,
1958; S.M. Ishaque, *Modern Persian Poetry*, Calcutta, 1943; *Four
Eminent Poetesses of Iran*, Calcutta, 1950; R. P. Masani, *Court Poets
of Iran and India*, Bombay, 1938; Muhammad Abdul Ghani, *A History of
Persian Language and Literature at the Mughal Court*, Allahabad, Part 1,
*Babar*, 1929, Part 2, *Humayun*, 1930, Part 3, *Akbar*, 1930; G.K.
Nariman, *Iranian Influence of Muslim Literature*, Bombay, 1918; Choeth
Ram, *A Short Survey of the History of Persian Literature*, Lahore,
1927; Iqbal Hussain, *The Early Persian Poets of India*, Patna, 1937;
“Persian Letters,” *Life and letters*, London, Vol, 63, No. 148,
December, 1949; A. J. Arberry, *Persian Poems*, London, 1954;

Reuben Levy, *Persian Literature, An Introduction*, London, 1923; A.V.
Williams Tackson, *Early Persian Poetry*, New York, 1920; H. I.
Sadanangani, *Persian Poets of Sind*, Karachi, 1956; E. G. Browne, *A
Literary History of Persia*, Four vols., London, 1906 – 1924; Umar
Muhammad Dawudpota, *The Influence of Arabic Poetry in the Development
of Persian Poetry*, Bombay, 1934; F. F. Arbuthnot, *Persian Portraits*,
London, 1882; S. A. Storey, *Persian Literature*, London, Section 1,
1922, Section 2, Fasciculus 3, 1939,Vol. 1, Part 2, 1953; Munibur
Bahman, *Post-Revolution Persian Verse*, Aligarh, 1955; Ambikaprasad
Vajpeyi, *Persian Influence on Hindi*, Calcutta, 1936; Hadi Hassan,
*Studies in Persian Literature*, Aligarh, 1924.


