Chapter 54: Turkish Literature
==============================

A. Development of Turkish Prose and Poetry
------------------------------------------

The earliest surviving written documents of Turkish literature date from
the first/seventh century. They consist of short inscriptions in the
so-called “Runic” letters in the Upper Yenisei Valley in Siberia.
Lengthier documents of the same linguistic type and in the same script
survive in the valley of the Orkhon in Outer Ungolia and date from the
second/eighth century. These consist of inscriptions in two steles in
honour of two princes of the Turkish dynasty of the Eastern Kok Turk
State, and a third erected in honour of its old minister. The history of
the Eastern Kok Turk is here related in a semi-legendary and artistic
way. Other inscriptions in the same script, large and small, are known
in Mongolia, Siberia, and Western Turkestan. Manuscripts too, belonging
probably to the third/ninth century, have been found. The language of
the Turkish runes is characterized by a certain archaism in its
phonetics, morphology, and vocabulary.

From the second/eighth century onwards the Uygur Turks became acquainted
with Manichaeism, Buddhism, and Syrian (especially Nestorian)
Christianity in Northern China and East Turkestan and developed a high
culture within the framework of Far Eastern civilization which lasted
until the seventh/13th century. The surviving Uygur manuscript and
xylographic literature is very extensive and proves a high cultural
activity in the fields of religion, philosophy, and other sciences. The
script used for these literary works was mainly the Uygur alphabet,
derived from the Soghdian script. In addition to the Uygur alphabet,
however, these Turks used, besides the ancient Turkish runes, the
Manichaen, Syraic, and Brahmi runes.

The Uygur alphabet remained in use until the 12th/18th century among the
Turks of China who did not adopt Islam. The conversion to Islam (from
the fourth/tenth century onwards) of the Turks of Central Asia was
followed by the adoption of the Arabic alphabet. However, the Uygur
alphabet remained in use as the Court script. It was given a new lease
of life in the Muslim territories by the Mongol conquest, and was used
in the seventh/13th to the ninth/15th centuries among the Golden Horde
and the Timurids for the Kipchak and Chaghata’i languages. As late as
the early tenth/16th century there were still in the Imperial
Chancellery in the Istanbul scribes skilled in writing the Uygur script.

The Uygur Turkish or, to use a more suitable term, the old Turkish
literary language (for the civilization that used it was wider than the
geographical or historical limits of the Uygur State) shows, broadly
speaking, the same dialectical peculiarities as the Kot Turkish
monuments. The few dialectical divergences are obviously in the main due
to the passage of time and to influence from the outside.[^1]

The conversion to Islam of the Turks of Central Asia began in the
fourth/tenth century. Throughout history the Turks proved to be devoted
Muslims and zealous defenders and promoters of Islam. Founded on the
literary Uygur of the pre-Islamic period, there developed in the
fifth/11th century under the Karakhanids, converts to Islam, the Muslim
Turkish literary language of East Turkestan written probably from the
first in the Arabic alphabet. The best known documents in this language
are two didactic poems, the *Qutadhghu Bilig* (The Science of
Happiness), composed by Yusuf Khas Hajib, and the *‘Atabat al-Haqa’iq*
(The Threshold of Facts), composed by Adib Ahmad. There is, further, a
translation of the Qur’an. Besides these works there is another dating
from the same century, the *Diwan-o Lughat al-Turk* of Mahmud
al-Kashghari composed in Baghdad in Arabic in order to acquaint the
Arabs with the Turkish world. It is a very valuable source for the
investigation of the various Turkish tribes, dialects, folk literature,
customs, culture, etc. of this time.[^2]

Islam was established in the fourth/tenth century in the Bulghar kingdom
of Kama also. But data are lacking to enable us to decide if there also
existed any literature. In any case Bughar elements are found in the
sepulchral inscriptions of the eighth/14th century in the Volga
region.[^3]

The development of literary Turkish in central Asia went on without
interruption, but its centres changed from time to time.

The absence of early manuscripts prevents us from giving a definite name
to the language of the *Hikmats* (theological didactic poems) of Ahmad
Yasavi, the founder of Turkish mysticism, who lived in the sixth/12th
century in West Turkestan.

In the seventh/13th century the various literary dialects of the Muslim
Turkish world were not yet clearly differentiated from one another. The
formation of the Mongol Empire, which embraced almost the whole Arabic
world of the period, created for a time an atmosphere favourable to the
development of uniform language for a considerable section of the Muslim
Turkish peoples. At first Turkish literary activity under the Saljuqs in
Asia Minor was to some degree bound up with that of Central Asia and
Eastern Europe. The seventh/13th century, however, is an epoch of
political agitations in Asia Minor and Eastern Europe. It is, therefore,
only in the next century that literary works are mainly to be found.[^4]

Literary activity on the northern shores of the Black Sea, in Khwarizm
which included the mouth of the Sir Darya, in the Capital Saray, and in
the Crimea attained a considerable development by the beginning of the
eighth/14th century but no uniform literary language developed. The
elements of the literary language of the Karakhanid period were combined
with those of the local spoken dialects. In Syria, Egypt, and Persia
under Turkish or Turkicized rulers there grew an interest in Turkish.
Thus, we find a series of grammar books and lexicons in Arabic from the
sixth/13th century until the beginning the tenth/16th century. They all
deal with the Kipchak but contain elements from other Turkish dialects
in varying degrees.

The prose work *Qisas al-Anbiya’* (Stories of the Prophets), with
passages in verse written by N. Rabghuzi, finished in 710/1310, although
lacking aesthetic value, is of great literary importance. Another
religious work in verse is the *Mu‘in al-Murid* of Sheikh Sharif Khuwaja
(713/1313). The very attractive romance in verse, *Khusraw wa Shirin* of
the poet Qutb (742 – 743/1341 -1342), although based on the
corresponding Persian work of Nizami, has nevertheless many original
passages. Khwarizimi’s poem *Mahabbatnamah* (The Book of Love), composed
in 754/1353, is another work of high literary merit. Seif-i Saray’s
translation of *Gulistan* (The Rose Garden) that appeared in 782/1380 is
another prose and verse book of high literary value. The religious work
*Nahj al-Faradis* (Way to the Paradise) of Mahmud b. ‘Ali (716/1316) is,
properly speaking, a “40-Hadith” book in simple prose with no aesthetic
aims. Finally, it may be mentioned the religious prose work of
*Mi‘rajnamah* (Book of the Ascension) composed for didactic purposes.

Further, there are other works written in Egypt and Syria which are: a
*Siyar* book composed in 784/1382, *Irshad al-Muluk w-al-Salatin*
composed by Barka Faqih in 789/1387, *Kitab fi al-Fiqh bi al-Lisan
al-Turki*, originating probably from the ninth/15th century, *Kitab fi
‘Ilm al-Nashshab wa Kitab fi Riyadat al-Khail*, a book on the art of
horsemanship translated from Arabic for soldiers in about 808/1405,
*Kitab al-Da‘wa*, another book on the art of horsemanship also
translated from Arabic in 844/1440.[^5]

We may date to the eighth/14th and ninth/15th centuries the beginning of
the development of the different literary languages in different parts
of the Muslim Turkish world.

The Chaghata’i language and literature which developed under the
Timurids, the descendants of the second son of Chingiz Khan, represent
the most brilliant phase of the development of Central Asiatic Turkish
literature. Names are known of a few Turkish poets who lived to the
first half of the ninth/14th century. Sakkaki was a panegyrist. Another
famous poet was Lutfi. To the same period belong the panegyrist Mir
Haidar Majdhub (Turkish Tilbe), Amiri, Sayyid, Ahmad Mirza, Gada’i,
Yaqini, and ‘Ata’i.

In the second half of the century Chaghata’i literature reached its
zenith in Mir ‘Ali Shir Nawa’i. In his *Diwan* (Book of Poems) as well
as in his numerous other verse and prose works he does not merely
imitate the Persian poets, as was the case with his predecessors, but
knows how to suit the taste of his contemporaries. He has, therefore,
enjoyed great popularity right down to the present day all over the
Turkish world. Of importance is his *Muhakamat al-Lughatain* (The
Contest of Two Languages) in which he endeavours to show that the
Turkish language is no less suitable than the Persian for poetical works
and intellectual purposes. He is also the first composer of Turkish
collection of the biographies of poets. Nawa’i is considered to be one
of the greatest personalities and intellectuals in Turkish literature.
The prince and patron of Nawa’i, Sultan Hussain Baiqara, was also a
poet.

The founder of the Timurid empire in India in the first half of the
tenth/16th century, Babur Shah, was also the author of a number of
poems, but he is most celebrated for his *Khatirat-i Babuir* (Memoirs of
Babur) or *Buburnamah* (Babur Book) very vividly relating his life and
expeditions as well as describing the life and topography of India. He
is considered the second great personality of Chaghata’i literature.

Minor personalities of the classical period are Hamidi, Muhammad Salih,
Shabani, etc.

Under the Uzbeks, who drove the Timurids out of Central Asia and eastern
Persia in the second half of the tenth/16th century, Turkish poets and
writers stuck to old Chaghata’i models without producing anything new or
original. The historian Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur Khan in the 12th/18th
century probably stands alone in endeavouring to avoid in his work
Persian and Arabic as well as Chaghata’i Turkish words.

Of importance in Mirza Mehdi Khan’s *Sanglakh* (Stony Place), a Turkish
Persian dictionary composed in 1174/1760 with its extensive preface on
classical Chaghata’i Turkish grammar containing comparisons with
Anatolian Turkish.

The same Turkish literary language as was written in the land of the
Uzbeks is written to the present day in Chinese Turkestan. Here also
Turkish culture has been influenced by Persian.

In the 14th/20th century a new Turkish literature based on the local
dialects has been founded under Russian und Kazan Turkish influences. It
includes dramatic works among its productions. In accordance with the
State policy of the new regime, a special alphabet in Cyrillic letters
has been created for the Uzbek language.[^6]

From the fifth/11th century onwards Turkish tribal and military units
began to make raids into Asia Minor, so that Anatolia lay totally open
to the Turks. Thus, the colonization of Asia Minor and Eastern Europe
went on with great success. Thanks to the ability of these Turks to
adapt themselves in course of time to the changing circumstances of
life, they succeeded in founding on very firm bases a strong and lasting
State.

Parallel to the political and social development, Anatolian Turkish
literature has had an uninterrupted development from the time of the
Saljuqs down the present day. It has, therefore, become the most
important and richest branch of all the Turkish literatures and has
exercised an influence on the literature of other dialects.

### Seventh/13th Century

Already in the seventh/13th century there developed in Anatolia a
Turkish literature based mainly on the Oghuz dialect. The well-known
Persian mystic Jalal al-Din Rumi and his son Sultan Walad produced some
Turkish verses, Ahmad Faqih wrote a fairly long mystic poem, and Shayyad
Hamzah left poems of different *genres*.

Yunus Emre was the greatest figure in this century. He is regarded as
the best Turkish popular mystic poet. His art is essentially one of the
people, i.e. it is Turkish. It was through his mystical verses that
there developed a tradition of writing poems in the language of the
people and in the popular syllabic metre, which did not lose its power
even in the period when Persian influence was at its highest.

Classical profane literature had its first representative in Dahhani.
His poems were in an elaborate style and attained a high degree of
perfection from the technical point of view.

Another poem of this century was ‘Ali’s *Qassah-i Yusuf* (Story of
Joseph), representing linguistically a mixture of Central Asian literary
Turkish and the vernacular Oghuz dialect. Moreover, other works of this
and even next century had more or less the same peculiar features, and
the rather pure Oghuz dialectical features in the manuscripts of works
of these centuries are probably to be ascribed to the later
copyists.[^7]

### Eighth/14th Century

The literary development followed the same line in the eighth/14th
century. A certain number of feudal princes in Asia Minor lacked Persian
or Arabic culture, and this was the reason why the language of the
people became important, why books were written in Turkish, and also why
a number of Muslim works were translated from Arabic and Persian into
Turkish. During this century there developed in Anatolia several
cultural centres, such as Quniyah, Nigde, Ladik, Kastamonu, Sinop,
Sivas, Kirsehir, Bursa, and Iznik.

Among the leading poets Ahmad Gulshahri should be mentioned for his
artistic merit. He put into Turkish the *Mantiq al-Tair* (Speech of
Birds) of the Persian poet ‘Attar, expanding it with stories from
various sources. We also possess a number of isolated poems of his.
Although a mystic, his literary aims were purely artistic.

The great mystic of this century is, however, ‘Ashiq Pasha with his long
poem *Gharibnamama* (Book of the Stranger). He is a mere imitator of
Jalal al-Din Rumi and Sultan Walad. There also exist a number of
detached mystical poems from the pen of ‘Ashiq Pasha, but all are far
from showing the lyrical merit of Yunus Emre.

In the second half of the century we find classical mystic poetry
attaining high perfection in Nasimi. He is a great poet whose mystic
lyrics are most expressive. His style is simple but full of power and
harmony. In his *Diwan* we find *tuyughs* a verse-form peculiar to
Turkish classical poetry and foreign to Persian literature.

Romantic tales and fables were also taken from Persian literature. Among
them is to be mentioned Mas‘ud’s love story in verse, *Suhail wa
Naubahar* (two proper names), a translation or rather on expanded
adaptation from an unknown Persian work. This story has considerable
literary value.

But, with the exception of Nasimi, Ahmadi is the greatest poet of this
period. He is the author of the *Iskandarnamah* (Book of Alexander). The
subject is taken from Persian sources, but he adds a long section
dealing with world history including the Ottoman dynasty. His *Diwan* is
more interesting from the artistic point of view. Among his poems there
are some which are of local interest.

Further, we must mention Qadi Burhan al-Din who has left a *Diwan* also
containing *tuyughs*. His poems have a note of sincerity and passion of
their own. He is the first to have attained perfection by the standards
of classical rhetoric.

Of the prose works are to be mentioned an anonymous translation of
*Kalilah wa Dimnah* and the legendary tales of *Dede Qorqut* mainly
about the Muslim-Christian struggle during the Turkish invasion of
Anatolila and its vicinity, reflecting vividly the life, customs, and
ideals of the Turks of the fifth/11th and sixth/12th centuries.[^8]

### Ninth/15th Century

In the ninth/15th century Turkish increased in importance as a literary
and official language. In the first half of the century there were three
great princely families who were patrons of scholars and poets:
Karamanoghli at Auniyah, the Jandaroghli at Kastamonu, and the Ottoman
Princes in Edirne and Bursa. As in the preceding centuries, the literary
activity under them was not confined merely to the translation of Muslim
works of a classical character.

In popular religious literature we may mention the *Maulid* (Birth of
the Prophet) poem of Sulaiman Chalabi and Ahmad. This fine work has all
the qualities of a masterpiece. It has been read by the people, for
centuries particularly on the occasion of the religious commemoration of
a dead person. In every century many similar poems have been written in
imitation of it.

The most important classical poet of this period is Sheikhi. His version
of *Khusrau wa Shirin* of the Persian poet Nizami is more than a mere
translation. The *Kharnamah* (Story of the Donkey) is a masterpiece of
satire. He is also the author of a *Diwan* which contains a considerable
amount of panegyrics and love poems. His part in the establishment of
classical poetry is great. His influence continued down to the
tenth/16th century.

Another great classical poet of the period is Ahmad Pasha. He surpassed
his contemporaries in panegyrics and love poems exercising, thus, a
great influence on the poets of his time. Next to him in this field is
Najati.

A certain number of chronicles in verse belong to this period.

Prose also developed considerably. In this connection we may mention the
anonymous commentary on the Qur’an, *Jawahir al-Asdaf* (Gems of Mothers
of Pearls), and the more popular book *Qirq Vezir Hikayalari* (The Tales
of the Forty Viziers).

But it was mainly artistic prose that was cultivated, its most brilliant
representative being Sinan Pasha with his *Tadarru‘ Namah* (Book of
Supplication). His style is artistically elaborated, yet natural and
sincere. Other representatives of artistic prose are Sari Kamal, Ahi,
Masihi, and Ja‘far Chalabi.

As a reaction to this ornate language the first representative of the
*turki-i basit* (simple Turkish), Wisali who wrote in *‘arud* metres but
used exclusively Turkish words deserves to be noted. However, only one
couplet of his has come to us.

The writing of history in prose also began to develop. We have many
anonymous specimens of Ottoman history. They show us that there existed
in the ninth-15th century among the people and especially among the
soldiers chronicles which were almost of the nature of epics. The
historical works of ‘Ashiq Pashazadah, Oruch Beg, and others do not
differ much in point of style from these anonymous chronicles. The works
of Tursan Beg, Bayati, and some others, on the other hand, were written
rather with the object of displaying a particular style and an extensive
literary ability.

A fine specimen of unaffected prose of this period is the treatise by
Deli Lutfi, which is one of the oldest works of humour in Turkish
literature.[^9]

### Tenth/16th Century

In the tenth/16th century the apogee of Ottoman political power is also
reflected in the sphere of literature. Literary activity flourished not
only in Istanbul, but also in Baghdad, Diyar-i Bakr, Quniyah, Kastamonu,
Bursa, Edirne, Yenije-u Vardar, and Uskup. Philological commentaries and
lexicographical and grammatical works were produced. Books without
number were translated from Arabic and Persian.

The greatest figures in poetry in chronological order are: Dhati,
Khayali, Fuduli, and Baqi. Dhati wrote a large number of works in poetry
and prose which are unequal in merit. His imagination and new ideas made
him very popular. Khayali surpasses Dhati as a poet. His *Diwan*
contains all his works. His most original poems are his love poems.
Fuduli must be regarded as the greatest lyrical poet of Turkish
literature. Although he used the dialect of Adharbaijan, he exercised
such an influence in Anatolia that literary historians regard him
belonging to the realm of Anatolian literature.

His love poems and love romance *Laila wa Majnun* have secured him a
special place in literary history. Love in his works is never entirely
profane in character, thanks to mystic inspiration. No other poet except
Nawa’i has acquired a like reputation throughout the whole Turkish
world. He exercised an influence even on the musician poets of the lover
classes. Baqi was undoubtedly the most reputed poet of his time, has
fame stretching as far as India. In the expression of sentiment he is
below Fuduli, but the musical charm and faultless ease of his poems have
given him the reputation of an inimitable master of classicism. His
elegy on the death of Sulaiman the Magnificent is a masterpiece of deep
sentiment and grief.

At this period Anatolian Turkish poetry attained the highest point in
artistic elaboration and rhetoric. It is true that this was in the main
an imitation of Persian poetry. But the Anatolian Turkish poets imitated
rather the Indo-Persian poetry and went even further in fineness and
abstraction. In the next centuries we see this refinement perfected on
its own lines.

Poets belonging to different dervish orders composed didactic works,
mystic poems and collections of legends of saints, along with
translations of Arabic and Persian mystical works.

Prose in this century assumed a heavier and more artificial form.
Outdoing the Persian models, the simplest ideas were expressed by the
most complicated images to the detriment of the subject. This lack of
taste is found in the greatest stylists of the period: Lami’i, Kamal
Pashazadah, Jalalzadah, Faridun Beg, ‘Azmi, Qinalizadah, Khuwaja Sa‘d
al-Din and others. This tendency to artificiality had a much more
disastrous effect on prose than on poetry. In very long works, however,
it was only the preface that was written in this turgid and clumsy
style.

Many literary, historical, religious or moralizing works of the period
were in fact written in a simpler language. The same applies to official
correspondence and other State documents. In religious works intended
for the people every endeavour was made to write as simply as possible.
The examples which we possess of the prose of Fuduli and Baqi show an
elegant and relatively simple language.

As a reaction to the ornate language, the movement called *turki-i
basit* (simple Turkish) has its second well-known exponent in Nazmi of
Edirne whose Diwan, though, again, in *‘arud* verse, contains only
Turkish words. But he has no artistic abilities.

In the field of historical works great progress was made. Besides rhymed
chronicles, we find historical works in prose in continuation of the
Saljuq tradition. A number of historical works were written in verse.
With the exception of the Ottoman history by Hadidi they always deal
with a single event or the victories of a single emperor or commander.
General histories were composed by ibn Kamal, Jalalzadah, Mustafa
Chalabi, Muhi al-Din Jamali, Lutfi Pasha, Khuwaja Sa‘d al-Din, and ‘Ali.
Some of these works are the sources for our knowledge of the social
history of this period.

Among historical works those which deal with literary history occupy an
important place. The first Ottoman collection of biographies of poets
was produced by Shahi Beg on the model of Nawa’i’s work. This was
followed by the works of Latifi, ‘Ashiq Chalabi, ‘Ahdi, and Hassan
Chalabi. ‘Ali also gives important notices of poets in his historical
work.

It is in this century that there appeared geographical works and
accounts of travels. Some are mere translations. The celebrated
*Bahriyyan* (Maritime Work) of Piri Ra’is and *Muhit* (Ocean) and
*Mir’at al-Mamalik* (Mirror of lands) of Saidi ‘Ali Ra’is are the best
works of this type. We have further records of voyages both in verse and
in prose.

The first grammar of Anatolian Turkish, planned on the model of Arabic
grammars, by Qadri of Pergamon, was also written in this century.

Alongside classical literature we find popular literature increasing in
every form. Wondering musician-poets were to be found wherever people
congregated, and love songs, heroic tales, elegies, and folk-songs were
recited.[^10]

### 11th/17th Century

In the 11th/17th century knowledge of the Ottoman literary language
spread among the Muslim lower classes generally and also through
districts to the non-Turksih population or Turks of speaking a
non-Ottoman Turkish dialect. The influence of Turkish literature and
culture is found as early as the tenth/16th century in the use of Arabic
script by the Muslim Hungarians and Croats. There are also found
dictionaries of Turkish-Serbian, Turkish-Bosaniak, and Turco-Greek in
verse. Istanbul was always the centre to which men of letters and
learning flocked from all parts of the Ottoman Empire and from beyond
its frontiers.

The classical Turkish poetry of the 11th/17th century was in no respect
below the level of the Persian models. The Turkish poets by this time
were working on original themes, though the influence of the Persian and
Indo-Persian poets was still felt.

Naf‘i may be regarded as the greatest master of eulogies *(qusidahs)*,
on account of the power of his imagination, the richness of his
language, and the elevation and harmony of his style. His love poems and
his satires *(hajwiyyat)*, on the other hand, are less successful.

Another very important classical poet was Nabi who is renowned for his
refined didactical poems and descriptions. His verses are still quoted
as proverbs. He was also the one who protested against artificial
language, saying, “The *ghazal* book is a dictionary.”

The greatest figure in romance poems *(mathnawi)* is Nav‘izada ‘Ata’i
who takes his subjects from the life of his time.

The number of religious and mystical works, lives of saints, and
didactic works connected with different orders is very great in this
century. Poetical forms were often used for them.

Literary prose follows the same lines as in the preceding century. The
great stylists like Vaisi, Narkisi Oqchizadah, and others carried
affectation of language to still greater lengths. Yet works which were
in their days considered to have no literary value are now being greatly
appreciated.

As an encyclopaedist, Katib Chalabi’s name must be mentioned.

Histories in this century also took the first place among prose works.
There are several which have the character of semi-official chronicles.
Mainly, though they are translations of general histories of Islam,
there are also original works on the same subject, and general and
special works and monographs on Ottoman history. The best historians are
Katib Chalabi, Pachavi, Na‘ima, and Qochi Beg. The verse chronicles are
much below the level of those of the tenth/16th century. The most
notable are those of Riyadi and Qafzadh Fa‘idi.

In the field of geography the most important works are those of Katib
Chalabi and Abu Bakr Dimashqi. They use European as well as Muslim
sources. The *Sayathatnamah* (Voyage Book) of Avliya Chalabi is
important as history of all aspect of social life.

The great popularity of the literature of the people continued in this
century in all classes of society. The musician-poets became very
numerous. We find them in the military classes and in the religious
orders. The most important of them are Karaja Oghlan Gavhari and ‘Ashiq
‘Umar. The influence of this popular literature is felt even among the
upper classes.[^11]

### 12th/18th Century

Literature and culture continued in the 12th/18th century to follow the
same lines as in the preceding centuries. There was a fast output in
prose and poetry, while the cultural links with Persia and Transoxiana
continued. But the tendency to a more individual development gained in
strength. Endeavour was made to simplify the language.

Among the poets Nadim in particular acquired a great reputation. By his
original themes, rich imagination, sparkling wit, and the harmonious
language he surpassed his predecessors and contemporaries. He was the
poet who brought much local colour to Turkish literature. He was famous
with his *sharqis*, another verse-form peculiar to Turkish classical
poetry and foreign to Persian literature. One of his poems he composed
in the Turkish syllabic metre and the national form *turku*.

Among the great poets of this century special mention must be made of
Raghib Pasha, the last great poet of the classical period.

The poets of this century practiced all forms of poetry, but special
attention was devoted to *genres* characteristic of an epoch of
decadence. On the other hand, true religious inspiration still
contained. The last masterpiece of romantic poetry was Sheikh Ghalib’s
*Husn-o ‘Ishq* (Beauty and Love) with its mystical inspiration and very
fine style.

Literary prose tended to become gradually simpler, although imitations
of the old artificial style were still found. A well-known stylist,
‘Uthmanzadah Ta’ib openly denounced exaggerated artificiality in prose.
Historical works occupied the first place, but they could not be
compared to those of the preceding century.

The political and military decline of the Ottoman Empire stimulated the
writing of a large number of memoirs investigating its causes. The most
remarkable of these is that of Qoja Segban Bashi.

From the point of view of geography we may note a number of important
descriptions by ambassadors of which that of France by Yirmi Sekiz
Muhammad Chalabi is a typical and very interesting example. We may also
notice a number of translations of European works on geography.

The writings celebrating the splendid festivals held by the Sultans are
important sources for sociological research.

The collections of biographies of poets are even more numerous than in
the preceding century.

Popular literature continued to enjoy the same popularity among all
classes of society. The works of the musician poets were also well
known. Taste for such literature penetrated more into the upper classes.

In this century Ibrahim Mutafarriqah inaugurated printing in Turkish
script, but for several reasons printing remained confined to a very
restricted sphere throughout the century and did not exercise any
particular influence on intellectual and artistic life.[^12]

### 13th/19th Century

At the beginning of the 13th/19th century Ottoman literature sank to a
very low level which continued until the period of political reform. It
was only natural that the old literary tradition could not disappear at
one stroke.

The prose of the period before the political reforms was not of much
value, although its production was not less in quantity than that of the
preceding centuries. The historical work by Mutarcim ‘Asim was
remarkable for its style and critical analysis. He used even simpler
language in his translation of *Burhan-i Qafi‘* (The Definite Proof) and
the *Qamus* (Lexicon). Lastly, mention must be made of the celebrated
poet and stylist ‘Akif Pasha who, on account of several poems written in
the popular metre and some works in simple prose, could be regarded as
the first to have spread literary innovations.

We also had representatives of popular literature. The best known
musician-poets were Dertli, Dhihni and Amrah.

B. Development of Turkish Grammar and Lexicography
--------------------------------------------------

1. Turkish is an agglutinative language. The *root* which is either
verbal or nominal and which (except in the case of certain pronouns) is
never inflected always appears at the beginning of the word. Verbal
forms are built from the verb-stem, which may be a simple *root* or a
root modified by formative suffixes. The verb-stem is followed by
suffixes indicating aspect and tense (“voice” and “negation” being shown
by aspect suffixes), to produce the tense-stem which, without further
suffixation, expresses the third person singular; other persons are
indicated by the addition of a personal suffix. The resultant word is a
unit as regards stress, intonation, and sound harmony, i.e. assimilation
of sounds tending to conform the sounds to the suffixes to the root in
general. Phonetic changes in the root or suffixes do not imply semantic
modifications.

Nominal forms again are built out of the noun-stem, which may be a
simple root or a root modified by formative suffixes.

Prefixes and infixes do not exist in Turkish.

The syntax of the language is based essentially on the following
principle. The governing parts of grammatical statement or of a group of
statements follow the parts governed. Hence the principal part of the
statement or of a group of statements, i.e. the finite verb or
predicate, is usually placed at the end, the completed parts follow the
complement, the qualified elements (nominal or verbal) are put after
their qualifiers (adjectival or adverbial), and the principal statement
follows the sub-ordinate.

Turkish in its original form did not include conjunctions. The only
sub-ordinate clause which is attested from the earliest documents
onwards is the conditional.

The characteristics of the Turkish language outlined above are to be
found in the earliest surviving Turkish documents, which date from the
first/seventh century.

2. This “pure” language, however, underwent a considerable change when
pagan Turks came into contact with the Far Eastern civilizations and
religions. The Turkish literary output of the period before the adoption
of Islam was mainly translations of the scriptures of various religions.
Such translations of sacred texts had to be as literal as possible. Of
course, it is no wonder that under the influence of the non-Turkish
structures of the languages so translated, this literary dialect, while
preserving its native participial and gerundial constructions, acquired
new types of sub-ordinate clauses, partly with defective constructions
and developed conjunctions formed from Turkish roots. In the field of
vocabulary also we find technical expressions, borrowed from the more
developed languages of the Far East. This does not, however, mean that
such borrowings were numerous. On the contrary, a great number of
expressions were mere Turkish translations from these languages.

3. As to linguistic peculiarities of the first Islamic literary dialect
in Central Asia, it differed but slightly from Old Turkish. Religious
terms markedly connected with the Far Eastern religious were no more to
be found. In their place, we find Islamic terminology. But this latter
was not as widespread as one would expect or find in later literary
works. Instead Far Eastern terms or Turkish calques from them were still
common. The development in the direction of one analytical sentence
structure was less pronounced. Though sub-ordinate clauses of the
Indo-European and Semitic types began to develop in general, the Turkish
sentence with its participial and gerundial forms still prevailed.
Nevertheless, new conjunctions were created out of Turkish words or
borrowed from Arabic and Persian, and these to a great extent encouraged
the development of new Turkish sub-ordinate clauses.

On the other hand, popular words of the Karakhanidian period show very
little foreign influence. Both in syntax and lexicography, this
influence was restricted to the minimum. In this respect the popular
literary products of the earliest Turkish Islamic literature resembled
the runic inscriptions.

4. In Khwarizmain period, Arabic and Persian exercised an increasing
influence on Turkish syntax. Both in verse and in prose, the basically
fixed Turkish word-order became more flexible and the rich stock of
terminations that henceforth developed in the language prevented
ambiguity and gave it greater clarity. The borrowings from the two main
Islamic culture languages, Arabic and Persian, increased. Vocabulary was
further enriched by the use of Arabic and Persian loan-words, though the
Far Eastern loan-words were still common, and inversion, particularly in
verse, was now used to a greater extent. Until the ninth/15th century,
Anatolian Turkish also reveals the same characteristics.

5. During the classical period of Ottoman literature, the syntactical
influence of Persian in the construction of sentences did not increase.
Rather, it diminished in the course of time.

The old Turkish type of sentence with only a single finite verb, but
using many participial and gerundial forms was particularly in use in
Ottoman prose. This made the formation of very long sentences possible.
Inversion, however, particularly in verse, was greatly practiced.
Persian and Arabic loan words and grammatical forms became more numerous
and Far Eastern loan words were totally forgotten.

6. In modern Turkish, the syntactical influence of Persian in sentence
constructions has left few traces. On the other hand, modern writers
have drawn fully on the resources of popular speech; the language has
thus been greatly enriched and rendered much more expressive, thanks to
the harmonious combination of the synthetic structure of the old
language with the freer construction and more vivid turns of expression
of everyday spoken Turkish.

New constructions of sub-ordinate clauses with conditional or temporal
force, formed from a finite verb followed by the interrogative ending,
have become meaningless.

In the Turkish vocabulary, Persian and Arabic loan words have become
much less numerous, giving place to Turkish words, some of which have
even been invented. Loan words from the European languages, mainly at
first from Italian then from French, are to be noticed.

7. Thus, we see that in the process of evolution, owing partly at least
to the influence of languages of other structural types, both Eastern
and Western, Turkish has developed conjunctions, other types of
sub-ordinate clauses, and a freer word order in the sentence.

Bibliography: Turkish Grammar and Lexicography
----------------------------------------------

K. Gronbech, *Der turkische Sprachbau*, Copenhagen, 1936, 182 pp.; C.F.
Voegelin, and M.e. Ellinhausen, “Turkish Structure,” *Journal of the
American Oriental Society*, 63, 1943, pp. 34 – 56, and *American
Oriental Society Publications and Offprint Series*, No. 17, Indiana
University; J. Deny; “Structure de la langue turque,” *Conferences de
l’Institut de Linguistique do* *l’Universite de Paris*, Paris, 9 and 10,
1949 – 50, 35 pp.; “Langues turques,” *Les Langues du Monde, Societe de
Linguistiques de Paris*, Paris, 1952, pp. 331 – 68; N. Poppe, “Altaisch
and Urturkisch,” *Ungarische Jahrbucher*, 6, 1926, pp. 94 – 121; “Plural
Suffixes in the Altaic Languages,” *Ural-Altaische Jahrbucher*, 24/3 –
4, 1952, pp. 65 – 84; “Einige Lautgesetze und ihre Bedeutung zur Frage
der mongolische-turkischen Sprach beziebungen,” *ibid.*, 30/ 1 – 2,
1958, pp. 93 – 97; P. Pelliot, “Les forms avec et sans q- (k-) en turc
et en mongo,” *T’oung Pao*, 38, 1944, pp. 73 – 101;

D. Sinor, “D’un morpheme particulierement repandu dans les langues
ouralo-altaques,” *ibid*, 38, 1944, pp. 135 – 52; “Le Probleme de la
parente des langues ouralo-alaiques,” *Revue de Geographie Humaine et
Ethnologie*, 1, 1948, pp. 65 – 69; K. H. Menges, “Altaic Languages”
*Colier’s Encyclopaedia*, 1, New York City, 1949, pp. 414 – 19; W.
Kotwicz,m *Les pronoms dans les langues altaiques*, Cracow, 1936, 80
pp.; “Contributions aux etudes altaiques,” *Rocznik Orientalistyezny*,
16, 1950, pp. 327 – 68; Studia nad jezykami altakskimi,” *ibid.*, pp. 1
– 134; A. Temir, “Turkce ve mogolca arasinda ilgiler,” *Ankara
Universitesi Dil ve Tarish-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi*, 3/1 – 2, 1955,
pp. 1 – 25; G. J. Ramstedt, *Einfuhrung in die alaische
Sprachwissen-schaft*, 1, Lautlehre, Helsinki, 1957; A. Caferoglu,
“Uygurlarda hukuk ve maliye istilahlari,” *Turkiyat Mecmuasi*, 4, 1934,
pp. 1 – 47.

[^1]: General Works on the development of the Turkish Language and
Literature: Krymski, Istoriya turcici i yeya literatuyi, two vols.
Moscow, 1916; M Fuad Kopruluzade, Turk edebiyatli tarihi, 1926, 386 pp.
plus seven maps (incomplete); “Turk edebiyatina umumi bir bakis,” Turk
dili ve edebiyats hakkinda arast, irmalar, Istanbul, 1934, pp. 1 – 25;
‘Un apercu general sur la literature turque,” Ankara, February 26, March
5 and 19, 1942; A. Bombaci, Storia della letteratura turca, Milano,
1956, 526 pp. The Pre-Islamic Language and Literature: M. Fuad
Kopruluzade, “En eski Turk siirleri,” Ikdam, March 19, 1916; M. Rasanen,
“Ein Uberblick uber die altesten Denkmaler der turkischen Sprachen,”
Studia Orientialia, 13/1, 1946, pp. 1 – 21; A. S. Levend, Turk dili ve
edebiyatinun ilk mahsulleri, Ankara, 1949, 31 pp; A. V. Gabain,
Altturkisches Schrifttum, Akademie-Berlag, Berlin, 1950, 24 pp; M. N.
Ozerdim, M.S. 4 – 5, “Yuzyillarda Cin’in Kuzeyinde hanedan kuran
Turklerin siirleri,” Ankara Universitesi Dil ve Tarih-Cografya Fakutesi
dergisi, 13/3, 1955, pp. 51 – 96.

[^2]: V.V. Barthold, “The Turks and the Qara-Kanids,” Four Studies on
the History of Central Asia, translated from the Russian by V. and T.
Minorsky, 1, Leiden, 1956, pp. 17 – 247; O. Pritsak, “Die Karachaniden,”
Islam, 21/1, 1953, pp. 17 – 68; A. A. Valitova, “Yusuf Balasagunskiy i
ego “Kutadgu bilig,” Kratkie Soobsceniya Inst. Vostokovedeniya, 4, 1952,
pp. 56 – 63; A. Bombaci, “Kutadgu Bilig hakkinda bazi mulahazalr,” F.
Koprulu Armagani, Istanbul, 1953, pp. 65 – 75; M Fuad koprulluzade, “II.
asur Turk sairi Edip Ahmet,” Turk dili ve edebiyati khakkunda
arastirmalar, Istanbul, 1934, pp. 68 – 73; “Divan-i Lugat al-Turk,”
ibid., pp. 33 – 34; “Le ‘Divant Lugat al-Turk,’” Ankara, January 30,
February 6, 1936; “Hibet al-Hakayik tetkiklerinin bugunku hali,” ibid.,
pp. 91 – 112; “Le quatrain dans la poesie classique turque,” Ankara,
November 27, 1941; C. Brockelman, “Altturkestanische Volksweisheit,”
Ostasiatische eitchrift, 8, 1920, pp. 49 – 73; “Mahmud al-Kasghari uber
die Spracchen und Stamme der Turken im 11. Jahrhundert,” Korosi
Csoma-Archivum, 1/1, 1921, pp. 26 – 40; “Altturkestanische Volkspoesie
1,” Asia Major, 1, 1925, pp. 22 – 44; “Volkskundliches aus
Ostturkestan,” Asia Major, 2, 1925, pp, 110 – 24.

[^3]: C. Gerard, Les Bulgares de la Volga et les Slaves du Danube,
Paris, 1939; J. Benzin, ‘Die angeblichen bolgarturkischen Lehnworter im
Ungarischen,” Zeitschrift der Deutshen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft,
105, 1944, pp. 24 – 27; M. Rasanen, “Der Wolga-bolgarische Einfluss im
Westen im Lechte der Wortgeschichte,” Finnisch-urgische Forschungen, 29,
1946, pp. 190 – 201; O. Pritsak, Die bulgarische Furstenliste und die
Sprache der Protobulgaren, Wiesbaden, 1955, 101 pp. plus three plates.

[^4]: v. Gordlevskiy, “Hodja Ahmad Yesown,” Festechrift George Jacob,
Leipzig, 1932, pp. 56 – 67; A. K. Borokov, “Ocerki po istorii uzbekskogo
yazyka,” Sovetskoe Vostokovedenic, 5, Moscow-Leningrad, 1948, pp. 229 –
50; M. Fuad Kopruluzade, L’Influence du Chamanisme tuco-mongol sur less
orders mystiques musulmans, Istanbul, 1929, 19 pp.

[^5]: M. Fuad Kopruluzade, “Gazneliler devrinde Turk siiri,” Turk dili
ve edebiyati hakkinda arastirmalar, Istanbul, 1934, pp. 26 – 32; “II.
asirda bir Turk filologu Fahreddin Mubaraksah ve eseri,” ibid., pp. 123
– 54; Harezmsahlar devrinde bir Turk filologu. Muhammad b. kays ve
eseri,” ibid., pp. 155 – 61; “La poesie turque sous les Gaznevides,”
Ankara, November 28, 1935; “Un philologue ture a la cour de Harezmsah,”
ibid., January 13, 1938; “Altin Ordu’ya dar yeni vesikalar,” Belleten 5,
1941, pp. 397 – 436; T. Halasi-Kun, “Philologica 1,” Ankara Universitesi
Dil ve Tarih-Cogafya Fakultesi Dergisi, 5/1, 1947, pp. 1 – 37;
“Philologica 2,” ibid., 7/2, 1949, pp. 415 – 65; A. Zajaczkowski,
“Zabytek jeztkowy z Zlotej Ordy, ‘Husrev z Sirin’ Qutba,” Rozenik
Orientalistyczny, 19, 1954, pp. 45 – 123; “Kutb’un Husrev u Sirin adh
eseri hakkuinda,” 8, Turk Dil Kurultayi, Ankara, 1960, pp. 159 – 64;
Manuel arabe de la langue des Turcs et des Kiptchaks Epoque de l’Etat
mamelouk), Warshaw, 1938, 30 plus 56 plus 16; Glosy tureckie w
zabytkach, 1, Katechizacja turecka Jana herbininsa, Wroslow, 1948, 76
pp.; M. Th. Houtsma, Ein turkisch-arabisches Glossar, Leiden, 1894, 114
plus 57 pp.; al-Qawanin al-Kulliyah fi Lughat al-Turkiyyah, Istanbul,
1928, 94 pp.; al-Tuhfat al-Dhakiyyah fi al-Lughat al-Turkiyyah (tr. B.
Atalay), Istanbul, 1945, 296 pp. plus 91 pp. in facsimile.

[^6]: A. Z. V. Togan, “Ali Sir Nevai,” Islam Anisklopedixi, 1, 1941; A.
Caferogla, agatay turkcesi ve Nevai,” Istanbul Universitesi Turk Dili ve
Edebiyats Dergisi, 2/3 – 4, 1948, pp. 141 – 54; “Modern Azerbaycan
edebiyatina toplu bir bakis,” Azerbaycan Yurt Bilgisi, 4, 19. “ 40 – 48;
“Adhari (Azeri),” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; “Buyuk Azeri
alimi Mirza Kazim Bey,” Azerbaycan Yurt Bilgisi, 1, 1932, pp. 62 – 68;
“Ismail Bey Gaspirinski, ‘Terciman’ in 50 yiligi munasebetiyle,” ibid,
pp. 165 – 69; “Die turkische Sprachforschung und Professor Dr. Mehmet
Fuad Koprulu,” Der Neue Orient, 9, 1929, pp. 40 – 45; W. Barthold,
“Baykara,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1959; J.B. Harrison, P. Hardy, and F.
Koprulu “Babur,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition, 1; L. Bouvat,
“Shaibani,” ibid, 4, 1926; B.Spukler, “Abu ’l-Ghazi Bahadur Khan,” ibid,
1; J. Echmann, “Mirza Mehdis Darstellung der tschagataishen Sprache,”
Analecta Orientalia Memoriae Alexandri Csoma de Koros Dicata, Budapest,
1942 – 47, pp. 156 – 220; K. H. Menges, “Des Cajatajische,” Der
Darstellung von Mirza Mahdi Xan, Wiesbaden, 1956, No. 9, pp. 627 – 739;
H. Eron, “Cagatay lugatleri hakkinda notlar,” Ankara Universitesi Dil ve
Tarih-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi, 8, 1950, pp. 143 – 45; P. Horn,
Geschichte der turkischen Moderne, 2. Auflage, Leipzig, 1909; M.
Hartmann, Dichter der neuen Turkei, Berlin, 1919; “Aus der neuereen
osmanischen Dichtung,” Mitteilungen des Seminars fur Orientalische
Sprachen, 19 – 21; Th. Menzel, Die turkische Literatur der Gegenwart,
Neue Ausgabe, 283 pp.; “Tewfik Fikret,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4, 1929;
A. Fischer and A. Muhieddin, Anthologie aus der neuzeitlchen turkischen
Literature, 1, Leipzig-Berlin, 1919; E. Saussey, Prosateurs tures
contemporains, Paris, 1935, 23, 385 pp.; K. Akyuz, Bati tesirinde Turk
siiri antalojisi, 2, baski, Aukara, 1958, 15, 857 plus 45 pp.; O. Spies,
“Der turkische Bauer in der Erzahlungsliteratur,” Die Welt des Islams,
Neue Serie 4/1, 1955, pp. 40 – 46; Turkiische Chrestomatie aus moderner
Literatur, 1957; J. Deny, “Shinasi,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4, 1927;
“Ahmad Wafik Pusha,” ibid., new edition; M. Kaplan, Namik Kemal. Hayati
ve eserleri, Istanbul, 1948 6 plus 240 pp.; A. H. Tanpinar, “’Abd
al-hakk Hamid (Abdulhak Hamit),” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; S.
e. Siyavusgil, “Ahmed Midhat Efendi,” Islam Ansiklopedisi, 1; J.H.
Kramers, “Sami, Shams al-Din, Sami Bey Frasheri,” Encyclopaedia of
Islam, 4, 1925; K. Akyuz, Tevfik Fikret, Ankara, 1947 10 plus 354 pp.;
P. N. Boratav, “Huseyin Rahmi’nin romaneilgi,” Ankara Universitesi Dil
ve Tarih-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi, 3/2, 1944 – 45, pp. 205 – 12; W.
Bjorkman, “Ahmad Rasim” and “Mehmed Emin Bey,” Encyclopaedia of Islam,
new edition; N. S. Banarli, Yahya Kemal yasarken, Istanbul, 1959, 7 plus
200 pp.; H. Yucebas, Butin cepheleriyle Mehmet Akif, Istanbul, 1958, Z.
F. Findikoglu, Ziya Gokalp, Sa vie et sa sociologie, Paris, 1936; U.
Heyd, Foundations of Turkish Nationalism (The Life and Teachings of Ziya
Gokalp), London, 1950, 174 pp.; Gokalp, Turkish Nationalism and Western
Civilization, Selected Essays of Ziya Gokalp, tr. and ed. with an
introduction, by N. Berkes, 1959, 336 pp.; Y. Bey Vezirof, Azerbayean
edebiyatina bir nazar, Istanbul, 1337 A.H., 103 pp.; B. Cobanzade, Azeri
edebiyatinin yeni devri, Baku, 1930; M. A. Nazim, “Azerbaydjanskaya
khudojestvennaya literature,” Trudi aterbaydjanskogo filial, 30, Baku,
1936; M. E. Resulzade, Cagdas Azerbayean edebiyats, Anakara, 1950;
Antologiya azerbaydjankey poesii, Moscow, 1939; V. Minorsky, “The Poetry
of Shah Isma‘il 1,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African
Studies, X/4, 1942; A. Genceli, “Tebrizli Saib,” Turk Amaci, 1, 1942 –
43 pp. 33 – 37, and 2, 1942 – 43, pp. 52 – 60; A. V. Yurtsever, Sabir’in
Azerbaycan edebiyatinda yeri, Ankara, 1951; H. W. Brands, “Akhund-zada,”
Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; Battal-Taymas, “Kirunh filolog-sair
Bekir Cobanzade’yi tanitma tocribesi,” Turk Dili Arastirmalari Yilligi –
Belleten, 1954, pp. 233 – 73; “Kirmh Bekir Cobanzad’nin siirleri,”
Turkiyat Mecmuasi, 13, 1955, pp. 23 – 44; A. Samoilovitch, “Acerki po
istorii turkmenskoy literatury,” Turkmeniya, 1, 1929; Wl. Zajaczkowski,
“Skic literatury turkmensiej,” Preglad Orientalictyczny, 1/4, 1952, pp.
106 – 11; E. Bertels, “The Study of the History of Turcoman Classical
Literature in the Soviet Union,” Papers Presented by the Seviet
Delegation at the 23rd International Congress of Orientaliste, Iranian,
Armenian and Central Asian Studies, Moscow, 1654, pp. 65 – 78;
“Makhtumkuli o khudoshestvennom tvorchestve,” Sov’et Edebiyats, 1944,
No. 7, pp. 128 – 31; M.F. Koprulu, “Cagatay edebiyati,” Islam
Ansiklopedisi, 3, 1945, pp. 270 – 323; ‘Ali Sir Nevai ve tesirleri,”
Turk dili ve edebiyats hakkinda arastirmalar, Istanbul, 1934, pp. 257 –
72; “Un grand poete turc, Ali Sir Nevai,” Ankara, October 15, 1936;
“Ziya Pasa,” Cumhuriyet, March 16, 1928; “Azeri,” Islam Anisklopedisi,
2, 1942, pp. 118 – 51; “Hasan oglu,” Daruljunun Edebiyat Fakultesi
Mecmuasi, 4/1, 1925, pp. 77 – 98; “Habibi,” ibid., 8/5, 1932, pp. 86 –
133; “Ismail Bey Gaspirinski,” Azerbaycan Yurt Bilgisi, 2, 1933, pp. 154
– 55; “Turkoman Literature,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4, 1931.

[^7]: Fr. Taeschner, “Zwei Gazels von Gulsehri,” Aramagani, Istanbul,
1953, pp. 479 – 85; Gulschehris Mesnewi auf Achi Evran, den Heiligen von
Kirschehir und Patron der turkischen Zunfte, Wiesbaden, 1955 8 plus 81
plus 13 pp.; Gulsehri, Mantiku ’t-tayr (in facsimile), preface by A.S.
Levend, Ankara, 1957, 32 plus 298 pp.; F. Iz, “Ashik Pasha,”
Encyclopaedia of Islam, 1, new edition; A.S. Levend, “Asik Pasa’nin
bilinmeyen iki mesnevisi,” Turk Dili Arastirmalari Yilligi – Belleten,
1953, pp. 205 – 55 plus 13 plus 15 in facsimile; “Asik Pasa’nin
bilinmeyen iki mesnevisi daha,” ibid., 1954, pp. 265 – 76 plus 3 plus 4
in facsimile; M. Fuad Kopruluzade, “Nesimi’ye dair,” Hayat, 1, 1927, p.
382; “Kadi Burhaneddin,” Dergah, 2, 1922, pp. 180 – 81; Hoca Mes’ud,
Suheyl u Nevbahar, ed. J. H. Mordtmann, Hannover, 1924, 378 pp. in
facsimile; G. L. Lewis, “Ahmadi,” Encyclopaedia of Isalm, 1, new
edition.

[^8]: M. Fuad Kopruluzade, “Anadolu’da Turk dil ve edebiyatinin
Tekamuline umumi bir baksi,” 2, 15 asir, Yeni Turk Mecmuasi, 5, 1933,
pp. 375 – 94; M. Fuad Koprulu, “Les poetes turcs d’Anatolie au Veme
siècle,” Ankara, Fegruary 3, 10, 1938; N. Pekoclay, “Suleyman Celebi
mevlidi,metni ve mensei meselesi,” Turk Dili ve Edebiyati Dergisi, 6,
1954 – 55, pp. 39 – 64; “Ahmed’in Mevlid isimli eseri,” ibid., pp. 65 –
70; F. K. Timurtas, “Harname,” ibid., 3/3 – 4, 1949, pp. 369 – 87;
“Seyhi’nin tip konusunda eseri,” ibid., 4/42, 1955, pp. 340 – 43;
“Seyhi’nin hayati ve sahsiyeti,” ibid., 5, 1953 – 54, pp. 91 – 120;
“Seyhi’nin sohreti ve tesiri,” ibid., 8, 1958, pp. 84 – 89; “Seyhi’nin
Husrev u Sirin Konusu,” ibid., 9, 1959, pp. 89 – 110; H. Inalcik, “Ahmad
Pasha, called Bursah,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; Fr.
Taeschner, “‘Ashik-Pasha-zade,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition;
“Deli Lutifis Mizah,” published by O. Rescher, Orientalische Miszellen,
2, 1926, pp. 40 – 43.

[^9]: . Fuad Kopruluzade, “Anadolu’da Turk dil ve edebiyatinin
tekamulune umumi bir bakis,” 16, asir, Yeni Turk Meemuasi, 7, 1933, pp.
535 – 53;”Fuzuli’nin yeni eserle’ri,” Azerbaycan Yurt Bilgisi, 1, 1932,
pp. 447 – 48; Milli edebiyat cereyaninin ilk mubessirleri ve Divan-i
turki-i basit, 26, asir sairlerinden Edirneli Nazmi’nin eseri, Istanbul,
1928; “Muverrih Ali,” Cumhuriyet, March 15, 1928; M. Fuad Koprulu, “Les
poetes turcs d’Anatolie au 26 eme siècle,” Ankara, February 24, mach 4,
1938; “Fuzuli,” Ankara, March 10 1938; “Baki,” Ankara, March 24, 31,
1938; The Menzel, Zuti,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4, 1934, pp. 1218 – 19;
A. N.Tarlan, Hayali Bey Divani, Istanbul, 1945, 14 plus 45p pp. plus 16
plates; “Fuzuli’nin bilinmeyen kasideleri,” Turk Dili ve Edebiyati
Degisi, 3/1 – 2, 1948, pp. 193 209; “Fuzuli’nin bilinmoyen kasideleri,
2,” ibid., 3/3 – 4, 1949, pp. 411 – 27; Fuzuli Divans 1, Gazel,
musammat, mukatta ve rubai kumi, Istanbul, 1950, 10 plus 247 pp.;
“Fuzuli’nin bilinmeyen kasiderleri, 3,” Turk Dili ve Edebiyati Dergisi,
4/3, 1951, pp. 257 – 64; Fevzye Aptulla, “Fuzuli’nin gazellerine dair,”
Edebiyatpp. 16 - 23, 1, 1934, pp. 16 – 23; H. Catbas, “Fuzulli’nin bir
mektubu,” Ankara Universitesi Dil ve Tarih-Cografya Fakultesi Dergisi,
6/3, 1948 – 49, pp. 136 – 46; kemal Edib, “Fuzuli’nin bilinmeyen
siirlerinden bir kaci,” ibid., 6/6, 1948 – 49, pp. 319 – 28; A. Karahan,
Fuuli, Muhiti, hayati ve sahsiyeti, Istanbul, 1949, 13 plus 309 plus 10
pp. plus 10 pp. in facsimile plus 1 map; A.S. Levend, “Fuzuli’nin Sah u
Geda’si,” Turk Dili, 3/35, 1954, pp. 655 – 56; H. Mazioglu, Fuzuli –
Hafiz. Iki sair arasinda bir karsilasturma, Ankara, 1956, 375 pp.;
Fuzuli, Turkce Divan, Ankara, 1958, 537 pp.; F. iz, “Baki,”
Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; F. N. Uzluk, “Lamil’nin
latifelerinden,” Turk Dili, 6/46, 1955, pp. 609 – 11; Mehmed Ali Ayni,
“Kinalizade Ali Celebi,” Mehmed Ali Ayni, Turk ahlakcilari, 1, Istanbul,
1937, pp. 77 – 104; “Khwadja Sa’daddin,” Encyclopaedia of Islam; Fr.
Babinger, “Schi Celebi,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, 4, 1926; Tezkere-i
Latifi, edition by Ahmed Cevdet, Istanbul, 1314 A. H., 381 pp.; V. L.
Menage, “Ashik Celebi,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; bahriye
Piri Reis, Das turkische Segelhandbuch fur das Mittellandische Meer vom
Jahre 1521, P. KIahle, 1, Text, 1. Liefurung; 2, Ubersetzung, 1.
Lieferung, Berlin-Leipzig, 1926; Bergamali Kadri, Muyessiret-ul-ulum
(facsimile, transcription, text, index), edition by B. Atalay, Istanbul,
20 plus 247 plus 182 pp.

[^10]: M. Fuad Koprulu, “Les poetes turcs d’Anatolie au 17 eme siècle,”
Ankara, April 17, 14, 1938; “Nef’i,” Ankara, May 12, 19, 1938; “Asik
Omer (12 asur sax sairi),” M. F. Koprulu, Turk saz sairleri, 2, 16 – 18,
asir, Istanbul, 1940, pp. 193 – 256; A. Karahan, Nabi, Istanbul, 1953;
J. Walsch, “‘Ata’i,” Encyclopaedia of Islam, new edition; Th. Menzel,
“Waisi,” Encyclopaedia of islam, 4, 1933; M. Fuad Kopruluzade, “Katip
Celebi,” Cumhuriyet, February 27, 1928; “Qochi Beg,” Encyclopaedia of
Islam; M.C. Baysun, “Evliya Celebi,” Islam Anisklopedisi; S. N. Ergun,
Karaca Oglan, Istanbul, 1950; M. H. Bayri, “Siirlerine nazaran Gevheri,”
Yen Turk Mecmausi, 75 – 76, 1939, pp. 103 – 06.

[^11]: M. F. Koprulu, “Les poetes turcs d’Anatolie au XVIIIeme sicele,”
Ankara, June 9, 1938; “Kodja Raghib Pasha,” Encyclopaedia of Islam;
“Ahmad Nedim,” Ankara, June 29, 1937; Sadettin Nuzhet, Seyh Galib. hayat
ve eserleri, Istanbul, 1936; M. Fuad Kopruluzade, “Osmanzade taib’e
dair,” Turkiyat Mecmausi, 2, 1928, pp. 427 – 30.

[^12]: M. F. Koprulu, “Less poetes turcs d’Anatolie au XIXeme siècle,”
Ankara, June 16 1938; “Erzurumlu Emrah (19, asir saz sairi),” M. F.
Koprulu, Turk saz sairleri, Antoloji, 3, 19 – 20, asirlar, Istanbul,
1940, pp. 577 – 640; “Asik Dertli (19. asir saz sairi), ibid, pp. 641 –
704; M. S.Ulkutasir, “Mutercim Asim (1755 – 1819),” Turk Dili, 1/1,
1951, p. 34; A. H. Tanpmar, “Akif Pasa,” Islam Ansiklopedisi, 1; Z. F.
Fundikoglu, Bayburtlu Zihni, Istanbul, 1950, 125 pp.


