Chapter 55: Architecture
========================

A. The First Three Centuries of Muslim Architecture
---------------------------------------------------

Arabia, at the rise of Islam, does not appear to have possessed anything
worthy of the name of architecture. Only a small proportion of the
population was settled and lived in dwellings which were scarcely more
than hovels. Those who lived in mud-brick houses were called *ahl
al-madar*, and the Bedouin, form their tents of camel’s hair cloth, *ahl
al-wabar*.

The sanctuary at Mecca, at the time of Prophet Muhammad, merely
consisted of a small roofless enclosure, oblong in shape, formed by four
walls a little higher than a man, built of rough stones laid dry. Within
this enclosure was the sacred well of Zamzam.

When Prophet Muhammad, as a result of the hostility of the unbelieving
Meccans, migrated to Medina, he built a house for himself and his
family. It consisted of an enclosure about 100 cubits square of
mud-bricks, with a portico on the south side made of palm trunks used as
columns to support a roof of palm leaves and mud. Against the outer side
of the east wall were built small huts *(hujarat)* for the Prophet’s
wives, all opening into the courtyard. We have the description of these
huts, preserved by ibn Sa‘d,[^1] on the authority of a man named ‘Abd
Allah ibn Yazid who saw them just before they were demolished by order
of al-Walid. “There were four houses of mud-bricks, with apartments
partitioned off by palm branches, and five houses made of palm branches
plastered with mud and not divided into rooms. Over the doors were
curtains of black hair-cloth. Each curtain measured 3 x 3 cubits. One
could reach the roof with the hand.” Such was the house of the leader of
the community.

The Dome of the Rock of Jerusalem, the oldest existing monument of
Muslim architecture, was built by the Caliph ‘Abd al-Malik and completed
in 72/691. It was an annular building and consisted of a wooden dome,
set on a high drum, pierced by 16 windows and resting on four piers and
12 columns, placed in a circle. This circle of supports are placed in
the centre of a large octagon, averaging about 20.59 m a side, formed by
eight walls, each pierced by five windows in their upper half. There was
a door on each of the four sides of the octagon.

The space between the circle and the octagon being too great to be
conveniently spanned by single beams, an intermediate octagon was placed
between the two to provide the necessary support for the roof. The two
concentric ambulatories thus formed were intended for the performance of
the *tawf*. The piers and columns were so planned that, instead of
concealing one another, they permit from almost any position, a view of
right across the building. A twist of about two and half degrees was
given to the central ring of supports, with the result that an observer
entering any door can see not only the central column in front of him
but also the column on the far side.

The exterior was always panelled with marble for half its height, as it
is today, but the upper part was originally covered with glass mosaic
*(fusaifisa­)* like the inner arcades. This was replaced by the present
coating of faience by Sultan Sulaiman in 959/1552. The harmony of its
proportions and the richness of its decoration make the Dome of the Rock
one of the most beautiful buildings in the world.

### The Great Mosque of Damascus

‘Abd al-Malik died in 86/705 and was succeeded by his son al-Walid, who
immediately began the construction of the Great Mosque of Damascus. A
curious situation had prevailed here since the conquest. A great
sanctuary of a Syrian god existed here, consisting of a *temenos*, or
sacred enclosure, measuring 100 m from the north to south and 150 m from
the east to the west, set in an outer enclosure over 300 m square.
Within the *temenos* was a temple.

In the fourth century Christianity became the State religion and
Theodosius (379 – 395 A.D.) converted the temple into a church.[^2]
After the Arab conquest, the *temenos* was divided between Muslims and
Christians. Ibn Shakir says that they both “entered by the same doorway,
placed on the south side where is now the great *mihrab*; then the
Christians turned to the west towards their church (i.e. the converted
temple), and the Muslims to the right to reach their mosque, presumably
under the southern colonnade of the *temenos* where is now the *“mihrab*
of the Companions of the Prophet.”

As for the corner towers, ibn al-Faqih (p. 108) says, “The minarets
*(mi’dhanah)* which are in the Damascus Mosque were originally watch
towers in the Greek days. . . When al-Walid turned the whole area into a
mosque, he left these in their old condition.” Mas‘udi[^3] says, “Then
came Christianity and it became a church, then came Islam and it became
a mosque. Al-Walid built it solidly and the *sawami‘* (the four corner
towers) were not changed. They serve for the call to prayers to the
present day.” This state of affairs lasted until al-Walid, after
bargaining with the Christians, demolished everything except the outer
walls and the corner towers and built the present mosque.

The mosque had a court *(sahn)*, an oblong rectangle, surrounded on
three sides by a portico. On the South side was the sanctuary nearly 136
m in length and a litter over 37 m in depth, formed by three arcades
running parallel to the south wall. A broad transept, running from north
to south, cut these arcades into two nearly equally halves, each half
consisting of 11 arches. Above these arcades was a second tier of small
arches, there being two of these small arches to every one of the main
arches below. The arched openings were filled with stucco lattices, and
must be regarded as windows. The interior was adequately lit, even when
the doors of the main arches next to the *sahn* were closed.

The decoration consisted of marble panelling (some parts of the original
panelling exist next to the east entrance) above which ran a golden
*karmah* or vine-scroll frieze, and above that was glass mosaic
*(fusaifisa)* right up to the ceiling. A considerable amount has
survived the three fires of 462/1069, 804/1401, and 1311/1893, and may
still be seen under the west portico (over 34 m in length and nearly
seven metres high), where the famous panorama of the Barada (the river
of Damascus) is in full view. When intact the surface of the *fusaifisa*
must have been greater than in any building in existence! The Great
Mosque of Damascus was rightly regarded by medieval Muslims as one of
the Seven Wonders of the World. Al-Walid also enlarged and rebuilt the
great Mosque of Medina in 89/708 wherein the concave *mihrab* appeared
for the first time.

Another building due to al-Walid was the audience hall and *hammam*,
known today as Qusair ‘Amrah, in Transjordan. It consists of an audience
hall about ten metres square, with two slightly pointed transverse
arches supporting three tunnel-vaults. There is a vaulted recess on the
side opposite the entrance, with a small vaulted room on either side of
it. A door on the east side gives access to the *hammam*, which consists
of three small rooms successively covered by a tunnel vault, a cross
vault, and a dome. The latter was the *calidarium*, or hot chamber, and
under the floor are hypocausts exactly as in a Roman bath.

But the most remarkable of all are the paintings which cover the walls,
mostly scenes from daily life, a hunting scene, and figures symbolizing
history, poetry, and philosophy with the words in Greek above their
heads. The dome of the *calidarium* was painted to represent the vault
of heaven, with the Great Bear, the Little Bear, the signs of the
Zodiac, etc. But most important of all was the painting of the enemies
of Islam defeated by the Umayyads, with their names written above them
in Greek and Arabic: Aaisar (the Byzantine Emperor), Rodorik (the
Visigothic King of Spain), Chosroes, Negus (the King of Abyssinia), and
two more names which have been obliterated.

Painting, contrary to the popular idea, is not forbidden by any passage
in the Qur’an, and hostility to it took proper theological form only
towards the end of the second/eighth century.[^4]

To sum up, the monuments of Umayyad architecture are really magnificent
structures of cut stone with arcades resting on marble columns,
splendidly decorated internally with marble panelling and mosaic
*(fusaifisa)*. The mosques are nearly always covered with a gable roof.
The minarets were tall, square towers, derived from the church towers of
pre-Muslim Syria, and the triple aisled sanctuaries were due to the same
influence. Umayyad monuments exhibit a mixture of influences, Syria
occupying first place and Persian second, while Egyptian influence is
definitely demonstrable at the end of this period at Mushatta.

Umayyad architecture employed the following devices: the semi-circular,
the horse-shoe and the pointed arch, flat arches or lintels with a
semi-circular relieving arch above, joggled voussoirs, tunnel-vaults in
stone and brick, wooden domes, and stone domes on true
spherical-triangle pendentives. The squinch does not appear to have been
employed. But we know from the descriptions of early authors that a type
of mosque which prevailed in Iraq had walls of bricks (sometimes of
mud-bricks) and its flat timber roof rested directly on the columns
without the intermediary of arches. Here we have a direct link between
the ancient Persian audience-hall *(apadana)* and the flat-roofed
portico *(talar)* of more recent Persian palaces.

At about this time the Aqsa Mosque at Jerusalem was partly rebuilt by
the Caliph al-Mahdi. Recent research enables us to affirm that it then
consisted of a central aisle, 11.50 m wide, with seven aisles to the
right and seven to the left, each about 6.15 metres in width, all
covered by gable roofs and all *perpendicular* to the *qiblah* wall.
There was a great wooden dome at the end of the central aisle. On the
north side was a large central door with seven smaller ones right and
left, and 11 “unornamented” ones on the eastern side.

This mosque had a great influence on the Great Mosque of Cordova built
in 170/786 – 787 by ‘Abd al-Rahman I, the last survivor of the Umayyad
family. It was added to on three occasions but this earliest part still
exists, as at Jerusalem, the aisles, of which there are 11, all run
perpendicular to the back wall, they are all covered by parallel gable
roofs, and the central one is wider than the rest. The influence of
Syria in Spain at this time is not surprising, for Spain was full of
Syrian refugees.

Another building of this period of great importance in the history of
architecture is the Cistern of Ramlah in Palestine; it consists of a
subterranean excavation eight metres deep divided into six aisles by
five arcades of four arches each, all of which are pointed and appear to
be struck from two centres, varying from one-seventh to one-fifth in
span apart. And there can be no doubt about the date, for on the plaster
of the vault is a Kufic inscription of Dhu al-Hijjah 172/May 789. It is,
therefore, centuries earlier than the earliest pointed arches in Europe.

The Arabs first set foot on the North African soil as conquerors in
19/640 under the courageous command of ‘Amr ibn al-‘As. The whole of
Egypt was occupied within less than two years and ibn al-‘As made the
military camp at al-Fustat, a site south of modern Cairo. Al-Fustat
continued to be the capital of Egypt until the Fatimids in 360/969
founded Cairo. ‘Amr constructed a simple mosque at al-Fustat, the first
in Africa, in 20 – 21/641 – 642. Enlarged and improved under the
Umayyads, this structure, in the course of time, grew into the
celebrated mosque of al-Fustat.

The mosque of ‘Amr was first enlarged at the order of Caliph Mu‘awiyah
in 53/673[^5] and four minarets were introduced in any Muslim structure.

The next major enlargement of this mosque took place during the reign of
Caliph al-Mamun in 212/827 at the hands of ‘Abd Allah ibn Tahir,
Governor of Egypt. Since then it has been repaired and rebuilt more than
once.

The mosque of ‘Amr is now a big enclosure. The side walls were each
pierced by 22 windows lighting the 22 aisles. There were three *mihrubs*
and seven arcades in the sanctuary, each arcade consisted on 19 arches
on 20 columns. The arcades were all braced with decorated tie-beams.

We must now speak of the great mosque of Susa on the gulf of Gabes which
the inscription of its wall tells, was built by Abu al-‘Abbas ibn
al-Aghlab in 236/850 – 51. It consists of a perfectly regular rectangle
measuring 49.39 m x 57.16 m internally, and irregular annexes to east
and west. The *sahn*, measuring roughly 41 m x 22.25 m is surrounded by
low arcades of slightly horse-shoe form, resting on squat T-shaped
piers. There are 11 arches to the north and south and sit to the east
and west. These arches are of horse-shoe form, the maximum span of each
being equal to the space between the piers below. The sanctuary consists
of 13 aisles, formed by 12 arcades of six arches running from the north
to the south, each divided into six bays by other arcades running from
the east to the west.

Internally, it is perfectly plain except for a splay-face moulding,
immediately above which is a fine inscription frieze in simple
undecorated Kufic, the maximum height of the characters being 28 m. The
frieze in which they are carved curves forward slightly to compensate
for the fore-shortening and thus help the observer at ground level. This
is the earliest known example of this treatment which passed into Egypt
with the Fatimids and appears in the Mosque of al-Hakim, 380 –
403/990-1013.

The Great Mosque of Samarra was built by the Caliph al-Mutawakkil; the
work began in 234/848 – 49 and finished in Ramadan 237/February – March
852. It was the largest mosque ever built, for its outer walls form an
immense rectangle of kiln-baked bricks measuring roughly 240 m deep
internally by 156 m wide (proportion approximately as 3:2); its area,
therefore, is nearly 38,000 metres square. Only the enclosing walls have
been preserved. The mosque proper as surrounded by an outer enclosure,
or *ziyadah*, on the east, north, and west sides and air photographs
show that the great rectangle thus formed stood in a still greater
enclosure measuring 376 m x 444 m. The minaret, the famous Malwiyah,
stand free at a distance of 27 ½ m from the north wall of the mosque.

There is a socle three metres high on which rests a spiral tower with a
ramp about 2.30 m wide, which winds round in a counter-clockwise
direction until it has made five complete turns. The rise for each turn
is 6.10 m but as the length of each turn is less than the previous one
it follows that the slope inevitably becomes steeper and steeper. At the
summit of this spiral part is a cylindrical storey, decorated with eight
recesses, each set in a shallow frame. The southern niche frames a
doorway at which the ramp ends; it opens onto a steep staircase, at
first straight then spiral, leading to the top platform, which is 50
metres above the socle. From eight holes to be seen here Herzfeld
concluded that there was probably a little pavilion on wooden columns. A
few years later, between 246 – 247/860 – 861, another immense mosque was
built by the same Caliph at Abu Dulaf to the north of Samarra.

Ten years later, important works were carried out in the Great Mosque of
Qairawan by Abu Ibrahim Ahmad, who reduced the width of the central
aisles by about 1.20 metres by constructing two new arcades in contact
with the old ones. The arches of these arcades are pointed horse-shoe
arches instead of sound horse-shoe arches like those with which they are
in contact. He also built three free-standing arches and one wall-arch
of the same type to carry a fluted dome in front of the *mihrab*. They
rise to a height of 9.15 metres and the square thus formed is terminated
above the cornice, its top edge being 10.83 meters from the ground. On
it rests the octagonal zone of transition, 2.15 metres in height, which
is formed by eight semi-circular arches springing from colonnetes
resting on little corbels inserted in the cornice just mentioned.

The dome, which is 5.80 metres in diameter, has 24 ribs, each springing
from a little corbel, between the ribs are concave segments, 30 cm deep
at the base and diminishing to nothing at the apex. The whole
composition is charming. Externally, the dome resembles a cantaloupe
melon, with 25 convex ribs (corresponding to the 24 concave segments)
which taper to nothing at the apex. Abu Ibrahim’s work was carried out
in 248/862. He also lined the *mihrab* with a series of very beautiful
carved marble panels assembled in four tiers of seven panels each, the
total height being 2.70 m. He also decorated the face of the *mihrab*
and the wall surrounding it with lustre tiles about 21 cm square. The
marble panels and the tiles were imported by him from Iraq and the
latter constitute the oldest examples of lustre pottery of certain date.

It was during the reign of Ahmad ibn Tulun (254 – 270/868 – 884), the
first Muslim sovereign of independent Egypt, which Muslim architecture
properly developed in the Nile Valley. He was son of a Turkish slave and
was born and brought up in Samarra. He proved to be a great
administrator and a great builder. Al-Qata’i, the new quarter of
al-Fustat, was adorned as there was a vast ground in front of the palace
where polo matches took place. The palace had nine gates and one of them
was called Bab al-Salat (Gate of Prayer). He also built a hospital at an
expense of 60,000 dinars.

But his greatest work, which still stands, is his famous mosque; it cost
him 120,000 dinars.[^6] It exhibits strong influence at the Samarra
school as ibn Tulkun himself came from Samarra and his architects and
craftsmen too were mostly Iraqis.[^7] This Iraqi impact is clearly
visible in the piers of the mosque and in its ornamental work in wood
and stucco.

The mosque of ibn Tulun is built on the outcrop of a rock and impresses
the visitor by its great size and the noble simplicity of its plan. It
consists of a *sahn* 302 square feet surrounded by *riwaqs*, five aisles
deep. There are 13 pointed arches on each side. The sanctuary is formed
by five arcades 17 arches each. The arches are surrounded by a
continuous band of ornament. Above runs a broad frieze of stucco
rosettes each in an octagonal frame.

The varieties of designs some composed of straight lines, others
triangular, and still others circular and interlacing, are
extra-ordinary. The windows form one of the most beautiful features of
the mosque. They are 128 in number. Their pattern is a mesh of
equilateral triangles by grouping six of which we can form hexagons. The
minaret, which is built of hive-stone, is almost a copy of the Malwiyah
of Samarra. About 1/17th of the Qur’an is inscribed in beautiful Kufic
characters on the wooden frieze round the inside of the building just
below the flat timbered roof.[^8]

Tulunid Egypt could also boast of a very unusual structure; it was the
palace of Ahmad ibn Tulun’s son, Khumarawaih (271 – 282/884 – 895). The
walls of its golden hall were covered with gold and decorated with
bas-reliefs of himself, his wives, and his songstresses.[^9] These
life-size figures were carved in wood.

Under the ‘Abbasids the Hellenistic influence of Syria was replaced by
the surviving influence of Sassanian Persia, which profoundly modified
the art and architecture, and this gave birth to the art of Samarra, the
influence of which extended to Egypt under ibn Tulun and even Nishapur
and Bahrain. In palace architecture there was a vast difference between
one of the Umayyads and that of the ‘Abbasids, partly due to the
adoption of Persian ideas of royalty which almost deified the king;
hence, elaborate throne-rooms, generally domed, for private audience,
preceded by a vaulted *liwan* (or four radiating *liwans*) for public
audience. The *baits* also were different, following the type of Qasr-i
Shirin and not the Syrian type of Mushatta and Qasr al-Tuba.

The scale was immense and axial planning was a marked feature. But all
are built of brick and a great part of the basest of materials –
mud-brick – hidden by thick coats of stucco. A new type of pointed arch
appears – the four centred arch. The earliest existing squinches in
Islam date from this period. An important innovation was the
introduction of lustre tiles, the earliest examples being those brought
to Qairawan from Iraq in 248/862. Bands of inscription were usually made
to stand out on a blue background. But the wide-spread influence of the
‘Abbasid art did not extend to Spain where the Umayyad art, brought
thither by Syrian refugees, was still full of life.

B. Muslim Architecture in Later Centuries
-----------------------------------------

### 1. Muslim Architecture in North Africa

#### The Fatimids

When the Fatimids came to power in Egypt in 358/969, they built a new
city north of al-Fustat and called it al-Qahirha (Cairo). Since then
Cairo has always been the capital of Egypt. The great mosque of al-Azhar
was also built almost at the same time (361/972). The original sections
of al-Azhar, which still exist, are built in brick and have pointed
arches. The minaret is of the heavy square type. The next Fatimid
mosque, completed by al-Hakim in 403/1012, follows the al-Azhar plan and
has a cupola of brickwork supported on an octagonal drum above the
prayer niche. The triumph of stone over brick, initiated by al-Hakim,
was not affected until the beginning of the sixth/12th century. The
first appearance of corbelled niche is found in the mosque of al-Qamar
(519/1125). This pillared mosque displays bold designs and austere Kufic
inscriptions.

The grandeur of Fatimid architecture may well be imagined from the
testimony of the massive gates of which three are extant in Cairo: Bab
Zawilah, Bab al-Nasr, and Bab al-Futuh.[^10]

#### The Mamluks

While the Tulunid and Fatimid architecture in Egypt was inspired by Iraq
and Iran respectively, the Mumluk monuments were influenced by the
Ayyubi School of Syria. The Mumluks produced some of the most exquisite
structures. Made of fine and durable stone, these monuments are
distinguished for their strength and solidity. Their simple decorative
motif assumes infinite grace.

Mamluk monuments may be roughly divided into three categories: the
*madrasah*-mosque monuments, the citadels, and the hospitals, besides
other public works like canals and aqueducts. The *madrasah* type was
first introduced in Egypt by Sultan Salah al-Din Ayyubi of the Crusade
fame. Although none of these institutions exist today, their impact may
easily be noticed in the collegiate mosque of Sultan al-Hassan (748 –
63/1347 – 61).

One of the early monuments of the Mamluk period is the Great Mosque of
Baibars (658 – 676/1260 – 1277). It was built in 668/1269. Napoleon used
it as a fort when he was in Egypt. Al-Malik al-Mansur Saif al-Din
Qalawun (678 – 689/1279 – 1290), a great builder, erected a hospital
connected with a *madrasah* and a mausoleum with its remarkable
arabesque tracery and fine marble mosaic. This hospital, known as
al-Maristan al-Mansuri, was completed with the mosque and the attached
school in 683/1284. It had special wards for segregating patients of
various diseases and contained laboratories, dispensaries, baths,
kitchens and store-rooms.[^11]

His son and successor al-Nasir (692 – 740/1293 – 1340) surpassed him in
the construction of public works. He dug a canal connecting Alexandria
with the Nile employing 100, 000 men, built an aqueduct connecting his
far-famed citadel al-Qasar al-Ablaq (the place of varied colour) at
Cairo with the river, founded 30 mosques at various places in his
kingdom, and provided for the public use drinking fountains *(sabils)*,
baths, and schools. Inside his citadel he built a mosque the material
for which was brought from ‘Akka.

Another noteworthy builder among the Mamluks was al-Nasir’s son, Sultan
Hassan, whose collegiate mosque is the most splendid example of Mamluk
architecture. It consists of a square *sahn* (central court) which is
flanked by four *liwans* (halls) forming the four arms of a cross.
Perhaps these unique cruciforms were each meant for the four major
schools of Muslim theology. Behind the *qiblah* wall of this mosque is
the mausoleum of Sultan Hassan which was built in 767/1363. It is
surmounted by a large dome made of bricks. The pendentives are in wood.
In its general appearance it seems to have been inspired by the
Sultaniyyah tomb of Sultan Khuda Bandah (d. 706/1306).

During the Mamluk period the use of brick was abandoned in minaret
construction in favour of stone. The cruciform plan of school-mosque
structure was perfected. Domes, renowned for their lightness, beauty of
outline, and excessively rich decoration, were constructed. Stones of
different colours in alternate courses *(ablaq)* were utilized for
striped masonry and decorations. Geometrical arabesques and Kufic
letterings were also profusely used.

Although the last hundred years of the Mamluk rule are a period of
decline, several impressive monuments of that period have escaped the
ravages of time and turmoil. For instance, the mosque and mausoleum of
Barquq (785 – 800/383 – 1398), the Mosque of Qa’it Bay (873 – 900/1468 –
1495) and the mosque of al-Ghauri (906 – 922/1500 – 1516). The Mosque of
Qa’it Bay consists of a mosque proper, a tomb, a fountain, and a school.
It is made of red and white stone and the dome is decorated with a
charming network of foliage and rosette. Elaborate arabesque
ornamentation does not seem to have affected its traditional vigour and
virile elegance.

#### Qairawin

During the reign of Caliph Mu‘awiyah, his famous general, ‘Uqbah ibn
Nafi‘ invaded the Magrib (the land west of Egypt) and founded the famous
military city of al-Qairawan (49/670) south of Tunis. ‘Uqbah built the
mosque and his headquarters in the centre and grouped dwellings around
them just as it had been done at other military towns of al-Kufah,
Basrah, and al-Fustat.[^12] The famous mosque of Qairawan, the fourth
most sacred Muslim sanctuary in the world, was built several times by
the successors of ‘Uqbah and finally by the Aghlabid ruler, Ziadat Allah
I (202 – 223/817 – 838).

The Qairawan mosque is a big oblong enclosure. The *sahn*, trapezoidal
in shape is entirely paved with marble. The arcades on the north side
rest on columns, but the others rest on rectangular piers with two
friezes with standing columns attached to their front face. The
sanctuary, like the Cordova mosque sanctuary, is a hall of columns. It
is divided into 17 aisles by 16 arcades. Each of these arcades consists
of seven arches. They are all of the round horse-shoe type. The *mihrab*
as well as the surrounding structure from top to bottom is constructed
of white marble covered with carvings. Part of this decoration consists
of inscriptions; the rest forms arabesques of various patterns.

Round the *mihrab* are exquisite columns, also made of marble. There is
a fine pair of orange-red marble columns situated in front of the
*mihrab* which is actually a recess, horse-shoe in plan. It is lined
with a series of marble panels, 28 in number. The semi-dome has a wooden
lining covered with a coating to which is applied the painted decoration
consisting of vine scrolls forming loops, filled in most cases by a
five-lobed vine leaf and a bunch of grapes.

The face of the *mihrab* is decorated with lustre tiles, 139 in number.

At the northern end of the sahn stands the famous minaret in great
prominence on a square base. It has three storeys all squarish or
rectangular. At the top is a dome. The minaret is made of bricks. This
is the oldest minaret on the African soil and is quite different from
the spiral *malwiyahs* of the mosques of Samarra and the mosque of ibn
Tulun.

In this region of al-Magrhrib is found perhaps the earliest monument of
Muslim military architecture. It is known as Qal‘ah Bani Hammad. This
citadel was built by Hammad bin Yusuf al-Barbari in the province of
Constantine (Algeria) in 370/980. It contains a grand mosque, a
reservoir, a palace, and some other constructions that were probably
used for administrative purposes. The mosque contains a square minaret
in the style of Qairawan but, unlike Qairwan, there are no corridors.
The citadel is in ruins now.

### 2. Muslim Architecture in Spain

Muslim architecture in Spain is considered a great marvel of aesthetic
ingenuity. The magnificent mosque and palaces, gardens and citadels,
fountains and aqueducts, public baths and private dwellings that ‘Abd
al-Rahman I (139 – 172/756 – 788) and his successors built at Cordova,
Seville, Granada, and other cities of this western most outpost of
Islamic culture, were unparalleled in the entire civilized world.

Spain was conquered by the Arab generals of the Umayyad Caliphs between
93/711 and 527/1132. The capital of the Spanish province of the Empire
was Cordova. Soon Arab settlements, especially Syrian, sprang up
everywhere. It was these Syrians whom the Governors of Cordova employed
as artisans and architects for new constructions,[^13] and “the city was
adorned with numerous beautiful structures.”[^14] It is, therefore,
natural that Muslim architecture in Spain mostly exhibits Syrian
features.

But a systematic embellishment of Spanish towns, with exquisite
structures, actually started when ‘Abd al-Rahman I found the independent
Umayyad Kingdom of Spain. This process lasted until the death of ibn
Ahmar (d. 671/1272), builder of the famous castle and palace of
Alhambra.

During the reign of the Umayyad Caliphs, Cordova grew into the most
magnificent city in the West. “The jewel of the world,” according to a
contemporary Saxon nun,[^15] contained 113,000 homes, 21 suburbs, 700
mosques,[^16] and 300 public baths.

One of the first projects of ‘Abd al-Rahman I was to build an aqueduct
for the supply of pure water to the capital. He also built a wall around
the city and erected for himself a palace called Munyat al-Rusafah
outside Cordova in imitation of the palace built by his grandfather,
Caliph Hisham, in northern Syria.

‘Abd al-Rahman also laid the foundation of the great mosque of Cordova
in 171/786. It was finished in a year at a cost of 80,000 dinars
(£40,000).[^17] It is the third largest mosque in the world covering an
area of 26,500 square yards. It is a vast rectangle, free on all sides.
Covered porticoes surround it on every side except the southern where
there are 17 arches. The sanctuary is a huge hall of 19 aisles, the roof
of which rests on 18 arcades. It could once be entered from the street
by 13 doors. The *sahn* is surrounded by porticoes.

The sanctuary of this mosque is a forest of columns. They exhibit great
variation of types. Some are smooth, others fluted, and a few even have
spiral flutings. The arcades, too, are of a remarkable design.

The mosque underwent several improvements and enlargements at the hands
of successive rulers. For instance, ‘Abd al-Rahman III built a minaret
73 cubits high “measured to the highest point of the open dome pavilion.
On the summit of this dome are golden and silver apples. Two were of
pure gold and one of silver. Below and above each were lilies very
beautifully worked out, and at the end of the span was a little golden
pomegranate.”[^18] Similarly, al-Hakam built a dome in front of the
*mihrab* and it was decorated in gold mosaic.

Although the architectural pattern of the great mosque, with its aisles
running parallel to the back wall, the horse-shoe arches, the parallel
gable roofs, and the arcades around the *sahn*, show clear Syrian
inspiration, the double tier of arcades are the most original features
of the great mosque.

‘Abd al-Rahman III (207 – 238/822 – 852) also erected a palatial mansion
and called it al-Zahra’, naming it after his wife. It stood on one of
the spurs of the Sierra Morena overlooking the Guadaliquivir *(Wadi
al-Kabir)*. It was started in 221/836. Marble was brought from Carthage
and Numidia. Columns as well as basins, with golden statures, were
imported from Constantinople. It took 10,000 workmen to build it in
about 20 years. The palace had 400 rooms and apartments. The eastern
hall was adorned with fountains, in which were placed golden statues of
animals, set with precious stones. Water flowed through the mouth of
these beautiful figures. The audience chamber was an exquisite piece of
workmanship in marble and gold studded with jewels.

The seventh/13th century citadel-castle of Alhambra (the Red Palace)
built by ibn Ahmar (671/1272) in Granada is another great architectural
legacy of the Muslims in Spain. It is situated on a hilly terrace on the
remains of an earlier Umayyad citadel. It was enlarged and embellished
by his three successors.

“This acropolis of Granada with its exquisite decoration in mosaics,
stalactites and inscriptions, was conceived and constructed” on a grand
scale and is without dispute “the last word in such workmanship.”[^19]
In the words of Amir Ali, “The towers, citadels, and palaces (at
Alhamabra), with their light and elegant architecture, the graceful
porticos and colonnades, the domes and ceilings still glowing with tints
which have lost none of their original brilliancy, the airy halls,
constructed to admit the perfume of the surrounding gardens, the
numberless fountains over which the owners had such perfect control,
that the water could be made high or low, visible or invisible at
pleasure, sometimes allowed to spout in the air, at other times to
spread out in fountains, and serene azure sky, the lovely arabesques,
paintings and mosaics finished with such care and accuracy as to make
even the smallest apartments fascinating, and illuminated in varied
shades of gold, pink, light blue and dusky purple.

The lovely dados of porcelain mosaic of various figures and colours, the
beautiful Hall of Lions with its cloister of 128 slender and graceful
columns, its blue and white pavement, its harmony of scarlet, azure and
gold, the arabesques glowing with colour like the pattern on a cashmere
shawl, its lovely marble filigree filling in the arches, its beautiful
cupolas, its famous alabaster cup in the centre, the enchanting Hall of
Music, where the Court sat and listened to the music of the performers
in the tribunes above, the beautiful seraglio with its delicate and
graceful brass lattice work and exquisite ceilings, the lovely colouring
of the stalactites in the larger halls and of the conical lining in the
smaller chambers,”[^20] made this architectural monument one of the
wonders of the world.

There was another royal villa within the walls of Granada. It was called
al-Generaliffe (a corruption of Jami‘ah al-‘Arif). It also was
considered a marvel of beauty with fountains, groves, and flowers. The
gardens were terraced in the form of an amphitheatre.

The Alcazar (al-Qasr) of Seville is another notable contribution of the
Muslims. It was first built by a Toledo architect for the Muwahhid
Governor in 596 – 597/1199 – 1200. Of the many Alcazars in Cordova,
Toledo, and other Spanish towns, the Seville Alcazar is the most
renowned and the only one surviving, This gracefully decorated castle
was until recently used as residence by the Spanish rulers. There is
another Muwahhid monument in Seville, the Giralda tower, which was
originally the minaret of the great mosque. It was erected in 580/1184
and was decorated with cusped arcading.[^21]

### 3. Muslim Architecture in Iran

History records that the earliest mosque in Iran was Masjid al-Thaur
built at Qazwin in 81/700, but the earliest Islamic monument so far
discovered in Iran is the mosque known as Tariq Khanah at Damghan,
halfway between Teheran and Meshed. It was built between 133/750 and
170/786. According to M. Goddard, “by the harmony of its proportions and
masses, it is still one of the most magnificent buildings of Islam.” It
was constructed on the vault system.

Iranian buildings throughout the Muslim period were known for their
exquisite domes. These domes never arose from the Roman pendentive
employed by the Byzantines but from the more primitive squinch arch
which spanned the angels of the square and were converted into an
octagon. The earliest Muslim dome in Persian is that of the Great Mosque
at Qum, south of Teheran. It was built by Abu Sa‘dain Hussain in 256/878
and was 80 feet high.

Since then three different types of domes have been built in Iran: (1)
single domes, (2) true double domes, and (3) an inner dome concealed by
a polyhedral tent dome or a conical roof. Single domes were popular
during the Saljuq period and were direct descendants of the Sassanian
domes. The most conspicuous and representative dome of the second type
may be seen over the tomb of Sultan Sanjar at Merv (552/1157) while the
most renowned earlier example of the third type is the Gumbad-i Qabus
(398/1007).

The Gumbad-i Qabus was built by Shams al-Ma‘ali ‘Abd al-Hassan Qabus,
the ruler of Gurgan and Tabaristan in 397/1006. This mausoleum is
actually a cylindrical tower with a conical top. The inside is empty, a
continuous void from the ground to the roof where it is domed with a
tent like cone. The total height of the tower is a little over 167 feet.
It is built of burnt brick. There are two Kufric inscriptions also, one
26 feet three inches above the ground and the other just under the
corbel.

These tomb-towers hold an important place in the Saljuq architecture.
They are mostly found in Adharbaijan and across the border in Quniyah.
Prominent among these are Khalifah Ghazi at Amasia, the tomb-towers at
Akhlat and Kaisari.

These tomb towers are dressed in stone. They are usually octagonal in
shape with conical roofs. The exterior faces are decorated with arcading
cut in high relief on the stones of the structure. Most of the tombs
have four windows or portals. The interior is usually plain and the
chamber is always covered by an inner dome of cut stone. Built flights
of stairs to these chambers are rarely found. They were entered probably
by means of a ladder.

The Saljuqs concentrated mainly on the construction of mosques and it
was during their reign that the basis for the standard Iranian mosque
was firmly laid. Its features were: at the beginning of a longitudinal
axis an *ivan* portal leads into an open court, arcades surrounding the
court are interrupted by four *ivans*, two on the longitudinal axis and
two on the cross axis with prayer halls at the back of the arcades, the
major *ivan* opens into a square sanctuary chamber crowned by a dome
with a *mihrabi* in the rear wall of the chamber.

The earliest Saljuq mosque containing all these elements is the small
Masjid-i Jami‘ at Zauara, north-east of Ispahan, which was erected in
530/1135.

During the Saljuq period vaults over the square or rectangular bays of
the prayer hall of mosques display a considerable variety of types. In
the earliest surviving Iranian mosques, the bays were covered by barrel
vaults. This resulted in complication of construction at the corner
angles and did not offer any opportunity for display of technical skill.
The Saljuq builders replaced the barrel vaults by domical type vaults.
In order to enhance the decorative quality of vaults, they built groin
vaults, cloister vaults, vaults on groin squinches, vaults on triangular
false pendentives, domical lantern vaults, saucer domes and flat vaults.
Examples of these experiments may be seen in those areas of the Jami‘
Masjid at Ispahan which are assigned to the Saljuqs.

Surface enrichment of the Muslim architecture in Iran was of three
types: brick patterns, plaster, and mosaic faience. Decorative brick-lay
appeared in pre-Saljuq work, reached its maximum effectiveness under the
Saljuqs, and tended to die out in the eighth/14th century. Stucco was an
important feature of decoration even in the earliest Muslim monuments
and held its popularity throughout. Faience, first used by the Saljuqs
on a large scale, developed considerably during the Il-Khanids and
reached its zenith under the Timurids and the Safawids.

A number of Saljuq monuments contain *mihrabs* executed in small cut
bricks. Brick end plugs were also utilized for decorative purposes but
it was stucco, and to some extent sculpture in stone, that played the
most important role in the exterior and interior embellishment during
the Saljuq period. The arabesque and monumental inscriptions in Kufic
and *nasta‘liq* writing became an essential part of decoration. For
instance, in Merv there still stand the ruins of the tomb of Sultan
Sanjar (511 – 552/1117 – 1157) the last of the great Suljuqs, decorated
on the inside with panels of fine arabesque and inscriptions, both Kufic
and *naskh* in cut terra-cotta.

One of the most beautiful Kufic inscriptions of the Saljuq period is
known from a ruined *madrasah* at Karghid in Khurasan. It contains the
name of Nizam al-Mulk, the Grand Vizier of Sultan Alp Arsalan (455 –
485/1063 – 1092). The Jami‘ Masjid at Qazwin, built in 509/1116, and the
*mihrab* of Imamzadh Karrar at Buzun (528/1134) exhibit the most
developed Saljuq style of decoration in stucco and stone. The Jami‘
Masjid at Ardistan (555/1160) has three *mihrabs* rich in stucco
decorations. Here, several systems of arabesque are intervened or placed
one above the other, the heavy or baroque arabesque in high relief
usually forming the background.

Stucco was used extensively in the Saljuq era not only for the
decoration of mosques, but also for that of palaces and houses of
nobles. Compositions consisted of hunting scenes and Court scenes.
Occasionally, the relief of figures was so high and thick that it
approached sculpture. These stucco reliefs were chiefly found in Rayy
(Teheran) and Sawa.

Fifteen Saljuq monuments display, on the interior or the exterior,
glazed tiles used in the inscriptions of patterns. Mosaic faience
developed in Gumbad-i Kabud at Maraghah (593/1196) reached a stage at
which strips of glazed tiles were set in a plaster ground to form an
elaborate strap-work pattern, splendid calligraphic friezes of lustred
faience surmounted dadoes composed of star tiles in golden brown lustre
on a white ground, and *mihrabs* were executed in the same material, for
instance, the famous *mihrab* of the Maidan Mosque at Kashar
(623/1226).[^22]

Mention may be made of Malik Shah, a great Saljuq monarch (465 –
485/1072 – 1092) who made Ispahan, his capital, one of the most
beautiful cities in Asia. He built the famous Jami‘ Mosque and for the
first time introduced the tapering fluted style of tower in Iran. The
finest example of this cylindrical minaret is found in Iran. It is
called Mina-a ‘Ali and was built by Malik Shah. It is decorated with
geometrical patterns and bands of inscriptions on glazed tiles.

Persia suffered the greatest disaster at the hands of Mongol invaders at
the beginning of the seventh/13th century. Merv and Nishaput fell to
Chingiz Khan in 617/1220, and within 25 years the entire country was not
only occupied but cities were completely burnt, buildings were totally
razed, and, at places, the entire population was slaughtered like
animals with the result that very few buildings erected between the Arab
invasion of Iran and the rise of Il-Khan Mongols stand today.

The Mongols ruled over Iran for about 143 years (644 – 791/1246 – 1389).
Hulagu, the founder of the Mongol Empire, assumed the title of Il-Khan
and made Tabriz his capital.

The first Mongol construction in Iran was an astronomical observatory
built at Maraghah, the summer capital of Hulagu Khan, at the instance of
his famous minister, Nasir al-Din Tusi, in 678/1279.

But it was Hulagu’s successor, Arghun, who revived the great
architectural tradition of Iran. He began the construction of
Arghuniyyah, a splendid suburb of Tabriz. Work was also undertaken at
Sultaniyyah near Qazwin and summer palaces were built at Alatagh,
Mansuriyyah, and Lar.

The Golden Age of Il-Khanid architecture was, however, ushered in by
Ghazan Khan, who embraced Islam and came to the throne in 694/1295.
Ghazan was not only a great builder but was himself an architect. He
designed and built Shenb, a suburb west of Tabriz, in 696/1297. The
observatory was crowned with a cupola shaped to his own design.[^23] He
also built his lofty tomb at Shenb. It was 12-sided in plan and had a
crypt at ground level. A great mausoleum was encircled with a golden
inscription. Some 14,000 workmen were employed in its construction.
Besides, there was a monastery for dervishes, a Shafi‘ì and Hanafi
college, an academy of philosophy, a residence for the descendants of
the Holy Prophet, a hospital, a palace, a library, and a splendid garden
kiosk called Ardiliyyah.

The tomb was the focal point of the entire built-up area. It was
surrounded by gardens which were encircled by a suburb called
Ghazaniyyah. Near each of the gates of this town, which soon rivalled
Tabriz, was built a caravanserai, markets, and public baths. The name of
the chief architect of Ghazaniyyah was Taj al-Din ‘Ali Shah.

Although Ghazaniyyah is a heap of bricks today and Ghazan’s famous tomb
a crumbling mound of debris, very detailed account of Ghazan’s extensive
construction comes to us from the works of Rashid al-Din, Wassaf, Hamd
Allah Mustaufi, and Shams Kashani.

Ghazan was succeeded by his illustrious brother Olejeitu (705 – 18/1305
– 18) who embraced Islam and assumed the name of Muhammad Khuda Bandah.
Olejeitu far surpassed his predecessors in architectural achievements.
As a matter of fact, most renowned buildings of the Il-Khanid period
belong to his reign.

Soon after he came to the throne, Olejeitu ordered work at Sultaniyyah,
a site near Qazwin. Plan for this new capital was prepared by his father
Arghun but he died before it could be executed. Olejeitu built a
wonderful city at Sultaniyyah. The citadel was 500 *gaz* on a side. It
was protected by a wall and 16 towers of cut stone. The principal mosque
was ornamented with marble and porcelain. There were a hospital and a
college also. Surrounded by 12 smaller palaces was the royal palace, a
kind of high pavilion or kiosk. The entire ensemble was set in a
marble-paved court.

These palaces have since disappeared but the mausoleum of Sultan
Muhammad Olejeitu Khuda Bandah still towers over the surrounding area.
According to Goddard, this tomb “is certainly the finest example of
known Mongol architecture, one of the most competent and typical
products of Persian Muslim building and technically perhaps the most
interesting.”[^24]

The second most famous monument of Il-Khanid period was the mosque in
Tabriz of Taj al-Din ‘Ali Shah, Olejeitu’s minister. Only a very small
section of this mosque exists today, but Mustaufi, writing in 736/1335,
stated that the main *ivan* of this mosque was a tremendous structure.
It was 30.15 metres wide, with side walls 10.40 metres thick. The height
up to the vault was 25 metres. The pointed arch of the *mihrab* was
supported on two columns of copper and the *mihrab* frame was
embellished and pointed with gold and silver. According to ibn Battutah,
the open court of the mosque was paved with marble, the walls covered
with Kashani (faince decoration) and there was a square pool in the
middle with fountains.

Mention must also be made of the largest the most revered shrine of Imam
‘Ali Rida at Meshed and of his sister Fatima at Qum.

During the Mongol rule, two very renowned dynasties flourished in
central and southern Iran: the Atabeks and the Muzaffarids. The Atabeks
were the autonomous rulers of Ars with Shiraz as their capital and the
Muzaffarids controlled the entire region south of Teheran with their
capital being Yazd. History records that Shiraz possessed many buildings
constructed by the Atabeks but hardly any of structures exists today.
The Muzaffarids seem to be more fortunate in the several very famous
buildings that owe their existence to these potentates are still extant
in Yazd and Kirman.

Like Iranian art in all its forms, Iranian architecture during the
Il-Khanid Mongols were decorative, characterized by precision, clarity
and lucidity. However, contrary to the Saljuq period, the Il-Khanid
construction places a decided emphasis upon verticality. A look at the
portal of Jami‘ Masjid at Ispahan and its north side arches, the portal
of Khanqah at Natauz, the tomb shrine at Ziarat, the niche of Bayazid’s
shrine at Bistam, and Pir-i Bakram portal proves the point. Chambers too
become loftier in relation to their horizontal measurements. *Ivans*
also become narrower but higher.

The Safawid Emperor, Shah ‘Abbas the Great (995 – 1038/1587 – 1628), was
one of the greatest builders Persia has ever had. He was a wonderful
town planner. His achievement in this field can be seen at Ispahan, the
capital, which he built anew. The scheme included the Great Maidan
surrounded by vaulted bazaars, with the portal of his mosque opening in
the centre of the south side, the Ala-Qapu palace on the western side,
and the avenue, over two miles long, known as the Chahar Bagh.

Shah ‘Abbas also built the Jami‘ Masjid of Ispahan. It has four *ivans*
and a domed chamber with a *mihrab* on the *qiblah* side. The south-east
*ivan* is flanked by two halls, each with eight dome covered bays and a
*mihrab*. The entire building including the main dome is splendidly
decorated with enamelled tiles and faience mosaic.

### 4. Muslim Architecture in Central Asia

The starting point of Muslim architecture in Central Asia is the extant
tomb in Bukhara of Sultan Isma‘il (279 – 294/892 – 907), the founder of
the Samanid dynasty. It is a cubical structure with a dome. Its
decoration is almost entirely of brick work. The spandrils of the
central arch bear square-shaped *motifs*. The central hemi-spherical
dome is surrounded by four small cupolas on its four corners.

Uskend in eastern Farghanah was another centre of the Samanids where
four important monuments – one *minar* and three mausoleums – still
stand. The *minar* is a tapering tower gradually diminishing in
circumference as it reaches the top. It is cylindrical and fluted and
has lost its top. It is the oldest specimen of its kind which later
became very popular in Iran and Turkey. The decoration consists of tiles
combined in geometrical patterns, the ground between them filled with
small stucco leaves.

Merve was another great Muslim cultural centre in this region. The
oldest monument in this town is a mosque built in 131 – 138/748 – 755.
It is called the Hamadani Masjid in memory of Haji Yusuf of Hamadan.
Still in good condition, it is used for daily prayers.

The capital of Amir Timur (737 – 807/1336 – 1404) was, however,
Samarqand and he made it one of the most splendid cities in the east by
building palaces, mosques, and shrines there. The style of these Timurid
buildings follows Khurasanid tradition although Chinese and Turkish
motifs are also visible. They included the famous mosque of Khuwaja
Ahmad Uassavi constructed in 800/1397 near Samarqand. The architect of
this mosque was a Persian from Ispahan. It is an enormous square
structure, a cubic block from which rose two domes, one covering the
mosque proper and the other the tomb of the saint. The second dome is
melon shaped a characteristic of Timurid monuments. The entrance is
flanked by two towers like that of a fortress, a product of Timur’s
warlike mind.

Timur was greatly attached to Kish, his birth place, where he built a
palace which was considered a marvel by contemporary visitors. The
description given by Clavijo the Spanish ambassador, sent to the Timurid
Court by King Henry III, shows that this place followed the style of
ancient palaces at Nimrud and Khursabiad. Its surface was completely
covered with enamelled tiles like the Ishtar Gate of Babylon.

But it was Samarqand which received Timur’s fullest attention. The most
prominent building in the city is the mosque of Bibi Khanum, which Timur
built in memory of his wife in 801 – 808/1398 – 1405, with its
monumental gateways and the double dome. This mosque is the first known
specimen of the classical Jami‘ Mosque in Turkestan. The second
masterpiece of this period is Timur’s own mausoleum at Samarqand, known
as Gour-i Amir (Amir’s grave). It was constructed by Timur himself. It
has an immense dome almost completely covered with glittering tiles. Its
walls are resplendent with multi-coloured slabs which are transformed by
points into beautiful mosaics forming numerous Arabic and Persian
inscriptions. To the right and the left arose two circular minarets.
Ulugh Beg, who had inherited a passion for buildings form his
grandfather, Timur, added to this tomb a series of other buildings. He
also built a grandiose portal to the shrine.

Timur’s son and successor, Mirza Shah Tukh (807 – 851/1404 – 1447),
transferred his seat of government from Samarquand to Herat in Khurasan.
He built there a citadel surrounded by a wall with four gates. The Jami‘
Mosque of Herat, which stood in the midst of the chief market, was the
most beautiful in the whole of Khurasan. Shah Rukh’s wife, Gauhar Shad
Aqa, was also a great builder. She constructed a college at Herat (820 –
840/1417 – 1437). Its architect was Ustad Qawwan al-Din of Shiraz. The
original marble slab of this college is still preserved in the Heart
museum. It is calligraphed in *thulth* style by the renowned
calligraphist Ja‘far Jalal of Herat. Besides, Herat could boast of
Musallah, the mausoleum of Gauhar shad Aqa and the *madrasah* of Hussain
Baiqrah.

### 5. Muslim Architecture in Turkey

The Muslim architecture in Turkey (Anatolia) was inaugurated by the
Saljuqs in the fifth/11th century. During the course of 250 years of
their rule, the Suljuqs constructed many monumental buildings at Siwas,
Quniyah, Kaiseri, Erezrum, Divrigi, Karman,and other important towns.
These structures include mosques, tombs, mausoleums, palaces, castles,
hospitals, caravanserais, market halls, public baths, public fountains,
bridges, aqueducts and reservoirs. Quite a few are still extant. The
Saljuq architectural traditions were not only maintained by the Ottoman
Turks but reached their zenith both in quality and number in the
tenth/16th and fifth/11th centuries.

The oldest mosque in Anatolia (fifth/11th century) built by the Turks is
supposed to be the Ulu Cami at Siwas.[^25] It is a rectangular structure
surrounded by a wall. It has a covered portico, an open court, a flat
roof with a layer of earth raised upon horizontal wooden rafters and
stone pillars.

The richest and most impressive of the Saljuq mosques is the Ulu Cami at
Divrigi (626/1229). It has two gateways. The applique *motifs* of the
northern gate are suggestive of knitted or woven design. In the middle
of the mosque is an octagonal water basin and above it a dome open to
the sky. Outside the exterior walls is a ground minaret and inside a
hexagonal conical dome.

The Saljuq mausoleums follow the style common in Khurasan and Merv – a
high drum and a dome – with this difference that stone is used instead
of bricks and the decoration takes the form of relief. These mausoleums
are generally polygonal in shape. The polygons are joined by means of
triangular surfaces to a square base resting on the ground. The roof
consists of a flat dome inside a conical structure outside. They look
like a tent in stone. The tomb of Khalifah Ghazi at Amaisia is one of
the oldest monuments (541/1146) and the Douer Gumband (675/1276) is the
richest one in decoration. It is a dodecagonal structure formed of blind
arcades, side by side with geometrical designs we find fan-shaped
palmettes and birds and lions in relief. The mausoleum of Khudaband
Khatyun at Nigede (712/1312) contains, besides floral and geometrical
ornamentation, reliefs representing birds, stags, and other animals with
human heads.

No complete Saljuq palace has survived, but history records several such
buildings at Alaniya, Siwas, and Quniyah. For the pavilion and main
building of the Saljuq palaces in Anatolia, the Khurasan house plan,
with a courtyard and four *ivans*, served as a prototype. As a matter of
fact, the same plan is followed in subsequent Ottoman palaces also – a
number of pavilions (kiosks) and groups of buildings set among a
succession of courtyards and gardens with ponds, the entire structure
being surrounded by a wall.

There were medical schools also and these were attached to hospitals,
for instance, the one at Siwas (614/1217), the largest of all Saljuq
hospitals, had a medical college attached to it.

The Saljuq caravanserais, like their *madrasahs*, had strong gateways
for security reasons, with the wall decoration concentrated upon them.

The Saljuq baths differ from those of Damascus in having a plan centred
on an octagon with four *ivans*, and the washing arrangements without a
common pool. The Sultan Hammam at Quniyah gives a good idea of Saljuq
baths. There are separate twin buildings for men and women. The first
room to be entered is the disrobing room *(camegah)* with marble floor
and a fountain in the middle. From here a passage leads to the
tepidarium *(sogu kulul)* for repose and massage. Then comes the hot
room *(sic alik)* a domed octagonal hall round which are recesses
*(ivans)* containing water basins and private rooms *(khalwah)*.

With the downfall of the Saljuqs (654/1256), Anatolia was divided into
more than a dozen independent principalities *(beyliks)* which ruled
over various parts of the country for about 200 years. They were
overcome by the Ottoman Turks.

The Ottoman Turks ruled over Turkey for almost 600 years (699 –
1342/1299 – 1923). During the Bursa period (699 – 907/1299 – 1501),which
is also called the foundation period, the old Ulu Cami type of mosques
continued to be constructed but the roofing consisted of co-ordinated
domes. For instance, the Ulu Cami at Bursa, first capital of the
Ottomans (745 – 801/1344 – 1399), had 20 domes and 12 piers all
co-ordinated. But mosques with single domes were also built, for
instance the “Ala al-Din Mosque at Bursa (726/1326) and the Green Mosque
at Iznik (780/1378).

The mosque that set the pattern for the monumental mosques of the
tenth/16th century was that of Bayazid II with a second half dome
opposite to and in the same axis with the half dome that supported the
central dome on the side of the *mihrab*. This principle was accepted by
the famous Turkish architect Koca Sinan whose masterpiece is the
Sulaimaniyyah Mosque (957 – 964/1550 – 1557). The mosque of Sinan Pasha,
Ahmad Pasha, Sokkolu Muhammad Pasha, Mihrimah Khatun,and Rustam Pasha
built by Sinan follow the same style. His great masterpiece, Sebiniyyah
Mosque (977 – 983/1569 – 1575) at Edirne, however, had only one dome.

In the 11th/17th century, Turkish mosques followed the style of
Shehrzadeh Mosque (950 – 955/1543 – 1548) which was also built by Sinan.
It has a central dome supported and surrounded by four half domes. This
style may be seen in Sultan Ahmad’s Mosque (1018 – 1025/1609 – 1616) and
the Walid Mosque.

Under the Ottomans, *madrasahs* and hospitals followed the traditional
style but the mental hospital of Bayazid II is quite original. It has
separate rooms for mental patients and a communal hall of hexagon shape
with dome open to the sky for psycho-pathical cases. At one end of the
hall, there is a dais for musicians, and the acoustics are excellent.

The Ottoman mausoleums are invariably roofed with a dome. Decoration is
restricted to coloured patterns, and facing of glazed tiles is applied
inside instead of outside. Nearly all Ottoman Sultans are buried in
Istanbul. One of the oldest mausoleums (868/1464) there is that of
Mahmud Pasha, the Grand Vizier of Muhammad the Conqueror. It is
octagonal in shape with its facade of geometrical patterned tiles inlaid
in stones. The tomb of Sultan Sulaiman the Magnificent (974/1556) is a
masterpiece of ornamentation. The tombs of Salim II (982/1574) and Murad
III (1003/1595) are also the finest specimens of Turkish faience
ornamentation. The marble tomb of Sultan Hamid (1203/1789) is a baroque.

Covered market is a special feature of Ottoman rulers. The covered
market of Bursa has a colourful interior of stone and brick masonry that
of Edirne (821/1418) has six piers and 14 domes. The famous market of
‘Ali Pasha at Edirne (977/1569) built by Sinan had in addition six
gates. The markets built by Muhammad the Conqueror and Sulaiman the
Magnificent at Istanbul are most famous. The former has 15 domes and two
rows of four pillars and the latter has 20 domes. These two
constructions, with the addition from time to time of streets, comprise
the famous covered market of Istanbul. It is really a market city.

It covers an area of 30,700 square metres and includes 65 streets, a
square, 300 shops, 1,000 rooms, 18 gates, eight fountains, a school,
wells, and 16 caravanserais. At the time of Sultan Muhammad and Sulaiman
it was mainly the wood, but after the fire in 1113/1701 it was rebuilt
in brick and stone. Architecturally, however, the so-called “Egyptian
Market of Istanbul,” which was built in 1071/1660, is far superior. The
windows at the sides of the high, sloping roofed central portion give
light at a lower level to the central passage, which forms a right
angle, on either side of which are set the rows of shops, 88 in all,
each covered by a dome. It is a singly-storied building except the
entrance arcades. The effect of the interior is as impressive as that of
a cathedral.

The earliest Ottoman palace was built at Bursa, called Bey Sarai, but no
trace of this structure is found now.

The complex structure now called the Topkapi Palace (Seraglio) grew out
of the subsequent additions to this palace by the Sultans through the
centuries. The famous Topkapi Palace remained the residence of the
Ottoman Sultans from the ninth/15th century to the 13th/19th century
when they moved to Bosphorus. This palace was the centre of government
as well as of culture. No other assemblage of buildings affords such an
opportunity as this to study at one place the entire history of the
Ottoman Architecture.

It covers 699,000 square metres of area, comprising five groups of
apartments totalling 348 rooms, two groups of offices, eight servant
quarters, ten mosques, 14 paths, two hospitals, five schools, 12
libraries, 22 fountains, a fish pond and vineyard, one outer and four
inner courts, and the whole assemblage is surrounded on the landside by
a wall. At a time, food for 5,000 residents of the Palace was cooked at
the royal kitchen.

In spite of the fact that the Topkapi Palace was not constructed and
designed by any single architect, it still possesses a remarkably
homogeneous character. The entire arrangement of the palace, with its
non-geometrical sub-divisions and its terrace walls counter-acting the
steep slope of the ground, conforms admirably to present day principles
of town planning.

It is not possible to give full description of the palace. The third and
fourth courts, however, contain the most interesting buildings. The
structure in which foreign envoys were received by the Sultan
*(Arzodasht)* is a marvel of the ninth/15th century architecture. The
library of Sultan Ahmad (1131/1719) is remarkable for its plan and
marble facade. The Baghdad Pavilion (1048/1638) in the fourth court
contains four *ivans* and one central dome. Its terraces, facing the
Bosphorus and the Golden Horn, are surmounted by a wide caved roof
supported on arcades. The walls are faced, both inside and outside, with
tiles. The Pavilion of Mustafa Pasha (1116/1704) is in Rococo-Turkish
style, made in wood, to serve summer requirements.

Unlike the Il-Khanid monuments of Persia and Central Asia, Turkish
architecture on the whole is horizontal, not vertical. The height of
Turkish buildings is much less than their length and expansion.
According to Behcat Uncal, this horizontal effect gives an impression of
comfort and repose. In religious buildings, solid parts pre-dominate
over the window openings. On the other hand, in secular buildings,
window strips dominate the facade. The Turks avoided total symmetry in
their ground plans and facades.

### 6. Muslim Architecture in Pakistan and India

The Muslim conquest of Indo-Pakistan sub-continent started in 94/712
when Muhammad bin Qasim invaded Sind. Contemporary records show that he
constructed a mosque and other buildings at Daibul, but these structures
no longer exist. Recently some excavations made in southern Sind led to
the discovery of certain traces of ancient monuments. But the experts
have not yet come to any final conclusion with regard to the age of
these structures. Suggestions have been made that the rectangular
foundation excavated at Bhambor is that of the first mosque on the
sub-continent built at the time of Muhammad bin Qasim.

Similarly, no Muslim monument built before the middle of the sixth/12th
century has so far been discovered although it is known that Multan had
been an important centre of Muslim culture prior to Mahmud of Ghaznah’s
excursions. After Lahore was conquered by Mahmud in 393/1002 a permanent
garrison of Afghan soldiers was established there.[^26] Later on, Lahore
became the capital of Mahmud’s successors (492/1098 – 582/1186). It is,
therefore, most probable that mosques, palaces, tombs, and other
structures built by Muslim rulers of Multan, Lahore, and other small
principalities in the Indus Valley between the second/eighth and the
sixth/12th centuries suffered at the hands of invaders or were destroyed
by the ravages of time. What exists today belongs to a much later period
as compared with Iraq, Syria, Iran, Egypt and Spain.

Indo-Islamic architecture, during its history of more than five
centuries (545 – 1119/1150 – 1707), however, covers such a vast area and
has passed through so many stages and styles that in this brief section
only a passing reference can be made to them. Besides the imperial style
of Delhi, which served as a model, at least eight very marked provincial
styles have been noted by experts. These provincial styles belong the
West Punjab (545 – 725/1150 – 1325), Bengal (597 – 957/1200 – 1550),
Jaunpur (762 – 885/1360 – 1480), Gujrat (700 – 957/1300 – 1550), Mandu
and Malwah (808 – 977/1405 – 1569), the Deccan (748 – 1206/1347 – 1617),
Bijapur and Khandesh (828 – 1067/1425 – 1656), and Kashmir (813 –
1112/1410 – 1700). One of these styles the Multan style in West Punjab –
is even older than the imperial style of Delhi.

The earliest Muslim monument in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent happens
to be the tomb of Shah Yusuf Gardezi at Multan, built in 547/1152.[^27]
It is a rectangular structure with a flat roof. One of the walls has an
oblong portion which is slightly projected to frame the entrance. The
walls are completely encased in the most colourful tiles for which
Multan has always been famous. These tiles are decorated with
geometrical, inscriptional, and floral motifs. The absence of domes,
pillars, and arches in this modest building is very significant.

It was at Delhi that the foundations of Muslim architecture were laid on
a grand scale. Soon after he made this imperial city his capital in
587/1191, Qutub al-Din Aibak ordered the construction of the famous
Quwwat al-Islam Mosque in 592/1196. This is the oldest mosque extant in
the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent. It consists of rectangular courtyard
(141 ft x 105 ft) surrounded by pillared cloisters. The sanctuary on the
western side possessed elaborate series of aisles with shallow domed
ceilings. In front of the sanctuary was placed an iron pillar brought
from Mathura as a mark of victory.

Three years later, an expansive arched facade was built across the
entire front of the sanctuary. Its pointed arches made in red stone are
magnificently carved with inscriptions and floral *motifs*. They
produced the effect of loftiness and lightness as, following the
contemporary north Iranian style; they are vertical in their
composition.

Qutub al-Din Aibak laid the foundations of another most remarkable
building the same year. It was the Qutub Minar. Although it was
constructed at a time when Muslim in India was hardly established, it
has never been surpassed in the boldness of its conception, its
aesthetic composition, its exquisite execution, and its imposing effect.
It is a unique monument in the entire Muslim history. The idea of this
fluted and star-shaped tower was certainly borrowed from Ghaznah as well
as North Iran, where the ruins of similar towers still exist. But the
Qutub Minar has surpassed all such towers. It lies outside the Quwwat
al-Islam Mosque and was probably designed on the basis of Samarra mosque
or the mosque of ibn Tulun (second/eighth and third/ninth centuries).

It is a five-storeyed building with a domical roof. The storeys diminish
in height and dimension as they ascend and are ornamented by four
projecting balconies. Between these balconies there are richly
sculptured and raised bands containing Arabic inscriptions. The basement
contains six such bands. The lowest storey has 24 projecting ribs
forming the flutes. They are alternately angular and circular in the
first storey, only circular in the second, and angular in the third. Te
other two storeys are of plain marble with red stone belts and were
added later. Its tapering construction produces the effect of a height
greater than the actual which is 238 feet.

A notable contribution of Muslim architecture in India was made by
Sultan Shams al-Din Iltutmish (606 – 643/1211 – 1236) who added the
famous arched screen in front of the Ajmere mosque built by his
predecessor in 597/1200. These arches, seven in number, extending over
200 feet, more nearly approach the four-centred type invariable found in
subsequent Muslim buildings. Each arch is surrounded by three lines of
writing, the outer Kufic, the other two in Arabic characters separated
from each other by bands of carved arabesque ornament.

Another significant aspect of Muslim architecture in the seventh/13th
century is the construction of a large number of tombs. Famous among
there are the tombs built by Iltutmish for his son at Sultan Ghari
(626/1231) and for himself (633/1235) and the tomb of Sultan Balban
(679/1280), in Delhi. The shrines of Shah Baha al-Haq (661/1262), Shah
Shams al-Din Tabriz (675/1276) and Shah Rukn-i ‘Alam (720/1320) at
Multan also belong to the same period. The last named Shrine is one of
the most impressive buildings in Pakistan. It is an octagonal structure
with sloping walls having tapering turrets at the angles. Erected on an
elevated plane, its total height is 115 feet and the dome is 50 feet
wide inside. It is made in brick with bands of carved chiselled and
parts are inlaid with glazed tiles suggest the Arab-Iranian origin of
Multan architecture.

The beginning of the eighth/14th century brought a remarkable change in
the imperial style at Delhi. This change was caused by the invasion of
Central Asia and Iran by the Mongols. Bringing death and destruction in
their wake, the Mongols were responsible for a large scale migration of
Turkish and Persian architects, engineers, and artisans to Delhi and it
was this group of people who built the famous ‘Ala’i Darwazah
(705/1305), one of the most exquisite piece of architecture near the
Qutub Minar. The ‘Ala’i Darwazah (the Gateway of ‘Ala al-Din Khalji)
occupies a key position in the evolution of Muslim architecture in
India. A mere glance at this elegant gate will show that it must have
been built by expert architects, having knowledge, vision, and capacity
to prepare the design in detail before it was executed. Its style is
distinctive and original. The method of its walling, the shape of its
arches, the system of support for the dome, and the design of surface
decoration all suggest supervision of master builders.

The main arch is a pointed horse shoe. It is rather vertical, the width
of its span being much less in proportion to its height. There are bands
of inscriptions carved in white marble.

The Tughlaqs who ruled over India from 720/1320 to 816/1413 were great
builders. The founder of the Tughlaq dynasty, a soldier who ruled hardly
for five years (720 – 725/1320 – 1325), managed to build in this short
period a fort, a palace, his own tomb, and the fortified city of
Tughlaqabad. This was the first capital city founded by any Muslim
monarch in India, although Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalji, his predecessor,
had also earlier planned a similar capital. Tughlaqabad, near Delhi, is
now in ruins except for the tomb of the warrior king. It is a unique
building as the tomb looks more like an independent fortress than a
burial place.

Perhaps the disturbed political conditions, on account of Mongol
invasion, demanded the expediency of utilizing every building for
defence purposes in times of emergency. This fortress tomb was built on
a high plane. It is made in red sandstone and white marble. It has thick
sloping outer walls giving the building a pyramidal appearance. Its
doorway is literally a death trap for intruders and within the courtyard
there is solidly built underground vaults for hoarded wealth. The dome
is pointed Tartar in shape – a style followed throughout the Muslim
period in India. This pentagon produces the effect of great strength,
solidity, and robustness.

The Mongol invaders could not destroy Delhi; this was done by one of her
own rulers, Muhammad Tughlaq, who moved his capital to Daulatabad in the
south. Delhi became a deserted city and all its trade, art, and industry
were completely ruined. Most of the artisans and architects, who could
manage to escape from the Royal camp, took refuge in provincial capitals
with the result that when the capital was restored by Firuz Taghlaq was
no more master builders were to be found in Delhi.

The Royal treasury was also empty and the economic condition of the
subjects had become much deteriorated. In spite of the fact that Faruz
Taghlaq proved to be one of the greatest builders India has ever
produced, his buildings had to be simple and unornamented, producing the
effect of austere severity. Gone were the engravings and carvings, the
refined decorative *motifs*, and the well finished and properly cut
stone pieces of marble and red stone, and the embellishments of the
outer and inner surfaces. Instead, walls were made of rubble covered
with thick layers of cement. It was the puritanical phase of
architectural asceticism.

Firuz Shah Tughlaq built four fortified cities in North India: Firuz
Shah Kotlah in Delhi, Jaunpur, Hissar, and Fatehabad. Firuz Shah’s
fortified citadel in Delhi was situated on the river bank. It was
roughly a rectangle with rectangular courtyards, baths, tanks, gardens,
palaces, barracks, a huge Jami‘ mosque for a congregation of 10,000
people, servant quarters, etc. The main architectural principles of
palace-fort, followed by the great Mughuls at Agra, Delhi, Allahabad,
and other places, had been laid down by Firuz Shah.

Several mosques were built in Delhi by Firuz Tughlaq between 772/1370
and 777/1375, the most famous being the Khirki Mosque. It was built on a
*tehkhanah* or sub-structure of arches. It is a unique construction as
it is almost a covered mosque like Saljuq mosques in Turkey, a rare
phenomenon in India. The portal is for the first time reached by some
flights of steps. It is entered through an arch and beamed doorway. The
interior consists of cloisters formed by a series of square bays, each
one roofed by a cup-shaped dome. There are three rows of such domes,
each row having three constellations of nine domes each. Thus, there are
in all 81 such domes. Each corner of the rectangles is supported by a
tower and a tapering round bastion.

The invasion of Timur in 801/1398 was a major calamity for India. He not
only sacked Delhi but took away with him Indian artisans to build the
famous Jami‘ Mosque at Samarqand. Delhi lost its political supremacy.
The rule of Sayyid and Lodhi monarchs were confined to the Gangetic
basin only. And during the whole of the ninth/15th century and the first
quarter of the tenth/16th century Delhi could boast of no architectural
achievements. No palaces, no mosques, no forts, and no cities were
built, only tombs were erected as memorials to the dead.

However, a significant addition in the construction of domes was made in
this period. This was the introduction of double dome in India, although
this style of dome-making had been practised in other Muslim countries
for centuries. We find this double dome – an inner and an outer shell to
raise the height of the dome without disturbing the interior plan – for
the first time in the tomb of Sultan Sikandar Lodhi (924/1518).

#### Bengal

The Muslim architecture of Bengal is as old as that of imperial Delhi,
as Bengal was conquered by one of Qutub al-Din Aibak’s generals in
599/1202. It soon became an independent kingdom and remained so until it
was annexed by Akbar the Great in 984/1576. The Muslim monarchs of
Bengal were men of fine taste and they built scores of mosques, palaces,
and other structures at their capitals at Gaur and Pandua bear testimony
to their architectural genius but nowhere have climatic and physical
conditions caused greater havoc to Muslim monuments than in Bengal. As
no stone was available in the vicinity, most of these buildings were
constructed in bricks could not withstand the onslaughts of heavy rains,
storms, and humidity.

The oldest Muslim monument in Bengal is the multi-domed mosque at the
village of Pandua. It was built in the middle of the seventh/13th
century. It is the oldest multi-domed mosque in the entire
sub-continent. Another very significant structure erected at Pandua is
the Adina Mosque (766/1364). It was the focal point of the new capital
city built by Sikandar Shah (759 – 791/1358 – 1389). The Adina Mosque, a
double storeyed structure constructed on orthodox lines, is the largest
and the most impressive building in Bengal. It is as big as the Great
mosque at Damascus (705 ft x 285 ft). “To the spectator standing within
the expensive quadrangular court of the Adina Mosque, surrounded by its
seemingly endless archways, the conception as a whole presents the
appearance of the forum of some ancient classical city rather than a
self-contained Muslim house of prayer, with the high-vaulted sanctuary
on the western side simulating an imperial approach in the form of a
majestic triumphal archway.”[^28]

Around the courtyard is a screen of arches, 88 in number. The roof is
covered with 306 domes. The upper storey, probably a Royal Chapel, is
supported on a range of arches carried by unusual pillars. These are
very short but ponderous piers, abnormally thick, and square above and
below. These pillars are unique in their construction and are found
nowhere in India. The interior of the sanctuary hall is a superb pointed
arch vault, the earliest and the rarest example of its kind in India.
The design and execution of the central niche are also most impressive.
It is inscribed with delicate arabesque and calligraphic texts.

The Muslim architecture in Bengal was partly conditioned by its climate,
for due to excessive rains the surface of the roof had to be curved and
covered with a number of small domes. The finest examples of such curved
roofs may be seen in Chota Sona Masjid at Gaur (899/1493) and Qadam
Rasul. Another characteristic of Bengal monuments is their “drop” arches
in which the span is greater than the radius.

#### Jaunpur

Jaunpur was made a provincial capital by Firuz Toghlaq who built there a
fort and laid the foundations of Atala Mosque. Later on, the famous
Sharqi monarchs of Jaunpur adorned their city with mosques, tombs,
palaces and other buildings associated with an imperial capital. As a
matter of fact, Jaunpur became the cultural capital of Northern India
under the Sharqi monarchs. It was called “Shiraz of the East.” Sikander
Lodhi, the Sultan of Delhi, completely destroyed this city’s Royal
structures when he occupied it in 885/1480; its five mosques alone were
spared. The most outstanding characteristic of these stone-built mosques
is the pylon formation of their facades. Most famous among these mosques
are the Atala Mosque and the Mami‘ Masjid completed in 811/1408 and
875/1470 respectively.

The sky high pylons of these mosques have a unique construction, the
like of which is not to be found anywhere in the Muslim world. Their
origin is unknown. John Terry, however, suggests that since the early
Muslim rulers of Jaunpur were Abyssinians, these pylon-like portals
might have been inspired by the pylons of Pharaohic temples in the Nile
Valley.[^29]

The Atala Masjid is a very distinctive and majestic building. Although
its general arrangements are conventional, its double-storeyed cloisters
are very spacious, having 42 feet across and five aisles deep.

Many of the elements found in Jaunpur buildings were derived from the
architecture of the Tughlaqs at Delhi, for instance, the recessed arch
with its fringe ornamentation, the shape of the arch, and the sloping
side of its supports, the beam and brackets supporting the arches, the
tapering turrets, the square shafts of the pillars, and the imposing
flights of steps leading to the portals, all suggest that artisans
trained in the imperial style at Delhi during the eighth/14th century
and the beginning of the next were brought to Jaunpur. Jaunpur mosques
show a very pleasant innovation in providing especially constructed
galleries for religious needs of women. These galleries were covered
with beautiful open work screens as seen in the Lal Darwazah Mosque
(854/1450).

Although Jaunpur mosques do not display much refinement, they are
strong, sincere, and purposeful in their character. They are good
examples of bold and forceful workmanship.

#### Gujrat (700 – 957/1300 – 1500)

Gurjat presents by far the most graceful provincial style in the annals
of Indian architecture. The Gujart style of architecture, in the course
of 250 years of Muslim rule, passed through three marked stages: the
formative and experimental stage well represented by the Jami‘ Masjid at
Cambay (725/1325), the middle stage of increased assurance and
directional authority, the best and most consummate illustration of
which may be found in the Jami‘ Masjid at Ahmedabad, and the final stage
when it reached its zenith in the latter half of the ninth/15th century
under the patronage of Mahmud Begarha I (863 – 917/1458 – 1511), the
typical example being that of the Jami‘ Masjid at Champaner.

In the Cambay mosque, though much was borrowed from the Delhi style of
Khalji period and also from the Ajmere mosque, its fine proportions,
dignified appearance, and simple design provided a model for subsequent
mosques in Gujrat.

The second phase owes its existence to Ahmad Shah, the great builder,
who founded the capital city of Ahmedabad (814/1411). His zeal for
building projects was matched by that of his courtiers and successors,
so much so that few cities can claim to possess larger numbers and finer
specimens of monumental architecture that the capital of the Ahmad Shahi
dynasty. Besides, many tombs and other structures, one can count more
than 50 mosques of that period in Ahmedabad alone. Ahmad Shah’s citadel
with its palace is situated on the left bank of the river of Sabarmati.
It is a rectangular enclosure occupying a prominent position. Almost in
the heart of the town was built the great Jami‘ Masjid connected with
the citadel by a wide avenue. Astride this avenue was erected a stately
triumphal gateway call the Tin Darwazah as it posses three arched
entrances. The entire conception was a bold attempt at town planning not
usually found in provincial towns.

The Jami‘ Masjid of Ahmedabad is considered the high water mark of
mosque design in western India. In its sanctuary have been combined two
different facade conventions, the screen of arches on the one hand and
the pillared portico on the other. Thus, a subtle contrast between the
volume and strength of the wall surface and the depth and lightness of
the colonnade has been achieved.

In the reign of Muhammad Shah (846 – 855/1442 – 1451), son and successor
of Ahmad Shah, Sarkhaj, a suburb of Ahmedabad, acquired great importance
as the burial place of a divine. Here palaces, gardens, pavilions,
gateways and a large artificial lake, besides mosques and mausoleums,
were erected on a grand scale.

The Gurjat architecture attained its third and final stage during the
reign of Mahmud Begarha I. He founded three cities, and adorned them
with imposing buildings. Moreover, splendid constructions were added to
the glory of Ahnedabad. Most of these were mausoleums, four of which are
the Raudahs (tombs) of Sayyid ‘Uthman at Usmanpur, of Sheikh Ahmad Khatu
at Sarkhel, of Shah ‘Alam, and of Mubarak Sayyid near Mahmudabad.

Most famous among the mosques of this period are the mosques of Mian
Khan Chishti (861/1456), of Bibi Achut Kuki (877/1472), of Mahfuz Khan
(898/1492), and finally Sidi Sayyid which last is a notable departure
from the conventional mosque design. It is composed entirely of arcades
of arches; eight square piers support these to form the interior over
which is laid a flat roof. The walls of the sanctuary are composed
largely of perforated stone screens. For the first time, the entire
screen has been perforated with “palm and parasite” motif with a
wonderful skill and aesthetic taste.

Sultan Mahmud Begarha built a new capital also, at Champaner, 78 miles
south-east of Ahmedabad. It was a walled citadel with palaces, a Jami‘
Mosque, and other usual constructions.

#### The Deccan

The Muslim architecture of the Deccan was the product of the
amalgamation of two separate trends introduced in South India from Delhi
and Iran in the eighth/14th century. Another notable feature of the
Deccan monuments was the almost complete absence in them of any
influence of the then existing South Indian art, in spite of the fact
that this territory was so rich in the Chalukyan and Dravidian temple
architecture. It is surprising that, while Muslim architects of North
and West India freely borrowed from the local style, their
co-religionists in the South preferred not to be in any way obliged to
and affected by the styles prevalent in the Deccan.

The Deccan was first conquered by Sultan ‘Ala al-Din Khalji. But the
first independent Muslim ruler of South India was a Persian adventurer,
‘Ala al-Din Hassan Bahman Shah. He had served under Sultan Muhammad
Tughlaq at Daulatabad. He established the Bahmani dynasty at Gulbargah
(748/1347), the fortress of which is considered a most remarkable
production of military architecture. Almost carved out of a living rock,
this fortress is now in ruins except for its most extra-ordinary Jami‘
Mosque built in 769/1367. It is one of the few Indian mosques entirely
covered like the Cordova mosque.

The whole area, including the courtyard, is roofed over by 63 small
domes. Light is admitted through the side walls which are pierced by
great arches. It was built by Muhammad Rafi‘, a hereditary architect of
Qaswin in northern Iran, who must have trained in the Saljuq style of
covered mosques found in Turkey. Other monuments of the Bahmani period
at Gulbargah include scores of Royal tombs including the famous Haft
Gumbad (seven domes).

The most unique construction of the entire history of Indian
architecture is the Gulbargah market, 570 feet long and 60 feet wide,
adorned with a range of 61 arches on either side supported by pillars
and flanked with a block of buildings of a highly ornamental
character.[^30]

The Bahmani capital was moved from Gulbargah to Bidar by Ahmad Shah (826
– 840/1422 – 1436). It was adorned with a fortress, palaces, two
mosques, and the famous college built in 877/1472 by the great scholar
minister Khuwaja Mahmud Gawan. It was a three-storeyed building with
loft towers. Its surface is almost wholly covered with glazed tiles of
green, yellow, and white colour with floral and inscriptional *motifs*
gracefully executed by expert hands.

But the magnificent monument of the ‘Adil Shahi rulers of Bijapur far
excel those in other capital cities of the Deccan. In number, too, they
are second to none; there are more than 50 mosques, 20 tombs, and nearly
the same number of palaces in Bijapur. These were constructed within 100
years after 957/1550. Prominent among these buildings are the Jami‘
Masjid, the most powerfully simple mosque, the Raudah of Ibrahim, one of
the most elaborate tombs, the GOL Gumbad, a grandiose structure, and the
Mihtar Mahal, the most delicate and the most refined of the all.

The Gol Gumbad, the mausoleum of Muhammad ‘Adil Shah, is considerably
larger than the pantheon in Rome, and it has the largest domical roof in
existence. This huge dome is based on a circular cornice obtained
through interesting arches. This method of constructing intersecting
arches, perhaps of Turkish origin, was a favourite device with Bijapur
artisans. It was unknown in other parts of India. Besides being of great
utility in dome construction, these intersecting arches produce an
exceedingly aesthetic effect, those for instance in the sanctuary of the
Jami‘ Masjid at Bijapur.

#### Malwah

The small independent State of Malwah in Central India lasted for about
one and a half centuries (804 – 937/1401 – 1530). Its capital, Mandu,
was situated on a plateau possessing a very picturesque view. It was
adorned by Hoshang Shah (807 – 839/1405 – 1435) and Mahmud Shah I (940 –
974/1436 – 1469) with magnificent palaces, mosques, and other buildings,
finest among which was the Jami‘ Masjid (858/1454). It was a multi-domed
building with repeated arcades of arches forming the sanctuary.

Facing the mosque and situated on an elevated plain is the large
structural complex called the Ashrafi Mahal (Palace of the Gold Mohar).
It was built by Mahmud Shah I. This complex consists of a college, a
mausoleum, and a tower of victory.

Two other notable buildings in Mandu are the Hindola Mahal (swinging
palace) and the Jahaz Mahal (ship palace). The former was built by
Hoshang Shah and is a combination of audience hall and Royal apartments.
The latter was built by Mahmud I and is a double-storeyed building
extending for some 260 feet along the water-front of two small lakes. It
is a colourful structure suggesting gaiety and entertainment.

These and other palaces and mosques of Mandu are all built in red
sand-stone. For decorative purposes, the builders used marble and
various semi-precious stones such as jasper, agate, and coruclian which
were found in the vicinity. Glazed blue and yellow tiles were also
employed as panels and borders. It is, therefore, correct to say that
Mandu monuments are note-worthy not for their structural qualities but
for their decorative properties, in which an aesthetic colour sense
takes a prominent position.

#### The Mughul Period (933 – 1119/1536 – 1707)

The Mughul Emperors of India were descendants of a highly cultured
dynasty. Their great ancestor, Timur, had embellished his capital city
of Samarqand with exquisite palaces, mosques, mausoleums, and
*madrasahs*. Babur, the founder of the Mughul Empire, too, was a
scholar-warrior of a remarkably refined taste. In his “Memoirs” he
relates that a considerable amount of construction in India was
undertaken under his order, although he ruled only for five years. Two
mosques attributed to him still exist – one at Panipat in east Punjab
and the other at Sambhal, a town east of Delhi. They are, however, built
in the traditional style.

The first construction in pure Mughul style, a combination of Persian
and Indian style was erected at Delhi in 972/1564 by Emperor Humayun’s
Queen in memory of her beloved consort. During Humayun’s forced sojourn
in Iran, she faithfully stood by him for 12 years. She must have
acquired a taste for Persian architecture there. When she decided to
build Humayun’s tomb, she entrusted the task to an Iranian architect,
Mirak Mirza Ghiyath. The result was that for the first time a Persian
conception was interpreted in Indian architecture.

The introduction of bulbous domes, so common in Iran and Central Asia,
and of arched alcoves, a complex of rooms, corridors and a vast garden
surrounding the tomb was a significant landmark in Indian architecture.
Added to these purely Persian innovations were certain Indian
characteristics such as the fanciful kiosks with their elegant cupolas
and excellent stone masonry combined with artistic marble work. From
these it is obvious that there emerged a new style under the Mongols,
the origin of which can be easily traced in Humayun’s tomb.

This style was almost perfected by Akbar the Great, who constructed
numerous buildings during his long reign. He built four great
fortresses: at Agra in 972/1564, at Ajmere in 978/1570, at Allahabad in
991/1583, and at Lahore at almost the same time. According to *A‘in-i
Akbari*, “there were built upwards of 500 edifices of red stone in the
fine styles of Bengal and Gujrat” in Agra fort alone.[^31]

The most complete of these buildings is the palace called the Jahangir
Mahal in Agra. The palace-fortress of Lahore is unique in this respect
that its outer walls are decorated with glazed tiles with sport *motifs*
such as elephant combats, games of polo, and hunting episodes. Figure
compositions and floral devices also are found in the panels.

The most monumental achievement of Akbar is Fatehpur Sikri, his new
capital city, 26 miles west of Agra. It is a complex of palaces,
official residences, and religious buildings, so designed and executed
as to form one of the most spectacular structural productions in the
whole of India. These are all built in red stone. Famous among them is
the Diwan-i Khas (private audience hall), the Jami‘ Masjid with its
Buland Darwazah (high gate) and palaces of Queen Jodha Ba’i, Maryam
Sultanah, Rajah Birbal and Hawa Mahal.

The Diwan-i Khas is a rectangular hall with unique arrangements. It has
a large and circular pillar in the centre, its massive capital
supporting a circular platform. From this platform stone bridges radiate
along each diagonal of the hall to connect it with hanging galleries.
The Emperor used to sit on the central platform and listen to
discussions among scholars of different religions.

The most impressive single structure of Fatehpur Sikri is the Buland
Darwazah which was built in 979/1571 to commemorate the conquest of the
Deccan. It is 134 feet high with a further flight of steps, 42 feet
high. Across its front, the gate measures 130 feet. It serves as
entrance to the Jami‘ Masjid containing the tomb of Sheikh Salim
Chishti.

Emperor Akbar’s son, Jahangir, was not much interested in buildings. The
only important construction undertaken during his reign was Akbar’s tomb
at Sikandarah in 1022/1613. Unlike previous mausoleums, Akbar’s tomb has
no dome. It seems that a new group of architects were trying to evolve a
style different from the one followed by earlier Mughuls. Two more tombs
were built in the same style in which the central dome was replaced by a
rectangular pavilion. These were the tombs of I‘timad al-Daulah built at
Agra in 1036/1626 and the tomb of Jahangir built at Lahore. Both were
constructed under orders of Queen Nur Jahan. Of these three, the tomb of
I‘timad al-Daulah is the most delicate and ornate piece of architecture.
It is made of marble with its surface tastefully decorated with precious
stones of different colours. This inlaid work is in *pictora dura*
style.

The reign of Emperor Shah Jahan (1036 – 1069/1627 – 1658) is the golden
age of Mughul architecture. While Akbar’s monuments surpassed those of
his predecessors in red stone architecture, his illustrious grandson
preferred the use of marble on a scale unparalleled in history. His was
the age of marble and its architectural style was determined by marble
forms with the result that the character of the arches had to be altered
into a foliated one, white marble arcades of engrailed arches became a
distinguishing feature of Shah Jahan’s buildings. The bulbous dome also
was constricted at the neck and ornamental elements became curvilinear.

Shah Jahan was almost possessed with a passion for buildings. He started
with the Agra Fort wherein he built the marble hall of Diwan-i ‘Am as
soon as he ascended the throne in 1037/1627. Ten years later, the
Diwan-i Khas, a hall also made of marble, was added to it. The double
columns of this hall are amongst the most graceful constructions of his
reign. From time to time, several other palaces, pavilions, and mosques,
e.g. the Khas Mahal, the Shish Mahal, the Muthamman Burj, the Moti
Masjid, and the Naginah Masjid, were added to the complex inside the
citadel.

In 1048/1638, Shah Jahan decided to transfer his capital to Delhi where
he laid the foundations of Shah Jahanabad, a palace-fortress on the
right bank of the river Jamuna. The vast, oblong complex is a city
within a city. It is a well planned enclosure and a product of the
architectural genius of Shah Jahan himself.

The citadel, made of red stone and marble, consists of four groups of
buildings arranged symmetrically. The large central quadrangle contains
the Diwan-i ‘Am, the two square court-yards in the form of ornamental
gardens on either side, and the range of marble palaces along the
riverside. These palaces include the Rang Mahal and the Diwan-i Khas,
two most lavishly ornate buildings considered to be the crowning jewels
of Shah Jahan’s seraglio.

Since the citadel did not include any mosque, Shah Jahan built the
famous Jami‘ Masjid of Delhi on a site near his palace. It is erected on
a lofty plinth and is one of the two largest and most famous mosques in
the sub-continent, the other being the Badshahi Masjid of Lahore.
Rectangular in shape, the Jami‘ Masjid has tree entrances, the main and
the most imposing entrance faces the east and much resembles Akbar’s
Buland Darwazah at Fatehpur Sikri. It is made in red stone and marble.
The three domes are made of marble with vertical strips of black stone
inset at regular intervals.

Several noteworthy buildings were erected by Shah Jahan and his governor
at Thattah, the then capital of the province of Sind. Among these are
the Jami‘ Masjid, begun in 1057/1647, and a group of tombs built on the
Makli Hill by Mirza ‘Isa Khan who governed Sind from 1037/1627 to
1054/1644. The Jami‘ Masjid is built of bricks decorated with glazed
tiles of blue, white, and yellow colours. These tiles were cut in very
small sizes, only have an inch wide, thus nearly 100 such tiles have
been used within one square foot producing a mosaic effect. The designs
are chiefly geometrical, but the spandrils of the arches often show
conventional floral compositions.

Since stone and wood were scarce in Sind, most of the construction was
done in bricks and glazed tiles. The architectural style of Sind closely
resembles that of contemporary Persia – brick walls arcaded with Tudor
type arches, kiosks with cupolas, a “Lodhi” style dome, and the outer
surface embellished with glazed tile work.

The greatest masterpiece of Shah Jahan is the Taj Mahal (1042 –
1050/1632 – 1650), built by the Emperor in memory of his beloved Queen
at Agra on the bank of the river Jamuna. This exquisite poetry in marble
touches the highest pinnacle of Muslim architecture and is unsurpassed
in history. Its rhythmic proportion, its atmospheric setting, its
feminine delicacy, its animated ornamentation, and its pleasing symmetry
make the Taj Mahal one of the great wonders of the world.

While Shah Jahan built in marble and red stone, brick and glazed tile
were patronized by the nobility. The finest example of this type of
buildings is the famous mosque of Wazir Khan in Lahore. Built on
conventional lines, every portion of its structure, both inside and
outside, is enriched with a variegated scheme of colours either by means
of floral patterns painted in tempera or panels of more conventional
designs executed in lustrous glaze.

The Mughuls were very fond of landscape architecture. Nothing pleased
them more than ornamental gardens, traces of which are found almost in
every city where the Mughuls had lived. The most famous among these are
the Shalimar Gardens and the Nishat Bagh of Srinagar and the Shalimar
Gardens of Lahore, all three of them built by Shah Jahan. These gardens,
like most of the Mughul buildings, are almost always symmetrical and
geometrical. But their rectangular terraces, kiosks, balconies, pools,
fountains, and cascades present a most pleasant effect and testify to
the refined taste of their originators.

The Emperor Aurangzib (1068 – 1119/1657 – 1707) was the last of the
great Mughuls. Although too much occupied in political affairs of the
state to indulge in constructional work, he has left a famous monument
in the Badshahi Masjid of Lahore, the present capital of West Pakistan.
Built in red stone and marble, the Badshahi Masjid is one of the two
biggest mosques in Indo-Pakistan sub-continent and is an imposing
example of strength, solidity and expanse.

With the death of Aurangzib in 1119/1707, the glorious chapter of Muslim
architecture in this sub-continent came to an end. The decline of the
Moghul Empire was so swift and the political conditions prevailing in
Lahore, Delhi, and other important centres of Muslim culture so insecure
and unsettled that traces of late 12th/18th century Muslim structures
are very rare.

Bibliography
------------

• Syed Amir Ali, *A Short History of Saracens*, London, 1951; M. S.
Briggs, *Muhammadan Architecture in Egype and Palestine*, Oxford
University Press, London, 1924; K. A. C. Creswell, *Early Muslim
Architecture*, two vols., Oxford, 1932, *A short Account of Early Muslim
Architecture*, Pelican Edition, London, 1958; (Mrs.) R. L. Devonshire,
*Rambles in Cairo*, Cairo, 1917; *Some Cairo Mosques*, Constable,
London, 1921; James Fergusson, *history of Indian and Eastern
Architecture*, two vols., London, 1910; E. B. Havell, *Indian
Architecture from the first Muhammadan Invasion to the Present Day*,
London, 1913; P. K. Hitti, *History of the Arabs*, London, 1949; S.
Lane-Poole, *Saracenic Art*, London, 1886;

• Maqrizi, *al-Mawa‘iz wa’l-I‘tibar fi Dhikr al-Khitat w-al-Athar*, two
vols., Cairo, 1911; Maqqari, *Nafh al-Tibb*; A. U. Pope, *Survey of
Persian Art*, six vols., Oxford University Press, London, 1938; E. T.
Richmond, *Moslem Architecture*, Royal Asiatic Society, 1926; G. R.
Rivoira, *Moslem Architecture: Its Origin and Development*, Oxford,
1918; Taghribirdi, *al-Nujum al-Zahirah fi Muluk Misr w-al-Qahirah*,
Leiden, 1855; J. Terry, *The Charm of Indo-Islamic Architecture*,
London, 1955; B. Unsal, *Turkish Islamic Architecture*, London, 1959; D.
N. Wilber, *The Architecture of Islamic Iran – Il-Kanid Period*,
Princeton, 1955.

[^1]: Tabaqat, Vol. 43, p. 190.

[^2]: Malalas, Chronographia, pp. 344 – 45.

[^3]: Prairies, vol. 4 pp. 90 – 91.

[^4]: K. A. C. Creswell, “Lawfulness of Painting in Early Islam,”
ArsIslamica, 40 – 13, pp. 159 – 66.

[^5]: Idem, A Short Account of Early Muslim Architecture, Pellican
Edition, London, 1958, p. 13.

[^6]: Ibn Khallikan, Wafayat al-A‘yaan, Cairo, 1299-1881, vol. 1, p. 97;
ibn Taghribardi, al-Nujum al-Zahirah fi Muluk Misr w-al-Qahirah, vol. 2,
Leiden, 1855, p. 8.

[^7]: Al-Muqaffa‘, p. 362, quoted by Guest in E. G. Browne Memorial
Volume, p. 171.

[^8]: P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, London, 1949, p. 454.

[^9]: Ibn Taghribardi, op. cit., vol. 2, pp. 57 – 58; Maqrizi, al-Khitat
w-al-Athar, Cairo, 1911, vol. 1, p. 316 – 17.

[^10]: Maqrizi, op. cit., p. 380.

[^11]: Ibid., vol 2, p. 406 – 07.

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 248.

[^13]: K. A. C. Creswell, A Short Account of Early Muslim Architecture,
p. 227.

[^14]: Amir Ali, A short History of the Saracens, London, 19514, p. 515.

[^15]: P. K. Hitti, op. cit., p. 527

[^16]: Maqqari, Nafh al-Tib, vol. 1, p. 355.

[^17]: Ibn Adhari, p. 245, quoted by Creswell, op. cit., p. 214.

[^18]: Al-Maqqari, op. cit., vol. 1, pp. 369 – 70.

[^19]: P. K. Hitti, op. cit., p. 595.

[^20]: Amir Ali, op. cit., pp. 567 – 68.

[^21]: P. K., Hitti, op, cit., p. 595.

[^22]: K. A. C. Creswell, Persian Art, ed. E. Denison Ross, London,
1930, p. 53.

[^23]: Donald N. Wilber, The Architecture of Islamic Iran – Il-Khanid
Period, Princton, 1995, p. 17.

[^24]: Ibid., p. 139

[^25]: Behcet Unsal, Turkish Islamic Architecture, London, 1959, p. 17.

[^26]: S. M. Latif, Lahore, Lahore, 1956, p. 10

[^27]: Percy Brown, Indian Architecture, Bombay, p. 34.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^29]: John Terry, The Charm of Indo-Islamic Architecture, London, 1955,
p. 12.

[^30]: James Fergusson, History of Indian and Eastern Architecture,
London, 1910, vol. 2, p. 266.

[^31]: Percy Brown, op. cit, p. 100


