Chapter 56: Painting
====================

A. Introduction
---------------

It is difficult to distinguish Muslim contribution to painting from the
history of Muslim painting. An assessment of Muslim contribution to this
art would involve a consideration of the changing and growing attitude
of Muslims towards painting and a study of the historical background
which determined this attitude. Both these considerations are necessary
because they imply each other, an understanding of the one without the
other is bound to be inadequate and lopsided. Let us first consider the
Muslim attitude towards painting.

It seems that Muslim attitude towards painting in the early history of
Islam was hostile. This was justifiable because Fine Arts had at that
time an uncanny association with pagan beliefs and rituals. Painting was
reminiscent of polytheism which Islam had come to fight against and
destroy. Islam then needed an extraverted attitude – an attitude in
which the soft and feminine qualities of artistic creation and
appreciation could find little room. The social consciousness of man at
that period of history did not have sufficient insight into subtle
differentiation of various aspects of life. Being a facet of pagan
polytheism painting was prohibited by Islam in its zeal to breaks idols.

Profound aesthetic possibilities inherent in Islam had to lie dormant to
be realized only when was ripe for their realization, i.e. after Islam
had succeeded in its mission to make monotheism an effective force in
the development of human consciousness and to foster and nourish the
scientific impulse so that man could become master of his history and
responsible for its vicissitudes. Once this attitude was fairly
established in their history, the Muslims began to pay attention to
those pagan pursuits which they had neglected before which were now
shorn of their polytheistic associations. Painting was no longer the art
of making images but the art of breaking images. Through painting one
could now cast out the devils of one’s heart and thus prepare one’s soul
for direct encounter with God. There was no longer any question of
worshipping the gods one painted, for no longer did they remain the
objects of worship for the Muslim mind.[^1]

Orientalists have always seen Muslim paintings through coloured
spectacles. They enumerated the influence which moulded the character of
Muslim art and maintain by deft implication that Muslim art could be
reduced to these influences, that there was nothing original in this
art. They do not see that Islam not only absorbed external influences
but also modified them to suit its own native genius. Muslim painting
was only an aspect of *Muslim* life. It was an expression of the
spiritual explorations of sensitive minds. These sensitive minds, rooted
in their own culture, had their own peculiar longings and yearnings,
aspiration, and conflicts. It was out of these dynamic forces that
peculiar idioms and patterns which we call by the name of Muslim Art.

B. Characteristics of Muslim Painting
-------------------------------------

Muslim painting began under a shadow – the shadow of taboo on pictorial
representation of material things. Islam started its career as an
iconoclastic missionary religion to the main aim of which to establish a
social order based on reason. It propounded laws, made institutions, and
fostered organizations that the ideal could come to earth. It not only
enunciated values and principles but also tried to demonstrate that they
could be realized in this mortal life of ours. In this endeavour, Islam
had to suppress the pagan orientation not only of the Arabs but of all
the peoples it conquered. Paganism had an uncanny and almost an internal
relation with idol-worship, and Fine Arts were the only means by which
idols could be raised and formed in such a way that they could, by their
beauty and elegance, induce in the beholders a mood of devotion and
emotional abandon.

The aesthetic sense among the pagans was the religious sense. Devotion
to beauty and worship were identified in the pagan mind. Paganism was
the cult of the irrational. It was based on the bond between the
primitive man and the forces of nature that he faced in his daily life.
Islam came with the message that there is only one God, that He alone is
worthy of worship, and that the forces of nature can be subjugated and
bent to serve man’s will and desire. It was necessary for Islam at that
stage to sub-ordinate the aesthetic to the moral and the beautiful to
the good. It was, therefore, a historical necessity which led early
Muslims to prohibit the art which fostered representation of gods,
goddesses, and national heroes as objects of worship. It did not mean
that such a prohibition is inherent in Islam.

Muslim painting, therefore, began with a handicap. Without this handicap
its individual and unique character is not conceivable. Some of the
unique characteristics of Muslim painting are as follows:

1. Muslims loved their Holy Book, the Qur’an. In their attempt to copy
it they tried to write it beautifully and gracefully. They developed new
forms of writing and created novel movements in calligraphy. The
forceful and lyrical language of the Holy Qur’an induced them to write
it with passion and warmth to introduce cadence and grace to the form of
the written word. Muslim painting is the result of these movements in
calligraphy. Thus, we find that Muslim painters emphasize line *(khat)*
more than anything else. A powerful and colourful line and a forceful
stroke can create a ravishing form, pulsating with charm and
fascination. It is the “line” that matters, everything else would take
care of itself. Whether it is a straight line or curve, the stroke alone
is responsible for the aesthetic forms; it provides the criterion of
beauty.

2. Islam implies a serious commitment to history. For Islam, nature is
interesting only as a background to human personality and human deeds.
Muslim painters are intensely alive members of Muslim society. For them
wars and battles, rise and fall of dynasties, destruction and
construction of cities are not matters to be observed with a spiritual
nonchalance and complacency but events of vital interest. For a Muslim
artist, human personality has supreme value. We, therefore, find that it
is the human drama, the human action, which occupies the centre of
Muslim paintings. Vast spaces, mountains and valleys, storms of wind and
rain which characterize Chinese paintings are conspicuous by their
absence in Muslim painting. The principal reason for this attitude seems
to be the realization that for a painting of nature to be vital and
vivacious it has to employ human symbols.

The storms must oppress and plunder, the wind must be caught unawares in
a tree, the valley must sing songs, and mountains must radiate human,
maternal warmth. One cannot enjoy a landscape painting unless it is
perceived animistically, unless it is human in some way. Not that Muslim
painters did not paint landscapes, they did sometimes far more effective
than the impressionistic painters of France and Holland. What did they
eschew, however, was painting a landscape for its own sake. A human
being must be there to give actuality to natural scenery. Without human
beings nature is dead and insignificant. For Muslim painters a scene of
natural beauty is incomplete and incomprehensible with the observer
being there in the painting in one form or another. It is a new mode of
perception; seeing nature as an inter-play between natural stimuli and
the human eye. Western critics of Muslim art do not see this point. They
dismiss the entire Muslim painting as sentimental and romantic because
it is not interested in nature *per say*.

3. Muslim painters did not introduce perspective in their paintings.
Their paintings seem almost all – except those made in the time of
Jahangir under the impact of Dutch and Flemish painters – to be lacking
in depth. The third dimension and the changes it causes in human
perception are ignored by the Muslim painters. Perhaps the reason is
that they are interested in distant objects as well as in near objects.
An object far away is as much relevant to the central figure as the
object in the forefront. Why not bring it forward in imagination,
observe it telescopically at it was and paint it in its full magnitude?

One finds a similar spectacle in some of the illustrations of the *Shah
Nameh*. There in a single painting several episodes are brought together
to make a complete story. The Western critic is baffled, and even when
he praises such “erratic” paintings he does so condescendingly. The
reason he does not understand this style of painting is that he is alien
in spirit of the Muslim conception of time. For a Muslim, time and
eternity are only two facet of the same reality, he does not have to
create a dichotomy between time and eternity, he does not have to make
time illusory in order to satisfy his longing for eternity. A Muslim is
expected to try constantly to create eternity out of time. No wonder
then that Muslim painting tried to combine all dimensions in a single
unity and all phases of time in one whole.

4. Muslim painters did not paint darkness. In their painting all is
light and colourful. The resplendent sun seems to cover their canvas and
paper. There are no dark shades or black shadows haunting the painting
like ghosts threatening life with primordial dangers. Their painting is
a painting of luminous tints and hues and colours. This again reflects a
singularly strange attitude, especially to the Western, for he can
wallow in darkness.[^2] Darkness and fondness for darkness are typically
pagan characteristics.

It connotes qualities which emanate from a state of pre-consciousness.
You cannot be conscious and remain in darkness. Darkness is a dragon
which devours distinctions, discriminations, and differentiations.
Darkness also characterizes a condition of stark individualism, when the
individual is sundered from society and finds himself in the grip of
absolute helplessness. Modern Western sensibility which is completely
unconnected with Muslim culture cannot appreciate the absence of
darkness. It seeks an external representation of the black despair
within. But black individualistic despair was no part of Muslim
consciousness.

As we have seen, Islam emphasizes a serious commitment to history. In a
growing Muslim society the individual, apart from being an individual,
is a social being *par excellence*. Sociality is a *raison d’etre* of an
individual. The helplessness of an individual and the resulting
spiritual darkness, therefore, is a condition alien to Muslim
consciousness. Perhaps, when the Muslim individual is faced with rapid
industrialization, he may for a time get into despair and thus enter the
realm of darkness in order to emerge again with light. Of course, there
were Muslim mystics and they did come at times face to face with the
phases of inner darkness, but they were people who never painted.

5. Muslim painting, consciously or unconsciously, employed symbols which
represent mystical states. Sometimes endless curves with no beginning or
end stand for the state of bewilderment in which nothing outside seems
to gratify spiritual longings. At other times *mandala*[^3] forms are
used to indicate the state of spiritual wholeness which mystics desire
to achieve. Western critics do not see these motifs in Muslim art and
like to dismiss it as merely decorative and ornamental. Unless one sees
Muslim art in its proper historical perspective and imaginatively flows
with the stream of Muslim history and ideology, one is not likely to
appreciate the significance of this unique idiom.

6. Muslim painting, especially in Iran, was devoted to the expression of
a single emotion in one painting. Every detail of the subject was
perceived and made use of for an effective rendering of the subtle
nuances of that emotion. The trees and flowers were not there to fill a
background; they were there to add to the melody flowing from a
painting. Most of the Persian miniature paintings are like orchestras in
which each object painted contributes to the symphony. This unique
characteristic of Muslim painting may have emanated – as Basil Gray
suggests – from the mystical and pantheistic tendencies of the Persians,
they, perhaps, regarded every object of nature as manifesting God. But a
more plausible explanation of this singular quality can, perhaps, be
found in the Muslim conception of time.

Muslims regard duration as continuous and eternal, time as
discontinuous, universe for them is new at each moment. One continuously
hears the sound of *kun ja-yakun*.[^4] For a Muslim artist, therefore,
simultaneity of eternity is far more significant then succession of
events. The emotional meaning of an object is implicitly contained in
the total situation. This attitude is hard to grasp for the Occidental
mind. That is why we find that the Western critics of Muslim art, by
trying to fit its mode of expression in the pre-conceptions and
categories of their own culture, misunderstand and distort the essence
of its individuality.

The nearest parallel to this conception is the Chinese conception of
synchronicity embodied in their religious classics, such as *I Ching*.
Since each moment is an act of God, the Muslim painter sees every
temporal and spatial situation as somehow transcending serial time and
geometrical space. His peculiar perception gives a painting its
particular individuality, the fact that his eager vision selects a
peculiar array of objects imparts to its uniqueness. But the fact that
this array is the manifestation of the Divine gives it an aura of
universality. Both particularity and universality are, thus, combined
and synthesized in a single work of art.

7. Muslim paintings – again especially miniatures – are illustrations of
literary and religious classics. Several explanations of this peculiar
characteristic have been advanced. But the only explanation which is
consistent with the general Muslim attitude is that for a Muslim nature
is itself in illustration of the Word of God. *Kun fa-yakun* are the
words which translate themselves into the sensible world. The world is
Logos in matter and motion. Muslim consciousness is rooted in the
awareness of a profound inter-relationship between word and fact. Word
seems to be the life blood of the universe.

This point will become clearer if we attend to a parallel recently drawn
by Dr. W. C. Smith between the Christian “Eucharist” and the
memorization of the Qur’an by Muslims. Dr Smith writes, “The Koran, in
formal Muslim doctrine pre-existent and uncreated is for the Moslem the
one tangible thing within the natural realm that is super-natural, the
point where eternal has broken through into time. By Koran one means, of
course, not the ‘ink and paper’ but the content of the Koran, its
message, it words, ultimately its meaning. The *hafiz* (freely, the
‘memorizer’, but, more literally, the ‘apprehender’) has in some sense
appropriated this himself, has interiorized it in a way that could
conceivably suggest to a Christian some analogy with what happens when
the Christian in the Communion service appropriates God, the
super-natural, the embodiment of eternity in time.”

This parallel is extremely valuable. For where Christians have to
incorporate the body of Christ in order to have communion with the
God-head, Muslims have to incorporate the words of the Qur’an so that
they would have communion with God. The eternal Word and its meaning are
one, they cannot be separated. And it is the Word which gives spiritual
sustenance to the believer.

If we look at the artistic illustrations composed by Muslims painters
from this point of view, we may appreciate the significance of this
tendency better and more adequately. The word for a Muslim has a
compelling power of creation: his spirit must fly to eternity on the
wings of words. Not only that, these are the only wings which can take
him there. Hence, every sensuous experience which inspires a painter to
express himself in colour and line, in order to be integrated in his
personality, must be capable of verbal expression. The rise and fall of
sensuousness must be capable of being regulated by words.[^5]

Muslim painting, especially in its early phases, was not an autonomous
medium of expression. It was subsidiary to literature. The earliest
Muslim paintings were the results of the efforts of painters to
illustrate some of the classical books. They derived their content from
these books and their form from their need to decorate and make
beautiful. The passion to illustrate the written word is not something
peculiarly Muslim, it has inspired painters like Delacroix to illustrate
Goethe’s *Faust* and artists like Michelangelo to point Christian myths
and legends on the interior walls of cathedrals and churches. It is
significant that the grand old man of painting in Pakistan, ‘Abd
al-Rahman Chughta’i, won his reputation as a great artist by his
illustration of *Diwan-i Ghalib*. When painters, whether of the East or
of the West, seek grand visions and cosmic views to colour their
artistic endeavours, they illustrate great books. Perhaps the need for
these visions is perennial.

Let us now substantiate these points by have a brief a glance at the
history of Muslim painting.

C. Historical Background
------------------------

Muslim painting started its career under the Umayyads, who as rulers and
conquerors were mainly without any puritanical disdain for luxury. The
palaces they built were expressions of the theme of splendour and
richness, which gradually came to dominate all aspects of their lives.
One finds the walls of these palaces made beautiful and attractive with
paintings inspired by various colourful motifs. About 94/712, the
Umayyad Caliph, Walid I, built a desert lodge at Qusair ‘Amrah. This
romantic palace was decorated by wall paintings representing allegories
and various kinds of animals and plants.

The ‘Abbasids went further. In their pagan pursuit of imaginative luxury
they made the human figure loom large in their paintings. In their
paintings girls dance, musicians sings and play on instruments, animals
stroll, and birds fly and twitter. These figures are enclosed in
circular disks. One finds a resplendent example of this tendency in the
palace at Samarra built in the third/ninth century. Side by side with
these paining one sees the opposite motif. On wooden boards are painted
plants in white, red, yellow, and blue. In these paintings human and
animal motifs are absent.

But the early ‘Abbasids made their artistic influence felt more in Iran
than perhaps anywhere else. Here one sees several palaces decorated with
frescoes in diverse styles and various modes of execution. Some of them
are only in black and white, while in others all colours are employed to
create the desired effect. The black and white paintings portray human
movements, while the multi-coloured paintings depict human and
diabolical figures, male and female, with and without haloes, heads,
busts and dresses. The plaster niches found at Nishapur are made of
different designs, but all have the vase or goblet motif; these vases
seem to radiate palmettes against a blue background and have a
triangular shape reposing on top. Sometimes two magical eyes diffuse a
spell over the entire niche. In Egypt, beautiful frescoes were made
under the patronage of the Fatimid Caliphs in the fourth/tenth century.
They had several themes – geometrical patterns, birds, palmettes moving
out of central figures, human beings holding drinking cups in their
hands. One also sees the dawn of miniature painting in this period.

D. Book Illustrations
---------------------

In the seventh/13th century, the ‘Abbasids began to patronize
illustrations of classical works of science and mysticism. The impetus
probably came from some of the illustrations made by painters in the
second/eighth and third/ninth centuries under the influence of Mani, the
great Iranian painter. The ‘Abbasids probably employed the Nestorian or
Jacobite Christians to illustrate the books they regarded as classics.
The main difference in content between the Manichaean illustrations and
Muslim illustrations was that the former were mainly representations of
religious themes and the latter devoted by and large to making the
sciences of the body and the soul sensuously attractive to the human
eye. For instance, the Arabic translation of Dioscorides’ *Materia
Medica* was illustrated profusely by ‘Abd Allah ibn al-Fadl. Similarly,
other books dealing with animals and plants in a scientific manner had
their themes illustrated by skillful painters of the time.

The distinctive feature of these illustrations was that they treated of
operational themes. They dealt with subjects such as doctors preparing
medicines or surgeons doing operations. These illustrations have a very
simple style. Rich and powerful colours make the theme throb and pulsate
with energy and vivacity, rosettes and palmettes cover and decorate the
apparel and garments, but the background is only just indicated,
generally with a few conventionalized trees.

One book which was distinguished for its remarkable illustrations was
Hariri’s *Maqamat*. Its illustrations were done by a powerful painter of
the time, Yahya ibn Mahmud of Wasit, conveniently known as al-Wasiti.
This painter copied and illustrated the most important copy of the
*Maqamat* in 635/1237. These magnificent paintings deal with everyday
life. They show ordinary Muslims travelling in the desert, praying in
the mosque, drinking in the tavern, and reading in the library. There
realism is enchanting, their conception is bold, their strokes are sure
and vital, and the line they imprint is fine and delicate.

In this period, *Kalilah wa-Dimmah*, a Hindu book of stories, which was
translated into Arabic by ibn Muqaffa‘, was quite a popular fount of
inspiration for the painters who aspired to make their mark as
illustrators. One of the manuscripts prepared in 628/1230 show minute
observation of details and an excellent realization of the animal motif,
but here, as elsewhere, the third dimension is only barely and
abstractly indicated. In northern Mesopotamia under the Saljuq Atabegs
painting seems to have acquired considerable popularity. Nur al-Din
Mahmud, the Urtuq Sultan of Diyar-Bakr, asked al-Jazari, the great
inventor, to write a treatise on the work he had done. Several
illustrated copies of this book called “Automata” can be seen in the
various museums of the world.

In Iran, during this period of history, only wall paintings and ceramics
portraying figures and legends in comparatively subdued colours were
being made. Turquoise, blue, or white serving as background would shoot
forth gold, silver, green, violet, etc.

E. The Mongo School
-------------------

The Mongols brought with them a deep fondness for the Chinese art. The
painters of Mesopotamia, as we have seen, themselves possessed a great
sense of realism. This sense was made more acute and sharp by their
contact with the Chinese culture and Fine Arts. The Chinese artists had
achieved considerable excellence and maturity in painting landscapes.
The Muslim artists assimilated in their idiom not only on themes
selected by the Chinese painters but also their method of
impressionistic painting in black and white. Ibn Bakhtishu‘’s *Manafi‘i
al-Hayawan* is the earliest Iranian manuscript of the Mongol times.
Several copies of this book were made in different styles, sometimes
adopting mild tones and at other times venturing forth in bolder
colours.

The most important influence that Mongol painting received in this
period was that of a master mind. Rashid al-Din, the man who wrote,
among other books, *Jami‘ al-Tawarikh*, a history of the Mongols, was,
above all, a devotee of learning and arts in the pursuit of which he
founded a colony of people whose main business was the enrichment of
life with knowledge. Several artists, provided with accommodation and
amenities of life in that colony, were asked to copy and illustrate
books, mainly his own. The miniature painting in all these books –
especially those in *Jami‘ al-Tawarikh* – show a peculiarly sober but
fascinating blend of the Iranian and Chinese features of artistic
expression. Some of the copies of this book can be assigned to a later
period because they suggest developments which occurred only in the
beginning of the eighth/14th century.

Quite a few of the painters of this period copied and illustrated *Shah
Namehi* of Firdausi. Again, there are several variations of the
composite influences of the Chinese and Iranian styles of painting. The
realism of these paintings is particularly marked, the expressions are
distinctly individualized, and the details are painstakingly portrayed.

F. The Timurid School
---------------------

Then came Timur. He was the man who left a trail of blood behind
whenever he ransacked a country. Nonetheless, he was a great lover of
arts. When he conquered a country he would take special care not to kill
the artists. He would then take them to Baghdad, where under his
patronage they copied and illustrated manuscripts. But true artistic
greatness was achieved only under the inspiring benevolence of Shah Rukh
(Timur’s son) who made Herat his home. Shah Rukh was interested in books
and he inspired many artists to calligraphy and decorate the famous and
important books of the time.

Khalil, a great painter, who was regarded second only to Mani, was the
leading figure in art at Shah Rukh’s Court. Shah Rukh’s son, Baisunqur
Mirza, founded an academy of book arts with a large staff. Among the
important painters were Amir Shahi and Ghiyath al-Din. *Shah Nameh* was
still the fount of themes for the Court painters, but they also
addressed themselves to mystical and romantic subjects – such as those
found in Nizami’s *Khamseh* and Sa‘di’s *Gulistan* and *Bustan*. The
vivid and lyrical imagery of those paintings suggest that the painters
modified and changed their style to suit the novel subjects they had
discovered. At Shiraz, where an independent school flourished at this
time, colours were milder and cooler, and the style, though not vastly
different, was definitely less skilful than that of the school at Herat.

Another book, *Diwan-i Jami*, was also a popular source of inspiration
for the painters of that period. ‘Abd al-Karim of Khwarizm calligraphed
and illustrated Maulana Jami’s *Diwan* at the end of the ninth/15th
century. In Samarqand a book on astronomy was also illustrated for the
library of Ulugh Beg.

G. The Great Behzad
-------------------

The Iranian historian Khwandamir wrote thus about Behzad in the middle
of the tenth/16th century, “He sets before us marvellous forms and
rarities of his art, his draughtsmanship, which is like the brush of
Mani, has caused the memorials of all the painters of the world to be
obliterated, and his fingers endowed with miraculous qualities have
wiped out the pictures of all the artists among the sons of Adam. A hair
of his brush, through its mastery, has given life to the lifeless form.”

This great painter began his career with Sultan Hussain Mirza at Herat
at the end of the ninth/15th century. Later, he came to Tabriz in the
early tenth/16th century to work under Shah Isma‘il. It has been said
that when a battle was raging against the Turks, Behzad and Shah Mahmud
al-Nishapuri were hidden by Shah Nasir in a cave. In 929/1522, Behzad
was appointed Director of the Royal Library. The two well-known
manuscripts that Behzad illustrated were *Khamseh* and *Bustan*. One
sees in these paintings a keen perception of form, a highly sensitive
and subtle sense for colour, experimentation with colours to evolve new
*Gestalten*, and novel patterns of feeling and awareness. These
paintings show that Behzad had an astonishingly strong consciousness of
the opposites: of dramatic action and immobility, of blending peace and
unrest, of combining generality with individuality. *Zafar Nameh*, a
biography of Timur, was also illustrated by Behzad. Besides, he
illustrated Maulana Jami’s *Diwan*, and his illustrations show his
experimental genius at its best.

The most outstanding student of Behzad was Qasim ‘Ali, who carried on
the style and artistic tradition, set by his inimitable master. Qasim
‘Ali, who acquired the experimental spirit of Behzad, became well known
as a painter of faces.

One thing that strikes the modern connoisseur of painting is that
Behzad, who unfortunately did not outgrow the narrow confines of
miniature painting, had an intense awareness of the *mandala*. One has
only to look at his masterpiece, “The Dancing Dervishes,” which, apart
from its ravishing curves and powerful lines suggesting movement and
rhythm, is a beautiful *mandala* figure. The dervishes make a moving and
dancing circle which seems to revolve around a centre. The centre is
again not bereft of content. It is filled with four dervishes dancing
hand in hand.

This painting gives a lie to all those Western critics of Muslim
painting who have repeatedly charged Muslim art, almost *ad nauseam*,
with being almost entirely decorative. This painting is one of the
illustrations in *Diwan-i Jami*, a Book of poems with a markedly
mystical content. Here is a painter who not only illustrates but also
absorbs the mystical content in his artistic forms. *Mandala* represents
spiritual wholeness. It seems that Behzad was painting his powerful
pictures not to produce decorative effects but to answer a spiritual
need. It was a response to his spiritual longing, a colourful realm
discovered by his spiritual quest, as answer to the prayers of his soul.
When one looks at “The Dancing Dervishes,” one finds that compared with
it the most renowned *mandala* paintings by the mystics of other creeds
pale into insignificance. The spell that Behzad’s paintings cast on the
beholder can radiate only from a whole soul. It is not the work of a
mere decorator.

H. The Safawid School
---------------------

Herat continued to throb with art even when Behzad shifted from there to
Tabriz. Behzad’s influence was not passing or transitory, it stayed
because it continued to move and stir the Muslim soul. Amir Khusrau
Dihlawi’s *Khamsea* was copied at Balkh and was illustrated by one of
Behzad’s students. It contained some very significant miniature
paintings. The great calligrapher ‘Ali al-Hussaini copied and
illustrated ‘Arif’s Go-i *Chaugan* in 930/1523. Similarly, *Diwan-i
Hafiz* was illustrated by Shaikhzadeh, a student of Behzad, and Sultan
Muhammad who had an individual style. Sultan Muhammad also copied
Nizami’s *Khameseh* and produced some very outstanding and superb
paintings. In his paintings he introduced new colour schemes and new
ways of perception.

Sultan Muhammad was a Court painter *par excellence*. He was not only an
intimate and close friend of Shah Tehmasp, but also taught him how to
paint. He illustrated Nizami’s *Khamseh* and Firdausi’s *Shah Nameh*.
Along with his teacher Mirak, he created a new style of painting. His
fingers are more sophisticated and his background is richer in detail
and ornament.

Sultan Muhammad also painted some portraits of charming young men and
lovely ladies. Some of his portraits are those of Shah Tehmasp himself.

The second half of the tenth/16th century saw the rise to eminence of
another painter, Ustad Muhammadi, son and student of Sultan Muhammad.
The miniatures painted by this great artist reveal an enchanting style
and a sense of composition unprecedented in the history of Muslim
painting. He took his subjects from everyday life and imparted an
inimitable rhythm to all the details of his figures. Trees, wild and
tamed animals, men and women enter his paintings and become immortally
and irrepressibly alive.

I. The Bukhara School
---------------------

In the early tenth/16th century, Bukhara became the centre of hectic
creative activity. Mahmud Madhahhib, a student of the famous
calligrapher Mir ‘Ali, excelled in painting love scenes. He also
illustrated Nazami’s *Makhzan al-Asrar*. Several other painters painted
miniatures in this century and their work shows the influence of Behzad
and his school. But they did not blindly imitate Behzad; they accepted
his influence and developed a new style. They experimented with colours
and afforded local touch to the figures they made. One painter
illustrated Sa‘di’s *Bustan* and another Muhyi Lari’s *Futuh
al-Haramain*. One finds these paintings beautiful and decorative, but
lacking in the spiritual fire which was characteristic of Behzad’s work.

They were bereft of the ardent longings which animate paintings of the
Herat school. They are expressions of artistic decay which set in at
about this time in Iran and other Muslim countries. The principal reason
of this decline seems to be the desire of clinging to the same old form
of miniature painting and a refusal to experiment with other media of
expression. That is why in Isfahan, under the patronage of Shah ‘Abbas,
illustrations were made but only of works of much lower calibre than
*Shah Nameh* or *Diwan-i Hafiz*. Paintings were made to portray scenes
from books like *Chihal Sutun* and *‘Ala Kapi*. At this time Rida’-i
‘Abbasi were regarded as the most outstanding painter of Iran.

His tinted drawings throb with life and vigour. One finds in them
undulating curves flowing with facility into the patterns they weave and
mild strokes emphasizing the ends. This was indeed a breath of fresh
air. Life itself, rather than books, became the fount of inspiration.
This was a great change, but it could not be felt as such because great
changes need great artists to sustain them. Unfortunately, neither
Rida’-i ‘Abbasi nor anyone else had the powerful vision of a Behzad or a
Sultan Muhammad. Consequently, the 11th/17th and 12th/18th centuries,
people imitated and admired Rida’-i ‘Abbasi, but no new movement came
into being.

J. The Turkish Painting
-----------------------

The origin and development of Turkish painting is still wrapped in
mystery. However, this much we know that in 855/1480 Sultan Muhammad II
invited Gentile Bellini to his Court and commissioned him to paint his
portrait. In the tenth/16th century Shah Quli and Wali Jan, the Iranian
painters, came to Constantinople and became Court painters. These
artists selected the houris of paradise as their subject-matter. Shah
Quli achieved excellence as a painter of curved leaves and Wali Jan
became distinguished for the elegance of his lines. Some Iranian
painters illustrated “History of the Ottoman Sultans” and *Sulaiman
Nameh*, a book of stories by Firdausi of Brusa. The main distinction of
these painters was that they did a good deal of experimental work in
colours.

K. The Mughul Painting
----------------------

Babur, the first Mughul Emperor of India (933 – 937/1526 – 1530) was a
philosopher and great lover of nature. It seems that he patronized Fine
Arts and brought with the traditions of Behzad and the Bukhara school.
Babur’s son, Humayun, invited Khuwaja ‘Abd al-Samad of Shiraz and Mir
Sayyid ‘Ali to his Court at Kabul and asked them to illustrate *Amir
Hamzah*. The paintings they made of this fantastic story were 1400 in
number. Akbar, Humayun’s son, was a unique patron of arts. He built a
city, Fatehpur Sikri, where he decorated his palaces with mural
paintings and founded an academy of Arts.

This was an institution for the creation and promotion of a native
school of painting. Painters of this school were influenced by Behzad
and the early Timurid paintings. Nizami’s *Haft Paikar* was copied and
illustrated by the painters at Akbar’s Court in a style which had a
peculiar blend of two traditions: Behzad School and the early Timurid
School. They show a local touch in so far as the content is concerned,
but in the selection of colours and design they were markedly Iranian.

Hindu painters, working under the Mughul influence, illustrated
manuscripts dealing with the lives and exploits of Timur, Babur, and
Akbar. Their paintings reveal a remarkable mixture of the Hindu,
Iranian, and European influences. For the first time in Muslim art one
notices the presence of perspective and a clear visualization of the
third dimension.

Jahangir (1014 – 1038/1605 – 1628) carried on the tradition of his great
ancestors, and he carried it much further. He liked art to be
representative of life as it is lived in the present and not a mere
illustration of the wisdom of books. Thus, in his time realistic
painting of plants and animals were produced in abundance. On his
travels he would take his Court painter with him and urge to portray
significant historical events in their paintings. Mansur, Murad, and
Manohar were distinguished painters of his time. These artists painted
rare birds, animals, and flowers in an exquisitely realistic style.

Jahangir and his nobles were also fond of getting their portraits made.
The famous portrait painters of this time were Bishandas, Manohar,
Muhammad Nadir, and Abu al-Hassan. Abu al-Hassan was Jahangir’s
favourite: he painted some beautiful miniatures and some very fine
portraits of Jahangir. Mughul painters also painted pictures
representing nobles and princes conversing with Hindu ascetics and
hermits. Shah Jahan, Jahangir’s son, was a devotee of portrait painting.
Some of his own portraits, made by artists at his Court, show acute
observation, elegance and subtlety in execution, and a deep sense of
colourfulness. Muhammad Fakhr Allah Khan and Mir Hashim were two of the
important painters of his time. Dara Shikoh, Shah Jahan’s son, who never
ruled, was a great admirer and patron of arts – but after him, that is,
in the 12th/18th and 13th/19th centuries, Mughul art suffered a complete
decline.

Bibliography
------------

Sir Tomas Arnold and Alfred Gillaume (Eds.) *The Legacy of Islam*,
Oxford University Press, 1931; V. F. Calverton, *making of Man*, Modern
Library, New York, 1931: Wilfred Cantwell Smith, *Some Similarities and
Differences Between Christianity and Islam*, Macmillan, New York, 1959;
M. S. Dimand, *A Handbook of Muhammadan Art*, Harsdale House, New York,
1947; S. Gray, *Persian Painting*, Hatsford, London, 1948;

B. Gray and Goard Andre, *Iran, Persian Miniatures*, Unesco World Art
Series, 1956; Sir Muhammad Iqbal, *The Reconstruction of Religious
Thought in Islam*, Sheikh Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1958; C. G. Jung,
*Practice of Psycho-therapy*, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1954;
Laurence Binyon, *Spirit of Man in Asian Art* Harvard University Press,
Harvard, 1936; Louis Massdignon, “”Time in Islamic Thought,” *Eranos
Yearbook*, Rhein-Verlag, Zurich, 19514; R. P. Wilson, *Islamic Art*,
Ernest Benn, London, 1957.

[^1]: “Prayer, then, whether individual or associative, is an expression
of man’s inner yearning for a response in the awful silence of the
universe. It is a unique process of discovery whereby the searching ego
affirms itself in the very moment of self-negation, and thus discovers
its own worth and justification as a dynamic factor in the life of the
universe.” Sir Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1958 p. 92,

[^2]: Thus, Bachofen writing about the characteristics of matriarchal
societies regards preference for darkness as an important attribute of
such pagan cultures. Bachofen says, “By no means less significant is a
second expression of the same fundamental law, that of pre-dominance of
night over day born of her maternal womb. In antiquity... preference of
night over the day (was) associated with ... a dominant maternal
influence. In this instance two hoary customs and usages, councils and
court assemblies, that is, the preference for darkness for the exercise
of social functions, show that we are not dealing with a philosophic
theory of later origin, but an actual mode of life. Added to these
observations comes the preference of the sinister aspect of life and
death over its bright aspect of creation, the pre-dominance of the dead
over the living and of sorrow over joy.”

[^3]: ‘Images of the goal,” says Jung, “are mostly concerned with ideas
of the mandala type, that is, the circle and the quaternity. They are
the plainest and most characteristic representations of the goal. Such
images unite the opposites under the sign of the quaternio, i.e. by
combining them in the form of cross, or else they express the idea of
wholeness through the circle or sphere.”

[^4]: Louis Massignon, “Time in Islamic Thought,” Eranos Yearbook,
Rhein-Verlang, Zurich, 1951.

[^5]: In a footnote in his paper on Christianity and Islam, Dr. Cantwell
Smith writes, “It is the word (Kalam) of God, it is not He nor is it
other than He.” He further quotes from Al-Nasafi, “We do not say that
the verbal expressions (alfaz) and letters are eternal...The (uncreated)
Qur’an, the Speech of Allah, does not reside in the hearts, nor in the
tongues, nor in the ears, but it is an Eternal idea subsisting in the
essence of Allah.” The last line in al-Nasafi’s quotations, however,
suggests that the Eternal Idea cold be grasped without the Word. But
this is a mistaken view of Muslim consciousness. In Muslim consciousness
the Word is an integral part of the total meaning of God. That is why a
Muslim, however rationalistically oriented he might be, will always
admire –covertly or overtly – the heroic fight that Imam Ahmad bin
Hanbal put up against the doctrine of al-Qur’an khalq1-Allah , that is,
the Qur’an is the creation of God. One may agree with Dr. Smith when he
writes, “By this act (i.e., memorizing) the Moslem is, as it were,
taking the gift of God up off the book and paper in which it is
enshrined and incorporating it within himself, so that it becomes for
him alive and inalienably personal.” It is quite true that the spoken
word which is incorporated in the personality of the memorizer (hafiz).
After all, the Qur’an descended as the spoken word of God.


