Foreword
========

The Laws and Regulations of Islam are divided into two major and
distinct categories – the first being those laws that deal with a human
being’s relationship to his Creator and Master. The second category is
those laws that regulate and govern our relationship with each other.
Seeing as how in the branch of Islamic Law, known is Fiqh, 90% of the
rules govern our interaction with each other, it is a requirement that
we become familiar with how we should carry ourselves when around
members of the same sex and more importantly, those of the opposite
sex.

<p dir="rtl">
و سلام عليكم و رحمة الله و بركاته
</p>


**Notes before you read this Book**

1. This book contains the fatawa of eight Maraja’ Taqlid, three of whom
have passed away, namely: Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid Ruhullah
al-Musawi al-Khumayni, Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza
al-Gulpaygani, and Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali al-Araki.
The other five Maraja’, who are presently living, May Allah protect them
all, include: Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Behjat,
Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Nasir Makarim Shirazi, Ayatullah
al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Husaini as-Seestani, Ayatullah
al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Mirza Jawad Tabrizi, Ayatullah al-Udhma
al-haj ash-Shaykh Fazil Lankarani.

1. The actual reference from the Arabic and Farsi texts of the various
Maraja’ Taqlid in this book have been omitted. As for the rulings for
each of the Maraja’ we have used symbols, which will be mentioned at the
end of this section, for brevity. In the event that one or more of the
Maraja’ have not been mentioned in any ruling, this means that we were
not able to get a hold of his rulings in that matter.

1. The main ruling which is given is in accordance tot he rulings of
Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni, and
in the event of any difference between his rulings and those of the
other Maraja’, the opinions of those who differ will follow the original
ruling. If there is no difference between the rulings, then we will only
mention (with their appropriate symbols), those Maraja’ who share the
same opinion.

1. Since the views of eight of the Maraja’ Taqlid of the Shi’a World
have been mentioned, in case the Marja’ to whom one is doing taqlid to
expresses an Ihtiyat Wajib, with ease the reader is able to refer one of
the Maraja’ who have expressed a ruling (perform Ruju’).

1. Although we have referred to all of the printed books detailing the
various laws of Islam from each of the Maraja’, but just to be
completely satisfied that what we have compiled is correct, we had three
of the major scholars who work in the offices of each of the Maraja’
look over our work.

1. For ease of reading, it is possible that the rulings we have
included in this book, which we may put forth as a “Rule”, may have been
posed to the office of the Marja’ in the form of a question, or
vice-versa.

1. The abbreviations for the Maraja’ Taqlid are as follows:

A

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali al-Araki

B

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Taqi al-Behjat

G

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani

K

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khumayni

L

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Fazil al-Lankarani

M

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Nasir Makarim al-Shirazi

S

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj as-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Husaini as-Seestani

T

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-haj ash-Shaykh Mirza Jawad al-Tabrizi


