Rules of Invitations (inviting People)
======================================

260 – Rule: It is not allowed to invite someone that one knows in the
event that he or she comes, will commit sins or things that go against
the laws of Islam, unless they keep an eye on them so that they do not
commit a sin. AGK

Therefore: It is not allowed to invite women or men that will initiate
vain or trivial things in the wedding gatherings.

To invite them is haram. B

Question: Is it permitted to invite someone that one knows if he/she
attends, will indulge in sins and evil acts?

Answer: It is wajib upon all Muslims to prevent and stop the spreading
of corruption. T

261 – Rule: It is haram to invite magicians with the purpose of having
them perform magic in the gatherings and one must refrain from this.
GK

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed to perform magic, and one
must refrain from inviting magicians. A

All forms of magic are haram - except if the work itself is permissible
and it is not counted as vain, and the aim of it (the magic) is not
something useless, rather it is logical and lawful. B

Question: Is it permitted to invite magicians with the purpose of
having them perform magic at a gathering?

Answer: Magic includes: demonstrating or passing something off that is
not real as real by performing an action very quickly, which normally
people would not perform. If this kind of work has an unlawful side,
such as causing harm to a believer, then it is haram. It is also not
permissible to invite one to perform these types of acts; and in other
than this, it is not haram and similarly, it is not a problem to invite
them (if these things are not being done). S

Magic and slight of hand, even if the person performing these things
announces to the people that what he is doing is not real, is still not
free from doubt and the believers must stay away from such things. L

It is wajib upon all Muslims to prevent and stop the spreading of
corruption. T

262 – Question: What is the ruling for watching magicians in the
following scenarios:

1. Live performances in the presence of the magician?

2. On the television?

Answer: In both scenarios, it is not haram. BT

Answer: Performing magic is not free from doubt, and the believers must
stay away from such things. L

263 – Rule: It is also haram to give money to magicians for their
performance. AKGL

Note: According to the fatawa of most of the Maraja, magic is not
allowed; similarly to invite one or a group of people to perform this
haram action, is also not allowed.

In the event that the magician is performing haram acts, then it is
also haram to give him money, and if he is not performing haram acts,
then it is not haram (to give him money). S


264 – Rule: It is haram to invite music performers to perform,
regardless whether it is a gathering for women or men. ABGKLMST

265 – Rule: It is not a problem to invite poets with the intention of
having them read poetry, or those poems in praise of the Prophet of
Islam and his Family, as long as it is not in a manner of singing.
ABGKLMST

266 – Rule: It is not a problem to invite the Ahl al-Kitab to these
kinds of gatherings, unless one knows that if they come they will commit
acts that go against the Sacred Laws of Islam, or that they will not
obey the rules of the religion, in which case, it is not allowed to
invite them. AGK

267 – Rule: It is not allowed to go to gatherings in which there are
vain and futile acts taking place, except in a case in which one will
try to prevent the others from sin. AGKL

Therefore: It is not allowed to go to gatherings in which one knows
that the people attending, or the hosts, will not practice the religion;
or they may perform vain acts; or there is a mixed gathering in which
the laws of the religion will not be observed, even if it is the wedding
ceremony of a close relative.

268 – Rule: It is not allowed to go to gatherings in which there are
vain and futile acts taking place, even if one knows that he or she will
not become involved in something haram. AGKL

269 – Rule: It is not allowed to invite a male photographer or
videographer to take the movie or photos of the bride and groom or other
non-Mahram, in the event that one has knowledge that they will not be
observing their proper clothing. AGK

It is wajib upon all Muslims to prevent those things that will aid in
the spreading of corruption. T

270 – Question: Is it allowed to take part in gatherings in which there
are vain and futile acts taking place, only to eat the food there?

Answer: In the event that the area has been cleared of all haram
things, then it is not a problem to take part (in that gathering) simply
for eating. L

271 – Question: Are we allowed to accept an invitation of non-Muslims
and go to their house, keeping in mind that when you go to someone’s
house you will have to invite them to your house as well. In the event
that we are permitted to go, is it permitted to eat their food other
than meat (such as tea and sweets) that they may serve or not?

Answer: It is not a problem to accept their invitation if you have a
(good) reason, but one must refrain from eating things that are known to
be Najis (or that one has knowledge are Najis). G

272 – Question: If a woman takes part in, or goes to a wedding ceremony
without the permission of her husband, but has the permission of her
father because it is possible that by the wife not attending the
gathering, it will cause sorrow among the hosts, but the husband does
not know the reason why the wife is attending the wedding, then in this
situation, is it against the rules of the religion for the wife to
attend the wedding ceremony (since she did not have the permission of
her husband)?

Answer: It is haram for the wife to leave the house without the
permission of her husband and it does not matter if the woman’s father
has given her permission. G


**Rules Relating to the Preparation of Things for the Wedding
Ceremony**

273 – Rule: It is haram to plan any kind of vain and futile acts.
ABGKLMST

274 – Rule: It is not allowed to prepare or arrange for a room, hall or
any kind of atmosphere or surroundings, in which vain or futile acts
will take place, with the intention of having sins committed (such as
setting up an area for dancing or a musical performance). ABGKLMST

**Overall Rules**

275 – Rule: It is not allowed to prepare anything that can be used for
a haram act, if it is with the intention of using it for something
haram. ABGKLMST

276 – Rule: It is not allowed to purchase, borrow, etc… cassettes or
musical instruments for entertainment (that are haram). ABKLMST

It is not allowed at all to prepare anything for vain acts. G

277– Rule: It is haram to decorate the car with flowers, or honk the
horn in the streets of the city, if it draws the attention of
non-Maharim towards the bride or other women who have beautified
themselves, or if it disturbs the people. GKMT

**Rules Relating to the Wedding Party
Dancing**

278 – Rule: It is not allowed for men to dance, except if one wants to
dance for his wife. K

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, a man must not dance even if it is for his
wife. A

It is a problem for men to dance in gatherings of men, and according to
Ihtiyat Wajib, one must refrain from it. B

It is not allowed for a man to dance for any reason, even for his wife.
G

It is not a problem to dance for those of the same sex as long as
nothing haram is involved. L

The actual act of dancing is not haram, unless it is associated with a
haram act. T

279 – Question: Is it permitted for a man to dance for his wife?

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted. A

Answer; It is not permitted. G

Answer: It is not a problem. KL

Answer: It is not a problem, unless it is associated with a haram act.
T

280 – Question: What is the definition of dancing?

Answer: Any action that the general public would consider as dancing.
BGKLMST

281 – Rule: In the prohibition of dancing for men, there is no
difference in the types or ways it is performed. AGK

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted for a man to dance, and
in this ruling it does not make a difference as to what type of dancing
it is. B

The actual act of dancing is not haram unless it is associated with a
haram act, and in this ruling it does not make a difference as to what
type of dancing it is. LT

Therefore: There is no difference whether the dancing is specific to a
region or country, or one that may take place in various types of
gatherings, wedding gatherings or any other kind of dancing.

282 – Rule: Similarly in the prohibition of dancing, it does not make
any difference if the men dance in a group or alone; with musical
instruments or without; and whether the on-lookers are non-Mahram or
not. AGK

Dancing, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, in its entirety is a problem and
it must be avoided. B

If the dancing is in the presence of non-Mahram, or it is accompanied
by music or is associated with any other haram act, then it is not
permitted. LT

283 – Question: What is the ruling for a man to dance in private where
there is no one else to see him?

Answer: Dancing in every way is a problem. A

Answer: Dancing in every form is not permitted and according to Ihtiyat
Wajib, it must be avoided. B

Answer: This dancing comes from the same root as vain and futile
amusements. G

Answer: In the event that it is not associated with a haram act, then
dancing in itself is not a problem. LT

284 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted for women
to dance anywhere, whether it is at wedding parties, birthdays, etc… and
the only exception is the dancing of the woman for her husband. GK

Therefore: Women are not permitted to dance at wedding parties, etc…
even if non-Mahram men are not present.

Note: In some of the books of questions and answers from the late
Ayatullah Khomeini that have been printed, there is a ruling that says,
‘It is not clear whether it is haram for women to dance in the presence
of other women’ has been mentioned. These questions, along with the
ruling ‘It is not permitted, according to Ihtiyat Wajib’, are no
different from each other. Thus, sometimes a Mujtahid may not be
completely sure if a specific act is forbidden and in that ruling he
will express his opinion as an Ihtiyat Wajib.

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, women are not permitted to dance even for
their husbands. A

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, women are not permitted to dance even in
gatherings of other women. B

Dancing in itself is not haram, unless it is associated with a haram
act. LT

285 – Question: Is it permitted for women to dance in wedding parties
in the event that only her Maharim are present?

Answer: It is not permitted. ABGK

Answer: It is not permitted unless the (only) one who is watching is
her husband. T

Therefore: It is not permitted for women to dance in those specific
gatherings that take place before the reading of the marriage contract
and those that take place after the wedding, even if those who are
taking part are her sister, brother, mother, aunt, or any other close
family members.

286 – Question: What is the ruling for a woman dancing in private such
that there is no one who can see her?

In its entirety, dancing is problematic. A

It is from the same root of vain and futile acts. G

287 – Rule: In the rulings which state that dancing is forbidden, there
is no difference in the type of dancing, and any action or movement that
the general public would consider as dancing (except for one’s husband),
is not permitted. GK

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, all forms of dancing are forbidden - even
for one’s husband, and in this ruling there is no difference between the
various types of dancing. A

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted for a woman to dance in
women’s gatherings, and in this ruling, there is no difference between
the various types of dancing. B

In itself, dancing is not a problem, unless it is associated with a
haram act, and in this ruling there is no difference between the various
types of dancing. LT

**Music**

288 – Rule: It is not allowed for men or women to play or to listen to
entertaining music, even if it with an instrument other than a musical
one such as a pail, drum, etc… ABGKLST

289 – Rule: It is not allowed to play cassettes that have entertaining
music on them in men’s gatherings. BGKLST

290 – Question: Please inform us what is meant by entertaining music?

Answer: Music that is used in vain and gatherings of amusement. BGKST

291 – Question: Please inform us how to differentiate between music
that is entertaining music and music that is not, especially since the
common people differ concerning one particular type of music. Those who
used to listen to music in the past for example, would say that it is
entertaining music, and others that have not heard that type of music
will say that it is not entertaining music; in either scenario, what is
one’s responsibility in this difference? Is it permitted to hear such
types of music?

Answer: The basis of determining entertaining music is either one’s own
certainty that that kind of music is entertaining music, or else one can
refer to the common people. In the event that one is in doubt, it is not
a problem to listen to it. ABKLMS

Answer: It is not allowed to listen to anything which may be considered
as music, whether it is entertaining music or not. G

Answer: The basis of determining entertaining music is either one’s own
certainty or those who have knowledge (of music) inform him.
Notwithstanding, in the event that someone else does not tell them
something that contradicts the speech of those who have knowledge
(regarding music). However, if the common people have a difference in
regards to a type of music such that the person doubts whether it is
entertaining music or not, then in this case, listening to it, according
to, Ihtiyat Wajib, is not permitted. T


292 – Question: What is the meaning of entertaining music?

Answer: Entertaining music is that which changes a person’s mental
state into one that is not normal, and brings about pleasure and joy.
L

293 – Question: Some of the music that is played by the Radio and TV of
the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting Company is the same music that
was played at the time of the despotic rule of the Shah, and some of it
is the music that has been taken from films from abroad, and yet another
type of the music played is that in which the vocals have been taken out
and it (too) was played at the time of the Shah – please inform us which
of these are permissible, and which of them are haram?

Answer: Music that is entertaining music is haram (even if played by
the Iranian Broadcasting Company), but as for music that one is doubtful
about, is not a problem (to listen to). BKLMS

Answer: It is haram to listen to any type of music, whether it is
played by the Iran Broadcasting Company or otherwise. G Answer:
According to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must keep away from music which one has
doubts about. T

294 – Question: Some of the songs, which are played by the Iranian
Broadcasting Company, have fast tunes which take a person out of his
‘normal’ state. What is the ruling on listening to such types of music?
What is the ruling on those types of music such as those with lyrics
about Shahid Mutahhari and others that cause one to fall into a state of
sorrow? Also, what is the ruling on making such types of music?

Answer: Listening to or making any type of music that is entertaining
music is not permitted. The basis for it to be haram is not that which
makes one happy or sad – rather, the basis for it being haram is whether
it is entertaining or not. ABKMLST

Answer: Listening or playing music is haram in its entirety. G

295 – Rule: It is not a problem to listen to or compose ‘War Songs’, or
music that is used at the time of war or ‘Azadari – in summary, whatever
type of music that is not considered as entertaining music that would
change one’s mental state (is allowed). ABKMST

Answer: Listening or playing music is haram in its entirety. G

296 – Question: If a person does not get stimulated or aroused by
listening to music, then what is the ruling on him listening to such
types (of music)?

Answer: The basis for music being haram is that which the general
public consider as entertaining music or otherwise, and it does not
matter if the individual becomes stimulated or not (by listening to it).
ABKLMST

Answer: Listening to music is haram in its entirety. G

**General Rules**

Therefore, listening to or producing any type of entertaining music is
haram, whether because of that (entertaining music), one would become
stimulated or not, and whether one would gain pleasure from it or not.
It makes no difference if the music brings one happiness or sadness;
whether it is traditional music or otherwise; Iranian or non-Iranian;
whether it be in a wedding ceremony or anywhere else.

In the event that the music is not entertaining music, then it is not a
problem to listen to or compose it. If a certain type of music is
doubtful (one does not know if it is entertaining music or not), then it
is not a problem for one to listen to or compose it.

297 – Question: Is it permissible to listen to certain types of music
with an intention that we are listening to it without the intention of
it being a vain and futile act? For example, music which is said to be
good to calm and soothe the body, or music that some doctors recommend
(their patients to listen to) for healing, or music that has been
composed for the war in which there is no intention of vain and futile
acts?

Answer: In all instances, as long as the music is not entertaining
music, then it is not a problem to listen to it. ABKLMST

Answer: It is haram to listen to any sound that the common people would
consider as music. G

298 – Rule: It is not permissible to compose any type of entertaining
music with any musical instrument, whether it be for a wedding ceremony
or any other type of gathering; whether it be for men or women; or
whether it is made by men or women. ABGKLMST

299 – Question: I usually watch television programs and with me are
children from age 5 up to 20, both girls and boys, students in school
and those in the hawza. Sometimes, I see things on the television that
go against the laws of Islam, and since I do not want to see the Islamic
culture and ideals of the children go bad, or that the children mix
haram and halal, or confuse bad from good, I point out (the lawful and
prohibited) to them. However, some people are very rude to me and tell
me that Imam Khomeini (may he rest in peace) considered all of the
television programs as being permissible (halal). Please inform me, that
as far as seeing non-Mahram women who are dressed up, laughing and
playing, and the music that is being played – what is one’s
responsibility?

Answer: Still (today), the television and radio programs are not 100%
Islamic, and amongst these (programs) there are those that are not
permissible, which, if special attention is paid to them, can be
corrected. However, it is necessary that one’s interaction with the
youth and young adults be such that their conviction in the actual
principles of the Islamic Republic are not caused to waver, since these
principles are the protection of the fundamentals of Islam and Shi’ism.
L

It is known that just as in the beginning of Islam, all of the rules of
Allah, step by step, were revealed and put into practice. In this system
(Government of Iran) too, which was preceded by a despotic regime that
was against Islam, we can not expect that all of the rules of Islam be
put into practice in a short period of time. Rather, it is necessary
that if this happens over a duration. It is hoped that in the near
future, all of the laws of Islam will be realized under the Islamic
Government. Thus, in those areas where one has certainty that something
forbidden is taking place, one must refrain from it; and no harm or
corruption will take place, then one should guide the others (to what is
right) as well.

300 – Rule: It is not a problem to make music by other than those
instruments that are used in vain and futile gatherings such as a copper
basin, metal bowl, pail and … with the condition that the music is not
entertaining music. ABKLMST

In all instances, composing music with instruments that are used for
vain and futile gatherings is haram and with other than these
(instruments) such as the copper basin and a metal bowl, according to
Ihtiyat Wajib, it is also not permitted. G

301 – Rule: It is haram to listen to entertaining music and singing,
however hearing these (without paying attention to them) is not a
problem. T

Summary: Sometimes a person listens to music and is actually paying
attention to it – this is haram; however sometimes a person simply hears
the music but is not paying attention to it – in this instance, it is
not a problem. An example of this is if music can be heard from the
house of one’s neighbors; or someone who is listening to entertaining
music drives by, but the person pays no attention to it – in these
instance, even if the person hears it, it is not a problem.

302 – Question: You have mentioned that it is not a problem for a woman
to dance for her husband. Is it permissible to listen to music while the
dancing is taking place?

Answer: If the music is entertaining music, then it is not allowed.
KLT

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible for a woman
to dance even for her husband, just as it is not permissible to listen
to entertaining music. A

Answer: It is completely not allowed to dance, and according to Ihtiyat
Wajib, one must refrain from this, even if it is a woman dancing for her
husband. It is (also) not permissible to listen to entertaining music.
B

It is completely not allowed to listen to music, however, it is
permitted for a woman to dance for her husband. G

**Reciting**

303 – Rule: It is not a problem for men to recite, as long as it is not
in the form of Ghina and there is no corruption involved in it. BKLMST

304 – Question: Please clarify to us what Ghina means. Does reciting
something in a pleasing way constitute Ghina?

Answer: A pleasing sound, or reciting something in a pleasing way in
itself does not constitute Ghina, rather Ghina can be explained as:
prolonging the sound, along with a change in the pitch in such a way
that is suited to vain and futile gatherings and assemblies of music and
sinning. K

Answer: It can be explained as something that takes place in the
gatherings of the people of corruption. B

Answer: Ghina is a sound in which the tone comes from the throat which
the common people refer to as singing, and it causes excitement in the
person, and is suitable for gatherings of vain and futile entertainment.
L

Answer: If a text, poems or prose is read in such a way that it would
be suitable for gatherings of vain and futile entertainment, then it
would be considered as Ghina. ST

305 – Question: In auspicious occasions, is it permissible to recite
songs or poems, or various supplications or poems in praise of the
Sinless Imams, peace be upon all of them, which contain a virtuous
message with a good voice?

Answer: It is haram to recite anything, whether it be a poem, prose,
Qur’an, or poem in praise of the Pure Imams in any form that would be
considered as Ghina, and reciting the Qur’an supplications or things
such as this in the form of Ghina would actually incur more of a
punishment. BKLMST

306 – Rule: It is not permitted for women to recite in the way that is
classified as Ghina, except in wedding ceremonies and those gatherings
that the common people usually hold before or after such a ceremony
(wedding), with the condition that non-Mahram men do not hear their
voices, although, according to Ihtiyat Mustahab, it is better to refrain
from this. KLST

Therefore: Women are permitted to recite things in the wedding
ceremonies and those that customarily take place both before and after
the wedding, with the condition that non-Mahram men do not hear their
voices, whether they sing as a group or individually.

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to recite in the form
of Ghina in wedding ceremonies. A

Only the woman who is singing in the wedding party where the pitch of
the sound goes up and down, and is related to lyrics which are not
obscene is an exception (these are allowed). However, it is a problem if
done in the presence of non-Mahram men. B

It is not far from being probable that to recite in a wedding ceremony,
that too on the night of the wedding, is permissible with the condition
that non-Mahram men do not hear their voices; although, according to
Ihtiyat Mustahab, it is better to refrain from this. G

Therefore: It is not permissible for women to recite in the form of
Ghina or in a form that would be considered as entertaining in the
wedding ceremonies or other than this. However, if the sound is not in a
way that may be considered as entertaining then it is not a problem.

307 – Question: Is it allowed for women in Nikah ceremonies, or in
programs for the birth anniversaries of the Ma’ sumin, peace be upon
them, to recite in a form of Ghina?

Answer: It is not permissible, and women must refrain from such, and
only in the wedding ceremony are women permitted to recite things, that
too in the event that no non-Mahram men can hear their voice. BGKLST

Answer: In every way, it is not permitted to recite in the form of
Ghina, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must not recite in the form
of Ghina in the wedding ceremonies as either. A

308 – Question: If the Nikah ceremony and wedding ceremony are done
together, then is it permissible for the women to recite things in the
event that no non-Mahram men hear their voices?

Answer: It is not a problem. KLST

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must refrain (from this). A

Answer: It is not far form being probable that to recite in a wedding
ceremony, that too only on the night of the wedding, is permissible with
the condition that non-Mahram men do not hear their voices, although
according to Ihtiyat Mustahab, it is better to refrain from this. G

309 – Question: Is it permissible for women to recite things in the
form of Ghina during the wedding party, in the event that Mahram men are
present? Answer: It is not a problem for the women, but it is not
permissible for the men to listen to the recitation that is in a form of
Ghina. T 310 – Question: Is it permissible for a woman to sing for her
own husband?

Answer: Singing things for one’s husband is not an exception to the
rule, however if a non-Mahram can not hear her voice, and it is not in
the form of Ghina, then it is not a problem. ABGKLST

Therefore: Any kind of singing, even for one’s husband is not allowed.
Only those sounds that are permitted to hear, and that too, as long as
no non-Mahram men can hear her voice are not a problem.

311 – Rule: It is not permissible for a woman to recite songs
individually (not in a chorus) which are not entertaining, such as poems
in praise of the Prophet and his Ahl al-Bait (Peace be upon them), if
non-Mahram men can hear her voice. AGKLST

If it leads to corruption, then it is not permitted. Rather, in most
occasions, if a woman is reciting something in the presence of a man and
he is listening to it, it will lead to corruption; thus it is not
permitted. B

312 – Rule: It is not a problem for men to recite things in solo for
men or women with the condition that it is not in the form of Ghina and
it does not lead to corruption. ABKLST

313 – Question: What is the ruling for women reciting things in a
chorus in the presence of women and also in the presence of non-Mahram
men?

Answer: If it is not in the form of Ghina and it does not lead to
corruption, then it is not a problem. KL

Answer: If it leads to corruption, then it is not permitted. Rather, in
most occasions, if a woman is reciting something in the presence of a
man, and he is listening to it, it will lead to corruption; thus it is
not permitted. B

314 – Question: What is the ruling for men reciting things in a chorus
in the presence of men or in the presence of non-Mahram women?

Answer: If it is not in the form of Ghina and it does not lead to
corruption, then it is not a problem. BKLST

315 – Rule: It is not a problem for men and women to recite something
in a chorus: as long as it is not in the form of Ghina, it does not lead
to stimulation or corruption, and as long as the rules related to Mahram
and non-Mahram are observed. L

It is not permissible for men and women to inter-mingle. B

316 – Rule: It is not a problem for women to read the Holy Qur’an in
the presence of non-Mahram men even if it is done with a pleasing voice,
with the condition that it does not make one excited and no corruption
is associated with it. KL

If it leads to corruption, then it is not permitted. Rather, in most
occasions, if a woman is reciting something in the presence of a man and
he is listening to it, it will lead to corruption; thus it is not
permitted. B

Women and young girls must not read the Qur’an while in the presence of
non-Mahram men. Also, if a man recites (the Qur’an) with a pleasing
voice and it causes the women to become excited, this (too) is a
problem. G


