Rules Regarding the Gatherings of Men in Wedding Ceremonies
===========================================================

317 – Rule: It is not a problem to clap hands in gatherings of men as
long as it is not in the manner of Ghina.

Therefore: If the clapping is in the way of Ghina, then there is a
problem, in it. If it is in a irregular way (not a steady beat), and
clapping the hands is used as a means of encouraging someone is, then it
is not a problem. AGK

Clapping one’s hands in happy occasions and during a speech in order to
encourage someone, if it does not reach to the point of being considered
as a vain act, then it is not a problem. B

Clapping one’s hands in happy occasions and in the programs to
commemorate the birth anniversary of the pure A’immah is not a problem,
with the condition that it does not take place in a Masjid or
hussainiah. L

In itself, clapping the hands is not haram unless it is accompanied by
(another) haram act. T

318 – Question: In the wedding gatherings for men, is it allowed for
children to dance while other men clap their hands?

Answer: Children do not have any responsibility (from the Islamic point
of view) and as far as the ruling for clapping hands, if it is not done
in a manner of Ghina, then it is not a problem. AGKL

Answer: If it does not reach to the level of being considered as a vain
act, then it is not a problem. B

Answer: If it does not necessitate a haram act, then it is not a
problem. T

319 – Question: What is the ruling for clapping the hands during happy
occasions, weddings, and other times? If along with clapping the hands,
a metal bowl is used (to bang on) or a tub (made of copper) are also
used, then what is the ruling?

Answer: It is not a problem. L

320 – Question: What is the ruling for clapping the hands during happy
occasions and speeches?

Answer: If the clapping of the hands is in order to encourage the
person in something that the Islamic law permits, then apparently, it is
permitted. A

Therefore: It is not permitted to clap one’s hands for men who are
dancing, or to clap one’s hands (in praise of) jugglers, or to encourage
someone who is performing vain and trivial acts, even if the hand
clapping is not in a rhythmical form.

321 – Rule: It is not allowed for the bride or other non-Mahram women
to go to the men’s side of the gathering, unless they (the women) have
proper hijab on. ABGKLMST

Therefore: If the women have any zinat on their face and hands, then
they must cover this too from the non-Mahram men, but it is still better
that they refrain from entering the men’s gatherings.

322 – Rule: If the groom knows that in the event that he goes into a
gathering of women, he will look at non-Mahram women who have beautified
themselves, then he must not go into that gathering, even if his looking
is not with the intention of lust or gaining (sexual) pleasure.
ABGKLMST

Therefore: It is haram for the groom to enter a women’s gathering even
if it may be for just one minute – such as to have a photograph taken or
to put the ring on, etc… in the event that he will be forced to look at
non-Mahram women who have beautified themselves. However, if the women
completely cover themselves and the groom will be able to refrain from
looking at them, only then is it not a problem.

323 – Rule: It is not allowed for non-Mahram men to look at the bride
if she does not have proper covering on or if she has any zinat on her
face and hands. ABKLMT

Therefore: To look at the bride, even if it is without the intention of
lust, is not allowed, even if it may be just to congratulate her, bid
her farewell or…

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed for non-Mahram men to
look at so much as the face and hands of non-Mahram women, whether they
have zinat on or not. G

If the women believe in upholding the hijab and if they were told to
observe their hijab they would comply, then it is not allowed to go to
that gathering of, and in all other instances, it is not a problem as
long as one does not look at them with the intention of lust or to gain
(sexual) pleasure. S

324 – Rule: It is haram for men and women to inter-mingle in wedding
ceremonies if it involves looking at the bride or other women, in the
event that they do not have the proper covering, or have zinat on, and
thus one must refrain from these types of gatherings. ABGKLMST

325– Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed to shave the
beard off or to trim it in such a way that it can no longer be visible.
In this ruling, all men are the same and there is no difference in the
ruling if the men are being made fun of, or what kind of atmosphere
surrounds them – the rule does not alter. Therefore, to shave off the
beard for one who has just become baligh, or if he does not shave off
his beard other people will make fun of him, or it is his wedding night,
etc… if he shaves off his beard or even trims it in such a way that it
is said he has shaved off his beard, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it
is not permitted. KLT

It is haram to shave off the beard in all circumstances. AG

It is not allowed to shave the hair on one’s face (for men). B

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is haram to shave the beard; unless if
by one not shaving his beard, it will cause him difficulty, for example,
people will make fun of him or will mock him (to such an extent that he
can not stand to bear it), then in these circumstances, it is not a
problem to shave the beard. S

326 – Rule: Shaving off a part of the beard has the same ruling as
shaving off the entire beard. BK

Therefore: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, men are not allowed to shave off
a part of their beard, except an amount which is just to even it out.

If one trims the beard to a very small amount in order to even it out,
then it is not a problem, for example the amount of the beard around the
nose or near the eyes (one is allowed to trim), but in other than this
instance, it is haram. AGL

327 – Question: Is it permitted to shave the hair that is under the
chin (neck) or that which is on the top of the cheeks?

Answer: If it is in an amount that would not be considered as shaving,
rather it would be considered as trimming the beard, then it is not a
problem. ABGKT

328 – Question: What is the amount of the beard (that one must keep)
and what amount must it not be less than?

Answer: Such an amount is sufficient that the general people say that
one has a beard. ABGKLMT

329 – Rule: It is not a problem to shave off the mustache. ABGKLMST

330 – Question: Would the job of being a barber who has to shave off
the beards of others be considered as haram?

Answer: It is haram to shave off the beard and whatever money a barber
receives for this is also haram. G

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted. L

Answer: In the event that shaving the beard is, according to Ihtiyat
Wajib not permitted, then taking money for shaving the beard too is,
according to Ihtiyat Wajib, not permitted. S

331 – Question: In wedding ceremonies, there is a type of game (in
Iran) commonly known as “Playing with Sticks” in which two people sit
across from one another and, with whatever strength they have, they hit
the feet of the other one (with the sticks) – and many people end up
breaking the other’s foot. What is the ruling for such a game?

Answer: This type of game falls in the category of vain and futile acts
and is haram. G

332 – Question: My job entails me to work with dirt and dust and so I
am compelled to shave off my beard since if I do not shave it, then the
dirt and dust will gather in it. Is my profession haram?

Answer: It is haram to shave off the beard according to Ihtiyat, and
the excuse mentioned above does not make it permissible, and in this
ruling you are no different than others. KL

333 – Question: What is the view on playing with the instruments of
gambling such as dominoes, cards or other instruments used in gambling,
in the event that the intention is not to win or lose and (the
intention) is only to play ?

Answer: It is not permissible. GKLT

Answer: It is not improbable that it would enter into the ruling of
vain acts and therefore, according to Ihtiyat, one must avoid it. A

Answer: According to Ihtiyat, one must avoid it, and regarding chess,
the Ihtiyat is even stronger. B

Answer: Cards and chess are haram according to the stronger view and in
the other scenarios, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible.
S

334– Question: What is Islam’s view on the groom wearing a necktie?

Answer: The necktie is something this is related to Christians and is
one of their signs, thus it is better than Muslims refrain from wearing
it, although among the Muslims, it is no longer taken as a sign (for the
Christians). L

Answer 1: The necktie is of the signs of the Christians, but
unfortunately, it has become common among the Muslims. G

Answer 2: The necktie is one of the signs of the Christians and in is
incumbent on Muslims to refrain from wearing it. G


**Rules Relating to Women’s Wedding Ceremonies**

334 – Rule: It is not a problem for women to clap their hands in
wedding ceremonies. AKT

It is not a problem to clap the hands in joyous gatherings, or if
someone is speaking in order to encourage them, as long as it does not
reach to the point of being considered as vain or futile. B

It is not a problem to clap ones hands in joyous gatherings, or, in the
birth anniversaries of the A’immah, peace be upon all of them, with the
condition that it is not in a Masjid or a hussainiah. L

335 – Question: What is the rule regarding children dancing in wedding
ceremonies and women clapping their hands?

Answer: Children do not have any responsibility (from the Islamic point
of view), and (als0) it is not a problem for women to clap their hands
in wedding ceremonies. GKL

Answer: Children do not have any responsibility (from the Islamic point
of view) and it is not a problem to clap the hands in gatherings if it
is not in a manner of Ghina. A

Answer: If it does not reach to the level of being considered as vain
and futile, then it is not a problem. B

Answer: If it is not associated with a haram act, then it is not a
problem. T

336 – Rule: It is not permitted to stay in a wedding ceremony in which
there are vain and futile acts taking place. AGKL

If refraining from vain and futile acts means leaving a gathering, then
it is not allowed to stay there (thus, one must leave). B

Therefore: If a woman sees that in a wedding ceremony other women are
dancing, or women are inter-mingling with non-Mahram men, or that others
are performing entertaining music in front of men; then, first the woman
must try to prevent them (from these acts), and in the event that it has
no effect on them, then she must leave from there.

337 – Question: Is it allowed to be present in wedding ceremonies in
which there are musical instruments, drums, dancing or singing going on,
if it is a wedding of someone in the family, or we are obliged to go?

Answer: It is haram to take part in gatherings in which there are vain
and futile things going on just because it is a relative’s wedding does
not make it permissible. AGKL

338 – Question: What is the ruling on using a tambourine in wedding
ceremonies?

Answer: It is problematic. AGK

339 – Rule: The usage of any kind of (cassette) tape with entertaining
music at women’s gatherings is not allowed, and one must refrain from
it. ABGKLMST

340 – Rule: If a groom is present (in a women’s gathering), it is no
exception and therefore, non-Mahram women must observe proper hijab in
front of him. ABGKLMST

Therefore: If a groom enters a gathering of women, then the women who
have zinat on their face or hands must cover their entire body,
including the face and hands from him, even if the groom only comes in
for only a few minutes such as to put the ring on, have a photograph
taken or for any other reason. In any case, it is better to avoid having
any non-Mahram men enter into a gathering of women.

341 – Question: Is it allowed for me - a Muslim women - to sit in a
gathering in which my son-in-law is present, but there are also other
women sitting there who are not observing hijab?

Answer: If you are able to prevent them from sinning (then you can be
there), and if you are not able to, then you should not attend their
gatherings of sin. G

342 – Question: Is it permissible to listen to certain kinds of music
with the intention that listening to them is not for vain and
entertaining purposes? For example, music that is said to be good to
calm the nerves or music that some doctors recommend as a cure, or that
form of music which has been composed for wars – in which the aim and
purpose of them is not for vain acts?

Answer: It is haram to listen to any kind of sound that the general
public would consider as music. G

343 – Rule: It is not allowed for a woman to adorn or beautify herself
with the intention of having non-Mahram men look at her. ABGKLMST

344 – Question: What is the ruling for a hairdresser or a beautician
who beautifies and adorns other women, when the beautician knows that
the women will show (themselves) to non-Mahram men?

Answer: If a beautician beautifies the women with the intention of
having them showing it off to non-Mahram men, then it is as if she is
assisting her in her sin, and it is haram; however, if she has knowledge
of it, without the intention, then it is not a problem. AGK

Answer: If a beautician beautifies the women with the intention of
having them show it off to non-Mahram men, then it is definitely haram;
but if she has knowledge of it, without the intention, then according to
Ihtiyat, she should still refrain from it. B

345 – Rule: A non-Mahram man must not take the photograph or video of
the bride and groom or any other non-Mahram women, even if they are his
close relatives (if the women are not observing their proper hijab).
ABGKLMST

346 – Rule: It is not allowed to have a video or photograph taken with
the groom or other non-Mahram in the event that the women are not
observing their proper hijab. AGK

347 – Rule: If a woman knows that in the event that she has a
photograph taken without her hijab on, it will be shown to others in the
family and non-Mahram also will see it, then it is not allowed for her
to have the photograph taken without her hijab on. GK

Therefore: If the bride knows that in the event that she has a
photograph taken without her proper hijab on, a family member who is her
non-Mahram will see it, then she must not have the photograph taken, and
it does not matter if the photographer is a woman or a Mahram man.

348 – Question: I would like to say that it is known that in wedding
ceremonies, normally the photographs or video is taken by a woman, but
when exposing the film or other things related to this, it is possible
that a non-Mahram man may also see them. What is your opinion on this,
noting that the bride has make-up on and is not wearing the hijab?

Answer: If the non-Mahram does not look at the photographs with the
intention of lust and fear of falling into sin, then it is not a
problem, if he knows the person who is in the photo or video. A

Answer: In the event that the non-Mahram man knows her, then it is not
permitted to see them (photos or film). In other than this instance, if
it is not with the intention of lust or deriving sexual pleasure, then
it is not a problem. LKT

Answer: If the photo of the bride is in a place where her non-Mahram
can see it, then this is one example of spreading corruption, and thus
it is not allowed. G

Answer: In the event that the woman believes in upholding the Islamic
hijab then it is a problem for the non-Mahram to look at a video or
photo of her even if he does not know her and no corruption will be
caused by looking at her. M

Therefore: (There are two scenarios) either the non-Mahram man knows
the woman or he does not know her. In the event that he does not know
her, then it is not a problem to look at her video or photo as long as
it is not with the intention of deriving sexual pleasure; but if he
knows her and if she believes in upholding the Islamic hijab, then it is
not permitted to look at her film or photo if she is not wearing
sufficient clothing. If she does not believe in upholding the Islamic
hijab, then even if the man knows her, it is not a problem to look at
her photo or film as long as it is without the intention of lust or
deriving sexual pleasure.

Answer: If the women are not of those women who do not properly wear
the hijab or who do not wear the hijab at all and if they were commanded
to wear the hijab, they would not listen – then if she is a Muslim or
otherwise and the man knows her, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, he must not
look at her photo or film. In other than this instance, it is not a
problem to look (at it) without the intention of lust or deriving sexual
pleasure. S

Therefore: If a non-Mahram (man) does not know the women, or the women
are among those who either do not properly wear the hijab or do not wear
the hijab at all, then it is not a problem to look at their photo or
film without the intention of lust or deriving sexual pleasure.

**Miscellaneous Rules**

349 – Question: What is the ruling for a woman who beautifies herself
for other than her husband in various gatherings specifically for
women - such as weddings or dinner invitations where there are only
women present? In the event that it goes against the pleasure of the
husband, what is the ruling?

Answer: In the event that no non-Mahram men see her, then it is not a
problem, however she should try to obtain the pleasure and approval of
her husband. ABGKLMST

350 – Question: In order to take part in a specific type of gathering,
a woman has to wear a certain style of clothing which her husband is not
happy with; but by not wearing it, she will not be dishonored and in the
event that she wears that clothing, it will result in the family being
upset and may cause conflict (between them). From the Islamic point of
view, what is the ruling for wearing (this clothing) – is it allowed or
not?

Answer: If by wearing this clothing, it causes conflict and (will lead
to) corruption, then she must refrain from wearing it. The husband also
must not stop her from wearing a type of clothing that is commonly worn
by her peers. AGKL

351 – Rule: The houses of Muslims must be respected and it is not
permitted to enter them without the permission of the owner; in fact, it
is not even allowed to look into someone else’s house from the roof, a
crack in the wall, or through the door. AGK

352 – Rule: If someone looks into the house of another person with the
intention of looking at something that is haram for him (for example,
looking at the women or daughters in that house), then the owner of that
house can, in fact, it is Wajib for him to refrain and stop him from
this action. If the person does not refrain from this (looking into the
house), then one can stop him by force, such as by hitting him or
something similar to this.

Therefore: One must pay close attention to the fact that it is not
permissible to look into the house of others, with the intention of
looking at non-Mahram - whether this looking is done from on top of the
roof, from the patio, window, from a crack on the side of the door or
window. Therefore, it is necessary that if, God forbid, one does such an
act, he is prohibited (from doing it again), and if he continues to do
such, then one is permitted to hit him or do something else to prevent
him (from continuing it).

353 – Rule: If a person is looking into the house of someone else such
that it is not possible to see the people of that house, but from far
away, with the aide of modern devices (such as binoculars) he can see
them, then his ruling is the same as the person who is looking (at the
people) from close. Therefore, he must be prevented (from looking) in
the same order as was mentioned previously.

354 – Question: Is it permitted to just keep certain things in one’s
house without using them – such as cards, movies which are not permitted
to watch, of a container that has alcohol in it?

Answer: It is wajib to get rid of gambling instruments and things that
like this and to not do this (get rid of them) is a major sin. K

355 – Question: Is it allowed for a mother or father to hit their child
without any reason simply due to being angry or not having patience, or
is it a violation of haqq-un-Nas (The rights of another person)?

Answer: It is not allowed, however, it is permitted in order to teach
him manners as long as it does not exceed the limits such that the skin
color becomes red, black or purple-blue in color (due to hitting the
child). AKT

Answer: In the event that the hitting is limited to teaching him
manners, it is not a problem, but one must make sure that it does not
reach to the level of having to pay the blood money. L

356 – Question: What is the ruling if a maternal or paternal aunt,
maternal or paternal uncle, brother or sister hit the child?

Answer: It is not allowed, except with the permission of the guardian
of the child, and that too if it is for improving the manners of the
child. AGK

Answer: If one has the permission of the guardian and if the child has
done something very bad, then it is not a problem to hit him five or six
times as long as the conditions in the previous ruling are met. T

357 – Question: In order to teach the child manners, is it permitted
that instead of hitting him, one performs something else such as to lock
him in a dark room, place him in an enclosed room where he is alone, or
to scare him with a frightening voice, with the condition that these are
done to teach him manners?

Answer: If it does not cause the child any harm, then it is not a
problem, however, one must be very cautious if locking the child in a
dark room or scaring him with a frightening voice. T

358 – Question: Can a mother or father, as a means of upbringing the
child, to command their son or daughter to perform tasks such as
vacuuming the house, doing the laundry, going to buy groceries and other
things such as this, without paying them anything?

Answer: It is not a problem. G

359 – Question: A girl who is mature and intelligent wants to marry a
practicing, religious, young Muslim boy, but her father does not give
her the permission due to reasons related to the boy’s material status –
can the girl marry him without the permission of her father or not?

Answer: In the event that the father refuses a religious and known
match (for his daughter), then his pleasure and permission become
invalid, and thus is not needed. A

Answer: The permission of the father in the marriage of a virgin girl
is a condition; except in the instance that he refuses a suitable match
and the daughter is in need of getting married, and she fears that if
she turns away from this marriage, she will not find a suitable husband.
K

Answer: If the girl is a virgin and her father or grandfather do not
give her permission to marry a man who the common people and the
religion would consider as her equal, or they are not ready to take part
in the wedding of the girl, or she has no family members to give her
permission (for the wedding) due to insanity or the like, then in these
instances, it is not necessary to get their permission. S

The same rule applies if it is not possible to get their permission
because they are not there or for some other reason it is not possible
to get their permission and the girl really needs to get married, then
the permission of her father or grandfather is not becomes
unnecessary.

Question: My father has left us and does not pay any attention to us,
and sometimes a period of time passes in which we do not hear from him.
As for the issue of marriage, is it still necessary to get his
permission or not?

Answer: All in all, in the event that the guardian of a daughter cuts
off all connections with her or leaves her free and does not interfere
in her affairs, then it is not necessary to have his permission; but
also, as long as the girl is mature and intellectually mature such that
she can determine her own affairs in relation to marriage, then she is
allowed to get married (without his permission). L

Answer: A girl who has reached the age of maturity and intellectually
mature - meaning that she can determine her own affairs, then in the
event that she is a virgin, according to Ihtiyat, she must have the
permission of her father or grandfather to get married. However, if a
suitable match is found (for her) but her father opposed (the marriage)
then his permission is not a condition (it is not needed). Similar is
the case if the father or the grandfather are not present and the
daughter is in need of getting married. M

**Notes:**

[^8] This is a form of Istikh?ra as explained in Maf?t¢¦ al-Jin?n, page
1074 (as printed by Uswah Publications, Qum, Iran, 2000) using papers
(cards).


