Chapter 2 : Rules Related To Looking At Others
==============================================

<p dir="rtl">
بسم الله الرّحمن الرّحيم
</p>

قُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ A30B وَقُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ
أَبْصَارِهِنَّ….

“(O’ Prophet!) Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks
and guard their private parts - that is purer for them; surely Allah is
aware of what they do. And say to the believing women that they cast
down their looks…”

Al-Qur’an · Surah al-Nur · Ayat 30-31

<p dir="rtl">
اَلْحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي لاَ يَبْلُغُ مِدْحَتَهَ الْقَائِلُونَ وَ لا
يُحْصِي نَعْماَئَهُ الْعَادُّونَ وَ لاَ يُؤَدِّي حَقَّهُ
الْمُجْتَهِدُونَ الَّذِي لَيْسَ لِصَفَّتِهِ حَدٌّ مَحْدَودٌ وَ لاَ
نَعْتٌ مَوْجُودٌ وَ الصَّلاَةُ وَ السَّلاَمُ عَلى مَوْلاَنَا وَ
مُقْتَدَانَا أَبِي الْقَاسِمِ مُحَمُّدٍ وَ عَلى أَهْلِ الْبِيْتِهِ
الْطَيِّبِينَ الطَّاهِرِينَ لاَ سِيَّمَا بَقِيَّةُ اللهِ فِي
الأَرْضِيِينَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلى أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِينَ إِلى
قِياَمِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ.
</p>

**The Rules of Looking - Related to Men
Men Looking at Other Men**

1 – Rule: Men are permitted to look at the entire body of other men
except the private parts, with the condition that it is not done with
the intention of lust or seeking sexual pleasure. ABGKLMST

Therefore: It is haram to look at any part of the body of another man,
even the face and arms, if it is done with the intention of lust or
seeking sexual pleasure. Similarly, it is also not permitted for men to
look at the private parts of other men who are baligh, either with or
without the intention of lust.

Note: The meaning of “intention of lust” or “seeking of sexual
pleasure” is the fear of falling into sin or corruption.

2 – Rule: If a man fears that if he looks at the body of another man,
he is liable to commit a sin, then he is not permitted to look at that
man’s body. BGKLMT

3 – Question: What is meant by the private parts?

Answer: For men, the private parts include the anus, penis and
testicles. For women, the private parts include the vagina and anus.
AGKLMST

Therefore: The back part of the leg (thighs) are not counted as the
private parts, and therefore it is permissible to look at them, however
according to Ihtiyat Mustahab it is better to refrain from looking at
them (as well).

4 – Question: In lakes, ponds, public showers, or on the banks of
rivers… men wear something in which the skin of their body is not
showing, however the form and shape of their private parts are
completely showing – is it permissible to look at them?7

Answer: What is meant by the covering of the body is that the skin of
the body should not be visible, and in the event that one is not led
into committing a sin, then looking (at such a man) is not a problem.
AGKLT

If in this action there is fear of falling into corruption or
committing a sin, then it is not permissible. B

5 – Rule: Fathers are not permitted to look at the private parts of
their sons who are baligh, whether it be in the shower or anywhere else.
Also, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, the father is not permitted to look at
his son’s private parts even before the son has become baligh during the
time when he is Mumayyiz. AGKLMS

It is haram to look at the private parts of a child who has reached to
the age of Mumayyiz. BT

6 – Rule: It is haram for a doctor to look at the private parts of
another man, except in the case of necessity.AFGKLST

Therefore: It is not permissible for a man to refer to a doctor for
birth control (vasectomy) so as to prevent his wife from becoming
pregnant. However, it is not a problem to have such an operation
performed in the event that it is not permanent (the operation can be
reversed), but since such operations necessitate the need for someone
else to look at the private parts, thus it is haram. However if there is
a procedure which can be performed such that it does not involve the
doctor looking at the private parts, then it is not a problem. Also, if
one’s wife is a doctor and she can perform the operation, then it is
permissible.

**Men Looking at Mahram Women**

7 – Rule: Men are permitted to look at the entire body of their
Maharim, with the exception of their private parts, with the condition
that this looking is not done with the intention of lust and there is no
fear of falling into corruption. (One’s wife is an exception to this
rule). ABGKLMST

Therefore: Men are not permitted to look at the private parts of their
daughter, mother, sister or any other Maharim women, even if it is done
without the intention of lust or falling into sin. Similarly, according
to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to look at the private parts of
a Mumayyiz child who is not yet baligh.

8 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Mustahab, men should refrain from
looking at the area from the navel down to the knees of their Maharim.
GKLM

Men and women who are Mahram to each another are permitted to look at
the complete body of one other, with the exception of the private parts,
with the condition that the looking is without the intention of lust.B

**Men Looking at Non-Mahram Women**

Non-Mahram women are divided into two categories: Muslims and
non-Muslims. As for those who are Muslims, they are further divided into
those who correctly observe their hijab, and those who do not observe
it.

1. Muslim women who observe the proper Islamic hijab.

9 – Rule: If a Muslim woman is properly observing her hijab, then it is
not a problem for a man to look at her face and hands, as long as the
following conditions are met:

1. Her face and hands have no decorations (zinat) on them.

2. The looking is done without the intention of lust or falling into
sin or corruption. ABK

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to look at even the
face and hands of a non-Mahram woman, whether she has any zinat on them
or not. G

In every way, if the non-Mahram is a Muslim woman who observes the
proper Islamic hijab; or even if she does not observe the proper Islamic
hijab, but if she was told about hijab she would observe it, then to
look at her face and hands without the intention of lust and falling
into sin is not a problem. However, according to Ihtiyat Mustahab, it is
better not to look at her face and hands. S

If the zinat on the face and hands consists of an ordinary ring, the
removal of facial hair or applying Surma, even if these things are
common among old women, then it is not wajib for the women to cover
them, and also, it is not a problem for the man to look at them as long
as this look is not with the intention of lust. T

Therefore: Men are not permitted to look at the face and hands of women
who do not observe proper hijab; for example, those women who have an
amount of hair showing, have short sleeves on, or those women who have
not covered their arms, wrists or hands.

10 – Rule: It is haram for a man to look at the hands of a non-Mahram
woman who has a ring, bangles or bracelet on, long fingernails, nail
polish applied, or who has beautified herself in any other way – whether
the non-Mahram is a close relative or a non-family member. ABKG

In the event that the non-Mahram woman is wearing an ordinary type of
ring on her hand, then it is not a problem to look at her hand. However,
in all other instances, if she has any other type of zinat on her hands,
then it is not permissible to look at this. T

Note: Shop owners whose products are usually of the type that mostly
only women use, for example, jewelry or clothing accessories; and those
shops that sell cosmetic items and items for beauty and skin care, etc…
are most susceptible to falling into this sin (mentioned in rule 10),
and more than others, must be careful in observing the correct Islamic
rules and regulations.

11 – Question: In public and other schools, there are some practicing
Muslim men, who teach Muslim girls. Naturally, it is necessary for the
teacher to write something on the board, and as it is normal, the girls
look at the hands and face of the teacher without the intention of lust
and sexual pleasure. Is this type of looking permissible?

Answer: It is not a problem for women to look at the face and hands and
other parts of the body that men normally do not cover, as long as it is
not with the intention of lust or fear of falling into sin. AGKLMS

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is haram for a woman to look at
the body of a non-Mahram man. However, the permissibility for a woman to
look at the parts of the body of a non-Mahram man that are commonly left
open, for example, the head, etc… is not free from doubt, unless this
type of looking leads or helps one in committing a sin.B

12 – Question: Is it permissible for a man to look at the face and
hands of a non-Mahram woman who is in the Taqlid of a Marja‘ who says
that it is permissible to keep these open?

Answer: There is no connection between the permissibility of keeping
the hands and face open and looking at these parts.G

13 – Rule: It is not permissible to look at a non-Mahram woman who has
any kind of beauty on her, even if it is something such as a woman
trying on some clothing, a ring, a bracelet, a belt, or anything else to
see if it fits. AKG

If the zinat on the face and hands consists of an ordinary ring, or the
removal of facial hair or applying Surma, even if these are common among
old women, then it is not a problem for a man to look at these parts as
long as it is done without the intention of lust. However, as for other
types of zinat, for example, bracelets and bangles, these must be
covered from non-Mahram men and in addition to this, non-Mahram men are
not allowed to look at such things either. T

14 – Question: Is it permissible to look at the sole, top, heel of the
foot or the calf of a non-Mahram Muslim woman if she has not covered it
properly, and if it is without the intention of lust?

Answer: No, it is not allowed, and with the exception of the face and
hands, a man is not permitted to look at any other part the body of a
non-Mahram woman. ABK

Answer: It is haram to look at the body of a non-Mahram woman in any
way, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to look at
her face and hands either. G

Answer: In the event that the woman is among one of those who observes
her proper Islamic hijab, or if she was told about the hijab, she would
follow it, then it is not permissible to look at those parts, otherwise
it is not a problem. S

Answer: According to Ihtiyat, it is not allowed to look at the feet
(top and the bottom of the feet up to the ankle)T

15 – Rule: If a man fears that in the event that he looks at a
non-Mahram woman he will fall into sin, then he must not look at her.
AKLMS

He must not look at her. B

16 – Rule: It is haram to look at a non-Mahram woman with the intention
of lust. or to bring about sexual pleasure, even it may be her face and
hands, or the shape of her body.ABGKLMST

**General Rules**

17 – Rule: It is haram to look at anyone or anything with the intention
of lust or with the fear that one will fall into sin (with the exception
of one’s spouse), even if one is looking at a Mahram. This rule applies
to looking at a woman, man, animal, inanimate object, photo, film,
statue, or any other thing. It is also haram to look at one’s own body
in the mirror or in anything else with the intention of bringing about
sexual pleasure. ABGKL

Question: Is it haram to look at anything that would bring about sexual
pleasure even if it may be a person looking at his own body?

Answer: In itself, it is not haram for a person to look at his own body
to bring about sexual pleasure.T

18 – Rule: A doctor is not one’s Mahram and therefore, except for in
the case of a necessity, he is not permitted to look at the body of a
non-Mahram woman. ABGKLMST

19 – Rule: If a doctor is compelled to look at a part of the body of a
non-Mahram woman, they he must suffice to look at only that part of the
body (that is for treatment), and it is not permitted to look at more
than that. Also, if it is possible, then the examination or testing must
be performed over the clothing. ABGKLMST

20 – Rule: Men are not permitted to give an injection to non-Mahram
women since this act necessitates looking or touching the body of the
woman, even if the injection is given into the vein. However, in the
case of necessity where there is no Mahram available to give the
injection, then it is not a problem. ABGKLMST

21 – Question: Does looking at the inside parts of the body, such as
the liver, intestines, etc… have the same ruling as looking at the
outside of the body?

Answer: Apparently, as for the prohibition in the looking and touching
of the body parts, there is no difference between the outside and the
inside body parts, however, just as has been mentioned in the book
al-‘Urwatul Wuthqa in rule 45 in the section of looking - looking at a
tooth, for example, once it has been taken out of the mouth is
permissible.L

22 – Rule: In the following instances, it is haram for a woman to go to
a non-Mahram man in the event that she is able to go to a female general
physician, or a specialist who is a woman, who is at the same level of
knowledge as that of a man for:

· The taking of X-rays, taking blood for testing, ultrasound, or any
other medical work, in which it is necessary to look at the body of the
woman. ABGKLMT

However with the exception of those situations in which it is permitted
(for the man) to look at the body of the non-Mahram woman. (These were
explained in the section on ‘looking’.)S

23 – Question: In the markets, ordinary places, or in people’s houses,
sometimes the eyes unintentionally fall on a non-Mahram woman that
either have beautified themselves, or have not properly observed their
hijab. What is the rule for looking at them in these circumstances?

Answer: That which is haram is to look, not simply having the eyes fall
on someone. Therefore, that which one sees unintentionally is not a
problem, however, without delay one must turn away so as to not fall
into the category of looking. ABGKLT

24 – Rule: It is haram for one to go to a place with the intention that
his eyes may fall on a non-Mahram woman who is not in hijab. AGKT

Going to such a place is not a problem, but one must not look at the
non-Mahram women.B

Therefore: If a person passes by a certain spot at a special time in
order to look at non-Mahram women, or goes to a place to fulfill a task
where there are a lot of non-Mahram women, or goes to a specific place
such as on a bus, recreational area for sports, or exercise, or chooses
to go to any area in which there are a lot of non-Mahram there, with the
main aim to look at non-Mahram women, etc… then in summary, it is not
permissible for a man to perform any action in order to have his eyes
fall on non-Mahram women, and thus, it is necessary for one to refrain
from these things.

25 – Rule: It is haram for a man to go to a place in the event that he
knows that non-Mahram woman are not in hijab, or do not observe proper
hijab, such that he goes there with the intention of looking at them.
AGKT

Going to such a place is not a problem, but one must not look at the
non-Mahram women. B

Therefore: It is haram to go on the roof of the house, or to look out
the window with the aim of looking at a non-Mahram woman. It is also
haram to enter a room, kitchen, or any other place in which one knows
that non-Mahram women are present with the aim of looking at them.
Likewise, it is haram to look through the crack of a door, window or
from the side of the curtains to peek inside a room or any other place
such as these, with the aim of looking at non-Mahram women, even if it
is just for one moment.

26 – Rule: It is not a problem to go to those shopping centers in which
women who live in the villages or in the country side visit, and who are
not accustomed to wearing the complete or proper hijab, even if one
knows that he will look at them. Business transactions with them also
are not a problem. AKLMT

According to what is apparent, it is permitted to look at those women -
without the intention of lust - who live in the country side and places
other than this (for example, those women who live in the city and who
do not observe the proper hijab), who are not in the habit of covering
properly - with the condition that there is no fear of committing a
haram act. Therefore, associating with them, business transactions and
other dealings with them are permitted as well. B

In the event that one is certain that he will not intentionally look at
them, then it is not a problem.G

It is not a problem to look at “common place” women (those who do not
observe hijab whatsoever, or the proper hijab) whom, if told to observe
the hijab would not comply with the condition that it is done without
the intention of lust and one does not fear that he will fall into a
haram act. In this ruling, there is no difference between non-Muslim
Women and others (Muslims or those living in the Village, etc…). Also,
there is no difference in the hands, face and other parts of the body,
which they normally do not cover.S

27 – Rule: It is not a problem to look at the hands up to the elbows,
an amount of hair on the head, the feet up to the knees and the area
under the chin and the neck of an elderly woman who is a non-Mahram.
AGKLT

It is not a problem to look at the body of an old woman as long as it
is not with the intention of lust. B

Rather, apparently, it is not a problem to look at all of their hair.
M

28 – Rule: As for those people whom it is not permissible to look at,
it does not make any difference if one looks at them from behind a
glass, in a mirror, through the reflection of water or any other thing
that reflects their image. (Meaning even in these ways, it is not
permissible to look at them). AGKLMST

29 – Question: Is it permissible for a man to look at a woman who is
very ugly, without the intention of lust? (In the event thatt she is not
observing her proper Islamic hijab)?

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, he must not look at her, because if
she is not an old woman, then a man can not be certain that his look at
her would not be a lustful one.T

30 – Rule: It is haram to look at the body of a non-Mahram woman,
whether tha woman knows that you are looking at her or not; whether she
is blind or can see; whether she is a non-Mahram family member, such as
one’s brother’s wife, the wife of one’s paternal uncle, a female cousin,
etc… or she is an outsider (the ruling of looking at the face and hands
has already been mentioned). Even if this looking is done without the
intention of lust, it is still haram. ABKLM

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must also refrain from looking at the
face and hands of a non-Mahram woman. G

31 – Rule: Women of the Ahl as-Sunnah have the same ruling as (other)
Muslim women. AGK


