Non-muslim Women
================

32 – Rule: It is not a problem to look at those parts of the body that
are not normally covered by non-Mahram women who are not Muslims
(whether they be from the Ahl al-Kitab, or Kuffar), with the condition
that it is not done with the intention of lust. However, according to
Ihtiyat Wajib, a man is not allowed to look at those parts of the body
that are normally covered. KMLT

It is not a problem to look at the hair, face, head and hands of the
women of the Ahl al-Kitab and Kuffar as long as it is not done with the
intention of lust and one does not fear that he will commit a haram act.
According to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must not look at other than what is
listed above. A

It is permissible to look at those parts of the body that are not
normally covered by women who are Ahl al-Zhimmah [^2], rather even those
women who from the time of birth have been categorized as being Kafir,
as long as it is without the intention of lust and one does not fear
that he will fall into sin.B

It is only permissible to look at the face and hands of a non-Muslim
woman, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must refrain from looking at
other than these two parts of her body. G

Looking at the bodies of women who are “common place”, who if were
commanded or requested to observe the hijab would not listen, is not a
problem, with the condition that the look is done without the intention
of lust and no fear of falling into a haram act – and in this ruling,
there is no difference between Kuffar or other women (such as Muslims,
Christians, Jews, etc…). Also, there is no difference between the hands,
face and other parts of the body that they do not usually cover. S

Note: In the event that the non-Mahram is a non-Muslim and her covering
is less than women like her would wear, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib,
it is not allowed to look at her. For example, those women who in order
to sexually excite others, wear a specific type of clothing. Therefore,
it is not a problem to look at the hair, hands, and feet up to the knees
or any other place that non-Muslim women usually do not cover.

33 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed to look at the
private parts of a Kafir.S

34 – Rule: If one knows or fears that in the event that he will look at
non-Mahram who are non-Muslims they will fall into sin or corruption,
then they must not look at them.ABGKLMST

**Men Looking at Children**

35 – Rule: In the event that the child is a boy, it is not a problem to
look at his body, until he becomes Mumayyiz, with the condition that it
is not with the intention of lust. However, after he reaches the age of
Mumayyiz, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to look
at his private parts. GKLMST

Therefore: Fathers must be cautious in not looking at the private parts
of their sons who have become Mumayyiz, whether it be in the shower, or
any other place.

In fact, it is haram to look at the private parts of a boy who is
Mumayyiz but has not yet reached to the of bulugh, even if it is not
with the intention of lust. AB

36 – Question: What is considered to be the age of Mumayyiz?

Answer: The age at which a child understands good and bad, about the
relations between men and women. AG

Answer: The age at which a child understands good and bad.B

Answer: This is the age at which a child is aware of the relationships,
which take place between men and women.K

Answer: The age at which a child, who has not yet become baligh
understands good and bad. Also, there is the possibility that his or her
looking at the body of a non-Mahram may lead to sexual excitement. MS

37 – Rule: In the event that the child is a girl and a Mahram - such as
one’s daughter, sister, brother’s daughter or sister’s daughter, etc…
then to look at her body until she reaches the age of Mumayyiz is not a
problem; and after she becomes Mumayyiz then according to Ihtiyat Wajib,
one must not look at her private parts.KLMS

It is haram to look at the private parts of a girl who is Mumayyiz, but
has not yet reached the age of bulugh, even if it is done without the
intention of lust. ABT

38 – Rule: In the event that the girl is a non-Mahram and Mumayyiz,
then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, a man must not look at those parts f
her body that girls of that age normally cover. KM

Question: It has been mentioned in rule 2447 in the Taudhiul Masail
that it is allowed to look at the body of a non-Baligh girl as long as
it is not done with lust, etc… but in that same book on page 578, it has
been mentioned that one can only look at those parts that are not
normally covered. Which of these (two rulings) is correct, thus which
one should be acted upon?

Answer: You can refer to ruling 25 in the section on Marriage in the
book Tahrir al-Wasilah of Ayatullah Khumayni for more information. A

Therefore: Therefore, there is no difference between the ruling of
Ayatullah Araki and Ayatullah Khumayni (as was stated above).

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed for a man to look
at the body and hair of a girl, who has not yet finished 9 years, but
can understand between good and bad (Mumayyiz), even if it is done
without the intention of deriving pleasure. B

Answer: It is not a problem to look at the face, hands and hair of a
girl who is not baligh, as long as it is not with the intention of
deriving pleasure and it does not lead one to sexual excitement, and by
looking, one does not fear that he will fall into a haram act. L

Answer: It is haram to look at the body of a non-Mahram girl who has
not yet reached 9 years of age, however, she understands between good
and bad. Also, it is haram to look at her, if that look normally may
stimulate or arouse sexual desires, and similarly (it is haram) to look
at her hair, whether it is with the intention of lust or without. In
addition, it is also haram to look at her face and hands if it is with
the intention of lust and furthermore, looking at her without the
intention of lust even, is not free from doubt. (This ruling comes under
Ihtiyat Wajib). G

Answer: It is not a problem to look at the body of a girl who is not
baligh with the condition that it is not done with the intention of
deriving pleasure - with the exception of her private parts, whose
ruling was already mentioned. Although according to Ihtiyat Mustahab, it
is better that those parts that girls (of her age) would usually cover
with clothing should not be looked at either. S

Answer: It is not allowed to look at the private parts of a child who
is Mumayyiz, except in the case of necessity. T

Therefore: It is not a problem to look at the hair, hands, the feet up
to the knees, neck and face of a girl who is not baligh, and who is a
non-Mahram, with the condition that it is not done with the intention of
lust.

Rule – 39: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permissible to look at
the rest of the body of a girl, for example the shin, stomach, private
parts, chest, etc…K

A Mumayyiz girl who is not baligh has the same ruling as that of a
baligh woman whose ruling has already been mentioned (it is haram to
look at her body, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not permitted to
look at her face and hands either, as was previously mentioned in
detail).G


**The Rules of Looking Related to Women**

**Women Looking at Other Women**

40 – Rule: Women are permitted to look at the entire body of other
women except the private parts, with the condition that it is not done
with the intention of lust. ABGKLMST

Therefore: In public showers, swimming pools, sports halls, fitness
clubs, etc… if a woman looks at other women, even the face and hands
with the intention of lust, or such that she fears that she will fall
into sin, then this looking is not permitted. It does not matter whether
she knows the other woman or not; whether it is a young woman or and old
one, whether she is ugly or beautiful. AGK

41 – Rule: It is haram for women to look at the private parts of other
women, except in the case of necessity. ABGKLMST

Therefore: If the use of apparatuses that enter into the womb, or the
tying of the tubes or other procedures that are used for birth control -
necessitate looking at the private parts, then it is haram, except in
the case of necessity. However, birth control itself is not a problem,
if it does not necessitate others to look at the private parts. This is
with the condition that it does not make the woman permanently sterile
and if she ever wants, she can conceive once again.

For example: If a woman’s husband is a doctor, and he uses a method to
prevent his wife from becoming pregnant, then it is not a problem.

Attention: Birth Control, if it does not necessitate a haram action, is
not a problem; but if it involves a haram act, then it is not permitted.
One’s attention must be drawn to the point that some types of birth
control may involve one of the three haram acts that are stated below,
whose details will come later on:

1. Looking at the private parts of another woman, except in the case of
necessity.
1. Exposing of the private parts to a doctor, except in the case of
necessity (which will follow in the Chapter on Covering).
1. Touching of the private parts, except in the case of necessity
(which will follow in the Chapter of Touching).

42 – Question: In your reply (to us) concerning the permissibility of
using the IUD, you mentioned that, “If using this device (IUD),
necessitates a haram touch or look, then it is not permitted.” Please
inform us, is the act of placing the IUD in the womb of the mother
counted as a medical condition meaning that a doctor, midwife, or in the
case of necssity a male doctor can perform this act just as in other
medical cases in which it is permitted, or is this issue of the IUD not
a medically related case in which instance only a woman’s mahram (her
husband) is permitted to place the IUD?

Answer: This action in itself, if it does not result in the abortion of
the child or sterility of the woman, is not a problem; however, the
prohibition of touching and looking (at the private parts) remains as
strong as before, and in this case, there is no necessity (to use the
IUD) since pregnancy can be prevented by other methods. ABGKLT

Answer: It is permissible for a woman to use the IUD and things such as
this to prevent pregnancy as long as there is no major harm in them.
However, the placing of the instrument must not necessitate one to look
or touch a part of the body, which is not permitted to see or touch.
Therefore, it is not permissible that someone, other than a woman’s
husband performs this action, unless it is in the case of necessity; for
example, if it is dangerous for the (health of the) woman to become
pregnant. Also in the case that it is unclear or unknown whether this
instrument (IUD or otherwise) aborts the embryo after its fertilization;
and thus, according to Ihtiyat, one must refrain from this (the usage of
the IUD).S

**Women Looking at Men who are Mahram**

43 – Rule: A woman is permitted to look at the entire body of a man who
is her Mahram, with the exception of his private parts, with the
condition that it is not done with the intention of lust. (One’s husband
is an exception to this rule.) ABGKLST

Men and women who are Mahram to one another (for example brother and
sister) are allowed to look at the body of one another, but only to that
extent that is common between Maharim and in other than this, according
to Ihtiyat, they must not look (at the other parts). M

Therefore: It is not allowed to look at any part of the body of a
Mahram man with the intention of lust, be it one’s son-in-law, son,
brother, nephew, etc… and thus one must keep away from this.

44 – Rule: It is not a problem to look at the shape of the private
parts of the man from on top of the clothing, provided it does not lead
to corruption. IT

If it does not lead to sin and corruption, then it is not a problem. BT
Women Looking at Non-Mahram Men 45 – Rule: It is haram for women to look
at the bodies of non-Mahram men with the exception of the face, hands,
and that amount which men normally do not cover. AGKMST

Therefore: It is not a problem for women to look at the hair on the
head, the face, the hands up to the wrist, the feet up to the ankle, and
the neck of a non-Mahram man with the condition that it is not
associated with lust. Thus, women are not allowed to attend sporting
tournaments [such as swimming, wrestling, weight lifting, soccer (also
known as football in some countries) etc…] in which men do not have
proper covering.

According to Ihtiyat Wajib it is haram for a woman to look at the body
of a non-Mahram man. However, the permissibility for a woman to look at
the parts of the body of a non-Mahram man that are normally kept open,
such as his head, is not free from difficulty, except if that looking
helps and leads one to evil and sin (in which case, it is not allowed).
B

It is haram for a woman to look at the body of a non-Mahram man, with
the exception of his face and hands. L

46 – Rule: It is haram to look at the arms, chest, or any other part of
the body of a non-Mahram man who is wearing inappropriate clothing, such
as a short sleeve shirt, or has kept the collar of his shirt open, or is
wearing see-through clothing, etc… even if it is without the intention
of lust. AGKLMS

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed. B

47 – Rule: It is not a problem for a woman to look at the shape and
figure of the body of a non-Mahram man from on top of the clothing, if
it is not with the intention of lust and there is no fear of falling
into sin. ABGKLT

48 – Question: Can a woman give an injection to a non-Mahram man, or do
other medically-related things which involve looking at the body of the
man, if it is done without the intention of lust?

Answer: It is not permitted, except in the case of necessity. AGKLMS

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed, except in the
case of necessity. B

49 – Rule: It is haram to look at the body of a non-Mahram man, even so
much as the face and hands if it is done with the intention of lust, or
one fears falling into sin.ABGKLMST

Therefore: There is no connection between the permissibility of the
woman to look at the body of a non-Mahram man and the necessity for a
man to cover. Meaning even though it is not wajib for a man to cover
himself completely, but it is wajib for the woman not to look at him.
Women Looking at Children

50 – Rule: In the event that the child is a girl, then up until the age
of Mumayyiz, a woman can look at the entire body of the child, and once
the child has become Mumayyiz, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, the
woman must not look at her private parts. KMLS

It is haram to look at the private parts of a Mumayyiz child. ABGT

Therefore: Mothers must pay special attention in the shower and in
other places that they do not look at the private parts of their
daughters or other women’s daughters that are Mumayyiz, even if it is
without the intention of lust.

51 – Rule: In the event that the child is a boy, then before he reaches
the age of Mumayyiz the woman can look at his entire body; and once he
becomes Mumayyiz, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, she must not look at his
private parts. In this ruling, there is no difference between a Mahram
boy and a non-Mahram boy. AKLMS

It is haram to look at the private parts of a Mumayyiz child. BGT

52 – Question: If we are in doubt as to whether or not a child has
reached the age of Mumayyiz, then what is the ruling (related to looking
at him)?

Answer: His ruling would be that of a non-Mumayyiz child. AGKLMST
Answer: From the point of view of looking, this child has the same
ruling as a child who is not Mumayyiz, although according to reasoning,
it is better to refrain from looking.B

**Rules of Looking When in a State of Doubt**

53 – Rule: If one doubts whether a certain person is amongst those whom
it is permissible to look at or not, then one must not look at them.
AGLM According to Ihtiyat, one must refrain (from looking). B

Example: If a man sees a woman in the dark, of if he sees a woman
coming towards him who he absolutely does not recognize, and he doubts
whether she is one of his Maharim (in which case to look at her is
allowed), or if she is a non-Mahram (in which case he can not look at
her), then it is not permissible to look at her.

54 – Rule: If in a group of people, one has a doubt; for example, it is
known that there is a Mahram there (in the group), but one does not know
which one in the group it is, then one must not look at any of them.
AGLM

Example: If a woman knows that there is a Mahram man amongst a group of
men that are not wearing proper clothing, but she does not know which
one of them it is, then she is not permitted to look at any of them.
Similarly, a man who knows that he has a Mahram in a gathering of women
is not permitted to look at them in order to find her. (In the event
that the women do not have the proper clothing on.)

55 – Rule: If one doubts whether or not a person is a man or a woman
(for example at night time, if the person is far away, fog or for some
other reason), then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, one must not look at
that person. KL

Rather, it is haram to look at them. G
It is not a problem to look at them. M

56 – Rule: If someone doubts whether an object is a human being, an
animal or something else, then in this case it is permissible to look at
that thing. AGLM

**The Rules of Looking at Photographs
Men Looking at the Photographs of Non-Mahram Women**

57 – Rule: Men are permitted to look at the photographs of non-Mahram
women who are properly observing their hijab (in the photo) with the
condition that it is not with the intention of lust. ABGKLMST

58 – Rule: If there is a photograph in which a woman has not observed
her hijab properly, and the man knows that woman, then he is not allowed
to look at that photo. If he does not know her, then he is allowed to
look at the photograph of that non-Mahram woman, with the condition that
it is not with the intention of lust. BKLT

Therefore: Either the man knows the woman, or does not know her. If he
does not know her, then there is no problem in looking at her photograph
without the intention of lust or deriving pleasure. However if he knows
her, and she is a woman who believes in observing and protecting the
Islamic hijab, then he is not allowed to look at her photograph in which
she is not wearing the proper hijab. If she does not believe in
observing the proper hijab, then even if the man knows her, it is not a
problem to look at her photograph as long as it is not with the
intention of lust or deriving pleasure.

It is not a problem to look at the photographs of non-Mahram women, or
films with them in it by means of the television or other than that, if
it is not with the intention of lust or fear of falling into corruption
and sin, even if one knows the person in the photograph. A

In the event that the man does not know the woman, then according to
Ihtiyat Mustahab, he should not look at her photograph; and if he knows
her, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, he must not look at her
photograph, especially if it is degrading to her stature, and /or
associated with corruption. G

In the event that the woman believes in observing and protecting the
Islamic hijab, then looking at a photograph of her without hijab is
problematic, unless the man does not know her and looking at the
photograph will not lead to any corruption. M

If the non-Mahram woman in the photo has not observed the proper
Islamic hijab, then in the event that the woman is not among those who
do not observe proper hijab, or do not observe hijab at all and if she
was told to wear it, she would not listen, and the man looking at the
photograph knows her, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, he must not look
at that photograph. In other than this scenario, it is not a problem to
look (at that photograph) as long as it is not with the intention of
deriving pleasure or enjoyment. S

Therefore: If the man does not know the woman, or the woman is one who
does not observe proper hijab or does not observe hijab at all and if
she was told to wear it, she would not listen; or if she has observed
her proper Islamic hijab in the photograph, then it is not a problem to
look at her photo.

Therefore: Men must not look at the family photo albums in which there
are women family members who are not observing their proper hijab. GK

It is not a problem to look at the photographs, even if the man knows
the woman, as long as it is not with the intention of lust, and there is
no fear of falling into corruption.A

59 – Question: What is the ruling of looking at the photographs of
non-Muslim women, or Muslim women who are not observing their proper
Islamic hijab?

Answer: In the event that the man does not know the woman and there is
no fear of falling into corruption, and it is not with the intention of
lust. then it is not a problem, although according to Ihtiyat Mustahab
he should refrain from it. ABGKLT

Answer: In the event that the woman is a non-Muslim or does not believe
in observing the proper Islamic hijab, then it is not a problem to look
at it (the photograph), as long as it is without the intention of lust
or deriving sexual pleasure. M

Answer: In the event that the photograph is that of a non-Muslim woman
or of a woman (Muslim) who does not care (if others see her) or is a
common place woman, then it is not a problem to look at it if it is
without the intention of lust or deriving sexual pleasure. S

60 – Rule: It is not a problem to look at the photographs of children –
whether they are boys or girls, if it is without the intention of lust
and there is no fear of falling into sin. ABGKLMST

61 – Rule: In the event that one fears that by looking at the
photograph of someone they will fall into sin, then one must not look at
that picture. ABGKLMST

62 – Rule: It is not permitted to show a photograph to someone which
one knows it is haram for that person to look it. AGK

Therefore: Women are not allowed to show pictures to their husbands,
brothers, or fathers in which there are non-Mahram women who are not in
hijab, and also, it is not permissible for the men to look at them
either.

63 – Question: What is the ruling for looking at the photographs of a
woman, when she was a child, in the event that she was not properly
clothed?

Answer: If looking at those photographs does not lead to her
degradation and does not arouse one sexually, then it is not a problem.
T

64 – Rule: It is haram to look at any photographs with the intention of
lust, be it that of a man or woman; a Mahram or a non-Mahram; a human
being or something else. The photo of one’s spouse is an exception to
this rule. ABGKLMST

65 – Rule: The buying, selling, and keeping of pornographic photographs
is haram and (if one has them in one’s possession) then they must be
destroyed. AGK

66 – Question: Is it permissible for a man to look at the photograph of
a non-Mahram woman who has died, in the event that he knows her?

Answer: If there is no corruption involved, then it is not a problem.
A

Answer: It is a problem for a man to look at the photograph of a
non-Mahram woman who has passed away. G

67 – Question: Please give us your opinion on the role for looking
related to those who are specializing in a field of medicine or those
students who are studying medicine, or … and because of the field of
their studies, they are forced to go through scientific books and films
that have indecent material in them.

Answer: If they need to look at them for learning and it is not with
the intention of deriving sexual pleasure, then it is not a problem.
GL

68 – Question: Is it permissible to look at non-Muslim women on
television who are not wearing the proper or sufficient clothing?

Answer: It is not a problem, if it is not with the intention of
deriving pleasure and one does not fear that he will fall into
corruption. ABGKLMST

69 – Question: It is permissible for men or women to look at obscene or
pornographic photographs, without the intention of deriving pleasure or
lust?

Answer: If it is related to corruption and deriving pleasure then it is
a problem, and many types of these (photographs) are definitely haram.
B

Answer: Looking at these types of photographs is not permitted. T Women
Looking at the Photographs of Men

70 – Rule: Women are permitted to look at the photographs of men with
the condition that is not with the intention of lust, and it does not
matter whether she knows the man or not, and whether the man is her
Mahram or non-Mahram. K

Therefore: It is not a problem for women to look at the photographs of
athletes, or martyrs, etc… unless it is associated with lust or falling
into corruption.


**The Rules of Watching Films**

71 – Rule: Films and TV shows that are directly broadcast (live), have
the same ruling as (looking at) living people, and if it is a
pre-recorded broadcast, then it has the ruling of (looking at)
photographs. K

Therefore: If a film or show is broadcast live, then the ruling for
watching it is the same as looking at a living person. Therefore, except
for the face and hands of the non-Mahram woman, men are not permitted to
look at the women (with those conditions that have already been
mentioned); and similarly, women are not permitted to look at the bodies
of men that are in fitness or sports programs, or other than that.

Similarly, if the film or show has been pre-recorded, then for one to
look at the men and women in that film or show has the same ruling as
looking at a photograph. Thus, men are not permitted to look at a film
in which a Muslim woman whom he knows and who has not observed the
proper hijab is in. However, if he does not know her nor does he have
fear of falling into sin, then he can look at her. Similarly, men are
not permitted to look at the films, which have been taken during wedding
ceremonies, in the event that the women are not in proper hijab, and he
knows them.

Films (and TV shows), whether live broadcast or pre-recorded, have the
same ruling as looking at a photograph. AGL

Therefore: According to the ruling of Ayatullah Araki, it is not a
problem for men to watch films in which there are non-Mahram women, even
if he knows them, with the condition that it is not with lust nor is
there is no fear of falling into sin, and with the other details that
were previously mentioned.

As for the ruling of Ayatullah Gulpaygani, according to Ihtiyat
Mustahab, men should not watch those movies in which there are
non-Mahram women, if he does not know them; and if he does know them,
then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, he is not permitted to watch them
(along with the other details that were previously mentioned).

It is a problem to look at a non-Mahram via the television or hearing
their voice, if it is going to lead to corruption or falling into sin.
B

72 – Question: Is one permitted to look at photographs of naked women
and or pornographic videos without the intention of deriving pleasure or
lust?

Answer: It is not permitted since looking at these types of photographs
or films usually has a negative and corruptive effect (on the soul). G

73 – Question: What is the ruling for women watching sporting events
that are shown on television, in the event that the men participating in
them do not have the proper covering on?

Answer: In the event that there is no fear of falling into sin, and it
is not with the intention of lust, then it is not a problem. KLMST

Answer: Women are not permitted to, intentionally, to look at these
types of programs. G

74 – Rule: As for what has been stated in the above rulings, there is
no difference between films that are shown on video, movie projectors,
or any other form. ABGKMST

75 – Question: If looking at a film in which non-Mahram women are
playing sports, some of which are not in their hijab, may sexually
excite some people who are watching it, but that same film, if others
watched it, would not make them sexually excited, then is it allowed for
these people to watch such a film?

Answer: If the video/program is being broadcast live, then it is not
allowed to look at it with the intention of lust, whether it excites one
sexually or not. However, if the show is not being broadcast live and if
the person watching it will become sexually excited, then he is not
allowed to view such a program, but if he will not become sexually
excited, then he is allowed to watch it. T

76 – Rule: Looking at a deceased person has the same ruling as looking
at a living person. GK

Therefore: A man is not allowed to look at the body of a deceased
non-Mahram woman. A woman too is not allowed to look at the body of a
deceased non-Mahram man, according to those rules that have been
mentioned previously.

77 – Question: Is it allowed to listen to the radio or watch the
television news broadcast of a woman anchorperson, or not?

Answer: It is not a problem, as long as it is not with the intention of
lust or sexual excitement. BKMST

Therefore: If a person feels that he will not fall into sin, then it is
not a problem, but in other than this situation, looking at her or
listening to her voice is not permitted.

Answer: Looking at that has the same ruling as looking at a photograph.
AG

78 – Question: It is permissible for men or women to look at obscene or
pornographic photographs, without the intention of deriving pleasure or
lust?

Answer: Looking at these types of movies mentioned above, that have
been produced and can lead to being misled, are not permissable. L

Answer: Looking at these types of photographs is not permitted. T

**Notes:**

[^2] Ahl al-Zhimmah are those Jews and Christians who, living under an
Islamic governemt, agree to pay the special Jizya tax. These Jews and
Christians are protected under the Islamic Governement and their lives
and property is sacrosanct and protected.


