Prologue
========

##### In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

Those who are aware of the conditions prevailing on the world of Islam
know well that the Islamic Ummah has nowadays transformed into ummahs,
each having its own customs and conventions. Consequently, the direction
of Muslims lives is determined by those who see their sovereignty and
survival in aggravating discords, for which they variously invest making
use of any possible means.

It goes without saying that there are differences, mostly theological,
among the Islamic sects. The Islamic theologians, *Mutakallimun*, have
established these differences, of which the generality of Muslims are
unaware. In comparison with these differing issues, there are many more
things in common. Those heading the disagreements emphasize a
magnification of the differences and refuse to talk about the common
points in the principles, usul, and subsidiaries, *furu\`*.

In a gathering of the Approximation of the Islamic Sects. I was assigned
to deliver a lecture about how the Islamic sects explain the personal
status (of their followers), including marriage, divorce, inheritance.
Much to the amazement of the participants, the article I presented to
the conference showed that there is unanimity between the present four
Sunni schools and Shiism in most of the above matters, an issue that was
unbelievable to the participants before.

They (the Sunnis) are keeping aloof from realities, imagining the
Shiites as a sect having been severed from other Islamic sects. Using
their mass media, they talk day

and night against this history-long oppressed sect and do nothing other
than serve the common enemy, all grist to the enemys mill. I advise this
misinformed group that they have a closer contact with the Shiites and
the Shiite scholars, for it will remove the veil of misinformation and
introduce the Shiites as their full blood brothers they have been in
search of for ages. And this is an actualization of the Quranic verse
*Surely this Islam is your religion, one religion (only), and I am your
Lord, therefore worship Me. 21:92.*

A chronic trick the colonial rule plays among the Islamic nations has
been the instillation and propagation of doubtful issues, aiming at
harming the glorious Islamic Revolution. This fraudulence has variously
been in circulation in the Middle East and other areas for the last
centuries.

Many pilgrims to the house of God whose minds have been confused by the
enemies evil propagations against the Islamic Revolution, and who meet
Iranian pilgrims during the Hajj ceremony, have raised questions for
which they require answers.

To meet this requirement, Mr. Sayyid Reza Husayni, a highly esteemed
scholar, has, under my supervision, collected a great number of the
questions, often of religious and cultural type, in the present book.
Our intention was to answer them as briefly as possible. Further
elucidation and explanation should be left for another occasion.

We hope that this insignificant service will meet Imam Zamans
acceptance, may our souls be sacrificed for him.

***Qum, Houzeh Ilmiyyeh  
 Ja'far Sobhani,  
 1994***

##### In the Name of God

For a long time we cherished the hope of translating a book that could
explain the Shiite treasure of learning in a simple, non-technical
language, when we came upon The Shiite Apologetics, which answers some
of the fundamental questions in a fluent, sincere and unbiased language
and in a manner that is in harmony with their primordial inclinations.

We hope that the present book that has made use of authentic *hadith*
sources, would answer some of the accusations made against the Shiites,
making it easy for readers to see things for themselves and judge the
reality.

***Sayyid Iraj Razzaghi  
 Dr. Sayyid Muhammad Reza Hashemi  
 Gholam Hasan Khavari***

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](01.htm)
