Question Ten
============

### What does Raj\`ah mean and why do Shiites believe in it?

Answer:
-------

Raj\`ah in Arabic means, to return and it specifically refers to the
return of a group of people to life before the Day of Resurrection -
simultaneous with the global uprising of the promised Mahdi. This is a
truth which is inconsistent neither with the common sense nor with the
logic of Revelation: on the one hand, in view of Islam and other Divine
religions, mans essence or soul continues to live an immortal life after
it departs the body; on the other, God is Omnipotent, as stated in the
Quran - nothing can limit His might. Thus, the issue of Raj\`ah
(returning of life) is logically possible, for a passing look upon the
matter proves that bringing the dead to life is far easier than creating
them. Thus, the Creator who created man first is undoubtedly able to
bring them to life again.

Referring to instances of Raj\`ah in the bygone nations, the Holy Quran
states: *and when you said; O Moses, we will not believe in you until we
see Allah manifestly, so the punishment overtook you while you looked
on. Then We raised you up after your death that you may give thanks.
(2:55-56). Also, the holy Quran quotes Jesus Christ as saying: and I
bring the dead to life with Allahs permission* (3:49)

The holy Quran not only attests the possibility of Raj\`ah but also
confirms that a group of people will return to life before the Day of
Resurrection. The following verses refer to this point:

*And when the word shall come to pass against them, We shall bring forth
for them a creature from the earth that shall speak to them, because
people did not believe in our revelations. And on the day when We shall
gather from every nation a party from among those who rejected our
revelations then they shall be formed into groups.* (27:82-83)

To prepare the ground for a discussion on the question of the return of
the dead before Resurrection Day, the following points should be taken
into consideration:

1) Muslim commentators believe that the above verses refer to Judgment
Day. The first verse mentions one of the signs of what will happen
before the Day of Resurrection. Jalal al-Din Suyuti in his al-Durr
*al-Manthur,* quotes Ibn Abi Shaybah who reported Hudhayfah as having
said that the phrase *bring forth as a creature* points to an event that
will take place before Resurrection Day.[1]

2) As attested in the following verse, all men, not a chosen group from
each nation, shall be brought to life on the Resurrection Day:

*That is a day when all mankind will be gathered together.* (11:103)

*And the day when We move the mountains and you will see the earth
emerging, and We gather them together so as to leave not anyone of them
behind.* (18:47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 177, commenting on verse 82 of Chap.
27 of the Qur'an, 'the Ant (al-naml).'

However, the verse 37:83 mentioned above clearly states that only a
group of men will be brought to life.[1]

Based on these introductory points, it is clear that only a particular
group of people who disbelieve the signs of God (as understood from
verse 37:83) will be brought to life before the Day of Judgment. This is
called Raj\`ah in which we believe. However, Resurrection will be
inclusive of all people.

The Household of the Prophet, who are companions and commentators of the
Quran, have elucidated the issue. For the sake of brevity, two
statements of Imam Sadiq are quoted in this connection:

The days of God are three: the day of the rising of Mahdi (a.s), the day
when (some of) the dead return to life (raj\`ah), and the Day of
Resurrection. The Imam also says, The one who has no faith in our return
to life is not (to be considered as) one of us.

The following points merit consideration:

1) Philosophy of Raj\`ah:
-------------------------

A deliberation on the question of Raj\`ah reveals that there are two
lofty goals in it. One is to display the real glory of Islam and the
shame of disbelief. The other is the rewarding of the believers and the
righteous, and the punishment of disbelievers and the unjust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur refers to this day as Resurrection Day. (vol. 3,
p. 349.)

2) Raj\`ah vs. Transmigration:
------------------------------

It should be mentioned that belief in the Raj\`ah never entails belief
in transmigration since the latter denotes a denial of the Day of
Resurrection. In the view of those who believe in transmigration, the
universe is an unending circulation with periods each of which is a
repetition of the one before it, and the spirit returns to the world and
enters another body after it leaves the body in which it dwelt. If the
spirit had done good deeds in its past life, it will then be lodged in a
body that would enjoy a happy life. Otherwise, it will enter a body to
lead a miserable life in its future life span. Such a return is
considered a resurrection for the spirit.

Those who believe in Raj\`ah, however, believe in the Day of
Resurrection as prescribed in the Shariah of Islam and reject the idea
that the spirit enters another body after its departure from a former
body. [1] They believe that a group of people will return to this world
before the Day of Resurrection. Then they will return to the eternal
abode once the requirements of Raj\`ah are fulfilled, so that they will
be resurrected with all mankind. They also believe that the spirit will
never return to another body once it departs the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Rejecting the idea of transmigration, Sadr al-Muta'allihin states
the following in his al-Asfar, vol. 9, chapter 1, p. 3, sub-section 8:
"The (idea) of the spirit leaving the body and entering another one,
whether this happens in the fetal stage or else, requires that one of
the two (the body or the spirit) be in a state of potentiality and the
other in the state of de facto. That which is in de facto must at the
same time maintain its potentiality, and this is impossible because the
combination of the spirit and the body is a natural unity; such a
natural combination will be impossible between two things of differing
states: potential and de facto."

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](09.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](11.htm)
