Question Thirteen
=================

### Does asking for help from others than God connote polytheism?

Answer:
-------

Based on wisdom and on the logic of revelation, not only all human
beings but also all phenomena in the world are in need of God to give
them life as they are in need of Him to give them the ability to be
effective. The Holy Quran says, *O mankind! You are poor in relation to
Allah, and Allah is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.* (35:15). In
another verse, The Quran attributes all victories to God and says,
*Victory comes only from Allah, the mighty, the wise* (3:126).

It is based on this immutable principle of Islam that we Muslims say in
our prayers, Thee do we worship and of Thee do we beg assistance. (1:5).

To clarify the above question, we can say that seeking others help, but
not Gods, can conceivably assume two dimensions. First, if we consider
one whose help we are seeking, a human being or a phenomenon, as being
entirely independent in origin and as one that enjoys freedom of action
and is needless of God in assisting, such an attitude is no doubt pure
polytheism and is refuted in the Quran which says, *Say, who is the one
who can withhold you from Allah if He intends to do you evil or desires
mercy for you? They will not find for themselves besides Allah any
guardian or a helper.* (33:17). The second attitude considers the one
that

is called upon as a mere creature in need of God and dependent on Him,
one on whom God has bestowed power to solve some of the problems people
have.

Based on the latter mentality, one whose help we seek is a medium set by
God the Sublime as a means to fulfill some of the needs of the people.
This way of seeking help is actually begging Gods assistance because it
is He who has created these mediators and has bestowed upon them the
power. Mans life is principally based on the foundation of asking the
means and causes for help to the extent that without their help his life
would be deranged.

Now, if we take them as the means of the realization of Gods assistance
and as those whose existence as well as their effectiveness come from
God, then such seeking help is incompatible neither with monotheism nor
with worshipping the One God.

If a monotheist farmer uses such helping factors as soil, water, air and
light in planting the seed and producing fruit, he in reality pursues
Gods assistance because it is He who has given the factors and
instruments their potentiality and power. It is obvious that such an
invocation is in full agreement with the spirit of worshiping the Unique
One.

In fact, the holy Quran itself orders us to seek help form such
phenomena as patience and prayer when it says, *Seek assistance through
patience and prayer.* (2:152). Although showing perseverance is clearly
done by man, and we have been commanded to seek assistance from patience
and prayer, this does not contradict the formula we repeat in the daily
prayer, *and from Thee do we seek assistance.*

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](12.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](14.htm)
