Question Fourteen
=================

### Does calling on others (Du\`a') necessarily mean worshipping them (\`Ibadah) and is it therefore a kind of polytheism?

Answer:
-------

This question has been raised because some verses of the Holy Quran,
such as the following ones, outwardly prohibit requesting anyone but
God:

*And that the Mosques are Allahs, therefore call not upon anyone besides
Allah. 72:18*

And do not call besides Allah on that which can neither benefit you nor
harm you. 10:106

Some people, sticking to such verses as a pretext, take calling on Gods
saints-after their deaths as polytheism.

Let us first explain the meaning of Du\`a and \`Ibadah in order to
clarify the answer to the question.

There is no doubt that the word Du\`a in Arabic means invocation and the
word \`Ibadah means worshipping. So we can never consider these two
words as synonyms; neither can we say that any kind of calling upon
someone equals worshipping him for the following reasons:

a) The word Du\`a has been used in the Holy Quran in

some contexts such as Chapter 71; we can never claim that it denotes
worshipping:

*He said: my Lord! I have called unto my people night and day.* 71:5

Can one claim that Noah meant he had been worshipping his people night
and day? Thus, we cannot say that Du\`a (calling) and \`Ibadah
(worshipping) are synonymous and that if one calls a prophet or a saint,
he has necessarily worshipped them just because these words (may) entail
worship.

b) The word Du\`a calling as used in the above verses conveys the
concept of worshipping because these verses actually refer to the
idolaters who took their idols as gods. The humbleness the idolaters
showed, the prayer they performed and the humble entreaty they made were
doubtlessly all directed to the idols that they considered as the ones
with the right to intercede and to forgive and with the power to act
freely in the affairs which are related to this world and the next. It
is self-evident that any calling upon these beings equals worshipping
them. The clearest example to this assertion comes from the verse of the
Quran which reads: *And their gods on whom they called besides Allah
availed them naught.* 11:101

Thus, the verses mentioned (at the beginning of the chapter) are
unrelated to the topic in question, which is the issue of a servant of
God requesting another one while the former considers the latter neither
a god or a lord nor one who can act freely and bring about changes in
the affairs of the world or of the hereafter, but believes him to be a
dear and honorable servant of God chosen by Him to the

position of Prophethood and Imamate, one whose prayers God has promised
to answer, as stated in the following verse:

*And if, then they wronged themselves, they had but come unto thee and
asked forgiveness of Allah, and asked forgiveness of the messenger, they
would have found Allah forgiving and Merciful.* 4:64

c) The verses themselves contain clear evidence of the fact that the
calling referred to above, is not a general, ordinary request for the
needs to be fulfilled; rather, it is related to worshipping. This is why
the word worship service follows the word calling in the following
verse:

*And your Lord says: Call upon me, and I will answer your prayer; surely
those who are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell abased.*

This clearly means that the calling made (by polytheists) was an
invocation to creatures credited with Gods attributes.

Conclusion:
-----------

Following the three preliminary arguments just outlined, we can safely
conclude that the Qur'ans principal aim in these verses is to prohibit
the idolaters from calling upon their idols, whom they considered as
Gods partners, prudent and able to intercede. If the idolaters showed
humbleness, lamented, implored and begged for intercession or prayed for
what they needed, it was because they believed their idols to be small
gods responsible for Godly deeds. They assumed that the Lord has
transferred the responsibility for some terrestrial and celestial tasks
to the idols. How can these Verses have reference to asking a

pure soul who, in the callers opinion, has gone no further that complete
devotion and is indeed a beloved and honored servant of God?

When the Quran declares: *and that the mosques are Allah's, therefore
call not upon any one with Allah,* it is addressing the pagan Arabs who
worshipped idols, celestial bodies, angels and the Jinn. This verse and
the like speak of calling upon a person or a thing while considering him
or it a deity, and no doubt, such a calling upon these creatures by
someone with such beliefs is equal to worshipping them. But what do
these verses have to do with asking for the help and blessings of a
person when the caller does not attribute Godly position, prudence or
devotion to the addressee but is just imploring a worthy and beloved
servant of God?

Some may think that we can only call upon saints while they are still
alive and if we do so when they are not, it is polytheism.

In answer to this problem it suffices to say that firstly we call upon
the pure spirits of the righteous servants of God like our Prophet and
the Imams who, according to the Holy Quran are alive in the Barzakh the
intermediate state between death and Resurrection in a horizon above the
martyrs. We are not calling upon the bodies buried in the earth. If we
call upon them at their shrines, it is because this makes us more
conscious of and connected with the Saintly spirits. Furthermore,
according to certain traditions, prayers are answered in these
precincts. Secondly, the question of life or death of the saints can
hardly be a criterion for the issue of monotheism or polytheism.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](13.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](15.htm)
