Question Fifteen
================

### What is Bada' and why do Shiites believe in it?

Answer:
-------

Bada in Arabic means to become manifest. In Shiite terminology, it
denotes a change in the course of ones fate due to his good deeds. It is
a lofty point in the Shiite dynamic school derived from the logic of
Revelation and the exploration of reason.

As the Quran views the affairs, man is not such as to be invariably
helpless before his fate, but he may change the course of his fate by
returning to the Truth and by doing worthy deeds, this being a universal
and lasting principle, asserted by the Quran *Allah does not change the
conditions of a people until they change their own conditions. 13:11.
Also, And if the people of the cities had believed and guarded (against
evil), We would certainly have opened up for them the blessings from the
heaven and the earth.* 7:96. Such states the Quran concerning a change
in Prophet Yunus (Jonah) lot: *But had it not been that he was of those
who glorify (Us), he would certainly have tarried in its (i.e. the
whales) belly until the Resurrection Day.* 37:143-4.

The above verse indicates that Prophet Yunus was apparently to remain in
this special jail until the Day of Resurrection, but his good deed (his
glorifying God) changed his lot and saved him. This is a fact recognized
by Islamic narrations (hadiths), concerning which the holy Prophet (a.s)
said, Ones sins do deprive one from ones destined provision and nothing
but supplications can change it; one can also lengthen ones life only by
performing good deeds.[1]

This tradition and similar ones prove if man commits sins, he will be
deprived of the provisions he should receive; nevertheless, he can
change his fate and prolong his life when he supplicates to God and does
good deeds.

Conclusion
----------

As understood from the Quran and the Prophets words, it is quite
probable for one to be doomed to a certain painful end due to the
natural sequence of cause and effect, stemming from his everyday
behavior; he may be warned by a saint such as the Prophet or an Imam, of
such a consequence if he continues misbehaving. Such an end may,
however, change its direction and lead to happiness if one corrects his
deeds. This fact, derived from the logic of revelation, the Prophets
Sunnah and the explorations of the reason is, in Shiite terminology,
called *Bada'.*

It is worth mentioning here that Bada' is not specifically a Shiite
application; it can be traced in the Sunnite

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Musnad Ahmad vol. 5, p. 277; Also Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak \`ala
al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p. 493, and similar others in al-Tajol Jam', vol.
5, p. 111.

writings concerning the words of the holy Prophet, (a.s), such as the
following example: *It appeared good to God to afflict them (with
trouble.)* [1]

It should also be mentioned that Bada' never implies a change in Gods
knowledge, for He knows, from the very beginning, the natural course
mans actions will move in, as well as the influence of the factors that
can change this process and cause Bada, as He has said in the Quran: *He
blots out and He establishes whatever he wills, and with Him is the
essence (mother) of the Book* 13:39

This means that at the time when Bada occurs, God actually clarifies for
us what has been a clear fact to Him since eternity. This is why Imam
Sadiq, peace be upon him, says, *In no event did God consider (the
occurrence of) Bada' but He knew it before it took place.* [2]

The Philosophy of Bada
----------------------

If man feels he has a free hand in changing his fate, he will no doubt
try to make himself a better future, and will endeavor more
energetically to improve his life. In other words, just as repentance,
Tawbah, and intercession save him from hopelessness and a bleak life,
Bada will fill him with happiness, giving him hope for a bright future,
for it is in the light of such an insight that man knows that he can, as
ordained by God, change his lot and move on to a better future and a
brighter end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-hAdith wa al-Athar, by Madj al-Din
al-Mubarak ibn Muhammad al-Jazri, vol. 1, p. 109. [2] Usul a- Kafi, The
Book al-Tawhid, chapter on Bada', tradition 9.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](14.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](16.htm)
