Question Sixteen
================

### Do the Shiites believe that the Quran has been distorted?

Answer:
-------

The renowned Shiite scholars unanimously maintain that no distortion
whatsoever has entered into the sacred precinct of the Quran: nothing
has been added to it nor anything has been dropped from it, and that the
Quran we have with us today is the same divine Scripture which was
revealed to the noble Prophet. To this regard, a few elucidatory points
are presented below:

1. The Lord of the worlds Himself has guaranteed the protection of the
Quran by saying Surely, We have revealed the reminder and We will most
surely be its guardian 15:9. It is evident that the Shiites, giving the
Quran their widest attention in making their decisions and taking
actions, value this holy Quranic verse and do believe in the message it
conveys.

2. The great leader of the Shiites, \`Ali (a.s), a constant company of
the noble Prophet and a scribe of the Revelation, has, in various
circumstances, invited people to the same Quran in common use. Quoted
below are some of his words in this regard:

And know that this Quran is an advisor that never deceives and a guide
that never misleads.[1]

Verily, Allah, the Glorified, has never advised anyone as He has done
through the Quran; therefore, it is His strong rope and His plain
medium.[2]

Then He sent upon him (Muhammad - peace be upon him and his descendants)
a book which can be likened to a light whose flame can not be put out, a
dazzling lamp whose gleam does not die, a path that never leads its
traveler astray, and a separator of good from evil whose arguments will
never weaken.[3]

The lofty words of the great Imam of the Shiites imply that the glorious
Quran is similar to a beacon that gives light, illuminating the way for
the travelers and will remain so forever. No distortion will ever enter
into it, distortion of the kind that may extinguish its light or lead
the people astray.

3. The Shiite scholars of religion unanimously hold that the holy
Prophet (a.s) has said, I leave behind two precious things among you:
the Book of Allah (The Quran) and my Ahl al- Bayt, my *Itrah*; You will
never go astray so long as you adhere to them.

This is an Islamic tradition with unbroken chain of narrators,
frequently quoted by both Shiites and Sunnis, confirming the Shiites'
belief that no alteration will ever

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Subhi al-Salih's Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 176. [2] Ibid, sermon l76
[3] Ibid sermon 198

happen to the Quran; otherwise, the Quran would be unable to guide or
prevent misguidance, which is incompatible with the clear content of the
tradition narrated above.

4. The fact that the Quran is a criterion to distinguish truth from
falsehood, and good from evil has been expressed by the Imams of the
Shiites, whose words all our scholars have narrated. (The Imams have
said) Any statement, even the traditions attributed to us, should be
verified by the Quran. If they are compatible with the Quranic verses,
they are true; otherwise they are invalid and are false.

The Shiite books of jurisprudence and traditions abound with narrations
(i.e. *hadiths*), a few of which are mentioned below:

Imam Sadiq (a.s) has said, Any tradition not in conformity with the
Quran is baseless.[1] This tradition clearly shows that no alteration
will take place in the Quran; therefore, this holy Book can remain an
eternal criterion for distinguishing truth from falsehood.

5. The great Shiite scholars of religion, the forerunners of the Islamic
and Shiite culture, have admitted the fact that the Quran will remain
intact forever. Some of these people, too many to enumerate here, are as
follows:

a) Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad Ibn \`Ali ibn Husayn Babawayh of Qum, known as
Saduq (d.381 A.H.) says, It is our belief that this Quran is the word of
God, the Revelation, into which falsehood finds no way; it has been sent
down

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, the chapter on superiority of knowledge, Bab
al-Akhdh bil-Sunnah wa Shawahid al-Kitab, tradition 4.

from God, the Wise; and it is He Who has sent it down and it is He Who
safeguards it.[1]

b) Sayyid Murtada \`Ali ibn Husayn Musawi Alawi, known as \`Alam al-Huda
(d. 436 A.H.) has said, Some companions of the Prophet (a.s), such as
\`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud and Ubayy ibn Ka\`b often recited the whole Quran
to the Prophet (a.s). This shows that the Quran had already been
collected and well ordered, without lacking anything.[2]

c) Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad Ibn Hasan Tusi, known as *Shaykh al-Taifah*
(d.460 A.H.), has said, The issue concerning anything being added to or
deleted from the Quran does not befit this book, for Muslims unanimously
hold that nothing has been added to the Quran. As regards any deletion,
the appearance of the Muslims canon law, the Shariah, proves it to be
otherwise. This statement (that nothing has been added to the Quran) is
more befitting to our law school, Shiism. This is what Sayyid Murtada
has accepted and confirmed, (and is) a fact also proved by the
appearance of the *hadiths.*

(Only) a scanty number of people have made reference to some traditions
handed down from the Shiite and the Sunnis, pointing to the Quranic
verses that are missing or transposed. But such traditions are of the
kind that bring no sound knowledge, nor do they impel one to act upon
them; it is better to shun them away.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-I\`tiqadat, p.93 [2] Majma\` al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 10, quoted from
Sayyid Murtada's al-Masa'il al-Tarabulsiyyah. [3] Al-Tibyan, vol. 1, p.
3.

d) Abu-\`Ali Tabrasi, the author of Majma\` al-Bayan Exegesis has said,
As regards (the issue of) anything being added to the Quran, the Islamic
community, as a whole, believes it to be a baseless idea. A handful of
our people and a small group from the Hashawiyyah sect, however, have
narrated words from the Sunnis in regard to verses having being deleted.
But what is generally accepted in our Shariah, which is correct,
counters it.[1]

e) \`Ali Ibn Tawus Hilli, known as Sayyid Ibn Tawus (d. 664 A.H.) has
said, It is the Shiites conviction that no alteration can happen to the
Quran.[2]

f) Commenting on the Quranic verse *Surely We have revealed the Reminder
and We will most surely be its guardian,* Shaykh Zayn al-Din al-\`amili
(d. 877 A.H.) has said, This verse means We will safeguard the Quran
against any change and alteration.[3]

g) The author of *Ihqaq al-Haqq,* Qadi Sayyid Nur al-Din Tustari (d.
1019 A.H.) has said, The accusation laid against the Twelver Shiites for
claiming that they believe the Quran has been altered is not accepted by
all the Shiites. Only a few of them, whom Shiites disregard, believe
so.[4]

h) Muhammad Ibn Husayn, known as Baha al-Din \`amili (d.1030 A.H.) has
said, It is a truth that the Glorious

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majma\` al-Bayan, vol. 1, p.10. [2] Sa\`d al-Su\`ud, p.144. [3]
Izhar al-Haqq, vol. 2, p.130. [4] ala' al-Rahman, p. 25.

Quran is secure against any addition or deletion. The claim that the
name of the Commander of the Faithful (a.s) has been deleted from the
Quran is unacceptable to the scholars of religion. Anyone who probes
into history and traditions knows that the Quran is unalterable and it
has been compiled during the time of the Prophet (a.s). Successive
traditions (we have at hand) and the statements made by thousands of the
companions of the Prophet prove this point.[1]

i) Having quoted such verses as *Surely, We have revealed the Reminder
and We will safeguard it,* the author of al-Wafi, Fayd Kashani, (d.1091
A.H.) has said, How can distortion and alteration ever occur to the
Quran? Such traditions stand in opposition to the Book of God; they
should, therefore, be considered baseless.[2]

j) The renowned scholar in religion, Kashif al-Ghita, has the following
statement in his *Kashf al-Ghita,* The Quran is, no doubt, secure
against any distortion because God has promised to protect it; to this
the Quran itself testifies, and so do all the scholars, just as they
have done throughout the ages. The differing idea of some people, too
few, should not be heeded.

h) The ex-leader of the Islamic Revolution, Ayatollah Imam Khomeini,
also has made the following comment, another clear proof in this
respect: Anyone who knows how devoted Muslims have been in collecting,
preserving, and reciting of the Quran will testify that the idea of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] Tafsir al-Safi, vol. 1, p. 51.

alteration of the Quran is baseless and implausible. The narrations
handed down in this one respect are either weak (so they can not be
taken as evidence) or fabricated (with marks of forgery evident in them)
or are narrations the subject matter of which is tawil, the esoteric
meaning and some interpretation of the Quran, or similar issues for the
explanation of which a comprehensive book should be written. Were it not
for the fear of deviation from our discussion, we would go through the
history of the Quran and prove that the glorious Quran is in reality the
book we have at hand and that the theoretical difference we see among
the reciters of the Quran is a new issue that has nothing to do with
what Gabriel, the Faithful Spirit, revealed to the pure heart of the
noble Prophet.[1]

Conclusion
----------

Muslims, both the Shiites and the Sunnis, maintain that the Quran in use
is the very Divine Book that was sent down to the Prophet (a.s), and is
secure against any distortion, either addition or deletion. Thus, the
accusation made against the Shiites is proved to be unfair. If the weak
narrations are referred to as evidence for the discussion, we will
answer that these narrations are not restricted to the Shiite sources,
for a group of the Sunni interpreters of the Quran, named below, have
also narrated the same weak traditions.

1. In his commentary of the Quran, Abu-\`Abdullah Muhammad Ibn Ahmad
Ansari of Cordova, quotes Abu-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Imam Khomeini's Tahdhib al-Usul, vol. 2, p. 96 (compiled by
Ayatollah Subhani).

Bakr Anbazi to have said, on the authority of Ubay ibn Ka\`b, During the
time of the Prophet the *Ahzab* chapter of the Quran, which contains
seventy three verses, was as long as the Baqara chapter, which has two
hundred and eighty six verses. The verse on stoning was also a part of
the former chapter[1] whereas such a verse does not exist in the Ahzab
chapter now. The author of the same book quotes \`aishah to have said,
During the lifetime of the Prophet, the *Ahzab* chapter contained two
hundred verses, but when the Mushaf (the Quran) was collected into one
volume, no more verses were found than are now at hand.[2]

2. The author of Al-Itqan has related that there were one hundred and
sixteen Surahs, in the Mushaf that Ubay had compiled, for it contained
two other chapters: *Hafd* and *Khal\`*[3]. We know, however, that there
are only one hundred and fourteen chapters in the Glorious Quran,
without any trace of alleged chapters: *Hafd* and *Khal\`*.

3. In his *al-Nasikh wal-Mansukh,* Hibatullah Ibn Salamah relates from
Malik ibn Anas as having said, During the time of the Prophet, we used
to recite a Surah that was as long as chapter *Repentance,* of which I
have memorized only one verse: If the son of Adam were in possession of
two valleys full of gold, he would long for a third one; were he given
the third one, he would long for the fourth. Nothing but dust will fill
his inner side; God forgives whoever repents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tafsir Al-Qurtubi, part 14, p. 113; Chapter al-Ahzab, the Holy
Qur'an. [2] Ibid. [3] Al-Itqan, vol. 1, p. 67.

We know that such a verse does not exist in the Quran, nor does it
follow eloquence of the Quran.

4. In his *al-Durr al-Manthur* Jalal al-Din Suyuti quotes \`Umar ibn
al-Khattab as having said, The Ahzab chapter was as long as Baqara
chapter and it contained the verse on stoning.[1]

We can thus conclude that a small number of both Shiites and Sunnis have
related basically weak traditions in regard to alterations in the Quran.
The vast majority of Shiites and Sunnis, however, have not accepted
these traditions; moreover, the text of the Quranic verses and the
traditions of absolute authority as well as thousands of the Prophets
companions and consensus of the Muslims all over the world show that no
distortion, alteration, addition or deletion has befallen the Quran nor
will such a thing ever happen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 5, p. 180.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](15.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](17.htm)
