Question Seventeen
==================

### How do Shiites regard the Companions?

Answer:
-------

The Shiites believe that those who had the honor of meeting the Prophet
and the privilege of being his companions are divided into several
groups. Before going into details, it would be appropriate to see what
is meant by Companion.

1. According to Sa\`id ibn al-Musayyab, a Companion is one who was with
the Prophet for a couple of years and fought at his side in one or two
battles.[1]

According to Waqidi, The scholars believe that whoever met the Prophet
and accepted Islam, pondered on the issue of religion and accepted it,
is among the Prophets Companions, even if he met the Prophet just for
one hour.[2]

According to Muhammad ibn Isma\`il al-Bukhari, Any Muslim who associated
with the Prophet or met him, is considered the Prophets Companion.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 1, p. 11-12. [2] Ibid, p. 11-12. [3] Ibid.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal says, Any one who associated with the Prophet for a
month, a day or even an hour, or (even) saw him is among his
companions.[1]

Sunni scholars believe that anyone who associated with the Prophet is
just; this is a categorical principle to them.[2]

We shall now proceed to discuss the Shiites viewpoint, sprung from the
doctrine of Revelation and the enlightening verses of the Quran.

History has recorded the names of more than twelve thousand people as
the Companions of the Prophet (a.s). There were various personalities
among the companions. No doubt, being the Prophets company was a great
honor for a group whom the Muslim nation always respects, because they
were the pioneers of Islam, the ones who erected the flag of Islamic
glory for the first time. The holy Quran praises the pioneer
standard-bearers and declares:

Not equal among you are those who spent (freely) and fought before the
victory, (with those who did so later). They are higher in rank than
those who spent (freely) and fought afterwards. (57:10).

Nevertheless, it has to be admitted that the Prophets companionship was
not an elixir to have metamorphosed peoples nature, insured them all for
the rest of their lives and put them among the just. To clarify the
matter and settle the issue, it is worth appealing to the Divine Book,
the Qur'an, which is accepted by all Muslims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] Al-Istiab fi Asma' al-Ashab, vol. 1, p. 2; Usd al-Ghabah,
vol. 1, p. 3 quoting Ibn al-Athir.

The Quran and the Companions:
-----------------------------

According to the doctrine of Revelation, those who had the privilege of
being the Companions of the Prophet are divided into two groups. The
first group includes those whom the Quran praises, mentioning them as
the founders of the glorious palace of Islam. The following are Quranic
passages concerning this group.

1. The Vanguard:
----------------

The vanguard (of Islam) -- the first of those who forsook (their homes)
and of those who gave them aid, and (also) those who follow them in
(all) good deeds -- well pleased is God with them, as are they with Him:
for them He has prepared gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell
therein forever. That is the supreme felicity. (9:100)

2. Those Who Swore Allegiance (under the tree)
----------------------------------------------

Allah was well-pleased when they swore allegiance unto thee beneath the
tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down peace of
reassurance on them and has rewarded them with a near victory. (48:18)

3. The Muhajirun (the Immigrants):
----------------------------------

(Some part is due) to the indigent Immigrants, those who were expelled
from their homes and their property, while seeking grace from God and
(His) good pleasure, and aiding God and His apostle: such are indeed the
sincere ones. (49:8)

4. Companions in the Conquest (of Mecca):
-----------------------------------------

*Muhammad is the messenger of God; and those with him are hard against
disbelievers and merciful amongst themselves. (O Muhammad!) See them
bowing and falling prostrate (in worship), seeking bounty from Allah and
(His)*

*acceptance. On their faces are their marks (being) traces of their
prostration.* (48:29)

The second group of the Prophets Companions consisted of black-hearted
hypocrites whose true identity was revealed by the Holy Quran and the
Prophet was warned against them. They are referred to in the following
Quranic passages:

1) The Undisguised Hypocrites:
------------------------------

when the Hypocrites come unto you (O Muhammad), they say, *We bear
witness that you are indeed Allahs messenger and Allah knows that you
are indeed His messenger, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are
speaking falsely.* (63:1)

2) The Disguised Hypocrites:
----------------------------

*Certain of the desert Arabs round about you are hypocrites as well as
(desert Arabs) among the folk of Medina; they are obstinate in
hypocrisy: you know them not; We know them.* (9:101)

3. The Diseased-hearted:
------------------------

*When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said: Allah
and His Messenger promised us naught but delusions!* (23:12)

4) The Wrongdoers:
------------------

*Others (are those who) have acknowledged their wrong doings: they have
mixed an act that was good with another that was evil. Perhaps God will
turn unto them (in mercy); for God is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.*
(9:102)

Besides the Quranic verses, there are numerous traditions from Prophet
Muhammad disproving some of the

Companions. Two examples are mentioned here.

1. Abu-Hazim relates that according to Sahl ibn Sa\`d, the Prophet said:

I send you to the Fountain of Kawthar; whoever arrives at it drinks from
it and whoever drinks from it shall never be thirsty again. Some people
come to me; I know them and they know me; then we are separated from
each other.[1]

While I was narrating this tradition, says Abu-Hazim, Nu\`man ibn
Abi-\`Ayyash heard it and asked, 'Did you hear Sahl say it in this way?'
I said, 'Yes.' He said, 'I bear witness that according to Abu-Sa\`id
Khidri this same tradition ends as follows:

They are with me. Then I am told You are not aware of what they did
after you. Then I reply, 'Far from (Allah's) mercy are those who changed
(the precepts) after me.

The phrases I know them and they know me and who changed after me
clearly refer to the Companions who were with the Prophet for some time.
(Bukhari and Muslim have reported this tradition, too)

2. Bukhari and Muslim quote the Prophet to have said:

On the Day of Resurrection, a group of my Companions or my people come
to me; they are then taken away from the Fountain (of Kawthar); (They
are prevented from coming to or nearing the Fountain). I say, O Lord,
these are my Companions. And the Lord replies, You know not

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jami\` al-Usul of Ibn al-Athir, the book al-Hawz fi wurud al-Nass;
\`Alayhi; p. 20 (Tradition No. 7972).

of what they did after you; they returned on their heels (to the Age of
Ignorance).[1]

Conclusion:
-----------

Based on Quranic verses and Prophetic traditions cited above, it becomes
clear that the Companions and those who met the Prophet were not of the
same rank. One group included the pure individuals of the highest merit
whose valuable services facilitated the growth of the young tree of
Islam. The other group included people who were, right from the
beginning, hypocrites, double dealers, black-hearted or sinful. Thus,
the Shiites' view - the same view as in God's Book and in the Sunnah -
concerning the Companions of the Prophet becomes clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jami\` al-Usul, vol. 11, p. 120 (Tradition No. 7973).

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](16.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](18.htm)
