Question Eighteen
=================

### What is meant by mut\`ah (i.e. temporary marriage) and why is it allowed by Shiism?

Answer:
-------

Marriage is a bond between a man and a woman; it may be either
permanent, with no time specified when it is contracted, or temporary
and limited in time. However, they are characteristically the same, and
are both legitimate, the only difference being that one is permanent and
the other one temporary. They share the other conditions as specified
below.

1. There should be no religiously-defined barriers either of blood
relation or relationship through marriage; otherwise, their marriage
will be invalid.

2. The dowry they both agree upon should be specified in the contract.

3. The marriage duration must already be decided upon.

4. The marriage contract must be religiously concluded.

5. The children born to them are legitimate and lawful; both religiously
and officially, just like the children born through permanent marriage.

6. Such children must be financially supported by the father; they
inherit from both parents.

7. When the marriage period terminates, the wife must observe the
waiting period the Shariah has determined if she has not reached
menopause. If she is pregnant, she should not remarry until she has
given birth to her child. Other regulations pertaining to permanent
marriage must also be observed in temporary marriage. An important
difference being that the husband does not have to financially support
the wife, for the temporary marriage has been laid down to satisfy the
(casual) needs. Another difference is that the wife does not inherit
from the husband unless it has been specified in the marriage contract
that she will. It is evident that these two differences do not have any
effect on the nature of marriage.

It is generally believed that Islam is an ever- lasting and final
religion that satisfies all human needs. Now, a young man who has to
stay abroad for several years in order to follow up his studies, and
cannot enter into a permanent marriage relationship because of his
limited possibilities will have to choose one of the following three
ways:

a. to remain a bachelor,

b. to indulge into indecent relationship

c. to marry a woman temporarily, based on the aforementioned
regulations.

The first choice is doomed to failure because although there are a few
people who can tolerate a celibate life, this is not possible for all.

Those who choose the second option will end up in corruption and
distress; moreover, Islam considers such a

procedure unlawful. Only an ill mind and perverted thought may recommend
it under the pretext of the necessity.

The third solution, suggested by Islam and frequently practiced during
the lifetime of the Prophet (a.s), will be the only way to follow. This
kind of marriage was later on questioned.

Those who fear the mut\`ah marriage and consider it illegitimate should
remember that the Islamic jurisprudents have all allowed for a similar
thing to happen in a permanent marriage: the couple may conclude a
permanent marriage contract but actually have the intention of
separating after a year or so. This kind of marriage, permanent in
appearance, is temporary in actuality. It differs from *mut\`ah in that
mut\`ah* marriage is temporary and limited both outwardly and inwardly,
whereas this particular kind of marriage is apparently permanent but
limited in nature.

Now, why should those who support this kind of permanent marriage,
sanctioned by all Islamic jurists, be afraid of temporary marriage?

Now that we have been acquainted with temporary marriage, it is time to
become more familiar with the reasons for its sanctioning. Two points
are worth mentioning:

1) Mut\`ah was lawful in the earliest period of Islam.

2) It was not abrogated so long as the Prophet was alive.

As for the legitimacy of mut\`ah, the holy Quran states, *Give them (the
women) their marriage portion for the enjoyment you have had of them as
a duty.* 4:24. The

words in the verse are clear proof that this verse has been revealed in
regard to temporary marriage for the following reasons:

a) The word istimta\` (enjoyment) literally refers to temporary
marriage; were it not so, there would be other contextual clues in the
verse.

b) The word *ujurahunna* (their marriage dowry) is another lucid proof
referring to mut\`ah since other expressions as *sadaq and mahr* (dowry)
are used for permanent marriage.

c) Shiite and Sunni commentators of the Quran both hold that the above
verse has been revealed in regard to mut\`ah marriage. For example, in
his *al-Durr al-Manthur,* Jalal al-Din Suyuti quotes Ibn Jarir and Saddi
to have said that the above verse concerns mut\`ah marriage.[1]
Abu-Ja\`far Muhammad ibn Jarir Tabari on the authority of Saddi,
Mujahid, and Ibn \`Abbas also says that this verse is related to
temporary marriage.[2]

d) The authors of Sihah and Masanid as well as hadith collections are of
the same opinion. For example, in his own Sahih Muslim ibn Hajjaj quotes
Jabir ibn \`Abdullah and Salamah ibn Akwa\` to have said, A herald came
to us from the Prophet (a.s) and said 'The Messenger of Allah has
permitted you to have enjoyment of women.' This means he has permitted
mut\`ah marriage.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p.140, commentary on the Qur'anic verse
mentioned above. [2] Jami\` al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, part 5, p. 9.
[3] Sahih Muslim, part 4, p. 130, printed in Egypt.

The hadiths related in the books of *Sahih and Musnad* are too many to
be cited here. These are sufficient evidence that mut\`ah marriage was a
law during the time of the holy Prophet (a.s)[1], admitted by the
commentators and scholars of Islam.

A question may be raised as to whether the content of the *mut\`ah*
verse has been abrogated.

There may be few people who doubt that mut\`ah marriage was allowed in
the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah (a.s). There may be doubt
concerning its maintenance and its not having been abrogated.

Hadiths and the history of Islam indicate that *mut\`ah,* a command of
the Divine, was frequently practiced by Muslims up to the time of the
second caliph, who prohibited it for certain considerations. In his
Sahih, Muslim Ibn Hajjaj quotes (the event of) a debate between Ibn
\`Abbas and Ibn al-Zubayr in regard to *mut\`at al-nisa'* and *mut\`at
al-hajj.* Jabir ibn \`Abdullah said, We, together with the Prophet,
practiced both types of *mut\`ah;* \`Umar prohibited us from both; and
we no longer practiced them.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A sample list of the documents includes: Sahih al-Bukhari, the
chapter on Tamattu\`; Musnad Ahmad, vol. 4, p. 436, & vol. 3, pp. 3 &
356; Malik's al-Muwatta', vol. 2, pp. 4 & 30; Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 7,
pp. 5 & 306; Tafsir al-Tabari vol. 5, pp. 6 & 9; Ibn al-Athir's
al-Nihayah, vol. 2, pp. 7 & 249; Tafsir al-Razi, vol. 3, pp. 8 & 201;
Tarikh Ibn Khillakan, vol. 1, pp. 9 & 359; Ahkam al-Qur'an, vol. 2, pp.
10 & 178; al-Raghib's al-Muhadharat, vol. 2, pp. 11 & 94; al-Suyuti's
al-Jami\` al-Kabir, vol. 8, pp. 12 & 293; Ibn Hajar's Fath al-Bari, vol.
9, p.141. [2] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 7, p. 206; Sahih Muslim, vol. 1, p.
395.

In his commentary on the Quran, Jalal al-Din Suyuti has quoted \`Abd
al-Razzaq, Abu-Dawud and Ibn Jarir to have asked Hakam if *mut\`ah*
marriage has been abrogated; he answered No.

\`Ali (a.s) has said, If \`Umar had not prohibited mut\`ah, no one would
have committed adultery except for the wicked people.[1]

\`Ali ibn Muhammad Qushchi also says, \`Umar went up the pulpit and
said, O people, there were three things practiced during the Prophets
lifetime, which I forbid and I will punish anyone who performs them.
They are mut\`at al-nisa, mut\`at al-hajj and saying *hayya \`ala khayri
al\`amali* in adhan.[2] The narrations concerning this point are too
many to be mentioned here.[3]

It should be noted that *mut\`ah* is a kind of marriage, and marriage is
divided into two kinds: permanent and temporary marriage. The woman with
whom the temporary marriage contract is concluded is considered ones
wife, and the other

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p.140; exposition under the Qur'anic
verse on mut\`ah. [2] An exposition of al-Qushchi's al-Tajrid, the
Discussion on Imamate, p. 484. [3] For further information, see the
following documents: Musnad Ahmad, vol. 3, pp 2, 356 & 363; al-Jahiz's
al-Bayan wa'l-Tabyin, vol. 2, pp. 3 & 223; al-Jassas's Ahkam al-Qur'an,
vol. 1, pp. 4 & 344; Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol. 2, pp. 5 & 375; al-Sarakhsi
al-Hanafi's al-Mabsut, the book on Hajj, Bab al-Qur'an; Ibn Qayyim's Zad
al-Ma\`ad, vol. 1, pp. 7 & 447; Kanz al-\`Ummal, vol. 8, pp. 8 & 298;
Musnad Abi-Dawud, pp. 9 & 247; Tarikh al-Tabari, vol. 5, pp. 10 & 32;
al-Tabari's al-Mustabin; Tafsir al-Razi, vol. 3, pp. 12, 200 & 202;
Tafsir Abi-Hayyan, vol. 3, p.218.

party of the contract is regarded as her lawful husband Such a marriage
has been taken into consideration by the Quranic verses revealed in
regard to marriage, an example of which is as follows: *and those who
guard their private parts, except for their wives or their slave-girls.*
23:5-6.

Thus, when a woman marries a man based on the aforementioned conditions,
she will be an exclusive example of those to whom the phrase for *except
for their mates* refers, i.e. a wife.

The verse quoted above permits sexual intercourse with two groups of
women: ones wife and his slave-girl; this means that the woman married
to under the temporary contract will be included within the first group,
(i.e. the wives).

It is surprising that some people have considered the above verse as
abrogating the mut\`ah verse in al-Nisa chapter. We know that the
abrogating verse should come after the one it abrogates. The Quran
proves the reverse (of their claim), for al-Muminun Chapter, assumed to
be the abrogator, is in reality a Meccan chapter (revealed before the
Prophet (a.s) immigrated to Medina), whereas Nisa Chapter of the Quran
containing permission for mut\`ah was revealed in Medina (that is, after
the Prophets emigration to Medina). Now, how can a Meccan verse abrogate
one that was revealed in Medina?

Another argument in support of the fact that Mut\`ah verse was not
abrogated during the Prophets time is the numerous traditions denying
the abrogation of mut\`ah verse during the time of the Messenger of
Allah (a.s), an example

of which is the tradition narrated by Jalal al-Din Suyuti quoted
above.[1]

In conclusion, we would like to say that the Imams descended from the
Household of the Prophet of Allah (a.s), who according to Thaqalayn
tradition are peers to Quran and inseparable from it, have made it clear
that mut\`ah marriage is lawful and has not been abrogated.[2] Moreover,
the reality that Islam is able to solve mans problems at any time,
confirms that the temporary marriage, if the relevant stipulations are
satisfied, is a legitimate contract, which nowadays can be one of the
ways to save the youth from immorality and corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, pp. 140-1; exposition of the verse on
mut\`ah. [2] Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol. 14, Kitab al-Nikah, Bab 1, on
mut\`ah, p. 436.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](17.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](19.htm)
