Question One
============

### Which one is correct, my itrah, or my sunnah?

Answer:
-------

The eminent narrators of the hadith have reported it in two ways:

a) *Kitaballah wa \`itrati, Ahla Bayti* \_ the Book of Allah and my
kindred, my household;

b) *Kitaballah wa sunnati* \_ the Book of Allah and my Sunnah.

The authentic hadith quoted from the holy Prophet (a.s) contains the
phrase: *wa Ahla Bayti.* The hadith citing sunnati instead of *Ahla
Bayti* -my household- is nil and void in terms of authenticity, but the
one containing *Ahla Bayti* is sound for the following reasons:

Chain of narrators of the hadith containing Wa Ahla Bayti
---------------------------------------------------------

The two great Islamic narrators of the hadith who have quoted this
narration are:

a) Muslim, who, in his Sahih, quotes Zayd ibn Arqam as saying: Once the
Messenger of God delivered a sermon at Ghadir Khumm \_ a brook between
Mecca and Medina. Having praised God, he said: O people! I am a human

being who is about to be summoned by the divine angel and who is to
respond to this call. I am leaving behind two precious things
*(Thaqalayn)*: the first is the Book of Allah, which contains guidance
and light. So take hold of the Book of Allah and act according to it.
Thus, he put great emphasis on acting according to the Holy Quran. Then
he added: and *Ahla Bayti* (my household). With regard to my *Ahla Bayt*
I remind you of Allah. He repeated this sentence three times.[1]

b) Darimi has also quoted the same hadith in his book Sunan.[2] It
should be noted that both hadiths are textually as lucid as the day,
with no distortion in them.

c) Tirmidhi has quoted the same narration using the phrase *wa \`itrati,
Ahla Bayti*: I leave behind two things among you. If you take hold of
them, you will not be misguided after me. One of them is greater than
the other: the Book of Allah, which is a rope extended from the heaven
to the earth, and *my itrah,* my household. The two will never separate
until they return to me by the pond (of Kawthar). So, heed how to deal
with them.[3]

Muslim and Tirmidhi, authors of the books of Sahih and Sunan, have both
emphasized the phrase *Ahla Bayti.* This is sufficient proof advocating
our view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p.1803, No. 2408. \`Abd al-Baqi edition. [2]
Sunan al-Darimi, vol. 2, p. 431-2. [3] Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol. 5, p.
663, No. 37788.

The text containing wa sunnati.
-------------------------------

The narration containing the phrase *wa sunnati* (My Sunnah) instead of
*Ahla Bayti* \_ household \_ is forged and weak in its chain of
narrators; moreover, it was devised by the Umayyads.

In his *Mustadrak,* Hakim Nayshaburi, on the authority of \`Abbas ibn
Abi-Uways, on the authority of Abi-Uways, and he on the authority of
Thawr ibn Zayd al-Daylami, on the authority of \`Ikrimah, on the
authority of Ibn \`Abbas, quotes the holy Prophet as having said, O
people, I leave two things among you, which, if you take hold of, you
would not be misguided: the Book of Allah and His Prophets Sunnah.[1]

Mention should here be made of Abu-Uways and Isma\`il ibn Abi-Uways, the
father and son respectively, as pests among the narrators of the chain
of this hadith. Not only are they unreliable but also accused of
fabricating hadiths.

Comments of the experts of \`ilm al-rijal concerning these two narrators
------------------------------------------------------------------------

a) Hafiz Mazzi, a researcher of *\`ilm al-rijal* has the following
points to say in his book, *Tahdhib al-Kamal,* concerning Isma\`il and
his father: Yahya ibn Mu\`in, a great scholar of *\`ilm al-rijal,* says,
Abu-Uways and his son are weak He is also quoted to have said, These two
are used to plagiarizing hadiths. Ibn Mu\`in has further said about
Abu-Uways son: He can not be trusted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak \`ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p.93.

b) Nasais comment on Abu-Uways son: He is weak and inauthentic.

c) Abul-Qasim Lalka'i: Nasai has said a great deal about him (Isma\`il),
such as: The *hadiths* he quotes are to be rejected.

d) Ibn Adi, a scholar of *\`ilm al-rijal:* Ibn Abi-Uways has narrated
strange *hadiths* from his uncle, which no one accepts.[1]

e) In the prologue to *Fath al-Bari,* Ibn Hajar has said, The narrations
Ibn Abi-Uways has cited can never be taken as a basis for argument due
to the charges Nasai made against him.[2]

f) In his book, *Fath al-Mulk al-\`Ali,* Hafiz Sayyid Ahmad ibn Siddiq
quotes Salamah ibn Shayb as having said, I have heard Isma\`il ibn
Abi-Uways saying, Whenever the citizens of Medina divide on an issue, I
fabricate a tradition.[3]

The son, Isma\`il ibn Abi-Uways, is thus accused of fabricating
narrations in addition to being called a liar by Ibn Mu\`in. Moreover,
none of his *hadiths* have been cited in either of the Sahih Muslim and
Tirmidhi have written.

There is no need to quote more than what Abu-Hatam Razi wrote in his
book, *al-Jarh wal-Ta\`dil,* regarding Abu-Uways, His narrations are
written down, but are not taken

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hafiz al-Mazzi's Tahdhib al-Kamal, vol. 3, p.127. [2] Ibn Hajar
al-\`Asqalani's Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, p. 391, Dar
al-Ma\`arif Print. [3] Al-Hafiz Sayyid Ahmad's Fath al-Mulk al-\`Ali, p.
15.

as a ground to base arguments on.[1] Abu-Hatam has also quoted Ibn
Mu\`in as having said, Abu-Uways is unreliable. The *hadiths* these two
persons quote are never authentic, and are contradictory to the
authentic ones. It is noteworthy that Hakim Nayshaburi, the narrator,
has acknowledged the *hadith* as being weak and has, therefore, not
bothered himself to correct them. He has, however, presented evidence in
favor of the content of the *hadith,* which is weak and inauthentic.
This weakens the *hadith* rather than strengthening it. His ill-founded
document is mentioned below.

The Second Evidence for wa sunnati
----------------------------------

In the following narration Hakim Nayshaburi directly quotes Abu-Hurayrah
as reporting the following tradition, without ascribing it to an
infallible person: I have surely left two things among you, after which
you will not be misguided: the Book of Allah and my Sunnah. And these
two will not separate until they return to me by the pond.[2]

The chain of narrators Hakim mentions is: Al-Dabbi, on the authority of
Salih ibn Musa al-Talhi, on the authority of \`Abd al-\`Aziz Ibn Rafi\`
on the authority of Abi-Salih, on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah. Like
the aforementioned hadith, this narration is forged too. In the chain of
narrators of this *hadith* mention has been made of Salih al-Talhi
concerning whom the following comments have been made by the expert of
*ilm ar-rijal:*

a) Yahya ibn Mu\`in: Salih ibn Musa is undependable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Abu-Hatam al-Razi's al-Jarh wa'l-Ta\`dil, vol. 5, p. 92. [2]
Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak \`ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p. 93.

b) Abu-Hatam Razi: The narrations he quotes are weak and repudiated. In
many of his *hadiths* he ascribes *munkar* to the trusted ones.

c) Nasai: The *hadiths* he cites are not to be recorded. Also, His
*hadiths* are abandoned.[1]

d) In his *Tahdhib al-Tahdhib,* Ibn Hajar writes: Ibn Habban says: Salih
ibn Musa ascribes to the trusted people words that are not the like of
theirs. Also, The traditions he narrates are not to be taken as
evidence.

e) Abu-Na\`im: His narrations are abandoned; he constantly cites *munkar
hadiths.*[2]

f) Ibn Hajar in *Taqrib*: His narrations are abandoned.[3]

g) Dhahabi in *Kashif*: His narrations are weak.[4] Dhahabi discusses
the aforementioned narration in his *Mizan al-I\`tidal,* and calls it
*munkar.*[5]

The Third Document for Wa sunnati
---------------------------------

a) Ibn Abd al-Barr quotes the aforementioned narration in his book
*Tamhid* with the following chain of the narrators (\`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Yahya, on the authority of Ahmad ibn Sa\`id, on the authority of Hunayn,
on the authority of Kathir ibn \`Abdullah ibn \`Amr ibn \`Awf, on the
authority of his father on the authority of his grandfather.)[6]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hafiz al-Mazzi's Tahdhib al-Kamal, vol. 13, p. 96. [2] Ibn
Hajar's Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 4, p.355. [3] Ibn Hajar's Taqrib, (the
translation, No. 2891). [4] Al-Dhahabi's al-Kashif, (the translation,
No. 2412). [5] Al-Dhahabi's Mizan al-I\`tidal, vol. 2, p.302. [6]
Al-Tamhid, vol. 24, p. 331.

Concerning Kathir ibn \`Abdullah, Imam Shafi\`i says, He is one of the
pillars of falsehood.[1] Abu-Dawud says: He is among the liars.[2] Ibn
Habban says: \`Abdullah ibn Kathir quotes from his father and his
grandfather narrations which are based on forgery. It is permanently
unlawful to cite traditions from \`Abdullah, unless with the aim of
(showing) astonishment or criticism.[3]

b) Nasai and Daraqutni: His *hadiths* are abandoned.

c) Imam Ahmad: He denounces (the correct) *hadiths*; he is not
dependable. Ibn Mu\`in is of the same opinion. How strange for Ibn Hajar
to consider him in his *al-Taqrib* as weak, and to call lying extremists
those who accused Kathir ibn \`Abdullah whereas it is those who are
avant-gardes in knowledge that have accused him of falsehood and
forgery. Dhahabi calls his word illusive and infirm.

Uncited Quotation
-----------------

In his book, *al-Muwatta*, Malik calls the aforementioned narration as
one without citations, directly narrated, and we know such narrations as
worthless.[4] It is thus clearly proved that the narration containing
*wa sunnati* is one fabricated by mendacious narrators linked with the
Umayyad court, aiming at having it positioned against the authentic one
containing *wa itrati.* It is thus necessary for preachers delivering
sermons in mosques and discussing

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Hajar's Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 8, p.377, printed by Dar
al-Fikr; also Tahdhib al-Kamal, vol. 24, p.138. [2] Ibid. [3] Ibn
Habban's al-Majruhin, vol. 2, p. 211. [4] Malik's al-Muwatta', vol. 3
p.889.

religious issues to abandon the narration not handed down from the
Messenger of God, and instead to familiarize people with the authentic
narration, the one Muslim has narrated in his *Sahih* as containing
*Ahla Bayti* and Tirmidhi has cited the phrase *itrati wa Ahla Bayti.*
Scholars should also reveal the difference between the authentic and
other weak narrations.

In conclusion, we would repeat that by using the phrase *Ahla Bayti*,
the holy Prophet refers to his progeny: Hadrat Fatimah, Hasan and
Husayn, peace be upon them, as reported in Muslims *Sahih*[1] and
Tirmidhis Sunan[2] which have quoted \`aishah as having said that the
following Quranic verse: *Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O Ahla-Bayt and purify you a thorough purifying
(33:33),* was revealed to the holy Prophet (a.s) when he was in Umm
Salamahs house. Then the Messenger (a.s) summoned Fatimah (a.s), and
Hasan (a.s) and Husayn (a.s) and put an aba on their heads, while \`Ali
(a.s) was behind him. Then he said, O Allah, these are my *Ahl al-Bayt*,
so remove from them uncleanness and purify them a thorough purifying. At
this time Umm Salamah said, O Messenger of Allah, am I one of them? He
said, You hold your own place; you are also on the good path.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 1883. [2] Al-Tirmidhi, vol. 5, p.663. [3]
Hasan ibn Ali al-Saqqaf's Sahih, Sifat Salat al-Nabi, pp. 289-294.

Implications of Thaqalayn Hadith
--------------------------------

The holy Prophets juxtaposing the *itrah* and the Quran and calling both
Allahs authentic authorities among Muslims, can have, at least, the
following implications:

1) The words of the Prophets *itrah* are, like the Quran, Gods authentic
proofs in religious affairs, ideological or juridical, to which Muslims
should stick, and from which they should not deviate. Although the
Muslims were divided into two groups on the issue of caliphate and of
the administration of the affairs of the community, each with a reason
supporting their belief, they should never differ in Ahla Bayts
scholarly stand, for there is a general unanimity on the authenticity of
*hadith* of Thaqalayn, which considers the Quran and itrah as the
scholarly stand in matters of beliefs and religious precepts. If the
Islamic ummah follows the contents of this *hadith*, divisions will
narrow in scope, and unity will prevail.

2) The Quran is the word of God and secure against any error, therefore
*Falsehood shall not come to it from before it nor from behind (41:42).*
And so is its peer, the itrah, for how can an erring individual or the
erring ones be taken as peers to the Quran? The narration under
discussion is evidence supporting their infallibility from any errors.
It should be noted that inerrancy does not entail prophethood, since
many a person is secured against sin who is not a prophet. The Blessed
Mary is such an example whom the Quran addressed: *Allah has chosen you
and purified you and ranked you above the women of the world. (3:42)*

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](00.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](02.htm)
