Question Nineteen
=================

### Why do Shiites prostrate on Turbah?

Answer:
-------

Some people think that prostrating on the ground while praying, or on
martyrs tombs is a sign of worshipping the ground or of the martyrs, and
is therefore a kind of polytheism.

In answer the above question, it should be noted that there is an
undisputable difference between prostration for God alsujudu lillahi and
prostration on the ground alsujudu \`ala al-ard The above objection has
been raised because the distinction between the two phrases has not been
made out. The former definitely means, Prostration is done exclusively
for God, but the latter means prostration on the ground. In other words,
when we prostrate on the ground, we do so exclusively for God. Muslims
all over the world prostrate on something for God and so do all pilgrims
to the sacred House (the Ka\`bah) who prostrate on the stone of the
sacred House for Allah.

It is thus clear that prostration on the earth, on the plants and on
similar objects never denotes worshipping them; rather it is a
prostration dedicated to God, manifested in utmost humbleness, as low as
the earth. It is also clear that prostration on turbah differs from
prostration for turbah. The holy Quran say, And onto Allah falleth
prostrate whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. 13:15. Also,

the holy Prophet said, For me has he earth been made a place of worship
and pure. [1] Thus, prostrating for God and prostrating on the earth,
Turbah, are not the least in opposition. They are harmonious because to
prostrate on the earth and on the plant signifies the utmost humbleness
before One God.

Now, to further elucidate the Shiites view, the following citation,
words of Imam Sadiq, the six Imam, peace be upon him, is worth
mentioning: Husham ibn al-Hakam says, 'I asked Imam Sadiq (a.s) about
what prostration is permissible on and what is not.' The Imam responded:
' It is not permissible to prostrate on anything except on the ground or
on what grows from it unless these products are used as food or for
dress... I said ' May I be your sacrifice! What is the rationale behind
it ?' The Imam answered, 'Prostration means being humble and obedient
exclusively towards God, and it is not proper to prostrate upon what
could be eaten or used as cloth. Moreover, those whose hearts are filled
with the love of the world are the slaves of food and dress. As man is
in a state of worshipping God while he is in prostration, it is not
worthy for him to put his forehead upon what is an object of worship for
those stubborn worshippers of material things who bow in respect before
the material representations. Prostration on the earth is, thus,
preferable since it is in greater harmony with the state of humbleness
towards God.[2]

These words are a clear proof to the fact that prostrating on the earth
is done exclusively because it is more in harmony with being humble
before God, the Exalted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih al-Bukhari, The Book of Prayers, al-Salat, p. 91. [2] Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 85, p. 147 quoting \`Ilal al-Shara'i\`.

The next question asks why Shiites prostrate on the earth and on some
plants, but not on all things. The answer is that just as an act of
worship must be legalized by Islam, so should the manner and details of
performing the act be taken from the words and deeds of its law-maker,
the holy Prophet (a.s), who is in the language of the Quran, an
excellent exemplar for all the pious.

Below are some canonical Islamic traditions which describe the Prophets
Sunnah and which indicate that the Prophet, (a.s) used to prostrate on
the earth as well as on what grows from the earth, such as straw mat;
this is exactly in the same manner as the Shiites believe in:

1) A group of Muslim traditionists have, in their sihah and masanid,
quoted the Prophet as having said For me has the earth been made a place
of worship and pure.[1]

The word Ja\`al (to make) has a legislative connotation making it clear
that it is a divine command issued to the followers of Islam, thus
proving it to be lawful to prostrate on the earth, stone and other
particles which constitute the earths crust.

2) Other traditions specify that the Noble Prophet used to order Muslims
to put their foreheads on the ground while in prostration. Umm Salamah,
the Prophets wife, has quoted the Prophet as having said: tarrib wajhaka
lillah[2] put

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1, p. 212, the chapter on "Having recourse to
wholesome dust"; Sahih al-Bukhari, the book of prayers, p. 91; also Ibn
Taymiyah's Iqtida' al-Sirat al-Mustaqim, p. 332. [2] Kanz al-\`Ummal,
vol. 7 printed in Damascus, p. 465, tradition no. 19809, The Book of
Prayers and Prostration and what belongs to it.

your face on the dust for the sake of Allah. The word Tarrib comes from
the word turab, meaning dust.

There are two implications in the word Tarrib used by the Prophet:
first, one should put his forehead on Turab, the dust, and second it is
an order which must be carried out, since the word Tarrib is a derived
from turab, meaning dust, and is used an imperatively.

3) The Noble Prophets deeds are clear proofs and bright lights showing
the way to the Muslims. Wail ibn Hajar says, Whenever he was in
prostration, the Prophet (a.s) put his forehead and nose on the
ground.[1] Anas ibn Malik, Ibn-\`Abbas, some the Prophets wives such as
\`aishah and Umm Salamah, as well as many of the narrators of the
Prophetic traditions have narrated the following: The Prophet, (a.s),
used to prostrate on khumrah,[2] (a mat made from palm fibers). Also,
Abu-Sa\`id, a companion of the Prophet says, I went to the Prophet
(a.s), and saw him performing prayers on a straw mat.[3] This is further
clear evidence in support of the Shiites view who maintain that it is
permissible to prostrate on what grows from the ground, provided that it
is not used as food, and that it could not be used as some kind of dress
material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ahkam al-Qur'an, vol. 3, p. 209, printed in Beirut, the chapter on
Prostration. [2] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2 p. 421, The Book of performing
Prayers, on Khumrah (clay). [3] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2 p. 421. The
Book of performing prayers on Hasir.

4) The words and deeds of the companions of the Prophet and those of the
second generation of the narrators of traditions, tabi\`un, are also
clear indications to the Noble Prophets Sunnah. Jabir ibn \`Abdullah
Ansari says, I used to perform the noon prayers together with the holy
Prophet (a.s). I would take a handful of pebbles to keep them in my hand
to allow the pebbles to get cool; I put my forehead on them. This was
because the weather was very warm[1] The narrator (of the tradition)
then adds, Prostration on the dress he had on, if permitted, would have
been easier than taking and keeping the pebbles.

Ibn Sa\`d (d. 209 A.H.) says, in his al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Masruq ibn
al-Ajda\` used to take a piece of clay brick along to prostrate on
whenever he made a sea voyage.[2] Masruq ibn al-Ajda\` was a member of
the tabi\`un group, who was also an associate of Ibn Mas\`ud, whom Ibn
Sa\`d considers among the first generation of narrators after the
companions of the Prophet, and the one who has directly quoted
traditions from Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, \`Uthman, \`Ali (a.s) and \`Abdullah
ibn Mas\`ud.

This lucid statement is a proof against the baseless expressions of
those who claim it to be polytheism and an innovation in religion if one
carries along a piece of the turbah clay. Also, it discloses the fact
that the vanguard in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1 p. 439. The Book of al-Salat, the chapter
on 'What has been narrated concerning how to perform the prayers quickly
when the weather is warm.' [2] Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 6, p.79,
printed in Beirut on the biography of Masruq ibn al-\`Ajwa'.

the history of Islam themselves used to do the same.[1] For example,
Nafi\` says, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar used to take his turban off to bare
his forehead when he wanted to prostrate.[2] Razin says, \`Ali ibn
\`Abdullah, son of \`Abbas, wrote and said, 'Send me a piece of stone
from al-Marwah mountain so I will prostrate on it.[3]

5). Muslim transmitters of hadiths have also narrated cases when the
holy Prophet prohibited men from putting a part of their turban on their
foreheads when they ware prostrating. Salih al-Saba\`i says, Once the
holy Prophet saw that a man who was in prostration had covered his
forehead with his turban. The Prophet (a.s) bared the mans forehead.[4]

\`Ayyad ibn \`Abdullah of the Quraysh says, The holy Prophet (a.s) saw
that a man had prostrated on a part of his turban. Pointing to the mans
forehead, the Prophet told him to take it off.[5]

It is clearly understood from these traditions that prostrating on the
ground was an uncategorical necessity at the time of the holy Prophet so
much so that if a Muslim put a part of his turban on the ground to
prostrate on, the Messenger of God would prohibit him from doing so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] For further information, refer to the book Siratuna by \`Allamah
al-Amini. [2] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2 p. 105; the book of al-Salat; Bab
al-Kashf \`an al-Sajdah fi al-Sojud. [3] Al-Azraqi, Akhbar Makkah, vol.
3, p. 151. [4] Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 2, p. 105. [5] Sunan al-Bayhaqi,
vol. 2, p. 105.

6) The Shiites infallible leaders, who are according to the Hadith
Thaqalayn, peers of, and inseparable from the Quran, and are also the
household of the Prophet, have clearly expressed this fact: Imam Sadiq
(a.s) says, Prostrating on the ground is an obligatory duty, and on
straw floor covering, the khumrah, is a Sunnah.[1] Elsewhere he says, It
is not permissible to prostrate on anything except on the ground or on
what grows from it, unless these products are used as food or for
dress.[2]

Conclusion
----------

All the proofs stated above are clear evidence to the fact that not only
the traditions quoted from the household of the Prophet, but also the
Sunnah of the Messenger of God, and the deeds of his companions, and of
the first generation of the narrators after the companion, all emphasize
the necessity of prostrating on the ground and on what grows from it
unless these products are used for food or for dress. Also, there is no
doubt that it is permissible to prostrate on the things that have been
specified, whereas there is doubt and uncertainty as to whether it is
permissible to prostrate on other things. Therefore, to observe prudence
that leads to salvation, it is befitting to prostrate only on the things
that have been mentioned.

In conclusion, it should be reminded that the question raised here is a
juridical issue; lots of differences of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol. 3, p. 593, The Book of al-Salat, chapter: ma
yusjadu \`alayh, tradition No 7. [2] Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol. 3, p. 591,
The Book of al-Salat, chapter: ma yusjadu \`alayh, tradition No 1.

opinion can be seen among Muslim jurists concerning similar subsidiary
questions which should, however, not be a cause for anxiety since
similar juridical differences also abound the four Sunni Schools. As an
example, the Malikiyyah say that it is a recommended deed to put ones
nose on the ground when one is in prostration while the Hanbaliyyah
consider it an obligatory duty and say that such an action nullifies the
prayer if it is not observed.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fiqh \`Ala al-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah; Vol. 1, p. 161, printed in
Egypt; The Book of al-Salat, al-Sujud.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](18.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](20.htm)
