Question Twenty
===============

### Why do the Shiites kiss the doors and the walls of the shrines and seek blessings thereof?

Answer
------

Seeking blessing from what reminds one of the saints is not something
that has just appeared among Muslims; rather, it is a practice with deep
roots in the history of the Prophets life and of his companions.

Not only our honorable Prophet and his companions, but also the earlier
Prophets used to seek blessings. Below are examples taken from the Quran
and from the Prophets Sunnah regarding the legitimacy of seeking
blessings from what the saints had touched.

1. The Quran says that when the truthful Joseph introduced himself to
his brothers and forgave then, he said: Go with this shirt of mine and
lay it on my fathers face, he will again be able to see.(12:93). Also,
When the bearer of good news came he cast it on his face, so forthwith
he regained his sight.(12:96)

This clear expression of the Quran is a manifest proof showing that
Jacob, the Messenger of God, sought blessings from the shirt of another
Messenger of God, Joseph; it also says that the shirt restored Prophet
Jacob's eyesight to him.

Can anyone claim that what these two honorable prophets did was
something beyond the scope of monotheism and of worshipping the one God?

2. There is no doubt that the holy Prophet (a.s) rubbed his hand over
the al-Hajar al-Aswad (asking Gods favor) when circumambulating the
house of God, Ka\`bah.

In his Sahih, Bukhari says; Someone asked \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar about
(the permissibility of) touching the al-Hajar al-Aswad, and he answered:
I saw the Prophet lovingly touching and kissing the al-Hajar
al-Aswad.[1] If the touching and kissing of a stone ever had had the
implication of associating someone or something to God, the Prophet, the
harbinger of monotheism, would never have attempted at it.

3) The Sunnis sihah and Masanid, history and Sunnah books contain a
large number of narrations on the Prophets companions seeking blessings
from the things the Prophet had touched: his dress, the water he had
used to make ritual ablution with, the jug he had drunk water out of,
etc. These examples leave no doubt at all that it is legitimate and
lawfully favorable to seek blessings. Although the narrations that have
been handed down are too many to mention here, a few examples will be
quoted below.

a) In a lengthy discussion on some characteristics of the Prophet and of
his companions, Bukhari reports the following: Whenever the Prophet made
the ritual ablution,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih al-Bukhari, part 2, the book of al-Hajj; sub-section: Taqbil
al-Hajar, p. 151-2, printed in Egypt.

the Muslims (who were there) almost killed each other (over obtaining
some of the water).[1]

b) Ibn Hajar reports: Children were brought to the Prophet, to be
blessed, and he prayed for them.[2]

c) Muhammad Tahir Makki reports: Umm Thabit is quoted to have said ' The
Messenger of God, peace be upon him and his descendents came to me. He
drank water out of a suspending water-pouch while he was standing. (When
he had finished) I cut off the outlet of the pouch (to keep it as
something blessed). Makki then adds: this narration has been cited by
Tirmidhi, who called it sound and hasan. The commentator of this
tradition says, in Riyad al-Salihin, Umm Thabit cut the outlet of the
pouch off to save it as a reminder of where the Prophet's lips had
touched while he was drinking water, and as something to seek blessings
thereof. Those who accompanied the Prophet also used to drink water out
of what the Prophet had drunk.[3]

d) Those who had (volunteered) to serve in Medina used to carry pots of
water to the Prophet before the morning prayers. The holy Prophet dipped
his hand in the pots one by one; he still dipped his hand in water even
if they came to him in a cold morning.[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 3, chapter: ma yajuzu min al-shuruti
fi'l-ilsam; sub-section: al-shurutu fi'l-jihadi wa'l-musalahah, p. 195.
[2] Al-Isabah, vol. 1, the prelude, p. 7, printed in Egypt. [3] Muhammad
Tahir al-Makki's Tabarruk al-Sahabah, chapter 1, p. 29, translated by
Ansari. [4] Sahih Muslim, section 7, Kitab al-Fada'il, chapter: Qurbu
al-Nabi min al-Nas wa Tabarrukuhum, p. 79. For further information see:

These are clear permits to seeking blessings from what the Prophets have
been in contact with. Thus, those who accuse the Shiites of polytheism
and dualism (because the Shiites believe in this issue) have
misconceived or misinterpreted monotheism and polytheism, because
polytheism means worshipping someone else beside God, or ascribing Godly
affairs to someone else, and taking him to be principally independent
and needless of God in existence and influencing (on others) . The
Shiites, however, maintain that God's saints and their relics are all
created (beings) and are dependent on the Unique God both for their
existence and for any influence they may have on other things. It is
only out of respect and sincere love toward their Imams and those
foremost in Gods religion that the Shiites seek blessings from these
saints. It is because of their love towards their Prophet and his
descendents that the Shiites kiss the grave or the doors and the walls
of the shrines on visiting these sanctuaries. This is an innate feeling
deep in the heart of any devoted person, of which the following poem is
and excellent manifestation:

*Passing by Salim area  
 I do kiss the walls,  
 this and that, not because I love the walls  
 but I do love the one residing therein.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sahih al-Bukhari, Kitab al-Ashribah; Malik's al-Muwatta', vol. 1, p.
138, on Saluting the Prophet; Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 5, p. 90; Musnad
Ahmad, vol. 4, p. 32; al-Isiab, commenting on al-Isabah, vol. 3, p. 631;
Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, p. 1, pp. 281-2.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](19.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](21.htm)
