Question Twenty-two
===================

### Why Do the Shiites say that Imam \`Alis sons, Hasan and Husayn are the Prophets sons?

Answer:
-------

A survey of the Quran commentaries, history books and narrations makes
it clear that the belief referred to above is not held just by the
Shiites, but that it is unanimously agreed upon by all scholars of all
Islamic sects, a fact for which there is plenty of evidence in the Book
and the Prophets Sunnah.

Basing the discussion on the Glorious Quran, the narrations and the
comments made by the distinguished exgesists, we will here deal with the
clear evidence:

The Quran considers ones consanguineous children descended from ones
sons or daughters as his offspring.

1. In the following verse Prophet Jesus is called a son of Ibrahim
whereas Jesus is Marys son, linked to Prophet Ibrahim through his
maternal line: And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob, each of whom We
guided and Noah did We guide aforetime, and of his seed (We guided)
David and Solomon and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the
good, and Zachariah and John and Jesus. 64:84-5

Muslim scholars, as exemplified below, have taken the above verse as
clear evidence for the fact the Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (Peace be
upon them) are the Prophets offspring.

1) Jalal-u-Din Suyuti reports: Hajjaj summoned Yahya b. Ya\`mur and
(when he came), told him I have been told that you consider Hasan and
Husayn as the holy Prophets offspring, and that you have found this in
the Book of Allah, whereas I have studied through the Quran but have not
been able to find it. Yahya b. Ya\`mur said Have you not studied the
chapter al-An\`am wherein is the verse And from his offspring (came)
David, Solomon, John and Jesusa Hajjaj answered, I have. Yahya asked, Is
Prophet Jesus not an offspring of Ibrahim, while we know he (Jesus) had
no father (and was linked to Ibrahim through his maternal line)? Hajjaj
answered You are right.[1]

It is clearly understood from this Quranic verse and from the
interpretations the exegesists have given that not just the Shiites but
all Muslim scholars consider Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn the offspring of
the Prophet of God.

2) One of the clear verses of the Quran supporting the above truth is
the mubahalah verse mentioned in ali-\`Imran chapter And whoso disputeth
with thee concerning it (the Divine Revelation) after the knowledge hath
come unto thee, say (unto him): Come! We will summon our sons and your
sons, and our women and your women, and our souls and your souls, then
we will pray humbly (to our Lord) and (solemnly) invoke the curse of
Allah upon those who lie. 3:61

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 3, p. 28, printed in Egypt, notes on
Chapter al-An\`am.

The exegesists assert that the above verse, known as the mubahalah, was
sent down after the Prophet had argued with the heads of Najran
Christians and they still persisted in their views. Then upon Gods
command the Prophet, accompanied by \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, the Prophets
daughter, Fatimah, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s) advanced towards the
Christians to invoke the Curse of Allah. The Christian leaders, having
observed the Prophets conduct and that of his household, were filled
with terror for their lives, and requested the messenger of God to
abandon the invocation of curse. The holy Prophet agreed, and the issue
was settled after an agreement had been concluded. The Shiite and the
Sunnite scholars unanimously agree that the Commander of the Faithful,
Fatimah, Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s) did accompany the holy Prophet
on the day of Mubahalah. It thus becomes clear that the phrase our sons
uttered by the messenger of God, signifies Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn,
and that Hasan and Husayn (a.s), mentioned in the above verse, are
considered as the Prophets children.

Having mentioned many a narration as comments on the Quranic verse in
question, the commentators have clearly testified our above assumption.
Some of them are as follows:

a) Jalal al-Din Suyiti quotes Hakim, and Ibn Mardawayh and Abu-Na\`im on
the authority of Jabir Ibn \`Abdullah as saying by our souls, i.e.
anfusana is meant the messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his
descendents) and \`Ali; by our son, Hasan and Husayn by our women,
Fatimah.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 39, printed in Beirut.

b) Fakhr Razi, after quoting the above narration, says in his exegesis,
Know that this narration is recognized as valid by the exegesists and by
those conversed with traditions;[1] then he adds, The above mentioned
verse (i.e. mubahalah verse) is a proof that Hasan and Husayn (a.s) are
the Prophets sons, for He (the Prophet) had promised to summon his sons,
so he called Hasan and Husayn.[2]

c) Abu-\`Abdullah Qurtubi, too, says in his book of exegesis that (the
phrase) our sons as stated in the Quran is a proof that one's daughter's
children are also considered one's offspring.[3]

3) The holy Prophets statements (two of which are mentioned below) are
the strongest proof that Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn (a.s) are the
Prophets sons: These two are my children; whoever loves them loves
me.[4]

While pointing to Hasan and Husayn (a.s), the Prophet said, These two
sons of mine are my sweet smelling flowers in this world.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mafatih al-Ghayb, tafsir; vol. 2, p. 488; printed in Egypt in 1308
A.H. [2] Ibid. [3] Al-Jami\` li-Ahkam al-Qur'an, vol., 4, p. 104,
Printed in Beirut. [4] Ibn \`Asakir's Tarikh Madinat Dimashq, on Imam
al-Husayn's biography. [5] Ibid. p. 62; tradition 112.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](21.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](23.htm)
