Question Twenty-seven
=====================

### Why do Shiites perform ritual prayers (Salat) three times a day instead of five ?

Answer:
-------

At the beginning, it is necessary to review some juridical points:

1. All Islamic sects hold that it is permissible to perform the noon and
the afternoon prayers successively on the day of Arafat. This is true
with evening (*maghrib*) and *\`isha*' prayers at Muzdalifah.

2. The Hanafites believe that performing the noon and afternoon prayers
successively and *maghrib* and *\`isha* successively is restricted to
\`Arafah and Muzdalifah and not inclusive of any other circumstances.

3. The Hanbalis, the Malikis and the Shafi\`is say, In addition to above
circumstance one can also perform the noon and afternoon prayers, or
*maghrib* and *\`isha*' prayers successively when one is on a trip.
Certain law schools from among the above consider it permissible to say
the prayers successively in time of emergency: when one is caught in the
rain, or he is ill or he fears the attack of the enemy. [1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Extracted from al-Fiqh \`ala al-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah, the book of
al-

4. The Shiites believe that there is, as follows, a specifically valued
time for each of the prayers: for the noon and afternoon, evening and\`
isha' prayers. There is also a shared time.

a. The time that is specifically valued for the noon prayer is the
canonical time, long enough to recite a four unit (rak\`ah) prayer,
allocated to performing the noon prayer only.

b. The specific time for the afternoon prayer is the time one has left,
long enough to perform only the afternoon prayer before the evening dusk
sets in.

c. The shared time for the noon and afternoon prayers begins with the
termination of the noon-prayer specific time, and lasts until the time
is due for the afternoon prayer to begin.

The Shiites claim that the noon and the afternoon prayers can be
performed successively within this shared time span.

The Sunnis, however, maintain that the noon-specific praying time begins
as the religion has specified it, and terminates at the time when the
shadow an object casts is as long as the object itself. It is forbidden
to perform the afternoon prayer during this time limit. Then comes the
specific time for the afternoon prayer to begin, and extends so long as
the evening dusk, *maghrib* time, has not set in.

The noon prayer cannot be performed within this time allowance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Salat, al-jam\` bayn al-salatayn taqadduman wa ta'akhkhuran.

d. The specific time for the evening prayer, *maghrib*, begins as
canonically decided, and terminates when the evening prayer which is a
three unit (Rak\`ah) finishes. Only *maghrib* prayer can be performed
within this limited time span.

e. *\`isha*' specific time is an interval ending in ritual midnight, an
interval just long enough to perform *\`isha*' prayer. Only *\`isha*
prayer can be performed within this time span.

f. The shared time for the performance of the evening (*maghrib*) and
*\`isha* prayers begins with the time allowed for the evening prayer
(*maghrib*), and extends up to the time specifically valued for *\`isha*
prayer.

According to the Shiites, the evening and *\`isha* prayers can be
performed successively within this shared time limit

The Sunnis, however, believe that the time specifically valued for
*maghrib* prayer begins when the dusk sets in. and terminates just as
the evening steps in. During this interval reciting *\`isha* prayer is
forbidden. When the evening dusk overshadows, it is time for *\`isha*
prayer that extends up to the midnight ritually determined. *maghrib*
prayer cannot be performed within this time span.

Conclusion:
-----------

***A: The Shiites Viewpoint:***

The noon prayer can be performed when the canonical noon begins,
followed by the afternoon prayer without leaving an interval in between.

We may, if we wish, postpone the noon prayer until we are close, in
time, to the moments specified for the afternoon

prayer, in such a manner that the noon prayer will end a bit before it
is the right time for the afternoon prayer, then we go on to recite the
afternoon prayer. This means that both prayers will be performed
successively, although it is recommended to begin the noon prayer at the
canonical time, and do the afternoon prayer at the time when the shadow
an object casts is as tall as the object itself.

The same procedure applies to evening (*maghrib*) and *\`isha* prayers,
that is, we can perform *maghrib* prayer at the canonical time, followed
by *\`isha* prayer without an interval in between. We may also postpone
*maghrib* prayer until it is about the time for the *\`isha* prayer in
such a manner that *maghrib* prayer will end before it is time for
*\`isha* prayer, then we go on to recite *\`isha* prayer. This means
that *maghrib* prayer and *\`isha* prayers will be performed
successively, although it is recommended to perform *maghrib* prayer
after the canonical *maghrib* time sets in and do *\`isha* prayer when
the evening dusk has overshadowed. This is the Shiites' view.

The Sunnis do not announce an uncategorical concession for the
noon/afternoon prayers and *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers to be
performed successively anywhere and at any time in the same manner that
they are performed at \`Arafah and Muzdalifah. So, the question still
remains to be further delved on.

5. Muslims unanimously agree that the holy Prophet (Peace be upon him
and his descendants) used to perform his prayers successively. However,
this behavior of his has been interpreted in two different manners:

a. The Shiites have interpreted it to mean that it is allowed

to perform the afternoon prayer immediately subsequent to the
termination of the noon prayer. The same is true of the *\`isha* prayer
that can be performed soon after *maghrib* prayer, and this is not
restricted to any specific time, place or condition; it is applicable to
all places at all times.

***B: Others Point of View***

The implication of the narration concerning the Prophets manner of
performing the prayers is that it is allowed to perform the noon prayer
towards the end of the time due for it; however, the afternoon prayer
should be done on time. The same procedure applies to *maghrib* and
*\`isha* prayers, with the former to be performed towards the end of the
time allowed for it. However, *\`isha*' prayer should be done on time.

We will now go to discuss the narrations in order to prove the Shiites'
point of view on the permissibility of performing prayers successively
at the time allowed for one of them, not as the Sunnis hold: performing
one towards the end of the time due for it, and performing the other
exactly at the beginning of the time set for it.

***The Narrations***

1. Ahmad ibn Hanbal, the leader of the Hanbaliyyah school of
jurisprudence reports on the authority of Jabir Ibn Zayd who said: I
heard Ibn \`Abbas saying: I was with the holy Prophet (a.s). We
performed the prayers consisting of eight units (Rak\`ahs) (the noon and
the afternoon prayers) successively, and (when the time came) we did the
seven units (Rak\`ah) prayers *maghrib* and *\`isha* in the same manner.
I told Abu'l-Sha\`tha', I suppose the Messenger of God deferred the noon
prayers and (on the other hand) performed the afternoon prayer a bit
sooner; also, he

postponed *maghrib* prayer a bit, and performed *\`isha* prayer a little
sooner, too. Abu'l-Sha\`tha' said, I suppose so, too[1]

This narration expresses the holy Prophets performing the noon,
afternoon, *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively, without leaving
an interval between each set.

2. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal quotes the following on the authority of \`Abdullah
Ibn Shaqiq: Having finished the afternoon prayer, Ibn \`Abbas began
preaching which lasted until sunset and when the stars appeared. (At
this time) the people there announced that it was time to pray. A man
from Bani-Tamim tribe who was among the crowd repeatedly said, It is
time to pray. Ibn \`Abbas was furious and said, Do you want to teach me
the practice of the Prophet ? I witnessed the holy Prophet performing
the noon and the afternoon prayers successively, and *maghrib* and
*\`isha* prayers without an interval in between. \`Abdullah continued:
Being perplexed (about Ibn \`Abbas statement) I consulted Abu-Hurayrah;
he confirmed Ibn \`Abbas.[2]

In the above narration, two of the companions: \`Abdullah Ibn \`Abbas,
and Abu-Hurayrah report that the prophet performed the noon, and
afternoon, and *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively, and Ibn
\`Abbas followed him.

3. Malik Ibn Anas, the leader of Maliki School of Jurisprudence says in
his book, Muwatta', The holy Prophet (a.s) performed the noon and the
afternoon prayers, and frequently did the evening and *\`isha* prayers
successively at a time when there was no fear of the enemy, nor was he
on a trip.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, vol. 1, p.221. [2] Ibid. p. 251. [3]
Muwatta' Malik, Kitab al-Salat. 3rd ed. (Beirut), p.125, narration
178;  
 ---\>

4. Malik, quotes the following on the authority of Mu\`adh Ibn Jabal,
The holy Prophet (a.s) used to perform the noon and the afternoon (and
later on) *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively.[1]

5. Malik quotes the following on the authority of Nafi\`, who himself
cited \`Abdullah Ibn \`Umar as having said, The holy Prophet (a.s) used
to perform *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively whenever he was
in a hurry to go somewhere.[2]

6. Malik Ibn Anas quotes the following on the authority of Abu-Hurayrah:
On the way to Tabuk, the holy Prophet (a.s) performed the noon and the
afternoon prayers successively.[3]

7. Malik reports the following in Muwatta', on the authority of Nafi\`:
Whenever it was raining and the men of eminence performed *maghrib* and
*\`isha* prayers successively, \`Abdullah \`Umar also joined them (and
did the same).[4]

8. Malik ibn Anas quotes Imam \`Ali ibn Husayn (a.s) as follows:
Whenever the holy Prophet (a.s) went on a trip during the day, he
recited the noon and the afternoon prayers successively and whenever he
went on a trip at night, he did *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers
successively, too.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sahih Muslim, vol. 2, p.151, Beirut, the section on reciting the prayers
successively while at home. [1] Ibid. p. 134, narration 176, Beirut ed.
1403 AH; also Sahih Muslim, Egypt Ed. Section 2, p. 152. [2] Muwatta'
Malik, the book of prayers, 3rd edition (Beirut) p. 125, narration 177.
[3] Muwatta' Malik, the book of prayers, p. 124. narration 175. [4]
Ibid, p. 125, narration l79. [5] Ibid, p. 125, narration 181.

9. In the comment he has made on Muwatta, Muhammad Zarqani, on the
authority of Abu'l-Sha\`tha', says, In the city of Basra, \`Abdullah ibn
\`Abbas performed the noon and the afternoon prayers without leaving an
interval in between (and when the time came) he performed *maghrib* and
*\`isha* prayers successively, too.[1]

10. Zarqani reported on the authority of Tabarani, on the authority of
Ibn Mas\`ud: When the holy Prophet (a.s) had performed the noon and the
afternoon prayers successively, he was asked about (the reason). He (the
Prophet) said, I did it to make things easier for my people.[2]

11. Moslem Ibn Hajjaj, reported on the authority of Abu-Zubayr, on the
authority of Sa\`id ibn Jubayr, on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas: The
holy Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendents) performed the noon
and the afternoon prayers successively when he was in Medina, not on a
trip, and when there was no fear of the enemys attack.[3]

Commenting on the Prophets decision, Ibn \`Abbas maintains that the
Prophet did so because he did not want to put any one of his people in
trouble.[4]

12. In his Sahih, Muslim reports on the authority of Sa\`id Ibn Jubayr
(and he) on the authority of Ibn \`Abbas: The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh al-Zarqani \`ala Muwatta' Malik, section one on reciting the
prayers successively while at home and on trip. Narration 294 [2] Ibid,
p. 294. [3] Sahih Muslim, Egypt ed. P. 151, "On reciting the prayers on
trip. [4] Ibid.

holy Prophet (a.s) performed the noon and the afternoon prayers, (and
later on) the *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively in Medina when
there was no fear of anything nor was it raining.[1]

Sa\`id Ibn Jubayr continues: I asked Ibn \`Abbas: Why did the Prophet
act this waya He said, Because the Prophet did not want to cause any
inconvenience for his people.[2]

13. Abu-\`Abdullah Bukhari has a special chapter in his Sahih on
deferring the noon prayers until it is time for the afternoon prayer[3].
This itself is the most eloquent evidence that the noon prayers can be
postponed a little to be duly performed with the afternoon prayer when
it is time for the afternoon prayer. He mentions, The holy Prophet (a.s)
performed, in Medina, seven units (Rak\`ah) of prayers (*maghrib* and
*\`isha*) and (before that) the eight units (Rak\`ah), the noon and the
afternoon prayers, successively.[4]

This narration not only clearly says that the noon prayer can be
deferred to be performed together with the afternoon prayer; it
contextually implies that, in imitating the holy Prophet (a.s),
*maghrib* prayer can, be postponed until it is time for *\`isha* prayer,
so that both are performed then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, p. 152 [2] Ibid, a discussion on the above narration. [3]
Sahih al-Bukhari, section 1, p. 110, the book of prayers, the chapter on
deferring the noon prayer until the afternoon prayer time. [4] Ibid.

14. Elsewhere Bukhari says, \`Abdullah ibn \`Umar, Abu-Ayyub and Ibn
\`Abbas have reported that the holy Prophet (a.s) performed *maghrib*
and *\`isha* prayers successively.[1]

Reporting the above, Bukhari intends to say that the holy Prophet
performed *maghrib* and the *\`isha* prayers successively, since it is
self evident that the Prophet always performed prayers.

15. Muslim quotes the following in his Sahih: Someone addressed Ibn
\`Abbas and said, Prayer, He (Ibn \`Abbas) did not reply. Again, the man
said, prayer. Again Ibn \`Abbas did not reply. For the fourth time he
repeated Prayer. This time Ibn \`Abbas said, May you be deprived of your
mother. Do you want to teach us something about prayersa We used to
perform prayers successively at the time of the holy Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendents.[2]

16. Muslim report: Surely the holy Prophet (Peace be upon him and his
descendants) performed the noon and afternoon, and (later on) *maghrib*
and *\`isha* prayers successively when he was on expedition to the Tabuk
war. Sa\`id ibn Jubayr said: I asked Ibn \`Abbas for the Prophets
decision. He said, The holy Prophet meant not to inconvenience his
people.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih al-Bukhari, section 1, "On prayers", p. 113, printed in Egypt
in 1314 H. [2] Sahih Muslim, section 2, p. 153. [3] Ibid, 151.

17. Muslim Ibn Hajjaj quotes Mu\`adh having said, During the Tabuk war,
the holy Prophet left (to pray) and so did I. The Prophet performed the
noon and the afternoon prayers and (later on) *maghrib* and *\`isha*
ones successively.[1]

18. Malik ibn Anas reports in Muwatta: Ibn Shihab asked Salim ibn
\`Abdullah: Can the noon and the afternoon prayers be performed
successively? He answered, Yes, no problem. Have you not observed it
performed in this way on the day of \`Arafah in the \`Arafah valley?[2]

Salih ibn \`Abdullah meant to say that it is permissible to perform the
prayers successively elsewhere, just as it is permissible to perform
them on the day of \`Arafah in the \`Arafah valley.

It is necessary to mention that Muslims consider it permissible to
perform the noon and afternoon prayers successively on the day of
\`Arafah at the time set for the non-prayer. By the above, Salem means
to say that just as it is permissible to perform the two prayers
successively at \`Arafah, they can do the same at other times, too.

19. The following traditions come from Muttaqi Hindis book, Kanz
al-\`Ummal.

\`Abdullah ibn \`Umar said, The holy Prophet, peace be upon him and his
descendants, performed the noon and the afternoon prayers successively
while he was at home, not on a trip. Someone asked Ibn \`Umar: Why did
the Prophet act this way? he answered: So as not to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih Muslim, section 2, p. 152, printed in Egypt. [2] Muwatta'
Malik, 3rd ed., Beirut, p. 125, narration 180.

inconvenience his people. One may perform the prayers successively of he
wishes.[1]

20. Jabir reports: The holy Prophet (a.s) performed the noon and
afternoon prayers successively, the adhan having been chanted once and
the Iqama two times.[2] (One for each of the prayers.)

Kanz al-\`Ummal also reports the following narration:

21. Jabir reports: The holy Prophet (a.s) was in Mecca and the sun had
set. He performed *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively after he
had arrived at Sarf region, nine miles from Mecca. In Kanz al-Ummal, Ibn
\`Abbas is reported to have said: The holy Prophet performed the noon
and afternoon prayers, and *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers when he was in
Medina and not on a trip and when it was not raining. The transmitter of
this narration says: I asked Ibn \`Abbas, Why did the Prophet perform
two prayers successively ? Ibn \`Abbas replied: Because the Prophet
desired to expand the affairs of his people.[3]

Conclusion
----------

The clear reasons that support the Shiites sound understanding of the
issue are summed up as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kanz al-\`Ummal, the book of al-Salat, chapter four on Travelers'
ritual prayers, the section on successive performance, vol. 8, p. 246
(1st ed. In Aleppo, 1391 H). [2] Kanz al-\`Ummal, the book of al-Salat,
chapter four on traveler's ritual prayer, the section on successive
performance, vol. 8, p. 247, 1st Edition, Aleppo. [3] Kanz al-\`Ummal,
the book of al-Salat, chapter four on, vol. 8.

Performing two prayers successively at one praying time is a means of
making things easier.

Many reports testify the fact that it would have been difficult for
Muslims if the noon and afternoon prayers or *maghrib* and *\`isha* had
not been permitted to be performed at one praying time successively.
That is why the Holy Prophet allowed the successive performing of the
prayers to introduce some kind of facilitation on Muslims affairs. (See
points sixteen, nineteen, and twenty-two as well.)

If the narrations mentioned before are taken to mean that the noon
prayers can be deferred until the due time is about to finish- in Sunnis
belief when the shadow an object casts is as tall as the object itself-
but the afternoon prayer ought to be performed on time, that is both
prayers ought to be done within their specific time span, it will not
only cause no ease, but will create greater difficulties. Performing the
prayers one after another is meant to facilitate things for Muslims.

It is thus clear that the two prayers constituting a set may be
performed within their shared time span: either at the beginning or
about the end of the time range rather than to begin one about the end
of the appointed time, and to perform the other on time.

***Successive Performance of Prayers at Arafah: A Model***

All Islamic denominations take it as permissible to perform the
noon/afternoon prayers successively at Arafah;[1] There are, however,
narrations supporting the permissibility of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fiqh \`ala al-Madhahib al-Arba\`ah, the book of al-Salat,
al-Jam\` bayn al-salatayn taqadduman wa ta'akhkhuran.

same procedure at other places, too. This implies that there is no
difference between Arafah and other places and times. (See discussion
eighteen above).Thus just as all Muslims unanimously agree on the
permissibility of performing prayers successively at Arafah, it is
allowed to perform the noon/afternoon prayers successively elsewhere.

Prayers Performed on a Trip, Another Example
--------------------------------------------

Hanbaliyyah, Maliki and Shafi\`i jurists allow sets of prayers to be
performed successively when one is on a trip. The narrations mentioned
above specify that in performing prayers there is no difference between
the time when one is on a trip or at home. The holy Prophet (Peace be
upon him and his descendants) performed his prayers successively under
both circumstances. on trip and at home (See narrations mentioned in
items three, eleven, thirteen, nineteen and twenty-two above.)

Based on the above points, just as it is allowed to perform ones prayers
successively when one is not on a trip (as the Shiites believe in), it
is allowed to do the same when one is not on a trip.

Successive Performance of Prayers in Time of Emergency: An Example showing one's Choice.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A large number of the narrations cited in Sunnis anthologies of
narrations testify the fact that the holy Prophet and his companions
performed their prayers successively just as the Shiites say - at one
praying time in emergency situations such as the time when it was
raining, or when they feared the enemys attack, or when they were ill.
This is why many jurists of various Islamic sects have issued verdicts
(fatwas) on its permissibility in

some emergency circumstances.

However, the narrations mentioned above say it clearly that as far as
successive performance of prayers is concerned, there is no difference
between emergency and non-emergency conditions, for the holy Prophet
(a.s) performed his prayers successively in circumstances when it was
not raining, nor was there a fear of the enemys attack. (See narrations
three, eleven, twelve and twenty-two).

The Companions of the Prophets Behavior
---------------------------------------

In the traditions quoted above, we can see that many of the Prophets
companions performed their prayers successively at one praying time, as
in the case of \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas who disregarded the peoples
objections and deferred *maghrib* prayer until it was dark and the stars
had appeared in the sky. He then performed *maghrib* and *\`isha*
prayers together. In answer to the objections, people had raised, he
replied: I witnessed the holy Prophet performing his prayer in this way.
His words were confirmed by Abu-Hurayrah. (See points two, seven, nine
and fifteen).

In the light of these traditions, it is sure that Ibn \`Abbas had
performed his prayers in the same manner that the Shiites believe in: he
had performed two prayers together at one praying time.

The Prophets Manner, an indication of performing the prayers successively
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Narration twenty- one mentioned above has made it clear that when he was
still in Mecca, the holy Prophet (a.s) deferred the *maghrib* prayer
until he arrived at Sarf, a region nine miles from Mecca. There, he
performed the *maghrib* and *\`isha* prayers successively at one praying
time.

With the slow-moving means of transportation of the past, it is natural
for the Prophet to have arrived at Sarf long after *maghrib* praying
time even if he had left Mecca when the sun had just sat. So, the
Prophet performed both prayers at one praying time.

When taken together, the narrations from authoritative hadith sources of
the Sunnis (i.e. sihah and Masanid) prove the Shiites sound view that it
is permissible to perform the noon and afternoon prayers, or *maghrib*
and *\`isha* prayers successively at one praying time, and this can be
extended to all situations and all times.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](26.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](28.htm)
