Question Twenty-eight
=====================

### What are the sources for the Shiite Jurisprudence ?

Answer:
-------

In compliance with the Book of God and the Prophets Sunnah, the Shiites
base their understanding of the Islamic law (the Shariah) on the
following four basic sources:

*the Book of God  
 the Prophets Sunnah  
 consensus  
 reason*

The Book of God and the Prophets Sunnah, concerning which a summary
discussion will be given below, are the most basic ones.

The Book of Allah (The Quran)
-----------------------------

Those following the Shiites school of law have taken the Book of Allah
as the most unwavering and normative source of jurisprudential issues
and of religious tenets. Their religious leaders, the Imams, have
announced it to be the loftiest source from which to derive juridical
precepts, i.e. all views and statements should be accepted only after
they are matched with and verified by the content of the Quran; if there
is no correspondence, they should be

rejected. The sixth leader of the Shiites, Imam Ja\`far al-Sadiq (a.s)
says, Any statement not in conformity with the Quran is baseless.[1]
Imam Sadiq (a.s) also quotes the Noble Prophet as having said, O people,
if I am quoted as having said something that agrees with the Book of
Allah, it is my words; if it contradicts the Book of Allah, then I have
not said it.[2]

These two traditions clearly show that the Book of Allah is, according
to the Shiite Imams, the firmest source to derive religious precepts
from.

The Prophets Sunnah
-------------------

The Prophets Sunnah, i.e. the words, the deeds and whatever the
Messenger of God (a.s) has approved of, is the second clearest
fountainhead of the Shiite jurisprudence. The Imams from the household
of the Prophet (a.s) are believed to be the carriers of his Sunnah and
the treasure - house of his knowledge. The words of the Prophet are also
accepted even if they are handed down through other reliable sources.
The following discussions are deemed necessary here:

Why Should the Prophets Sunnah be Resorted to ?
-----------------------------------------------

The Imams of the Shiites have advised their followers not only to study
the Quran but also to follow the Prophets Sunnah, thus praising both the
Book of God and the Prophets Sunnah. Imam Sadiq (a.s) says, Accept a
hadith

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, chapter: Superiority of Knowledge;
subdivision: al-Akhd bi'l-Sunnah wa Shawahid al-Kitab, hadith 3. [2]
Ibid, hadith 5.

only after you have found evidence for it in the Book of Allah or in the
statements made by the Messenger of God; otherwise, the hadith is good
only for the person who has narrated it.[1] Imam Baqir (a.s) maintains
that observing the Prophets Sunnah is obligatory for the jurisprudent:
The true jurisprudent is one who leads an austere life, is desirous of
the Hereafter and resorts to the Prophets Sunnah.[2] The Imams of the
Shiites esteem the Quran and the Prophets Sunnah so highly that any
opposition to it is considered a cause of disbelief. Imam Sadiq, (a.s)
has said, One who opposes the Book of Allah and the Prophets Sunnah is
certainly a disbeliever.[3]

This lucid statement shows that more than any other Islamic sect, it is
the Shiism that values the Prophets Sunnah, and this proves how baseless
are the words of those who accuse the Shiites of being alienated from
the Prophets Sunnah.

Why is it necessary to stick to the traditions of Ahl al-Bayt ?

To clarify the Shiites view in regard to the traditions of the household
of the Prophet, Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) it is necessary first to deal with the
following two points: (a) the nature of the words of the infallible
Imams, (b) the reasons for the authenticity of Ahl al- Bay and the
necessity to follow them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1, chapter: Superiority of Knowledge,
subdivision: al-Akhd bi'l-Sunnah wa Shawahid al-Kitab, hadith 2. [2]
Ibid, hadith 8. [3] Ibid hadith 6.

Nature of the words of the Prophets itrah
-----------------------------------------

The Shiites maintain that only God has the right to codify rules for
mankind, and it is only He Who propagates the Divine Law through His
Messenger, who is merely an intermediary between God and mankind in
respect to the Revelation. Thus, the Shiites acceptance of the
traditions of the household of the Prophet as one of the sources of
jurisprudence does not imply that these hadiths maintain an authenticity
independent pf the Prophets Sunnah; they are considered authentic only
because they represent the Messenger of Gods Sunnah. This means that the
infallible Imams of the Shiites have nothing of their own to convey.
What they say is nothing but the Prophets Sunnah Below are cited a few
of the hadiths from the Prophets itrah to clarify the matter.

1) In answer to a question someone had asked, Imam Sadiq (a.s) said, Any
answer I gave you has come from God's Messenger (a.s); we do not utter
things of our own will.[1] On another occasion, the same Imam said, My
words are those of my fathers, and what my father has said has come from
my grandfather; the words of my grandfathers are those of al-Husayn, and
his words and the latters words are those of al-Hasan; Al-Hasans words
are those of the Commander of the Faithful, and what the Commander of
the Faithful has said is what the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has said, and
the words of the Messenger of God are the words of God Himself, may He
be exalted.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jami\` Ahadith al-Shiah, vol. 1, p. 129. [2] Ibid, p. 127.

2) Imam Baqir, (a.s) tells Jabir the following: My father quoted
traditions from the Messenger of God and he from Gabriel, and Gabriel
from the Exalted God; this is the chain of the narrations I have
narrated.[1]

Thus, the nature of the statements the Imams of the Shiites have made is
clearly understood to be that of the Prophets Sunnah.

Reasons for the authenticity of Ahl al-Bayt and the necessity to follow them
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Both Shiite and Sunni traditionists maintain that the Messenger of God
left two precious things behind invited all Muslims to follow them and
made Muslims prosperity dependent upon following these two: The Book of
Allah and his household, Ahl al-Bayt. Below are a few sample traditions
in this respect:

a) In his Sahih, Tirmidhi has narrated the following hadith from Jabir
ibn \`Abdullah Ansari, on the authority of the Messenger of God: O
people, I leave two things among you: The Book of Allah and my itrah, my
household; if you stick to them, you shall never be misguided.[2]

b) Tirmidhi has also narrated the following hadith in the same book: The
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said I leave behind two things among you; if
you stick to them, you will never be misguided after me; one of them is
greater than the other: One of them is The Book of Allah, which is a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, p.128. [2] Sahih al-Tirmidhi , the book of al-Manaqib,
chapter: Manaqib Ahl Bayt al-Nabi, vol. 5 pp 662 and 3786, printed in
Beirut.

rope extended from the heaven to the earth, and the other one is my
itrah, my household; these two will never separate until they return to
me by the pond (of Kawthar). So heed how you will deal with them.[1]

c) In his Sahih, Muslim ibn Hajjaj quotes the Holy Prophet (a.s) as
having said: O people! I am a human being who is about to be summoned by
the divine angel and who is to respond to this call. I am leaving behind
two precious things (thaqalayn) among you: The first is the Book of
Allah, which contains guidance and light. So stick to the Book of Allah.
Then he persuaded people to follow it. Then he added, The second is my
household. I remind you of Allah about Ahl al-Bayt (my household); again
I remind you of Allah about Ahl al-Bayt (my household); and again I
remind you of Allah about Ahl al-Bayt (my household).[2]

d) A group of traditionists have quoted the blessed Prophet as having
said, I am leaving behind among you two precious things: the Book of
Allah and Ahl al-Bayt (my household); the two will never separate until
they return to me by the pond (of Kawthar).[3]

Relevant hadiths are too many to be mentioned here, for only the chain
of the transmitters of the hadith has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, p. 66; hadith 3788. [2] Sahih Muslim, part 7, chapter: On the
Excellence of \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib, pp. 122, 123, printed in Egypt. [3]
Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak \`ala al-Sahihayn, part 3, p. 148; al-Sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqah, book 11, chapter 1, p. 149. See also: Musnad Ahmad, part 5
pp. 182 and 189; Kanz al-\`Ummal, part one: al-I\`tisam bil-Kitab
wa'l-Sunnah, p. 44.

occupied a six-volume book, \`Abaqat al-Anwar, compiled by the eminent
scholar, Sayyid Mir Hamid Husayn.

The hadiths mentioned above clearly show that requisite for ones faith
in Islam are sticking to the Ahl al-Bayt of the Prophet (a.s) and
following them as well as the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the
Blessed Prophet, and that going astray will be the result of not
following Ahl al-Bayt. Now, the question that arises is: Who are the
itrah of the Prophet whose following the Blessed Prophet has made
obligatory on usa Below is an explanation of the term itrah as is
understood from the hadiths.

Who are itrah of the Prophet (a.s)?
-----------------------------------

The hadiths properly show that the Blessed Prophet (a.s) by clearly
saying that The Quran and itrah will never separate juxtaposed his
itrah, his household, with the book of God, called on all Muslims to
obey his itrah and declared them as the authorities after his departure.
The household of the Prophet (a.s) based upon the Prophets statement are
introduced as the peers of the Quran, i.e. infallible, and well versed
in pure Islamic knowledge; were it otherwise, they would separate from
the Quran; this, however, is impossible since the Prophet announced: The
Quran and the itrah will never separate until they return to me by the
pond of Kawthar. It is thus proved a necessity to recognize Ahl al-Bayt
and, their characteristics which correspond to the Shiite Imams.

Below is a presentation of our proofs based on the traditions the great
Islamic traditionists have narrated:

1. Having narrated the hadith of thaqalayn, Muslim Ibn Hajjaj says,
Yazid Ibn Hayyan asked Zayd Ibn Arqam,

Who are Ahl al-Bayt of the Blessed Prophet (a.s) ? Are they the Prophets
wives ? Zayd Ibn Arqam replied, No (such is not the case); by God, a
wife lives with her husband only for some time, and then the husband
divorces her; then she will return to her parents and relatives. Ahl
al-Bayt of the Blessed Prophet (a.s) are of the same descent as he
himself, they are his close relatives, who are forbidden to receive alms
after (the demise of) the Prophet.[1]

This tradition clearly testifies the fact that the Prophets itrah, the
following of whom has, like the Quran, been made a duty, are not the
Prophets wives, but they are the people who in addition to coming from
the same stock and besides being spiritually related to him, are so
particularly merited as to be called the Muslims authorities, the same
as the Book of Allah.

2. The Noble Prophet not only described the attributes of the Ahl
al-Bayt, but also specified their number as being twelve. Muslim ibn
Hajjaj quotes Jabir ibn Samarah as having said, I heard the Prophet
(a.s) say, Islam will always be dignified under twelve successors. Then
he said something I hardly heard. I asked my father What did the Prophet
saya He answered, 'The Prophet said that they would all come from the
Quraysh.[2]

Muslim Ibn Hajjaj also quotes the Prophet (a.s) as having said, So long
as these twelve men rule, the peoples affairs

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih Muslim, part 7, book: Superiority of \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib, p.
123, printed in Egypt. [2] Ibid. vol. 6, p. 3.

will run appropriately.[1] The above two narrations are lucid proof to
the Shiites claim that The twelve Imams of the Shiites are the peoples
true leaders after the Prophet (a.s). In Islam, there are no other
immediate vicegerents of the Prophet, twelve in number, who brought
honor and glory to Islam except the twelve Imams from the itrah of the
Prophet. If we exclude the four Rashidun Caliphs, other caliphs from the
Umayyad, and the \`Abbasids brought Islam shame and blemishes by their
deeds, to which history testifies.

Thus, the Ahl al-Bayt that the holy Prophet has introduced to the
totality of Muslims throughout the world are the twelve leaders from his
household, who are protectors of the Prophets Sunnah and bearers of his
knowledge.

3. The Commander of the Faithful, \`Ali (a.s), also maintains that the
Imams of the Muslims come from Bani-Hashim clan; this is another clear
proof for the Shiites claim that they know who Ahl al-Bayt really are.
\`Ali (a.s) says: The Imams stem from Bani-Hashim clan; no one else is
worthy (of ruling) over Muslims. The others rule is baseless.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] Subhi al-Salih's Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon 144.

Conclusion:
-----------

A survey of the traditions cited above indicate that:

1) It is a religious duty to stick to and follow the Ahl al-Bayt of the
Prophet, (a.s) parallel to obeying the Quran.

2) The Ahl al-Bayt of the Messenger of Allah, introduced as the peers of
the Quran, have the following characteristics:

a) They are all from the Quraysh tribe and Bani-Hashim clan

b) They are so closely related to the Messenger of Allah that it is
forbidden to pay them alms (sadaqah).

c) They are all infallible; otherwise, they would be separated from the
Quran. But the Holy Prophet has said, They will never separate from the
Quran until they come to me by the pond of Kawthar.

d) They are twelve in number, and one after another succeed the
Messenger of God as walis and leaders of Muslims.

e) These twelve vicegerents of the Prophet (a.s) bring increasing glory
and honor to Islam.

The descriptions given in the traditions make it crystal clear that the
Ahl al-Bayt that the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him and his
descendants, had mind, and whose obedience he charged Muslims with are
none but the twelve Imams from the household of the Holy Prophet, the
ones the Shiites take pride in following and whose instructions the
Shiites stick to in recognizing their juridical code of belief.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](27.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](29.htm)
