Question Two
============

### What is meant by Shi\`ah?

Answer:
-------

The Arabic word Shi\`ah means follower. The Holy Quran reads, *One of
his (Noahs) followers (Shi\`ah) is Ibrahim. (37:83)*

In the Islamic terminology Shiism refers to a sect believing that the
holy Prophet (a.s), before his death and on many other occasions,
including Dhul-Hijjah 18th, the twentieth year of Hijrah known as the
Day of Ghadir and in the presence of a large gathering, appointed \`Ali
(a.s) as his successor, that is as the caliph of the Muslims and the
political, scientific and religious authority after him.

A word of explanation is warranted here. Concerning the Caliphate issue,
the Immigrants (*Muhajirun*) and the Helpers (*Ansar*) divided into two
groups after the death of the holy Prophet: one group believed that the
holy Prophet had not neglected the issue of the leadership of the
Islamic community and had appointed his successor, \`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib,
the first person who declared his conviction in the Prophethood of
Muhammad. This group consisted of some Immigrants and Helpers, headed by
the noblemen of the Bani-Hashim clan, as well as by some of the great
companions of the Prophet, such as Salman, Abu-Dharr, al-

Miqdad, Khabbab ibn al-Aratt and others; they were called the Shiites of
\`Ali, the Commander of the Faithful. In fact, it was the holy Prophet
himself who entitled \`Alis followers as such. When appointing \`Ali ibn
Abi-Talib, he said, By the one in whose hands lies my life, he (\`Ali)
and his followers are saved on the Day of Resurrection[1] So, the
Shiites are the Muslims who were organized into a group in the early
days of Islam because they believed that the rank of Wilayah, the
leadership of the Islamic community, was divinely ordained. This sect is
still faithful to following the Prophet and his family.

The position of the Shiites is thus clear, contrary to the claims of
some ignorant or malicious people who maintain that Shiism was a later
development, not existing in the early period of Islam. For further
information, see the following books: *Asl al-Shi\`ah wa Usuluha,
al-Muraja\`at, and A\`yan al-Shi\`ah.*

The other group maintains that Caliphate was an elective institution. So
they swore allegiance to Abu-Bakr, and were later called the Sunnis.
Thus, against many principles in common, the two sects were divided due
to their differing views on the issue of the Prophets successorship.
Both sects were originally formed by some Immigrants (*Muhajirun*) and
Helpers (*Ansar*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, in his al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 6, narrates
this tradition while commenting on the Qur'anic verse: "(And) lo! Those
who believe and do good deeds are the best of the created beings."
(98:6).

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](01.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](03.htm)
