Question Twenty-nine
====================

### Why do you pay visits to Abu-Talibs grave, and did he die a Muslim ?

Answer:
-------

Abu-Talib, the son of \`Abd al-Muttalib, and the distinguished father of
the Commander of the faithful, \`Ali (a.s), and the honorable uncle of
holy Prophet (a.s), is in the Shiites view a man who had firm belief in
the mission of the Messenger of God. He was a help and a support to the
Prophet in all circumstances of peril Islam faced in its early days of
advent.

The Family:
-----------

Abu-Talib was born to a family headed by \`Abd al-Muttalib grandfather
of the Prophet (a.s) and the hero amongst the adherents to the faith of
Ibrahim, the True friend of God.

A little investigation into the history of the Arabian Peninsula will
make it clear that \`Abd al-Muttalib never renounced the worshipping of
God, nor did he falter in his supporting the monotheistic religion.

Having gathered a large troop, all elephant riders, Abraha was on his
way to Mecca to destroy Ka\`bah (The House of God). He took possession
of some of \`Abd al-Muttalibs

camels and was astonished when \`Abd al-Muttalib came to demand naught
but his camels. In response to the question as to why \`Abd al-Muttalib
only wanted his camels back but did not request Abrahah to give up
attacking the Ka\`bah, \`Abd al-Muttalib, filled with belief and trust
in God, answered, I am the master of the camels, and the House has a
master to care for it.[1] He then set out for the Ka\`bah, where he took
the circular doorknocker in his hand and beseechingly said:

*O Lord, I implore none but thee;  
 O Lord, stop, then, thy enemies.  
 Surely, the enemies of the House  
 Are thy enemies. Stop them  
 From destroying the House.*[2]

These and similar eloquent statements are clear evidence for \`Abd
al-Muttalibs firm belief in God and worshipping Him. Ya\`qubi, the
historian, has the following words to say concerning \`Abd al-Muttalib:
He denounced worshipping the idols, and worshipped the one God.[3]

Now, let us see what this monotheist father says concerning his son,
Abu-Talib.

Abu-Talib from the view point of \`Abd al-Muttalib

History shows that some clairvoyants had informed \`Abd al-Muttalib of
the bright future awaiting his grandson, the holy Prophet, and of his
divine mission.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Kamil fi'l-Tarikh by Ibn al-Athir, vol. 1, p. 261, printed in
Egypt, 1348 A.H. [2] Ibid. [3] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, vol. 2, p. 7, printed
in Egypt.

After Sayf ibn Dhi-Yazan was appointed the governor of Abyssinia, \`Abd
al-Muttalib, heading an expedition, went to him and delivered a talk
(customary in such circumstances). When he finished his eloquent speech,
the ruler gave him the glad tidings that an honorable Prophet had come
into existence in \`Abd al-Muttalibs House and said, His name is
Muhammad (a.s); his father and mother will die, and his grandfather and
his paternal uncle will be patronizing him respectively.[1] He,
Muhammad, worships the one God, expels Satan, and smothers all the fires
(of idolatry) and destroys the idols. His words are the separators of
truth from falsehood; he decrees in justice, enjoins to doing good and
he himself does good. He prohibits people from evil, and nullifies it.
No doubt you, \`Abd al-Muttalib, are his grandfather.[2]

Having heard this life-inspiring news, \`Abd al-Muttalib, to thank God,
fell in prostration and then narrated the following episode: I had a
son, a very dear one, for whom I chose a stately lady to be his wife,
i.e. aminah, the daughter of Wahab ibn \`Abd-Manaf. She gave birth to a
son, whom I named Muhammad. His parents soon died. My brother Abu-Talib
and I took charge of his training.[3]

It is inferred from the above question that \`Abd al-Muttalib, having
known of the bright future that awaited the orphan, decided that his
dearest son, Abu-Talib, should be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1, pp. 136-7, Egypt; also Beirut ed. p.
114-115. [2] Ibid. [3] Ibid. vol. 1, p. 137, Egypt ed.

Muhammads guardian; thus others were deprived of such felicity and
honor.

It is thus evident that Abu-Talib was in the eyes of his faithful and
monotheist father, a person of such a deep faith and piety that he was
considered the only one worthy of being charged with the responsibility
of patronizing the holy Prophet.[1]

Evidence in Support of Abu-Talibs Faith

1) His Poems:

A survey of the eloquent odes that Muslim scholars have quoted from
Abu-Talib reveals his true faith. The following extracts are just a few
examples from among the many:

*a. The noble should know that verily Muhammad is a Prophet  
 Like Moses and Jesus, the son of Mary.  
 He was given the same light they were given  
 They all guide and protect as God has ordered them to.*[2]  
 *b. Do you know that we  
 Found Muhammad to be Prophet  
 Like Moses mentioned in the earlier books ?  
 And surely in peoples hearts is his love;  
 One whom God has chosen should never be treated unjustly.*[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1, p. 134, Egypt; Sirat Ibn Husham,
Beirut ed. Vol. 1, p. 189; Abu-Talib, the Believer of Quraysh, p. 109;
al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 117, Beirut ed. [2] al-Hujjah, p. 57;
similarly quoted in al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak, vol. 2, p. 623, Beirut ed.
[3] Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 1, p. 41; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn

*c. Surely God honored His Prophet, Muhammad  
 The best one created among people is Ahmad,  
 A name derived from His own to glorify him;  
 Then the Owner of the Throne is Mahmud,  
 And this, Muhammad.*[1]  
 *d. O Prophet, I swear by God:  
 Never will your enemies get you,  
 Not before I am buried.  
 Then, fear not, and do your duty  
 What thou hast been inspired to do,  
 And given the new goods,  
 And bring light to our eyes.  
 You called me and I know that you wish me well.  
 You called and I know you have been truthful  
 I have surely learnt that Muhammads religion is the best  
 Of religions the world over.*[2]  
 *e. O thou who art Allahs witness on me,  
 Bear witness that I am an adherent  
 Of the religion of the Prophet, the most praised one.  
 Whoever goes astray, (I will not)  
 I am the guided (one)*[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 2, p. 72, second ed. [1] Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 14, p. 78, second ed. Beirut; Tarikh Ibn \`Asakir,
vol. 1m p. 276; Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 1, p. 266; Tarikh al-Khamis,
vol. 1, p. 254. [2] Khuzanat al-Adab by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, vol. 1,
p. 261; Tarikh Ibn Kathir, vol. 3, p. 42; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 14, p. 55, second ed; Fath al-Bari, vol. 7, pp
153-157; al-Isabah, vol. 4, p. 116, Egypt, 1358 A.H.; Diwan Abi-Talib,
p. 12. [3] Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol., 14, p. 78,
second ed; Diwan Abi-Talib, p. 75;

In the last days of his fruitful life, Abu-Talib advised the noblemen of
the Quraysh to support the Prophet in full. The following verses
illustrate this point:

*f. I advise four people:  
 My son \`Ali; the Shaykh of the tribe: \`Abbas;  
 Hamzah, the real supporter, the lion-hearted,  
 And Ja\`far  
 To help the Prophet.  
 May my mother and children be sacrificed for you,  
 Be like shields in your guarding Ahmad,  
 Guarding him against his foes.*[1]

Such a wealth of eloquent words, clearly manifestations of Abu-Talibs
strong belief in God and his faith in the mission of the holy Prophet
(a.s) leads anyone of fair judgment and of unprejudiced mind to discern
the Shiites point of view in regard to Abu-Talibs true faith. He will,
then, regret the baseless, politically motivated accusations some
writers have made against Abu-Talib, the Faithful of the Quraysh, the
Prophets uncle and Islams great guard in times of peril.

***Abu-Talibs Behavior towards the Prophet: a Sign of His Faith***

Famous Muslim historians have narrated a multitude of events clearly
indicating Abu-Talibs singularly sacrifice in defending the holy
Prophet, all showing his unwavering belief.

a. To support Islam and guard the holy Prophet (a.s), Abu-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mutashabihat al-Qur'an by Ibn Shahrashub al-Mazandarani: An exegesis
of Chapter al-Hajj, verse: "And surely Allah will help him who helps His
cause." 22:40.

Talib chose to remain with the Prophet at Shi\`b Abu-Talib rather than
heading the Quraysh. There, he remained and endured all the difficulties
until the economic sanction came to an end.[1]

b. In addition, Abu-Talib has bid his dear son, \`Ali, to support the
Messenger of God in full, and to accompany him in all the difficulties
Islam faced in its early days.

c. In his commentary on Nahj al-Balaghah, Ibn Abil-Hadid quotes the
following words Abu-Talib had told his son, \`Ali (a.s): The Messenger
of God invites you to what is good, so follow him.[2]

All these valuable services Abu-Talib has rendered the holy Prophet
(a.s), as well as the sincere sacrifices he had made in safeguarding the
holy cause of Islam are the clearest proofs to his faith. Accordingly
Ibn Abil-Hadid, the great Muslim scholar writes the following poem
depicting the vital role Abu-Talib played in defending the holy Prophet
and his religion:

*Had it not been for Abu-Talib and his son,  
 Islam wouldve never gotten into shape.  
 His home in Mecca, a shelter to the Prophet;  
 His son in Yathrib, drowned in the whirlpool of death*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1, p. 134; (b) Tarikh al-Khamis, vol.
1, p. 253-254, Beirut ed; Sirat Ibn Husham, vol. 1, p,. 189, Beirut;
Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 14, p. 52, second ed.;
Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, vol. 2, p. 6, printed in Najaf. Al-Isabah, vol. 4,
p. 115, 7th ed.; al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 1, p. 119, Beirut ed. 1380
A.H. [2] Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 14, p. 53,
second ed.

*Never can Abu-Talibs glory be marred,  
 Neither by idle talkers, nor by those knowing  
 But pretending ignorance.*[1]

***3. Abu-Talibs Last Testament: a Clear Proof to His Faith***

The famous historians of the world of Islam: Halabi the Shafi\`i in his
Sirah, and Muhammad Diyarbakri, in his Tarikh al-Khamis, have quoted
Abu-Talibs final words, given below, in which he had called his tribe to
help the Messenger of God:

*O, you the Qurayshites, be friends and followers  
 of the Prophet,  
 And follow his party (Islam). I swear by God that he who  
 follows his path of light will prosper.  
 Were I to stay alive longer, I would surely fan away  
 His troubles.  
 These he said and passed away.*[2]

***4. The Prophets Admiration: Evidence to Abu-Talibs Faith***

The Messenger of God (a.s) admired Abu-Talib in various circumstances,
two of which will be mentioned below:

a) A number of historians have quoted the holy prophet as having told
\`Aqil, Abu-Talibs son, the following: I like you for two reasons:
firstly, because you are a relative of mine; secondly, because I know
that my paternal uncle, Abu-Talib loved you.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 1, pp. 300 and 301; Beirut ed.
al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1, p. 391, printed in Egypt. [3] Tarikh
al-Khamis, vol. 1, p. 163, Beirut ed.; al-Istiab, vol. 2, p. 509

b) In his Sirah, Halabi quotes the Messenger of God admiring his uncle,
Abu-Talib in the following manner: The Quraysh disbelievers could do me
no harm so long as Abu-Talib was alive.[1] The holy Prophets statements
are no doubt lucid proof of Abu-Talibs belief, for the Quran says that
the Prophet loves believers only: Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah, and
those with him are firm of heart against the unbelievers, compassionate
among themselves. 48:29. Also, You shall not find a people who believe
in Allah and the hereafter befriending those who act in opposition to
Allah and his Apostle even though they were their (own) fathers, or
their sons, or their brothers, or their kinsfolk; They are those into
whose hearts He has impressed faith. 58:22[2]

The Quranic verses and the Prophets attachment to and his admiration of
Abu-Talib displayed in various circumstances leave no room for anyone to
hesitate that Abu-Talib had an unwavering belief in the Messenger of
God.

***5. The Prophets Companions Testimony***

The following are some of the testimonies the companions of the holy
Prophet (a.s) have made concerning Abu-Talibs genuine faith:

a. An ill-informed persons unfair accusations once made against
Abu-Talib in the presence of the Commander of the faithful, \`Ali (a.s)
made the latter angry; he said Silence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, vol. 1,p. 291, Egypt ed. [2] Further
Qur'anic verses conveying the same point are: al-Mumtahanah 1, Bara'ah,
23, and al-Ma'idah 54-81.

May God break your mouth! I swear by Him who raised Muhammad to
Prophethood with truth that if my father Abu-Talib desires to intercede
for any sinner on the day of resurrection, God will grant him the
permission to do so.[1]

Elsewhere \`Ali (a.s) says I swear by God that Abu-Talib, \`Abd-Manaf,
the son of \`Abd al-Muttalib, was a believing Muslim who hid his faith
from the Quraysh unbelievers lest they might harbor a grudge against
Bani-Hashim.[2]

The above statements made by \`Ali (a.s) not only confirm Abu-Talibs
strong faith, but raise him to the status of a saint who can, with Gods
permission, intercede.

b. In this respect Abu-Dharr says, By Allah, the One, Abu-Talib, may God
be pleased with him, did not die before he had surrendered to Islam.[3]

c. Both \`Abbas, the son of \`Abd al-Muttalib, and Abu-Bark, the son of
Abu-Quhafah, are quoted by different narrators as having said, Surely,
Abu-Talib did not die before he said, There is no God except Allah,
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.[4]

***6. Abu-Talib from the Point of View of the Prophets Household***

The Imams from the household of the Prophet have all emphasized
Abu-Talibs unwavering faith, and have, in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hujjah, p. 24. [2] Al-Hujjah, p. 24. [3] Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah
by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, p. 14, p. 71, 2nd ed. [4] Al-Ghadir, vol. 7, p. 398,
3rd ed., Beirut, 1389 A.H., on the authority of Waki's Exegesis of the
Qur'an.

different circumstances exemplified below, defended this devoted
advocate of the Prophet.

a. Imam Baqir (a.s) said, Should Abu-Talibs faith be placed on one scale
pan and the belief of these people on the other, Abu-Talibs faith will
surpass (in weight).[1]

b. Imam Sadiq (a.s) said, The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus, Ashab al-Kahf,
did conceal their belief and pretended disbelief instead. So God gave
them a twofold reward; Abu-Talib acted in the same manner concealing his
faith and pretending to be a polytheist. Therefore, God gave him a
twofold reward in the same way.[2]

The above evidence clearly manifests, as the sunlight does, that
Abu-Talib enjoyed the following privileges:

1) He had a strong belief in God and in the mission of the holy Prophet.

2) He was sincere and devoted both to the Prophet and Islam.

3) The Prophet expressed his unique love for him.

4) He has been given the rank of an intercessor.

It is thus clear that the unfair accusations levied against Abu-Talib
are baseless. Two realities are thus made known:

a) Abu-Talibs faith has been acknowledge by the holy Prophet (a.s), the
Commander of the faithful and the Imams from the household of the
Prophet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 14, p. 68, 2nd ed,
Beirut; Al-Hujjah, p. 18. [2] Ibid. p. 70; Al-Hujjah, pp. 17 and 115.

b) The unfair and baseless accusations levied against him were
politically oriented and were initiated at the instigation of some
Umayyad and \`Abbasid kings, who were constantly in conflict with the
Household of the Prophet and Abu-Talibs offspring.

It is now appropriate to go through the apparently clearest pretext used
in terrorizing the personality of Abu-Talibs, the time-honored advocate
of the Prophet and to put forward to the reader the Quranic verses, the
words of the Prophet, the intuition of the common sense and reason to
judge for himself how groundless the Zohzah narration is.

On the authority of such narrators of Hadith as: Sufyan Ibn Sa\`id
Thawri, \`Abd al-Malik Ibn \`Umayr, \`Abd al-\`Aziz Ibn Muhammad
Darawardi and Layth Ibn Sa\`d, Muslim and Bukhari have ascribed the
following words to the holy Prophet (a.s):

a. "I found him (Abu-Talib) in a mountain of fire; then I carried him to
Zohzah (the water cistern).

b. On the Day of Judgment, he may benefit from my intercession; he will,
then, be put in a cistern of fire up to his ankles while his brain will
be boiling.[1]

Although the narrations and the evidence cited previously do emphasize
Abu-Talibs belief and reject the baseless Zohzah narration, the
following two points: unauthenticity of the chain of narrators of the
hadith, as well as the conflict between this narration, the Quran and
the Prophets Sunnah will be dealt with below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 5, the book of al-Manaqib, chapter: the story
of Abi-Talib, p. 52, Egypt; also the same source, vol. 8, book: al-Adab,
chapter: the Polytheists' nickname, p. 46.

***Unauthenticity of the Chain of Narrators of Zohzah Narration***

Those who have narrated Zohzah hadith are Sufyan ibn Sa\`id Thawri,
\`Abd al-Malik Ibn \`Umayr, \`Abd al-\`Aziz ibn Muhammad Darawardi and
Layth Ibn Sa\`d, whose capabilities we will now go through, basing our
investigation on the words and comments of Sunni scholars skilled in the
science of the narrators, \`ilm al-rijal.

***Sufyan ibn Sa\`id Thawri***

Abu-\`Abdullah Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn \`Uthman Dhahabi, the famous
scholar in \`ilm al-rijal, has the following to say concerning Sa\`id
Thawri: He used to quote weak narrations.[1] This comment is a clear
proof to his deceitfulness, and his narrating from the weak or the
unknown narrators, thus invalidating his words.

***\`Abd al-Malik Ibn \`Umayr***

Dhahabi introduces him this way, He lived long and as a result had a
weak memory. Abu-Hatam says, He (\`Umayr) was unable to memorize
hadiths, because his memory had weakened. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal also says,
\`Umayr was weak and confused (meaning that he used to cite baseless and
forged hadiths). Ibn Mu\`in says, The traditions he quotes are incorrect
or confused. Ibn Kha\`rash says, Shu\`bah (another scholar) was
displeased with him. Kawsaj quotes Ahmad Ibn Hanbal as having said, He
is weak, indeed.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Dhahabi's Mizan al-I\`tidal, vol. 2, p. 169; Beirut, 1382 A.H.
[2] Mizan al-I\`tidal;, vol. 2, p. 66o, Beirut Ed.

These statements disclose \`Abd al-Malik ibn \`Umayrs characteristics as
follows:

1. He had a weak memory and was a forgetful person.

2. He was weak (a term used in \`ilm al-rijal; that is, one cannot trust
the traditions (hadiths) he narrates.

3) There are a lot of errors in what he narrates.

4. He blends the correct and incorrect narrations.

Each one of the above points will suffice to repudiate the hadiths
\`Umayr narrates.

***\`Abd al-\`Aziz Ibn Muhammad Darawardi***

The Sunni experts in traditions have all considered him a neglectful
person whose hadiths cannot be relied on.

a) Ahmad ibn Hanbal says, In quoting hadiths by heart, he (\`Umayr) is
used to saying groundless and unrelated things.[1]

b. Abu-Hatam says, What he says can not be taken as proof.[2]

c. Abu-Zara\`ah, too, considers him a person of ill memory.[3]

***Layth Ibn Sa\`d***

A survey of the Sunni books on \`ilm al-rijal shows that all the
narrators of the hadith named Layth were unknown or weak, whose hadiths
cannot be trusted. Layth Ibn Sa\`d was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mizan al-I\`tidal, vol. 2, p. 634, Beirut; 1st print. [2] Ibid. [3]
Ibid. p. 634.

one of such weak and careless narrators of hadiths.[1]

Yahya ibn Mu\`in says, He was careless in treating those from whom he
quoted and of the hadiths he heard.[2]

Nabati, too, considers him among those who are weak (in relating hadith)
and has recorded his name among such people in his book Al-Tadhlil \`Ala
al-Kamil.[3]

Taking the above into consideration, it is thus clear that the original
narrators of Zohzah hadith are themselves totally weak, so their hadiths
cannot be trusted.

***The Text of Zohzah Hadith is Incompatible with Book and Sunnah***

This tradition, ascribed to the holy Prophet, says that the Prophet
saved Abu-Talib from a mountain of fire and took him to a cistern, thus
minimizing his chastisement. It also says that the Prophet desired to
intercede for him on the Day of Judgment, whereas a decrease in
punishment and the provision of intercession, as accepted by the Quran
and the Prophets Sunnah are only for the believers and the Muslims. Had
the matter been as claimed in the hadith, it would mean that Abu-Talib
was not a believer, so he could not have been included among those who
might enjoy a decrease in punishment or benefit from the Prophets
intercession.

It thus becomes evident that Zohzah narration, and the words of those
who called Abu-Talib a disbeliever are baseless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mizan al-I\`tidal, vol. 3, p. 420 - 423, 1st ed. Beirut. [2] Ibid.
p. 423. [3] Shaykh al-Abtuh, p. 75; Mizan al-I\`tidal, vol. 3, p. 423.

Lets now review the issue in the light of the Qur'an and the Prophet
(a.s)s Sunnah.

***The Quran:***

And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is the fire of hell; it
shall not be finished with them entirely so that they should die, nor
shall the chastisement thereof be lightened to them; even thus do We
retribute every ungrateful one. 35:36

***The Prophets Sunnah***

The Prophets Sunnah repudiates disbelievers to be among those who
benefit from the Prophets intercession. Abu-Dharr Ghifari quotes the
holy Messenger of God (a.s) as having said, I have been given permission
to intercede for those who do not disbelieve in Allah.

The text of Zohzah *hadith* and the words of those who consider
Abu-Talib faithless are in contradiction with the Book of God and the
Prophetic Sunnah.

Conclusion
----------

Taking the above into consideration, it becomes evident that the text of
Zohah narration is worthless and cannot be taken as a basis to build
arguments on. The strongest fortress that had been taken as sanctuary by
those who desired to mar Abu-Talibs faith thus falls down and the bright
face of the Quraysh man of faith and the time-honored help to the
Prophet (a.s) continues shedding light.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](28.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](30.htm)
