Question Thirty
===============

### Do the Shiites believe that Angel Gabriel acted treacherously in Fulfilling his mission, delivering the Divine Message to the Prophet instead of delivering it to \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib ?

Answer
------

Before proving that this accusation levied on the Shiites by some
ignorant or malicious people is baseless, we had better search for the
sources which it has sprung from.

The Origin of the Accusation
----------------------------

From certain Quranic verses and the pertinent traditions it is clearly
understood that the Jews held that Gabriel had acted treacherously, for
God had ordered him to deliver the Divine Message to the family of
Israel, but contrary to Gods command, he had delivered it to the family
of Isma\`il. So they took Gabriel a foe[1] and proclaimed, The
trustworthy Gabriel acted treacherously. To prove how baseless their
statement is, the Quran criticizes them and calls Gabriel The
Trustworthy Spirit: The trustworthy Spirit brought it (the Quran) down
upon your heart that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tafsir al-Fakhr al-Razi, vol. 1, pp. 436-7, printed in Egypt, l308
A.H.

you might be of the warners. 26:194. Also, Say: Whoever is the enemy of
Jibril for surely he revealed it to your heart by Allahs command. 2:97.

A survey of the above verses and the pertinent interpretations indicates
that, for some reasons, the Jews considered Gabriel an enemy and called
him the Angel of Chastisement, accusing him of acting treacherously in
delivering the Divine Message.

Thus, the slogan the Trustworthy Gabriel acted treacherously has its
origin in superstitions of the Jews chewed at by some ignorant writers
who cherish long-standing animosity against Shiites and thus unjustly
accusing Shiites of holding such a belief.

Prophethood as viewed by Shiites
--------------------------------

Following the Book, the Prophetic Sunnah and the unambiguous traditions
of the household of the Prophet, Shiites recognize Muhammad ibn
\`Abdullah, peace be upon him and his household, not only as the
rightful Prophet who has been raised to Prophethood upon Gods command,
but also as the Seal of the Prophets and the highest of Gods ambassadors
in rank, as evidenced by \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib, (a.s), the great Imam of
the Shiites: I witness that there is no god except Allah, the One, Who
has no partner, and that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, the Seal
of the Prophets, and His proof to the two worlds.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Nahj al-Sa\`adah, vol. 1, p. 188, Beirud ed.; Usul al-Kafi, vol. 8,
p. 67, 2nd ed. Tehran, 1389 A.H.

Imam Sadiq (a.s) also says, Allah, the Glorified, raised only five
prophets from among the Arabs: Hud, Salih, Isma\`il, Shu\`ayb and
Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets (a.s).[1] This tradition clearly
disproves the baseless accusation levied on the Shiites, and confirms
that only Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah (a.s) is the final Messenger of
God.[2]

All over the world the Shiites thus believe that angel Gabriel has acted
faithfully in delivering the divine mission, that Muhammad ibn
\`Abdullah (a.s) is the rightful Prophet, and the Final Messenger of
Allah, and that \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib (a.s), is the Prophets
administrator, his legatee.

The following narration, known as hadith al-manzilah is recognized by
both Shiites and Sunnis in which the holy Prophet (a.s), having
announced himself as the last Prophet introduces \`Ali (a.s) as his
administrator and caliph after him: Will you not be pleased to be to me
as Aaron was to Moses, save that there will be no Prophet after me[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 11, p. 42, second ed. Beirut, 1403 A.H. [2] See
Subhani's Mafahim al-Qur'an for further familiarity with a multitude of
traditions handed down concerning the Shiites view on the Final
Prophet's mission. [3] Some of the numerous documents concerning the
above tradition are: Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 6, p. 3. Egypt, chapter:
Tabuk War; Sahih Muslim, vol. 7, P.120, Egypt, chapter: \`Ali's virtues;
Sunan Ibn Majah, vol. 1, p. 55, 1st ed. Egypt, chapter: virtues of the
Prophet's companions; Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak \`ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 3,
p. 109, Beirut; Musnad Ahmad , vol. 1. pp. 170, 177, 179, 182, 184, and
185; also vol. 3, p. 32; Sahih al-Tirmidhi , vol. 5, p. 21, Beirut,
chapter: \`Ali's excellence; Ibn al-Maghazili's al-Manaqib, p. 27,

The great Islamic traditionists, the Shiites and the Sunnis alike,
confirm the chain of the tradition of the above hadith and this is a
clear proof confirming the truth of the Shiites statement in regard to
the following points:

a) Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah (a.s) is the dearest Prophet of God, and the
Seal of the Prophets, who has been raised to Prophethood upon Gods
command; there will be no other Prophet after him.

\`Ali Ibn Abi-Talib (a.s) is the Prophets legatee and successor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beirut, 1403 A.H.; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 37, p. 254, 2nd ed, Beirut, 1430
A.H.; Shaykh al-Saduq's Ma\`ani al-Akhbar, p. 74, Beirut, 1399 A.H.;
Kanz al-Fawa'id, vol. 2, p. 168, Beirut, 1405 A.H.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](29.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](31.htm)
