Question Thirty-one
===================

### What criterion is there for Dissimulation ?

Answer:
-------

Taqiyyah, i.e. dissimulation which means keeping ones heart felt belief
in secret has the Quran as its source and is a religious duty of every
Muslim to employ it in order to prevent the adversaries from causing
physical, spiritual and religious harms.

Dissimulation as Viewed by the Quran
------------------------------------

The Quran contains various verses in regard to dissimulation, two of
which are as follows:

Let not the believers take the unbelievers for friends - rather than the
believers for whoso does that belongs not to God in anything unless you
have a fear of them. 3:28

Whoso disbelieves in God, after he has believed excepting him who has
been compelled and his heart is still at rest in his belief but
whosoevers breast is expanded in unbelief, upon them shall rest anger
from God, and there awaits them a mighty chastisement. 16:106

The exegesists mention the following occasion as the foreground for the
revelation of the above verse: The infidels who had arrested \`Ammar ibn
Yasir and his parents demanded that they deny their faith and pronounce

disbelief. \`Ammar's companions pronounced their faith in God and in the
Prophethood of the Holy Prophet; some of them were, as a result, killed.
Contrary to his heartfelt conviction, \`Ammar, did not disclose his
belief, but outwardly uttered what the pagans had told him to and was
set free.

Deeply worried and unhappy about what he had said, \`Ammar returned to
the Holy Prophet, peace be upon him and his descendants, who comforted
him. The above verse was then revealed on this occasion.[1]

This sacred verse and the interpretations that the exegesists have made
reveal the fact that dissimulation was recognized at the time of the
Prophet and was practiced to prevent physical and spiritual harms.

Dissimulation as the Shiites View it
------------------------------------

Due to the history-long animosity the despotic Umayyad and \`Abbasid
rulers showed against the Shiites and the attempts they made in
massacring the Shiites,[2] the latter group concealed their true faith
as the Quran had ordered them to and were thus able to survive those
difficult conditions.

It is clear that in such a suffocating and oppressive atmosphere as the
one mentioned above no other solution could be conceived of to save the
Shiites from the devastating hurricane of the tyranny that threatened to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 4, p. 131. [2] For detailed information,
see Abu'l-Faraj al-Isfahani's Maqatil al-Talibiyyin; Ahmad Amin's
Shuhada' al-Fadilah; Muhammad Jawad Mughniyah's al-Shiah wa'l-Hakimun.

uproot them. If the despotic rulers and their puppets had not made it
their aims to turn against the Shiites and mercilessly kill them, there
would have been no reason for the Shiites to practice dissimulation.

It should be noted that dissimulation is practiced not only by the
Shiites but also by other Islamic sects when they face the bloodthirsty
enemies of Islam whom they are unable to avert such as the Khawarij and
any other brutal enemies of Islam who commit unlawful acts).

Accordingly, if all Islamic nations come to an understanding and live in
harmony, there will be no grounds for the application of taqiyyah.

Conclusion
----------

From what has been discussed above, we can reach the following
conclusion:

1 .Taqiyyah originates from the Quran. The behavior of the Prophets
Companions and the Prophets approval are clear evidence that
dissimulation was allowed and practiced in the early days of Islam.

2. The Shiites intention of practicing dissimulation was to put a stop
to being mercilessly massacred, and to prevent the hurricanes of cruelty
that threatened to annihilate them.

3. Dissimulation is not a practice employed only by the Shiites only; it
is in practice by other Muslims too.

4. Taqiyyah suggests not only being on the alert against the infidels
and keeping ones Islamic faith in secret from the idolaters, but is also
a necessity at the time when Muslims' lives are being threatened by any
cruel opponent against whom there is no possibility of fighting.

5. There will be no grounds for dissimulation in case members of the
Islamic community reach an understanding.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](30.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](32.htm)
