Question Thirty-two
===================

### Why is the Ja\`fari faith considered the official religion in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran ?

Answer:
-------

There is no doubt that the Islamic Republics Constitution treats all
branches of the Islamic faith (madhahib) with deference and there is no
doubt that the Islamic faiths (such as: the Ja\`fari, the Maliki, the
Shafi\`i, the Hanbali and the Hanafi) are not equal and harmonious in
their expression of the individual and social duties of people; there
are many great differences among them in this regard.

However, in order to legislate and draw up regulations for a society, it
is felt that there is a dire need for the rules and regulations to be
harmonious. Hence, in any country, only one of the Islamic faiths can be
taken as the source to draw social rules from, for in the case of there
being a variety of legislative sources, never can a set of harmonious
rules be drawn up.

It is thus befitting to single out on the right criterion from among the
Islamic faiths, one as the source of the social laws and regulations in
order to avoid any kind of disturbance and disorder in the laws of the
country and to

pave the way for the legislation of a series of coherent and harmonized
rules in legal and social fields.

The Criterion for Choosing the Ja\`fari Faith
---------------------------------------------

Another question is By what criterion is the Ja\`fari faith chosen, from
among other Islamic faiths, as the source from which to draw up laws and
regulations of Iran? The answer to this question is clear: the majority
of Iranians are the Muslims who have pronounced the Ja\`fari faith as
the basis of their belief and as the expression of their individual and
social duties. Thus, it goes without saying that choosing the Ja\`fari
faith as the official religion of the country in the Islamic Republics
Constitution is a natural phenomenon which is in agreement with all
logical and legal criteria.

The Status of Other Islamic Faiths
----------------------------------

Although the Ja\`fari faith has been taken as the official religion in
the Islamic Republics Constitution, the other Islamic faiths (madhahib)
such as the Shafi\`i, the Hanbali, the Hanafi, the Maliki and the Zaydi
have been recognized as well. Moreover, the followers of these faiths
can, in the following cases, act as they have been instructed by their
own religions:

1. Performance of religious rites

2. Religious education or upbringing

3. Individual duties

4. Specific religious procedures such as marriage, divorce, inheritance,
framing of wills, etc.

Furthermore, in a region in which any one of the mentioned

Schools has the majority of followers, the execution of the local
regulations is observed, within the authorities invested on the local
councils, in accordance with the beliefs of the majority, while the
rights of other religious followers are also respected.

Now, in order to further clarify the matter, we will quote the twelfth
article of the first chapter of the Islamic Republics Constitution,
which deals with this matter:

The official religion of Iran is Islam of the Twelver Ja\`fari School
and this article is inalterable in perpetuity. The other sects of Islam,
including the Hanafi, the Shafi\`i, the Maliki, the Hanbali and the
Zaydi, are regarded with full respect and the followers of these sects
enjoy complete freedom in performing their religious rituals according
to their own jurisprudence and with respect to their religious
instructions, personal status (including marriage, divorce, inheritance
and framing of wills) and the causes relating thereto are considered to
be official in courts of law. In every region where the followers of any
of these sects enjoy a majority of the particular sect, the local
regulations will be formulated according to the precepts of jurisdiction
of the councils of that region with the assurance that the rights of the
followers of other sects will be respected.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](31.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](33.htm)
