Question Thirty-five
====================

### Why is Imamate considered higher in rank than Prophethood ?

Answer:
-------

It would first be necessary to clarify the three concepts of
Prophethood, Divine Mission and Imamate as expressed in the Quran and
the narrations so as to answer the question and find out why Imamate is
considered superior to the other two ranks.

1) The Rank of Prophethood
--------------------------

The word nabi Prophet is derived from naba prophecy, literary: giving
important tiding; so the Prophet means the herald of significant news or
one who brings news of an event. In the Quranic culture, it refers to
someone who receives the divine revelation in various manners, a
reporter who, as Gods representative, reports from God, without the
mediation of a human being.[1] A Prophets duty is thus limited to
receiving the Revelation and conveying it to people. In the words of the
Quran: So Allah raised Prophets as bearers of good news and as warners.
2: 213

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Rasa'il al-\`Asharah by Shaykh al-Tusi, p. 11.

2) The Divine Mission
---------------------

The Messenger, as understood within the context of the Divine
Revelation, refers to those Prophets who, in addition to receiving the
Revelation and reporting in the capacity of Gods representatives, are
given the responsibility of propagating the Mission they have been
charged with. The holy Quran says: but if you turn back, then know that
a clear deliverance of the message is (incumbent) on Our apostle. 5:92.
Therefore, the Divine Mission risalah is a position endowed onto a nabi,
a Prophet. That is, Prophethood, nubuwwat and Divine Mission, risalah
are two concepts signifying the particularities of the Prophets who have
received the Divine Revelation, are bearers of news, and therefore are
nabis, and at the same time Messengers, rasuls since they have the duty
to propagate it.

When we take the above explanations together, we can conclude that as
long as they function within the bounds set by nubuwwah and risalah, the
Prophets are mere guides who announce what is lawful and what is not,
introduce to people the paths leading to prosperity, and have no
responsibility other than conveying the news they have received from
God, or propagating the mission they have been charged with.

3) The Status of Imamate
------------------------

The Quran views the Divine Leadership, the Imamate, something different
from the other two positions: Imamate is a position with a wider range
of authority for managing the society and leading the people. Below are
evidence derived from the illuminating verses of the Quran to support
our view:

a) As regards bestowing Imamate onto a dear Prophet, Abraham, the true
friend of God, the Quran says, When his Lord tested Abraham by means (of
certain) words, and he fulfilled them, He said: I am going to make you
into a leader for mankind. He said: What about my offspring ?

This verse clearly distinguishes the status of Imamate from those of
Prophecy and the Divine Mission. Abraham had years before been appointed
a Prophet, and, as the following two evidence indicate, tested in such
circumstances as the time when he had to make the demanding decision to
sacrifice his son, Isma\`il.

a) The Almighty God had bestowed Abraham two sons Isma\`il and Ishaq at
the time when Abraham had grown old. The Glorious Quran says, Praise be
to Allah, Who has given me in old age Isma\`il and Ishaq. 14:39 The
decision to sacrifice Isma\`il, a divine trial, followed by still the
more difficult ones, preceded Gods raising Abraham to the position of
Imamate towards the end of his life, although the Divine Revelation a
sign of the Prophethood had descended upon him years before, far ahead
of the time he had the offspring.[1]

b) Still more proof for the superiority of the position of the divine
Imamate leadership of the society and of the Ummah over those of
Prophethood and the Divine Mission is conveyed in this Quranic verse:
And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain which refers to the
intolerable tests Abraham had to pass successfully before

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] See verses 99-102 of Chapter al-Saffat, verses 53-54 of Chapter
al-Hijr, and verses 70-71 of Chapter Hud.

the position of Imamate could be bestowed on him, although he had
already attained Prophethood and risalah. The reason is clear: The
divine leadership, Imamate, includes receiving of the revelation and
propagating it as well as managing of the society that leads to Ummahs
perfection and happiness. It is natural for such a rank to be
particularly sensitive and great, the attaining of which requires
success in intolerable and successive tests.

The above verse reveals that the Almighty God bestowed the position of
Imamate and leadership of the society onto Ibrahim after He had tried
him with difficult tests.

Further to Ibrahims request, God accepted his pray and having raised him
to the rank of Prophethood, allowed for his righteous offspring the
leadership of the Ummah and the ruling over the society, as is mentioned
in the glorious Quran But indeed We have given to Ibrahims children the
Book and the wisdom, and We have given them a grand kingdom. 4:55.

It is thus understood that Imamate and the leading of the community is a
rank different from Prophethood; it is a rank the Almighty God gave His
prophet, Ibrahim, after he succeeded in the difficult tests test by Him.
It was then that Ibrahim requested God for the rule and leadership to
continue in his righteous offspring, which was accepted.

Besides the divine Book and wisdom, allusions to Prophethood and
risalah, they were granted a grand kingdom and leadership, the
realization of Ibrahims pray. This is why some of Ibrahims offspring
such as Joseph, David, and Solomon were both Prophets and leaders of the
community.

It is thus clear that the rank lf Imamate is something different from
both Nubuwwah, Prophethood, and risalah, the Divine Mission. Also, due
to the wider scope of authority and responsibility, Imamate is worthier
and occupies a superior position.

Superiority of the Position of Imamate
--------------------------------------

The preceding discussion showed that since the Prophet and the Messenger
are bearers of the news and the message, their activities are limited to
warning and illuminating of the direction (to God). If a Prophet,
however, attains the position of Imamate, he will have to shoulder
greater responsibilities in actualizing the divine scheme and
implementing the commands of the holy religion to establish an exemplary
prosperous community and to lead his people in such a way as to secure
their happiness in this world and in the next.

Such an important responsibility, the execution of which requires a
constant confrontation with hardships and battling with desires, is
evidently in dire need of an enormous spiritual power, of burning for
God, and of greater tolerance of difficulties, a responsibility which
will not actualize if it is not accompanied with Gods love and self
annihilation in the way of acquiring His satisfaction. This is why the
Almighty God granted Ibrahim the position of Imamate after he had passed
a chain of intolerable tests and was in the final link of life. So, it
is the most meritorious of His servants, like the Blessed Prophet of
Islam, who receive the position of imamate, the leadership of the people
and the rule over the society.

Is Concomitancy of Prophethood and Imamate a Necessity ?
--------------------------------------------------------

A further question may ask if the two ranks are concomitant, that is, if
a Prophet should necessarily be an Imam, or if it is necessary for an
Imam to be a Prophet, too. The answer to both questions is, as the logic
of Revelation views it, negative.

A study of the Quranic verses concerning Saul and his fighting the
oppressor Goliath (Jalut) indicates that after the demise of the Prophet
Moses, God raised Ishmooil to prophethood, but gave Talut the position
of Imamate, the leadership and the rule. Preceding this event, a number
of the Israelites (Bani-Isra'il) had requested the prophet of the time
to choose a leader so they could fight in the way of God. The glorious
Quran says Surely Allah has raised Talut to be a king over you. They
said: How can he hold kingship over us while we have a greater right to
kingship than he, and he has not been granted an abundance of wealtha He
said: Surely Allah has chosen him in preference to you, and He has
increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique, and Allah grants His
kingdom to whom He pleases, and Allah is Ample-giving, knowing.

The above verse denotes the following points:

Necessities may demand a separation of Prophethood from Imamate, with
simultaneous assignment of prophethood to one individual and Imamate to
another, each qualified for the duty assigned to him. The Israelites had
no objection to such a division in essence and did not claim their
prophet to be superior, but did, instead, say, We have a greater right
to kingship than he.

It is God who had given Talut the rank, Surely Allah has raised Talut to
be a king Also, Surely Allah has chosen him in preference to you.

He was not merely an army commander, but a king who was to lead The
Israelites in the holy war they want to wage in the way of Allah. His
God-given position, however, gave him further authority in the state of
affairs. The Quran says, Allah grants His kingdom to whom He pleases.

The foremost requisite in leading the society and the people are sample
knowledge along with physical and spiritual capabilities, particularly
because in those days the leaders had to accompany the army.[1]

It is thus becomes evident that there is no need for Prophethood and
Imamate to go together, nor should there necessarily be a division
between the two ranks. One may be chosen only a nabi, a Prophet, but not
an Imam, whose duty it is to lead people. Similarly, God may choose
someone an Imam to lead the society, but he may not be a Prophet. There
may also be a time when someone qualified is granted both
responsibilities. The Quran states, So they put them to flight by Allahs
permission. And Dawud slew Jalut, and Allah gave him kingdom and wisdom,
and taught him of what he pleased. 2:251

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] from Ayatollah Subhani's Manshur Javiden Qur'an.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](34.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](36.htm)
