Question Three
==============

### Why is \`Ali (a.s), the son of Abu-Talib, the Prophets Successor?

Answer:
-------

As regards the successorship of the holy Prophet, the Shiites firmly
believe that it is an ordained position. They maintain that the position
of Imamate is, in some respects, like that of Prophethood. A prophets
successor, just as the prophet himself, should be introduced by God. The
biography of the Messenger of God, Muhammad (a.s), also bears witness to
this principle: the Prophet himself explicitly and implicitly appointed
\`Ali (a.s) as his successor in numerous occasions, three of which are
mentioned here:

1) At the beginning of the prophetic mission, when the holy Prophet was
commissioned by God through the verse *and warn thy tribe of near
kindred* (26:214), he addressed them saying, who will, from among you,
help me with this matter to be my brother, my counselor, my legatee and
my successor? It was only \`Ali (a.s) who replied positively to this
heavenly call. Then the Prophet addressed his relatives and announced,
This person (\`Ali) will be my brother, my legatee and my successor
among you, so listen to him and follow him.[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Tabari, vol. 2 pp. 62-63; al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 2,
pp.

2) In the war of Tabuk, the holy Prophet asked \`Ali, Do you not want to
be to me as Aaron was to Moses, save that there will not be any prophet
after me?[1] This means that just as Aaron was the immediate legatee and
successor to Moses, so would \`Ali be the Prophets successor.

3) In the 10th year after Hijra, when returning from the last pilgrimage
to Mecca in a valley called Ghadir Khumm, in the presence of a large
multitude, the Prophet introduced \`Ali (a.s) as Master of Muslims and
Believers. At the beginning of his address, the Prophet asked people, Do
I not have authority on you more than you have on yourselvesa When all
the people gathering there unanimously affirmed it, the Prophet
announced: *man kuntu mawlahu fa hadha \`Aliyyun mawlahu* Whomsoever I
have been the master, \`Ali will be his master from now on. It is clear
that what the Prophet implied by the word mawla (master), was the very
same authority and full superiority par excellence that he had over the
believers which was established for \`Ali as well.

On that day Hassan Ibn Thabit put the historical Ghadir event into a
poem that reads:

*Their Prophet was inviting them on the day of Ghadir  
 And a herald whispered into the messengers ear,  
 Who is your master and prophet? he asked.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

40-41; Musnad Ahmad, vol. 1, p. 111; Nahj al-Balaghah Commentary by Ibn
Abi'l-Hadid, vol. 13, pp. 210-212. [1] Sirat Ibn Husham, vol. 3, p. 520;
Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah, book 9, chapter 2, p. 121.

*They replied, and no ignorance they pretended:  
 Your God is our master, and you are our prophet forever  
 And no one among us will you find opposed to the mastery, ever.  
 Then he called Rise, thou \`Ali  
 The leader and Imam after me I agree you be.  
 So, \`Ali is the master of those whose master I've been,  
 And I want you truthful followers of his to be after.  
 O God! Be his friends friend Thou.  
 Then he prayed, And be his foes foe.[1]*

The Ghadir tradition is one of the successive traditions cited by not
only all Shiite scholars but also by about three hundred and sixty Sunni
ones,[2] who have quoted one hundred and ten of the Prophets companions
in the chain of the narrators of this tradition. Moreover, twenty-six
great Muslim scholars have written separate books on the recording and
the handing down of this tradition. For instance, the famous Muslim
historian, Abu-Ja\`far Tabari wrote two volumes of books on this issue.
\`Allamah Aminis encyclopedic book, *al-Ghadir*, provides further
information in this regard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kharazmi, the Maliki, al-Manaqib, p. 80; Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, the
Hanafi, Tadhkirat al-Khawass, p. 20; al-Kanji, the Shafii, Kifayat
al-Talib, p. 17. [2] For Instance, see Ibn Hajar's Al-Sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqah. (Egypt) book 9, chapter. 2.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](02.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](04.htm)
