Question Six
============

### Why do Shiites consider the Imams Ma\`sum, infallible?

Answer:
-------

There are several reasons proving that the Imams of the Shiites, all
members of the household of Prophet Muhammad (*Ahl al-Bayt*), are all
infallible (i.e. protected against errors and sins). Only one of the
reasons is presented here:

According to Shiite and Sunni scholars, the blessed Prophet, in the last
days of his life, said, I leave behind two invaluable things for you:
the Book of Allah and my *Ahl al-Bayt*. They will never be separated
until they meet me at the fountain of Kawthar.[1]

There is no doubt that the Quran is secure from any deviation and
mistake. How can there possibly be any mistake in the divine revelation
sent down by God, carried by Gabriel, and received by the blessed
Prophet? It is as clear as daylight that all the three are free from any
error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hakim's al-Mustadrak, part 3, p. 148; Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah,
part 11, chapter one, p. 149. Similar texts are mentioned in Kanz
al-\`Ummal, part one on al-I\`tisam bil-Kitab wal-Sunnah, p. 144; Musnad
Ahmad, part five, pp. 182 and 189.

Muslims maintain that the Holy Prophet is safe from any errors in
receiving, guarding and conveying the revelation. With the book of Allah
so truly and firmly free from any error, it is obvious that the
household of the Prophet, the *Ahl al-Bayt*, are also secure from errors
and mistakes, for the household have been paired with the Quran in the
tradition cited above. Thus, since the two have been paired up with the
Quran, they must be infallible in guiding and leading the people. Put
another way, there is no reason why an erring person should be paired up
with the Quran.

The clearest evidence to the infallibility of the Imam is the words of
the holy Prophet, who said, These will never be separated until they
meet me at the Fountain of Kawthar. Should the household of the Prophet
not be protected against errors, or should they ever err, they will get
separated and deviate from the error-free Quran; this, nonetheless, has
strongly been refuted.

Certainly the household cited above does not mean all the prophets
relatives, in-law or ancestral, for surely not all of them were secure
against errors. Therefore, the honor is peculiar to some members of his
family, the Imam, who have been beacons for the Ummah, and guardians of
the prophetic Sunnah and the Shariah (the religion) throughout history.

Also, twenty-six Muslim scholars have written separate books on the
recording and handing down of this tradition. For instance, the famous
Muslim historian, Abu-Ja\`far Tabari wrote two volumes of books on this
issue. \`Allamah Aminis book *Al-Ghadir*, provides further information
in this regard.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](05.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](07.htm)
