Question Seven
==============

### Why do you bear witness to \`Alis guardianship (Wilayah) in the call to prayer (the Adhan), saying I testify that \`Ali is Allahs Wali?

Answer:
-------

1) All Shiite jurists have clearly expressed in their books of canonical
law, demonstrative or otherwise, that saying the sentence I testify that
\`Ali is Allahs wali is not part of the call to prayer (the Adhan) and /
or of the Iqamah, and that no one has the right to utter that sentence
as an indispensable part of the Adhan.

2) In the viewpoint of the Quran, \`Ali (a.s) is declared as one of Gods
saints. The following verse explicitly mentions him as the guardian
(wali) over the believers: *Only Allah is your wali (guardian) and his
apostle and those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the
poor-due while bowing down (in prayer) (5:55).*

Also, certain traditions in the tradition digests collected by Sunni
traditionists specify that the above verse was revealed about \`Ali
(a.s), who donated his ring to a poor man while bowing down in
prayer.[1] When this verse was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] The documents on the background and condition of the revelation of
this verse are too many to mention here; only a few will be cited as
follows: al-Tabari's Commentary (tafsir), vol. 6, p. 186; Ahkam
al-Qur'an (tafsir al-Jassas) vol. 2, p. 542; Tafsir al-Baydawi, vol. 1,
p.345; al-Durr al-Manthur, vol. 2, p. 293.

revealed Hassan ibn Thabit put the event into verse as follows:

*You are the one who bestows while bowing in prayer.*

May souls be sacrificed for you, the best of those who bow down before
Allah.

It was thus that Allah sent you the best of the wilayah and announced it
in explicit verses.

3) The noble Prophet says, The reality of every deed depends on ones
intention. Thus if \`Alis guardianship is one of the principles attested
to by the Qur'an, then why should there be any objections to announcing
this fact in the Adhan along with the attestation to Muhammads
prophethood if it is not announced with the intention of considering it
as part of the Adhan?

If including a formula into the Adhan is disagreeable and the Shiites
have, on the same ground, been criticized, what explanation is there for
the following points?

a) History shows that the formula Hurry to the best deed (*hayya \`ala
khayr al-\`amal*) was part of the Adhan in the time of the second
caliph.[1] But he omitted it on the assumption that upon hearing it,
people might take prayer as the best deed and not take part in the holy
war (the Jihad). This has continued in the same manner.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kanz al-\`Ummal, the book of al-Salat, vol. 4, p. 266. Al-Tabarani
said, "Bilal used to call to prayers in the morning, saying 'Hurry to
the best deed (hayya \`ala khayr al-\`amal).' Sunan al-Bayhaqi, vol. 1,
p. 424-5; Malik's al-Muwatta' vol. 1, p. 93. [2] Kanz al-Irfan, vol. 2,
p. 158. Also, al-Sirat al-Mustaqim wa Jawahir al-Akhbar wa'l-athar, vol.
2, p. 192; Al-Kushchi's Sharh al-Tajrid, on

b) The formula Prayer is better than sleep *(al-salatu khayrun min
al-nawmi)* was not part of the Adhan during the time of the Holy
Prophet; it was added later on.[1] Accordingly, Shafi\`i in his book
*al-Umm* says It does not please me to say, in the Adhan, prayer is
better than sleep, because Abu-Mahdhurah (one of the traditionists) has
not mentioned it in his narrations.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Imamate, p. 484: "He went up the pulpit and said, "O People, three
things were practiced during the Prophet's time but I forbid them and
administer punishment if they are done. These are temporary marriage
(mut\`ah), mut\`at al-Hajj and saying 'Hurry up to the best deed." [1]
Kanz al-\`Ummal, the book of al-Salat, vol. 4, p. 270. [2] Quoted from
Dala'il al-Sidq, vol. 3, part 2, p. 97.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](06.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](08.htm)
