Question Eight
==============

### Who is Mahdi and why do Shiites expect his return?

Answer:
-------

One of the issues unanimously accepted by all Divine religions is that
of the Reformer who will reappear at the End of the Time. Not only
Islamic societies but also Jewish and Christian societies await the one
who will administer justice all over the world. This fact will be made
clear by referring to the Old and New Testaments.[1] The holy Prophet of
Islam also made a statement which the Islamic traditionists have quoted:
If there remains of the world only a single day, Allah will lengthen it
until He has sent one from the people of my household. He will fill the
world with equity and justice after it has been filled with injustice or
oppression.[2]

Such a Reformer is, therefore, acknowledged by prophets. There are also
numerous traditions in the Sunni scholars

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] ( The Old Testament: Book of Psalms of David, 96-97; Book of Daniel,
Chap. 12. The New Testament: The Gospel of Matthew, Chap. 24; The Gospel
of Mark, Chap. 13; The Gospel of Luke, Chap. 21. [2] ( Sunan Abi-Dawud.
Egypt: al-Taziyah Press. Vol. 2, p. 207; Yanabi al-Mawaddah, Chap. 2, P.
432; Nur al-Absar, Chap. 2, p. 154.

anthology of traditions (i.e. *Sahihs and Musnads*) concerning the
Promised Mahdi. Besides, the Islamic traditionists - Sunni as well as
Shiite scholars - have written a large number of books about him.[1] The
descriptions given in all these traditions do fit the immediate son of
Imam Hasan \`Askari[2] (The eleventh Imam of the Shiites), whose name is
the same as the noble Prophets.[3] He is the twelfth Imam[4] and a
grandson from the line of Imam Husayn, the son of \`Ali Ibn
Abi-Talib.[5] The Promised Mahdi was, upon Gods command, born in 255 H /
877 A.D. and now continues his life in an unknown guise.

It is necessary to mention that such a long life is inharmonious neither
with science nor with the logic of revelation. Modern science is
planning to lengthen mans life and believes that man has the disposition
for living long, and the possibility will increase if disasters and
harms are, in part, prevented.

Mention has also bee made in history of those who have had long lives.
For instance, the following verses of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] ( Muhammad Ibn Yusuf al-Kanji al-Shafii's al-Bayan fi Akhbar Sahib
al-Zaman; al-Burhan fi \`Alamati Mahdiy akhir al-Zaman by \`Ali Ibn
Husam al-Din (known as al-Muttaqi al-Hindi); al-Mahdi wa'l-Mahdawiyyah
by Ahmad Amin of Egypt. Shiite scholars have written numerous books on
the subject, such as al-Malahim wa'l-Fitan. [2] Yanabi al-Mawaddah fi
al-Manaqib by Jabir ibn \`Abdullah al-Ansari. [3] Sahih al-Tirmidhi ,
vol. 2, p. 46, Delhi, 1342 ; Musnad Ahmad, Vol. 1, p. 376, Egypt, l313.
[4] Yanabi al-Mawaddah, p. 443. [5] Ibid, p. 432.

Quran can be mentioned regarding the Prophets Noah and Jonah:

*So he remained among them a thousand years save fifty years. (29:14)*

And had he not been one of those who glorify (Us), he would certainly
have tarried in its (the whales) belly to the Day of Resurrection.
(37:144)

From the viewpoint of the Quran as well as that of Muslims, Khidr, the
noble Prophet, and the Noble Jesus are still alive.

[![ Back](images/back.gif)  
Back](07.htm)

[![ Home](images/index.gif)  
Index](index.htm)

[![ Next](images/next.gif)  
Next](09.htm)
