Editors Introduction
====================

The life of Imam Hasan (as) was both eventful and full of lessons, and
yet the significance of his role seems to have been ignored, forgotten,
or eclipsed by the extent of focus on Imam Husayn (as). Why has history
blackened the radiant face of that Imam in whose adoration forty
thousand people unanimously raised their hands to pledge allegiance, and
the outside of whose house was continually overflowing with people?

A common misconception is that he was just a peace-maker, yet nothing
could be further from the truth. For Imam Hasan (as) was overwhelmingly
and popularly appointed as Caliph due to his charisma, knowledge and
eminent piety. Then he led the Islamic Caliphate for six months with
authority and control, and he prepared his army, leading it to war
against Muawiya and exhorting it to be brave and unflinching.

Only when his men became weak at the knees and fell prey to bribery, did
he have to resort to peace in order to achieve his objectives. And by
that means, he forever made absolutely clear the difference between
Caliphate and Monarchy, thus putting an end to Muawiya’s schemes.

So what we see in our history and communities is that there is an
imbalance of treatment between Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Husayn (as),
whereas the Prophet (saws) declared them both as the leaders of the
youth of Paradise. This book very nicely redresses that balance by
displaying the brilliance of Imam Hasan’s (as) leadership, the
farsightedness of his thinking, and his iron-like resolve in serving
Allah (swt) all characteristics so reminiscent of his father before him.

Moreover, the author demonstrates, with exacting scholarship using
authentic sources and the motherbooks of history, how there would have
been no Karbala without the groundwork laid by Imam Hasan (as). The book
also has great value as a manual of instruction on how one should obey
the Imam of one’s time, in war and in peace .Thus making it an excellent
way of preparing for the emergence of the Twelfth Imam (ajtf).

The author, Hujjatul Islam Sayyid Muhammad Qurat-ul-Ain Abidy, has been
in the Holy City of Qom for twenty years, first as a student in the
Islamic Seminary & then as a teacher of Qur’an Tafseer and Fiqh. Among
his publications are the following works:

• ‘Islah Ijtimai Dar Islam’ (Social Reforms in Islamic Society),

• ‘Sirat-e-’Ali’ (Translation to Urdu of the biography of Imam ‘Ali
(as)).

• ‘Ghina’ (Translation into Persian of a treatise on music).

He is also a founding member of the Islami Afkar Foundation in Pakistan
and a senior teacher in the Al-Asr organization of London.

I hope that this book is of benefit to both scholars, who will
appreciate the thoroughness of its investigations, and to lay people,
who will appreciate the excitement of a narrative depicting the rise and
fall of rulers and the battles fought between them. In particular,
students of Islamic history from 40AH – 50AH, and those studying the
causes of the shift from Islamic Government (Caliphate) to materialistic
Monarchy, will find this work valuable.

Zahir Davdani (Meng)  
 Qom - 30/9/05.


