The Terms of the Peace Treaty
=============================

Before starting a discussion on the peace treaty, it is considered
necessary to state that the historians have very boldly tried to keep
the world in the dark about the clauses and the relevant details of the
peace treaty. Was the treaty between Imam Hasane Al-Mujtaba (as) and
Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan, signed in 41A.H, so unimportant that its details
may be ignored? The researchers agree that not only are there surprising
disagreements on the issue but there are so many ambiguities and
misunderstandings as well. [^1]

The historians themselves mention that the grandson of the Holy Prophet
(saw) had himself advanced many conditions, had taken so many
commitments and assurances and had only then agreed to peace.

These terms, which had been proposed by Imam Hasan (as), were in the
interest of Muslim Ummah in general and the treaty was signed with the
witnesses of prominent personalities of Iraq and Syria. Before going
into the details of the treaty, it is essential to briefly review the
historical sources.

The historians Masudi and Yaqubi do not mention the terms at all.
Similarly, Ibn. Hajar 'Asqalani and Hakim Naishapuri do admit that
(Imam) Hasan (as) had made peace only after so many terms had been
agreed and commitments and assurances given, but do not mention the
details of what those conditions were.

A similar attitude can be noticed in the narration of 'Sahih-e-Bukhari'
in which the details beginning with the coming of the delegations till
the signing of the agreement have been given, but when the point of the
terms and conditions is reached then the issue is evaded by writing
'etc. etc.' but it is accepted that the Syrian delegation had accepted
all the terms and conditions of Imam Hasan (as).

Abul Faraj Isphahani also does not take keen interest in the issue.
After mentioning three conditions he says that other terms and
conditions had also been suggested by Imam Hasan (as) which the
delegation sent by Muawiya had accepted. The historian Tabari records
the treaty (like other issues relating to Imam Hasan (as)) giving two
different narrations by Zuhri and 'Awana bin Hakam.

Zuhri, instead of describing the details, tries to create some
misunderstanding. As against him, Tabari records three conditions
directly from 'Awana bin Hakam and the fourth indirectly. The historian
Dinawari has mentioned four conditions but his sources are quite
different from others. Ibn. Abi-al-HAdid takes three conditions from
Madaini and the fourth one is incidentally considered as a separate
issue which is taken from Madaini himself.

A more or less similar attitude has been adopted by the rest of the
historians who have considered it sufficient to record one, two or at
best three terms, but none of them considers it essential to describe
the text of the treaty or the details of the resolutions which had been
agreed to after so many exchanges and meetings between the two
delegations. [^2]

Among the old historical records only 'Al-Futuh' of Ibn. Atham Kufi and
'Ansabul Ashraf' by Baladhuri contain the text of the treaty and five
terms and conditions are mentioned in it. Outwardly, one may conclude
that these were the only terms agreed upon. However, a thorough search
of other records reveals that the picture is quite different as there
were other conditions too!

In such a situation, neither any one historical source can be totally
relied upon nor the general conditions mentioned here and there can be
taken as true. Only after great effort and deep research about the
available sources and the circumstances prevailing at that time, can the
correct terms and conditions of the treaty can be determined.

The Blank Paper
---------------

The historian Baladhuri writes in 'Ansabul Ashraf' that Muawiya sent
Abdullah b. Amir b. Kerez and 'Abdel Rahman b. Samarah to (Imam) Hasan
(as) and the two informed Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) about the damages through
war and the consequences of continued bloodshed among Muslims, and
indicated the willingness of Muawiya to hand over the rule to Imam Hasan
(as) after his death.

In addition, they said that Muawiya would offer much more to Imam Hasan
(as) in lieu of peace. Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) agreed with their ideas and
sent 'Umru bin Salma Hamdani, Arhabi and Muhammad bin Ash'as Kandi along
with them so that they could record the terms offered by Muawiya and may
express the agreement (on behalf of Imam Hasan (as)). So, Muawiya sent
the following letter to Imam Hasan (as):

"This letter is from Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan for Hasan bin ‘Ali (as). I
make peace with you on the condition that after me the government will
be handed over to you and I vouch for you before God, feeling obliged to
God and the Holy Prophet (saws), remembering the firm pledge taken by
the Glorified God from any of His bondsmen, that I will neither indulge
in any intrigue against you nor would conduct any armed struggle against
you.

Further that each year I will pay you ten lakh (one million) Dirham from
Baitul Maal and the revenue of Mansa and Darb Jard (Darabgard) will be
reserved for you. 'Abdullah b. Amir, 'Umru b. Salma Hamdani, 'Abdel
Rahman b. Samarah and Muhammad bin Ash'as Kandi are witness to it and it
has been written in Rabi II 41 A.H."

When Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) read the above letter of Muawiya, he gave a
brief reply in one sentence: "He is trying to tempt me about something
which I would not hand over to him if I had an inclination towards it."
After quoting the above sentence of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), Baladhuri
writes that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) called 'Abdullah bin Haras b. Noful,
the nephew of Muawiya, and told him that he should go to his uncle
(Muawiya) and tell him that if Muawiya was agreeable to guarantee the
life and honour of the general public, then he would agree to hand over
the reign to him. 'Abdullah b. Haras went to Muawiya and explained the
condition to him.

In return Muawiya gave him a blank paper at the end of which was the
seal of Muawiya, and sent the message to Imam Hasan (as) that he may
write on it (the white paper) whatever he thought fit.  
 Imam Hasan (as) wrote the required terms and conditions on it, and
after taking the signatures of the high powered Syrian delegation as
witness, sent it back to Muawiya so that he (Muawiya) may affirm his
agreement to all those terms and both these persons may be a witness to
the agreement. [^3]

Ibn. Atham Kufi has also written about the blank paper with some
variation. He writes:  
 "On learning of the betrayal by Iraqi nobles and after addressing them,
(Imam) Hasan (as) sent 'Abdullah b. Haras to Muawiya and stated that if
Muawiya is ready to protect the life, property and honour of all men,
then he would give allegiance to him, otherwise he would not do so.

When 'Abdullah b. Haras reached Muawiya, he (Muawiya) wanted to know the
terms of peace. He added a few conditions (the same which, according to
Baladhuri, had been suggested by Muawiya). At this Muawiya asked for a
blank paper and putting his seal on it with his own finger, said:

'Take this page to Hasan (as) and tell him to write in it whatever he
wishes. All his (Muawiya's) companions are a witness that he has
willingly put the seal by himself.'" [^4]

After studying these two historical sources also, the issue is not clear
as to why the need for sending the blank paper arose when Muawiya had
agreed to all the terms and conditions conveyed by the representative of
Imam Hasan (as)? However, after studying other historical documents, the
problem is solved.

These documents clearly indicate that Imam Hasan (as) had demanded some
terms and conditions from Muawiya before agreeing to peace. These
included the issue of the next caliph and general peace and order to be
included in the peace treaty, as Imam Hasan (as) had demanded that the
caliphate must be returned to him after the death of Muawiya and that
the people of Iraq, Hijaz and Madina would not be arrested for having
fought Muawiya in the days of his (Imam's) father.

Muawiya was ready to accept all the terms and conditions of Imam Hasan
(as), except that he could not guarantee the safety of ten persons who
included prominent persons like Qais b. S'ad against whom Muawiya had
vouched to cut his tongue and hands whenever arrested. Imam Hasan (as)
conveyed to Muawiya that in such a situation, he was not prepared for
peace with him.

Learning this, Muawiya put his seal on the blank paper and handed it
over to the representative of the Imam (as) so that he may write what he
thought appropriate and that he was willing to accept all the terms of
the Imam (as) regarding peace. Imam Hasan (as) wrote all the terms and
conditions demanded by him and sent it back to Muawiya.

When Muawiya agreed to those terms and a promise for the same was taken
from him in the presence of responsible persons, only then the agreement
was reached between the two sides according to which Imam Hasan (as)
agreed to hand over the government to Muawiya for a given time (i.e.
till the time Muawiya was alive). [^5]

The narration about the blank paper and related facts can also be traced
from other historical sources which show that the delegation of Muawiya
had accepted all the demands of Imam Hasan (as) and both sides had
arrived at total agreement before the treaty. [^6]

For that reason, a team of researchers supports the narration about the
blank paper being sent and agreement between both sides being reached on
the terms written down by Imam Hasan (as). For the same reason, the year
of the treaty is known as "A'am al-Jama'at" (the year of understanding).
[^7]  
 Zuhri also does not deny the existence of "sahifa-e-baiza", i.e. the
white paper, but he mentions its dispatch at a time which does not seem
to be logical. Zuhri claims that when the conditions in Iraq
deteriorated, then Imam Hasan (as) wrote to Muawiya about peace and put
forward his conditions.

At the same time Muawiya had sent a delegation with a blank paper which
had the seal of Muawiya. When the blank paper was presented to the Imam
(as), he added more terms for peace and kept it with him. On his side,
Muawiya agreed to the terms of peace as indicated in the letter of Imam
Hasan (as), but refused to agree to additional terms.

When the two sides met, there was disagreement between them about peace.
Imam Hasan (as) stated that the terms and conditions written in the
blank paper are reliable while Muawiya said that he agreed to the
original terms but did not agree to the conditions added later. Due to
this disagreement, Muawiya did not fulfill any of the conditions of Imam
Hasan (as). [^8]

Later historians, who include Ibn. Athir, Abu Mustakuya and Dr. Taha
Husayn, were also misled by the above misunderstanding created by Zuhri.
[^9]

These persons do not totally rely on Zuhri's narration, yet they have
faced some difficulty in this regard. We have discussed Zuhri's
narrations about Imam Hasan (as) in previous chapters and have proved
that Zuhri is so much biased against Imam Hasan (as) that he defends
Muawiya even at the cost of Imam Hasan (as).

By the assumed misunderstanding he wants to give the impression that if
Muawiya did not fulfill the terms of Imam Hasan (as), its reason was not
breach of the agreement but mutual differences, in which in a way both
were right. However, no other historical reference is available to show
that all the issues had not been settled between the two sides before
the agreement, as claimed by Zuhri.

On the other hand, all historians agree that both sides had agreed on
the terms of the treaty before its being signed, but Muawiya did not
honour it after the treaty had been signed and announced. Another reason
for Zuhri's version being unreliable is that he neither narrates the
conditions of the agreement proposed earlier, nor the details of those
added later, nor is he able to give any logical timing of the blank
paper being sent!

The learned scholar Sheikh Razi Ale Yasin gives his opinion about the
blank page sent by Muawiya in the following words: "The historians and
biographers have changed the detailed terms and conditions of the peace
treaty into an abridgment for the reason that 'on the basis of write
whatever conditions you wish, as you have the right for the same',

They feel that, as the blank paper had the seal of Muawiya, Imam Hasan
(as) might have put as many conditions in it which he considered
appropriate or which suited his aims and objectives, whether those
related to his own self or his Ahlul Bayt (as) or his Shia. No other
doubt exists on the said issue"!

He further writes: "if today the situation is that we cannot clearly
distinguish all the terms of the agreement, so what? We know this much
that all the terms were in favour of Imam Hasan (as) and could lead to
his success. So, all those terms and conditions which would be to the
advantage of Imam Hasan (as) and to the disadvantage of Muawiya, would
be correct (would be part of the agreement). This is due to the fact
that Imam Hasan (as) was absolutely free to write in the agreement
whatever he thought fit." [^10]

The Terms and Conditions of the Peace Treaty
--------------------------------------------

The peace treaty between Imam Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) and Muawiya bin Abi
Sufyan was signed on the following terms and conditions:

1. Hasan (as) would hand over the rule, or government, to Muawiya
provided he acts according to the Holy Book of God, the Sunnah of the
Holy Prophet (saws) and the character of pious and virtuous caliphs.

2. Muawiya does not have a right to nominate anyone after him. The rule
would be handed back to Hasan (as) after him, or according to some
narrations, it would be left to a consultative body ('*shura*') of
Muslims.

3. The life, property and honour of the general public, whether black or
white, belonging to Syria, Iraq, Tihama, Hijaz or which ever area, would
be safeguarded.

4. The life, property, and honour of Shias of Imam ‘Ali (as) and their
family members, will be protected and Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan is bound by
the covenant of Almighty God in this respect and he will honour his
covenant with Almighty God in this regard.

5. Muawiya will not take any open or secret action against Imam Hasan
bin ‘Ali (as) or against Ahlul Bayt (as) of the Holy Prophet (saws) and
he will not try to terrorize them anywhere on earth.

6. Imam ‘Ali (as) will be remembered with honour and dignity and he will
not be reviled, according to some narrations, in the life time of Imam
Hasan (as) no abusive language against Hazrat ‘Ali (as) will be used.

7. Muawiya will hand over the Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa and the revenue of
Darab Jard (Darabgard) to him (Imam Hasan (as)) so that he may meet his
expenses from the same and may repay the debt and other dues.

Analysis of the Terms and Conditions
------------------------------------

### Following the Book and Sunnah

"Hasan (as) would hand over the rule, or government, to Muawiya provided
he acts according to the Holy Book of God, the Sunnah of the Holy
Prophet (saw) and the character of pious and virtuous caliphs;" [^11]

In the above first condition, many points have to be thoroughly studied:
The Imam (as), by demanding Muawiya to follow the Book and Sunnah as the
first condition of the Treaty, proved that acting according to the Book
and Sunnah was the ideal goal of the Imam (as), and if he was handing
over the reign temporarily to Muawiya, then only his steps in accordance
with the Shariah would be considered legal.

Accordingly, if Muawiya went against the said condition and Imam Hasan
(as) were able to rule again, then he would have the legal right to
claim it back from Muawiya. In fact, the Imam (as) had restricted the
actions of Muawiya to be within law and constitution. Incidentally, by
adding the virtuous character of pious caliphs as a condition, he had by
implication also proved that his father was a pious and virtuous caliph
and the feelings and ideas of Muawiya about him were wrong.

If earlier his father had not accepted the condition (of following the
previous caliphs) in the '*Shura*' of Hazrat Umar, it was due to the
fact that he did not consider their style in accordance with religious
standard and he himself had better grasp and understanding than them of
the issues relating to the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah.

### Monarchy or Caliphate

Another important point for consideration in the above condition is
whether Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had handed over the rule over Muslims and
the government to Muawiya through peace treaty, or he had given
allegiance to Muawiya as a caliph and had accept ed the caliphate of
Muawiya formally.

It should be clearly understood that often such language has been used
in historical versions which implies that either Imam Hasan (as) had
shown his willingness to give allegiance to Muawiya, or had assured him
of following him completely, or handed over the caliphate to him, or, in
the words of historian Ibn. Qutaiba, had handed over the Imamat to him!

We are not concerned about the words used. Ahlul Sunnat in this regard
differentiate between caliphate and 'Khilafate Rashida' (truly religious
caliphate). Without going into this argument, we have to find an answer
to the question whether Imam Hasan (as) had handed over the caliphate to
Muawiya and accepted him formally as a caliph and had given allegiance
to him (i.e. the way the allegiance was given by the Muslims wherein the
commitment of complete obedience to the caliph was made).

Alternatively, whether Imam Hasan (as) had made a peace treaty with
Muawiya like an agreement between two parties in any other dispute,
rather than giving allegiance and, through the agreement, he had
temporarily handed over the government to Muawiya on specified
conditions and not the high religious authority which is called
'caliphate'?

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was a duly elected and formal caliph of Muslims.
His caliphate had all the legal and constitutional validity which was in
accordance with the practice among the Muslims at the time.

Not only the leading personalities and the residents of Haramain
Sharifain had paid allegiance to him but he also had the support of all
the states and the opposition by Syria and Egypt could not affect the
constitutional position, especially as a period of six months had
elapsed since his taking over as the caliph.

If Imam Hasan (as) had given allegiance to Muawiya or had agreed to hand
over the caliphate to him, granting him the legitimacy of caliphate,
then Muawiya would have been included among the true Islamic caliphs
('Rashidin Caliph') and no political opponent of his would have been
able to challenge that status as Hazrat Abu Bakr had also nominated
Hazrat Umar as caliph.

However, the fact remains that after fourteen hundred years, even the
supporters of Muawiya cannot dare claim that Muawiya was a truly Islamic
caliph ('Rashid Caliph'). Muawiya understood the point very well and
when he fully realized the political plan of Imam Hasan (as), even
before the formal announcement of the peace treaty, he publicized that
Imam Hasan (as) had accepted him as a caliph.

Perhaps he thought that through a large army, military strength and
repenting his earlier deed against Imam Hasan (as), he would be
successful in getting recognition as a caliph. However, despite the
political and military pressure, the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws)
not only refused to accept Muawiya as a caliph, but accused him as being
power hungry and declared his government as oppressive and illegal. We
will discuss the details of this aspect in subsequent chapters.

For that reason, though some historians have shown anxiety, a majority
of them have expressed words like 'tasleem-ul-amr' (acceptance of the
order) or 'nuzool-ul-hukm' (receipt of a directive), which clearly
indicate that the Imam (as) had only relinquished power, or handed over
government, to Muawiya. A team of current researchers supports this
view. A few leading ones among these are:

Justice Amir ‘Ali,  
 Dr. Abdel Salam Turmanini,  
 Dr. Syed Muhammad Vakil,  
 The scholar Razi Aale Yasin. [^12]

It was Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)'s maturity of thought, example of
excellence, courage, and the success of his political foresight which
resulted in Muawiya being considered as a monarch or king by all
sections of the society at that time, and he had to accept that status.
A clear example of the same is that after Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), S'ad bin
Abi Waqas, the well known Companion of the Holy Prophet (saws),
addressed Muawiya as 'monarch'. [^13]

However, there is no historical significance of allegiance to Muawiya
after peace. Rather some researcher or historian, while discussing the
peace, might only guess that Imam Hasan (as) might have given
allegiance.

The scholar Razi Aale Yasin, while discussing the issue of monarchy or
caliphate, writes:

We know for sure that referring to Ahlul Bayt (as), Muawiya told his son
Yazeed 'certainly it is their right'! It is also in our knowledge that
while offering peace, Muawiya wrote to Imam Hasan (as): 'the affairs
will not be decided without your order nor shall your views be opposed
on any issue.' "!!

We are also aware that after taking over the reigns, Muawiya while
addressing from the pulpit at Kufa, said: "I did not wage war against
you that you may say the prayers and observe fast, I only fought against
you that I may rule over you.”!!! We have also learnt that Imam Hasan
bin ‘Ali (as) had refused to accept Muawiya as caliph, on which Muawiya
kept quiet and could not refute him.

The scholar Aale Yasin, analyzing these arguments, draws the conclusion
that: "Now we can say with certainty that when Muawiya took over the
rule, he did not assume caliphate. And when he himself said that 'I did
not wage war against you that you may say the prayers and observe
fast...', then he himself proved that he was not a religious guide or
caliph but an ordinary ruler having worldly consideration, who was not
interested in prayers or fasting. All that he wanted was to rule over
the people.

Similarly, Muawiya's words 'decisions will be taken with your (Imam's)
consent' or 'the right belongs to them', clearly indicate that he
conceded that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had such a high religious standing
which Muawiya could not challenge. Certainly, caliphate is nothing other
than that high status! For that reason, when Imam Hasan (as) declined to
accept his caliphate and said that he was claiming caliphate without any
justification, Muawiya had no choice except to keep quiet. [^14]

### The future of Caliphate

"Muawiya does not have the right to nominate anyone after him. After him
the authority shall return to (Imam) Hasan (as). According to some
narrations, 'after Muawiya, it will be left to '*Shura*' of Muslims as
they deem fit'."

Imam Hasan Al-Mujtaba (as) knew the intentions of Muawiya very well. He
knew that Muawiya will change the Islamic system of government to the
kingdom of Qaiser and Kisra and it will become his family hierarchy.
Therefore, the Imam had, by agreement, taken away the right of
nomination of heir apparent from him.

What is narrated by some that the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saw) had
advanced the condition that Muawiya will not nominate anyone after him
but rather the election of the caliph will be left to the '*Shura*' of
Muslims, is not correct. [^15]

'Allama Ibn. 'Abdul Barr writes: "There is no difference of opinion
among ulama that Imam Hasan (as) had offered the rule to Muawiya till
his life time only. Therefore, it had to return to Imam Hasan (as) after
him and this was one of the conditions of the agreement between the two.

Imam Hasan (as) considered it advisable not to shed the blood of Muslims
for the sake of caliphate and made the agreement, though he considered
himself much more entitled to caliphate." 'Allama Ibn. 'Abdul Barr
quotes many narrations in which the condition of the government being
returned to Imam Hasan (as) is very clearly mentioned. [^16]

Hafiz Dhahabi also writes about this condition very strongly in his
various publications. He also quotes 'Umru bin Deenar according to whom
Muawiya had made the agreement with Imam Hasan (as) that if he meets
with any accident, the rule will be returned to Imam Hasan (as). [^17]

All the historians and researchers who have mentioned this condition
are: Ibn. S'ad (according to Ibn. Hajar 'Asqalani), Ibn. Hajar Asqalani
(Al-asabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahaba) Ibn. Asakir (Tarikh-e-Ibn. Asakir),
Muhib al-Tabari (Dhakair al-Uqba), Ibn. Qutaiba Dinawari (al-Imamah
wal-Siyasa), Husayn Dayar Bakri (Tarikh al-Khamis), Suyuti (Tarikh
al-Khulafa), Ibn. Abdul Barr (al-Istiab) Hafiz Dhahabi (Tarikh
al-Islam-o-al-'abar) Dr. Abdul Salam Tarmanini (Ahdas al-Tarikh
al-Islami) [^18]

All these writers have clearly written that, according to the agreement,
the rule had to return to Imam Hasan (as) after Muawiya. Apart from
this, there are other sources of evidence after which no element of
doubt remains in accepting this condition.

In this regard, attention is drawn to those letters of Muawiya, written
before peace, wherein he had offered the future government to Imam Hasan
(as) and had confessed that he (Imam Hasan (as)) was the rightful
claimant of the same. In addition to these letters, another argument is
available from Ibn. Qutaiba Dinawari and other sources.

They write that when Muawiya tried to appoint Yazid as his heir apparent
and invited delegations from different areas, all the others agreed but
when the Iraqi delegation was asked about it, its leader Akhnaf bin Qais
said:

"(O Muawiya) you have already made an agreement with Imam Hasan (as) in
the name of God (and religion), of which you are well aware, that after
you, the government will be his." [^19]

Only the historians Ibn. Aasam Kufi, Baladhuri and Ibn. Abi al-HAdid
Mo'tazilli disagree with this condition and state that Imam Hasan (as)
had said that the choice of future incumbent of caliphate should be left
to '*Shura*'. [^20]

The other writers do not write anything about the appointment of the
future caliph.

Firstly, this disagreement does not have much force in that if the
Muslims were consulted, whether in the life of Muawiya, or after him,
they would not elect anyone except Imam Hasan (as) as they loved him
more than even his father. However, it seems that by adding the
condition of '*shura*' an impression has been given that Imam Hasan (as)
had abdicated and had handed over the rule to Muawiya.

Therefore, after Muawiya he needed a fresh mandate for caliphate, which
would be available through '*shura*'. But these writers ignore the fact
that Imam Hasan (as) had put in all the terms and conditions in the
blank paper which he thought fit; he had completed six months of
caliphate and had handed over the rule to Muawiya for a given period.

Therefore, the authority to rule over Muslims should have been returned
to him according to law and ethics and it does not make sense that he
himself would raise the issue of '*shura*'. Ibn. Aasam Kufi and
Baladhuri also write that Muawiya had offered the future rule to Imam
Hasan (as) but they claim that the Imam (as) had shown no inclination
towards it.

We feel that these writers have mixed up two issues: one, concerning the
destiny of Muslims, and the other, regarding worldly rank and wealth.
Imam Hasan (as) had not shown disinclination towards the guidance of
Muslims, or caliphate. He had rather shown no interest towards worldly
status and the collection of wealth through it.

We have discussed the issue in the earlier chapter on 'the philosophy of
peace'. In support of the argument is the narration of Baladhuri himself
wherein he has mentioned that when Muawiya offered his future rule and
huge sums of money to Imam Hasan (as), he had replied: "he is tempting
me towards something which, if I had any inclination towards the same, I
would not offer it to him." [^21]

Dr. Taha Husayn has also arrived at the same truth. He adds another
point in this connection that, in the opinion of Imam Hasan (as),
Muawiya did not have any right to nominate anyone as his heir apparent.
In his book 'Fitnatul Kubra' he writes:

"Muawiya had made three offers to Imam Hasan (as): (1) he would nominate
him as his crown prince; (2) he would pay him ten lakh (one million)
Dirham every year from Baitul Maal; and (3) he would pay the tax revenue
of two Persian states to him. Imam Hasan (as) did not accept the offer
as, according to him, Muawiya did not have the right to one of these,
i.e. the issue of appointing the crown prince." [^22]

It can be clearly concluded that Imam Hasan (as) had not totally
rejected the offer of Muawiya but rather that Muawiya did not have the
right to offer the same. In the language of 'al-Futuh' the historical
record by Ibn.

Atham, there is a contradiction, or may be, some confusion, when on the
one hand, it is stated that these conditions were proposed by the
delegation of Imam Hasan (as), while, on the other, it is mentioned as
an offer by Muawiya. After the above arguments, we are firmly of the
opinion that this is not a correct statement.

In some narrations not only by Shias but others as well, it is stated
that Imam Hasan (as) had put the condition that after him the caliphate
would be handed over to Imam Husayn (as) and he would be his heir
apparent. Justice Amir ‘Ali, the author of 'Roohe Islam' (the soul of
Islam), also supports this view.[^23]

It is not improbable that due to the danger to his life, he might have
had the foresight and selected, among all, Imam Husayn (as). Behind this
decision of the Imam were not the family traditions or the fear but
rather the religious principles and the political philosophy of his
grandfather, the Holy Prophet (saws), who had very well introduced the
abilities of these two brothers and had clearly shown the Muslims their
leadership qualities through so many of his traditions. However, it may
be said that the fact of Imam Husayn (as)'s nomination is not so well
recorded in history.

### The restoration of Peace and Order

"The life and property of all persons, whether black, red (Persian
slave) or of whatever colour, and living in Syria, Iraq, Tihama, Hijaz
or anywhere else, will be protected and they will not be harmed." [^24]

This condition reflects that one of the top priorities of Imam Hasan
(as) was to provide protection of life, property and honour to all men.
With the conquest of vast territories, many Persians, named as
'Humaraa', had also been enslaved along with the blacks and had become
part of the Muslim Ummah.

Due to the tribal and the feudal system of the Arabs, they had not yet
been granted full citizenship rights. Rather, they were oppressed.
Rising above the consideration of Muslim or non-Muslim, master or slave,
the Imam (as) had made peace with Muawiya on the condition that he will
protect the life, property and honour of all persons.

This way the Imam (as) proved that he was above the distinction based on
colour, religion or race was very serious about restoring peace, and
that it was his goal to protect the life, property and honour of every
person living in the Muslim society.

### The Shias of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib

"The life, property, and honour of Shias of Imam‘Ali (as) and his family
members, will be protected and Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan will honour his
covenant with Almighty God in this regard" [^25]

In the previous chapters we have indicated that wars between Syria and
Iraq had been going on for a long time, beginning with the 'Siffeen' war
during the period of Imam ‘Ali (as) in which the supporters of the Imam
and the lovers of Islam had participated in large numbers, and Muawiya's
army had not only suffered huge life and property losses but had also
suffered defeat in the battlefield.

The faithful to the Imam (as) were known as the Shias of Imam‘Ali as
they considered the members of the house hold of the Holy Prophet (saws)
as rightful claimants to the caliphate. They included many Companions of
the Holy Prophet (saws) from Badr as well. Although many of these
faithful followers of Imam ‘Ali (as) had been martyred, yet those that
remained were wanted by Muawiya and his military commanders.

Qais bin Sa’d, the well-known leader, who was the 2nd in command of the
vanguard unit, and who with a small force of four thousand soldiers, had
harassed the sixty thousand strong army of Muawiya and had put up a
tough fight, was one of those wanted by them.

That is why, when 'Abdullah bin Haras, the delegate of Imam Hasan (as)
put it to Muawiya that if he was prepared to agree to protect the life,
property and honour of the residents of Iraq, Hijaz and Madina, and to
ignore their actions of the days of the Imam's illustrious father, it
being a major condition, then the Imam would be agreeable for peace.

However, when Muawiya refused to grant amnesty to ten followers of Imam
‘Ali (as) and said that whenever he would get hold of Qais, he would
severe his hands and feet, Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) and his representative
refused to agree to a conditional peace. [^26]

This shows how much love and consideration for the life, property and
honour of his, and his noble father's, sincere supporters and their
families the Imam (as) had, as he was not prepared to make any
compromise whatsoever in this regard. It was because of the firm stand
taken by the Imam (as) that Muawiya sent a blank paper and had to agree
to all the conditions written on it by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as).

It was a great political success of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) that he got the
agreement of Muawiya for complete protection of his sincere followers.
It is the duty of a true leader to protect the life and honour of his
supporters and followers or to sacrifice them for a noble cause.

In reply to the objections raised by some of his Shias, the Imam (as)
had stressed this very fact that his steps were a guarantee for their
survival with honour, and if he had not done so, there would have been a
massacre of them. If the current religious and political leaders learn
this guiding principle from Imam Hasan (as), then bloodshed and tensions
among the Muslims can be considerably reduced.

### Conspiracy against Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet

"Muawiya will not take any open or secret action against (Imam) Hasan
bin ‘Ali (as) or against Ahlul Bayt of the Holy Prophet (saws) and he
will not try to terrorize them anywhere." [^27]

If this condition was violated or anyone else would harm the progeny of
the Holy Prophet (saws), then the blame would come to Muawiya as it was
his rule. Due to the high status and the popularity of the progeny of
the Holy Prophet (saws) among the Muslims, any such conspiracy was not
in the interest of Muawiya.

Through this condition, in a way, it had become the responsibility of
Muawiya to protect the life and honour of the progeny of the Holy
Prophet (saws) and the Holy Ahlul Bayt (as).

### The undesirable schism of reviling Hazrat ‘Ali (as)

"Hazrat ‘Ali (as) will be remembered with dignity and honour and no
abusive language will be used against him or, according to some
narrations, it will not be practiced in the life of Imam Hasan (as)."

This condition, with some variation, has been recorded by the majority
of the historians, some of the more prominent ones being: Abul Faraj
Isphahani, Ibn. Abi-al-HAdid Mo'tazilli Ibn. Khaldun Ibn. Asakir ,Ibn.
Kathir Sheikh Mufid The historian Tabari Ibn. Athir Ibn. S'ad Ibn.
Sabbagh Maliki The scholar Razi Ale Yasin The scholar Baqar Qarshi.
[^28]

This condition reflects that Imam Hasan Al-Mujtaba (as) was very much
concerned about the high status and respect for his illustrious father.
He and his group were determined to face all conspiracies meant to hurt
the honour of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) and would not show any leniency in this
respect.

### The Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa

"Muawiya would hand over the Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa and the revenue of
Darab Jerd (Darab Gard, a state in Iran) to Imam Hasan (as) so that he
could meet his expenses and pay back his debt and other dues." [^29]

Before deciding whether this condition is true or false, it is necessary
to study the relevant details.

The historian Tabari, and later Ibn. Athir, writes that Imam Hasan (as)
wanted that Muawiya should hand over to him the money available in the
Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa. Muawiya agreed to this condition. At that time
there were fifty lakh (five million) Dirham in that Bait-ul-Maal which
(Imam) Hasan bin ‘Ali (as) took to Madina. [^30]

Dr. Husayn Muhammad Jafri, challenging this narration of the historian
Tabari, writes:

"For two reasons, there seems to be no logical reason for this
condition:"  
 "1. Till the time of the peace agreement, Imam Hasan (as) was the
undisputed caliph of Kufa. Therefore, the Bait-ul-Maal was under his
custody;"

"2. Our sources confirm that it was the practice of Hazrat ‘Ali (as)
that at the end of every week he used to distribute all that was in the
Bait-ul-Maal. Therefore, it is difficult to believe that within the few
months of the caliphate of Imam Hasan (as), despite heavy war expenses
and the disorder due to the martyrdom of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), fifty lakh
(five million) Dirham would still be available in the Bait-ul-Maal."
[^31]

In a few narrations it is mentioned that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had
demanded that Muawiya should allow him to take as much money from
Bait-ul-Maal as he wished so that he could repay the debt and other
dues, while some others say that Imam Hasan (as) wanted that Muawiya
should hand over the Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa to him.

At that time there were said to be seventy lakh (seven million) Dirham
in the Bait-ul-Maal of Kufa which Imam Hasan (as) is alleged to have
taken with him to Madina. Muawiya had promised to give him an additional
sum of ten lakh (one million) Dirham per annum. In "Mukhtasar-al-Jame' "
it is even alleged that Imam Hasan (as) had sold the caliphate to
Muawiya for fifty lakh (five million) Dirham and had taken the
commitment that he would pay a similar amount annually to the Imam (as).
[^32]

According to the historian Dinawari, Imam Hasan (as) had demanded that,
apart from Bait-ul-Maal, the revenue of an Iranian state Darab Jard
would be reserved for him a sum of twenty lakh Dirham (two million)
would be given to his younger brother Imam Husayn (as) and Bani Hashim
would be given preference over Bani Abde Shams. Also, that these
conditions had been included in the Peace Agreement. The condition about
Darab Jard's revenue has also been mentioned by other historians. [^33]

All these narrations have so many inaccurate statements that the
researchers doubt whether such a large amount could have been demanded
from Muawiya and consider these narrations as weak. Those mentioning
such narrations have used the Arabic words "qeel or yaqal" which is a
clear indication that these are weak narrations.

That is why a large number of historians do not even mention these
conditions. Apart from the above, many objections can be raised against
these narrations:

(1). Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was the caliph of Islam. Is it possible that
he was so indebted that he needed such a large amount for its repayment
while the Bait-ul-Maal of Muslims was under his own control?

(2). In the Bait-ul-Maal, along with booty, there is also the amount of
propitiatory offerings and Zakat. Is it possible that Imam Hasan (as),
being one of the Ahlul Bayt on whom propitiatory offerings are
forbidden, had considered it lawful to use the money from Bait-ul-Maal
for his personal expenses? Had he done so, would the other members of
the household of the Holy Prophet (saw) not have objected?

(3). It is a hard historical fact that huge sums had been offered to the
Imam (as) by Muawiya so that he may abdicate caliphate in favour of
Muawiya, but he declined Muawiya's politics of bribery and faced him
boldly. He clearly indicated that if he had the love of wealth and
coveted worldly power and authority, Muawiya would never have been able
to snatch the same from him.

In the light of these hard facts, there is no doubt that the weak
narrations, particularly those that he sold the caliphate in exchange
for a certain amount and put the condition that Bani Hashim be given a
higher status than Bani Umayyah, are unreliable. The fact is that in the
dignified and pious life of the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws)
there is no chance of such behaviour.

In authentic narrations about him it has been stated that twice he had
distributed all that he had among the needy. Similarly, in his character
and manners there is no indication that he might have aired family
status and ignored the principle of equality in the distribution of
money from Bait-ul-Maal.

(4). From the Shia sources the narrations regarding the Imam (as) having
asked for the money and revenue are not confirmed. The only demand that
is confirmed is that Muawiya would pay compensation to those who were
killed or injured in Siffin and other wars and the revenue from Darab
Jerd would be reserved for the purpose. This appears to be a reasonable
condition as Muawiya was responsible for these wars and it was his duty
to compensate for the same. The scholar Baqar Qarshi writes in this
regard.

"Imam Hasan (as) did not like that he should take any sum from the
Bait-ul-Maal for himself or his Shias. As far as he was concerned, the
propitiatory offerings are forbidden for him as well as for all Ahlul
Bayt (as).

As far as his Shia are concerned, it cannot be denied that the
propitiatory offerings are undesirable as these may include ill gotten
money (after the payment of which the rest of the amount becomes
'paak'). Therefore, the Imam (as) did not consider it suitable for his
Shias as well, and fixed the revenue from Darab Jerd (for compensation
to them) which was booty, and there was no element of doubt in its use
for them." [^34]

The scholar Hashim Ma’aruf al Hasani also doubts the weak narrations and
he expresses his views thus: "These narrations lack authenticity from
the point of view of continuity of source and are weak. Apart from this,
it is also likely that the governments of Bani Umayya and Bani Abbas
concocted such narrations just like dozens of others that they had
concocted about Imam Hasan (as).

So that they may influence human minds that Imam Hasan (as) had
bargained for money in exchange for caliphate and had opted for a life
of pleasure, giving up the most important religious issues. These ideas
were spread by an Abbasid caliph who wanted to harm the cause of Husayni
followers who were active against the oppressive rulers. [^35]

We cannot claim that the above research is a hundred percent correct but
it cannot be denied that Muawiya had offered large sums to Imam Hasan
(as) which he had rejected outright as he considered it "blackmail" and
bribe.

In his opinion, Muawiya or any other caliph did not have the right to
give the money belonging to Muslims to anyone - even to Imam Hasan (as).
This fact has been mentioned by Atham Kufi in his history. [^36]

Researchers like Dr. Taha Husayn also do not disagree with these
conclusions. [^37]

[^1]: Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins and Early Development of Shia
Islam', Qum, AnsarianPublications pp.148,149

[^2]: The sources have been given in later chapters.

[^3]: Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', Beirut, Darul Ta’aruf lil Mat
boo'at, 1977, vol. 3, p.40-42

[^4]: Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh, Hyderabad: Daira al Maa'rif al Usmania,
1971, vol. 4, p.158-159.

[^5]: Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al-Khamis', Beirut, Muassasah
Shabaan, vol. 2 p.390; Muhib al Tabari - Dhakair al Uqba, Cairo, Maktaba
al Qudsi, 1356 A.H., p. 139; Ibn. A'bdul Barr, 'Al IStiab'.

[^6]: Ibn. Hajar Asqalani - 'Al Asabah fi Tamyiz al Sahaba; Suyuti -
'Tarikh al Khulafa', Qum,Intisharat al Raza, 1411 A.H., p. 191.; Abul
Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', Najaf, Maktaba al Haidariya, 1965, vol.1,
p.43; Bukhari - 'Sahih Bukhari'; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Al A'bar;, Beirut,
Darul Kutub al Ilmia, vol. 1, p.35; Ibn. Qutaiba - 'Al Imama wal
Siyasa', Qum, Manshurat al Razi, 1413 A.H. p.184.

[^7]: . Hasan Kamil al Maltavi, 'al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', Cairo,
Ministry of 'Auqaaf', Egypt, 1994, p.123; Abdus Salaam Tarmanini -
'Ahdas al Tarikh al Islami', Al Kuwait, Majlis al Watani-lil-Saqafa,
1988, vol.1, p.420; Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins and Early
Development of Shia Islam', Qum, Ansarian Publications pp. 151-152.

[^8]: Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', Beirut: Darul Kutub al Ilmiah 1988,
vol 3, p. 167.

[^9]: . Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh, Beirut: Dar Ahya al Turas,
1989, vol. 2, p.446. Dr. Taha Husayn - 'Islamiat, Al Fitnah al Kubra
‘Ali-o-Nubuwah', Beirut, Dar ul Ilm, 1991, pp. 979-980; Abu Maskuya -
'Tajarib al Ummum', Tehran, Dar Sarosh, 1987, vol. 1, p. 387.

[^10]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum, Manshuraat al Razi, 1993,
p.258.

[^11]: Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.160; Baladhuri - Al-Ansab al
Ashraf, vol. 3 p., Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, Cairo:
Dar Ahya al Kutub al Arabia, 1962, vol. 16, p.22; Hasan Kamil al
Maltavi - 'Al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', p.121; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul
Hasan', Qum, Manshuraat al Razi, 1993, p.259. Husayn Muhammad Jafri -
'The Origins and Early Development of Shia Islam', Qum, Ansarian
Publications, p.152.

[^12]: Amir ‘Ali - 'Mukhtasar Tarikh al Arab' (Arabic translation: 'feef
B'albaki), Beirut, Dar ul Ilm lil Malayeen, 1961, p...; Abdus Salaam
Tarmanini - 'Ahdaas al Tarikh al Islami',vol. 1, p.420; Mohd. Vakil -
'Al Umayyun bain al Sharq wal Gharb', Beirut, Dar al Shamiah, 1995, vol.
1 p.25; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum, pp.267-276.

[^13]: . Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', Beirut: Darul Kutub al
Ilmiah, 1987, vol. 3 p. 275; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum,
pp.268.

[^14]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', pp.274-275.

[^15]: . Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.159; Baladhuri - Al-Ansab al
Ashraf, vol. 3 p.42; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, vol.
16, p.22.

[^16]: Ibn. A'bdul Barr - 'Al IStiab'.

[^17]: Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Tarikh Al Islam', Beirut, Darul Kutub al Arabi,
1987, Period of Muawiya, p.5; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Al A'bar;, Beirut, vol.
1,pp. 34-35; refer to Ibn. Hajar - 'Al Asaba fi Tamyiz al Sahaba'.

[^18]: Ibn. Hajar - 'Al Asaba fi Tamyiz al Sahaba'; Muhib al Tabari -
Dhakair al Uqba, Cairo, Maktaba al Qudsi, 1356 A.H., p. 139; Ibn.
Qutaiba Dainwari - 'Al Imama wal Siyasa', Qum, Intisharat al Razi, 1413
A.H. p.184; Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis, p.390; Suyuti -
'Tarikh al Khulafa', Qum,Intisharat al Raza, 1411 A.H., p. 191; Abdul
Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq'...Asakir, Beirut, Darul Ahya
al..., 1987, vol 4, p.224.

[^19]: Ibn. Qutaiba - 'Al Imamah wal Siyasah', Egypt: Shirka Mustafa al
Babi, 1963, vol. 1 p. 171.

[^20]: The references have been quoted earlier.

[^21]: . Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3 p.41.

[^22]: Taha Husayn - 'Islamiyat - Al Fitnatul Kubra'-’Ali-o-Nubuwah',
p.979.

[^23]: Amir ‘Ali - 'Mukhtasar Tarikh al Arab', 1961, p.87.

[^24]: . Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.160; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al
Ashraf', vol. 3 p.42; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’,vol.
16, p.22; Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', p.390; Taha Husayn -
Islamiyat - 'Al Fitnatul Kubra' pp.979-980; Hasan Kamil al Maltavi - 'Al
Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', p.121; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum,
p.260; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', vol 2, p.242.

[^25]: . Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.160; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al
Ashraf', vol. 3 p.42; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’,
vol.16, p.18 & p.44; Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', Najaf, Maktaba
al Haidariya, 1965, vol.1, p.43; Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins
and Early Development of Shia Islam', Qum, Ansarian Publications, p.149;
Abu J'far al Tabari - 'Tarikh al Ummum wal Mulook (Tarikh al Tabari)',
Beirut: Darul Kutub al Ilmiah 1988, vol 3, p. 170; Hasan Kamil al
Maltavi - 'Al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', p.121; Taha Husayn - Islamiyat -
'Al Fitnatul Kubra' pp.979-980; Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad' vol. 2
p.10; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', vol 2, p.244.

[^26]: . References have been quoted under 'blank page' chapter.

[^27]: . Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.160; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al
Ashraf', vol. 3 p.42; Taha Husayn - 'Al Fitnatul Kubra' p.979; Hasan
Kamil al Maltavi - 'Al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', p.121; Razi Ale Yasin -
'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum,p.261; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin
‘Ali', vol 2, p.245.

[^28]: Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.43; Ibn. Abi al
Hadid - ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, vol. 16 p.44; Ibn. Khaldun, ‘Tarikh
Ibn. Khaldun’, Beirut, Muassasah A'lami lil Mutboo'at, 1971, vol. 2, p.
186; Abdul Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq'..., vol 4, p.224; Ibn.
Kathir, 'Al bidayah wal Nihaya', Beirut, Maktaba al Ma'rif. 1974, vol.8,
pp.15-16; Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad', Tehran, Intisharat-e-Ilmiah,
vol. 2 p.10; Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', Beirut: Darul Kutub al Ilmiah
1988, vol 3, p. 166; Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', vol. 2,
p.446; Abdul Aziz Salim - 'Tarikh al Daula al Arabia, Iskandaria: Moas
sasah Shabab al Jame'h, 1993, vol.2, p.337; Ibn. Sa’d - 'al Tabaqaat al
Kubra', Tarjuma Al Imam al Hasan, under publication, research by Abdul
Aziz Tabatabai, Qum, Moassa sah Aale Ahlul Bayt, 1996; Qism min al
Jaza-e-Samin' p.76; Ibn. Sabbagh Maliki- ‘al Fusul al Muhimmah', Najaf,
Darul Kutub, p.145; 261; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin
‘Ali', vol 2, p.243.

[^29]: Ibn. Khaldun, ‘Tarikh Ibn. Khaldun’, vol. 2, p. 186; Abdul Qadir
Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq'...Ibn. Asakir, Beirut, vol. 4, p.224;
Ibn. Kathir, 'Al bidayah wal Nihaya', vol.8, p.15; Hafiz Dhahabi,
'Tarikh Al Islam'; Dainwari - 'Al Akhbar al Tiwal, Cairo, Dar Ahya al
Kutub, 1960, p.218; Ibn. Khalkan - 'Wafeeyat al 'yan', Qum, Manshurat al
Razi, 1364 A.H., vol. 2, p.66; Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh',
Beirut, vol. 2, p.446; Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', vol. 2,
p.390; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Al A'bar, vol. 1, pp.34-35; Tabari - 'Tarikh al
Tabari', vol 3, p. 166; Ibn. S'ad - 'al Tabaqaat al Kubra', vol. 8,p.76,
under publica tion. Dr.Abdus Salaam Tarmanini - 'Ahdaas al Tarikh al
Islami',vol.1, p.420; Abdul Aziz Salim - 'Tarikh al Daulatal Arabia,vol
.2, p.337 ; Sayuti - 'Tarikh al Khulafa', Qum, p. 191.

[^30]: Earlier references.

[^31]: Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins and Early Development of
Shia Islam', p.149.

[^32]: Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', vol. 2, p.390.

[^33]: The references have been quoted under No. 29.

[^34]: Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', Najaf, Matba'
al Aadab', 1973, vol 2, p.245.

[^35]: Hashim Ma’aruf - 'Serat al Aimmah Ithna Ashar' Beirut, Darul
T'aaruf lil Mutboo'at, 1977, vol. 1, p.584; For further reference, refer
to Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', vol 2, p.405.

[^36]: . Ibn. A'sum - 'Al Futuh', vol.4, p.159.

[^37]: . Taha Husayn - Islamiyat - 'Al Fitnatul Kubra', ‘Ali-o-Nubuwa,
p.979.


