The Peace Treaty’s Consequences and After Effects
=================================================

A logical result that arises in the human mind is that a treaty is meant
to be implemented, but if one of the parties breaches the contract, it
loses its utility. That is why Islam attaches great importance to
promises and agreements and emphasizes that if the Muslims make an
agreement even with the infidels, they must abide by it. Not only that,
but breach of covenant is considered a base act in Islam. The Holy
Qur’an says:

***"But because of their breaking their covenant, we cursed them and
made their hearts hard” (5:13)***

***"(Those) who violate the covenant of Allah after its confirmation,
and cut asunder that which Allah commands to be joined, and make
mischief in the land are the losers." (2:27)***

These Qur’anic verses clearly state that those who breach a treaty are
cursed by Allah, Almighty Allah makes their hearts hard, they make
mischief in the land and they act against the commands of God. As far as
the covenant between Imam Hasan (as) and Muawiya is concerned, the
historians have no doubt that firm commitments in this regard had been
taken from Muawiya.

He had made promises with Imam Hasan (as) and had a covenant with Allah
as well. The historians and biographers also do not disagree that
Muawiya, instead of honouring the covenant, openly violated it. A writer
like Zuhri also writes that Muawiya did not act according to any one of
the terms and conditions agreed in the covenant with Imam Hasan (as).
[^1]

Haseen bin Munzir said: "By God, Muawiya did not act according to any
term or condition of the covenant with Imam Hasan (as); he murdered
Hajar and his companions; he got allegiance for his son Yazeed as the
crown prince; and he poisoned Imam Hasan (as)." Ibn. Abi al Hadid has
copied this sentence from Madaini. Apart from him, Baladhuri and other
writers have also mentioned it.[^2]

Muawiya announced the breach of the covenant with Imam Hasan (as) from
the pulpit at a time when the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws) had
formally announced its acceptance. He acted accordingly during his reign
by destroying all the Islamic values. Muawiya openly acted against the
Holy Qur’an and Sunnah not only in regard to the concept of Baitul Maal
but in distribution of its amount as well.

Similarly, he acted against the rule of inheritance, against the
principles of dealing with non-Muslims and in many other such instances.
In fact, he adopted an aggressive practice against the commands of the
Holy Qur’an and Sunnah. A clear example of the same is the case of Ziyad
bin Sumayyah. However, to decide whether he was successful in his
manipulations or that Imam Hasan (as) did not get anything, will be
premature!

As far as the aims and objective of Muawiya are concerned, the analysis
by the researchers shows that his ultimate aim was not to defeat Imam
Hasan (as) in the battlefield, because if he had been martyred, Muawiya
would have only achieved political leadership and his rule would not be
considered legal and in accordance with Shariah. [^3]

His real aim was to get a legal status for his government which was
possible if Imam Hasan (as) abdicated in his favour and, through the
peace treaty, gave him the right to rule. For this reason, he was
offering peace from the beginning and was frightening the Iraqis with
the consequences of war.

When, through disorder, the internal conditions in his own army became
apparent and it was most difficult for Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) to continue
the war, then he agreed for peace with Muawiya, but he was only willing
to allow him the right to rule in accordance with the terms of the
treaty.

There was wide disagreement between the two sides about the terms and
conditions of the peace treaty, but when Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) refused to
agree to peace under unreasonable conditions, then Muawiya had to agree
to all the terms and conditions proposed by the Imam (as) and the treaty
was signed accordingly.

Muawiya had thought that he would overcome the will of the Imam (as)
through power, money and military strength, like he had managed with the
Iraqi army personnel and the landlords of Kufa. The Syrian army had made
a show of strength and Muawiya put full political pressure on the Imam
(as) that he should formally accept Muawiya as a caliph, but the Imam
(as) not only did not accept him as a caliph.

But rather called him an oppressive ruler and one who was after power at
any cost and who had considered enjoying the pleasures of the world as
the ultimate aim of his brief life. Due to the will power and extreme
determination of the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saw), which Muawiya
could not visualize earlier, he had to accept the condition that he was
only a monarch and not a caliph.

It is quite likely that Muawiya would have practically acted against the
peace treaty in any case, yet his open announcement of the same from the
pulpit, in the presence of a large assembly of Muslims of Kufa, shows
his strong reaction. This reaction became visible when he failed in his
main mission.

It is a great political victory of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) that through his
words and action he proved the difference between monarchy and
caliphate. That is how Muslim thinkers and the ulama could clearly
distinguish monarchy from caliphate and declared Muawiya as a monarch.

Had the Imam (as) not succeeded in his mission, the Muslims would not
have been able to understand the difference between monarchy and
caliphate till Doomsday. It is a tragedy that knowledgeable persons have
seldom appreciated this great achievement of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)!

As far as the utility of the terms and conditions of the Peace Treaty is
concerned, it was not restricted to their enforcement only; rather it
had a wider implication, which should be looked at from different
angles.

The first condition of the Treaty was that Muawiya was obliged to act
according to the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah. Some researchers think that,
like other earlier caliphs, the Imam (as) had only formally put this
condition as part of the treaty.

However, we do not consider this analysis as correct as it is evident
that although the Imam (as) knew that Muawiya would not act according to
the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah yet this way the Imam (as) granted only those
actions of Muawiya as legal which were according to the Holy Qur’an and
Sunnah. If Muawiya acted against the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah, then the
responsibility for those actions could not be placed on Imam Hasan (as)
as he had not accepted Muawiya as having full authority.

Moreover, if the Muslim Ummah had awakened and launched a movement under
the guidance of the grandson of the Holy Prophet SAW), then Imam Hasan
(as) would have been legally justified to boycott the government of
Muawiya and lead the movement against him as he was not acting according
to the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah and was thus breaching the agreement.

The second condition of the agreement was that Muawiya did not have the
right to nominate his heir apparent and after him the reign of the
government would be handed back to Hasan bin ‘Ali (as).

There is no doubt that Muawiya was all the time scheming to nominate his
son Yazeed as his heir apparent. However, though he had all the worldly
power, he did not dare do so in the life of Imam Hasan (as). Once he did
try to launch a movement to declare Yazeed as his heir apparent but the
Iraqi delegation told him clearly that during the life of Imam Hasan
(as) they could not give such an allegiance.

Dr. Syed Abdul Aziz Salim writes: "Muawiya made up his mind to get
allegiance for Yazid, particularly when Moghira had already sent a
delegation of the people from Kufa. However, he waited so that Hasan bin
‘Ali (as) and the sons of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (saw) may
not be able to protest against this step. So, he postponed the
announcement of the crown prince till after the death of Imam Hasan bin
‘Ali (as)."[^4]

Not only were Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) and the Companions of the Holy
Prophet (saw) against this nomination, but his own governors would also
have opposed it. The names of Ziyad bin Abih and Marwan bin Hakam could
be taken in this respect. Maulana Maodoodi writes that Muawiya wrote to
Marwan bin al Hakam, the governor of Madina that he had become old and
wished to nominate someone in his life time as his successor. [^5]

This shows that the policies of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) were so effective
and his influence among the Muslims so great that even though Muawiya
wanted to, yet he could not violate this condition during the lifetime
of the Imam (as). So he did it after the martyrdom of the Imam
(as).However, the fact remains that even then he did not succeed in his
plan and Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) and his brother Imam Husayn (as) were
successful in their mission.

When Muawiya bin Yazid (Muawiya the Second) confessed in 64 A.H. that
his father and grandfather had oppressed Hazrat ‘Ali (as) and the
progeny of the Holy Prophet (saws), desecrated the Holy K'aba, shed the
blood of Muslims, due to which he was not prepared to share that blame
and cursed such monarchy. So, the family of Muawiya lost the monarchy to
another family after four or five years. [^6]

As per these conditions, Muawiya was obliged to protect the life,
property and honour of the public and would not file suit against the
Shias of Imam ‘Ali (as). Though outwardly there was peace, and civil war
among the Muslims had been avoided after the Peace Treaty, yet there was
no freedom for the general public the opponents of Muawiya were tortured
and sometimes, to keep them out of his way, Muawiya used to get them
killed and their property etc. destroyed.

We do not intend to go into the details, yet the fact remains that
Muawiya tried all possible means to strengthen his rule. Although
Muawiya and his government did not indulge in mass killing of the Shias,
yet oppression and injustice was practised against them. They were
forced to use unworthy words against Hazrat ‘Ali (as) and those who
refused to do so, their life, property and honour were in danger.

Ziad bin Abih, the governor of Muawiya, turned out a large number of
Shi'as from Kufa to Khurasan and forced them to fight against the
Khawarij. An important case of the murder of Shi'as during the rule of
Muawiya is that of Hajar bin A'dee and his companions, the details of
which we will discuss later.

This incident also did not occur during the life time of Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as). Therefore, it is not difficult to conclude that Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as) was successful in saving the life and honour of the majority of his
Shi'as and other followers.

He had made it known in his speech as well, telling the people that
although the peace agreement was a big test for them and he was not
unaware of its consequences, yet they should realize that whereas the
Hallowed and Glorified God had guided them to the light of righteousness
from the darkness of infidelity and polytheism through the guidance of
his illustrious grand father, He had protected their life and honour
through him (the Imam (as)).

The fifth condition was that Muawiya would not indulge in any conspiracy
against the progeny of the Holy Prophet (saw). Although clear historical
proof of Muawiya breaking this condition is not available, yet when he
became old, he wanted that his son Yazid should become the caliph,
though he had not been able to attain that status himself. He realized
that during the life time of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), he could not succeed
in getting the allegiance for Yazid from the Muslims.

Therefore, he started the conspiracy to martyr Imam Al-Mujtaba (as).
However, he did not want to get involved directly in the conspiracy of
shedding the blood of the Imam as he was afraid of its consequences. But
Marwan bin Hakam did the job for him. Some researchers try to exonerate
Muawiya from this crime. In the chapter on the martyrdom of Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as) we have examined the narrations and the views expressed
by the researchers.

Yet no one can deny that it was a common practice of Muawiya in those
days to get an opponent killed to get rid of him. [^7]

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was the greatest stumbling block in the way of his
son becoming the heir apparent. Although Muawiya was successful in his
conspiracy against the Ahlul Bayt (as) of the Holy Prophet (saws) after
ten years of the peace treaty, by getting Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) poisoned,
but the Muslims had developed strong feelings of hatred and enmity
against him due to this act.

That is the reason why the researchers in general, who are not Shi'a,
condemn this step strongly and consider it a dirty crime. The sixth
condition of the peace treaty was that Imam ‘Ali (as) will be remembered
with dignity and honour.

Allama Maududi writes in the book 'Khilafat-o-Mulukiyat':

"Another very loathsome schism, started during the reign of Muawiya, was
that he himself, and under his instructions all his governors, very
frequently used to revile Hazrat ‘Ali (as) so much so that in the mosque
of the Holy Prophet (saws) itself, and from the pulpit, just in front of
the mausoleum of the Holy Prophet (saws), they used to swear to Imam
‘Ali (as) who was one of the dearest relations of the Holy Prophet
(saws).

To include such dirty language in the Friday sermon was particularly an
abhorable act from the religious and cultural point of view. On assuming
the power, Hazrat Umar bin Abdul Aziz changed this and such other bad
practices of his family."[^8]

Not only Allama Maududi but all historians mention this act in their
valuable books and all students of history know that it is an
established fact. Therefore, there is no need to quote the historical
references for the same. Allama Ibn. Athir Jazaree writes that Muawiya
had made an agreement with Imam Hasan (as) that he would not use
undesirable words against Hazrat ‘Ali (as) during the life time of Imam
Hasan (as) but he did not fulfill this condition as well.

Muawiya had introduced this schism with considerable pressure. In the
whole Muslim world, wherever Friday prayers were held, Hazrat ‘Ali (as)
was reviled in the sermons from the pulpit and, God forbid, it was said
that Amirul Muminin Hazrat ‘Ali (as) was an enemy of God, and abusive
words against him were used in the 'Qunoot'. This schism continued until
the rule of Hazrat Umar bin Abdul Aziz.

Ahlul Sunnat complain that the companions of the Holy Prophet (saws) are
called names but they forget the harsh reality that it was Muawiya who
started to indulge in mud slinging against the Companion of the Holy
Prophet (saws).

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) knew that Muawiya would indulge in taunting remarks
and abusive language against his illustrious father. That is why he put
this condition in the peace treaty and made it quite clear to Muawiya
that he would take very serious notice of such practice which would not
at all be tolerated.

Amirul Muminin Hazrat ‘Ali (as) had himself predicted before his
followers that Muawiya would indulge in using undesirable words against
him and would force others to do the same. A sermon of the Imam (as) in
*Nahjul Balaghah* is a proof of the same.

Dr. Taha Husayn writes:

"In spite of the fact that Imam Hasan (as) wanted to maintain the policy
of understanding with Muawiya, yet when Imam Hasan (as)'s father was
remembered with undesirable words or when the Imam (as) would come
across someone who had conspired against his father or revolted against
him, Imam Hasan (as) would show extreme disapproval and it would result
in even harsh words being exchanged." [^9]

Ibn. Abi al Hadid quotes Madaini that Imam Hasan (as) warned Muawiya bin
Khudaij and Habib bin Muslama of the curse of Almighty God and very
serious consequences for reviling Hazrat ‘Ali (as). [^10]

These two persons were prominent among those who used to propagate the
policies of Muawiya and were his blind followers. Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)
warned them, Muawiya, and his other followers as well, that he would not
keep quiet simply by putting the condition in the peace treaty; rather
he would encounter this dirty politics of Muawiya with full force at his
command.

Abul Faraj Isphahani writes that after entering Kufa, Muawiya addressed
from the pulpit while Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Husayn (as) were sitting
near it. Muawiya used abusive language against both Imam ‘Ali (as) and
Imam Hasan (as).

At this Imam Husayn (as) revolted, rose to reply but Imam Hasan (as)
caught hold of him, asking him to sit down and himself rising, said:"O,
the one calling ‘Ali (as) names, know that I am Hasan and my father is
‘Ali (as) while you are Muawiya and your father is Saghar; my mother is
Fatima (sa) and your mother Hind; my grandfather is Muhammad (saws) the
Holy Prophet, and yours is Uteba bin Rabia'h; my grandmother is Hazrat
Khadija (sa) while yours is Qateela.

May God curse the one among us who is not spoken well of, whose family
is remembered with contempt, whose mischief and rebellion spread in the
past and present and whose infidelity and malice are quite old." Hearing
this all the persons siting in the mosque immediately said amen
('Ameen').

This shows that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) resolutely opposed this
reprehensible practice and strongly resisted Muawiya's politics in this
regard. He did not come down to the level of Muawiya but replied him in
such a dignified manner that all the Muslims supported him despite
Muawiya's political and military strength. All the writers of the
incident have said amen and we feel that every Muslim will say amen at
this prayer of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as).

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) organized a group, led by Hajar bin Adi, who
started to resist this schism and gave up their lives for the cause,
proving that they were ready for martyrdom but would neither use any
words against the true caliph of the Holy Prophet (saws), the leader of
the pious ones, nor would allow any one to do so.

Although these persons sacrificed their lives to protect their faith,
this incident created very strong feelings of anger, revolt and revenge
in the whole Muslim Ummah against Muawiya and his government which
continued for a long time. That is why the historians reserved pages
after pages of their books for this incident. We will try to throw more
light on the incident in later chapters.

Anyway, the fact remains that Muawiya did not honour this condition of
the peace treaty and started a most undesirable schism against Hazrat
‘Ali (as). But history shows that he had to pay a very heavy price for
the same. The resistance against him was not an ordinary one but behind
it was the political thought and planning for the same by Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as), whose political and religious support started the
protest movement with the result that the schism could not last long.

We have provided the evidence that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), rather than
demanding financial support, had asked for compensation for those who
had suffered in the wars during the period of his illustrious father in
Siffin etc.

The acceptance of this condition by Muawiya implied that he had accepted
that he was responsible for shedding the blood of Muslims in these wars
by starting the aggression, and therefore that he should be the one to
pay the reparation for the same to those who had died or were injured in
these wars. The historians write that Muawiya instigated the people of
Basra, telling them that Imam Hasan (as) wished to empty their Baitul
Maal. Being misled by Muawiya's agents, the inhabitants of Basra refused
to pay the revenue of Darab Jerd, saying that it was their money. [^11]

Though Muawiya did not pay the war reparations to those who had fought
on the side of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), but as a consequence, they also went
further against him, realizing that Muawiya was not prepared to pay
their due share as well. Anyway, the confession made by Muawiya in this
regard was itself his political defeat.

Conclusion
----------

We have only thrown some light on the results of the terms and
conditions of the Peace Treaty, but persons with deep insight into the
atmosphere, political background and the issues involved at the time
conclude that, under the difficult conditions, all the political and
other steps taken by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)) at the time were much deeper
and calculated than those of Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan.

The grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws) had not only taken into account
the conditions prevailing at the time but had the foresight of future as
well. He took the maximum advantage of diplomatic and political
conditions prevailing at the time. The proof of the success of his
political moves is that the well known political and religious
personalities of the time, including the wives of the Holy Prophet
(saws), his Companions and ulama, came out in strong opposition to
Muawiya.

[^1]: Tabari - ‘Tarikh al-Tabari’, Beirut: Darul Kutub al Ilmiah 1988,
vol 3, p. 167.

[^2]: . Ibn. Abi al Hadid - ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, Cairo, Mustafa
dar al Babi, 1962, vol. 16, p.17; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', Beirut,
Dar ul Ta’aruf, 1977,vol. 3, p.47.

[^3]: Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins and Early Development of Shia
Islam', Qum, Ansarian Publications, p.134.

[^4]: . Syed Abdul Aziz Salim - 'Tarikh al Daula al Arabia, Iskandar ia:
Moassasa Shabab al Jamiah, 1993,vol. 2, p.341.

[^5]: Abul A'la Maududi - 'Khilafat -o-Mulukiyat', Lahore, Idara
Tarjuman al Qur’an, 1990, p.150.

[^6]: Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi', Beirut, Dar Sadir, 1960, vol.2,
p.252.

[^7]: Amir ‘Ali - 'Mukhtasar Tarikh al Arab' (the Arabic transla tion of
'afeef B'albaki), Beirut, Dar ul Ilm , 1961, p.78.

[^8]: Abul A'la Maududi - 'Khilafat -o-Mulukiyat', Lahore, Idara
Tarjuman al Qur’an, 1990, p.154.

[^9]: Taha Husayn - 'Islamiyat, al Fitnatul Kubra - ‘Ali-o-Nubuwah',
Beirut, Darul Ilm, 1991,p.986.

[^10]: Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, Cairo, Mustafa al
Babi, 1962, vol.16, p.18.

[^11]: Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3 p.47; Ibn. Athir - 'Al
Kamil fi al Tarikh, Beirut: Dar Ahya al..., 1989, vol. 2, p.446.


