Historical Background of Kufa
=============================

In Shi'ite history, Kufa has had a central position. From the time of
the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) to the revolutionary period of Imam
Husayn (as) and further till the steadfast and firm stand taken by
Hazrat Mukhtar, many important incidents took place there.

One of the most important of these was the peace treaty of Imam Hasan
(as). It would be appropriate to give a brief description of the
historical background of Kufa before the peace treaty of Imam Hasan
(as), so that the conditions through which the residents of Kufa were
passing or had faced earlier, would become clear.

Kufa was founded in 17 A.H. when the Muslim army had achieved success in
the Qadsiya wars and the 2nd Caliph had asked S’ad b. Abi Waqas, the
commander of the Muslim army to stay on in Iraq. This way he could
advance towards Persia after strengthening the Muslim army. However, the
Muslims soldiers were on the lookout for a site which may, apart from
being a suitable place for the army, offer a good climate and have
suitable living conditions.

After a two year search, a location on the western side of the river
Euphrates was selected as the army garrison, where Muslim soldiers could
come from other cities to stay, and after getting due training, plan for
an attack on the then great Persian kingdom.

In the beginning Kufa had a population of 24,000, of which twelve
thousand were from southern Arabia (Yemen) while eight thousand were
from northern Arabia (Nazaar). Apart from these, there were four
thousand Persian prisoners of war or slaves who had been arrested during
Qadsiya battles and had converted to Islam.

Initially, Kufa was inhabited by those persons who had come to fight in
the Qadsiya wars, but later, Muslims migrated to the city from other
cities. After the decline of the great Iranian kingdom, a large number
of Iranians had also settled there. These were in addition to those whom
the Muslims had brought as their slaves or maids.

By the time of the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), a new generation from
the maids had grown up. Apart from the Muslims, a sizable number of
Christians from Najran had also settled there. It is said that at the
time of the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) there were forty thousand
Muslim soldiers, and Kufa and its population has been estimated at about
one hundred thousand inhabitants.

Whereas other cities normally had a tribal set up, Kufa, having been
founded on conquest and strategic considerations, consisted of persons
from different tribes and areas. Due to these conditions, S’ad b. Abi
Waqas faced many problems in settling the persons of different colour
and race under various tribal groups or to assimilate them in one social
and cultural set up. After some time he divided them into seven groups.

It has been reported that during the period of the 2nd Caliph, some
effort was made to spread Islamic culture in Kufa and to train the
Muslim army on an Islamic pattern. For this purpose, Ammar Yasir was
appointed the governor of Kufa.

However, due to the fact that the caliph used to treat the Muslim
soldiers better through the distribution of Bait ul Maal, and the number
of slaves and maids had considerably increased due to extensive
victories. The values had changed and wealth, authority and such other
considerations had taken the place of Islamic and moral values.

As a result, the wealthy persons had acquired a much higher status in
Kufa. Later, during the rule of the 3rd Caliph, with the appointment of
Walid b. 'Aqaba as governor, the tribal aristocracy was revived and the
Islamic values were even ridiculed. During this period, the Umayyads had
attained domination in the politics of Kufa but the religious and the
faithful persons of Kufa could not bear the ridicule of religious values
and stood against the rulers.

Thus Kufa had become divided into different groups. On one side was the
religious group who were devoted to the teachings of the Holy Qur’an and
the Sunnah, while on the other side was the ruling clique who wanted to
strengthen its rule and the capitalistic system. During the caliphate of
Hazrat ‘Ali (as), the religious group had attained an upper hand in Kufa
as many Muhajirin, Ansars and the Companions of the Holy Prophet (saws)
had immigrated there due to its becoming the capital.

Apart from it, a large number of Shi'as had appeared in Kufa during the
caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali (as). However, the influence of non-believers
and tribal chiefs, who had been against the religious group from the
beginning and had been intriguing against religion ever since, was not
an insignificant one.

That is why the residents of Kufa had, in the beginning, decided to
remain neutral in the camel ('Jamal') war and the religious group had
not succeeded in their efforts until the arrival of Imam Hasan (as), who
succeeded, after long discussion, in recruiting twelve thousand soldiers
for the army, though forty thousand soldiers were present there at the
time.

During the caliphate of Imam Hasan (as), another group, known as
'Khawarij' had gained considerable influence in Kufa. These persons had
become the enemies of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) after the Siffin war and had
particular, specific ideas. It is said that their speeches used to
swiftly influence the thinking of the people who were accepting their
ideas.

The common people were confused, being divided into these three groups.
Due to the varying views, ideas and opinions, they were unable to decide
who was right and who was wrong! For further understanding the
conditions prevailing at the time of the caliphate of Imam Hasan (as),
three points should be well understood:

After crushing the internal rebellion of the camel ('Jamal') war, Hazrat
‘Ali (as) decided in 36 A.H. to declare Kufa as the capital. There is no
doubt that this was a major step in the history of Kufa. The historical
records do not reflect any clear reason for this decision. No historian
has given any indication that the Imam (as) wished, before the 'Jamal'
war, to announce the shifting of the capital to Kufa.

However, some researchers have written that when the Imam (as) heard the
news of the death and destruction by the rebellious group in Basra, he
was busy at the time in preparing for war against the insurgents of
Syria. But, realizing the nature of the rebellion, he had to postpone
the earlier war plans and to march towards Basra.

After restoring peace in Basra, his first priority was to bring the
Syrian insurgents back on the right path as directed by Almighty Allah
and to fight them, as ordered by the Holy Prophet (saws). From a
military point of view, Kufa was an ideal location where a large Muslim
army was present and soldiers from other areas could also be gathered
there.

Moreover, he could also contain the internal and external conspiracies
which had been hatched against the Muslims and reached a city like Kufa.
One link of these conspiracies was the 'Jamal' war itself which had been
planned by the Syrian rebellious group, and was difficult to control
from Madina.

The historical perspective described here makes it clear that a majority
of the influentials in Kufa belonged to the group of self-seekers and
those after status. They had old associations with the mutineers of
Syria. Although they were with the leader of the faithful in the Siffin
war, yet behind the scenes they had been intriguing against the Imam
(as). These aversive intrigues at first led to the Imam (as)'s outward
set back in the Siffin war, the disobedience of his orders, and finally
his martyrdom.

From the above facts it can be concluded that in addition to differences
due to race, colour, ideas and beliefs, Kufa was also a hot bed of
malice, mistrust and intrigue. The main aim of the intrigues was to
weaken the truly Islamic Alavi government. So, these extended till the
time of Imam Hasan (as) and beyond. Imam Hasan (as) also faced great
danger due to these intrigues, as they had reached a crisis stage during
the time of his caliphate.

It is a historical fact that the residents of Kufa used to say so many
things emotionally, yet at the moment of trial they would run away from
the battle field and lacked patience and steadfastness. This fact
emerges more clearly at the time when Imam Husayn (as) went to Kufa at
the invitation of its nationals and wished them to participate in his
revolution. Then the people advised him otherwise, explaining the nature
of the residents of Kufa as follows:

"No doubt their hearts are with you, but their swords are with your
enemy", which meant that those people were very emotional while
expressing love, regard and respect for someone but would abandon him at
the time of trial and tribulation. At that time they only worried about
their personal interests.

There is no doubt that in the Siffin war these people were responsible
for the leader of the faithful suffering a set back from a victorious
position they did not follow the command of Imam Hasan (as) for war and
left him alone at Madain, due to which the carpet was pulled under his
feet and he was severely injured in a dagger attack.

Subsequently, when Hujr b. Adi, the Companion of the Holy Prophet
(saws), started a movement against the representative of Muawiya, the
residents of Kufa withdrew their support for him at a difficult hour.
Hazrat Muslim b. Aqeel faced the same fate and Imam Husayn (as) had to
face untold problems and tribulations, even though it were the residents
of Kufa themselves who had invited Imam Husayn (as) to come to Iraq.

We have to regretfully state the fact that when the historians discuss
the peace treaty of Imam Hasan (as), they ignore these hard realities,
as if the residents of Kufa had, against their very nature, become fully
prepared for war and that Imam Hasan (as) had ordered them to accept
peace to avoid bloodshed!

There is no doubt that a large number of Shi'a and the devotees of the
household of the Holy Prophet (saws) ('Ahlul Bayt') were present in
Kufa, who had faith in Imam Hasan (as) and accepted him as their caliph
and Imam, but only till such time as their own interests were not
endangered and Imam Hasan (as) had not instructed them to face any major
responsibility. There were very few Shi'a who were determined to remain
faithful to the Imam (as) till death.

The time of the accession to caliphate of Imam Hasan (as) was such a
sensitive and difficult one that the people of Iraq had by then become
extremely disheartened due to prolonged internal wars. The wars had
resulted in huge destruction and their social and political conditions
had become miserable.

The people of Iraq were facing a very cunning and formidable enemy.
Under the leadership of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), they had tried, in the Siffin
war, to finish off the rival who was based in Syria, but the war did not
result in success due to some moneyed persons and self-seeking officers.
A number of wars continued later till the people got tired of the same,
so much so that they started disobeying the orders of the leader of
faithful himself.

The unending wars, beginning with the camel ('Jamal') war, and
continuing with the Siffin war, the Nahrwan war against the 'Khawarij',
the skirmishes with the detachments of the Syrian army sent by Muawiya,
and the use of the army to quell revolts in certain areas all had
resulted in a situation where the people of Kufa had started to betray
the leader of the faithful.

They had openly started to disobey Hazrat ‘Ali (as) due to which the
Imam (as) had condemned them. In the sermons of the Imam (as), quoted in
'*Nahjul Balaghah*', his views are clearly reflected. He states that
while the people had become tired and sad, they had also disappointed
him. Among the consequences of these wars, two points need serious
attention:

(a) A large number of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (saws) and
sincere and religious personalities had lost their lives in these wars
and the group devoted to religious values which could present the
Islamic ideals, had become weak. For that reason, the common people had
lost the sense of deeper values of life and the hereafter. They were
after only the worldly benefits.

(b) In the bitter Siffin war a large number of the soldiers from Iraq
and Kufa had lost their lives and those who had survived were
remembering their loved ones in grief. Later, when their near ones
fought the Nahrwan war as the 'Khawarij', remaining rebellious despite
the advice of the leader of the faithful, and were eliminated, it had a
very bad effect on the residents of Kufa who became revengeful.

The selfish Iraqi leaders, taking advantage of the prevailing
conditions, disobeyed the orders of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) after the Nahrwan
war, to go to fight against the rebellious group of Syria, which the
Imam (as) had planned. These leaders, pretending excuses, forced the
Imam (as) to postpone the war.

The situation in Kufa at the time was such that the soldiers had a mixed
feeling of grief and revenge. It was not an ordinary situation, as they
had lost many of their relatives. Thus they could not be expected to
fight a formidable enemy very soon. The rest of the people, who included
the wealthy group, preferred peace and understanding.

In those distressed conditions they had also lost their Imam and caliph
and were facing the aggressive rulers of Syria who had been their
rivals. However, they were very hopeful that Imam Hasan Al-Mujtaba (as)
would find some political solution to the existing hatred between Syria
and Iraq, so that peace and tranquility would prevail in Kufa.

In his sermons, Imam Hasan (as) has himself described the pathetic
conditions prevailing in Kufa at the time, which we would discuss in
subsequent chapters. Apart from these, another consideration for Imam
Hasan (as) was that he had to take into confidence those persons from
Kufa and other cities who had gathered for a final battle with Muawiya
and who had taken a vow with his illustrious father to fight till death.
They were pressing the Imam (as) to march against Muawiya immediately.


