Imam Al-Mujtaba and Caliphate
=============================

A study of the historical record shows that the historians have ignored
the period between the accession to caliphate by Imam Hasan (as) and the
commencement of the war. Although this ambiguity is reflected in
describing the whole life of Imam (as), yet it is more visible for this
period.

The fact that no major conflicts or clashes took place in the disturbed
political and economic conditions of Kufa during the brief caliphate
period of Imam Hasan (as) shows a great success of his brief caliphate
period and reflects his great qualities of cool political planning and
statesman-like policies. As a true caliph, it was the statesmanship of
the Imam (as) which kept Kufa in peace under his centralized effective
control, despite all its differences and mistrust.

The sound political planning of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was visible from
the very day when the people wanted to pay allegiance to him. He had
permitted them the allegiance on the specific condition that they would
make peace with the one with whom he would do so and would fight one who
would fight against him. Due to this stand of the Imam (as), Kufa
remained united and peaceful, and he maintained a neutral position
between those wanting to fight and the seekers of peace.

Declaring the Holy Book and the Sunnah as the basis of allegiance, he
demonstrated a practical proof for being the grandson of the Holy
Prophet (saws) as well as his true caliph. There is no doubt that the
Holy Prophet (saws) commanded the people to follow the Holy Book and
Sunnah and used to make it clear to them that the solution of all their
problems lay in following the same.

It cannot be denied that the Holy Book and the Sunnah contain the
commands for war as well as peace and it is for the Imam and the caliph
of the Holy Prophet (saws) to decide as to when to fight and when to
make peace. The people must follow the Imam in either case.

After assuming the office of caliph, the first step that Imam Hasan (as)
took was that he raised the salary of the soldiers by 100 Dirham each.
Before him, the leader of the faithful had done the same at the time of
the Camel war, while he did it at the time of becoming the caliph.
Subsequently all the caliphs followed him in this respect.[^1]

Though the raise in the salary of soldiers has always been considered as
strengthening the fighting spirit of the soldiers, particularly at the
critical moment of war, yet the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saw), by
doing so, did not intend to wage war immediately. Rather, he wanted to
revive the morale of the Iraqi army which had been adversely affected
during the earlier years due to internal conflicts.

He might have taken other steps as well to restore the military strength
of the victorious forces, but that is not known to us. However, the fact
that he directed his urgent attention at these issues while facing a
dangerous enemy reflects his full command over the prevailing
conditions.

On Imam Hasan's (as) emerging as the true Islamic caliph, whose
allegiance was taken by all the governed areas, Muawiya had felt
aggrieved. He had strongly reacted against the caliphate of the Imam
(as) as it was beyond his imagination that the Muslims, who had always
been voicing differences on the issue of caliphate, would collectively
accept Imam Hasan (as) as the caliph, especially in a city like Kufa
where he had considerable influence.

It was also a bad omen for him as he had become a candidate for
caliphate after the death of Hazrat Uthman and was constantly trying to
grab the same. The main motive of all the intrigues against Hazrat ‘Ali
(as), which resulted in his martyrdom, was none other than the caliphate
itself. Therefore, he also refused to accept Imam Hasan (as) as the
caliph, just like he had done in the case of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), and
planned rebellion against him.

After the assumption of the caliphate by Imam Hasan (as), Muawiya wrote
to Ziyad b. Abih, the Imam (as)'s governor in Persia, to join him, while
threatening him if he acted otherwise. A year earlier than the martyrdom
of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), disorderly conditions had developed in Persia, so
his confidants had advised the Imam (as) to appoint Ziad b. Abih as the
governor to control the situation, which he had accepted.

When Muawiya's letter reached Ziad, he addressed the masses standing,
wherein he said: "I am surprised at the son of the liver-eater, the
central intriguer, the chief of the rebellious group, that he threatens
me while between him and me is the regard of two grandsons of the Holy
Prophet (saws) (Imam Hasan (as) and Imam Husayn (as)), with whom are
seventy thousand soldiers ready to fight, with open sword. By God, if he
tries to attack me, he will find me a tough soldier and a strong
swordsman."

In the speech, Ziad had exaggerated the army strength to frighten
Muawiya; he had not put down his arms till Imam Hasan (as)'s peace with
Muawiya, and had been loyal to the Imam (as) all along.[^2]

Apart from the above plans, Muawiya had sent a large number of spies to
Iraq. The learned scholar Baqar Qarshi writes in this regard:"Muawiya
invited his close associates, informed them about Imam Hasan (as)'s
accession to caliphate and drew their attention to the fact that if they
did not manage to control the situation, they would never be able to
establish their kingdom. After long deliberations it was decided to take
two key steps:

(a) "Spies should be sent to those areas that had paid allegiance to
Imam Hasan (as), particularly to Kufa and Basra to assess the social and
cultural atmosphere there, to determine their plans and to find out the
extent of their love for the 'Ahlul Bayt' (as). Apart from that, they
should be made to feel the terror of Muawiya, his power and strength.

(b) "Correspondence should be started with the dignitaries and tribal
leaders; they should be bribed and provided large sums of money so that
they may obey Muawiya." [^3]

It cannot be denied that the spies of Muawiya were active in Yemen,
Hijaz, Persia and Iraq since the time of the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali
(as). During the period of Imam Hasan (as), the spy network was
extended. The historians mention in particular the arrest of two spies,
one of whom was arrested in Kufa and the other in Basra. Imam Hasan (as)
sentenced them to death, thereby suppressing the spy movement and
perfidy through Islamic penal law. Later the Imam (as) wrote the
following letter to Muawiya:

"There is no doubt that you have sent many spies towards us, which
implies that you are planning war against us. I have no doubt about the
same. If Almighty God so wills, you should wait for the same. I have
also learnt that you have expressed your rejoicing at the sad incident,
which no sane person would do." [^4]

In this letter Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had warned Muawiya against his
destructive inclinations. On the one hand, he informed Muawiya that he
was aware of his intention to wage a war, while on the other, he stated
that he was determined and fully prepared to face him in the battle
field. In addition, he castigated him at rejoicing at the martyrdom of
Hazrat ‘Ali (as).

The brief peaceful period of the caliphate of the Imam (as) lasted for
four to five months. Hafiz Dhahabi writes in the book 'Al'Abar' that
Imam Hasan (as) had marched for war in Rabi II, 41 A.H. accordingly,
this period would be six months.

So, if the duration of war is taken as one and a half months and the
period of the caliphate of the Imam (as) is taken as six months and few
days, still a duration of four to five months remains, though according
to some other narrations the peaceful period of the caliphate of the
Imam (as) would be more than that.

During this period, the religious group which was loyal to his
illustrious father started pressing him for war against Muawiya. Ibn.
Abbas, his father's cousin and his governor in Basra, wrote a letter to
him, which reflects the religious feelings and has historical
significance:

"To the bondsman of God and the leader of the faithful, from Abdullah b.
Abbas, the bondsman of God. After salutation. The Muslims have handed
over the reign to you. They have objected to your not launching war
against Muawiya and not claiming your rights.

So, you should finalize the plans for war and start the same early; you
should treat your close associates kindly, you should win the hearts of
the nobles and dignitaries through giving them important posts and high
status. Moreover, you should follow reforms just like the earlier just
and fair rulers, so that they be attracted towards you. Know that war is
a sort of deception and there is scope for you in it till any Muslims's
rights do not suffer.

You certainly know that people had left your father and joined Muawiya
as your father was maintaining justice and fair play in the distribution
of prize money and the Baitul Maal funds, which was not liked by those
persons. "You are also aware that you are at war against those persons
who were fighting the Holy Prophet (saws) himself till the Islamic
victory (the conquest of Makkah).

These persons outwardly embraced Islam only after all men had embraced
it, the symbols of polytheism and idol worship had been removed and the
voices praising the Unity of God were heard all around. They would
recite the Holy Qur’an, yet make fun of its verses as well they would
stand in prayers half-heartedly they would observe the duties as
commanded by Allah, yet in their heart of hearts they disliked these.

Later, when they realized that only the apostles of God, good-natured
persons and pious ulama were entitled to respect and dignified status,
they also pretended to be abstinent and pious. Outwardly, they obtained
what their ancestors cherished but their long life proved that they were
misled and a trap for the Muslims! "Therefore, O respected Imam, may
God's blessings be upon you, you should start the war against them and
should not accept surrender at any cost.

Your father Hazrat ‘Ali (as) had also not accepted arbitration until it
was forced on him. And when that happened, he had agreed to it on the
condition that the arbitrators would follow justice and fair play. But,
when they announced their decision based on selfish aims and personal
interest, then he reverted to his earlier policy (of waging war).

Till his martyrdom, he was determined to fight them. May God's blessings
be upon him. Therefore, O highly respected Imam! Do not surrender this
right of yours which you deserve more than anyone else, even though the
undeserving ones may argue with you against it. With regards and May the
blessings of Glorified God be with you." [^5]

In this letter, Ibn. Abbas, expressing the feelings of the supporters of
the Imam, has emphasized the need for war. He analyses the reasons for
the outward set back of his illustrious father and throws considerable
light on the Umayyads' true feelings with regard to Islam. There is no
doubt that the religious elite who were sincere and who had proved their
loyalty towards his father were pressing the Imam (as) for war.

They were aggrieved that the people of Kufa had disappointed his father
as they could not arrange the army which could attack the rebellious
group and finish them off. To remove that feeling they were pressing the
Imam (as) to start the war. The letter of Ibn. Abbas was supportive of
the same. But it was premature for the Imam (as) to take such a big
step. He had not yet had the chance to reform the areas under his
control and to effectively reorganize his army.

Moreover, the majority, which was under the influence of the leaders and
self-seekers, was against war and they could leave the Imam (as) at any
crucial moment, thus declaring him responsible for all the bloodshed. In
the circumstances, it was essential that he should settle the issue
peacefully before starting the war, so that, in case of war, they should
have no ground to run away from the war and thus betray him.

Historians record that just after receipt of the letter of Ibn. Abbas,
the Imam (as) called the letter-writer and dictated the following
detailed letter to Muawiya:

"From the bondsman of God and the leader of the faithful Hasan, to
Muawiya b. Sakhar: There is no doubt that the Glorified God sent the
Holy Prophet (saws) as a divine blessing for the universe. Through him,
the right achieved mastery, falsehood was defeated and the Quraish got a
high status. Then He commanded the chief of His creation thus:

"For sure this is an occasion of warning, learning a lesson, for you and
your nation."

When the Holy Prophet (saws) breathed his last, there was a dispute
among the Arabs about his successor. The Ansar (Madenite companions of
the Holy Prophet) demanded that 'one should be from us and one from
you'. On this, the Quraish replied that 'we are from his family and the
clan. So, it is not appropriate that you should disagree with us on the
issue of the succession'.

So, the Arabs gave the right to Quraish but when we demanded our right
on the basis of kinship, i.e. belonging to the family of the Holy
Prophet (saws), the Quraish declined and did not do justice to us,
which, we thought, was very strange.

Though these persons had some priority in embracing Islam and respect,
yet I am very surprised today when a person like you, who has no
credible performance for the religious cause, nor has he served it in
any significant manner, and who is the son of the worst enemy of the
Holy Prophet (saws) from the Quraish clan, has claimed the candidacy of
caliphate. So, Almighty God will hold you accountable!

"Moreover, I must tell you that after the martyrdom of the leader of the
faithful, the Muslims have given the rein of their affairs to me and I
pray the Gracious God that He may mercifully keep me away from taking
such a thing in the world, which may cause a lesser reward for me in the
hereafter.

"O Muawiya! Desist from falsehood and further revolt and pay allegiance
to me like the masses have done, as you are well aware that I am
entitled to caliphate much more than you in the eyes of Almighty God,
his angels and those having a rational mind. So, you should fear God and
abandoning revolt do not shed the blood of Muslims.

But, if you continue the policy of waywardness and rebellion, then I
will attack you along with the Muslims and try to finish you off till
Almighty God may send His command and there is no doubt that He is the
One whose commands are the best." [^6]

The learned scholar Sheikh Razi Ale Yasin, analyzing the above
historical letter of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), writes: "Imam Hasan (as)
advised Muawiya to give up waywardness and rebellion and to join the
masses by giving allegiance to the Imam (as). It was the thoughtful
political approach of the time which was meant to weaken the enemy and
thereby to weaken his policy of opposition.

But the Imam (as) addressed Muawiya with these words after he had
advanced solid arguments in his own favour. He invited him, like a
leader and guide, towards the right path; like one in authority,
threatened him and ultimately gave him a clear ultimatum for war. Thus,
he followed the approach of his illustrious father, as if the period of
Hazrat ‘Ali (as) was still there; no doubt he was his true successor.

If war was inevitable during the caliphate of his father, then its
significance during his own period could not be overlooked. His own
caliphate was based on such authority and firmness which left no scope
for mischief mongers in the religion of God. For that reason he
admonished Muawiya in strong words and frightened him with the
consequential punishment in the hereafter." [^7]

The scholar Hashim Ma’aruf al-Hasani writes that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)
knew very well that Muawiya would never accept the offer of the Imam
(as), especially when, after the martyrdom of Hazrat ‘Ali (as), he was
considering himself to be in a relatively more sound position.

However, the Imam (as) wanted in this way to make it abundantly clear to
the whole Muslim world the extent to which Muawiya and his household
were hiding their malice and enmity towards Islam, the Holy Prophet
(saw) and the members of his household. This enmity they had inherited
from Muawiya's liver-eating mother and his father. [^8]

Imam Hasan (as) handed over this letter to Handab b. Abdullah Azdi and
Haris b. Suwaid Tameemi, two of his companions. They took it to Muawiya
so that they may formally ask him to submit and to give allegiance to
the Imam (as). On receipt of Imam Hasan (as)'s above letter, Muawiya
replied thus:

"I have fully understood the contents of your letter and when you
mention that the Holy Prophet (saw) was better than all human beings, I
have no doubt that he embodied all excellence; after that you have
mentioned the difference among Muslims and have particularly given the
names of Abu Bakr Siddiq, Umar Farooq, Abu Ubaidah, Amin, Talha, Zubair
and good natured Muhajirs (the refugees in Madina) and Ansars.

O Abu Muhammad! I do not like this for you for the reason that, when the
dispute among the Ummah arose on the issue of succession after the death
of the Holy Prophet (saws), they saw that the Quraish had a special
status in the eyes of the Holy Prophet (saws) due to their lineage as
well, and thus they were more entitled to it.

Then the respectable and religious Muslims among the Quraish and Ansar
agreed that the rank should be given to one who may be better in
learning and piety and who may have been ahead in embracing Islam. So,
they chose Abu Bakr. And if they had considered someone more respectable
than Abu Bakr, who had also embraced Islam earlier than him and would
have been able to safeguard Islam better than him, then they would not
have ignored him.

Your and my situation is similar. If I realized that you are more
experienced in ruling over the populace, have greater right over the
Ummah, are more capable in political issues and deceiving the enemy and
such other matters, then I would hand over the rule to you.

I realize that you are demanding it as your father's successor though he
fought a war against me which resulted in the selection of one person by
him and one by me so that these two arbitrators may give a decision in
the interest of the Ummah which may establish brotherhood among them. We
took a vow and agreement from them on the issue.

After that, they unanimously decided to dethrone your father from
caliphate. So, how can you demand something as a claim on behalf of your
father, when he was deprived of the same? "So, on account of my being
more experienced than you and being elder than you, you should submit to
me.

After me, the caliphate will belong to your household. Whatever you
want, you can take from the Baitul Maal of Iraq. Further, you can take
the tax of any area of Iraq for your personal expenses. So, O the father
of Muhammad! Think over carefully about yourself and your religion. My
compliments to you." [^9]

The scholar Hashim Ma’aruf al-Hasani expresses his views about the above
letter of Muawiya thus:

"The first letter of Muawiya is based on fallacy, deceit and fraud, of
which he was a master. On the one hand, he personates himself as one of
the respectables who cannot deny the dignified status of the dignitaries
even if they are their worst enemies.

While on the other, he tries to find fault with Hazrat ‘Ali (as), the
leader of the faithful, by writing that the Ummah had to select one who
was ahead of others in learning, piety and embracing Islam earlier than
others, so they selected Abu Bakr. Muawiya further wrote that 'you and I
are like your father and Abu Bakr if I realized that in the interest of
the populace you are better than me and that you are an expert and more
experienced than me in protecting the rights of the Ummah, politics,
collecting taxes and in deceiving the enemy, then I would have
positively responded to your invitation'."

Hashim Ma’aruf writes: " this meant that the qualities which Muawiya
had, were not in Imam Hasan (as), just like these qualities were not
supposed to be in his illustrious father when people gave allegiance to
Abu Bakr! Therefore, it was expedient from an Islamic point of view that
the caliphate should be given to him (Muawiya) just like it was
expedient to hand over the caliphate to Abu Bakr after the passing away
of the Holy Prophet (saws)."

Hashim Ma’aruf further writes: "This style of deception and fraud he
could not apply to the illustrious father of the Imam (as). But it seems
now all the favourable conditions had become available to him; the
majority of the leaders in Kufa had promised their support to him;
further, that through monetary temptation he had tried his best to turn
the masses' opinion against the Imam (as)."

The scholar Sheikh Razi Ale Yasin gives a comprehensive reply to these
fallacies of Muawiya in his book 'Sulh-ul-Hasan (as)', (the peace of
Hasan (as)). He writes:

"The letters of Muawiya contained material the main objective of which
was to widen the differences among the Muslims and to incite them for
mischief and rioting; he wanted to raise the dead issues and to destroy
the unity of Muslims which was the foundation of their religion.

When he failed to present his father and himself as challengers, he took
the names of others and started to mention their differences with the
members of the household of the Holy Prophet (saws) ('Ahlul Bayt'). In
these letters, let alone any argument, he could not mention even the
false ground of 'the revenge of the blood of Uthman', as historians
claim that Imam Hasan (as) had been the supporter of Hazrat Uthman and
had tried till the last moment to save him, and if that was true, then
what argument did Muawiya have?

The only argument that he had was: 'that I have been a ruler longer than
you and, being elder than you, I have more experience'. If he had any
other argument he would have advanced the same rather than mentioning
the differences!

It is not understood what the father of Yazeed meant by his experiences.
Was he referring to the day when the Syrians had lodged a complaint
against him to Hazrat Umar and the caliph had asked him to appear in
court along with his messenger, and he was trembling like an ordinary
slave from fear of the lashes of the caliph?

Or, was it the day when he had declined to support Hazrat Uthman and had
later confessed that he himself was one of the reasons for Hazrat
Uthman's failure and defeat?!! Or, was it the day when, as a rebel, he
had fought a war, along with his large army, against the Imam of the
time, without confessing his sin or error?!!! Can these experiences of
his entitle him to become a caliph? If that is so, then where is the
justification to caliphate?

Moreover, can such a rule, which is based on falsehood, slander and
bloodshed, form a basis for a high religious status? As far as the
question of age is concerned, we find no logic in religious philosophy
wherein caliphate may be handed over to someone due to his old age, as
it is possible that such a person may be more clever in buying the
favour of the people through money or in spreading malice, but that does
not mean that he should be selected as the successor to the Holy Prophet
(saw).

It is also possible that a person may have more patience and humility,
but the leadership cannot be given to him, as the humility which is
observed in an Imam may also be noticed in the leaders of hypocrites.

The scholar Ale Yasin concludes that: "these cannot form the basis of
caliphate as the views of a caliph are based on the commandments of the
Holy Qur’an; his whole reliance is on the traditions and he considers
himself answerable to Almighty God." [^10]

Doctor Muhammad Husayn Jafri has also given a very fine analysis of the
above letter of Muawiya. He writes: "This letter of Muawiya is very
significant in the sense that it presents a clear picture of his
political thinking regarding rulership the government which he had been
continuously striving to get.

In his view, the interest of the kingdom and those qualities should form
the basis of caliphate which had nothing to do with religion or moral
values. According to the arguments advanced by Muawiya, the following
qualities form the essential conditions for caliphate:

The individual's authority and ability, his political and organizational
skill, and his ability to extend the boundaries of the state, protect
the Muslims and defend them. This way, whatever was ambiguous, has been
made clear by Muawiya i.e. separation between politics and religious
principles." [^11]

Later, Muawiya sent another letter to Imam Hasan (as) in which he wrote:
"There is no doubt that Almighty God treats His bondsmen the way He
wishes. No one can change His command or decision and He is going to
take account very soon.

So, do not have reliance on the common people; do not think that you
will find any weakness in me if you give up the caliphate and give
allegiance to me, I will fulfill all my promises and will abide by the
agreement with you. Moreover, after me, the caliphate will belong to you
as you deserve it most among the people. My compliments to you." [^12]

This letter of Muawiya shows that having lost on arguments, he had
resorted to demonstrating his power and wanted to frighten Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as) so that he may surrender in his (Muawiya's) favour,
which resignation he would have used as the justification and religious
ground for his caliphate.

But the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws) understood his motives very
well. He ignored his threat and gave a very logical reply, saying: "I
have received your letter in which you have mentioned many points, but
avoiding to use indecent words, I cannot reply to you in the same manner
and seek protection of God. You should follow what is right and know
that I am the one on the right path and it will be a sin if I make a
wrong statement." [^13]

Although Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) avoided coming down to the level of
Muawiya while writing to him, yet he stuck to his stand that he was on
the right path and if Muawiya did not want to be counted among the
followers of falsehood, then he should pay allegiance to the Imam (as)
and give up his opposition. That is why when the messengers of the Imam
took his letter to Muawiya, he asked them to go back saying that now the
sword (meaning war) will decide between them. Thus, the chances of
political settlement of the dispute disappeared for the time being and
war was threatened. [^14]

The exchange of letters between Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) and Muawiya makes
for interesting reading. Through these letters the revered Imam (as)
wanted to make it clear to the Muslims as to who was right and who was
wrong in the struggle for caliphate.

In this way he put political pressure on Muawiya through public opinion
so that he may give up opposition to the Imam (as) and hostility towards
him and pay allegiance, thus joining the learned companions and other
Muslims.

With this peaceful negotiated approach, which is today considered much
better than war, neither any religious principle was being sacrificed,
nor was the Islamic government coming under any criticism. Rather, if
war became inevitable, the opponents of the war could not find any
excuse not to support the Imam (as). This way, the Imam (as) also got an
opportunity to attend to reforms in his caliphate for a short time. His
next step towards the aggressive policy of Muawiya was now awaited.

[^1]: Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', Najaf, Maktaba al Haidariya,
1965, vol.1, p.34; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, Cairo:
Dar Ahya al Kutub al Arabia, 1962, vol. 16, p.33; Razi Ale Yasin -
'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum; Manshurat al Sharif al Razi, 1414 A.H. p.75;
Jawwad Fadhlullah - 'Sulh ul Imam Hasan', Qum, Dar ul Musaqqaf, al
Muslim p.77.

[^2]: Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', Beirut: Dar Ahya al Turas al
Arabi, 1989, vol. 2 pp. 429, 453; Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi', Beirut:
Dare Sadir, vol.2 p. 218.

[^3]: Baqar Qarshi, 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', Najaf, Matba' al
Ilmiah, 1954, vol.2, p.19.

[^4]: Ale Yasin - 'Sulhul Hasan', p.76; Hashim al Maruf - Sirat al Aimma
al Ithna Ashar', Beirut, Dar ul Ta’aruf , 1986, vol.1, p.502; Baqar
Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', vol 2, p.21; Husayn Muhammad
Jafri, 'The Origin & Early Development of Shia Islam', Persian
translation, Ayet Ilahi, Tashay'o dar Masla-e-Tarikh, Tehran, Office of
Islamic Cultural Publications, 1993, p. 161; Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al
Talibin', vol.1, p.33; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’,
vol. 16, p.31; Sheikh Mufid, 'Kitab ul Irshad', Tehran,
'Intisharat-e-Ilmiah' vol 2, p.5; Jawwad Fadhlullah - 'Sulh ul Imam
Hasan', p.77.

[^5]: Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.34; Ibn. Atham - 'Al
Futuh, Hyderabad: Daira al Maa'rif al Uthmania, 1971, vol. 4,
pp.148-150; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, Cairo: Dar
Ahya al Kutub al Arabia, 1962, vol. 16, p.23; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al
Ashraf', Beirut, Dar al Ta’aruf lil Matbu’at, 1977, vol. 3, p.29; Hashim
al Maruf - Sirat al Aimma al Ithna Ashar', Beirut, Dar ul Ta’aruf ,
1986, vol.1, p.503; 6. Husayn Muhammad Jafri, 'The Origin & Early
Development of Shia Islam', Persian translation, Ayet Ilahi, p. 163;
Razi Aale Yasin

[^6]: 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum; Manshurat al Sharif al Razi; Baqar Qarshi -
'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin ‘Ali', vol 2, p.21; Hashim al Maruf - Sirat
al Aimma al Ithna Ashar', vol.1, p.505; Sheikh Mufid, 'Kitab ul Irshad',
Tehran, 'Intisharat-e-Ilmiah' vol 2, p.5; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh
al-Nahjul Balaghah’, vol. 16, p.24; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol.
3, p.30; Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.151; Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil
al Talibin', vol.1, p.35.

[^7]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', pp.82-83.

[^8]: Hashim al Maruf - Sirat al Aimma Ithna Ashar', vol.2, p.506.

[^9]: Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.37; Ibn. Atham - 'Al
Futuh, vol. 4, p.152; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3, pp.31-32;
Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, vol. 16, p.25; Razi Ale
Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', pp.83-88; Dr. Husayn Muhammad Jafri, 'The
Origin & Early Development of Shia Islam', Persian translation, p. 164;
Hashim Maruf - Sirat al Aimma Ithna Ashar', vol.2, pp.507-508; 10.
Hashim al Maruf - Sirat al Aimma Ithna Ashar', vol.2, p.509;

[^10]: . Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', pp.84-87.

[^11]: Dr. Husayn Muhammad Jafri, 'The Origin & Early Development of
Shia Islam',Persian Translation, Ayet Ilahi, p.165.

[^12]: . Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.38; Hashim Maruf -
Sirat al Aimma Ithna Ashar', vol.2, pp.508, 511; Jawwad Fadhlullah -
'Sulh ul Imam Hasan', Qum, Darul Musaqqaf al Muslim, p.87; Razi Ale
Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', p.88; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul
Balaghah’, vol. 16, p.37.

[^13]: . Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.38; Hashim Maruf -
Sirat al Aimma Ithna Ashar', vol.2, pp.508, 511; Jawwad Fadhlullah -
'Sulh ul Imam Hasan', Qum, Darul Musaqqaf al Muslim, p.87; Razi Ale
Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', p.88; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul
Balaghah’, vol. 16, p.37.

[^14]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', p.88.


