The Constituents of the Army and Its Quality
============================================

In the reliable historical records no detail is available through which
we could ascertain the composition of various groups that constituted
the army of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) and their quality. Occasionally it has
been mentioned that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had taken the regiments to
fight Muawiya who were the toughest and very firm, or that the Arab
leaders had completely submitted themselves to the grandson of the Holy
Prophet (saws) so that he had full liberty to fight anyone or make
peace. [^1]

We feel that these accounts are based on exaggeration as reliable
historical records show so many facts which contradict these feelings.
Basically, the army of Imam Hasan (as) was composed of the Iraqi army
and their political, social and uncertain nature is reflected in the
sermons of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) as quoted in '*Nahjul Balaghah*' wherein he
had indicated their weak and wavering nature.

Between the period of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) and the peace of Imam Hasan (as),
there is a maximum intervening period of ten months. During this period
there was very little scope of any major changes in their nature. In
this background we have some words spoken by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) as
well which serve as a shining guide for us. Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) has
described the qualities of his army and has comprehensively compared the
wars fought during the time of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) and his own.

He says: "You were going towards Siffin when you were devoted to
religion and the worldly benefits were insignificant for you, while
today you are preferring worldly comforts over religion.

Be warned that you can be divided into two groups of the dead one the
martyrs of Siffin over whom you are shedding tears or the dead of
Nahrwan whose revenge you are keen to take. The others have run away
from war. But those who are crying for the dead, they seem to be
determined to fight." [^2]

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) has, in a very fine manner, compared the Siffin war
and the one fought during his time. In both these wars, on the one side
was the rebellious Syrian group while on the other was the Iraqi army
under the command of Islamic caliph.

The difference was that earlier the Iraqi army was fighting with such
valour and determination that Muawiya had almost lost his senses, while
now they had become victims of the enemy's intrigue and were doubtful,
rather afraid of the consequences of the war.

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), explaining the different situation said that their
success in the Siffin war was due to their religious leaning, sincerity
and devotion, while the loss and their defeat in the war during his time
was due to the absence of these very qualities. In other words, now they
wanted personal and worldly benefits.

Now they were not fighting with the religious zeal and true spirit, but
rather for their own worldly gain. Later, the grandson of the Holy
Prophet (saws) referred to the two wars which had a profound effect on
their destiny, i.e. the Siffin war, and the Nahrwan war.

So many other wars had also been fought but in these two wars they had
suffered very heavy losses which could not be recompensed. They had not
been able to overcome the negative effects of these wars, and
particularly those of the Nahrwan war, as they were full of rage due to
the feeling of enmity and the spirit of revenge.

Therefore, Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) considers them belonging to two
different groups: one who was shedding tears on the loved ones who lost
their life in the long and bloody Siffin war. This group was relatively
better and, therefore, was ready to fight a defensive war along with
Imam Al-Mujtaba (as). The other group either belonged to the very
'Khawarij' group or had sympathy with it.

Though they were involved in the conspiracy to assassinate Hazrat ‘Ali
(as), yet they wanted to take revenge from the worthy son of the leader
of faithful Imam ‘Ali (as) as well. About the rest, the Imam (as) said
that they had kept away from war.

Sheikh Mufid is the first historian who, taking advantage of the above
quoted words of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), has clearly divided his army into
different groups. The later historians have also written about this
grouping. Briefly, the following five groups constituted the army of the
noble Imam.

Shia
----

A particular class of people, devoted to Imam Hasan (as) and his
illustrious father, having a special identity based on faith, thought,
intellect and mystic knowledge. These people consider caliphate as the
right of the household of the Holy Prophet (saws) ('Ahlul Bayt') from
the very beginning, and obedience to them as obligatory.

There was no doubt about their asceticism, piety, faith, sincerity,
honesty and devotion to 'Ahlul Bayt' (as) among these were well known
and prominent personalities and the Companions of the Holy Prophet
(saws) as well. No doubt, in asceticism, piety and faith, these persons
presented an ideal and the Muslims used to seek religious knowledge and
learning from them only.

But they were small in numbers as a large number from this group had
been martyred in the unending wars during the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali
(as). However, the remaining prominent personalities among them were
still performing their duties honourably in the army of Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as) to the best of their ability.

They tried their best in inducing people to join the army, but it seems
they could not change the thinking of the majority of the people of
Kufa, and could not win their support. They remained faithful to the
members of the household of the Holy Prophet (saws) even after the
martyrdom of Imam Hasan (as) and some of them joined the revolution
brought about by Imam Husayn (as) and attained martyrdom along with him.

The Supporters of Feudalism
---------------------------

The Arab society was based on tribalism. The war was also fought in
accordance with the same system. The tribal chief would decide whether
to fight or not to fight and the other members of the tribe had to
follow him. One tribe, along with its chief would form a unit or a
battalion. Islam was against this system of blind faith but it required
a long time for the people to be educated, to acquire deep knowledge and
to attain faith in the light of Islamic teachings.

It cannot be denied that during the time of Hazrat ‘Ali (as) itself,
many prominent tribal members had changed their loyalties. According to
the historian Masudi, a majority of the wealthy persons of Iraq had
negotiated with Muawiya, but their survival depended on outwardly
supporting Hazrat ‘Ali (as) in the war between him and Muawiya, while
remaining neutral.

On many occasions, they openly opposed the leader of the faithful,
thereby adversely affecting the war. During the time of Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as) these persons had started to support Muawiya more openly and their
number had also increased.

Most of the army of Imam Hasan (as) was composed of such persons who
would only accept the order of their tribal or party leader. In such
circumstances, there was always a possibility that such leaders could
force the majority of the army of Imam Husayn (as) to leave him at the
slightest hint by Muawiya.

The Group of Self-Seekers
-------------------------

While discussing the history of Kufa, it was mentioned that many
nationalities from different areas, belonging to different families,
colours, breeds, religions and tribes had settled in Kufa. Due to its
garrison status, a large number of persons had settled there who wanted
to gain worldly benefits through war.

For them military ranks and booty were the main attraction and they were
not concerned whether the war was being fought for a just cause or for
falsehood. Although, apart from them, the whole army was inclined
towards self-seeking and worldly benefits, yet a group of self-seekers
existed in the army of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) who had no love for religion
or moral values.

Khawarij
--------

Outwardly these people were pious and very respectable but the level of
their intellect could be judged from the fact that, God forbid, they had
slandered the leader of the faithful, Hazrat ‘Ali (as) as being a
polytheist, and had fought the war called 'Nahrwan' against him. Their
number after their defeat in Nahrwan war could not be considered as
large but their group constituted a great danger for Imam Hasan (as).

Outwardly, they were faithful to the Imam (as), but they were waiting
for an opportune moment to attain their base objective. To kill Muawiya
was also one of their aims. Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had been watching them
and was quite alert.

The Doubters
------------

These people did not belong to any particular group or party. They did
not have the ability to differentiate between the truth and falsehood
and thereby to feel their responsibility to be on the right path.
Moreover the extensive propaganda by the Khawarij and the Umayyad group
had put them in doubt about the true path followed by the Ahlul Bayt
(as) and about the prophethood.

In the normal conditions, they were with the army, but in an uncertain
situation they could abandon the Imam (as), as they had an infirm
faith.[^3]

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)'s army was composed of these groups with varying
tendencies. A majority of these people could become a source of danger
for the Imam (as). Due to their wavering and depressed attitude, the
revered Imam (as) had not decided to attack Muawiya. During his
caliphate he was busy in reform in these disturbed conditions, but
Muawiya, by starting the imposed war, had not given the opportunity for
the same to the Imam (as).

He had to face Muawiya in war, who would have otherwise entered Iraq as
victorious, would have at least imprisoned the Imam (as), and the fate
of Muslims would have been at his mercy. The war was not only to protect
the Islamic caliphate and rule but the survival of Iraq as an
independent country was also at stake.

Therefore, he decided to fight a defensive war taking all the different
groups in his army. Criticism has been levied on Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)
regarding the composition of the army and the selection of the soldiers
as well. But those indulging in criticism ignore the prevailing
atmosphere, the society and the political conditions at the time.

So, the objections are wrong. There is no doubt that Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as) was passing through a very trying period of Islamic history and not
much reliance could be put on the army. However, like a capable general,
who had proved his capabilities in war during the period of his
illustrious father, he took the decision to fight Muawiya with whatever
army he had.

He formed a vanguard brigade of twelve thousand soldiers to stop
Muawiya's advance. It was composed of very capable persons who included
those devoted to him as well as the 'Shurta al Khamis' (the Thursday
Soldiers' group) who had defeated Muawiya in the Siffin war. He had very
carefully selected the leadership of the vanguard brigade and was with
them, with a limited number of soldiers, till the march to Madain. There
he stayed back, waiting for reinforcements from Kufa, Basra and Persia.

The success of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) depended on the performance of the
vanguard brigade. It cannot be denied that in the vanguard brigade also
there were paid agents of the enemy, but if its leadership had acted
very tactfully according to his commands, it had the force and
capability to inflict heavy physical and material loss to the Syrian
army, thus blocking the advance by Muawiya, which would have forced him
to change his policy.

Later, with reinforcements, the Imam (as) would reach Maskin and take
control of the army himself, and the chances of his success would have
been enhanced. Thus, at least Muawiya could have been confined to Syria.
In such a situation, even enemies would have become friends.

But if the leadership of the vanguard brigade could not utilize the
select army to the best of its ability and face crisis, then the enemy
could penetrate and consequently the whole brigade would lose.

Due to its defeat, the whole plan would be upset, the agents of Muawiya
and the spies would get the chance that they were awaiting, and the
majority of the army would lose heart and leave the Imam (as) or cause a
crisis for the central leadership. In such a situation, the malicious
enemy like the Khawarij could get a chance to play some dirty trick.

[^1]: Hakim Naishapuri - 'Al Mustadrak 'Alal Sahihain', Beirut, Darul
M'arifa, vol. 3, p.170, 174; Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', Beirut,
Muassasah Sh'aban, vol. 2, p.390; Bukhari - 'Sahih Bukhari' Beirut,
Darul M'arifah, vol. 2, 'Kitab al Sulh', p.114.

[^2]: Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad', Tehran, Intisharate 'Ilmiah,
vol. 2, p.7; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Hasan bin ‘Ali', Najaf, Matba al
Ilmiah, vol.2, pp.52-55; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum,
Manshuraat al Razi, pp.68-73, 126-136; Abdul Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib
Tarikhe Damishq la Ibn. Asakir, Beirut, Dar Ahya al Turas, 1987, vol 4,
p.225; Ibn. Khaldun, ‘Tarikh Ibn. Khaldun’, Beirut, 1971, vol. 2, p.
187; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Tarikh Al Islam, Beirut, 1987, p.7.

[^3]: 3. Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad', Tehran; Razi Ale Yasin -
'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum, Manshuraat al Razi; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Hasan
bin ‘Ali', Najaf, Matba al Ilmiah, Masudi - 'Muravvij az Zaheb', Beirut,
Darul Fikr, 1989, vol.2, p.430, Ibn. Sabbagh - ‘al Fusul al Muhimmah',
Najaf, Maktab Darul Kutub, p.143.


