Selection of the Leader
=======================

The researchers complain that a factual, analytical and critical study
of the struggle between Imam Hasan (as) and Muawiya, as presented by
history, has not yet been undertaken. Thus, a chapter on the early
Islamic period remains dark, vague and unclear. A similar view has been
expressed by the well known German orientalist J. Wellhausen. While
analysing the period of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), he writes:

Events are recorded with confusion and fragmentation and that it is,
therefore, difficult to place certain details of the episode in precise
chronological order." [^1] 1

The researchers are justified in their comment, as those trying to
analyse the events during the period of Imam Hasan (as) come across many
such different, confused statements about the events and contradictory
narrations. Similar variation is also observed about the leadership of
the vanguard brigade. From the occurrences after reaching Maskin, it
seems that the difference is quite significant.

Rebuttal of another Misunderstanding
------------------------------------

Some historians have written that the command of the vanguard brigade
that Imam Hasan (as) had ordered to go to Maskin in the northern Iraqi
area to check the advance by Muawiya, was given to Qais b. S'ad b.
Abadah Ansari. The following historians have recorded it as such: [^2]
2  
 Ibn. Atham - 'Al-Futuh',  
 Hafiz Dhahabi - 'Tarikh al-Islam-o-al-'abar,  
 Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al-Khamis',  
 Ibn. Hajar 'Asqalani - 'Al Isabah fi Tamyiz al Sahaba'  
 Ibn. Khaldun - 'Tarikh Ibn. Khaldun'  
 Abu ‘Ali Maskuya - 'Tajarib al Ummum'

Two versions have been given in 'Tarikh al-Tabari'. According to Zuhri's
narration, Ubaidullah b. Abbas, the cousin of Imam Al-Mujtaba's father
(i.e. his uncle) was in command of the vanguard brigade, while according
to Musa b. Abdel Rahman's narration, the command was given to Qais b.
S'ad.[^3] 3

The historian Ibn. 'Asakir too, in his well known book 'Tarikhe Madinate
Damishq' mentions two different versions. According to him, only Abul
Safar has mentioned the name of Qais b. S'ad as the commander of the
vanguard unit, while others have mentioned Ubaidullah b. Abbas as the
commander.[^4]

On the other hand, we also come across the historical records wherein it
has been mentioned that though the leadership was given by Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as) to Ubaidullah b. Abbas, Qais b. S'ad was appointed as
his assistant and adviser. The following historians support this
version:

Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi'  
 Ibn. Kathir - 'Al bidayah wal Nihayah'  
 Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf'  
 Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al Talibin'  
 Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad'  
 Ibn. Abi al Hadid - ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’  
 Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fit Tarikh'

From the historical evidence available, it is not difficult to decide
that initially the commander of the vanguard unit was Ubaidullah b.
Abbas, but later the command was officially assigned to Qais b. S'ad. We
will quote only two sources here:

(1) The war command of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) in which he ordered
Ubaidullah to take the command of the vanguard brigade and appointed
Qais b. S'ad and S'eed b. Qais as his advisers.

(2) The letter from Ubaidullah b. Abbas or Qais b. S'ad to Imam Hasan
(as), after taking over the command of the vanguard brigade, in which
they have mentioned the crisis faced by the leadership. [^5]

From a historical point of view, the authenticity of the two documents
and their accuracy is proved. However, the misunderstanding by some that
Qais was the commander of the vanguard brigade was due to the main role
played by Qais b. S'ad. For sure, during the caliphate of Hazrat ‘Ali
(as) he had been the commander-in-chief of a very important brigade ‘the
Shurta al Khamis' (the Thursday Soldiers).

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had also not appointed Ubaidullah b. Abbas as the
sole commander, but he had appointed Qais as his assistant and next in
command. Due to later events, when Qais got the command, he was at the
centre of all the events, which caused the historians to consider him as
the commander of the vanguard brigade.

Some historians have raised objection that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)
appointed Ubaidullah as the commander. In this respect, the following
extract from 'Tarikh al-Tabari' etc., needs attention:

"When Hazrat ‘Ali (as) was martyred and the Iraqi people paid allegiance
to Imam Hasan (as) as the caliph, it became evident that Imam Hasan (as)
was not in favour of war. But he wanted to make a bargain for himself
with Muawiya before making any agreement. Imam Hasan (as) knew that Qais
b. S'ad would not agree with this view of the Imam (as). Therefore, he
dismissed him and appointed Ubaidullah b. Abbas as the commander of the
army." [^6]

Two conclusions can be drawn from the above historical extract: 1) Imam
Hasan (as) did not want a war (2) Before taking any decision about the
consequences of peace, he wanted to extract something from Muawiya.

As far as the stand taken by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) about the war is
concerned, we have already explained it in earlier chapters and no doubt
remains about the same. Yet, we would like to make a brief comment.

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as), just like his father, considered it his prime duty
to fight the rebellious group and he considered himself to be the
rightful claimant and heir to the caliphate, but due to a number of
problems, which have earlier been mentioned, he did not want to start
the war himself in the given disturbed conditions. But that did not mean
that he did not want to fight even a defensive war!

That is why, as soon as he got the information about Muawiya's advance,
he made the declaration of war and started large scale propagation for
the same. His sermon in the Kufa mosque about readiness for war and his
taking the limited army to the camp in 'Nakhaila' outside the city, the
same day, is a clear proof that he was taking appropriate steps for war.

Reliable historical records show that it was not Imam Al-Mujtaba (as)
but the people who were reluctant to fight and disappointed their Imam.
If Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was really inclined towards peace from the
beginning, he would neither have threatened Muawiya with the
consequences nor would have stuck to his firm stand till the end.
Rather, he could have easily replied to Muawiya's offer of peace at some
appropriate moment and would have presented him with his own conditions!
[^7]  
 Moreover, the above extract was from Zuhri's narration and it reflected
his own ideas. Researchers complain that he was partial. We will discuss
this aspect in detail in subsequent chapters. Similarly, we will reply
to the second conclusion referred to above, while discussing the 'peace
treaty'.

Some historians, prominent among them being Ibn. Kathir, have written
that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was against the war but the views of the
supporters of war and the Iraqi people prevailed over his own view they
gathered a large number of people after which the grandson of the Holy
Prophet (saws) had to decide in favour of war. [^8]

There is no doubt that the religious devotees and the supporters of war
had tried to pressurize the Imam (as) right from the beginning for war
and had wanted the allegiance to him to be paid on the condition that he
would consider the war against the rebels as the main goal of his
caliphate. But the true Islamic caliph had turned it down and allowed
them to pay allegiance only on following the Holy Book and the Sunnah.

The historians have no doubt that ultimately the extremist group as well
had agreed to the Imam (as)'s firm and rightful stand and gave
allegiance on that basis. As they could not prevail over the Imam (as)
at that critical moment, it was impossible for them to prevail over the
Imam (as) after he had duly taken over as the caliph.

The reliable historical records show that the decision for defensive war
was taken by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as). The religious group had supported him
in this regard which was appreciated by the Imam (as) and he had prayed
to the Gracious God to bestow His blessings on them. This shows that on
this issue there was no difference of opinion between him and the
religious group.

The basic question that remains, and the answer to which would put an
end to all objections and misunderstandings, is: on what considerations
did Imam Hasan (as) appoint Ubaidullah as the commander of the vanguard
brigade when persons like Qais b. S'ad b. Abadah Ansari were present in
the army, whose military experience, sincerity towards the Ahlul Bayt
(as), and honesty had already been tried?

The learned scholar Razi Ale Yasin (RA), through a comprehensive
analysis, gives four answers to this question:

Scholar Raazi Aale Yasin's analysis about the leader's selection
----------------------------------------------------------------

### First answer

The scholar Razi Ale Yasin writes that when Imam Hasan (as) wanted to
select Ubaidullah for the leadership, he had bound him down to consult
Qais b. S'ad and S'eed b. Qais. This is clearly stated in his war
command or the agreement. This way he did not allow the leadership to be
confined to one person, which would not be prudent, but appointed a
supreme committee of three persons who were the most capable persons in
the army.

If he had given preference to Qais b. S'ad over the other two, or over
other companions, and had confined the leadership to one person, it was
likely that other persons like him who had similar status, were sincere
and had a shining record in the religious war ('jihad') and otherwise,
would feel jealous.

Among those were Hazrat Aboo Ayub Ansari, Hujr b. Adi Kandi, Adi b.
Hatim Tai and some others. In such a situation, it was the best policy
for Imam Hasan (as) to prefer the cousin of his father, who was also the
cousin of the Holy Prophet (saws), and to bind him to consult Qais b.
S'ad and S'eed b. Qais. In this approach there was no danger of any
rivalry or disagreement.

### The Second Reply

The scholar Sheikh Razi, giving the second reply, writes that in the
circumstances it was necessary for Imam Hasan (as) that the selected
leader be from the Hashemi family. The point may be explained thus:
after the declaration of war in Kufa, the people had shown reluctance
and half-heartedness which was the beginning of a bad omen for Imam
Hasan (as).

So, it was essential for him to adopt such a policy which would provide
a good answer to any current or future criticism or objection. It was
easy for the people to blame Imam Hasan (as) if they would see any
weakness in his army or would notice any lack of fighting spirit in the
soldiers.

It is also possible that if the vanguard brigade had suffered defeat at
the hands of Muawiya, they would have argued that if the commander was
from the family of the Imam (as) he would have faced the adverse
situation in a more determined, cool and calculated manner, and the
result would not have been the same.

Therefore, taking all these factors into consideration, the selection of
the Hashemi leader was an important and sane decision. No one in the
army of Imam Hasan (as), neither Qais b. S'ad, nor S'eed b. Qais nor
anyone else was more keen and determined to fight Muawiya, than
Ubaidullah, as he was full of anger against Muawiya.

In fact he was burning with rage to take revenge from Muawiya, as two
innocent children of his had fallen victim to the murder and plunder by
the army which Muawiya had sent to Yemen under the command of Basar b.
Abi Artat. This incident is one of the darkest in history and is very
well known. So it was appropriate that the command of the vanguard
brigade should be given to an aggrieved one who would be very determined
to fight the murderer of his children.

The major part of the vanguard brigade which Imam Hasan (as) had formed
to fight Muawiya, consisted of the remaining soldiers who had been
organized by the leader of the faithful Hazrat ‘Ali (as) to fight
Muawiya. Hazrat ‘Ali (as) had appointed Qais b. S'ad the commander of
that army and Qais had been its leader all the time.

It would be a realistic assessment that such relation between the leader
and his soldiers is significant and it is easy for a leader who has
extraordinary influence over the soldiers to take independent decisions
at any time by distancing the army under his command from the central
command of the Imam (as).

This was such a delicate issue which required caution. Though we respect
Qais, we cannot deny his personal inclination to take independent
decisions. We cannot forget the day when he got the leadership and
standing among the soldiers he gave them the choice to decide between
two alternatives:

(1) The peace of Imam (as) which included allegiance to Muawiya;  
 (2) To continue the war without the specific order of the Imam (as).

There could be no better strategy than to not give the command to such a
personality but to still keep him as a political and military adviser,
thus benefiting from his ability and intelligence. So, in the given
conditions, Imam Hasan (as) made the best decision.

However, the appointment of Qais b. S'ad as the deputy commander by the
Imam (as), does not contradict his political policy, as firstly, he
would have to maintain the decisions taken by the earlier command, thus
he would not be able to make quick changes to the war scene.

Secondly, it was likely that the Imam (as) would himself reach Maskin by
that time and would take full control himself, as he had informed the
commander that he intended to reach there very soon. After that, what
was the problem in appointing Qais as the deputy commander?! [^9]

[^1]: S.H.M. Jafari - 'The Origin and Early Development of Shia Islam',
Qum, Ansarian Publications, p.137.

[^2]: . Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh, Hyderabad: Daira al Maa'rif al Usmania,
1971, vol. 4, p.154; Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', Beirut, Muassasah
Sh'aban, vol. 4 pp. 389-390; Ibn. Khaldun, ‘Tarikh Ibn. Khaldun’,
Beirut, Muassasah A'la mi, 1971, vol. 2, p. 186; Abu ‘Ali Maskuya -
'Tajarib al Ummum', Tehran, Dar Sarosh, 1987, vol. 1, p. 386; Hafiz
Dhahabi, 'Tarikh Al Islam, Beirut, Darul Kutub al Arabi, 1987, 'Ahde
Khulfae Rashidin', p.6; Ibn. Hajar Asqalani - 'Al Asabah fi Tamyiz al
Sahaba; Egypt, Matb'a Mustafa Muhammad, 1939, vol. 1 p.329.

[^3]: Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', Beirut: Darul Kutub al Ilmiah 1988,
vol 3, p. 164-65.

[^4]: Abdul Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq al Kabir' Beir ut,
Darul Ahya al Turas, 1987, vol 4, p.223.

[^5]: Ibn. Abi al Hadid, ‘Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghah’, vol. 16, pp.22;
Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad'vol. 2 p. 9; Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh,
vol. 4, p.157.

[^6]: Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', vol 3, p.165; Abu ‘Ali Maskuya -
'Tajarib al Ummum', vol.1, p. 385.

[^7]: References have been quoted in the earlier chapters.

[^8]: Ibn. Kathir, 'Al bidayah wal Nihaya', vol.8, p.14; H.A.R.Gibb and
Kramers, Shorter Encyclopedia of Islam: Leiden, E.J. Brill, 1974, p.135.

[^9]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum, Manshuraat al Shareef Razi,
1414 A.H., pp.108-111


