From Maskin to Madain
=====================

Ubaidullah b. Abbas was quickly advancing towards Maskin with twelve
thousand soldiers in the vanguard brigade. While passing through a place
called "Shami" near Qadisiya, he continued his advance till he reached
Maskin after crossing over the Euphrates. There he faced the Syrian army
which had already arrived.

The next day the Syrian ruler Muawiya ordered a number of armed units
under the command of Basar b. Abi Artat to attack the vanguard brigade
of the Imam (as). Ubaidullah and his men fought them off bravely and
defeating them before sunset, forced them to retreat to the Syrian camp.

At that moment Muawiya realized that Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) was very
serious about an armed struggle against him. So, by the night fall, he
started planning his cunning tactics. Muawiya sent his special envoy
Abdel Rahman b. Samrah, b. Habib b. Abde Shams to the vanguard brigade,
with the following message:

"A number of representatives of Hasan (as) have come to me with his
letters in which he has offered peace to me. I have come towards Iraq
with the same intention and I have ordered my soldiers not to engage
you. You should also not harm them till the issues are settled between
me and Hasan (as)."

Ubaidullah and his colleagues refused to believe the message,
considering it to be based on falsehood and deception, and abusing Abdel
Rahman b. Samrah, sent him back. [^1]

After that Muawiya tried to bribe Qais b. S'ad, the deputy commander.
Muawiya sent him one hundred thousand Dirham and suggested that he
should either support him or leave the army of Imam (as). Qais returned
the Muawiya, saying: "Does Muawiya want to deceive me in my
religion?"[^2]

On being disappointed from Qais, Muawiya sent his special envoy Abdel
Rahman b. Samrah to Ubaidullah. He requested special meeting with him
and swearing, tried to convince him that Imam Mujta ba (as) had offered
peace to Muawiya. Simultaneously, he offered Ubaidullah one hundred
thousand Dirham. The historian Abul Faraj Isphahani quotes the following
text of the message that was sent to Ubaidullah:

"No doubt Hasan (as) has written to me about peace and he is going to
hand over the rule to me very soon. So, if you obey me now, you will be
treated like an officer, otherwise you will be treated like an ordinary
soldier. If you accept my offer now, you will be given one hundred
thousand Dirham, half of which I am sending in haste as cash, while the
balance will be given to you on reaching Kufa."

The historians write that Ubaidullah b. Abbas fell a victim to this
conspiracy and deserting the army and leaving the command, he joined
Muawiya the same night. 3 According to Y'qubi and Baladhuri he was not
alone in deserting the army but the majority of the vanguard brigade
which is said to have numbered eight thousand, also deserted with him.
[^3]

Some versions mention that after Ubaidullah's desertion, the majority of
the leaders and well known personalities of Iraq, coming under similar
influence, had joined the army of Muawiya. It cannot be denied that a
majority in the vanguard brigade (nearly two thirds) had earlier or
later joined the forces of Muawiya. [^4]

The circumstantial evidence shows that apart from Ubaidullah b. Abbas
and Qais b. S'ad, Muawiya had tried to bribe other leaders in the Iraqi
army as well. But the main reason of his success was that all of them,
including Ubaidulah, had become frightened.

They knew Muawiya very well and their national and religious status and
interests would not at all allow them to bow to Muawiya. Muawiya had
offered cash only to Ubaidullah while others had been given only verbal
promises. Without getting any cash, why did they trust the verbal
promise?

If their attitude is analyzed, lack of leadership and the fear of
Muawiya and his army was the main reason for the same. There is no doubt
that against a well organized and armed force of sixty thousand, a
disorganized force of twelve thousand, all of whose soldiers could not
even be trusted, was no match.

Moreover, they were facing not an ordinary person but one like Muawiya.
The leader of the faithful Hazrat â€˜Ali (as) had warned his Persian
governor in the following words to beware of Muawiya:  
 "Undoubtedly sometimes Muawiya attacks a person from the front,
sometimes from back, while on other occasions from right or left. So,
you should remain very alert to his moves." [^5]

However, it cannot be denied as well that the soldiers in the vanguard
brigade were the best soldiers in the army of Imam Hasan (as). These
included a large number of the Shi'a of his father and his own who
included a number of the Companions of the Holy Prophet (saws). They
included the devotees of "Shurta al Khamis" who had vowed to fight till
death and, according to historians, Muawiya was fearful of them.

The tried and experienced Generals like Qais b. S'ad, S'aeed b. Qais,
S'as'ah b. Saohan and Adi b. Hatim as well were in the army of the Imam
(as) from whom Muawiya was afraid. About these very people Imam Mujta ba
(as) had stated that every one of them was equal to an army and that
they were from amongst the most trusted ones of the leader of the
faithful. In addition, Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had more than once advised
the commander to treat them with courtesy and kindness.

The other persons, though they were not as firm in faith and bravery,
yet if the leadership had trusted them and had, following the
instructions of the Imam (as), not allowed them to go astray and would
have maintained their trust, then there was no chance for Muawiya to sow
seeds of discord among them or for them to fall prey to his cunning
moves.

But when they saw the leadership itself getting involved, then they lost
hope from the army of the Imam (as) and started to offer faithfulness to
Muawiya. They did not fully trust Muawiya but this way they hoped that
their lives and those of their tribe would remain safe. The main person
responsible for this "lack of trust" was Ubaidullah b. Abbas.

It was the moral responsibility of the commander to take Qais b. S'ad
and S'aeed b. Qais into confidence, to consult them according to the
instructions of Imam Hasan (as), and to solve the problems taking into
account their honesty and ability.

Though some historians have defended him, writing that he deserted the
army after finding out the policy of Imam Hasan (as), history provides
no evidence that Ubaidullah verified what Muawiya had said. It is
possible that up to the last moment he considered Muawiya's words as
false but due to his poor and limited thinking he found himself in the
midst of honour and disgrace.

He might have worried that his subordinates were likely to leave him and
by accepting the offer of Muawiya, he could protect his future.
Otherwise, if he fell into the hands of the commanders of Muawiya, they
would disgrace him. With this thought, his faith was shaken, he got
frightened and fell pray to the very first move of conspiracy.

Early morning when the soldiers assembled for morning prayers as usual
and learnt that their commander along with two thirds of the army had
joined the army of Muawiya, they were amazed and at first they not
believe it. In accordance with the earlier instructions of the Imam
(as), Qais b. S'ad took over the command of the army.

After leading the prayers, he gave a remarkable sermon in which he
cursed Ubaidullah and called him 'coward' and 'traitor'. This way he
succeeded in restoring the morale of the remaining soldiers. His speech
had such a profound effect on the soldiers that they thanked God on a
coward like Ubaidullah leaving the army and vowed to fight till death
under the command of Qais b. S'ad. Their number has been mentioned as
four thousand. [^6]

This would show that only these persons in the vanguard brigade were the
true devotees of the Imam (as). It was their true faith and sincerity
that they withstood such a big shock and were thus considered as honest
and devoted soldiers of the Imam's (as) vanguard unit.

After the breach of trust by Ubaidullah, Muawiya did not doubt the
success of his negative policies. He started a dual campaign of
propaganda and rumour in the two parts of the army of Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as), i.e. in the vanguard unit and in the army at Madain. Ubaidullah
was not only the commander of the vanguard brigade and the cousin of the
Imam's father, but he was also considered to be very close to Imam Hasan
(as).

When a person like him could do what he did, then what complaint can
there be about others! So, after him, breach of trust, treachery,
betrayal of religion, deserting the army and rebellion became a daily
routine. He is directly responsible for all that. He was the first
person who, performing the role of 'Mir J'afer', brought down the
Hashemi caliphate and created the atmosphere which enabled the army of
the Imam (as) to fall prey to the conspiracy of the enemy. History will
never forgive him for such a crime!!

The agents of Muawiya on the one hand spread rumour in the army at
Madain that Qais b. S'ad had made peace with Muawiya and had joined him,
while on the other hand, in the army at Maskin they said: "Imam Hasan
(as) is planning peace with Muawiya." [^7]  
 Muawiya thought that after Ubaidullah and other officers, the vanguard
unit would now be having a defeatist tendency and would not have the
guts to fight. So he sent some units under the command of Basar b. Artat
to finish off the remaining soldiers. Qais b. S'ad, with four thousand
forces, bravely fought out the onslaught by Basar and again forced him
to run.

The next day he again attacked with a large army of twenty thousand who
were fully armed. This time also, after a bitter fight, he was defeated.
Many soldiers had died on both sides in this encounter but Basar had not
been successful. During the war, he shouted at the Iraqi army, saying:
"Your leader Hasan (as) has made peace. So, why are you bent upon
committing suicide?"

The soldiers of the vanguard unit had become used to such rumours. So,
they ignored Basar and continued to fight with courage and
determination, giving hard blows to the Syrian army. Intervening,
Muawiya also tried a number of times to stop the fight but was
unsuccessful. He sent a number of messages to Qais b. S'ad, frightened,
threatened him and once he even called him a Jew, son of Jew. Qais b.
S'ad was a very steadfast person.

He ignored the threats of Muawiya and had only one answer to all his
offers and proposals:  
 "By God you will not meet me except facing me on the battle front."

Qais b. S'ad continued the war, thus following the policy of the Imam
(as). He also gave detailed replies to the communications from Muawiya.
In one reply he wrote: "O Muawiya you and your ancestors are known as
the idolaters of Makkah. You embraced Islam Willy nilly. Neither your
faith is old nor is your malice new. We are the scions of religion while
you have gone out of it and are its enemy."

Muawiya wanted to send another threatening message to Qais b. S'ad but
Umru b. 'As advised him not to do so, saying that Qais b. S'ad might
give a stronger reply.[^8]

After the study of reliable historical records there remains no doubt
that Muawiya, despite all his cunning and political blackmail, did not
succeed in defeating the damaged vanguard unit, which was now under the
command of Qais b. S'ad. Qais, through his intelligence and with the
support of his devoted, faithful and steadfast soldiers, was keeping the
army of Muawiya engaged.

He had not only kept the fully armed Syrian army involved in war but
had, to some extent, gained an upper hand over it. However, that does
not mean that he had no problems. Though he had successfully countered
all the conspiracies of Muawiya, yet the main cause of his worries was
the fact that he was not aware of what was happening to the army of Imam
(as) at Madain and its central leadership there.

He was worried about the welfare of Imam Hasan (as) and was not aware of
the problems that the Imam (as) was facing, while all sorts of rumours
had been spread in the army. During these uncertain conditions, a news
was received that: "Imam Hasan (as) was attacked with a dagger on his
thigh and he is seriously ill while the soldiers, deserting him, have
run away."

One can imagine what effect the news might have had on the companions of
the (as) Imam during the crisis situation. Qais b. S'ad was aggrieved on
hearing the news. He was a very experienced and mature general and, as
always, did not allow his army men to be adversely affected by the news.
Planning the attack on the army of Muawiya, he did not give a chance to
his soldiers to think about the news.

Consequently, he nullified the enemy's conspiracy. He successfully
attacked the army of Muawiya a number of times and inflicted heavy
physical and material losses on it. In these attacks some of his
soldiers also lost their lives. Before night fall both the armies
separated and Muawiya sent the following message to Qais b. S'ad:

"O man! On what basis are you fighting me and are bent on losing your
life? We have reliably learnt that your supporters have dethroned your
Imam (as). He has been attacked on his thigh so severely that he was
close to death. In the circumstances, till learning the truth you should
refrain from attacking us."

After this communication from Muawiya, Qais stopped the attacks on the
army of Muawiya and awaited an authentic report from Madain. [^9]

What happened in Madain?
------------------------

It has been made clear in the earlier chapters that the success of the
army of Imam Hasan (as) and its morale directly depended on the
performance of the vanguard brigade. So, when the reserve forces in
Madain learnt about the betrayal by Ubai dullah and others, it was a big
shock for them, and losing hope for victory in war like some of the
officers of the vanguard brigade, they also started thinking in terms of
contacting Muawiya.

Therefore, the spies of Muawiya had no difficulty in spreading rumours
or in making cunning moves as directed by him.During that time Muawiya
sent a three man delegation, consisting of Moghira b. Sh'aba, Abdullah
b. Aamir b. Karez, and Abdel Rahman b. Samra, ostensibly to negotiate
peace with Imam Hasan (as). Before reaching the camp of the Imam (as),
Abdullah b. Aamir, loudly addressing the Iraqi army, said:

"O people of Iraq! I am from the vanguard unit of Muawiya. I do not
consider war to be justified. Muawiya has reached Maskin with his army.
You give my regards to Abu Muhammad (Imam) Hasan (as) and tell him that
for God sake he should have mercy on his own life as well as those of
his men."

After the utterance of these words by Abdullah b. Aamir, people lost
heart and started disliking war. This shows that they believed that
Abdullah b. Aamir had spoken the truth. It is a proof of their stupidity
that they believed that Muawiya did not want war! On entering the camp
of Imam Hasan (as), the delegation of Muawiya told him:

"For the sake of the transitory life of this world and forgiveness, the
bloodshed of the followers of the Holy Prophet (saw) should be avoided
by you. We do not deny that Muawiya is stuburn on the issue, but for God
sake you should not do so, otherwise so many lives will be lost due to
conflict between you two. Muawiya has also expressed his intention to
hand over the office to you after his death. Moreover, in return for
your retiring he will offer you much more."

We are sorry to acknowledge that, like other occasions, history does not
reflect the stand taken by Imam Hasan (as) on this occasion and it is
not clear what the Imam (as) said in reply! Anyway, while coming out of
the camp, these persons tried to give a false impression to the army of
the Imam (as), which was perhaps the main purpose of their mission.

They said: "For sure, the Gracious God has saved the lives of the people
through the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saws) disorder and trouble has
been avoided and he has agreed to peace." [^10]

Historians have written that after this, the people did not doubt their
statement. People were in the midst of uncertainty when an uproar was
heard that: "Qais b. S'ad has been assassinated. So, run" [^11]

After Ubaidullah b. Abbas, if the Iraqis had reassurance from any one,
it was Qais the son of S'ad b. Abadah. He was considered a perfect
symbol of faith, bravery and steadfastness and an ideal person. The
Iraqis knew that after defeating the vanguard brigade, Muawiya would
attack Madain. But they felt that it was not easy to defeat a commander
like Qais.

Thus they did not face an immediate danger from Muawiya. However, as
soon as they heard the rumour of the assassination of Qais, they almost
lost all hope. So, giving up everything, they started to run. Very soon,
the whole army panicked, confusion and disorder prevailed and the
Khawarij got an opportunity for revenge.

Taking advantage of the situation, they attacked the camp of Imam (as).
They robbed all that was in the camp of the noble grandson of the Holy
Prophet (saws) they even pulled the carpet from under his feet and the
robe from his shoulder.

Imam Hasan (as), saying "verily there is no power and strength but by
Allah", immediately got up, drew his sword and trying to save himself
from the unexpected attack, rode on the horse. He called his supporters
from "Rabi'a and Hamadan" tribes for help and marched with them towards
the governor house of Madain via "Muzlim Sabat" area.

Though these tribes performed the duty of protecting the Imam (as), yet
in the prevailing confusion and disorder, it had become very difficult
for them to distingu ish betwen friend and foe. While the Imam (as) was
passing through Muzlim Sabat, a Khawarij, Jarah b. Sanan Asadi, who was
lying in ambush, attacked the Imam (as) with a dagger as soon as he
passed by him.

The injury was so severe that the dagger had reached the thigh bone.
Imam (as) caught him by his beard, twisted him and threw him on the
ground with such force that his neck was broken. Immediately, Abdullah
b. Zabian and Abdullah b. Khatal attacked and killed him.

Due to heavy loss of blood, the Imam (as) had become seriously bruised.
After that, his devoted Shi'a, taking him under heavy protection, took
him to the governor's house at Madain where S'ad b. Mas'ood Saqafi was
his governor.

In this respect, the services of Amir Mukhtar (RA) were appreciable.
From what has been recorded in history that he talked to his Uncle S'ad
b. Mas'ood, saying that the Imam (as) may be handed over to Muawiya, was
in fact his wish to find out his uncle's intention and plans about the
Imam (as). S'ad b. Mas'ood called the best physicians for his treatment
which continued for many days. [^12]

Though Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had faced very severe incidents in his noble
life, yet this was a unique first and last incident of its type. At
least in Islamic history, no incident of this nature had occurred
earlier. In reliable historical records there is much difference of
opinion about the cause of the incident. We will discuss it in greater
detail in subsequent chapters.

The Imam (as) had neither become helpless against the conspiracies and
propaganda of Muawiya nor did he abandon the efforts to face him, yet
history does not record the details of the same. The fact is that Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as) was passing through a very difficult and complicated
Islamic period.

Many factors are likely to have caused the outward defeat of his army,
yet the main cause of it was that the Iraqi army was not completely
obedient to him. So it had not been able to carry out his commands
effectively. The leader of the faithful Hazrat â€˜Ali (as) had also
mentioned about their disobedience and rebellious activities, and had
mentioned a basic principle: "Whoever is not obeyed, has no opinion."
[^13]

Hazrat â€˜Ali (as) wanted to make it clear to the army at Kufa that the
main cause of their defeat was their disobedience. According to the
leader of the faithful, the armies that lack discipline never succeed
even if they have a great commander like Hazrat â€˜Ali b. Abi Talib
himself!

In the earlier chapters we have tried to analyse the political and
social conditions prevailing at Kufa so that the rebellious and
antagonistic attitude of Iraqis could be explained. However, it cannot
be denied that it needs a separate and thorough study.

The fact remains that at that particular period the Iraqis were in no
position to face the Syrian army. They had lost their senses,
enthusiasm, spirit and the zeal to fight. During the internal wars
starting with Basrah, they had lost all spirit. In his sermons Imam
Al-Mujtaba (as) had warned them to beware of rumours and propaganda by
Muawiya, but history has provided proof that as soon as any rumour was
spread, they would fall prey to it.

In this regard the following words of the Imam (as), as reproduced by
the historian Masudi, are very significant: "I warn you from listening
to Satan. Verily he is your enemy. If you would listen to him you would
be among those of his friends to whom he had said: â€œfor sure ... [^14]

This way you would be in the range of the enemy's swords and arrows and
would be badly injured and defeated. In such a situation, the faith of
no one would benefit him unless he had either been faithful earlier or
had earned virtue." [^15]  
 In such a situation a question arises whether such an army that would
try to assassinate its own leader and may not have the ability to
protect its own Imam and commander-in-chief, could be trusted to fight a
bloody war with the Syrian army?

The crisis beginning with the breach of trust by Ubaidullah had swept
the Iraqi army like a flood and had reached the peaceful areas of Syria,
but the conspiracies had not yet become exposed. From the time of the
murdurous attack on the Imam (as), his shifting to the governor house at
Madain, till his recovery, hardly any Iraqi officer was left who had not
made a deal with Muawiya.

The prominent Iraqi leaders had either joined the army of Muawiya, or
had agreed to support him while still remaining in the army of Imam
Hasan (as). They had also advised Muawiya to advance towards Madain and
had assured him that if he would march towards Madain, they would either
hand over Imam Hasan (as) to him or would themselves assassinate the
Imam (as). These intentions of theirs were not unknown to the Imam (as).
[^16]

The incident at Madain had a very adverse effect on the vanguard unit
which was involved in skirmishes with the Syrian army in a determined
manner and was performing its duty appreciably. Against all cunning and
trickery of Muawiya, Qais b. S'ad and his fellow soldiers had proved to
be a strong wall of defence and had not allowed the army of Muawiya to
advance even an inch.

However, as soon as they heard about the sad incident, it became
difficult for them to continue the war. It was the respected personality
of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) which was the main motivating force for the
soldiers of the vanguard unit who were determined to sacrifice their all
for him.

When the very life of the Imam (as) was endangered and he was
murderously attacked, then what was left for them to fight for? For that
very reason Qais b. S'ad was forced to stop the war and he got busy in
investigating the incident.

Meeting with the army officers
------------------------------

Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) had recuperated. He had thorough knowledge of the
changes that had occurred and had complete control over the latest
condition of the army. He knew about the secret plans of the officers of
his army and their negative intentions. On the other hand, he had
received the letter from Qais b. S'ad in which he had complained about
the desertion by the army commanders.

Anyhow, he ordered the prominent personalities in his army, officers and
leaders to assemble at the governor house at Madain and addressed them,
saying: "O men of Iraq! What action remains that you have not taken
against me! This is the letter from Qais b. S'ad. He writes that your
noble and respected men, by going to Muawiya, are giving allegiance to
him.

By God you have not done this today for the first time, but on a day in
Siffin also you had forced my father to accept 'arbitration' and when he
acceded to your demands, then you got divided among yourselves. Later,
he ordered you to start war against Syria afresh, but you adopted an
easygoing attitude till he breathed his last.

Subsequently you paid allegiance to me without any pressure on the
condition that you will fight whom I will fight and will make peace with
whom I will make peace. That is how I had marched for war with you all.
Almighty God is well aware of my intentions and my motive. But after
that see what you did to me!!

O people of Iraq! What I have seen and endured from you is enough. Now
do not deceive me any more in my religion as I intend handing over the
rule to Muawiya." [^17]

"O men of Iraq! even if other issues are ignored for the time being, yet
three of your actions are such which are sufficient for you to be set
aside: The assassination of my father, the murderous attack on me;
robbing my goods and belongings. [^18]  
 The address of Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) to the special group of the army is
very significant. If they had even the slighest disagreement with their
behaviour as analysed by the Imam (as), they would have protested
against the same. It was the limit of patience and humility of the
grandson of the Holy Prophet (saw) that even after witnessing so much
disobedience and breach of trust and bearing so much oppression, he
addressed them in such a manner.

He made it clear to them that they had been disobeying their caliph or
Imam since the period of Hazrat â€˜Ali (as). So, if now Imam Al-Mujtaba
(as) wanted to end the war by handing over the outward rule to Muawiya,
it were they who were responsible for the same.  
 After addressing the army officers and selected personalities, Imam
Hasan (as) went and addressed the army personnel at large as well.
Before accepting the peace offer, this sermon is very significant and
there are so many aspects in it for those who are interested in a deeper
study of the problem.

Imamâ€™s (as) sermon before peace
-------------------------------

We quote the sermon from authentic historical sources:

"By God, neither had we any doubt about fighting the Syrians nor did we
have any remorse, because it was we who had fought the Syrians with
confidence and humility. But enmity took the place of confidence and
uncertainty replaced patience. Earlier, when you were marching towards
Siffin, your religion dominated your worldly feelings, but today the
worldly benefits are upper most in your mind, over and above religion.

Beware that you have become divided between two types of slain persons -
one who were killed in Siffin and whom you are mourning, and the other
ones who were killed in Nahrwan, whose revenge you want to take. The
others have run away from war. However, the mourners of those killed
intend to fight on.

Beware, Muawiya has made us such an offer which is neither respectful
nor is it based on justice! So, if you decide to fight till death then
we will again attack Muawiya and force him, with the might of the sword,
to turn to the right path as commanded by Almighty God. But if you
choose worldly life, then we will accept his offer and get protection
for you."

Hearing this, the cry of 'life, life' was heard from all directions.
[^19]

So when the Imam (as) saw the low spirits of his companions and found
them unwilling to such an extent to fight, he sent Abdullah b. Haris b.
Noful b. Haras, the nephew of Muawiya, to him, and accepted the peace
offer. Though the above historical sermon of the Imam (as) was most
significant as he had also analyzed their moral and political
conditions, yet what is much more important is that the sermon had
clearly vindicated the stand taken by Imam Al-Mujtaba (as) about peace
and war.

History provides contradictory situations about peace and war but if
someone wants to study the true ideas of the Imam (as) about peace and
war, then he should concentrate on the above sermon. Imam (as) had shown
his firm determination to fight on despite the disobedience,
differences, treachery, many incidents, including the attack on his camp
and the murderous attack on himself, provided the soldiers were willing
to fight according to his command.

This means that whatever has been publicized about Imam Hasan (as)
himself wanting peace is not correct! The conclusion is that the true
Islamic caliph, the grandson of the Holy Prophet (saw), being the Imam,
did not deviate from the basic divine law which directs to fight the
rebellious group till they return to the right path as commanded by
Almighty Allah.

In accordance with this very firm Islamic law, his father had fought
with Muawiya and the Imam (as) also followed the same divine law step by
step till the end.

Thus he was not satisfied with peace with Muawiya and had made it clear
to the people that there was neither respect nor justice in it. However,
when they wanted to accept it despite this explanation, the Imam (as)
could not force them to fight on. So, he took the bitter pill of the
offer of peace by Muawiya.

[^1]: 1. Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', Beirut, vol. 2, p.446;
Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al Khamis', vol. 2, p.390; Hafiz Dhahabi,
'Al A'bar, vol. 1, pp.34-35; Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', vol 3, p. 166;
Ibn. S'd - 'al Tabaqaat al Kubra', vol. 8,p.76, under publica tion;
Dr.Abdus Salaam Tarmanini - 'Ahdaas al Tarikh al Islami', vol.1, p.420;
Abdul Aziz Salim - 'Tarikh al Daulatal Arabia,vol .2, p.337; Suyuti -
'Tarikh al Khulafa', Qum, p. 191; Husayn Muhammad Jafri - 'The Origins
and Early Development of Shia Islam', p.149; Husayn Dayar Bakri -
'Tarikh al Khamis', vol. 2, p.390; The references have been quoted under
No. 29; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin â€˜Ali', Najaf; Matba'
al Aadab', 1973, vol 2, p.245; For further information refer to Baqar
Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin â€˜Ali, vol. 2, p.405; Ibn. Atham -
'al Futuh', vol. 4, p.159; Taha Husayn - 'Islamiyat, al Fitnatul Kubra -
â€˜Ali-o-Nubuwah', p.979; 1Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', Beirut, Darut
Taâ€™aruf lil Mutboo'at, 1977, vol. 3, p.36.

[^2]: Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi, Beirut, Dar Sadir, 1960, vol. 2,
p.214.

[^3]: Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3, p.38; Yaqubi - 'Tarikh
al-Yaqubi', vol.2, p.214; Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulhul Hasan, p.147.

[^4]: Ibn. Abi al Hadid, â€˜Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghahâ€™, vol. 16, p.22; Ibn.
Atham - 'Al Futuh, Hyderabad: Daira al Maa'rif al Uthmania, 1971, vol.
4, p.157.

[^5]: Razi Ale Yasin - 'Sulh-ul Hasan', Qum, Manshuraat al Razi, 1994,
p.142

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi', vol.2, pp.214-215; Baqar Qarshi -
'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin â€˜Ali', vol 2, p.98; Abu Maskuya - 'Tajarib
al Ummum', Tehran, Dar Sarosh, 1987, vol. 1, p.386.

[^8]: Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4, p.156; Abul Faraj - 'Maqatil al
Talibin', vol.1, pp.42-43; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3,
pp.39-40; Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', Beirut: Dar Ahya ul
Turas, 1989, vol. 2 p.448; Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', Beirut: Darul
Kutub al Ilmiah 1988, vol 3, pp. 166-168; Ibn. Abi al Hadid, â€˜Sharh
al-Nahjul Balaghahâ€™, vol. 16, p.43. 10. Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh', vol. 4,
pp.156-157 and the previous reference.

[^9]:

[^10]: Yaqubi - 'Tarikh al-Yaqubi', Beirut, Dare Sadir, 1960, vol.2,
p.215; Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol. 3, p.40; Abul Faraj -
'Maqatil al Talibin', vol.1, p.43; Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh, Hyderabad:
Daira al Maa'rif al Uthmania, 1971, vol. 4, p.159; Hakim Naishapuri -
'Al Mustadrak al Sahihain', Beirut, Darul M'arifa, the book Marifatus
Sahaba, vol. 3, p.174; Ibn. Kathir, 'Al bidayah wal Nihaya', Beirut,
Maktaba al Ma'rif. 1974, vol.8, pp.17; Bukhari - 'Sahih Bukhari',
Beirut, Dar ul M'arifa, vol. 2, the book on 'Sulh' p.114.

[^11]: Husayn Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al-Khamis', Beirut, Muassasah
Shabaan, vol. 2 p.389; Ibn. Kathir - 'Al bidayah wal Nihaya', vol. 8,
p.14; Abdul Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq'le Ibn. Asakir,
Beirut, Darul Ahya al Turas, 1987, vol 4, p.223; Tabari - 'Tarikh
al-Tabari' (Al Rusul wal Mulook) vol. 3, p.165; Hafiz Dhahabi -
'Al'abar', Beirut, Darul Kutub al Ilmiah, vol. 1, p.35; Ibn. Athir - 'Al
Kamil fit Tarikh', vol.2, p.445; Ibn. Khaldun, â€˜Tarikh Ibn. Khaldunâ€™,
Beirut, Muassasah A'la mi, 1971, vol. 2, p. 186; Ibn. 'Asakir -
'Tarikh-e-Madinae Damishq', Tarjumatul Imam al Hasan, al Mahmudi's
research, Beirut, Muassasah Mahmudi. 1980, p.172; Abu Maskuya - 'Tajarib
al Ummum', Tehran, Dar Sarosh, 1987, vol.1, p.386; Ibn. Hajar Asqalani -
'Al Asabah fi Tamyiz al Sahaba; Suyuti, Tarikh al Khulafa,
Qum,Intisharat al Raza, 1411 A.H., p. 191; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Al Islam,
Beirut, Darul Kutub al Arabi, 1987, 'Ahde Khulfae Rashidin, p.6; Ibn.
Hajar - 'Al Usaba fe Tamayyaz al Sahaba, Egypt, Matba Musta fa Muhammad,
1939, vol. 1, p.329.

[^12]: Ibid, and Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad', Tehran,
Intisharat-e-Ilmiah, vol. 2 p.8; Ibn. 'Asam - 'Al Futuh, vol. 4,
pp.154-156; Hakim aishapuri - 'Al Mustadrak', Beirut, Dar ul M'arifa,
vol. 3, p.174; Ibn. Khaldun - 'Tarikh-e-Ibn. Khaldun', vol. 2, p.186;
Dinawari - 'Al Akhbar al Tiwal', Cairo, Dar Ahya al Kutub, 1960, p.217;
Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf' vol. 3, pp.35-36; Ibn. Sabbagh al Maliki -
'Al Fusol al Muhimmah', Najaf, Maktaba Darul Kutub, p.144; Abul Faraj -
'Maqatil al Talibin', Najaf, Maktaba al Haidariya, 1965, vol. 1, p.42;
Ibn. Abi al Hadid - â€˜Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghahâ€™ vol. 16, p.22; Masudi - '
Murawwij al Zahab', Beirut, Darul Fikr, 1989, vol. 3, p.

[^13]: Syed Razi - 'Nahjul Balaghah', Subhi Saleh and Faizul Islam's
compilation, sermon No. 27.

[^14]:

[^15]: Masudi - 'Muruj ad-Dhahab, 1989, vol. 3, p.10.

[^16]: Ibn. Sabbagh - â€˜al Fusul al Muhimmah', p.144; Baladhuri - 'Ansab
al Ashraf', vol. 3, p.39; Sheikh Mufid - 'Kitab al Irshad' , vol. 2,
pp.9-10; Ibn. Atham - 'Al Futuh, vol. 4, p.157; Tabrasi - 'Al Ihtijaj',
Manshurat al N'oman, 1966, vol. 2, pp.10-12; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al
Imam al Hasan bin â€˜Ali', vol. 2, pp.99-112.

[^17]: Baladhuri - 'Ansab al Ashraf', vol.3 p.39; Ibn. Atham - 'Al
Futuh', vol. 4, p.157; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al Hasan bin â€˜Ali',
vol. 2, p.127; Ibn. Abi al Hadid - â€˜Sharh al-Nahjul Balaghahâ€™, vol. 16,
p.22.

[^18]: Abu Maskuya - 'Tajarib al Ummum', Tehran, Dar Sarosh, 1987,
vol.1, p.338; Hafiz Dhahabi - 'Tarikh al Islam' Khulfa-e-Rashidin
period, p.7; Abdul Qadir Badran 'Tahzeeb-e-Tarikh-e-Damishq al KAbir',
vol.4, p.225; Ibn. 'Asakir - 'Tarikh-e-Madina-e-Damishq, tarjuma al Imam
al Hasan', p.183; Ibn. Athir - 'Al Kamil fit-Tarikh' vol. 2, p.46;
Tabari - 'Tarikh al Tabari', vol. 3, p.165; Dayar Bakri - 'Tarikh al
Khamis' p. 390; Masudi - â€˜Muruj ad Dhahabâ€™, vol.3, p.9.

[^19]: Tarikh-e-Ibn. Khaldun, vol.2 p.187; Hafiz Dhahabi, 'Tarikh Al
Islam', p.6; Ibn. Asakir - 'Tarikh Ibn. 'Asakir', al Mahmudi, p.178-9;
Abdul Qadir Badran, 'Tahzib Tarikhe Damishq', vol 4, p.225; Ibn. Athir -
'Al Kamil fi al Tarikh', vol. 2, p.447; Baqar Qarshi - 'Hayat al Imam al
Hasan bin â€˜Ali', vol 2, p.109.


