Introduction
============

"To Allah (Almighty God) we belong, and to Him is our return." (Qur'an
2:156)

Multitudes of men have walked on the surface of this Earth. They all
belonged to different nations and cultures. A few of them made history
for which they were remembered, whereas others were never to be
mentioned again. Although each one was personally different from
another - their habits, thinking and tastes differed - they all had two
(2) things in common, first, they were all delivered from their mothers
womb (birth) and second, they all tasted death. Who claims he has lived
a thousand years?

"The Sun travels to an appointed place. This is the decree of the
Mighty, the All-Knowing."(Qur'an 36:38)

Almighty God blesses us with all His gifts. The Sun gives us light
during the day to help us see and it helps our crops grow so that we can
eat. But the Sun also teaches us other things. The Almighty God causes
the day to die with its setting and allows the night to take over, which
is a time for rest.

In this way, He may be showing us that all of us will eventually have
to die just like the day. And when the Sun rises in the morning again
after our period of rest, it is as if Almighty God is telling us that we
too will be raised to life after we have died. These are all signs of
Almighty God to teach us to take care of our life.

One thing that we must remember is that death is
inevitable, and everything except the Almighty God
of course, will perish. Signs of death can be seen all around
us. At funerals we see people who were once walking
among us being buried in their graves. In the fall we see the
leaves turn from green to yellow and fall one at a time, and
in the winter we see trees, lifeless. In this way, all things in
this world will wither away and die.

According to an old fable, a man made an unusual agreement with Hazrat
Izraeel (pbuh) - the angel of death. He told Izraeel (pbuh) that he
would be willing to accompany him (as though he had a choice) only if
Izraeel (pbuh) would send him a notice well in advance. The agreement
was made. Weeks became months and the months into years.

One bitterly cold night, as the man sat alone thinking of his success
in life, Izraeel (pbuh) tapped on his shoulder. "You are here too soon"
the man cried out. "You sent no messenger.

I thought we had an agreement!" Izraeel (pbuh) whispered "Notice your
hair, once it was full and black, now it has streaks of silver in it!
Observe your face in the mirror and see the wrinkles. Yes! I have sent
many messages through the years! I have kept my part. I am sorry that
you are not ready for me but the order of Almighty God cannot be
averted!"

Hence, hair color turning gray from black or wrinkles on the face are
also the signs of nearing death, and the Almighty God is the only one
who can bring the dead back to life.

Surely all men die, and just surely Almighty God give them life with
His ability, and judges them on their deeds and actions. We know
Almighty God is the Creator and can recreate us, because if one can do
something he has the ability to do it again.

For instance, if your teacher asks you to draw a picture on the
blackboard and color it. Then if after ( 02 )

you have drawn it with beautiful colors, the teacher asks you to rub it
out and do it again, could you repeat the same drawing again?

Of course you would be able to repeat the picture. It is what you
created and are capable of doing again.

From this example, we can understand Almighty God is able to give life
to the dead because it is He Who created us in the beginning. Almighty
God can surely give life to the dead. He judges them on their deeds. On
Resurrection Day He will re-create the dead for judgment, and then allow
the doer of good to enter paradise but cast the evil-doer into hell.

Hatred towards death and love of the world is the outcome of an
ignorant person's mind, who thinks that the happiness of this world is
his prosperity and good fortune. The world beset with numerous troubles
and anxieties is about to end in misery and does not enjoy eternity,
perpetuity and sincerity. A poet has referred to this in the following
words - "Do not give your heart to this world, for its example is of an
unfaithful bride who has never loved you, even for a night.

"Imam Ali (pbuh) says: "If man will see how speedily his death is
coming toward him he willabhor ambitions and will give up admiring the
world."

It is of utmost importance that man should hold death dear and consider
it an opportunity of meeting with his Almighty, and not hate it and
consider it as evil, but should take lessons from it. He should ask
forgiveness from Almighty for his sins and tame the rebellious self
(Nafs). When the call of his Lord comes, he should welcome it with open
arms accepting it to be a blessing from Almighty. He should be contented
with the decree (Qadr) of Almighty.

He should also rejoice that shortly he would be taken to the presence
of Ahlul Bait [Household of Prophet] (pbut) and meet his deceased
companions and other believer brothers. He should also not be
disheartened by the delay in death but should consider it as an
opportunity afforded by Almighty to him to repent. This delay would give
him a chance to gather provisions useful for his journey to the other
world, for the journey is tiresome and full of dangerous valleys and
difficult paths.

In fact a believer always remembers death, since his or her main goal
is to reach the Almighty God. Hazrat Qasim (pbuh), the son of Imam Hasan
Al-Mujtaba (pbuh), when asked concerning death at Karbala, answered:
"death to me is sweeter than honey."

Therefore true believers, those who aresincerely devoted to the
Almighty God, anticipate death since to them it signifies the
long-awaited meeting with their creator.

During imprisonment, Imam Ali An-Naqi, Al-Hadi (pbuh) had a grave dug
up ready by the side of his prayer mat. Some visitors expressed concern
or surprise. The Imam explained, "In order to remember my end I keepthe
grave before my eyes."

Before a believer approaches the final moment of his/her life and death
overtakes him, it is necessary that he wakes up from the state of
negligence and prepares for the final everlasting place. This way he
will be able to avoid bewilderment and the fear of the so-called
untimely death.

At the time of leaving this world, as attested to by the Holy Qur'an, a
person will be in one of two states - either he will be of the
Companions of the Right, or the Companions of the Left (Refer Holy
Qur'an 56:7-56). If he is counted amongst the Companions of the Right,
he will be in a good, final state, but if he is one of the Companions of
the Left, he will be of those who have suffered a great loss ( 03 )

The Truth of the life of this world:

Once a man saw in his dream, that a Lion was chasing him! The man ran
to a Tree, climbed on to it and sat on a branch. He looked down and saw
that the Lion was still there waiting for him.

The man then looked to his side where the branch he was sitting on was
attached to the Tree and saw that two Rats were circling around and
eating the branch. One Rat was black and the other one was white. The
branch would fall on the ground very soon.

The man then looked below again with fear and discovered that a big
black Snake had come and settled directly under him. The Snake opened
its mouth right under the man so that he will fall into it.The man then
looked up to see if there was anything that he could hold on to. He saw
another branch with a Honeycomb. Drops of honey were falling from it.

The man wanted to taste one of the drops. So, he put his tongue out and
tasted one of the fallen drops of Honey. The Honey was amazing in taste.
So, he wanted to taste another drop. As he did, he got lost into the
sweetness of the Honey. Meanwhile, he forgot about the two Rats eating
his branch away, the Lion on the ground and the Snake that is sitting
right under him. After a while, he woke up from his sleep.

To get the meaning behind this dream, the man went to a pious scholar
of Islam. The scholar said: The Lion you saw is your Death. It always
chases you and goes wherever you go. The two Rats, one black and one
white, are the night and the day. Black one is the night and the white
one is the day. They circle around, coming one after another, to eat
your time as they take you closer to Death.

The big black Snake with a dark mouth is your Grave. It's there, just
waiting for you to fall into it. The Honeycomb is this world and the
sweet Honey is the luxuries of this world. We like to taste a drop of
the luxuries of this world but it's very sweet. Then we taste another
drop and yet another. Meanwhile, we get lost into it and we forget about
our time, we forget about our death and we forget about our graves.

Imam Ali (pbuh) says: "You are the game that death hunts. If you stand
still it will seize(catch) you. If you ran (flee) away it will overtake
you."

"What is the life of this world but play and amusement? But best is the
home in the hereafter, for those who are righteous. Will ye not then
understand?" (Qur'an 6:32)

**The Reality of "Departing from the World"
**
What is the reality of death? What is the philosophy of life and death?
For answering these questions, first of all, we must clarify our
perception regarding death, in other words, at the beginning we must see
how exactly death is and how we must visualize it.

Usually, most of the people are alarmed and fearful upon hearing the
word \`death', and to them, death appears dreadful and terrifying,
whereas, according to the Islamic ideology, this terminology or this
subject has a different appearance and can be perceived in a different
way. Basically it can be said that those who fear death, consider it to
be a negative entity.

According to this insight, death is an end of life and a moment of
everlasting separation of man with his life. They believe that with
death, the compounded substances of the body suffer a breakdown and
return to nature and man too, is nothing except this very broken-down
body. Hence, with death, everything ends with no hope remaining!

Indeed, with this view and insight, death is darker and more dreadful
than every other thing and perhaps, no calamity, pain, sorrow and
tragedy can be greater and more painful than the tragedy of death,
because death would mean the burial of all the desires, hopes, longings
and in short, the termination of all things for man - that man who loved
life and eternity very dearly.

Anyway, Islam does not possess such a dark and fear-instilling view of
death because according to the Islamic view, death is a positive entity.
The moment of death is a moment of rebirth of man and a moment of his
hastening out from a confined region of this world into a world, which
is wide, expansive and rapturous.

A world, wherein, man is not troubled by anxieties, sorrows and the
material and natural limitations. Of course, those who have habituated
themselves to worries and limitations must free themselves of such
habits. In other words, becoming free from the clutches of mother nature
entails some transient hardships but after that, in place of a confined
and dark place, man is taken into a world which is extensive, infinite
and full of luminosity and happiness.

According to this view, death is not annihilation but is inherent
fallout of one stage of progress and development of man. Similar to an
infant in the womb of the mother, which, after reaching a particular
stage of its development, just should not and cannot stay in the
confined and dark womb of the mother and obtain nourishment from her
blood, but must come out and continue its development in a more
extensive world.

Similarly, after a certain period, he should attain freedom from the
confined and limited world of nature and hasten to another world, which
is appropriate for his eternity-desiring soul.

In short, it is according to this view that life of man becomes
pleasant and sweet and his death too, not only does not become a means
of sorrow but also is regarded as an escape from the misfortunes,
sorrows and limitations. And if his death is like the death of the
champions and by his own choice and on the path of Truth and as a
result, can be called martyrdom,

then surely it will be more pleasant and more sweet, and in the moment
of death and departure from the world he shall experience such pleasure
that only the very righteous and the martyrs on the path of virtue and
piety have the knowledge of, and these are the very people who can taste
this pleasure. This is because, those pleasures cannot be described and
if ever described, does not possess the same pleasure (which is gained
by experiencing it).

The reality of death, according to the Holy Qur'an (32:11), is
\`Tawaffa' and not \`Faut'. \`Tawaffa' means

the angels commissioned to seize the soul of man, seize it and release
it from the captivity of the body and then transfer it to another world,
towards his Lord.

The Holy Prophet Mohammad (pbuh) has said: "You have not been created
to perish, but toremain forever. You only transfer from one home to
another when you die."

**Philosophy of Death:**

Why is it that man is created, and then after a certain period of time,
in which he lives in this world, departs from it? If death is total
annihilation and man after death becomes totally non-existent, this
question is propounded with greater seriousness, meaning that, according
to this assumption,

the probability of the creation of man being futile and the life being
vain and empty increases. But, in the event that we do not consider
death to be a \`negative entity' and define it to be a transfer or a
renewed birth, still the question arises and seeks its answer as to why
exactly do we come into the world and why exactly do we get transferred
from it?

This very question can be expressed in one of the two possible ways:

i) What aim did Almighty God or the Agent possess in creating His
creations, or in other words, what benefit does He wish to avail of by
the life and death of man and other creations?If the question is put up
in this form, it is necessary to state that the question and its answer
is not related to our discussion and it must be deliberated in a
discussion related and appropriate to it.

All we can say is that Almighty God is an Independent Entity, and He
avails of no benefit as a result of His creating His creations. Hence,
the exact answer for "Then why did He create?" is related to profound,
Gnostic topics.

ii) What purpose did Almighty God or the Agent have for his action? In
other words, Almighty God created His creations and among them man, that
they travel along which path and to where they reach or what goal they
follow? If the above question is expressed in this manner, we must say
that according to the Qur'anic verse, Almighty God created the heavens
and the creations so that they recognize Almighty God and worship Him:

"And I have not created the Jinn and the Men except that they worship
me." (Qur'an 51:56)

In the meaning that, all the creations must, in their journey for
perfection, reach a stage that they can, by means of man, become a
mirror for the Divine Attributes, because it is in this stage that the
worship and cognition of Almighty God can reach a stage which is
befitting it.

In short, Almighty God created His creations and amongst them, man so
that finally they reach the level of cognition of Almighty God and can
understand His Beautiful Attributes and manifest them within themselves,
because the real worship and cognizance of Almighty God can take the
creation and man to a position and status, the specialties and the
grandness of which must be referred to in gnostical topics.

So according to this view, the philosophy of life and death, which are
part of the creation of Almighty God, become clear. The life and death
and basically, the changes in the material world and the transfer from
one stage of life to another of it or the transfer from one world into
another world, all of these

play a part in the journey of man and the creations towards perfection.
Such changes or the ups and downs must be present, in the light of
which, people can be tested, and the pure are separated from the impure.
This is what, the Holy Qur'an says:

"Who created death and life that He may try you - which of you is best
in deeds; and He is Mighty and Forgiving."(Qur'an 67:2)

According to this verse, firstly, both life and death are part of the
creation of Almighty God. Thus, death is a thing which Almighty God has
created and hence cannot be a \`negative entity', because a negative
entity is not capable of being created.

Secondly, tests and trials are considered to be the philosophy of the
creation of life and death so that it can be known who is the most
righteous.

Of course, it should be known that this "test" is not in its literal
meaning that takes place on an appointed time and is taken from one
particular group or according to a pre-determined subject-matter, but it
possesses a very wide meaning. In other words, the tests and trials
here, encompass all the moments of the life and death of man, his ups
and downs during the span of his entire life, even during his transfer
into the next world and after that too.

Basically, these changes and transfers prepare the ground for the
development and progress of man. Similar to sportsmen, for whom, not
only their competition is a trial and a test, but the pre-competition
training is also considered as a form of test and these physic trials
and tests, help to prepare them for the original competition.

Life and death and the transfer of man from one world to another world
and also the bounties and at times the problems of life, according to
the verses of the Holy Qur'an, are trials and tests for man which
prepares him, stage by stage, for attaining his ultimate objective.

**\`Death'- according to the Holy Qur'an:**

In the Holy Qur'an, interesting and varied interpretations have been
made, regarding death, the study of all the aspects of which, shall
become very elaborate, hence we suffice by mentioning a few of the
beautiful and expressive interpretations, which have appeared in some of
the verses.

**1. Meeting with Almighty God
**
The Holy Qur'an, in the last verse of the Surah Kahf, has expressed
death as a meeting with Almighty God and says:

"So whoever desires to meet his Lord, he should do good deeds and not
associate anyone in the worship of his Lord." (Qur'an 18:110)

**2. Return to Almighty God**

Another interpretation which the Holy Qur'an has and which makes clear
the reality of death, is "return to Almighty God". However, the Islamic
philosophers, regarding the manner of the creation of the entities (and
amongst them, man) by Almighty God and after then, their return towards
Almighty God, have subtle, profound and interesting theories. The Holy
Qur'an says:

"Verily, we are Almighty God's and verily to Him shall we
return."(Qur'an 2:156)

**3. Seizing of the Soul**

One of the beautiful interpretations of the Holy Qur'an in the matter
of death is. This word means seizing a thing in its entirety. Hence,
according to the verse under consideration, the reality of death is that
the angels commissioned to take the soul, seize the entire personality
of man at the time of death, and remove it from the captivity of the
body. They, then carry it to the Divine Presence:

"Say: the Angel of Death who is given charge of you shall cause you to
die, and then to your Lord you shall be brought back." (Qur'an 32:11)

**\`Death' - according to the Traditions:**

The traditions also contain beautiful, subtle, instructive and
interesting interpretations regarding death, some which are mentioned.

**1. The bridge of crossing**

In some of the traditions, death has been referred to as a bridge, over
which people, at the time of transfer from this world to the other
world, shall cross and reach their goal, which is the other world. For
example, Imam Husayn (pbuh) on the day of \`Ashura', speaking to his
loyal companions said:

"Remain firm, O sons of noble people, because death is just a bridge
which will cross you and transfer you from discomforts and troubles,
into the extensive gardens of paradise. So which of you does not desire
his freedom from prison and entering into a castle. Of course, death for
your enemies is like their being transferred from a palace and a castle
into prison and torture."

Concerning this Prophet Jesus (Hazrat Esa) (pbuh) has said:

"Thisworld is like a bridge, cross it and do not build on it."

**2. Removal of clothes**

In some of the traditions, death has been compared to clothes, which of
course differs, with respect to a believer and an unbeliever. Death, for
a believer is like dirty clothes, which he removes and frees himself
from its dirtiness and unpleasant odor, whereas, death with respect to
an unbeliever is also like clothes, but beautiful, costly and
pleasant-smelling, which he must remove from his body at the time of
transfer to the other world.

**3. Sleep**

In some other traditions, death has been compared to sleep, in which
the soul goes out of the body. The only fundamental difference between
sleep and death is that the coming out of the soul from the body, at the
time of sleep, is only for a short period of time. In addition, the
connection between the body and the soul is not completely severed. On
the other hand, researches pertaining to the soul have proved that the
soul maintains a connection with the body in a very special manner.
While, at the time of death and after that, the severance of this
connection is more complete than that during sleep,

although, after death too, a weak connection does exist for a certain
period.

Another point is that the coming out of the soul at the time of death
continues up to the Universal Resurrection. This tradition says:Imam
Muhammad Baqir (pbuh) was questioned as to what is death? The Holy Imam
(pbuh) replied:

"Death is the very same sleep that comes to you every night. However
this is a sleep, which is very long, and man shall not wake up from it
until the Day of Judgment. Thus one who sees different types of pleasure
and happiness in his sleep over which he, (in his wakefulness) has no
power and similarly he sees the different types of fear-instilling
things, while he has no power over them. Thus, how is the state of
happiness and fear in the sleep? (The affairs shall be similarly so in
the state of death too). This is death. So be ready and prepared for
it."

Sayings on Death:

Holy Prophet Mohammed (pbuh) Says:

1. Most intellectual of man is he who remembers the death most.

2. One who gains the love and grace of Almighty Allah (swt), always
death (Ajal) will be before his eyes and he will be always worried about
his death. But the one who take Satan (Shaitan) as friend and becomes
evil doer (Bad-Bakht). Satan overpowers him and indulge (Giraftaar) him
in long long desires and then he never remembers death.

3. Somebody asked Holy Prophet (pbuh): How to gain reward of Shahid
(Martyr of Jang-e-Ohad). He replied, by remembering death twenty (20)
times in the day and night.

4. Remember the destroyer of pleasures. When asked what that was, he
(pbuh) replied, \`Death'.

Imam Ali (pbuh) Says:

1. How poor is the son of Adam, he knows not his length of days nor
understands his sickness. The sting of a flea will make him suffer, he
smelts of sweat and dies of cough.

2. Every breath is a step towards death.

3. It is truly surprising that someone forget death even as they watch
other dies.

4. The result of long life is disease and weakness.

5. Who leaves long will mourn (cries) on his friend.

Imam Hussain (pbuh) Says: "The children of Adam carry the mark of death
like necklaces that adorn the neck of a bride."


