Why Do We Fear Death?
=====================

The fear of death, for most of the people, is not a matter which
requires any evidence because it is totally obvious and we also see that
a lot of people manifest extra-ordinary sensitivity with respect to the
term \`death' and its reality. Thus the actual matter is self-evident.
That which requires proof and an answer is the reason for this fear and
alarm as to why we fear death?

**Reasons for the Fear of Death**

In answer to this question, it is possible to mention some reasons,
which have also appeared in our traditions, and which are as follows:

**1. Not having a correct insight**

In the previous discussions, we had mentioned that a lot of people
considered death to be an eternal destruction of themselves.
Consequently, it is but natural that they fear death and visualize it
dark and gloomy, because the love for permanence and eternity is one of
the natural instincts of people and each one in his own way, tries to
protect himself from calamities and diseases and ensure his own
permanence, and death, in his view, is greater and more pain-inflicting
than any disease or calamity, because it is the start of his everlasting
extinction.

Nevertheless, if the alarm and fear of death is as a result of
non-recognition of the reality of death, then for the removal of this
fear, it is vital that its reality, which is found in the Islamic
insight, be understood and with regard to it, a strong conviction be
developed. If a person bases his views regarding death on correct
foundations, many of his fears regarding death will cease to exist
because,

once he comprehends that with death, he shall enter into a world, more
extensive and eternal and also that he shall be liberated from the
material, natural and corporeal shackles, how then would he consider it
to be abominable and hateful.

**2. A new and an unfamiliar path**

One of the causes due to which man tends to fear death is that man,
after death, steps onto an entirely new path and embarks upon an
entirely new journey. Man, usually tends to travel on frightful paths,
over which he has traveled a number of times and has not encountered any
trouble, better than paths which are comparatively safer, but which are
totally new.

Since, the path being new and unfamiliar, it becomes reason for
hesitation and anxiety, especially since no one, who has traveled this
path, has brought any news about it, for the others.

Anyway, if the fear of death is due to the place and path being
unfamiliar, then it is necessary that the reality of death be completely
comprehended and one's conviction strengthened. In addition to this, it
is necessary to obtain the necessary information by means of the
Revelation and the traditions of the Infallible Imams (pbut) and the
righteous people, regarding the stages, places of danger and the other
particularities of death and after it, then believe in them and prepare
oneself to encounter them.

Just like a person, who during the course of a journey, finds himself
lonely and unaware of his whereabouts, manages to lessen his perplexity
with the help of necessary information, maps and equipment's, we too
must obtain the map of the way and the necessary information from
authentic and reliable sources.

In a tradition from Imam Ali ibn Muhammed (pbuh), it is narrated that
he (pbuh) approached one of

his companions who was sick and in a state of crying and grieving and
complaining due to fear of death. The Imam (pbuh) then addressed him
saying: "O servant of God, you fear death because you do not comprehend
it." Then the Imam (pbuh) presented an example and said: "If you had
become dirty, and due to the excess of dirt and dirtiness you were in
suffering and inconvenience,

and you knew that the cure for all this lay in your taking a shower,
would you wish to go to a bath and clean yourself or would you wish to
remain in the same state of dirtiness and as a result continue to
undergo the suffering." The sick man said, "Yes, I would wish to take
the shower." Then the Imam (pbuh) replied: "death (for you) is the very
same shower."

The point to be considered in the above tradition is that, the sick
person was one of the companions of the Imam (pbuh) and was aware of the
Islamic insight regarding death, but in spite of this, was intensely
fearful of death. And so, the Imam (pbuh) by presenting an example
explained to him the states and circumstances after death and thus
calmed him.

**3. Lack of preparation**

Some of the people have comprehended the reality of death and are also
aware of the Islamic insight regarding death. On the other hand, they
have also obtained some information regarding the stations and the
journey after death, however, in spite of all this, they still fear
death. This fear is not due to the two reasons previously mentioned but
because they have not made available for themselves the tools and things
necessary for this journey of theirs, while, on the contrary they have
been paying more-than-necessary importance to their present lives;

like a person who knows that he would have to spend the rest of his
life in another country, but has not collected any money for his
journey. Instead, all that he has gathered is in the form of house,
shop, land or other things which, presently, are neither capable of
being changed, nor transferred. In other words,

he has strived and worked and collected a capital, but the capital is
such that it cannot be transferred and there is also nobody who will buy
it. In short, it is not useful in any way for the objective, which he
had in mind. Someone asked Imam Hassan (pbuh): "Why are we reluctant to
die, why don't we like death?"

"Because", replied Imam Hassan (pbuh), "You ruined your next world and
developed thisone; naturally, you do not like to be transferred from
flourishing to decline."

This kind of fear of death, which results from the lack of preparedness
and the absence of the provisions of the journey usually occurs with the
believers, which in reality is not fear of death but instead, fear of
not possessing the sufficient provisions necessary for this journey.

Another point is that such a fear is usually mixed with eagerness.
Because, on the one hand, a believer is eager for the Divine meeting and
also for the companionship of the Righteous people. On the other hand,
due to lack of sufficient piety and the necessary provisions, finds
himself in a state of anxiety and fear, whereas the unbelievers do not
possess such a fear and eagerness.

They fear the actual death, because they consider it to be a complete
annihilation. Of course, it could be said that the fear of the
unbelievers could have a universal meaning, and the causes of it could
be those mentioned and also those not mentioned.

Nevertheless, death or transfer into another world is a universal law,
acceptance of which or fear of which shall create no change in the law
itself, and finally sooner or later, everyone shall taste the nectar or
the poison of death. That, which is more important than death, is the
preparation for it, and God willingly (Insha Allah); Almighty God shall
bestow such a success upon us as in the next story.


**The Clever King!**

There was a country long time ago where the people would change a king
every year. The person who would become the king had to agree to a
contract that he would be sent to an island after his one year of being
a king.

One king finished his term and it was time for him to go to the island
and live there. The people dressed him up in expensive clothes and put
him on an elephant and took him around the cities to say goodbye to all
the people. This was the moment of sadness for all the kings who ruled
for one year. After saying farewell, the people took the king with a
boat to the remote island and left him there.

On their way back, they discovered a ship that had sunk just recently.
They saw a young man who survived by holding on to a floating piece of
wood. As they needed a new king, they picked up the young man and took
him to their country. They requested him to be a king for a year. First
he refused but later he agreed to be a king. People told him about all
the rules and regulations and that how he will be sent to an island
after one year.

After three (3) days of being a king, he asked the ministers if they
could show him the island where all the other kings were sent. They
agreed and took him to the island. The island was covered with thick
jungles and sounds of vicious animals were heard coming out of them. The
king went little bit inside to check. Soon he discovered the dead bodies
of all the past kings. He understood that as soon as they were left in
the island, the animals came and killed them.

The king went back to the country and collected 100 strong workers. He
took them to the island and instructed them to clean the jungle, remove
all the deadly animals and cut down all the excess trees. He would visit
the island every month to see how the work was progressing. In the first
month, all the animals were removed and many trees were cut down.

In the second month, the whole island was cleaned out. The king then
told the workers to plant gardens in various parts of the island. He
also took with himself useful animals like chickens, ducks, birds,
goats, cows etc. In the third month, he ordered the workers to build big
houses and docking stations for ships. Over the months, the island
turned into a beautiful place.

The young king would wear simple clothes and spend very little from his
earnings as a king. He sent all the earnings to the island for storage.
When nine (9) months passed like this, the king called the ministers and
told them:

"I know that I have to go the island after one year, but I would like
to go there right now." But the ministers didn't agree to this and said
that he has to wait for another three (3) months to complete the year.

Three months passed and now it was a full year. The people dressed up
the young king and put him on an elephant to take him around the country
to say goodbye to others. However, this king is unusually happy to leave
the kingdom. People asked him, "All the other kings would cry at this
moment and why are you laughing?"

He replied, "Don't you know what the wise people say? They say that
when you came to this world as a baby, you were crying and everyone was
smiling. Live such a life that when you are dying, you will be smiling
and everyone around you will be crying. I have lived that life. While
all the other kings were lost into the luxuries of the kingdom, I always
thought about the future and planned for it. I turned the deadly island
into a beautiful abode for me where I can stay peacefully.

"The moral lesson from this story is about how we should live our life.
The life of this world is to prepare for the life hereafter. In this
life, we shouldn't get lost into the deceiving and attractive things of
this world and forget about what is to come in the afterlife. Rather,
even if we are kings, we should live a simple life like our beloved
Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) and save all our enjoyments for the hereafter.
May Almighty God make it easy for us. Amin.

Holy Qur'an urges us to prepare for tomorrow: "O ye who believe! Fear
Allah, and let every soullook to what (provision) He has sent forth for
the morrow. Yea, fear Allah: for Allah is well-acquainted with (all)
that ye do."(Qur'an 59:18)


**Prepare for Death. It can strike anytime at anyplace**

Holy Qur'an Says: "Verily the knowledge of the Hour is with Allah
(alone). It is He Whosends down rain, and He Who knows what is in the
wombs. Nor does any one know what it is that he will earn on the morrow:
Nor does any one know in what land he is to die. Verily with Allah is
full knowledge and He is acquainted (with all things)." (Qur'an 31:34)

Once the angel of death (Izraeel) (pbuh) appeared in the form of a
human being in the court of Prophet Solomon (Sulayman) (pbuh) and gazed
continuously at a person present there for some time. That person asked
Prophet Solomon (pbuh), "Who was that person?" He (pbuh) told him that,
that was the angel of death. He remarked: "The angel of death had gazed
at me in such a manner as if he had determined to take my life." Prophet
Solomon (pbuh) asked him, "What do you want?" He requested him to take
him to India.

He commanded the cloud to pick him up and drop him in India.
Consequently the cloud carried him to India. The angel of death came to
Prophet Solomon (pbuh) next day. Prophet Solomon (pbuh) asked him, "Why
did you fix your gaze at that person?" Angel of death replied: "I
wondered that the Almighty God had commanded me to take the life of this
person in India whereas he was sitting here in your presence."

Hence that person reached India, his prescribe place of death, from the
presence of Prophet Solomon (pbuh), so that the angel of death can
perform his job as ordered by Almighty God.

After some time, Prophet Solomon (pbuh), with the staff in his hand,
was viewing the kingdom around him, when he saw a young man approaching
him. He was surprised and asked him, "Who are you and who gave you
permission to enter the palace?"

The visitor replied: "I have come in with the permission of Almighty
God, the owner of the universe. I am the angel of death and Almighty God
has sent me to take your life away."

Prophet Solomon said: "Then allow me to go home to prepare for death
and rest on my bed." The Angel said: "No.

"While Prophet Solomon stood leaning on his staff, his soul left him.
His body remained standing for

such a long time that the people and the Jinn believed him to have
become a spirit or a magician. They carried on with the work entrusted
to them by Prophet Solomon, until Almighty God caused the Ants to eat
away the staff he was leaning on and his body fell to the ground.

**Before Time Runs Out:**

Man is on trial in this world. Here, everyone is being tested; if one
acts rightly, one will succeed in the trial of life. Neglect of the task
that lies before one is tantamount to failure. Those who do not strive
to succeed in the trial of life are doomed to failure, whether they like
it or not.

Man can be likened to an ice-vendor in this respect, one whose ice is
continually melting and who has to sell his merchandise before it all
dissolves. If he delays in selling the ice, then he will have nothing
left to sell; his capital and his profits will have vanished into thin
air.

This same principle applies to the life of man. Man is rapidly moving
towards a sorry end. There is only one thing he can do to avoid
disaster, and that is to put the time he has been allotted on earth to
the best possible use.

A successful ice-vendor is one who sells his ice before it has all
dissolved. Similarly a successful person is one who puts his life to
good use before it ends, and prepares for the life to come before it is
upon him.

**The Lesson of Death:**

Man desires life, but sooner or later, he has to come to terms with
death. Just as he is at the peak of his career, death comes and shatters
it all. Suddenly, he has to face a world for which he has made no
preparation.

Man aims at establishing his own glory on earth, but death comes and
demolishes all the delusions of grandeur which he had nurtured, teaching
him how powerless he is before death. Man wants to be his own lord and
master, but his helplessness in the hands of fate shows that he has no
control over his destiny. Man wants to satisfy his desires in this
world, but he is foiled by death, which constantly eludes him in this
world.

We must learn from death, for the secret of life is hidden in the
message it has to teach us. Death shows us that we are not our own
masters; that our stay on earth is only temporary; that the world is no
place for the realization of our dreams. Death teaches us how to live;
it shows us the way to real success.

**Doomsday:**

"This world is like a serpent, so soft to touch, but so full of lethal
poison. Unwise people are allured by it and drawn towards it, and wise
menpoison. Unwise people are allured by it and drawn towards it, and
wise menavoid it and keep away from its poisonous effects." Imam Ali
(pbuh)avoid it and keep away from its poisonous effects." Imam Ali
(pbuh).

People eat, drink and make merry in this world. They establish
themselves in comfortable homes. They seek to win promotion in life.
They believe or reject matters at will. They are free to do and say what
they like. They strive to excel in whatever department of life they
choose.

Man has been deluded by his worldly position. He thinks that what he
owns in this world will always

be his. He forgets that he is being put to the test by means of all the
power, which he wields in this ephemeral world. Nothing that he has will
last. Everything will be taken away from him. He will be stripped of
even the most basic of the worldly amenities he used to enjoy. He will
be brought before the Lord of the Universe to be judged.

All disparity between men will disappear on the "Day of Judgment." Fear
of God will seal everybody's tongue. Injustice will benefit no one;
truth will be inescapable. Man will stand alone, answerable for his
actions.

We must foresee the coming of that day before its arrival. Those who
fail to see it coming before it is upon them will have to pay dearly for
their shortsightedness. They will have to endure the punishment of hell
fire.


**Life's Journey**

Everyone's mind is full of hopes and ambitions. Everyone cherishes some
dream and lies to think that he is progressing towards the fulfillment
of that dream. Death puts paid to all his hopes and shows him that he
has been traveling towards the world of God, not the world of his own
fancies. The journey of his life is not destined to end in this world,
he is bound for eternity. How ignorant man is of his own fate. How
different from what he imagines his real destination.

Man spends his life ensuring that his children make the most of their
future, but he does not live to see the fruits of his efforts. Before
long he himself is forced to face future for which he has made no
preparation. Man strives to build himself a comfortable home, but death
comes between him and the enjoyment of which he dreamed. Man seeks to
enrich himself; he thinks that the more he earns, the more he will
advance in honor and prestige. But soon he has to come to terms with the
fact that he is bound for the desolation of the grave rather than the
honor and prestige of which he dreamed.

Man cannot do without ephemeral comforts. This obsession causes him to
deny the stark realities of life. If only he realized that his temporary
pleasures would soon be replaced by eternal torment then his attitude to
life would change radically.

**What Man should realize:**

Man thinks he is free to do and say what he likes in this world. He
accumulates wealth and thinks it will ensure his future security. He
wields power fearlessly, certain that it will never be taken away from
him. People are sure of themselves in this world they have no idea of
the fate that is in store for them. Eventually death will put paid to
the false security they feel in this world. They will be transported, in
a helpless state with dreadful suddenness to the next world.

No one can escape this fate. When death comes, we will realize, with
terror in our hearts, how wrong we had been about things in this world.
What seems real to us in this

world is, in fact, only a deception; the reality of things will only be
revealed to us after death.

A person's attitudes will suddenly change when he perceives reality.
"Lord", he will cry, "I thought I was free in the world, but my freedom
was only an illusion. I thought I was rich, but I have turned out to be
destitute. I considered myself powerful, but now I have been exposed for
the helpless creature that I was. I thought I had many friends in the
world, but they have all deserted me; there is no one to help me now."

This is what man should realize. But unfortunately man has forgotten
that this is the reality that is going to affect him more than
anything.

**The Three Friends:**

Once the Prophet of God, Hazrat Mohammed (pbuh) was sitting amidst his
Sahaba (Companions) in the mosque when all of a sudden he said: "Today I
shall narrate a story to you all which will reveal three riddles for all
of you to solve." This hushed the crowd and they all listened to what
the Holy Prophet had to say.

Hazrat Mohammed (pbuh) continued by saying that once a man got to know
that the days in his life was numbered and very soon he would be
confronted with death. With this knowledge he feared his loneliness in
the grave and went searching for true friends who would help and
accompany him.

He knocked on the door of his first friend and asked whether he would
help. To this the friend said, "of course, what are we here for." But
then the man went on to say that he had very few days to live after
which he required help. As soon as he uttered this statement, the friend
said: "I am sorry but when death does us apart, there is nothing we can
do for you but buy you a place in the graveyard and some cloth
(Kafan/Shroud) to cover your dead body." Grieved but looking forward to
his next friend, the man moved on.

On the second door, when he came face to face with his friend, and
after narrating the entire story of his death and asked for help, the
same answer was his fate again. The second friend said: "I have been
there with you all your life and can help you here. But there's nothing
I can do for you after you die except take your corpse to the graveyard
and bury you."

Lost in agony and despair, he headed for the third friend, very sure
that he would receive the same answer but there was a tinge of hope
left. When he confronted the third friend, and told him that he required
help, the friend eagerly volunteered to help. But the man continued to
say that I need help after I die. To which the third friend replied, "Do
not worry, my dear friend! I shall accompany you to the grave, be there
with you in the grave, even when the angels arrive for questioning
(Munkar-o-Nakeer), then assist you on the bridge (Pul-e-Sirat) and then
lead you to heaven." To this the man heaved a sigh of relief and then
passed away in peace.

The Prophet of God (pbuh) then turned and asked his companions if
anybody could identify the three friends and the man. When the
prevailing silence didn't dissolve, the Holy Prophet continued to say,
"The man in the anecdote is any other human being." The first friend is
"money/wealth", things that help us only in life and not after we die.

The second family/friend were the "children (sons and daughters)", we
strive for them all our life and

all they give us is a shoulder to the grave.

And the third and most important friend is "deeds (Aamal)." Who
accompany us all the way through.

Moral: Do not strive for materialistic values that will give you
nothing and help you in no way in youreternal life. But work and pray
and ask forgiveness from Almighty God for only the good deeds assist
mankind where every other thing loses value in the life hereafter!

Holy Prophet Mohammed (pbuh) Says:

1. "There are three friends of Human being - Wealth, Family and His
Deeds."
2. "Verily the love of this world is the root-cause of every evil"
3. "Who is most in danger?" Imam Sajjad (pbuh) replied: "The one who
does not regard theworld dangerous for himself."


