Jurisprudence (fiqh)
====================

Introduction
------------

The study of jurisprudence is one of the most extensive studies in
Islam. Its history is older than all the other Islamic studies. It has
been studied on a very wide scale throughout the whole of that time. So
many jurisprudents have appeared in Islam that their numbers cannot be
counted.

### The Word Jurisprudence (fiqh) in the Qur’an and the Traditions

The words *fiqh* and *tafaqquh*, both meaning "profound understanding",
have been often used in the Qur’an and in the Traditions. In the Holy
Qur’an we have been told:

**"*****Why should not a company from every group of them go forth to
gain profound understanding (*****tafaqquh*****) in religion and to warn
their people when they return to them, so that they may beware.*** **"
(9:122)**

In the Traditions, the Holy Prophet has told us: "Whoever from my nation
learns forty Traditions; God will raise him as a *faqih* (jurisprudent)
an *alim* (a man of '*ilm* or knowledge)."

We do not know for sure if the 'ulema and fuzala, the learned and
distinguished, of the Prophet's companions were called *fuqaha*
(jurisprudents), but it is certain that this name was applied to a group
since the time of those who had not witnessed the Prophet but had
witnessed those who had (*tabi'in*).

Seven of the tabi'in were called 'the seven jurisprudents'. The year 94
A.H. which was the year of the departure from this world of Imam Ali ibn
Husayn (d,) and the year in which Sa'id ibn Masib and Orwat ibn Zubayr
of the "seven jurisprudents" and Sa'id ibn Jabir and others of the
jurisprudents of Medina also passed away, was called the 'year of the
jurisprudents'. Thereafter the word *fuqaha* was gradually given to
those with knowledge of Islam, especially of the laws of Islam.

The holy Imams have repeatedly made use of these words. They have
commanded some of their companions to profound understanding
(*taffaqquh*) or have termed them as a master of jurisprudence or fuqaha
(the plural of *faqih*, a jurisprudent). The prominent pupils of the
Imams during that same period were known as Shi'ite fuqaha.

### The word jurisprudence (fiqh) in the terminology of the 'ulema

In the terminology of the Qur’an and the Sunnah, *fiqh* is the
extensive, profound knowledge of Islamic instructions and realities and
has no special relevance to any particular division. In the terminology
of the 'ulema, however, it gradually came to be especially applied to
the profound understanding of the Islamic laws. The 'ulema of Islam have
divided the Islamic teachings into three parts:

***First***, the realities and beliefs: the aim of which is awareness,
faith and certitude, and which are related to the heart and the mind,
containing issues like the issues related to the unseen past and the
unseen future, to Prophethood, revelation, angels and Imamate.

***Second***, morality and self-perfection: the goals of which are the
spiritual qualities of how to be and how not to be, containing issues
like cautiousness of God (*taqwa*), justice (*'idalat*), generosity,
courage, fortitude and patience (*sabr*) being satisfied and content
with God (*riza*) firmness on the true path (*istiqamat*) and so on.

***Third***, the laws and issues of actions: which is related to the
special external actions that human beings must perform and how the
actions they perform are to be and how they are not to be.

The jurisprudents of Islam have termed this last division, *fiqh*
(jurisprudence), perhaps from the viewpoint that since the early days of
Islam the laws were the most subject to attention and queries.
Therefore, those whose specialty was in this subject came to be known as
the fuqaha (jurisprudents).

### Two Types of Law

It is necessary that we mention some of the special terms of the
jurisprudents. Amongst these is the names of the two divisions the
jurisprudents have made of the Divine Laws: the laws of (human ) duty
(*hukm taklifi*) and the laws of (human) situations (*hukm waz'i*).

The laws of duty include those duties which contain obligation,
prohibition, desirability, undesirability, and, simple permissibility.

These five laws are termed as "the five laws" (*ahkam khamsah*).

The jurisprudents say that in the view of Islam no single action is
empty of one of these five laws. Either it is obligatory (*wajib*),
meaning that it must be done and must not be left undone, like the five
daily ritual prayers, or it is forbidden (*haram*), meaning that it must
not be performed and must be refrained from like lies, injustice,
drinking alcohol and such like; or it is desirable (*mustahab*) meaning
that it is good to do but leaving it undone is not a crime or sin,
including such things as praying in a mosque; or it is undesirable
(*makruh*), meaning that it is bad to do but if done no sin is
committed, like talking about worldly affairs in a mosque which is a
place of worship; or it is permissible (*mubah*), meaning that the doing
of it and the not doing of it are exactly equal, and this includes most
actions.

The laws regarding situation are not like the laws regarding duty. The
laws regarding duty consist of "do's" and "don'ts", commands and
prohibitions, or the giving of permissions, while the laws of situation
regard situations like marriage and ownership and the rights thereof.

### Types of Obligation

Another issue is that the obligations, the things that are obligatory,
are divided into many different classifications. Firstly, they are
divided into *ta'abbudi* and *tawassuli.*

*Ta'abbodi* means those things, the correct and valid performance of
which depends upon the intention (*niyyat*) of nearness of God. That is,
if the obligatory action is performed solely with the intention of
approaching the Divine without any worldly, material motive, it is
correct and valid, and if not, it is not valid. Prayer and fasting are
both "*wajib* *ta'abbudi*"

*Wajib tawassuli*, however, is that in which, even if performed,
imagine, without the intention of nearness to God, still the obligation
has been met and one's duty fulfilled. Obeying one's parents, for
example. Or the performance of responsibilities towards society, like if
a person undertakes to do a certain work in return for a certain
payment, the doing of that work. And, in fact, absolute loyalty to all
one's promises is the same way.

Another way in which the obligations are divided is into '*aini* and
*kafa'i*. An '*aini* obligation means that which is obligatory on each
and every individual, like prayer and fasting, and *kafa'i* obligation
is that which is obligatory on the general Muslim population, and which,
when performed by one or a group of them, is no longer obligatory on any
of them. Such types of obligation include the needs of the community
like the need for doctors, soldiers, judges, farmers, traders and so on.
In the same class is the burial procedures of deceased Muslims that the
general Muslim population is commanded to perform, which, when performed
by some, are no longer obligatory on any.

Another way the obligations are divided is into *t'ayini* and
*takhiyiri*. A *t'ayini* obligation is that a special specified thing
must be performed, like the daily prayers, fasting, *Hajj*, *khums*,
*zakat*, commanding to what is recognized as good (*amr bi m 'aruf)*,
struggle (*jihad*), etc.

A *takhiyiri* obligation on the other hand, means that the duty-bound is
to perform one thing out of two or several things. For example, if a
person has intentionally not fasted one day during the holy month of
*Ramazan*, it is a *takhiyiri* obligation for him either to free a
slave, or to feed sixty poor people or to fast consecutively for two
months.

Yet another way the obligations are divided is into *nafsi* and
*muqaddami*. A *nafsi* obligation means that the duty itself is the
concern of the Shari'ah, and it is for its own sake that it is demanded,
while a *muqaddami* obligation is obligatory for the sake of something
else.

For example, to save a respected person's life is obligatory but this
obligation is not a preparation for some other obligation. However, the
actions needed in preparation for saving him, such as acquiring a rope
or boat or other means of saving a person who, let us say, has fallen in
a river and cannot swim, are also obligatory, not for their own sakes
but as a preparation for a different obligation, the obligation of
saving the man's life.

Or, for example, the actions of the *Hajj* are themselves obligatory,
but the acquiring of a passport and ticket and the other preparations
are obligatory in preparation. Prayer is a *nafsi* obligation, while to
take *Wuzu* or *ghusl* or *tayammum* as their substitute in order to
enter the state of cleanliness necessary for the prayer are not
obligatory until the time of prayer has begun, and then not for
themselves, but as an obligatory preparation for the obligatory prayer.
Thus the *Hajj* and the ritual prayers are both *nafsi* obligations,
while acquiring a passport or taking ablution are *muqaddami*
obligations.

Brief History of Jurisprudence and Jurisprudents
------------------------------------------------

As we mentioned in the previous lessons, one of the preparations for
learning about any field of knowledge is to pay attention to the famous
personalities of that field, the views and ideas of whom were important,
and to its important books.

Jurisprudence, the jurisprudence in which books have been classified and
compiled that are still studied today, has a history of eleven hundred
years, meaning that for eleven centuries, without a break, centers for
the studying of jurisprudence and the related studies have existed.
Masters have trained students and those students in their turn have
trained other students, and this has continued down the ages until
today. Furthermore, this relationship between master and pupil has never
been broken.

Other fields, of course, like philosophy, logic, arithmetic and medicine
have been studied for far longer, and books exist on. these subjects
that are older than the books that exist on jurisprudence. Perhaps in
none of these subjects, however, can the guarding of the same kind of
ever-present relationship between master and pupil be shown that has
existed in jurisprudence. Even if such constant relationships existed in
other subjects, still they are particular to the fields of Islamic
studies. Only in the Islamic world does the system of teaching and
studying have a continuous uninterrupted history going back over a
thousand years.

### The Shi'ite Jurisprudents

We will begin the history of the Shi'ite jurisprudents from the period
of the Imam's "minor occultation" (260-320 A.H.), and this we will do
for two reasons:

***First***, the period previous to the "minor occultation" was the
period of the presence of the holy Imams, and in the period of their
presence, although there were jurisprudents and *mujtahid*s who were
able to make their own verdicts, who had been encouraged by the Imams to
do so, yet due to the presence of the Imams they were nevertheless
outshone by the brilliance of the Imams. That is, the referral of
problems to the verdicts of the jurisprudents is because of there being
no access to the Imams. In the period of the Imams' presence, however,
people tried as far as possible to refer to the original sources of the
Imams. Similarly, even the jurisprudents, bearing in mind distances and
other difficulties, used to place their own problems before the Imams
whenever they could.

***Second***, in the formal, classified jurisprudence, we are limited to
the period of the minor occultation, for none of the actual books in
jurisprudence from that period has reached us, or, if any have, I have
no information about it.

All the same, amongst the Shi'ites there were great jurisprudents during
the days of the holy Imams, whose value can become apparent and
determined by comparing them with the jurisprudents of their period from
other sects. The Sunni, ibn Nadin writes in his book Fihrist about
Husayn ibn Sa'id Ahwazi and his brother, both notable Shi'ite
jurisprudents, "They were the best of those of their time in knowledge
of jurisprudence, effects (i.e. writings and compilations) and talents,"
and, about 'Ali ibn Ibrahim Qumi he writes, "Amongst the 'ulema and
jurisprudents," and, about Muhammad ibn Hasan ibn Ahmad ibn Walid, "And
he has amongst books the book *Jam'e fil-fiqh*".

Apparently these books were compiled of traditions on the varying
subjects of jurisprudence that the compilers considered to be reliable,
and to which they acted in accordance, together with the comments of the
compilers.

The scholar Hilli, in the introduction to his book *M'utabar* wrote,
"Bearing in mind that our jurisprudents (God be pleased with them) are
many and their compilations numerous and to narrate the names of them
all is not possible, I will content myself with those who are the most
famous in merit, research and good selection, and with the books of
those paragons whose *ijtihad* is mentioned in other undoubtable books
as reliable.

"Those I will mention include, from the 'earlier' period (i.e. the
period of access to the Imams), Hassan ibn Mahboub, Ahmad ibn Ali Nasr
Bazanti, Husayn ibn Sa'id, Fadl ibn Shathan, Yunis ibn 'Abd ur-Rahman
and, from the later period, Muhammad ibn Babawayh Qumi (Shaykh Saduq),
and Muhammad ibn Y'aqub Kulayni and from the authors of verdicts
(fatwas) Ali ibn Babawayh Qumi, ibn Jamid Iskafi, ibn Ali 'Agil, Shaykh
Mufid, Syed Murtadha.'Alam ul Huda and Shaykh Tusi . . . "

Notice that although the first group are quoted as having their own
views and good selection and *ijtihad*, yet they are not mentioned as
being masters of verdicts.

This was because their books, even though they were the summaries of
their *ijtihad*, were in the form of collections of traditions and not
in the form of verdicts.

Now we will look at the history of Shi'ite jurisprudents, as I have
said, from the period of the Imam's occultation .

Ali ibn Babawayh Qumi, died in 329 A.H. buried in Qum. The father of
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Babawayh known as Shaykh Saduq, who is
buried near Tehran. The son was learned in Traditions, the father in
jurisprudence and compiled a book of his verdicts. Normally this father
and son are called Saduqayn.

'Ayashi Samarqandi, lived at the same time as Ali ibn Babawayh or a
little before. The author of a famous commentary of the Qur’an, though
his specialty was commentary, he is still numbered amongst the
jurisprudents. He wrote many books in different fields including
jurisprudence. Ibn Nadim writes that the books of this man were largely
available in Khorasan, but I have not yet seen his views related
anywhere, and his books on jurisprudence no longer exist.

'Ayashi was originally a Sunni Muslim but later became a Shi'ite. He
inherited vast wealth from his father, and this he spent on collecting
and copying books and on teaching and training his students.

Ibn Jamid-Iskafi, one of the teachers of Shaykh Mufid. It seems he
passed away in 381 A.H. and it is said that his books and writings
numbered fifty. His views have ever been subject to consideration in
jurisprudence and still are to this day.

Shaykh Mufid. His name was Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Naman. He was both
a mutakalam (theologian) and a jurisprudent. Ibn Nadim, in the section
of his book *Fihrist* in which he discusses Shi'ite mutakalamin, calls
him "ibn Mu'alim" and praises him. Born in 336 A.H. he passed away in
413. His famous book in jurisprudence, *Muqna'ah*, is still used today.

The son-in law of Shaykh Mufid, Abu Y'ala J'afari, tells us that Shaykh
Mufid slept little at night, and spent the rest in worship, study and
teaching or reciting the Qur’an.

Sayyid Murtadha, known as 'Alam ul Huda, born 355 A.H. and passed away
in 436 A.H. Allamah Hilli has called him the teacher of the Shi'ites of
the Imams. He was a master of ethics, theology and jurisprudence. His
views on jurisprudence are still studied by the jurisprudents of today.
He and his brother, Sayyid Razi the compiler of the *Nahj ul-balagha*,
both studied under Shaykh Mufid.

Brief History of Jurisprudence and JurisPrudents (2)
----------------------------------------------------

Shaykh Abu Ja’far Tusi, one of the shining stars of the Islamic world,
wrote many books on jurisprudence and the principles of jurisprudence,
Traditions, commentaries, theology and the transmitters. Originally from
Khorasan (in east Iran), he was born in 385 A.H. and after twenty-two
years emigrated to Baghdad which in those days was the great centre of
Islamic studies and culture. He stayed in Iraq the rest of his life and
after the demise of his teacher, Sayyid Murtadha, the directorship of
learning and the station of highest reference for verdicts (fatwas) was
transferred to him.

Shaykh Tusi remained for twelve more years in Baghdad but then, due to a
series of disturbances in which his house and library were ravaged, he
left for Najaf where he formed the famous scholastic centre which still
exists today. There, in the year 460 A.H., he passed away.

One of the books which were compiled about jurisprudence by Shaykh Tusi
was called *An-Nahayeh*, and was used as a textbook for religious
students. Another, *Masbut*, brought jurisprudence into a new stage and
was the most famous Shi'ite book of jurisprudence of its time. In
*Khelaf*, another of his books, he wrote about both the views of the
jurisprudents of the Sunni schools and also those of the Shi'ite
jurisprudents. He also wrote other books about jurisprudence, and, until
about a century ago, whenever the name Shaykh was mentioned the man
meant was Shaykh Tusi, and by Shaykhayn was meant Shaykh Tusi and Shaykh
Mufid. According to what has been related in some books, it seems the
daughters of Shaykh Tusi were also distinguished *faqih*at.[^1]

Ibn Idris Hilli, one of the distinguished Shi'ite 'ulema. He himself was
an Arab though Shaykh Tusi is counted as having been his maternal
grandfather. He is known for the freedom of his thought; he broke the
awe and reverence of his grandfather Shaykh Tusi and his criticisms of
the jurisprudents bordered on impertinence. He died in 598 A.H. at the
age of fifty-five.

Shaykh Abul-Qasim Ja’far ibn Hasan ibn Yahya ibn Sa'id Hilli, known as
Muhaqqeq Hilli. Author of many books about jurisprudence, amongst them:
*Sharay'e*, *Ma'arej*, *Al-Mukhtasar an-naf'i* and many others. He was
the student of ibn Idris Hilli, and the teacher of Allamah Hilli who we
are to speak about. In jurisprudence he has no superior. Whenever in the
terms of jurisprudence the word *muhaqqiq* is used it refers to him.
Great philosophers and mathematicians used to meet with him and used to
sit in his lessons of jurisprudence. The books of Muhaqqiq, especially
the book *Sharay'i*, has been a textbook for students and still is,
while his books have been subject to the commentaries of many other
jurisprudents.

Ibn Hasan ibn Yusef ibn Ali ibn Mutahhar Hilli, famous as Allamah Hilli,
one of the prodigies of the age. Books have been written by him about
jurisprudence, principles, theology, logic, philosophy, transmitters and
still other things. Around a hundred of his books have been recognized,
some of which, I like *Tathkurat ul-fuqaha* are alone enough to indicate
his genius. Allamah wrote many books on jurisprudence which have mostly,
like the books of Muhaqqiq, been commented on by the jurisprudents who
succeeded him. His famous books on jurisprudence include *Irshad*,
*Tabsaratol Muta'alemin*, *Qawa'id*, *Tahrir*, *Tathhorat-ul-fuqaha*,
*Mukhtalif ash-shia'* and *Mutaha*. He studied under various teachers:
jurisprudence under his paternal uncle, Muhaqqiq Hilli, philosophy under
Khawajeh Nasir ud-Din Tusi, and Sunni jurisprudence under the 'ulema of
the Sunnis. He was born in the year 648 A.H. and passed away in 726 A.H.

Muhammad ibn Makki, known as Shahid Awal ("the First Martyr"), one of
the great Shi'ite jurisprudents. He is of the rank of Muhaqqiq Hilli and
Allamah Hilli. He was from Jabal 'Amel, an area in today's south Lebanon
which is one of the oldest centers of Shi'ites and still is today a
Shi'ite area. Shahid Awal was born in 734 A.H., and, in 786 A.H.,
according to the fatwa of a jurisprudent from the Maliki sect which was
endorsed by a jurisprudent of the Shaf'i sect, he was martyred. He was a
pupil of the pupils of Allamah Hilli, amongst them Allamah's son, Fakhr
ul-Muhaqqeqin. The famous books of Shahid Awal on jurisprudence include
*Al-lum'ah* which he composed during the brief period he remained in
prison awaiting his martyrdom. Amazingly, this noble book was subject to
a commentary two centuries later by another great jurisprudent who
suffered the same fate as the author. He too was martyred and thus
became called Shahid ath-Thani ("The Second Martyr"). The famous book
*Sharh ul-lum'ah* which has been the primal textbook of the students of
jurisprudence ever since is the commentary of Shahid th-Thani. Other
books of Shahid Awal include *Durou*, *Thikra*, *Bayan*, *Alfiyeh* and
*Qawa'id*. All of the books of the First Martyr are amongst the
priceless writings of jurisprudence.

Shahid Awal came from a very distinguished family, and the generations
that succeeded him preserved this honor. He had three sons who were all
'ulema and jurisprudents, and his wife and daughter were likewise
jurisprudents.

Shaykh Ali ibn Abul ul-Ala Karaki, known as Muhaqqiq Karaki or Muhaqqiq
Thani. One of the Jabal 'Amal jurisprudents and one of the greatest of
the Shi'ite jurisprudents. He perfected his studies in Syria and Iraq
and then went to Iran and for the first time the position of Shaykh
ul-lslam went to Iran when it was entrusted to him. The order which the
ruling king of Iran (Shah Tahmaseb) wrote in Mutaqqiq Karaki's name in
which the king gave him complete control, declaring himself to be only
his agent, is famous. A well-known book that is often spoken of in
jurisprudence is Muhaqqiq Karaki's *Jam'i ul-Muqasid*, which is a
commentary on the *Qawa'id* of Allamah Hilli.

The arrival of Mutaqqiq Thani in Iran and his establishing a religious
university in Qazvin and then in Isfahan, together with his training of
outstanding pupils in jurisprudence, caused Iran for the first time
since the time of the Saduqayn to become a centre of Shi'ite
jurisprudence. He died between the years 937 A.H. a-nsl 941 A.H. He had
been the pupil of the pupil of Ibn Fahd Hilli, who had been the pupil of
the pupils of Shahid Awal, such as Fazlel Miqdad.

Shaykh Zayn ud-Din known as Shahid Thani, the "Second Martyr", was
another of the great Shi'ite jurisprudents. A master of several
sciences, he was from Jabal 'Amal and a descendant of a man called Saleh
who was a student of Allamah Hilli. Apparently Shahid Thani's family was
from Tus, and sometimes he would sign his name "At-Tusi Ash-Shami".

He was born in 911 A.H. and martyred in 966 A.H. He travelled widely and
experienced many teachers. He had been to Egypt, Syria, Hejaz,
Jerusalem, Iraq and Istanbul, and wherever he went he learnt. It has
been recorded that his Sunni teachers alone numbered twelve. Besides
jurisprudence and principles he was accomplished in philosophy, gnosis,
medicine and astronomy. Very pious and pure, his students wrote that he
used to carry wood at nights to support his household and, in the
mornings, sit and teach.

He compiled and wrote many books, the most famous of them in
jurisprudence being *Sharh lum'a*, his commentary on the *Lum'a* of
Shahid Awal. He was a pupil of Muhaqqiq Karaki (before Muhaqqiq migrated
to Iran), but Iran was one place that he himself never went to. The
author of M'alim which is about the Shi'ite 'ulema was Shahid Thani's
son.

Muhammad ibn Baqer ibn Muhammad Akmal Bahbahani, known as Wahid
Bahbahani, who came in the period after the fall of the Safavi dynasty
of Iran. After that overthrow, Isfahan was no longer the centre of
religion, and some of the 'ulema and jurisprudents, amongst them Sayyid
Sadr ud-Din Razawi Qumi, the teacher of Wahid Bahbahani, left Iran as
the result of the Afghan turmoil and went to the *atabat*, the holy
centers of Iraq.

Wahid Bahbahani made Karbala the new centre and there he tutored numbers
of outstanding pupils, many of them famous in their own right. Besides
this it was he who led the intellectual combat against the ideas of the
*akhbariyyin*, which in those days were extremely popular. His defeat of
the *akhbariyyin* and his raising of so many distinguished *mujtahid*s
has led to him being termed as "*Ustad ul-kul*" ("The General Teacher").
His virtue and piety was perfect and his students maintained profound
respect for him.

Shaykh Murtadha Ansari, a descendant of Jaber ibn Abdullah Ansari, one
of the great companions of the Holy Prophet himself. On a visit with his
father to the *atabat* of Iraq at the age of twenty, the 'ulema,
appreciating his genius, asked his father to let him stay. He remained
four years in Iraq and studied there under the leading teachers. Then,
due to a series of unpleasant events, he returned to his home. After two
years he went once more to Iraq, stayed for two years, and again
returned to Iran, this time deciding to benefit from the 'ulema in Iran.

He set off to visit Mashhad and on the way visited *Hajj* Mulla Ahmad
Nuraqi the author of the famous *Jam'i S'adat* in Kashan. This visit
became a long stay as he benefitted from the teachings of Mulla Ahmad in
Kashan for three years. He then went to Mashhad and stayed there for
five months. He also journeyed to Isfahan and to Burujerd in Iran and
the aim of all these trips was to learn from men of knowledge. Around
1202/3 A.H. he went for the last time to the *atabat* and began giving
lessons. After the decease of Shaykh Muhammad Hasan, he became
recognized as the sole authority for referral for verdicts.

Shaykh Ansari is called the *Khatim ul fuqiha walmuitahidin* (the seal
of the jurisprudents and the mujtahids). He was one of those who in the
precision and depth of his views have very few equals. Two of his books,
*Risa'il* and *Mukassib* are today's textbooks for (higher) religious
students, and many commentaries have been written on his books by later
'ulema. After Muhaqqiq Hilli and Allamah Hilli and Shahid Awal, Shaykh
Ansari is the first person whose books have been so regularly subject to
commentaries. He passed away in 1281 A.H., in Najaf where he is buried.

*Hajj* Mirza Muhammad Hasan Shirazi, known as Mirza Shirazi. His
preliminary studies took place in Isfahan and he then went to Najaf and
took part in the lessons of Shaykh Ansari and became one of the Shaykh's
leading and outstanding students. After Shaykh Ansari's demise, he
became the leading authority of the Shi'ite world, and he remained thus
until his demise about 23 years later. It was by means of this great
man's prohibition of tobacco that colonialism 's famous monopoly
agreement in Iran was broken.

*Hajj* Mirza Husayn Naini, one of the great jurisprudents and master of
principles of the fourteenth century Hijrat, a pupil of Mirza Shirazi,
who became a highly valuable teacher. His fame is mostly in Principles,
into which he introduced new views. Many of today's jurisprudents were
his pupils. He died in 1355 A.H. in Najaf. One of the books he wrote was
in Persian and was called *Tanaziyeh al-ameh* or *Hukumat dar Islam*,
which he wrote in defense of constitutional government and its roots in
Islam.

### Summary and Review

In total we have introduced sixteen of the faces of the recognized
jurisprudents from the time of the minor occultation until the end of
the 13th century Hijrat. We have only mentioned the jurisprudents that
in the world of jurisprudence and principles are very famous, whose
names and fame have been continually mentioned in lessons and books from
their own times until today. Of course, there are many other such names
we could have mentioned, but from those we have reviewed, certain points
became clear:

***First***, ever since the third century A.H., jurisprudence has had a
continuous existence. Throughout the whole of these eleven centuries,
schools have operated with no period of stand-still and the relationship
between teacher-student in all that time has never been severed. If we
start with my own teacher, the late great Ayatollah Burujerdi, we can
trace the line of his teachers back over a thousand years to the period
of the Imams. Such a constant chain seems to have existed in no culture
and civilization other than the Islamic one.

Of course, as we stated before, we did not appoint the third century to
begin with for the reason that Shi'ite jurisprudents began then, but
because the period previous to that period was the period of access to
the holy Imams, and during that time the brilliance of the Shi'ite
jurisprudents was always dimmed by the brilliance of the Imams, and the
jurisprudents had no independence of their own. Otherwise the beginnings
of *ijtihad* and jurisprudence amongst the Shi'ites and the composing of
books about jurisprudence occurred amongst the companions. The first
treatise on jurisprudence was written by Ali ibn Ali Raf'i who was the
brother of Abdullah ibn Abi Raf'i, the scribe and accountant of Amir ul
Muminin, Ali (*'a*) during the period of the Imam's caliphate.

***Second***, contrary to the perception of some, the Shi'ite sciences,
amongst them jurisprudence, have not been developed and systemized
solely by the 'ulema and jurisprudents of Iran. The 'ulema of Iran and
the 'ulema of other lands have both shared in this great work, and,
until the commencement of the tenth century and the emergence of the
Safavi dynasty, non-Iranians were predominant. It is only since the
middle of the Safavi period that predominance has been gained by
Iranians.

***Third***, likewise, the centre of jurisprudence and of the
jurisprudents has not always been Iran. At first Baghdad was the centre
of Shi'ite jurisprudence, and then, by the action of Shaykh Tusi, the
centre was transferred to Najaf. It was not long before Jabal 'Amal in
today's south Lebanon became the centre. Then Hilleh, a small town in
Iraq, and then for a while Halab, one of the districts of Syria. During
the time of the Safavids it was transferred to Isfahan, while at the
same time Najaf was revived by Muqaddas Ardebili and other greats and
still functions today.

Of the towns of Iran, it is only Qum that in the first centuries of
Islam, due to men like Ali ibn Babawayh, was a minor centre of
jurisprudence and the related studies while Baghdad was the main centre.
During the time of the Qajar dynasty, Qum was revived due to the efforts
of Abul Qasim Qumi and it was revived a second time in 1340 A.H. (i.e.
61 years before this translation) by the late Shaykh Abdul Karim Ha'iri
Yazdi, and today it is one of the two great centers of Shi'ite
jurisprudence.[^2]

***Fourth***, the jurisprudents of Jabal 'Amal played an important role
in the development of Safavi Iran. The Safavi dynasty, as we know, were
inclined to Sufism. Their path was originally based on the methods and
customs peculiar to Sufism. If they had not been corrected by the
profound and unchallengeable understanding of the jurisprudents of Jabal
'Amal, and if a profound centre of Islamic studies not been established
by those jurisprudents, things would have led in Iran to the same kind
of condition that now exists in Turkey and Syria.

This action of theirs had many effects. Firstly, the population and
government of Iran remained immune from that deviation, and, secondly,
Shi'ite Sufism likewise followed a more reasonable path. Thus, for
founding the religious university in Isfahan, the jurisprudents of Jabal
'Amal-Muhaqqiq Karaki and others - have a lot to be thanked for.

***Fifth***, as has been pointed out by others, Shi'ism in Jabal 'Amal
existed an age before it did in Iran, and this is one of the definite
proofs and reasons for rejecting the views of those who consider Shi'ism
to have been formed in Iran. Some believe that the Shi'ite penetration
into Lebanon was due to the great companion of the Prophet, the mujahid
Abuzar Ghaffari. During his stay in ancient Syria which included all or
part of present Lebanon, at the same time as stiffly opposing the
misappropriation of public wealth by Mu'awiyyah and the rest of Bani
Umayyid, Abuzar also used to propagate the holy platform of Shi'ism.

The Sections and Chapters of the Issues of Jurisprudence
--------------------------------------------------------

For us to form an acquaintance with jurisprudence it is necessary for us
to recognize its different sections. Previously we said that the range
of jurisprudence is extremely wide, for it contains all the subjects
related to all the actions about which Islam contains instructions.

The famous classification of today is the same classification first
introduced by Muhaqqiq Hilli in his *Sharay'i* and which Shahid Awal has
briefly commented on and explained in his *Qawa'id*. Amazingly the most
proficient of those who have composed commentaries of the book
*Sharay'i* amongst them Shahid Thani in his *Masalik*, made not the
slightest comment or explanation about the classification of Muhaqqiq,
and the First Shahid in *Lum'a* has not even followed Muhaqqiq's system

In any case, Muhaqqiq's classification is that all the issues of
jurisprudence are divided into four parts: worship, two-party contracts,
one-party contracts and (other) commands.

This division is based on the fact that the actions that must be
performed in accordance to the Shari'iah are either such that a
condition of their validity is the intention of nearness to God meaning
that they must be done solely for God and if there is any other
motivation for their performance the obligation is not fulfilled and
they must be done again, or they are not subject to this condition .

If they are of the first type, like prayer, fasting, *khums*, *zakat*,
*Hajj* and so on, they are termed in jurisprudence as worship
(*ibadat*).

If, however, they are of the second type and the intention of nearness
is not a condition of their validity, and, supposing that they are
performed with a different intention, are still correct and valid, then
they are of two types: either their actualization does not depend upon
the execution of a special contract or it does.

Acts that do not depend upon the execution of a special contract, like
inheritance, punishments, retribution and so on, are grouped together in
jurisprudence under the heading commands, (*ahkam*). If they do depend
upon the execution of a contract, then again they are of two types:
either the contract must be recited by two parties, or there is no need
for two parties and the contract is unilateral.

If they are of the first type, like selling, hire, and marriage, they
are called contract (*aqd*), in which one party states the contract and
the other agrees. If, however, one person can carry it out alone with no
need of another party like the changing of one's mind regarding one's
due, divorce and so on, it is called unilateral instigation.

In this classification all the sections of jurisprudence have been
divided into fifty two chapters. Ten chapters of worship, nineteen of
contracts, eleven of unilateral instigations and twelve chapters of
commands.

One point is not to remain unmentioned. In the first and second
centuries of Islam, the books of jurisprudence that were written were
related to one or a few of the subjects of jurisprudence, not about all
the subjects. For example, it is recorded that such and such a person
wrote a book about prayer and such and such a person a book about
marriage. For this reason, in later eras, when books about all the
issues of jurisprudence were written, the different chapters of
jurisprudence were all under the heading The Book. The custom is that
instead of writing The Chapter of the Ritual Prayer, or The Chapter of
the *Hajj*, we write, The Book of Ritual Prayer or the Book of *Hajj*.

Now, in the order first used by Muhaqqiq Hilli, we will look at the
different sections and chapters of the issues of jurisprudence.

### Worship

There are ten books of worship:

**The Book of Cleanliness** (*kitab ut-taharat*): Cleanliness is of two
kinds: being clean of external, non-inherent, material filth and
pollution; and being spiritually clean of inherent pollution. The first
type of cleanliness means the body, clothes and other things being clean
from the ten types of filth which include urine, feces, blood, sperm,
corpses and carcasses and so on and which are termed as *najasat*. The
second type of cleanliness means entering the state of purity by
performing the partial ablution, or total ablution or earth ablution,
that is a condition of certain forms of worship like prayer and
circumambulation of the Ka'ba and certain other things, and which is
annulled by a series of natural things like sleep, urination, sexual
intercourse and simple sperm discharge, and which must thereafter be
re-entered.

**The Book of Prayer** (*kitab us-salat*): In this book the obligatory
prayers, i.e. the five daily ritual prayers, the prayers of *'id ul
fitr* and *'id ul ahza*, the prayer for the deceased, the prayer of
special signs such as earthquakes and eclipses, etc. and the prayer of
the circumambulation of the Ka'ba; the *nafilah* prayers, i.e. the
desirable prayers such as the daily desirable prayers; the conditions,
preparations, essentials, preventions, delayers and annulers of prayer;
and the qualities of prayer, such as the prayer of a person at home and
the prayer of a person ruled as travelling, individual prayer and
congregational prayer, the prayer offered at the right time (*ida*) and
the prayer missed and made up for after its time (*qaza*), are all
discussed in detail.

**The Book of** *Zakat*: *Zakat* is a way of paying wealth that is
similar to a tax and which is due from nine things :gold, silver, wheat,
barley, dates, grapes, and animals of the cow family, animals of the
sheep family, and animals of the camel family. In jurisprudence the
conditions for *zakat* being due from these nine things; the amount of
*zakat* due; and the ways it is to be spent are all discussed and, from
the authentic sources and in the recognized ways, determined. In the
Qur’an, *zakat* is mostly mentioned along with prayer, hut only that it
is to be given and the ways it is to be spent has been explained; the
rest is known from the Sunnah .

**The Book of** **Khums:** *Khums*, like *zakat*, is a way of paying
wealth that resembles a tax. *Khums* means a fifth. In the view of the
'ulema of our Sunni brothers it is only a fifth of the spoils of war
that is to be transferred to the Bait ul-mal, or public treasury of
Islam, and it is to be spent for the public benefit. In the Shi'ite
view, however, spoils of war is just one of the things from which
*khums* must be paid. In addition, profits of mining, the finding of
buried treasure and of diving in the sea, wealth that is mixed with
illegitimate wealth when unable to discern the amount and/or the owner,
land that a *thimmi* kafir[^3] buys from a Muslim, and that which
exceeds one's yearly expenses from one's yearly earnings, must all be
divided into five and one of those fifths be given as *khums*. *Khums*
in the Shi'ite path of religion is the great budget that can secure the
important part of the budget of the state.

**The Book of Fasting** (*kitab us-sawm*): As we know, in a state of
fasting, one must refrain from eating and drinking, from sexual
intercourse, from immersing one's head in water, from breathing in dust
(even as far as the throat) and from certain other things. For one month
each lunar year, the blessed month of *Ramazan*, is obligatory for every
mature, sane person who is not ruled as an exception (like a ruled
traveler or a woman having her monthly period) to fast each day from
daybreak until sundown. Other than in the month of *Ramazan* fasting is
generally desirable. On the two festivals, fasting is forbidden, and on
certain other days, like the day of 'Ashura, it is undesirable
(*makruh*).

**The Book of Taking Seclusion** (*i'tikaf*): This literally means "to
reside in a specified place" In the terminology of jurisprudence,
however, it means a type of worship whereby a person resides in a mosque
for three days or more, not setting foot out of the mosque, and fasting
each day. This has laws and conditions that are determined in
jurisprudence. In its essence *i'tikaf* is desirable, not obligatory,
but if it is begun and kept up for two days, the third day becomes
obligatory. I'tikaf is to be performed in the Masjid ul-*Haram* in Mecca
or the Masjid un-Nabi in Medina, or in the masjid of Kufa in Iraq or the
masjid of Basreh in Iraq, or at least in the major masjid of a city.
*I'tikaf* in minor masjids is not permissible. The Holy Prophet used to
perform *i'tikaf* during the final days of the month of *Ramazan*.

**The Book of** **Hajj:** *Hajj* is that famous act of worship performed
in Mecca and the outskirts of Mecca that is normally linked to '*umrah*.
The performance of the *Hajj* consists of binding *ihram*[^4] upon
oneself in Mecca, a stay in 'Arafat, a stay for a night in Mash'ar, the
symbolic ceremony of throwing stones at the furthest (of three)
boulders, the sacrifice, the shaving of the head for men and the cutting
of a few curls for women, circumambulation (walking seven times around
the Holy Ka'ba), the prayer of the circumambulation, the walking of
seven times between the two hills of Safa and Marwah, the final
circumambulation, the prayer of the final circumambulation, throwing
stones at (all three of) the boulders, and the night stays at Mina.

**The Book of** **Umrah:** *Umrah* is a kind of lesser Pilgrimage.
Normally it is obligatory for those about to perform the *Hajj* to
perform the *Hajj* '*Umrah* first. The actions of '*umrah* are as
follows:

Binding "*ihram*" on oneself at one of the special places (*mi'qat*);
circumambulation; the prayer of circumambulation; walking seven times
between Safa and Marwa; and, finally, the cutting of a few hairs or a
fingernail or toe nail.

**The Book of** **Jihad:** This book deals with the issues concerning
Islamic warfare. Islam is a religion of society and community and of the
responsibilities of society, and for this reason it includes a law of
jihad. There are two types of jihad: *ibtida'i* (to be begun by Muslims)
and *defa'i* (defensive). In the view of Shi'ite jurisprudence,
*ibteda'i* jihad can only take shape under the direction of the Holy
Prophet or one of the twelve immaculate and perfect Imams, otherwise it
is forbidden. This type of jihad is obligatory only on men, but the
other jihad, the jihad of defense, is obligatory on both men and women
whenever the conditions demand it.

In the same way, jihad can be either internal or external. If some of
the people for whom obedience to the Imam is obligatory rise up against
him, just as the Khawarij at Nahrawan and other places, Talha and Zubayr
at the battle of Jamal and Mu'awiyyah and his companies at Siffin all
rose up against Amir ul-Muminin, Ali, internal jihad is also obligatory
against them.

In jurisprudence, the laws of jihad and of *thimmeh*, the conditions for
allowing non-Muslims to live in the Islamic state as citizens of the
state, and of peace between the Islamic state and non-Islamic states are
all discussed in detail.

**The Book Commending to what is Recognized:-as good-and Prohibiting
from what is Rejected-as bad** (*amr bi m 'aruf wa nahyan al-munkar*):
Because Islam is a religion of society and of the responsibilities of
society, and sees its orderly environment as the essential condition for
the enaction of its heavenly programs and the bestowing of prosperity
and fulfillment, it has brought into existence a shared general
responsibility. We are all duty-bound to be guardians of virtue and
goodness, and to combat evils and wrongs. The guarding of virtue and
goodness is named *amr* *bi m'aruf* and the combating of evil and
wrongs, *nahyan al-munkar*. The conditions attached to these duties and
their stipulations and regulations are all stated in jurisprudence.

Here, our concise glimpse at the ten parts of the section of worship
comes to an end, and it is now the turn of the contracts.

Contracts ('oqud)
-----------------

The second section, according to our classification, consists of the
contracts and includes nineteen books:

### The Book of Buying and Selling (kitab ul-bay'i)

This book deals with buying and selling, the conditions which the two
parties (the buyer and seller) must meet, the conditions of the two
commodities exchanged, the conditions of the contract and the type of
transaction: cash transactions; *nisiyah* transactions which are
transactions wherein a commodity is given cash and the payment after a
period and *salaf* transactions which are the opposite of *nisiyah*
transactions, i.e. a sale wherein payment is immediate and the commodity
is not put at the buyers disposal until after a period.

Transactions wherein both the payment and the product are to be
exchanged after a period are null and void. Similarly, in the chapter of
selling, advantageous transfers, disadvantageous transfers and advantage
less transfers are also discussed.

What is meant by advantageous transfer (*marabihah*) here is that a
person makes a transaction and then, after having made some profit,
transfers it to someone else. A disadvantageous transfer (*muwadah*) is
the opposite, meaning a transaction which, after having suffered some
loss and damage, is transferred to someone else. And what is meant by an
advantage less transfer (*tuwliyah*) is that a transaction is
transferred to someone else having made no profit nor having suffered
any loss.

### The Book "Rahn".

*Rahn* means mortgage. In this book of jurisprudence the laws of
mortgaging are studied.

### The Book of the Bankrupt (muflis)

*Muflis* means "the bankrupt", i.e. a person whose holdings do not meet
his liabilities. In order to investigate the liabilities of such a
person, the Hakim-Shari'ah i.e. a *mujtahid*, can prohibit him from the
right to his possessions until an exact investigation is made and as far
as possible the liabilities be paid.

### The Book of Prohibition (hajr)

*Hajr* means prohibition. What is meant is the prohibition of making use
of property. In many cases, the use of property by the original owner is
prohibited. As we have seen, the bankrupt is one instance. Another is an
immature child (i.e. a girl under nine or a boy under fifteen). The
insane, the person sane in other ways but who always spends his money
foolishly like spending all his money on clothes when he is desperately
in need of food, are other instances.

### The Book of Liability (diman)

Liability is that a person accepts the liability of another person's
debts. There exists a difference between Shi'ite jurisprudents and the
jurisprudents of our Sunni brothers about the reality of liability. In
the view of Shi'ite jurisprudents *diman* is the transference of the
obligation of a debt from the debtor to a party that accepts liability,
and is only valid with the consent of the creditor, and in Shi'ite
jurisprudence, once the liability has been transferred, the creditor has
no longer the right to seek it from the person who has made himself
liable.

Of course, if the liability was urged on the liable by the debtor, then,
once he has cleared the debt, the liable can take that amount from the
first debtor. In the view of Sunni jurisprudence, however, it is the
annexing of the obligation of the debt onto someone else, who also
becomes obliged to repay the debt. Which means that after the contract
of liability, the creditor has both the right to seek the debt from the
original debtor and also from the person who has made himself liable.

Sometimes two other chapters, *hawalih* (another kind of liability) and
*kafalah* (a kind of bail system) are also included in this book.

### The Book of Peace (sulh)

The *sulh* (peace) that is studied in this book is different from the
*sulh* that is studied in the book of jihad. Sulh in the book of jihad
means "political agreements", whereas the Book of Peace concerns
property affairs and common rights. For example, if a debt is owed
without the amount of the debt being precisely known, the two parties
make a *sulh* agreement and settle on a specified sum. *Sulh* agreements
generally occur as a settlement for arguments and disagreements.

### The Book of Partnerships (sharikat)

Sharikat is that a property or a right belongs to more than one person.
For example, if some brothers inherit their father's property, then, for
as long as they do not divide it, they are partners in that property.

Or, for example, two people together buy an automobile or a house or a
piece of land. Or it may happen that a group of people together take
possession of a piece of land that belongs to no one by reclaiming, say,
and restoring a part of a desert or marshland. Furthermore, a
partnership is sometimes accidentally forced on someone, like, for
example, when the wheat of two farmers accidentally becomes mixed and to
separate the wheat of one from the wheat of the other is not possible.

There are two types of partnership existing in Islam, contractual
partnership and non-contractual. The examples previously cited were
non-contracted partnerships. A contractual partnership is that two
people or a group of people by an agreement, compact and contract, form
what in English is called a company, such as a trading company, a
farming company or an industrial company. Contractual partnerships or
companies are subject to many laws which are still studied in
jurisprudence. In the Book of Partnerships the laws of profit sharing
are also discussed.

### The Book of the Partnership of Capital and Labor (mudarabah)

A *mudarabah* is a kind of contractual partnership, but not a
partnership of two or more investors. Rather it is a partnership of
capital and labor, meaning that one or more partners provide the capital
for a trading business and one or more partners provide the labor of the
actual trading. Firstly the partners must be in concord as to the
division of profits, and then the contract of *mudarabah* is to be
executed, or must at least be formed in practice.

### The Book of Agricultural Partnerships (mazaro'at and musaqat)

*Mazara'at* and *musaqat* are two more types of partnership. They are
like *mudarabah*, which we have just mentioned, in that they are both
types of partnerships between capital and labor. The difference is that
*mudarabah* is relevant to trading whereas *muzara'at* is for farming.
The meaning of this is that the owner of land and water makes an
agreement with someone else who does the actual farming and they are in
concord as to the specified proportion of each party in the division of
the profits.

Likewise, *musaqat* is for the affairs of orchards. This means that the
owner of fruit trees concludes an agreement with someone else who
becomes responsible for all the work involved in looking after those
trees, such as watering them and all the other things effective in fruit
production, and, according to the specified proportion they agree upon
in the actual agreement, both investor and worker take their share of
the profits.

Here there is a point that wish to mention, which is that in
partnerships between capital and labor, whether *mardarabah* agreements
or *mazara'at* or *musaqat*, any kind of harm or loss the capital is
subject to is born by the owner of the capital, the investor. And,
likewise, there is also no certainty of making a profit on the capital,
meaning that it is possible a profit will be returned, and it is
possible that a profit will not be returned.

The only profit that is returned to the owner of the capital is in
accordance to the profit made by the partnerships and to his specified
proportion of those profits. Here it is that the financer, just like the
worker, might make no profit, and it is even possible that he may lose
his capital and even become bankrupt.

In the world of today, however, even in most parts of the Muslim world,
bankers put their aims into practice by means of usury and as a result
they receive a specified profit in all circumstances, whatever the types
of concern they finance. Should one of the concerns that they have
financed return a loss instead of a profit, the manager of that concern
is absolutely obliged to return the banker's profit, even if he has to
sell his house.

Likewise, in the system of most of today's world, the financer never
goes bankrupt; on the basis of the system of usury the financer has
entrusted his capital to the hands of the manager, which the manager has
to repay many times over, and whatever happens the banker demands that
profit, even if the capital has suffered a misfortune or even been lost.

In Islam, profiting from capital in the form of usury, i.e. the action
of lending money and demanding the repayment of the loan whatever the
circumstances with an addition of an amount of profit is strictly and
severely prohibited .

### The Book of Trusts (wadiy'ah)

*Wadiy'ah*, or trust, means the entrusting of property with someone and
making that person one's agent in keeping and safe-guarding it. This in
turn creates duties for the trustee and, if the property suffers or is
lost, and the trustee has performed and observed those duties, he is not
liable.

### The Book of Lending (ariyah)

*Ariyah* is that a person receives the property of a second person in
order to benefit from its benefits. *Ariyah* and *wadiy'ah* are two
types of trusts, but in *wadiy'ah* the owner entrusts his property to be
kept and safe-guarded and without his permission the trustee has no
right to make use of it in any way. *Ariyah*, however, is that the owner
from the very beginning gives it to the other for him to use and then
return.

### The Book of Hire (ijareh)

In Islam there are two types of hire, either it is that a person cedes
the benefit of his property to another in return for an amount of money
which is called "the money of hire" (*mal-ijareh*), such as the normal
practices of hiring out one's house or car; or it is that a person hires
himself and, in the terms of jurisprudence, becomes *ajir*; which means
that he makes an understanding that in return for carrying out a special
work, like repairing a pair of shoes, cutting a person's hair, or
building his house and so on, he will receive a wage. or payment.

Hire is similar to buying and selling in as far as both involve an
exchange. The difference is that in buying and selling the exchange is
of a thing and money, while in hire the exchange is of the benefit of a
thing and money. Hire also has an aspect in common with *'ariyah* in
that both the hirer and the *'ariyah* trustee make use of a benefit, the
difference being that the hirer, having paid the price of the hire, is
the owner of the benefit, while the *'ariyah* trustee is not the owner
of the benefit, he only has the right to make use of it.

### The Book of Representatives (wakalah)

Sometimes it occurs that one needs to have a representative for those
works which demand a contract. Marriage and divorce are good examples,
for the contracts of marriage and divorce must be verbally recited in
correct and valid Arabic the person who is represented is called the
*muwakkil* and the representative is called the *wakil*, while the act
of representation itself is called *takwil*.

### The Book of Endowments and Charity (waqf and sadaqat)

An endowment is that which a person sets aside from his property for a
special use. In defining *waqf* it has been said that it means
safe-guarding the original article of *waqf*, making it
un-transferrable, while freeing its benefits. About whether an intention
of *qorbat,* of nearness to God, is a condition of *waqf* or not there
is a difference of opinion. The fact that it is included in this section
is because Muhaqqiq Hilli did not consider the intention of *qorbat* to
be an essential condition. In any case, there are two types of *waqf*,
general\\ *waqf*, and special *waqf*. Both these and the commands of
charity are discussed in detail.

### The Book of Temporary Endowments (sukna and habs)

*Sukna* and *habs* are similar to *waqf* with the difference that in
*waqf* the original property or wealth is guarded forever and there is
no longer any possibility of it being someone's property, whereas *habs*
is that a person designates the benefits of his property for a specified
period to be spent in a charitable way, and after that period it again
becomes his personal property. *Sukna* however, is that a person
designates a dwelling for the use of a poor, deserving person for a
period and at the end of that period it becomes exactly the same as the
owner's other property .

### The Book of Giving (hebat)

One of the effects of ownership is that one has the right to give one's
property to others. Giving is of two types: "in exchange" and "not in
exchange". Not in Exchange means that in return for one's gift one
receives nothing in return. Giving in Exchange, however, means that one
receives something in return for one's gift. Something given in exchange
is not retrievable, i.e. it cannot be taken back. When something is
given not in exchange, however, if it is given between the mahram
members of a family, or if the gift itself is lost or broken, it cannot
be taken back, otherwise it can, and the giver can nullify the
transaction.

### The Book of Wagers (sabq and rimayah)

*Sabq* and *rimayah* are two forms of betting agreement between the
competitors of horse races, camel races or shooting competitions. *Sabq*
and *rimayah* are forms of gambling, yet, because they are for
practicing the martial arts necessary for jihad, they have been counted
by Islam as permissible encouragement for the actual participants. Of
course, this permission does not extend to other than the participants.

### The Book of Wills (wasiyat)

This book is related to the enjoinments that a person wills to be
performed after his death regarding his wealth or his children, whose
guardian he is. Each person has the right to appoint a person as his
executor (*wasi*) to be the guardian of minors amongst his children
after his death; to supervise their education and other affairs. In the
same way, each person also has the right to have spent after his death
up to a third of his wealth in accordance with the stipulations he makes
in his will.

### The Book of Marriage (nikah)

First the conditions of the actual contract are discussed, such as the
*muharam*, the people for whom to marry each other is forbidden, such as
father and daughter, mother and son, brother and sister, and so on. The
two types of marriage are included: permanent and temporary.
Disobedience to the husband by the wife and the ill-treating of the wife
by the husband and the obligation of the man of the house to
economically provide for his wife and children are part of this book.
There are a few other issues that are also discussed.

Unilateral Instigations (iyqa'at)
---------------------------------

This part, according to the classification we are following, consists of
*iyqa'at*, which, as has been explained, are the actions in need of a
contract, but not of a two sided contract; a unilateral contract is
enough. There are fifteen of these:

### The Book of Divorce (talaq)

Divorce here means the cancelling of the marriage compact by the
husband. Divorce is either *ba'in* or *raj'i*. Ba'in is the kind of
divorce wherein the man has no right to return to the woman. A *raj'i*
divorce is that in which the man can return. What this means is that for
as long as the woman's special period of restraint (*'iddah*) has not
come to an end, the man can return to the woman and thus nullify the
divorce.

A divorce is a *ba'in* divorce either because the wife has no *'iddah*,
like a divorced woman with whom the husband has not had sexual
intercourse, or a woman who has reached the age of menopause, or
because, even though the woman must keep *'iddah*, the nature of the
divorce disqualifies the man's right to return, like the third
consecutive divorce of that couple, in which case, until she marries
someone else who has sexual intercourse with her and then himself dies
or divorces her and she keeps another *'iddah*, the first husband cannot
re-marry her.

It is a condition of divorce firstly that, at the time of the divorce,
the woman is clean of her monthly period. Secondly, there must be two
just witnesses present when the contract of divorce is recited. Divorce
is divinely detested. The Prophet of God tells us :"The most-detested
permissible (thing) before God is divorce".

### The Book of Divorce Wholly or Partly Instigated by the Wife (khul'a and mabarat)

*Khul'a* and *mabarat* are two types of *ba'in* divorce. A *khul'a*
divorce is a divorce motivated due to the wife being dissatisfied with
the marriage and giving the husband something or by releasing him from
all or part of the mehr[^5] so as to persuade him to divorce her. In
this case, just by the man divorcing his wife, he is disqualified from
returning to her, unless she wants to take back what she ceded, in which
case the man has the right to return to her.

*Mabarat* is also a type of *ba'in* divorce, like *khul'a* with the
difference that both parties are dissatisfied with the marriage, while
the wife still gives the husband a sum to divorce her. The other
difference is that the given sum in *khul'a* divorce has no specified
limit, but in *mabarat* it is a condition that the sum be not more than
the amount of the *mehr*.

### The Book of Illegal Divorce (zahar)

In the "ignorance" of pre-Islamic Arabia, *zahar* was a kind of divorce
consisting of the husband saying to the wife *anti 'aliya kazohriammi*,
i.e., "You are like the rear of my mother to me." And this was quite
enough for the wife to be recognized as divorced. Islam changed this. In
the view of Islam, *zahar* is not divorce. For a man to recite this
contract to his wife is forbidden, and he must pay a fine (*kafarah*).
Until he pays the fine it is forbidden for him to have sexual
intercourse with the wife. The fine of *zahar* is the freeing of a
slave, or, if not possible, fasting each day for two consecutive months,
or, if this is not possible, the feeding of sixty poor people.

### The Book of Vows of Abstention (Iyl'a)

*Iyl'a* is a general word meaning oath, but in jurisprudence it has a
special meaning, which is that in order to annoy his wife, a man recites
a contract swearing that he will not have sexual intercourse with her
ever again or for a fixed period (four months or more). If the wife
protests to the Hakim Shari'ah, he will oblige the man to one of two
things: break the vow or divorce his wife. If the man breaks his vow, he
must, of course, pay the fine. To break a vow is always forbidden but in
these circumstances it is obligatory.

### The Book of Cursing (l'aan)

*L'aan* is again related to the marital affairs of man and wife. It
means their cursing of each other, and it applies to a situation wherein
the husband accuses his wife of immorality, meaning here adultery or
lesbianism.

If someone accuses a woman of the said immorality and cannot produce
four just witnesses, the punishment of falsely accusing is to be carried
out upon that person himself, and the same applies if a man accuses his
wife. Now, if the man accuses his wife and cannot produce four
witnesses, then rather than punish him, something else can be done. What
can be done is called *l'aan*. If this takes place, however, although he
is no longer subject to the other punishment, his wife becomes forbidden
to him forever.

*L'aan* takes place in front of the Hakim Shari'ah. As we said before,
*l'aan* is a way in which the two parties curse each other. It takes
place like this: first the man stands up in front of the Hakim and says
four times, "God is my witness, I am truthful in my claim." The fifth
time he says, "God curse me if I lie in my claim." The woman then stands
up in the presence of the Hakim and says four times, "I call God as a
Witness that in his claim he is a liar." The fifth time she says, "The
Anger of God be upon me if in his claim he is truthful."

### The Book of Freeing (itq)

Freeing means the freeing of slaves. In Islam a series of legislatures
has been introduced about slaves. Other than the making of slaves of
captives taken in war, Islam considers no other form of slavery as
legitimate. Furthermore, the aim of taking slaves in Islam is not to
profit from them, rather it is for them to stay for a period in the
homes of genuine Muslims and come to understand the Islamic teachings.

This, all by itself, would draw them to the appreciation and acceptance
of Islam and its sublime teachings. In reality, this form of slavery is
the passage between the slavery of disbelief (*kufr*) and the freedom of
Islam. So the aim is not that slaves remain slaves forever, the aim is
for them to fully discover the Islamic teachings and their liberating
effect, and earn the real, spiritual freedom in the freedom of society.
Therefore, freedom after slavery is the aim of Islam.

Islam has provided many systems of *itq*. Because the goal of Islam is
freeing and not enslaving, the jurisprudents have titled the book
dealing with slavery the Book of Freeing and not the Book of Enslaving.

### The Book of Acquiring Freedom through Will, by Purchase and Through Relationship (Tadbir, mukatibeh and istilad)

*Tadbir*, *mukatibeh* and *istilad* are three of the ways in which
slaves are freed. *Tadbir* is that the owner stipulates in his will that
after his death his slave is free. *Mukatibeh* is that a slave settles
an agreement with his owner that by paying a sum (or agreeing to pay a
sum in the future) he will become free. In the Qur’an it has been
stipulated that if such an application is made by a slave in whom good
is discerned, meaning that belief is discerned in them, (or that it is
discerned that they can manage themselves and not become helpless), not
only is the application to be accepted but they are also to be given
capital from their owners' wealth.

*Istilad* concerns a slave woman who is made pregnant by her owner. Such
a woman, when the owner dies, definitely becomes part of the
inheritance, a part of which is inherited by her child, and since no one
can be the slave of one's parents, grandparents and so on up, or
children and grandchildren and so on down, she automatically becomes
free.

Similarly, there are many other ways slaves become free, such as a slave
being afflicted by blindness and so on; as the *kafarah* (fine) of
various sins, one of the forms of which, as we have seen, is freeing a
slave; being freed by someone simply to please God; and others, and
these are generally discussed in the Book of Freeing.

### The Book of Confessing (iqrar)

*Iqrar* is related to the Islamic laws of arbitration. One of the means
by which a case is proved against a person is the person's own
confession. If, for example, a person claims that he is owed something
by a second person, he must produce evidence or testimony, and, if he
does not, his claim is rejected. Should, however, the second person
himself confess to the debt, this confession renders evidence and
testimony unnecessary. Confession is accepted only from sane adults.

### The Book of Reward (ja'alah)

Reward in its essence is similar to the hiring of people. In hire,
however, a specific person is hired to do a specific work in return for
a specific sum, whereas in reward no certain person is hired. Instead,
the hirer simply announces that whoever does a certain work for him
(like finding his missing child, for example) will be paid a certain sum
as a reward.

### The Book of Vows (ayman)

If a person swears to do a certain thing, the doing of that which he has
sworn to do becomes obligatory for him. One condition is that the vow is
in the Name of God. Therefore, a vow made in the name of the Prophet or
of an Imam or the Qur’an, is not binding on him according to the Divine
Law.

Another condition is that what he vows to do is ruled as permissible in
the Shari'ah, so a vow to do something that is ruled as forbidden
(*haram*) or repulsive (*makruh*), is meaningless and not at all
binding. A legitimate vow would be like one swearing to study a certain
beneficial book from beginning to end, or swearing to brush one's teeth
at least once a day. The breaking of such a vow necessitates a fine
(*kafarah*).

### The Book of Taking an Oath (nathr)

*Nathr* is a type of undertaking to do something that involves an oath
but no special contract. If, for example, one makes an oath to pray all
the daily *nafilah* prayers, i.e. the encouraged prayers that accompany
the obligatory prayers of the day, all one has to do is declare that one
will pray the *nafilah* prayers.

As we saw, one of the condition of the *ayman* vows was that the object
of the vow be not forbidden (*haram*) or repulsive (*makruh*), so that
there is no obstacle to the vow being simply permissible. The condition
of *nathr*, however is that the object of the vow be useful in some way.
So any *nathr* to do something or to refrain from something which is not
beneficial, meaning that the doing and the refraining from the action in
question, are both equal, is void. As in the *ayman* vows, the breaking
of a *nathr* warrants a fine.

The inner meaning of *ayman* and *nathr*, and of the necessity of acting
in accordance to them, lies in the fact that both are types of compact
with God, and, in the same way that one must respect one's compacts with
the creatures of God ("*O you who believe, be loyal to your compacts*".
15:1]), so is one to respect one's compacts with God Himself. An *ayman*
or a *nathr* is normally made when one has little confidence in one's
willpower. By means of the *ayman* or *nathr* one makes a thing
obligatory for oneself until one is able to form the desired habit.[^6]

Laws
----

The ninth section of the four sections of jurisprudence consists of the
issues grouped under the heading of 'laws' (*ahkam*). This word used
here has no special definition. The fact is that those issues of
jurisprudence that do not fall into one of the other three groupings
have been grouped together to form this one. This section contains
twelve books:

### The Book of Hunting and Slaughtering (sayd and thibh)

First it is necessary to state that the meat of permitted meat animals
becomes permitted either when the animal is slaughtered in a special way
(*thibh* or *nahr*), or, if the animal is a wild animal the meat of
which is permitted, when it is properly hunted by specially trained dogs
or my means of an iron missile (like a sharp arrowhead or a sharp
bullet).

The meat of tame permitted-meat animals is not permissible to eat if
they are hunted, and they must be slaughtered in exact accordance to the
Shari'ah. The way of slaughtering most tame animals, like hens, sheep
and cows, etc., is called *thibh* and the way of slaughtering camels is
called *nahr*. There is a slight difference between the actual acts of
nshr and *thibh*, but the conditions, such as the slaughterer being a
Muslim, and killing the animal in the Name of God, are the same.

Hunting is related to permitted meat animals that are wild, like deer
and mountain goats, etc If the means by which the animal is hunted is a
dog, the dog must be so trained that it will do whatever it is
commanded, and thus reflect its master's will, and the meat of permitted
meat animals that are hunted and killed by dogs that are not trained in
this way must not be eaten. In the same way, hunting with animals other
than dogs, like hawks, is also not permissible.

In hunting by non-animals means, it is a condition that the weapon be
iron, or at least metal, and it must be so sharp that it kills the
animal by its sharpness. So hunting with stones and blunt metal missiles
is not permissible. In both forms of hunting, just like in both forms of
slaughtering, the conditions that the man responsible for the animal's
death, he the hunter, be a Muslim, and that he begins in the Name of
God, must be met for the meat of that animal to be permissible. There
are other conditions but they are detailed and here is not their place.

### The Book of Eating and Drinking

Islam has a series of instructions concerning the gifts of nature as
regarding eating and drinking. The laws of slaughtering and hunting are
amongst these, and so are the laws of eating and drinking. In the view
of Islam, all good things, i.e. things that are beneficent and useful,
are permitted, while all foul things, things that are not beneficial and
which are abominable for man, are forbidden. Furthermore, Islam has not
contented itself with explaining these generalities but has made it
clear that a whole group of things are foul and must be shunned, and
that other things are good and there is no obstacle to the making use of
them.

Eating means either the eating of meat or the eating of other things.
Meat is either from the creatures of the sea or of the land or of the
air. Of the creatures of the sea only fish are permissible, and then
again only the fish that have scales.[^7] The creatures of the land are
of two types: tame and wild.

The tame animals, the meat of which is permissible to eat are cows,
sheep, camels, hens, horses, donkeys and mules which are all
permissible, though the eating of the meat of horses, donkeys and mules
is undesirable (*makruh*). The meat of dogs and cats and pigs is
forbidden. Of the wild animals, the meat of carnivorous animals and
insects is forbidden. The meat of deer, however, and of wild cows and
goats and other wild animals that are permissible when tame, is
permissible. The meat of hares and rabbits, though they are not
carnivorous, in accordance to the famous verdict of the 'ulema is
forbidden.

Of birds, the meat of the different types of pigeon, partridge, ducks,
domestic hens and so on are permissible. The meat of hunting birds is
forbidden.

In the cases where the Shari'ah has not made clear the status of the
meat of birds, there are two signs of its being forbidden. One is that
when the bird flies it does not need to flap it's wings all the time and
mostly glides. The other is that it has no crop, or no gizzard or no
sign of a bump on the back of its leg.

Other than animals: to eat or drink any kind of intrinsic filth
(*najasat*) like urine, feces, blood, sperm, alcohol, etc., is
forbidden, and the same applies to any intrinsically clean thing that
intrinsic filth has dirtied and which is called *mutunajas*. Similarly,
to eat or drink anything that is harmful to the body, the harm of which
is considered significant like poison, for example, is also forbidden .
If medicine discerns that a certain thing, tobacco for example, is
definitely harmful to the body, to the heart, let's say, or to the
nerves, and shortens one's life expectation or produces cancer, then its
use will be forbidden. If it is not consequential, however, and is
simply like breathing the air of most cities, it is not forbidden .

For a pregnant woman to consume something which leads to the abortion of
her child, or for a person to consume something that leads to disorder
of the senses, or for a man to consume something that leads to his
sterilization, or for a woman to consume something that leads to her
permanent sterility, is forbidden.

To eat earth is absolutely forbidden, whether it is harmful or not. The
drinking of intoxicating liquors is also absolutely forbidden.
Furthermore, to consume that which belongs to another without the
consent of the owner is strictly forbidden, but this is an incidental
prohibition, not intrinsic.

Some parts of permitted-meat animals is forbidden, including the spleen,
the testicles and generative parts. Likewise, the milk of forbidden-meat
animals is also forbidden .

### The Book of Mis-Appropriation (ghasb)

Mis-appropriation (*ghasb*) means the taking or using of the property of
another by force, i.e. without the other's permission. Firstly, this is
forbidden. Secondly, it renders the mis-appropriator (*ghasib*) liable,
so that if the property is damaged or destroyed while in the control of
that mis-appropriator he is liable for it whether the loss or damage was
his fault or not. Whatever use one makes of mis-appropriated property is
forbidden. *Wuzu* taken with mis-appropriated water and prayer in
mis-appropriated clothes or in a mis-appropriated place is void.

At this point, it must be known that in the same way mis-appropriation
results in liability, so destruction causes liability. Meaning, for
example, that if a person smashes someone else's window, he is liable
for it. Causing likewise, produces liability. Causing here means that if
someone does not do any direct damage, like smashing a window, but does
something that causes damage, he is liable. If a man, for example,
leaves a thing like the skin of some fruits on a public walk-way and a
person slips on it and as a consequence suffers dam age, that man is
responsible for the damage suffered by the person who slipped.

### The Book of Right of Preference (shaf'ih)

*Shaf'ih* means the right of precedence of one partner to buy the share
of the other. If two people are legitimate partners according to the
Shari'ah and one of them wants to sell his share, the other partner, if
he wants to buy that share for the same terms and price for which others
wish to purchase it, has the right of precedence.

### The Book of Enlivening the Dead (ihiya al'muwt)

This book concerns wasteland, i.e. land that is dead or barren, that by
the absence of buildings or farming and suchlike is lifeless. The Holy
Prophet told us: "Whoever enlivens a dead land owns it." This issue has
many facets and these, in jurisprudence, are discussed at length.

### The Book of Finds

In this book are discussed the laws of finding things the owners of
which are not known. The find is either an animal or other than an
animal. If it is an animal and such as will not be harmed if left alone,
the finder has no right to take it into his control. If the animal might
be harmed if left alone, however, like a sheep in the middle of the
desert, the finder can take it into his control, but he must search for
its owner. If the owner is found, the animal must be returned to him,
and if the owner is not found, with the permission of the Hakim
Shari'ah, the animal must be given to the poor.

If the find is not an animal, and its value is less than that of 2.32
grams[^8] of minted silver, the finder can keep it for himself, but if
it is more he must search for the owner for one year (unless, like
fruit, it cannot be kept for a year). If the owner is not found, and if
the find was not made in the sacred area of Mecca, the finder has the
option of doing any of three things. Either he can use it for himself
with the intention that if the owner is discovered, he will repay the
find itself or its value to the owner, or give it as charity with the
same intention, or he can keep it in the hope that the owner will be
found.

If the find has no special signs the search for the owner is not
necessary and the finder has the same three options from the time of the
find.

### The Book of Inheritance.

We know that in Islam there are laws of inheritance. Inheritance in
Islam is not a matter of choice. In Islam, a person has no right to
specify a certain sum for a certain heir, or, for example, to leave all
his wealth to a certain heir. After a person's death, his wealth (apart
from "his" third which he can stipulate in a will to be disposed of
however he likes) is divided and shared amongst the heirs in accordance
to the relevant laws.

The heirs in the view of Islam form different ranks. By the existence of
one of the members of the first rank, the inheritance does not reach to
the second, and the third rank only inherits if there is no one from the
first and second ranks to inherit.

The first rank consists of the deceased's parents and sons and daughters
and, if the sons and daughters have died, the grandchildren.

The second rank is the deceased's four grandparents and brothers and
sisters and, if the brothers and sisters have themselves passed away,
their children.

The third rank is the deceased's uncles and aunts and their children.

Until here, of course, we have spoken only about inheritance of kin.
There is other inheritance as well, the inheritance of husband and wife,
and they inherit their share one from the other before the inheritance
of any of the three ranks. About what is the share of each of the
members of the ranks and of the husband and wife, however, is too
detailed a subject to go into here.

### The Book of Arbitration (qaza)

The issues of arbitration, i.e. the settling in court of differences and
disputes, are so many that we cannot even summarize them. Briefly, we
can say that the system of arbitration in Islam is a special system. The
justice of the arbitrator (*qazi*) is subject to extraordinary attention
in Islam. So much precision has been given to the knowledgeable
personality of the arbitrator that he has to be a *mujtahid* and an
expert on Islamic rights. About his moral and ethical competence,
endless diligence has been introduced. He must be free from all types of
sin, even those that do not directly affect his work. In no way does he
have any right to accept payment from either of the two parties, even
after the arbitration. His expenses are to be liberally reimbursed from
the public treasury. The position of the judge is to be so respected
that the parties of the case to be arbitrated, whoever they may be (even
a caliph, as the history of Amir ul-Muminin, Ali, so clearly shows),
must both present themselves before the judge with perfect respect for
his position and in no way expect or demand partiality. Confession,
testimonial and, in some cases, oaths play an important role in the
Islamic arbitration system.

### The Book of Testimony

This book is connected to the Book of Arbitration in the same way that
the Book of Confession is. If a person claims something, the other party
either admits it or denies it. If he admits it, this is sufficient for
the claim of the claimant to be proved and for the arbitrator to reach
his verdict. If he denies it, the claimant is bound to produce
testimony, and if he produces the testimony and it meets the conditions
stipulated in the Shari'ah, his claim is proved. The denier is not bound
to produce testimony .

In certain circumstances, the denier is bound to swear an oath, and if
he swears an oath his prosecution is to go no further. In jurisprudence,
it is said, "Testimony upon the claimant, and an oath upon whoever
denies it." The issues of arbitration are so many that books have been
written solely on this subject that are as voluminous as some of the
great books written on all the subjects of jurisprudence.

### The Book of Punishments (hudud and t'azirat)

This book is about Islamic punishments in the same way that the previous
two books were about Islamic arbitration. Some of the systems of
punishment have been precisely defined and determined in Islam, and
these are to be performed in the same way regardless of the conditions
and any other factors. These types of punishments are called *hudud*.
There are a few punishments, however, that the Shari'ah considers to
depend on the view of the Hakim[^9], who, by taking into consideration
the causes and conditions of the crime and any motivating factors or
factors that make the crime more serious, enforces a punishment in
accordance. These punishments are called *ta'zirat*.

The crimes for which *hudud* have been stipulated are adultery,
homosexuality (including lesbianism), falsely accusing a person of
committing one of these crimes- drinking alcohol, stealing and armed
civil disturbance, which are all considered crimes against God. Although
these have all been greatly misunderstood both inside and outside the
Islamic world, they are detailed and here is not the place to discuss
them more. It must be mentioned, however, that if a certain punishment
has not been introduced in the Shari'ah amongst the *hudud*, the Islamic
government must introduce punishments according to what it considers to
be in the best interests. These punishments are amongst the *t'azirat*.

### The Book of Retaliation (qisas)

*Qisas* is also a type of punishment, but for offences wherein one
person criminally ends the life or harms the body of another person. In
reality, *qisas* is the right Islam gives to the offended person or to
his heirs if the offense leads to the offended person's death.

Such offenses are either murder or loss or impediment of a part of the
body, and are either intentional (*amd*), similar to intentional
(*shabih amd*) or purely a mistake (*khata mehd*).

An intentional offense is that the offense was committed with the
intention to commit it, such as a person who intends to kill another
person and attacks him and kills him, whether or not the attack was made
with a special weapon of attack, like a sword or a gun, or whether made
with something else, such as a stone. If the serious intention of the
murderer was to kill the other, and this in fact he does, this is enough
for it to be ruled as "intentional ".

An offense that is "similar to intentional" is that the intention is to
do the act but not to do the harm which the act causes. An example of
this is that a person with the intention of-hurting another person hits
him with a club, which results in the victim's death. Another example is
that someone hits a child in their way of teaching a lesson and the
child dies. Also in this status is the case of the doctor who treats his
patient for a certain disease and the treatment causes the patient to
die.

Purely a mistake, however, is that there was no intention at all, such
as the killing of someone by a person who was only cleaning his rifle
and it accidentally fired a shot, or by a person who was only driving
his car quite normally in the street.

In the cases of intentional killing or similar to intentional killing
the heirs of the deceased have the right of *qisas*, meaning that under
the supervision of the Islamic government, and at the discretion of the
nearest of kin, the killer can either be executed or forced to pay
recompense but in the case of merely a mistake the killer is not to be
executed and is only obliged to pay the heirs the *diyah*, the financial
recompense.

### The Book of Financial Recompense (diyah)

*Diyah* is like *qisas* in that it is a right of the offended person or
the heirs of the offended person upon the offender, with the difference
that *qisas* is a way of taking payment in kind while *diyah* is a
financial penalty. The laws of *diyah* like the laws of *qisas*, are
very detailed.

Under the books of *qisas* and *diyah*, the jurisprudents have gone into
the question of the liability of doctors and of teachers.

About doctors they say that if the doctor is not proficient and makes a
mistake in his treatment of the patient that leads to the patient's
death, he is liable. And, if he is proficient and he treats the patient
without the patient's permission or the permission of the patient's
nearest of kin, and the treatment leads to the patient's death, he is
again liable.

If the doctor is proficient, however, and he treats the patient with the
permission of that patient, or of the patient's nearest of kin, he must
first make the condition to the patient or to the heirs that he will do
his utmost, but that, should his efforts happen to lead to the patient's
death, he is not responsible. In this case, supposing that the patient
dies or suffers some physical loss, the doctor is not liable and not
subject to *qisas*. If, however, he does not make this condition before
beginning the treatment, some of the jurisprudents say that he is
liable.

Likewise, if a teacher unnecessarily hitting a child leads to the
child's death or damage to the child's body, the teacher is liable. If,
however, it is really in the child's best interest to be punished, and
this should happen to lead to the child's death or damage to the child's
body, the teacher must have taken permission to punish him from the
child's guardians, otherwise he is liable.

[^1]: faqihat is the feminine plural of faqih, meaning, therefore,
female jurisprudents.

[^2]: The other being Najaf, despite the way it has been weakened and
reduced by the Ba'ath regime of Iraq.

[^3]: A thimmi kafir is a kafir (non-Muslim) who lives in peace in the
Islamic state in accordance to the laws and subject to the benefits it
accords him, and no other kafir is allowed to live in an Islamic state.

[^4]: ihram is a state which one binds upon oneself wherein many things
become forbidden for one. During the Hajj and umrah it accompanies the
wearing of two plain white, un-sewn pieces of cloth.

[^5]: Mehr is like a dowry in reverse, i.e. it is the agreed sum to be
paid by the man to the woman as a condition of their marriage.

[^6]: A point about nathr which the author has not mentioned is that it
is often made as a promise to do some good deed or deeds in return for a
requested favor. In this case, the nathr only becomes obligatory when
God has granted that favor.

[^7]: Shrimps, however, are ruled as sea-locusts, and are permissible to
eat, provided, like fish, they are taken from the water live.

[^8]: i.e. half a mithqal-an eastern measurement.

[^9]: The Hakim Shari'ah is, as we have seen, either a mujtahid meeting
the conditions of being just, etc. or his representative, who, in cases
needing what in English is called a magistrate, assumes this
responsibility.


