Translator's Epilogue
=====================

From the brief introduction to the issues of jurisprudence that has been
given here, it is to be seen how jurisprudence, like the Shari'ah
itself, enters into all the aspects of Islamic life, a necessity if life
is going to be Islamic.

One of the results of this has been that there has never been general
agreement as to how the different issues of jurisprudence (or, in other
words, the laws of Islam) should be classified, as to justly arrange and
classify the different aspects of life, even Islamic life, is very
difficult. After the success of the Islamic revolution in Iran, however,
a new development has taken place in this regard, which, although such
classifications are of minor importance, and although it is yet to be
seen how this new classification can be adapted to the existing
classifications, promises to revolutionize the outward appearance of
jurisprudence.

The new classification is wonderful in its simplicity. It divides all
the Islamic laws and legislations into four groups, under the headings
of "Worship and Self-Perfection", including the issues of cleanliness,
ritual prayer, fasting and the *Hajj*; "Economic Affairs", which
includes *khums*, *zakat*, endowment, partnership, etc.; "Family
Affairs", including marriage, divorce, wills and inheritance; and
"Political Affairs", which includes arbitration, Islamic punishments,
the jihad of defense and so on.

As has been said, the sum of the Islamic teachings are basically divided
into three: knowledge of the unseen reality, knowledge of the perfection
of one's inner self, and knowledge of the perfection of one's external
actions. Perhaps the reason why of all three it is the least important
external actions that have been given such importance within the schools
is that they are less inherent than belief and virtue and are,
therefore, more demanding of the intellectual capacities, and are
dependent upon the other two.

That is a person having some knowledge of God, Prophethood, Imamate and
the Hereafter, may become engaged solely in the struggle to purify
himself, attaching no more concern to his external actions than ensuring
that they accord to his moral values. A person who has a mastery of the
external laws of actions, however, cannot be without sure knowledge of
the realities and sublime moral excellence.

To learn and act according to the Shari'ah without certainty or at least
profound and sincere belief, without moral excellence and without a well
trained intellect is almost impossible . If one has scant knowledge of
the realities, or has knowledge of the realities but little virtue, one
will never see the point of adhering to the intricacies of living
according to the Shari'ah.

Therefore, although the teaching of jurisprudence is the centre of all
the religious institutions, the two more urgent studies also have their
place. If the students of jurisprudence did not themselves develop their
knowledge of the realities and of self-perfection, there simply would
not be any students of jurisprudence; the laws of the Shari'ah would be
forgotten and many of the words and commands of God, the Prophet and
Imams would no longer be acted upon because they would no longer be
understood


