Section 5: The Parable of an Ungrateful and a Grateful Man
==========================================================

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 32 - 36
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاضْرِبْ لَهُم مَثَلاً رَجُلَيْنِ جَعَلْنَا لاَحَدِهِمَا جَنَّتَيْنِ
مِنْ أَعْنَابٍ وَحَفَفْنَاهُمَا بِنَخْلٍ وَجَعَلْنَا بَيْنَهُمَا
زَرْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِلْتَا الْجَنَّتَيْنِ ءَاتَتْ اُكُلَهَا وَلَمْ تَظْلِم مِنْهُ شَيْئاً
وَفَجَّرْنَا خِلاَلَهُمَا نَهَراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَانَ لَهُ ثَمَرٌ فَقَالَ لِصَاحِبِهِ وَهُوَ يُحَاوِرُهُ أَنَاْ
أَكْثَرُ مِنكَ مَالاً وَأَعَزُّ نَفَراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَدَخَلَ جَنَّتَهُ وَهُوَ ظَالِمٌ لّـِنَفْسِهِ قَالَ مَآ أَظُنُّ أَن
تَبِيدَ هَذِهِ أَبَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَظُنُّ السَّاعَةَ قَآئِمَةً وَلَئِن رُّدِدتُّ إِلَي رَبّـِي
لاَجِدَنَّ خَيْراً مِنْهَا مُنقَلَباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***32. “And (O’ Prophet!) coin for them a parable: Two men, We made for
one of them two gardens of vines and We surrounded them with date-palms
and We placed between them tillage.”***  
***33. “Both of the gardens gave their fruits and withheld naught
thereof: and We caused a river to gush forth in their midst.”***  
***34. “And he had fruits (in abundance), so he said to his companion,
as he was conversing with him: ‘I have greater wealth than you, and am
mightier in respect of men’.”***  
***35. “And he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself. He
said: ‘I do not think that this will ever perish,”***  
***36. “And I do not think that the Hour (of Resurrection) will come,
and even if I am returned unto my Lord, I shall surely find a better
than this a resort’.”***

From this verse on, Allah, the Exalted, tells a story that by hearing it
people may come to themselves and obey Allah, and desist committing sins
and ingratitude.

For this very purpose, He addresses His Prophet (S) and says:

***“And (O’ Prophet!) coin for them a parable: Two men, We made for one
of them two gardens of vines and We surrounded them with date-palms and
We placed between them tillage.”***

It was a fertile field with two gardens of vines and dates in addition
to farms of wheat and kinds of corn, so that everything was complete in
it.

These two gardens, from the point of agricultural products, were matured
and the fruits of their trees were wholly in full maturation and their
farmings were going to be harvested, in a manner that nothing was
withheld therein.

The holy verse says:

***“Both of the gardens gave their fruits and withheld naught
thereof…”***

Most important of all was water, the cause of the life of every thing,
and in gardens and farmings there, in particular, it was available
enough, since, as the verse says:

***“…and We caused a river to gush forth in their midst.”***

Thus, the possessor of those couple of gardens and farming had got many
kinds of fruit and so much income.

The holy verse says:

***“And he had fruits (in abundance)…”***

But, since the world was in his favour, and those who are of little
capacity and are in lack of personality, when everything is in their
favour, they become proud and begin disobedience, the first stage of
which is self-admiration and arrogance upon others, the owner of those
couple of gardens started speaking with his friend.

The verse continues saying:

***“…so he said to his companion, as he was conversing with him: ‘I have
greater wealth than you, and am mightier in respect of men’.”***

Therefore, he told his friend that, in comparison with him, he had many
men in his authority and also he had both abundance of wealth, and
social position and influence. Then he asked his companion what he could
say and what he had to utter.

Little by title, as it is usual, these thoughts went on to be upper and
upper in him, so much so that he considered the world was eternal and
his wealth and honour were perpetual for him. So, he proudly entered his
garden.

He looked round unto the green trees therein, the branches of which had
come down unto the ground because of the height of the fruits, and unto
the ears of corn, which were spread clinging every side, when he was
listening to the sound of the river which was flowing forward, watering
the trees, he neglectfully said that he did not think that destruction
and mortality could fall over it.

The verse says:

***“And he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself. He said:
‘I do not think that this will ever perish,”***

He went even further than that and, since the eternity of this world
contrasts the fulfillment of Resurrection, he thought of the denial of
Hereafter and said:

***“And I do not think that the Hour (of Resurrection) will come…”***

He thought that these ideas are some things that a group of people had
invented to please themselves.

Then, he imagined if there were a resurrection in the course he would
have a high rank and personality, and he added:

***“…and even if I am returned unto my Lord, I shall surely find a
better than this a resort’.”***

He was wandering in these useless imaginations, and every moment he
added some new vain words to his former undue words. Then his faithful
friend began speaking and rejected his vain statements, which will be
dealt with in the following discussions.

### Note

The Arabic term /’ukul/ means some products and fruits which are edible
while the term /amar/ is applied for kinds of fruit, and sorts of wealth
and properties; it is even called to ‘trees’, too.

These verses can lead us to some principles of planting and keeping
typical and attractive gardens. These leadings are as follows:

A. The low and short trees may be planted in the middle, (vines), and
the tall trees around the garden, (date-palms).

B. Gardens may be arranged separate with each other, so that there can
be left a distance between them, (and We put between them).

C. The lands of the distance between gardens should be formed, (between
them tillage).

D. Water ought to be gushed forth in the midst of the gardens, (and We
cause a river to gush forth in their midst).

E. Gardens must not be hollow, weak and calamitous, (and withheld naught
thereof).

Therefore, the best views of the gardens are the vine gardens with
various grapes, and those that have vines and date-palms with together,
and kinds of farming (tillage) are in between the gardens (and We
Surrounded them) and that streams flow beneath the trees and beside the
farms, (and We caused a river to gush forth in their midst).

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 37 - 41
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لَهُ صَاحِبُهُ وَهُوَ يُحَاوِرُهُ أَكَفَرْتَ بِالَّذِي خَلَقَكَ
مِن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ مِن نُطْفَةٍ ثُمَّ سَوَّاكَ رَجُلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكِنَّ هُوَ اللَّهُ رَبّـِي وَلآ اُشْرِكُ بِرَبّـِي أَحَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلآ إِذْ دَخَلْتَ جَنَّتَكَ قُلْتَ مَا شَآءَ اللَّهُ لاَ قُوَّةَ
إِلاَّ بِاللَّهِ إِن تَرَنِ أَنَاْ أَقَلَّ مِنكَ مَالاً وَوَلَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَسَي رَبّـِي أَن يُؤْتِيَنِ خَيْراً مِن جَنَّتِكَ وَيُرْسِلَ
عَلَيْهَا حُسْبَاناً مِنَ السَّمَآءِ فَتُصْبِحَ صَعِيداً زَلَقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ يُصْبِحَ مَآؤُهَا غَوْراً فَلَن تَسْتَطِيعَ لَهُ طَلَباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “His companion said to him, as he was conversing with him; ‘Do
you disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust then from a sperm-drop,
then He fashioned you a (complete) man?”***  
***38. “But, as for me He, Allah, is my Lord, and none do I associate
with my Lord.”***  
***39. “And why did you not say when you entered your garden: ‘As Allah
will, there is no power except in Allah’? If you see me less than you in
wealth and children.”***  
***40. “Yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than your garden,
and will send on it (your garden) a thunderbolt from heaven so that it
becomes an even slippery ground without plant.”***  
***41. “Or its water will be sunk (into the earth), so that you will
never be able to seek it out.”***

These holy verses are upon the rejections of the baseless utterances of
that faithless, proud, and conceited rich man that are heard from the
tongue of his faithful companion. He waited silently and was listening
to the words of that haughty man in order that he would say whatever he
had in his inside.

Then he answered him all the same time, as the verse says:

***“His companion said to him, as he was conversing with him; ‘Do you
disbelieve in Him Who created you from dust then from a sperm-drop, then
He fashioned you a (complete) man?”***

In other words, this the Lord Who, at first, created man from soil. He
caused the nutritious material existed in the soil to be absorbed by the
roots of the trees. The trees in turn became the food of animals, and
man consumed from the plant as well as the meat of the animals.

His life-germ was made up of them. In the womb of the mother, the
life-germ developed its different stages of perfection until it became a
complete man. A human being that is superior to all the existing things
of the earth.

He can contemplate, think, make decision, and subject rather everything
under his control. Yes, the change of worthless dust into such a
wonderful being, with those different complicated organs of his body and
soul, is one of the great reasonings of Unity.

Then, in order to break the infidelity and pride of his companion, the
faithful man said that he boasted and was proud of his belief that Allah
was his Lord.

The verse, from the tongue of the faithful man, says:

***“But, as for me He, Allah, is my Lord, and none do I associate with
my Lord.”***

He told his faithless friend who boasted that he had garden, farming,
fruit and water in abundance, that he was honoured that his Lord, his
Creator, and his Sustainer was Allah.

He added that his companion glorified the life this world while he
glorified his belief, faith, and monotheism, as the holy verse continues
saying:

***“…and none do I associate with my Lord.”***

After pointing to the subject of Unity and infidelity which are the most
important subjects in the fate of man, again he reproached his faithless
companion, and said:

***“And why did you not say when you entered your garden: ‘As Allah
will…”***

Why did you not consider all of these from the side of Allah and you did
not thank for His bounties? And why did you not say that there is no
power and ability save from the source of Allah?

The verse in this regard says:

***“…there is no power except in Allah’?…”***

You have ploughed the earth, scattered the seed, planted the shoot,
guarded the trees, and provided every necessary thing for them on time
in a manner that they grew like that. All of these activities have been
done by means of the usage of the abilities, possibilities, and means
that Allah has given you. You have nothing of yourself, and without Him
you are naught.

Then, he added that it did not matter:

***“…If you see me less than you in wealth and children.”***

***“Yet it may be that my Lord will give me better than your garden…”***

My Lord not only will give me a better garden than yours, but also He
will send a thunderbolt from heaven on your garden and, in a short time,
He will change this green land into a plantless, slippery even plain.

The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and will send on it (your garden) a thunderbolt from heaven so that
it becomes an even slippery ground without plant.”***

Or He may order the land to move so that this spring and gushing water
should sink down into the earth and you will never be able to find it.

The verse says:

***“Or its water will be sunk (into the earth), so that you will never
be able to seek it out.”***

The Arabic term /husban/, used in this holy verse, originally is derived
from /hisab/ (calculation); then it has been used in the sense of the
arrows which are counted at the time of shooting. It has also been
applied with the meaning of ‘the punishment which comes upon persons on
reckoning’, and the purpose in the abovementioned verse is this very
meaning.

The Qur’anic word /sa‘id/ means ‘the sand, or dust on the surface of the
earth’ It is originally taken from /sa‘ud/ (a calamity).

The Arabic term /zalaq/ means an even land without any plant so that the
foot may slip on it. (It is interesting that today, in order to fix the
running sands and prevent the towns to be buried under the storms of
sand, people try to grow some plants and trees on such lands so that
they can control them, and deliver them from the state of being
slippery.

Indeed, that faithful and monotheist man warned his proud companion that
he could not attach and depend on those bounties, because none of them
was reliable.

In fact he says that he has seen with his own eyes or, at least, has
heard with his own ears that sometimes the heavenly thunderbolt, in a
short moment, turns gardens, houses, and farms into a heap of soil, or a
dry land without any water and any grass.

And also you may have heard or seen that sometimes a sharp earthquake
may ruin the irrigation systems and make springs dry so that they cannot
be mended.

When you know these clear facts, what is this pride and haughtiness for?
You who have seen these events, why do you attach to them? Why do you
say that you do not believe that these bounties will perish? But they
will be eternal. What an ignorance and stupidity!

The Prophet of Islam (S) said that if a servant says ‘*that which Allah
pleases*’ and ‘*There is no power except in Allah’*, when He bestows on
him wealth and children, Allah may repel his calamities and disquiet
from him so that he obtains his (good) wishes. Then he (S) recited this
verse.[^1]

Some Islamic traditions denote that the recitation of the holy phrase

***“There is neither might nor strength but in Allah”***

causes afflictions to be repelled and bounties to last long, and it is a
treasure out of the treasures of Heaven.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 42 - 44
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاُحِيطَ بِثَمَرِهِ فَاَصْبَحَ يُقَلّـِبُ كَفَّيْهِ عَلَي مَآ أَنفَقَ
فِيهَا وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَي عُرُوشِهَا وَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي لَمْ
اُشْرِكْ بِرَبّـِي أَحَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ تَكُن لَّهُ فِئَةٌ يَنصُرُونَهُ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَمَا كَانَ
مَنتَصِراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَالِكَ الْوَلاَيَةُ لِلَّهِ الْحَقّ‌ِ هُوَ خَيْرٌ ثَوَاباً وَخَيْرٌ
عُقْباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “And his fruits were enwrapped (into destruction), so he began
wringing his hands for what he had expended in it, and it was fallen
down upon its trellises, and he was saying: ‘Alas me! Would I had not
associated with my Lord any one!’”***  
***43. “And he had no troop to help him as against (the wrath of) Allah,
nor could he help himself.”***  
***44. “Thereover protection belongs only to Allah, the True; He is best
rewarding, and best for consequence.”***

Finally, the debate of those two men ended and the faithful man had got
no penetration in the depth of the soul of that proud, faithless rich
man who, with the same spirituality and doctrine, went back home.

He was unaware that the command of Allah had been issued that his green
gardens and cultivations to be perished. He should receive the
retribution of his pride and infidelity in this very world, in order
that his end would become as a gazing-stock and a warning to others.

Perhaps it was at the same moment that the darkness of night had covered
everywhere when the punishment of Allah, in the form of a destructive
thunderbolt, or a terrible violate storm, or a horrible ruinous
earthquake, in a short time, destroyed whatever there were in those
pleasant gardens which contained so many fruitful tall trees, and
fructified cultivations.

The verse says:

***“And his fruits were enwrapped (into destruction)…”***

The Arabic term /’uhit/ is from the root /’ihatah/ which, in such
instances, means ‘an encompassing punishment’, the result of which is a
complete destruction.

In the next morning, when the owner of the garden, with a series of
desires and imaginations, went toward his garden in order to visit it
and enjoy its products, approaching it, he encountered a dreadful scene,
so terrible that his mouth dried because of wonder and his eyes became
dim and motionless.

He could not know that he was observing that scene in dream or in
vigilance. The trees had utterly dropped on the ground, the cultivations
had became upside down, and there was seen little of life therein.

As if there were no pleasant garden and green tillage there. The doleful
moans of owls were heard in its ruins. The man’s heart started its
palpitation sharply, and his face grew pale. The saliva dried in his
mouth, and whatever of pride and arrogance was in his heart and his mind
suddenly dispersed.

As if he had got up from a long and deep sleep. He was thinking of the
heavy expenses he had earned from every side in his lifetime and had
expended in it.

The verse says:

***“…so he began wringing his hands for what he had expended in it, and
it was fallen down upon its trellises…”***

It was just in the same time that he regreted from his false and futile
statements and thoughts.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and he was saying: ‘Alas me! Would I had not associated with my
Lord any one!’”***

More lamentable than this it was that, at the time of confronting this
calamity, he was perfectly alone and had no one to help him for this
great damage and grievous affliction.

The verse says:

***“And he had no troop to help him as against (the wrath of) Allah…”***

He had not anything to substitute that, which was his whole capital.

The verse continues saying:

***“…nor could he help himself.”***

In fact, in this event all his arrogant imaginations disturbed and
proved to be nonsensical. On one side, he used to say that he never
believed that his great capital and abundant wealth would have an
annihilation, but he saw its annihilation with his own eyes.

On the other side, he arrogantly boasted to his faithful monotheistic
companion and said that he was more powerful than him from the point of
wealth and men. But, after this event, he observed that none was his
helper.

On the third side, he depended on his own power and considered his
ability illimitable. But, after that he became in lack of everything in
that event, he comprehended his great mistake, because he had nothing in
his disposal to compensate a part of that great damage.

Principally, those companions who, like flies around a candy, come nigh
to a person because of his property and wealth whom the person considers
as a support for his days of misfortune, will scatter when that bounty
vanishes, because their friendship has not formed as a spiritual
approach, but it has been based on material support. When it vanishes,
that friendship vanishes, too.

However, it was too late for him to be remorseful. This kind of
compulsory vigilance, which appears at the time of befalling some
grievous calamities upon a person, even for the Pharaohs, is worthless
and, therefore, it is not useful for him, either.

Yes, it was at the same time that he stated the phrase:

***“Would I had not associated with my Lord any one!’”***

by his own tongue. It was the same phrase that his faithful companion
had said before, but he said it when he was in safety, and this man said
it at the time of misfortune.

It was at that moment that this fact was proved once again that
protection, guardianship and Power belong to Allah, the Lord Who is the
Truth Himself.

The verse says:

***“Thereover protection belongs only to Allah, the True…”***

Yes, here it was made perfectly clear that all bounties belong to Him,
and whatever He wills, it will be done. So, there will be performed
nothing save by relying on His grace. Verily, it is only He Who has the
best rewards and provides the best end and fate for the obedient.

The verse continues saying:

***“…He is best rewarding, and best for consequence.”***

Thus, if a person wants to attach some and to rely on him and to be
hopeful to his reward, it is better for him that his support to be
Allah, and his attachment and his hope to be unto the grace and kindness
of the Lord.

But, O’ Man! How do you want to be the best in the world, while you
tread the clearest laws of the world of creation; allocate all merits to
yourself, and devour the right of others?

[^1]: Dur-rul-Manthur, the Commentary


