Section 8: Allah is Forgiving and the Lord of Mercy
===================================================

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 54 - 55
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ صَرَّفْنَا فِي هَذَا الْقُرْءَانِ لِلنَّاسِ مِن كُلّ‌ِ مَثَلٍ
وَكَانَ الإِنسَانُ أَكْثَرَ شَيْءٍ جَدَلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مَنَعَ النَّاسَ أَن يُؤْمِنُوا إِذْ جَآءَهُمُ الْهُدَي
وَيَسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّهُمْ إِلآَّ أَن تَأْتِيَهُمْ سُنَّةُ
الاَوَّلِينَ أَوْ يَأْتِيَهُمُ الْعَذَابُ قُبُلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***54. “And indeed We have explained in this Qur’an every kind of
similitude for mankind, but man, of most things, is contentious.”***  
***55. “And naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came
unto them, and seeking their Lord’s forgiveness, except that the wont of
the ancients should come upon them, or that the chastisement should come
face to face with them.”***

The Qur’anic term /sarrafna/, in this verse, means that ‘We have spoken
to them in different statements and through any style and logic which
may affect on them’.

The Arabic word /jidal/ means ‘dispute’ in a form of conflict and demand
of preference.

Beside the positive qualities the man has, like having a divine spirit,
being superior to the angels with their prostration unto him, having the
ability of penetration and subjecting the existence to himself, and the
like of them, he has also many negative epithets, such as disputation,
which have been referred to in the verses of the Qur’an.

Then, in this holy verse: the Qur’an deduces a kind of conclusion from
the last discussions, and it also hints to the coming discussions.

At first, it says:

***“And indeed We have explained in this Qur’an every kind of similitude
for mankind…”***

These explanations include the shaking history of the old nations and
the painful events of their lives, and that what happened before. They
were described for the people whether they were sweet or bitter. The
affairs were so much detailed that those hearts which were receptive and
eager to receive the truth, might grasp the truth, and there remained no
room for obscurity.

Yet, some rebellious arrogant people never believed, because man, more
than anything else, tends to dispute.

The verse says:

***“…but man, of most things, is contentious.”***

Then, in the next verse, it implies that with these many different
examples and through some shaking statements and various logical
reasoning, which must absorb any receptive person, again a great group
of people did not believe.

Of course, nothing restrained them that when the Divine guidance came to
them they would believe and seek forgiveness from their Lord, save that
they acted obstinately as if they wanted the fate of the ancient to come
for them, too, or the divine punishment should come in front of them and
they see it by their own eyes.

The verse says:

***“And naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came unto
them, and seeking their Lord’s forgiveness, except that the wont of the
ancients should come upon them, or that the chastisement should come
face to face with them.”***

In fact, the abovementioned verse points to this fact that this arrogant
and obstinate group will never believe with their willing and decision.
They may believe only in two circumstances. The first is at the time
when the painful punishments, which seized the ancient nations, surround
them.

The second circumstance is that they do see the divine punishment with
their own eyes. This constrained faith, of course, will be worthless.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 56
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا نُرْسِلُ الْمُرْسَلِينَ إِلاَّ مُبَشّـِرِينَ وَمُنذِرِينَ
وَيُجَادِلُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِالْبَاطِلِ لِيُدْحِضُوا بِهِ الْحَقَّ
وَاتَّخَذُوا ءَايَاتِي وَمَآ اُنذِرُوا هُزُواً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***56. “And We do not send the messengers save as bearers of good
tidings and warners, but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in
order to refute the Truth thereby; and they have taken My signs, and
what they are warned of, in mockery.”***

The prophets’ mission is to give glad tidings to the believers and to
warn the disobedient, but with no compulsion upon people to accept the
Truth. It is by the prophets (as) that Allah completes the argument to
humankind.

By the way, awareness of Allah’s way of treatment and the prophets’
messengership, the reaction of people, and the end of the arrogant
nations, is a kind of consolation for the Prophet (S). Therefore, in
order to comfort the Prophet (S) against the arrogance and obstinacy of
the opponents, the Qur’an says that his duty is only to give good
tidings and to warn.

The verse says:

***“And We do not send the messengers save as bearers of good tidings
and warners…”***

Then the verse implies that this is not a new matter that such people
oppose the Truth and mock it, but disbelievers always dispute with
falsehood. They imagine that they can refute the Truth with it and,
therefore, they take Allah’s revelations and His punishments, which they
are promised to, in mockery.

The verse says:

***“…but those who disbelieve dispute with falsehood in order to refute
the Truth thereby; and they have taken My signs, and what they are
warned of, in mockery.”***

In fact, their dispute on the way of proving the falsehood was to force
the Prophet (S) to bring some verses and miracles alongside their
desires, so that if he did not do as they wished, they would take it as
a proof and introduce his Book, the Qur’an, invalid. Thus, the
disbelievers used to apply the Qur’an, the Resurrection, and the Fire of
Hell as a means of mockery.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 57
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّن ذُكّـِرَ بِاَيَاتِ رَبّـِهِ فَاَعْرَضَ عَنْهَا
وَنَسِيَ مَا قَدَّمَتْ يَدَاهُ إِنَّا جَعَلْنَا عَلَي قُلُوبِهِمْ
أَكِنَّةً أَن يَفْقَهُوهُ وَفِي ءَاذَانِهِمْ وَقْراً وَإِن تَدْعُهُمْ
إِلَي الْهُدَي فَلَن يَهْتَدُوا إِذاً أَبَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***57. “And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the sings of
his Lord, then he turns away from them and forgets what his hands have
forwarded? Verily We have laid veils on their hearts lest they
understand it, and a heaviness in their ears: and if you call them unto
guidance, even then will they never get guided in that case at all.”***

Being heedless to the divine revelations, and having no contemplation on
them, is the greatest injustice.

So, in this holy verse, the Qur’an says:

***“And who is more unjust than he who is reminded of the sings of his
Lord, then he turns away from them and forgets what his hands have
forwarded?…”***

The application of the term /ŏukkira/ (is reminded) in the verse,
perhaps, is an indication to this meaning that the prophets’ teachings
are of the remembrance of the facts which have existed naturally in the
depths of man’s soul. The mission of prophets is to make these facts
manifest.

In this regard, Imam Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as), qualifying the divine
prophets, says:

*“…Allah sent His prophets toward them (people) to get them fulfill the
pledges of His creation, to recall to them His bounties...”*[^1]

It is interesting that, in this verse, the Qur’an teaches the lesson of
awareness to these inwardly blind persons in three ways. The first is
that these facts are quietly acquainted with their nature and
conscience.

The second is that they have come from the side of their Lord. And the
third is that they should not forget that they have committed some
faults in their lives, and the mission of the divine prophets is to wash
them out from them.

But these arrogant people, with all these indications and implications,
will never believe, because the veil of sin has been laid on their
hearts, and the veil of heaviness of crime has been laid on their ears
and, therefore, they do not hear the sound of the Truth.

Similar to this meaning, Surah Luqman, No. 31, through verse 7 says:

***“And when Our revelations are recited to him, he turns back proudly,
as if he had not heard them…”***

In other wards, it is like that the veils of lust, imitation from their
fathers, and the temptations of Satans and men, have fallen on their
hearts and, consequently, they have lost their wisdom so that they never
understand and they never regret from their indecent actions and,
therefore, never they renounce them.

They show that, as a deaf person, they have not heard it. Such people
have lost the eligibility of being guided and have plunged in
aberration.

It is in this case that Allah informs His Messenger (S) that if he
invites them to the guidance and felicity, they will never be guided and
they will never believe that this information has been proved. So they
finally passed away with infidelity.

The verse says:

***“…Verily We have laid veils on their hearts lest they understand it,
and a heaviness in their ears: and if you call them unto guidance, even
then will they never get guided in that case at all.”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 58 - 59
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَبُّكَ الْغَفُورُ ذُو الرَّحْمَةِ لَوْ يُؤَاخِذُهُم بِمَا كَسَبُوا
لَعَجَّلَ لَهُمُ الْعَذَابَ بَل لَهُم مَوْعِدٌ لَّن يَجِدُوا مِن
دُونِهِ مَوْئِلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتِلْكَ الْقُرَي أَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ لَمَّا ظَلَمُوا وَجَعَلْنَا
لِمَهْلِكِهِم مَوْعِداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***58. “And your Lord is Forgiving, the Lord of Mercy. Were He to seize
them (to task) for what they earn, surely He would hasten for them the
chastisement; but for them is an appointed term, never shall they find,
besides it, a refuge.”***  
***59.”And (as for the people of) these towns, We destroyed them when
they did wrong and We appointed a time for their destruction.***

The Qur’anic term /mu’il/ means: ‘a refuge, and a means of safety’.
Allah (s.w.t.) is both just and All-Forgiving. His justice requires that
the sinners must be punished, but, because of His Forgiveness, He
respites man to repent. Then if he does not repent, He will treat him
with His justice.

Thus; the manner of Allah (s.w.t.) in training men is that He respites
them up to the last stage and, unlike to the arrogant people of the
world, He never punishes them promptly, but His All-embracing Mercy
always requires that He gives the evil-doers the maximum respite.

In this verse, the Qur’an says:

***“And your Lord is Forgiving, the Lord of Mercy. Were He to seize them
(to task) for what they earn, surely He would hasten for them the
chastisement…”***

Allah’s remission necessitates that He forgives the repentant, and His
Mercy requires that He does not hasten in the punishment of other than
them, maybe they may join the group of repentant ones, while His justice
also requires that when their insolence and disobedience reached its
last degree, He might clear their account.

The verse continues saying:

***“…but for them is an appointed term, never shall they find, besides
it, a refuge.”***

Then, finally, in the next verse, for the last admonition and warning in
these series of verses, the Qur’an has pointed to the bitter and painful
fate of the former disobedient transgressors.

It implies that these are cities the ruins of which are before their
eyes, and when they committed cruelty and inequity, Allah destroyed
them, while He did not make haste in their punishment but He (s.w.t.)
fixed an appointed time for their destruction.

The verse says:

***“And (as for the people of) these towns, We destroyed them when they
did wrong and We appointed a time for their destruction.”***

However, the objective meaning of the words ‘these towns’, mentioned in
the verse, is the people of the towns of ‘Ad and Thamud, and the like of
them, who were destroyed as the result of their rejecting the prophets
and their denying the Divine revelations.

[^1]: Nahjul-Balaqah, Sermon One, Allah chooses His Prophets


