Section 10: Moses Following the One Gifted with Knowledge of Allah
==================================================================

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 71 - 72
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانطَلَقَا حَتَّي إِذَا رَكِبَا فِي السَّفِينَةِ خَرَقَهَا قَالَ
أَخَرَقْتَهَا لِتُغْرِقَ أَهْلَهَا لَقَدْ جِئْتَ شَيْئاً إِمْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُلْ إِنَّكَ لَن تَسْتَطِيعَ مَعِيَ صَبْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***71. “So they twain departed; until, when they embarked upon the ship,
he made a hole in it. He (Moses) said: ‘Have you made a hole therein to
drown its inmates? You have indeed done a grievous thing’.”***  
***72. “He said: ‘Did I not say that you could never bear with me
patiently?’”***

The Arabic term /xaraqa/ is used here, in this holy verse, with the
meaning of ‘tearing something mischievously and without consideration.’

The Qur’anic word /’imr/ is applied for ‘an important and strange work,
or a very indecent one’.

Both of them (Moses and the godly learned man) proceeded and went on
their way until when they embarked on a ship. Khidr made a hole in the
ship.

Since, on one side, Moses was a great prophet of Allah and he had to
protect the lives and properties of people, and he had to enjoin right
and forbid wrong; and on the other side, his conscious did not let him
keep silence for such a wrong action, therefore, he neglected the
promise he had with Khidr (as) and protested him.

The verse says:

***“So they twain departed; until, when they embarked upon the ship, he
made a hole in it. He (Moses) said: ‘Have you made a hole therein to
drown its inmates? You have indeed done a grievous thing’.”***

At this time, that godly learned man (Khidr), with a special firmness,
looked at Moses and spoke:

***“He said: ‘Did I not say that you could never bear with me
patiently?’”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 73 - 74
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ لاَ تُؤَاخِذْنِي بِمَا نَسِيتُ وَلاَ تُرْهِقْنِي مِنْ أَمْرِي
عُسْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانطَلَقَا حَتَّي إِذَا لَقِيَا غُلاَماً فَقَتَلَهُ قَالَ أَقَتَلْتَ
نَفْساً زَكِيَّةً بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ لَّقَدْ جِئْتَ شَيْئاً نُّكْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***73. “He said: ‘Do not take me to task that I forgot, and be not hard
upon me for my affair’.”***  
***74. “So they twain departed; until, when they met a lad, he (Khidr)
slew him. He (Moses) said: ‘Slew you an innocent person who had slain
none? You have indeed done a horrible thing’.”***

The Arabic term /’irhaq/ from the root /rahiqa/ means both ‘to encompass
forcefully’, and ‘to impose a difficult task on any one’.

Moses (as), who regretted for his haste, which was naturally for the
importance of the event, remembered his promise and tried to excuse.

He turned to the godly teacher and said:

***“He said: ‘Do not take me to task that I forgot, and be not hard upon
me for my affair’.”***

The voyage of those two (Moses and Khidr) ended and they got out of the
ship. They continued their way on the land. In their way, occasionally
they met a young boy whom that learned man (Khidr) suddenly killed.

The holy verse in this regard says:

***“So they twain departed; until, when they met a lad, he (Khidr) slew
him.***

Here, Moses (as) became inconvenient again. He saw the horrible scene of
killing an innocent young boy, which had no legal permission. As if a
curtain of sorrow and discontentment had fallen upon his eyes. It was so
hard for him that he forgot his promise again and began protesting
against that action.

The verse says:

***“…He (Moses) said: ‘Slew you an innocent person who had slain none?
You have indeed done a horrible thing’.”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 75 - 76
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكَ إِنَّكَ لَن تَسْتَطِيعَ مَعِيَ صَبْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِن سَأَلْتُكَ عَن شَيْءٍ بَعْدَهَا فَلاَ تُصَاحِبْنِي قَدْ
بَلَغْتَ مِن لَدُنّـِي عُذْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***75. “He (Khidr) said: ‘Did I not say that you could never bear with
me patiently?’”***  
***76. “He (Moses) said: ‘If I question you on anything after this, then
keep me company no more; you have received an excuse from me’.”***

That great godly learned man repeated the former sentence with the same
coolness particular to himself.

The holy verse says:

***“He (Khidr) said: ‘Did I not say that you could never bear with me
patiently?’”***

Moses (as) remembered his own promise to him. It was an attention
accompanied with shame, because he had broken his promise twice,
although forgetfully. Little by little, Moses (as) felt the teacher
might be right.

Therefore, he began asking forgiveness again and told Khidr to renounce
him his forgetfulness that time, too. But if thereafter he (Moses)
wanted him (Khidr) any explanation concerning his affairs, and objected
to him upon his deeds, he would keep him company no more, since Khidr
had received an excuse from Moses (as).

The verse says:

***“He (Moses) said: ‘If I question you on anything after this, then
keep me company no more; you have received an excuse from me’.”***

This holy phrase of the Qur’an leads us to the utmost justice and
far-sightedness of Moses (as), and it also shows that he accepted the
reality even if it had been bitter.

An Islamic tradition indicates that the holy Prophet of Islam (S)
recited this verse and said that Moses, the prophet of Allah, ashamed.
If he had waited and bore patience, he would have seen thousand
wonderful actions from Khidr.[^1]

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 77 - 78
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَانطَلَقَا حتَّي إِذَآ أَتَيَآ أَهْلَ قَرْيَةٍ اسْتَطْعَمَآ أَهْلَهَا
فَاَبَوْا أَن يُضَيّـِفُوهُمَا فَوَجَدَا فِيهَا جِدَاراً يُرِيدُ أَن
يَنقَضَّ فَاَقَامَهُ قَالَ لَوْ شِئْتَ لَتَّخَذْتَ عَلَيْهِ أَجْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هَذَا فِرَاقُ بَيْنِي وَبَيْنِكَ سَأُنَبّـِئُكَ بِتَأْوِيلِ مَا
لَمْ تَسْتَطِع عَّلَيْهِ صَبْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “So they twain departed; until, when they reached the people of a
town. They asked its people for food, but they refused to make them
guests. Then they found in it a wall about to fall, and he (Khidr) set
it up. He (Moses) said: ‘If you had wished you could have taken a wage
for it!’”***  
***78. “He (Khidr) said: ‘This is the separation between me and you. Now
I will inform you of the interpretation of what you could not bear
patiently’.”***

Allah’s saints are not malicious and revengeful. Khidr (as) served the
people of the town, although they did not make the twain guests.

The verse says:

***“So they twain departed; until, when they reached the people of a
town. They asked its people for food, but they refused to make them
guests...”***

The objective meaning of the Arabic term /qaryah/ here is Nasirriyah, a
city, or’Ilah, a harbour.

However, what happened upon Moses and his Teacher in that town leads us
to comprehend that the people of it were niggardly and of inferior
quality.

The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition concerning them said:

*“They had been some mean and of low quality.”*

Then, the Qur’an continues speaking about the twain who mended a wall
there in order not to fall.

The verse says:

***“…Then they found in it a wall about to fall, and he (Khidr) set it
up...”***

When Moses (as) saw that, in spite of the disgrace of those people,
Khidr mended the wall that was going to fall, as if Khidr wanted to give
the recompense of their disgrace to them, Moses thought it had better
the teacher did that work for a wage so that they could provide a food
by it.

Then Moses utterly forgot his promise once more, and began objecting to
it, but this time with a protest milder than before.

The verse, in this regard, says:

***“…He (Moses) said: ‘If you had wished you could have taken a wage for
it!’”***

In fact, Moses (as) thought that the action of Khidr was far from
justice that a person might sacrifice like that for a group of people
who were so mean.

It was at that time that the learned man said his last word to Moses,
since, from the total events which happened, he was convinced that Moses
could not patiently bear the deeds he accomplished. Therefore, he
announced their separation.

The verse says:

***“He (Khidr) said: ‘This is the separation between me and you. Now I
will inform you of the interpretation of what you could not bear
patiently’.”***

The announcement of that separation seemed as a sledge stricken over the
heart of Moses (as) – a separation from a teacher who had with him a
great amount of secrets! Yes, it was very painful for Moses to separate
from such a leader, but it was a bitter reality that Moses had to
tolerate.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 79
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا السَّفِينَةُ فَكَانَتْ لِمَسَاكِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ فِي الْبَحْرِ
فَاَرَدتُّ أَنْ أَعِيبَهَا وَكَانَ وَرَآءَهُم مَّلِكٌ يَأْخُذُ كُلَّ
سَفِينَةٍ غَصْباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***79. “As for the ship, it belonged to (some) poor people working on
the sea, and I intended to damage it, for there was after them a king
who seized every (safe) ship by force.”***

The Arabic term /wara’/, used here, is called to any hidden or concealed
place whether that place is located in front of a person or behind him.

What a person sees is the apparent feature of the affairs while there
may be some hidden features for them, too. The apparent view of Khidr’s
affairs seemed wrong to Moses (as), but there was a secret, mystery and
reality hidden in those affairs.

The verse says:

***“As for the ship, it belonged to (some) poor people working on the
sea, and I intended to damage it, for there was after them a king who
seized every (safe) ship by force.”***

Of course, Khidr did not make a hole in the ship in a way that water
could arrive in it and caused it to be drowned, but he made it only
defective.

There are sometimes so many defects and faults wherein lie some common
good. Khidr (as) made the ship damaged in order that it could not be
taken by that oppressive king and its miserable owners would not become
more miserable. In fact, he repelled a worse state by a bad one.

This work is not the job of everyone, and the recognition of the
difference between an important thing in religion and a more important
one is the job of the expert theologians.

Ahlul-Bayt, (the Prophet’s progeny) (p.b.u.t.), sometimes reprimanded
some of their sincere friends in front of others in order that they
might not be suspicioned by the tyrannical government of the time, and
their lives could be saved.

For instance, Imam Sadiq (as) once openly criticized Zurarah, so that he
would remain safe from the trouble of the Abbassides.

After that, he (as) sent a message for him saying that he did such to
protect his life, and then the Imam (as) recited the abovementioned
verse, and said that Zurarah was the best ship of that sea whom the
illegitimate ruler was seeking for and watching after.[^2]

Only those can enter the world of mysteries, and may be aware of the
innate of the things, who have passed the stage of the apparent of the
things; like Moses who knew the laws of the religion and practised
accordingly, but by accompanying Khidr in a course, he learned the
innate secrets, too.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 80 - 81
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْغُلاَمُ فَكَانَ أَبَوَاهُ مُؤْمِنَيْنِ فَخَشِينَآ أَن
يُرْهِقَهُمَا طُغْيَاناً وَكُفْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَرَدْنَآ أَن يُبْدِلَهُمَا رَبُّهُمَا خَيْراً مّـِنْهُ زَكَاةً
وَأَقْرَبَ رُحْماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***80. “And as for the lad, his parents were believers, and we were
afraid he would impose on them insolence and disbelief.”***  
***81. “So we did intend that their Lord should change him for them for
one better in purity and nearer in affection.”***

In this verse, the Qur’an refers to the secret of the second event,
i.e., the murder of the lad. It says:

***“And as for the lad, his parents were believers, and we were afraid
he would impose on them insolence and disbelief.”***

However, that learned man killed a young boy and reasoned his action
that if that boy had been continuing his life, he would have created a
disgrace event for his faithful parents.

Then the Qur’an continues saying:

***“So we did intend that their Lord should change him for them for one
better in purity and nearer in affection.”***

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /’irhaq/ means: ‘to impose a difficult task to
anyone’.

2. An Islamic tradition indicates that, instead of that boy, Allah
bestowed those couple of believers a daughter from whose progeny seventy
prophets came into being.[^3]

3. Sometimes it happens that a child causes his parents to go astray and
to pave the way of infidelity. On the contrary, sometimes the parents
also drag the pure and godly nature of their child towards infidelity
and deviated notions.

The holy Prophet (S) said:

*“Every child naturally believes in One God, except that his parents
change him.”*[^4]

4. A wise man does not do a vain, and his deed is based on wisdom and
common good, although it may seem apparently wrong.

5. The saints of Allah both have responsibility and think about the
future of people.

6. The substitution of the pious child in the place of that impious boy,
is a manifestation of the Lordship of Allah.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 82
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْجِدَارُ فَكَانَ لِغُلاَمَيْنِ يَتِيمَيْنِ فِي الْمَدِينَةِ
وَكَانَ تَحْتَهُ كَنزٌ لَهُمَا وَكَانَ أَبُوهُمَا صَالِحاً فَاَرَادَ
رَبُّكَ أَن يَبْلُغَآ أَشُدَّهُمَا وَيَسْتَخْرِجَا كَنزَهُمَا رَحْمَةً
مِن رَّبّـِكَ وَمَا فَعَلْتُهُ عَنْ أَمْرِي ذَلِكَ تَأْوِيلُ مَا لَمْ
تَسْطِع عَّلَيْهِ صَبْراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. “And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city,
and beneath it there was a treasure belonging to them, and their father
was a righteous man, so your Lord willed that they should attain their
maturity and take out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord, and I
did not do it of my own accord. This is the interpretation of what you
could not bear patiently.”***

In this holy verse the learned man (Khidr) uncovers the secret of his
third action, i.e., mending the wall, and said as follows:

***“And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and
beneath it there was a treasure belonging to them, and their father was
a righteous man, so your Lord willed that they should attain their
maturity and take out their treasure as a mercy from your Lord…”***

That is, Khidr was commissioned to mend that wall for the righteousness
of the parents of these two orphan boys, otherwise it might fall and,
appearing its treasure, it might be exposed to danger.

At the end of the verse, in order to remove any doubt from Moses (as),
and that he assuredly knew that all those deeds were fulfilled upon a
special plan and commandment, Khidr added that he did not perform them
of his own accord, but it was the command of Allah that he followed.
Yes, this was the mystery of the affairs that Moses (as) could not bear
patiently.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and I did not do it of my own accord. This is the interpretation of
what you could not bear patiently.”***

### The Story of Moses and Khidr and Its Facts

1. Finding a learned leader and taking benefits from his knowledge is of
so importance that even a great prophet such as Moses paves a long way
to find him. This is an example for all human beings in whatever
condition and standard of knowledge and age they may be.

2. The essence of the divine knowledge (the metaphysical theology) can
be obtain from the servitude and submission to Allah.

3. Knowledge should ever be learnt for practice, as Moses says to his
learned teacher that he teaches him a knowledge that leads him to the
aim, the right conduct. He means that he does not want the knowledge
only for itself, but he wants it to use as a means to reach the aim.

4. We must not haste in some affairs because there are some things which
need an appropriate opportunity.

5. The Apparent and the Innate Features of Affairs:

This is another important matter that this story teaches us. We ought
not make haste in judging about the unpleasant happenings which come
forth in our lives. There are many events in our lives that we are not
pleased with them, but later we understand that they have been from the
secret divine favours.

This is the same thing which the Qur’an points out in Surah Al-Baqarah,
No.2, verse 122.

6. Confessing the Reality:

When Moses (as) unwillingly broke his promise against his learned friend
(Khidr) for three times, he did not persist on this bitter reality and
gave justly the right to that learned man. Moses (as) kindly separated
from him and continued his own affairs.

A person should not be always busy experimenting himself until his
life-time ends, and must not turn his living into a laboratory for the
future, which will never come. After he examined a matter for several
times, he must usually accept its result.

7. The Results of the Parents’ Faith for their Children:

Khidr, for the sake of a righteous father, undertook the support of his
children in that part that he could. That is, under the light of the
faith and trust of the father, a child can become prosperous, and its
good consequence reaches his offspring, too.

8. Lifetime Shortens because of Hurting the Parents:

Where a child, for the sake that he may hurt his parents in future with
his disobedience and ingratitude, or causes them to come out of the way
of Allah, deserves death, how is the state of a child who is busy
committing this sin now? What is the circumstance of such persons before
Allah?

9. People May Become Enemy because of What They Do not Know:

Many times it happens that a person do good upon us but, since we are
not aware of the innate of the affairs, we consider it enmity, and
sometimes we may become disturbed in mind and impatient, concerning what
we do not know. But, the abovementioned story teaches us that we should
not haste in judgment. We must verify every matter from different points
of view.

10. The Courtesy of a Student Before a Teacher:

In conversation between Moses and that learned man (Khidr) some
interesting points around the courtesy of a student before his teacher
attract the attention; among them are:

A. Moses (as) introduced himself as a follower of Khidr (as) when he
said:

***“Shall I follow you…?”***[^5]

B. In the rank of humility, Moses (as) announced that the knowledge of
Khidr was abundant, and he said that he desired to learn a part of his
knowledge.

Moses said:

***“…So that you teach me right conduct of what you have been
taught?”***

11. The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition said:

*“That treasure was the wise words which were written on a golden
tablet. Its content was: ‘It is surprising why a person who believes in
Allah’s decree becomes grievous’.*

 *‘It is amazing why a person who is sure of the death, is happy; who is
certain of Reckoning, is neglectful; who is certain of sustenance,
troubles himself more than the common; and who is assured of the change
of the world but he trusts in it’.”*[^6]

12. According to the Islamic literature, the grace of Allah is not
limited to the direct children of a person, but it affects on the later
generations, too; so that the righteousness of ancestors causes Allah to
have favour upon their progenies.[^7]

13. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Allah revealed Moses (that) He rewards Children for the righteousness
of fathers.” Then, he (as) added: “If you are treacherous to the honour
of people, others will be treacherous to your honour, too.”* [^8]

14. In one occasion, in the story, the child is slain for the protection
of the Faith of the parents, and in another one, a prophet works, as a
labourer, for the sake of a righteous father, in order that the capital
under the wall reaches the child.

15. When some people protested Imam Hassan (as) for making peace with
Mu‘awiyah, he (as) said:

*“Do you not know that Khidr made a hole in the ship, and killed a lad
and his actions caused the anger of Moses? O people! If I did not accept
peace, all the Shi‘ite on the earth would be vanished.”* [^9]

By the way, in Arabic, the terms /qaryah/ and /madinah/ have been used
with the same meaning but, as one of the scholars said, if we work with
the Qur’an we will see that ‘Madinah’ is used wherein the light of
guidance is found, and wherever the light of guidance is not found it is
called /qaryah/.

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Tabary; and Tafsir-i-Abul-Futuh

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thqalayn

[^3]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^4]: Bihar-ul-’anwar, vol.3, p.282

[^5]: Verse 66

[^6]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^7]: The Commentary of Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^8]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^9]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn


