Section 12 : The Words of Allah Inexhaustible
=============================================

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 102
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَحَسِبَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَن يَتَّخِذُوا عِبَادِي مِن دُونِي
أَوْلِيَآءَ إِنَّا أَعْتَدْنَا جَهَنَّمَ لِلْكَافِرِينَ نُزُلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***102. “Do then those who disbelieve think that they can take My
servants as guardians besides Me? Verily We have prepared Hell for the
infidels to be entertained (therein).”***

This holy verse has pointed to a mental deviation of those people. It
had been the main origin of their other aberrations.

It says:

***“Do then those who disbelieve think that they can take My servants as
guardians besides Me?…”***

Have these servants, such as Messiah (as) and the angels, who were
worshipped, howsoever much their ranks may be high, any thing from
themselves that can support others?

Or, on the contrary, whatever they had were given them from the side of
Allah. They themselves needed to be guided by the guidance of Allah,
too. This is a fact that those people forgot and, therefore, sunk into
disbelief.

For a further emphasis, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an says:

***“…Verily We have prepared Hell for the infidels to be entertained
(therein).”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 103 - 104
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبّـِئُكُم بِالاَخْسَرِينَ أَعْمَالاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ
يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***103. “Say: ‘Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their)
deeds?”***  
***104. “Those whose effort is lost in this world’s life, while they
think that they are working good deeds.”***

This verse, as well as the other verses up to the end of Surah Al-Kahf,
not only is an explanation upon the qualities of the faithless persons,
but also is a kind of summary for all the subjects which were discussed
in this Surah. They are especially the matters concerning the story of
the Companions of the Cave, Moses, Khidr, Zul-Qarnayn and their efforts
and struggles against their opponents.

At first, it refers to the greatest losers, the most wretched persons
among all mankind. But, in order to move the sense of curiosity of the
hearers upon such an important subject, the Qur’an propounds it in the
form of a question, and commands the Prophet of Islam (S) as follows:

***“Say: ‘Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their)
deeds?”***

Then, immediately after this question, the Qur’an itself answers it, so
that the hearer does not spend a long time wandered, and it implies that
the greatest losers are:

***“Those whose effort is lost in this world’s life, while they think
that they are working good deeds.”***

Certainly the meaning of ‘to lose’ in this text is not only that a
person loses some profits, but the real loss is that he loses the main
capital, too. What a capital can be higher and worthier than intellect,
talent, God-given-powers, lifetime, youth, and health.

These very things, which produce our deeds and our actions, are the
fruit of our powers and abilities. When these powers turn into some
destructive and vain deeds, it seems all of them have lost and vanished.

The true and double loss is where a man loses his own material and
spiritual capitals on a wrong and deviated way, and he imagines that he
has done a good action. Such a person has neither obtained any useful
result from these efforts, nor has he learnt a lesson from that loss,
nor is he secured from the repetition of that event.

However, the Islamic traditions denote that this verse has been rendered
into the denier of the leadership of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) and
those who postpone the fulfillment of Hajj from today to tomorrow.[^1]

Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said the referent of a concept of this verse were
the people of the Book, who were legitimate at first, then they brought
some innovations in religion while they were working good deeds. Then he
(as) added the people of Nahrawan were not less than them.[^2]

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 105 - 106
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بَاَيَاتِ رَبّـِهِمْ وَلِقَآئِهِ
فَحَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فَلا نُقِيمُ لَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَزْناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ جَزَآؤُهُمْ جَهَنَّمُ بِمَا كَفَرُوا وَاتَّخَذُوا ءَايَاتِي
وَرُسُلِي هُزُواً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***105. “They are those who disbelieved in the signs of their Lord and
meeting Him (in Hereafter) so their deeds became null, and on the Day of
Resurrection We assign no weight for them.”***  
***106. “Thus Hell is their recompense for what they disbelieved and
took My Signs and My messengers in mockery.”***

The Arabic term /habt/ philologically means: the belly of an animal
swallowed because of eating some poisonous plants and the animal exposes
to death. Whoever sees such an animal thinks that it is safe and sound
with plenty of meat, while its belly is full of wind and the flesh of
its body is poisonous.

Some deeds of men which are considered vain are called /habt/ because
those deeds have been poisoned by committing sins, and, therefore, they
are empty and have been exposed to destruction.

Thus, the Qur’an in this verse implies that the disbelievers denied the
divine revelations and His reasons, as well as the reward and
retribution of Allah, and they spoiled their deeds thereby. They
performed those actions in a way that Allah had not enjoined.

Therefore, such people will not be worthy and respectable with Allah on
the Day of Resurrection. He will not heed them, and by punishing them,
He will despise them and abase them.

In Arabic language, when it is said that a thing has not weight, it
means that the thing is worthless. In other words, since they have not
any action which can be worthy and measurable, then there will not be
set a scale for them on the Day of Hereafter to weigh their deeds. Yes,
they will not have anything to be weighed and, therefore, there will be
no need of preparing a scale.

A well-known tradition narrated from the Prophet (S) denotes:

*“On the Day of Reckoning, the fat and heavy men of this life will bring
a body in the court of Allah the weight of which is not as heavy as the
wing of a fly.”*

The reason of it is that their deeds, thoughts, and personalities have
utterly been empty and vain in this world.

The verse says:

***“They are those who disbelieved in the signs of their Lord and
meeting Him (in Hereafter) so their deeds became null, and on the Day of
Resurrection We assign no weight for them.”***

In the next verse, the Qur’an implies that the disbelievers denied three
basic principles of the religious belief: (Origin and End and the
prophethood of the prophets), or farther than denial, they took them in
mockery.

The verse says:

***“Thus Hell is their recompense for what they disbelieved and took My
Signs and My messengers in mockery.”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 107 - 108
--------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَانَتْ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتُ الْفِرْدَوْسِ نُزُلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لا يَبْغُونَ عَنْهَا حِوَلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***107. “Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds there is for
them Gardens of Paradise for their entertainment.”***  
***108. “Abiding therein forever, they desire no removal therefrom.”***

The qualities of disbelievers, the greatest losers among people, and
their fate was rather widely defined. Now, the Qur’an, as a frame of
reference before the disbelievers, refers to believers and their fate,
so that the situation of both parties becomes quietly clear and
distinguished.

In this regard, the holy Qur’an says:

***“Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds there is for them
Gardens of Paradise for their entertainment.”***

The Qur’anic term /firdaus/ is a garden which contains all the bounties
and the whole necessary merits. Thus, it is the best and the most
privileged gardens of Paradise.

The holy Prophet of Islam (S) said:

*“Paradise has one hundred degrees, the best of which is ‘Firdaus’.
Whenever you supplicate, ask ‘Firdaus’ from Allah.”*[^3]

In view of the fact that the perfection of a bounty is that it does not
face with extinction, immediately after that, the Qur’an adds:

***“Abiding therein forever…”***

The fastidious and desirous nature of man constantly asks for variety
and changing, yet the inhabitants of ‘Firdaus’ will never demand removal
from it, for whatever they wish they find there, even variety and
perfection.

The verse continues saying:

***“…they desire no removal therefrom.”***

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 109
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّوْ كَانَ الْبَحْرُ مِدَاداً لِكَلِمَاتِ رَبّـِي لَنَفِدَ
الْبَحْرُ قَبْلَ أَن تَنفَدَ كَلِمَاتُ رَبّـِي وَلَوْ جِئْنَا
بِمِثْلِهِ مَدَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***109. “Say: ‘If the sea became ink for (writing) the Words of my Lord,
the sea would certainly be exhausted before the Words of my Lord were
exhausted, even though We brought the like of it to help’.”***

The Arabic term /midad/ is applied for the ink which is poured into an
inkpot and is used as a means of drawing the pen on the paper.

The objective meaning of the Qur’anic phrase /kalimat-i-rabb/ is either
the divine promises and the created things, or the godly philosophies
and conceptions, or Divine revelations and whatever has a sign from
Allah. Thus, every particle, every atom, and every cell is one of the
Words of Allah.

However, in the occasions of revelation of this verse it is said that
when the Jews heard this sentence from the Prophet of Islam (S) saying:

***“…and you are not given aught of knowledge but a little.”***[^4]

They said how such a matter could be right while the Jews were given the
Turah, and whoever has been given the Turah indeed has been given
abundant good. Then the abovementioned verse was revealed and
illustrated the infinite knowledge of Allah and that man’s little
knowledge is aught before it.

Some other commentators believe that the Jews told the Prophet (S) that
Allah had given him wisdom and

***“…whoever has been given wisdom, indeed has been given abundant
good”***[^5]***,***

but when they asked him (S) about the spirit, he replied them an
ambiguous answer. Then the abovementioned verse was revealed and
declared that however much a man may be learned his knowledge is aught
before the knowledge of Allah.[^6]

Therefore, this verse and the verse after it are concerned to the whole
subjects of this Surah. As if the Qur’an intends to say that the
information of the events of the Companions of the Cave, Moses, Khidr,
and Zul-Qarnayn are not so important when the infinite knowledge of
Allah is considered.

The holy Qur’an, addressing the holy Prophet of Islam (S), says:

***“Say: ‘If the sea became ink for (writing) the Words of my Lord, the
sea would certainly be exhausted before the Words of my Lord were
exhausted, even though We brought the like of it to help’.”***

In this verse, indeed, the Qur’an attracts the attentions to this fact
that you should not think that the world of existence is confined to
what you see, or to what you know, or to what you feel.

But it is so great and vast that if the water of the seas became ink for
writing the names, qualities, specialties, secrets and mysteries of it,
the seas would be used up before the whole of the creatures of the
existing world could be counted.

It is noteworthy that the abovementioned verse, not only illustrates the
infinite vastness of the world of existence in the past, present, and
future, but also it is an illustration of the infinite knowledge of
Allah, because we know that Allah has encompassed in His knowledge
whatever exists, and whatever will come into being, in the expanse of
existence. Even more, His knowledge is not separate from the existence
of these creatures.

Then, in other words, it can be said that if all the oceans throughout
of the world became ink and all the trees became pens they are never
sufficiently able to record the number of whatever exists in the
knowledge of Allah.

At the end, there is a tradition cited in the commentary book of
Ali-ibn-Ibrahim Qummi, and in the commentary book of Al-Burhan, narrated
from Abi-Basir, from Imam Sadiq (as) who, concerning the commentary of
this verse, said:

*“I inform you that the Word of Allah has neither an end, nor has it
finite, nor does it cause to eternity.”*[^7]

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 110
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَآ أَنَاْ بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يُوحَي إلَيَّ أَنَّمَآ
إِلَهُكُمْ إِلَهٌ وَاحِدٌ فَمَن كَانَ يَرْجُوا لِقَآءَ رَبّـِهِ
فَلْيَعْمَلْ عَمَلاً صَالِحاً وَلا يُشْرِكْ بِعِبَادَةِ رَبّـِهِ
أَحَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***110. “Say: ‘I am only a mortal like you. It is revealed unto me that
your God is (only) One God. Therefore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord
(in Hereafter) let him do righteousness, and make none sharer of the
worship due unto his Lord.”***

This holy verse, which is the last verse of Surah Al-Kahf, contains a
collection of fundamental principles of the religious beliefs, such as,
Unity, Resurrection, and the prophethood of the holy Prophet (S). This
is, in fact, the same as what the beginning of the Surah Al-Kahf has
begun with.

Since the subject of prophethood among common people has always been
accompanied with kinds of exaggeration and extravagance in the length of
its history, the Qur’an states it as follows:

***“Say: ‘I am only a mortal like you...”***

Thus, by this meaning, he nullified all the imaginary polytheistic
privileges which promoted the divine prophets from the rank of human to
the rank of divinity, and said that the only his privilege was that it
was revealed unto him.

Then, among all the subjects which are revealed, he emphasizes on the
subject of Unity and says:

***“…It is revealed unto me that your God is (only) One God...”***

In this part of the verse, only the subject of Unity has been pointed
out, because Unity is not merely a principle out of the fundamentals of
belief, but it is the essence of all fundamental principles and the
positive laws of Islam.

If, through a simple example, we similarize the Islamic teachings,
containing the fundamental principles and positive laws of the religion
to the jewelly beads of a jewelry, Unity should be similarized to the
string that has joined these beads to each other and has formed, from
all of them, a worthy beautiful necklace.

That is why that some Islamic traditions indicate that the holy phrase
/la’ilaha’illallah/ (There is not god save Allah) is a firm fortress,
and whoever enters it will be safe from the punishment of Allah.

The third sentence of this verse points to the subject of Resurrection,
which is connected to the subject of Unity with the Arabic conjunction
/f/, where it says:

***“…Therefore, whoever hopes to meet his Lord (in Here-after) let him
do righteousness…”***

Meeting the Lord, which is the innate observation of His Pure Essence by
the eye of the heart and the inside spiritual insight, is also possible
for the true believers in this world, too. But in Hereafter, because of
observing more effects with more clear manifestation of Him, it will
become general for the common.

The reality of the righteous deed is referred to through a short
statement in the last sentence of the verse.

It says:

***“…and make none sharer of the worship due unto his Lord.”***

In another more clear statement, an action will not be counted ‘a
righteous deed’ unless the reality of purity and sincerity accompanies
it. In fact, the righteous deed which has originated from a godly motive
and sincerity, and has mixed with it, is the passport unto the meeting
of Allah.

The righteous deed is so important in Islam that the Prophet (S) in a
tradition says:

*“The person who performs his deeds with sincerity for forty days, Allah
will flow the springs of wisdom and knowledge from his heart to his
tongue.”*

It can be concluded that this holy verse has referred to both Unity
(only One God), and prophethood (It is revealed unto me), and
Resurrection (to meet his Lord in Hereafter), and hope to the mercy of
Allah (whoever hopes), and effort and endeavour to reach it (let him do
righteousness), and purity in action (and make none sharer).

That was why the Prophet (S) said:

*“If only the last verse of Surah Al-Kahf were revealed to my community,
it would be sufficient for them.”*[^8]

Finally, upon the content of this verse, there have been narrated many
traditions concerning the importance of sincerity and the danger of
hypocrisy and hidden polytheism. Some of them are as follows:

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Verily Allah, the Exalted, will not accept any action in which there
is a tiny amount of hypocrisy.”* [^9]

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) in a tradition said:

*“Verily Allah has forbidden the Paradise forevery hypocrite, man and
woman; and piety is not (found) in beauty of face and clothing, but
piety is (found) in serenity and solemnity.”* [^10]

3. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The Fire (of Hell) and its people will cry because of the punishment
of hypocrites”.*

Then he (S) was asked:

*“O Prophet! How (and why) does the Fire (of Hell) cry?”*

He answered:

*“Because of (the intense of) the heat of the Fire by which they (the
hypocrites) will be punished.”*[^11]

4. It is narrated by’Abi-Basir who said:

 *“I heard’Aba-‘Abdillah (Imam Sadiq) (as) said:*

*‘On the Day of Hereafter, the servant, who had established prayer, will
be brought and he says: ‘O Lord! I have prayed for your pleasure’.*

*He will be answered:*

*‘But you prayed in order to be said what a good prayer so and so has
established. Take him unto the Fire.’*

*Then, he said:*

*‘The same manner will be treated with the one who has struggled, has
recited the Qur’an, and has given alms’.”*[^12]

5. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Verily, more than anything else, I fear about you for the minor
polytheism’.*

He was asked:

*‘O’ Messenger of Allah! What is the minor polytheism?’*

He answered:

*‘Hypocrisy’.*

Then he said:

*‘On the Day of Hereafter, when Allah, Almighty and Glorious,
recompenses the deeds of the servants, He will tell the hypocrites: ‘Go
unto those for whom you used to act hypocritically in the world, and see
whether you find the recompense of your actions with them’.”* [^13]

[^1]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, and Abul-Futuh

[^2]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, and Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^4]: Surah Al-’Isra, No. 17, verse 85

[^5]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 269

[^6]: Tafsir Qurtubi, pp. 4107 and 4108, and Tafsir-us- Safi, Surah
Al-‘Isra, No. 17, verse 85

[^7]: Tafsir-i-Ali-ibn ’Ibrahim, vol. 2, p.46, and Tafsir-ul-Burhan,
vol. 2, p. 496

[^8]: Tafsir-i-Dur-ul-Mamthur

[^9]: Jami‘-i-‘Ahadith-ush-Shi‘ah, vol.1, p. 368

[^10]: Jami‘-i-‘Ahadith-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 370

[^11]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 1, p.500, and Jami‘-i-‘Ahadith-ush-Shi‘ah,
vol.1, p. 369

[^12]: Jami‘-i-‘Ahadith-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, p. 368

[^13]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 499


