Section 1: Zachariah and John
=============================

Surah Maryam – Verses 1 - 3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كهيعص
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذِكْرُ رَحْمَتِ رَبّـِكَ عَبْدَهُ زَكَرِيَّآ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ نَادَي رَبَّهُ نِدَآءً خَفِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***1. “Kaf‘k’,Ha‘h’,Ya‘y’,‘Ain ‘‘A’,Sad‘s’.”***  
***2. (This is) a mention of the mercy of your Lord unto His servant
Zachariah.”***  
***3. “When he called upon his Lord in secret.”***

The mentioned letters are among the ‘Abbreviated Letters’ of the Qur’an
in which some mysteries and secrets are hidden. Some Islamic traditions
indicate that each of these letters is a sign of one of the great names
of Allah (The Names Most Beautiful). Kaf ‘K’ refers to /kafi/ (The
Sufficient); Ha ‘H’ refers to /hadi/ (The Guide); Ya ‘Y’ refers to
/waliyy/ (The Friend, The Protector, The Surety, The Patron); ‘Ain ‘A’
refers to /‘alim/ (The Knower); and Sad ‘S’ refers to /sadiq-ul-wa‘d/
(The One Who is Truthful in His promises). Sometimes, in some
supplications, Allah (s.w.t.) is invoked through these abbreviated
letters, in this manner:

 *“O Lord! by Ka, Ha, Ya, ‘Ain, Sad.”*

In a supplication, for instance, Hadrat Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“O Allah! We ask you, O’Kaf, Ha, Ya, ‘Ain, Sad!”*[^1]

Some Islamic traditions state that these abbreviated letters indicate
the event of the uprising of Imam Hussayn in Karbala, as follows: Kaf
refers to ‘Karbala’, Ha refers to ‘Halak’ (the slaughter of the
Prophet’s progeny), Ya refers to ‘Yazid’, ‘Ain refers to the subject of
‘Atash (thirst), and Sad refers to ‘Sabr’ (the patience and
steadfastness of Imam Hussayn and his self-sacrificing supporters).

It should be noted, of course, that the verses of the Qur’an have the
capacity to have different meanings but despite the variety of meanings,
they do not conflict with each other.

After the abbreviated letters at the beginning of Surah Maryam, the
first verse concerning the story of Zachariah begins.

It says:

***“(This is) a mention of the mercy of your Lord unto His servant
Zachariah.”***

This event occurred at the time when Zachariah was very worried and sad
because he did not have a child, and he, worshipping Him, called upon
his Lord secretly.

The verse says:

***“When he called upon his Lord in secret.”***

The Arabic term /nida/ means ‘to call with a loud voice’, and the
Qur’anic word /xafiyya/ means ‘in secret’ not in a low voice, since such
a call cannot be performed ‘silently’, but it can be done secretly.

Perhaps, the invocation of Zachariah, done in secret, was for the reason
that his people would not scoff at him by saying why that old man wished
Allah for a son.

Some Islamic literature indicates that the best supplication is that
which is asked in secret, and the best provision is that which is
sufficient. [^2]

Surah Maryam – Verses 4 - 5
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‌ِ إِنّـِي وَهَنَ الْعَظْمُ مِنّـِي وَاشْتَعَلَ الرَّأْسُ
شَيْباً وَلَمْ أَكُن بِدُعَآئِكَ رَبّ‌ِ شَقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنّـِي خِفْتُ الْمَوَالِيَ مِن وَرَآءِي وَكَانَتِ امْرَأَتِي
عَاقِراً فَهَبْ لِي مِن لَّدُنكَ وَلِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***4. “He said: ‘My Lord! verily my bones are weakened and my head is
all aflame with hoariness, and, my Lord! I have never been unblessed in
prayer to You.”***  
***5. “And verily I fear my kindred after I am gone, and my wife is
barren. So grant me from your presence a successor (a child).”***

Zachariah invoked Allah saying that his bones, the pillars of his body
and its most solid parts, were weakened and his head was all aflame with
hoariness. By this statement, Zachariah might have wanted to say that
the harbinger of death had been placed on his head and he had to get
ready for death.

Here is the verse:

***“He said: ‘My Lord! verily my bones are weakened and my head is all
aflame with hoariness…”***

Then, immediately after that statement, he adds that he had been
accustomed to the acceptance of his supplications by his Lord and that
He had never withheld His blessings from him. Now that he was old and
feeble, he was more in need of answers to his prayers, and that he would
not be unblessed.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and, my Lord! I have never been unblessed in prayer to You.”***

After that, he explained his supplication to Allah, as follows:

***“And verily I fear my kindred after I am gone, and my wife is barren.
So grant me from your presence a successor (a child).”***

### Explanations

The Arabic word /‘aqir/ is applied for a man or a woman that cannot
produce offspring.

The term /’išti‘al/ means: ‘the blaze of a fire when it flames and
spreads’. Thus, the holy phrase ‘and my head is all aflame with
hoariness’ means that the whiteness of the hair on my head blazed like
fire and has spread.

Some of the commentators have said that the objective meaning of the
Qur’anic word /waliyy/, mentioned in this holy verse, is ‘a righteous
son who succeeds the father’. Imam Sadiq (as) said that Zachariah’s
anxiety was about his uncle and his cousins.[^3]

Surah Maryam – Verses 6 - 8
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَرِثُنِي وَيَرِثُ مِنْ ءَالِ يَعْقُوبَ وَاجْعَلْهُ رَبّ‌ِ رَضِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا زَكَرِيَّآ إِنَّا نُبَشّـِرُكَ بِغُلاَمٍ اسْمُهُ يَحْيَي لَمْ
نَجْعَل لَّهُ مِن قَبْلُ سَمِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‌ِ أَنَّي يَكُونُ لِي غُلاَمٌ وَكَانَتِ امْرَأَتِي عَاقِراً
وَقَدْ بَلَغْتُ مِنَ الْكِبَرِ عِتِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “(One that) shall be my inheritor and the inheritor of the
posterity of Jacob; and make him, my Lord, well-pleasing.”***  
***7. (His prayer was answered:) O’ Zakariyya! verily We give you good
tidings of a son whose name is Yahya (John). We have given the same name
to none before (him).”***  
***8. “He said: ‘My Lord! How shall there be for me a son while my wife
is barren and I have reached infirm old age?’”***

Zachariah, the prophet, in his prayer, invoked Allah to grant him a
successor to be the inheritor of him and the posterity of Jacob, and He
would make him well-pleasing.

The verse says:

***“(One that) shall be my inheritor and the inheritor of the posterity
of Jacob; and make him, my Lord, well-pleasing.”***

The purpose of the phrase ‘to inherit’, here, has been rendered
differently by the Islamic commentators. Some of them believe that
‘heritage’ in this verse is heritage in properties, while some others
have said that it refers to the rank of prophethood.

A group of the commentators have also thought that the objective meaning
of it is an inclusive concept which probably envelops both of them.

Many of the Shi‘ite scholars have taken the first interpretation, while
some Sunnite scholars have seized the second meaning, and some others,
among Islamic scholars, such as: Sayyid-i-Qutb in Fi-Zilal and’Alusi in
Rouh-ul-Ma‘ani, have chosen the third idea.

Those who have taken it, confined to the inheritance of property, have
reasoned to the existence of the word /yariu/ (inheritor) in this sense.
For, when this word is used apart from other evidences, it means ‘the
inheritance of the wealth’.

But when it is used in the sense of spiritual affairs, it is usually for
the sake of the existence of some evidence in that verse; like Surah
Fatir, No 95, verse 32 which says:

***“Then We gave the Book for an inheritance to those whom We chose from
among Our servants…”***

Moreover, the wife of Zachariah, who was from the progeny of
Solayman-ibn-Dawood, regarding the very good condition of Solayman and
Dawood’s wealth, had inherited some considerable properties.

Zachariah was afraid that those properties would be obtained by some
impious persons who might amass them, or use them in a false way, which
itself could be the source of a corruption in the society.

That was why he asked his Lord to grant him a righteous child so that
this offspring might protect those properties and spend them in the best
way.

It is narrated in a tradition that Fatimat-uz-Zahra (as), the pure
daughter of the Prophet of Islam (S), reasoned to defend her claim to
Fadak. This incident is another evidence upon the above idea.

The Late Tabarsi, in his book’Ihtijaj, has said regarding this issue
concerning the Lady of Islam (as), as follows:

When some people had decided to withhold Fadak from Fatimah (as), and
she was informed of it, she said:

***“Is there in the Book of Allah that you inherit from your father and
I do not inherit from my father? Verily you have done a very indecent
thing.***[^4] ***Did you deliberately leave out from the Book of Allah
where, in the story of Yahya-ibn-Zakariyya, it says: ‘O Lord! Grant me
from Your presence a successor (a child); (One that) shall be my
inheritor and the inheritor of the posterity of Jacob?’”***

For more information on the idea of ‘inheritance’ as something
spiritual, or both spiritual and material you may refer to
Tafsir-i-Atyab-ul-Bayan, as well as other great commentaries of Islamic
scholars.

However, the Arabic word /radiyy/ means both: ‘being well-pleased with
Allah’ and ‘being loved by people’. The rank of Allah being well-pleased
with a person, and vice versa, is the best rank, a great salvation.

The subsequent verse states that the prayer of Zachariah was accepted in
the presence of Allah, an acceptance with full grace and particular
favour.

The words of Allah in the verse are recited as follows:

***“(His prayer was answered:) O’ Zakariyya! Verily We give you good
tidings of a son whose name is Yahya (John). We have given the same name
to none before (him).”***

The Qur’anic phrase ‘the same name to none before (him)’ means either
that the name ‘Yahya’ had not been used before him, or that such
personal qualities were not found in any one before him.

Zachariah, who did not see the relevant preconditions to assist in
gaining what he desired, asked Allah to explain the circumstance for
him.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘My Lord! How shall there be for me a son while my wife is
barren and I have reached infirm old age?’”***

Zachariah, saying:

***“How shall there be for me a son…?”***

means whether he and his wife would become young again, or they would
have a child in the same state of old age.[^5]

Yes, even the prophets’ knowledge is limited, and their surprise about
something does not contrast with the rank of their prophethood.

However, the Qur’anic word /‘itiyya/ means ‘to go beyond the limit’
which is usually said upon a person whose body has lost its elasticity
as a result of old age.

Imam Baqir (as) said that five years elapsed between the time when the
glad tidings was given and when the birth of Yahya occurred.[^6]

Surah Maryam – Verses 9 - 10
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ كَذَلِكَ قَالَ رَبُّكَ هُوَ عَلَيَّ هَيّـِنٌ وَقَدْ خَلَقْتُكَ
مِن قَبْلُ وَلَمْ تَكُ شَيْئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ رَبّ‌ِ اجْعَل لّـِي ءَايَةً قَالَ ءَايَتُكَ أَلاَّ تُكَلّـِمَ
النَّاسَ ثَلاَثَ لَيَالٍ سَوِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “He said: ‘So (it will be)’. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me,
for indeed I created you aforetime when you were nothing’.”***  
***10. “He (Zachariah) said: ‘My Lord! appoint for me a sign.’ Said He:
‘Your sign is that you shall not be able to speak to the people for
three nights, though sound (in health).”***

Allah (s.w.t.) is able to do every thing and every work is easy for Him,
as in this verse, He says:

***“It is easy for Me”.***

In Surah Al-Hadid, No. 57, verse 22 and in Surah At-Taْqabun, No. 64,
verse 7, the words are recited:

***“…that is easy to Allah”;***

and in Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verses 20 and 106, it is recited:

***“…Allah is All-powerful over everything”;***

and in Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 45 the Qur’an says:

***“…Allah is omnipotent over everything”.***

Therefore, Zachariah asked Allah how that matter could happen, and He
said:

***“So (it will be)”***

and Allah (s.w.t.) can strengthen his power in old age to give him
offspring.

In other words, Allah is the One Who is able to create all things from
aught, and then it is not surprising that He bestows a child upon
Zachariah in his old age and in those conditions.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘So (it will be)’. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me, for
indeed I created you aforetime when you were nothing’.”***

By hearing the abovementioned hope-inspiring statement, Zachariah became
very happy and encouraged and the light of hopefulness illuminated his
entire being, however, since that message was very magnificent and
constructive for him, he asked Allah for a sign, as follows:

***“He (Zachariah) said: ‘My Lord! appoint for me a sign.’…”***

No doubt Zachariah believed in Allah’s promise, but, in order to be more
assured, he asked Him for such a sign. This was similar to Abraham’s,
way who was certain of the Resurrection, yet he asked to see an aspect
of the resurrection in this world in order that his heart would become
more certain.

Then Zachariah (as) received this answer:

***“…Said He: ‘Your sign is that you shall not be able to speak to the
people for three nights, though sound (in health).”***

During those three days and nights Zachariah’s tongue (as) could move
only for prayers to Allah (s.w.t.) as well as in supplicating unto Him.

This was a clear sign, of course, in that a person would not able to
speak with people while his tongue and his body were utterly sound and
he could pray and worship to Allah fluently.

In the books of commentaries of Majma‘-ul-Bayan, of At-Tabari, and
Al-Mizan, it has been said that, at the time of recitation of the Divine
communications and the remembrance of Allah (s.w.t.), Zachariah’s tongue
could utter words fluently and correctly, but when he wanted to use his
tongue to speak with people, his tongue remained silent.

Of course, Zachariah (as) asked Allah (s.w.t.) for a sign to recognize
between right and wrong, and between the divine revelations and satanic
delusions.[^7]

This itself is an evidence to the fact that all our actions are under
the Will and device of Allah, so that if He let not we are not able to
speak even when we are in a complete health.

Surah Maryam – Verse 11
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخَرَجَ عَلَي قَوْمِهِ مِنَ الْمِـحْرَابِ فَاَوْحَي إِلَيْهِمْ أَن
سَبّـِحُوا بُكْرَةً وَعَشِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “Then he went out (of the sanctuary) unto his people and made
signs unto them that they should glorify (Allah) morning and
evening.”***

The Qur’anic word /bukrah/ is used for the length of time between the
dawn until the sunrise.

The term /mihrab/ (sanctuary) is called such since it is a
fighting-place against Satan and the temptations which hinder man’s
concentration of thought. Perhaps, the sanctuaries of the Children of
Israel had been the same places of prayer which people had chosen for
their Divine service and they worshipped therein.

According to what Tabarsi and Fakhr-i-Razi have said, the purpose of
/tasbih/ (to glorify), used in this verse, is ‘prayer’, because ‘prayer’
contains ‘glorification’. After this glad tidings and that clear Sign,
Zachariah came out of his prayer niche and went unto his people.

Then he signed to them that they should glorify Allah every morning and
evening. For, the result of the great bounty, which Allah had bestowed
Zachariah, would encompass all those people and could be effective in
their fate totally.

The verse says:

***“Then he went out (of the sanctuary) unto his people and made signs
unto them that they should glorify (Allah) morning and evening.”***

Moreover, this bounty, which was counted a miracle, could firm the
foundations of belief in their hearts.

### Some Traditions

1. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The most beloved sayings with Allah, the Glorious, is that the servant
says: ‘Glory be to my Lord and praise be to Him’.”*[^8]

2. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Whoever glorifies Allah thirty times every day, Allah, the Blessed,
the Exalted, may remove seventy afflictions from him, the least of which
is poverty.”*[^9]

3. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The hymns of Fatimatuz-Zahra, after every prayer, is more beloved with
me than one thousand units (rak‘ah) of prayer in a day.”*[^10]

Surah Maryam – Verses 12 - 13
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا يَحْيَي خُذِ الْكِتَابَ بِقُوَّةٍ وءَاتَيْنَاهُ الْحُكْمَ صَبِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحَنَاناً مِن لَّدُنَّا وَزَكَاةً وَكَانَ تَقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***12. “‘O’ Yahya! Take hold of the Book with might.’ And We gave him
wisdom (apostleship) while yet a child.”***  
***13. “And (also) compassion from Us and piety and he was
God-fearing.”***

The Qur’anic term /hukm/ means: ‘knowledge and understanding.’[^11] It
has also been applied in the sense of ‘ability and judgment’[^12], while
it is cited in Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan that the objective meaning of /hukm/,
in this verse, is: ‘knowledge unto the Divine sciences and the removal
of the curtain of Unseen’.

Three persons became prophets in childhood. They were Solomon, Jesus,
and John (as). There were also three persons who became Imam in their
childhood: Imam Jawad (the ninth Imam), Imam Hadi (the tenth Imam) and
Imam Mahdi (the twelfth Imam), peace be upon them all, because the rank
of prophethood and Imamate is granted by Allah.

Moreover, Divine prophets and the Immaculate Imams were bestowed upon
all virtues and sciences in the same World of Light. Therefore they
could speak and solve the problems even when they were in the wombs of
their mothers, in their cradles, and at the moment of their birth.

There are recorded many Islamic traditions in this regard in which it is
also said that even Siddighah-Tahirah, who was neither a prophet nor an
Imam, had this quality, too.[^13]

However, former verses denoted that Allah bestowed on Zachariah a son
named Yahya (John) when he was in old age.

Following that matter, in this verse, the great commandment of Allah
unto John is recited, as follows:

***“‘O’ Yahya! Take hold of the Book with might.’…”***

The objective meaning of ‘the Book’ here is Turah, and the purpose of
‘taking hold of the Book with might’ is that he should carry through its
content with an intensive sharp conclusiveness, and should act
accordingly, so that he could enjoy any material and spiritual power,
whether personal and social, in the way of its expansion and
generalization.

Next to this commandment, the Qur’an points to the merits that Allah had
granted to John, or he had obtained them with the grace of Allah, where
it says:

***“…And We gave him wisdom (apostleship) while yet a child.”***

1. Allah gave him the command of prophethood, wisdom, talent and
perspicacity in childhood.

2. And he was also given mercy and compassion in respect to people from
the side of Allah:

***“And also compassion from Us…”***

3. And Allah gave him piety and purity of soul, spirit, and action:

***“…piety…”***

4. And he avoided whatever was other than the command of Allah:

***“…and he was God-fearing.”***

By the way, the Qur’anic term /hanan/ means ‘compassion, kindness’.
Thus, it was the compassion of Allah to John and John’s love to Allah,
which caused the kindness of people to John and John’s affection unto
people, all of which were from the Grace of Allah and His Mercy.

Surah Maryam – Verses 14 - 15
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَرَّا بِوَالِدَيْهِ وَلَمْ يَكُن جَبَّاراً عَصِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَلاَمٌ عَلَيْهِ يَوْمَ وُلِدَ وَيَوْمَ يَمُوتُ وَيَوْمَ يُبْعَثُ
حَيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***14. “And kindness to his parents, and (unto the people) he was
neither insolent (nor) disobedient.”***  
***15. “And peace on him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and
the day he shall be raised alive!”***

Hadrat Yahya (John) was very kind to his parents and obeyed them. He
tried to make them happy, because obeying parents is obligatory, and
opposing them is forbidden. He also did not commit any sin,
transgression, and was never proud. He hurt no one.

The verse says:

***“And kindness to his parents, and (unto the people) he was neither
insolent (nor) disobedient.”***

Therefore, since Yahya (as) was qualified with all prominent epithets
and great honours, then peace upon him, as the verse says:

***“And peace on him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and the
day he shall be raised alive!”***

Some commentators have said that the most horrible states of a person
may appear in three circumstances:

1) The day when he comes out from the mother’s womb and enters into the
world.

2) The day he dies and finds himself among the people whom he has not
seen.

3) The day when he will be raised alive and finds himself in a great
place of gathering. Allah favoured John by His Grace and endowed
security on him in these three circumstances. Thus, Yahya (John) passed
all the narrow passages successfully with the safety of religion and
belief in Allah.

To hold dear the annual birthday, and remembrance of the annual day of
death of the saints of Allah, of course, is a Qur’anic matter.

### Some Points Upon John’s Martyrdom

Not only was the birth of John marvelous, but so was his death from some
points of view. Most Muslim historians, as well as some famous Christian
sources, have recorded the event of this martyrdom, (with slight
differences), as follows:

Yahya (John) was sacrificed because of the liaison one of the tyrants of
his age had with a woman related to him within the forbidden degrees.
Herod, the sensual king of Palestine, was in love with Herodias, his
niece, whose beauty had captured his heart in the fire of love.
Therefore, he decided to marry her.

When Yahya (John), the great prophet of Allah (as), was informed of this
he promptly announced there and then that their marriage was unlawful
and it was contrary to the laws of the Torah and that Yahya (John) would
struggle against it.

This news was spread throughout the city and the woman, Herodias, became
aware of it. She, considered Yahya (John) the greatest barrier on her
way, and decided to take revenge upon him at the most suitable
opportunity, and remove this obstruction in her way.

She intensified her relation with her uncle and made her beauty as a
trap for him. She had such a deep influence that one day Herod told her
to ask him whatever desire she had and she could be certain that her
demand would assuredly be performed.

Horodias said that she wanted nothing but the head of Yahya, because
Yahya had defamed both of them, and all people found fault concerning
them. She replied if Herod wanted to comfort her heart and make her
happy, he should do that accomplishment.

Herod, who was madly in love of that lady, inattentive to the end of
that action, submitted and very soon the head of John was presented to
that wicked woman. But, finally, the painful results of that hideous
action encompassed her.[^14]

Some Islamic traditions indicate that Imam Hussayn (as) the Great
Martyr, said;

*“From among the mean aspects of this world is that the head of
Yahya-ibn-Zachariah was brought as a present to a wicked woman from the
Children of Israel.”*

This statement means that, from this point of view, the conditions of
Yahya and those of Imam Hussayn (as) were alike, because one of the aims
of his rising was standing against the evil deeds of the tyrant of his
time, Yazid.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the Commentary

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^3]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary

[^4]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 27

[^5]: Tafsir-i-Kabir by Fakhr-i-Razi

[^6]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, and Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 14, p. 176

[^7]: Tafsir-i-Al-Mizan

[^8]: Kanz-ul-’Ummal, vol. 1, p. 466

[^9]: Amali by Sadugh, p. 55

[^10]: Muhajjat-ul-Bayda’, vol. 2, p. 348

[^11]: Lisan-ul-‘Arab

[^12]: Qamus-ul-Qur’an

[^13]: Tafsir-i-Atyab-ul-Bayan, and Reyhanatun-Nabiyy, p. 60

[^14]: Some Evangels and some religious literatures denote that Herod
married his brother’s wife, which was forbidden in the laws of the
Turah. Yahya scorned him for that action. Them that woman, by misusing
the beauty of her daughter, caused Herod to kill Yahya (John). (The
Gospel according to ST. Matthew, Chapter 14; and accrding to ST. Mark,
Chapter 6, No. 17 on)


