Section 2: Mary and Jesus
=========================

Surah Maryam – Verses 16 - 17
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ مَرْيَمَ إِذِ انتَبَذَتْ مِنْ أَهْلِهَا
مَكَاناً شَرْقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاتَّخَذَتْ مِن دُونِهِمْ حِجَاباً فَاَرْسَلْنَآ إِلَيْهَا رُوحَنَا
فَتَمَثَّلَ لَهَا بَشَراً سَوِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***16. “And mention in the Book about Mary when she withdrew from her
family to an eastern place.”***  
***17. “So she took a veil (to screen herself) apart from them. Then We
sent unto her Our Spirit (Holy Spirit) that presented himself to her a
perfect man.”***

The Messenger of Allah (S) said that Mary was one of the four typical
godly women.

The Arabic term /nabaŏa/ means: ‘to throw away something inattentively’,
while the Qur’anic word /’intibaŏ/ is used for ‘seeking retirement from
people’. Since Mary was dedicated to ‘The Remote Mosque’, she had chosen
a corner in the east of the mosque for herself.

After the statement of the explanation about Yahya (John), through these
holy verses, the Qur’an refers to the story of Jesus (as) and his
mother’s fate, because there is a close connection between these two
occurrences.

The birth of Yahya (John) to an aged father and a barren mother was a
wonderful thing, but the birth of Jesus, from a mother without a father,
was something even more marvelous.

It is surprising, of course, for a person be given wisdom and
prophethood in childhood, but it is more surprising than that that he,
as a baby, speaks in cradle concerning the Book and prophecy.

However, both of them are signs of the Power of Allah, the Exalted, and,
they both concerned people who had a very close blood relationship with
each other, because John’s mother was Mary’s maternal aunt both of whom
were barren and longed for a righteous child.

The verse says:

***“And mention in the Book about Mary when she withdrew from her family
to an eastern place.”***

In fact she humbly and anonymously withdrew from her family and went to
a place in the temple free from any disturbance in order to pray and to
tell her secrets to Allah.

At this time, Mary put a veil between herself and those people to screen
herself away from them so that her private place could be suitable for
worship and away from the prying eyes of people.

The verse says:

***“So she took a veil (to screen herself) apart from them...”***

Then one of the great angels (Holy Spirit), in the form of a perfect
handsome man, without any defect, presented himself to Mary and, by the
might of Allah, fulfilled his mission.

It was just as Allah, the Most High, in the Qur’an says:

***“Blessed be He in Whose hand is Domination; and He is All-Powerful
over everything.”***[^1]

The verse under discussion continues saying:

***“…Then We sent unto her Our Spirit (Holy Spirit) that presented
himself to her a perfect man.”***

Surah Maryam – Verses 18 - 20
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ إِنّـِي أَعُوذُ بِالرَّحْمَنِ مِنكَ إِن كُنتَ تَقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنَّمَآ أَنَاْ رَسُولُ رَبّـِكِ لاَهَبَ لَكِ غُلاَماً زَكِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَتْ أَنَّي يَكُونُ لِي غُلامٌ وَلَمْ يَمْسَسْنِي بَشَرٌ وَلَمْ
أَكُ بَغِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***18. “She said: ‘Verily I take refuge in the Beneficent (Allah) from
you! if you are God-fearing.”***  
***19. “He (the angel) said: ‘Verily I am only a messenger of your Lord
that I bestow on you a pure son’.”***  
***20. “She said: ‘How shall there be for me a son while no man has
touched me, neither have I been unchaste.”***

One of the recommendations of Allah to His Messengers is that they
should take refuge in Allah. Therefore, this state has been the moral
life of the prophets and the saints of Allah, and that is why when the
pious persons feel the probability of committing sin, they tremble in
fear and take refuge in Allah, The Beneficent.

It is evident that, at that time, a great fear overcame her when this
pious woman saw that a handsome foreigner had entered her sanctuary,
therefore, she immediately said:

***“‘Verily I take refuge in the Beneficent (Allah) from you! if you are
God-fearing.”***

Her Mentioning the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, and qualifying Him by
His general mercy, on the one hand and encouraging the man to piety and
being God-fearing, on the other, were all intended to deter that
unfamiliar man if he had intended something evil.

By saying these words, Mary was expecting a reaction from the stranger,
an expectation laden with fear and abundant anxiety.

But this situation did not last very long, and the stranger spoke and
stated his great mission:

***“He (the angel) said: ‘Verily I am only a messenger of your Lord…”***

This statement comforted Mary’s pure heart, as if water was poured over
a fire.

But this relief did not last long, because immediately after that he
added that he had come to bestow on her a son who would be pure from the
point of temper, manner, body, and spirit.

The verse continues saying:

***“…that I bestow on you a pure son’.”***

However, the term /zakiyy/, used in the verse, is derived from /zakat/
in the sense of: ‘purity, growth, and blessing’, while the word
/baqyan/, here, means ‘a prostitute’.

In this Surah the subject of being granted a child from Allah has been
mentioned several times: the bestowal of Jesus to Mary in verse 19; that
of Isaac and Jacob to Abraham in verse 49. Moreover the remittal of
Aaron to Moses in verse 53; and the glad tidings of a child to Zachariah
in verse 7 are among them.

Having a child is something of great value, but greater than this is the
purity of the child.

By hearing these word, Mary was seized with a severe trembling and again
she became very worried.

In that situation, and only thinking about the natural means of having a
child, she wondered and:

***“She said: ‘How shall there be for me a son while no man has touched
me, neither have I been unchaste.”***

Surah Maryam – Verses 21 - 23
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ كَذَلِكِ قَالَ رَبُّكِ هُوَ عَلَيَّ هَيّـِنٌ وَلِنَجْعَلَهُ
ءَايَةً لّـِلنَّاسِ وَرَحْمَةً مّـِنَّا وَكَانَ أَمْراً مقْضِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَحَمَلَتْهُ فَانتَبَذَتْ بِهِ مَكَاناً قَصِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَجَآءَهَا الْمَـخَاضُ إِلَي جِذْعِ النَّخْلَةِ قَالَتْ يَا
لَيْتَنِي مِتُّ قَبْلَ هَذَا وَكُنتُ نَسْياً مَنْسِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “He said: ‘So (it will be)’. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me,
and that We will make him a Sign (miracle) unto the people and a Mercy
from Us, and it is a matter decreed.***  
***22. “So she conceived him (Jesus) and withdrew with him to a distance
place.”***  
***23. “And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a
palm-tree. She said: ‘Would I had died ere this, and had been a thing
forgotten’.”***

The Divine angel, in the guise of a man, appeared before Mary and blew
on her so that she became pregnant. Then, Mary went to a distant place
for she was worried about the accusation of people who did not know of
the matter, or because a pregnant woman needs comfort and a quiet
environment.

The opinions recorded in most commentaries are divided and abundant
about the place and that how Mary became pregnant, or who was the first
person that was informed of the matter, but since the Qur’an has not
stated anything in this regard, we, too, do not offer any discussion
concerning these subjects, because they are not so functional in the
development of our understanding.

Some of the difficulties and hardships that Mary tolerated are as
follows:

A. The accusation and suspicion of people.

B. Pregnancy and childbirth in solitude and isolation.

C. The lack of a resting place and taking refuge beside a palm tree.

D. Maintaining a child with no father and being among some people who
looked at her with revulsion.

However, when the angel saw Mary’s surprise at hearing that glad
tidings, he told her that Allah’s command was exactly what he had said
to her, and that her Lord announced that creating a child out of a
virgin was not difficult for Him.

Allah intended for that extraordinary occurrence to be evidence of the
child’s prophethood and a proof of the immunity of his mother, and that
it might also be a bounty from Him upon mankind for their guidance by
means of this prophet.

The verse says:

***“He said: ‘So (it will be)’. Your Lord says: ‘It is easy for Me, and
that We will make him a Sign (miracle) unto the people and a Mercy from
Us, and it is a matter decreed.”***

The creation of Jesus with no father, of course, is a special event that
occurred by the Will of Allah. Finally, at the higest spiritual point
Mary experienced the most intense experience of the divine in her life,
to receive the spirit of a prophet in her womb.

Mary conceived and that promised child was settled in her pure womb.
Most of the commentators have said that Gabriel blew into her collar and
at the same moment she felt the stirrings of pregnancy.

It has also been narrated from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) that Gabriel
blew into Mary’s collar and at the same moment Jesus existed in mother’s
womb,[^2] while, in the wombs of other women, the creation and growth of
a child usually extends to about nine months.

Mary came out with her abdomen grown big and heavy, and when her
maternal aunt saw her, she became quite upset, seeing her niece in that
status. Mary was always bashful and deferential with her maternal aunt,
so because of this, and the fear of being accused of immoral conduct,
she chose not to stay among the people and went to a far off place.

She spent in seclusion relying on hope in her Lord, with a state of
anxiety, mixed with happiness. It was her Lord Who had wrought this
great miracle upon her, and only He could silence the accusing fingers
and voices that could not accept that a woman could conceive without a
man. What could she do with that accusation?

But, in the other hand, she felt that this child was the promised Divine
prophet, a great heavenly gift. She thought how the Lord, Who had given
her the glad tidings of that child, and had created him with that
miraculous quality, would leave her alone?

Accounts vary concerning the length of Mary’s pregnancy. Some have said
that it lasted one hour, while some others believe that it took a longer
time. Ibn ‘Abbas says that one hour after that she went to that distant
place, the child was born, because Allah has not mentioned any length of
time for between Mary’s departure for that place and the birth of the
child.

It is said that when Mary was ten years old, she became pregnant in one
hour, and the body of the child was formed in that very hour, and in
that very hour the child was born. The birth of the child occurred when
the sun was setting in the horizon.

It has also been narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that Mary’s pregnancy
lasted nine hours.[^3]

Whatever the duration of her pregnancy was, the time come for the birth
of the child. Women, in such a state, usually seek the help and refuge
of their kindred that they might help them in the birth of their child.
But Mary’s situation was an exceptional one, she did not want anyone to
witness her delivery, and as soon as the pain began, she set out toward
the desert.

The verse says:

***“So she conceived him (Jesus) and withdrew with him to a distance
place.”***

In this regard the Qur’an implies that the pain of childbirth drove her
to the stump of a withered palm-tree from which only that trunk had
remained; i.e. it was a dry tree.

The verse says:

***“And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a
palm-tree...”***

In that condition, a storm of sadness and grief came over her pure
being.

This storm was so turbulent, and the burden on her shoulder was so
heavy, that, as the verse says:

***“…She said: ‘Would I had died ere this, and had been a thing
forgotten’.”***

It is evident that it was not only the fear of future accusations that
was pressing upon Mary’s heart, there were also other problems such as
delivering a child alone in the desert with no midwife or friend as a
helper.

There was no place to rest, nor water to drink, there was no food to
eat, nor any means to take care of the child with what was available in
the environment. These were all the discomforts that Mary had to
tolerate.

Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“The best clothing of the religion is modesty.”*[^4]

Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“Verily modesty and chastity are among the specialties of Faith, and
both of them are the epithets of the noble and the method of the
righteous.”*[^5]

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“The modesty of a man with himself is the fruit of Faith.”*[^6]

Hadrat Ali (as) said:

*“Modesty is from Allah, the Pure, it protects (one ) from the
punishment of Hell Fire.”*[^7]

Surah Maryam – Verses 24 - 25
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَادَاهَا مِن تَحْتِهَآ اَلاَّ تَحْزَنِي قَدْ جَعَلَ رَبُّكِ
تَحْتَكِ سَرِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُزّ‌ِي إِلَيْكِ بِجِذْعِ النَّخْلَةِ تُسَاقِطْ عَلَيْكِ رُطَباً
جَنِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***24. “Then (a voice) called out unto her from beneath her: ‘Grieve
not! Verily your Lord has made a stream to flow beneath you’.”***  
***25. “And shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards yourself. It will
drop on you fresh ripe dates.”***

The Qur’anic word /sariyya/ means ‘a small stream’; and the term
/janiyya/ is applied for ‘a fruit which is ripe and ready to be picked
off’.

Some commentators have said that the caller unto Mary has been Gabriel;
but the context of the verses shows that the caller has been Jesus, in a
manner that the mother hears his words and believes what he says, and,
later with a calm mind, she tells people to ask about her chastity from
the child in the cradle.

At the time of delivery and after it, women usually need tranquility,
water and appropriate food, the things which have been mentioned in
these verses.

The food which has been recommended in the Qur’an and by some Islamic
tradition for the woman who has already delivered, is fresh ripe dates.

Also, the Prophet (S) said:

*“The first food for the women who have already delivered, should be
fresh dates”.*[^8]

Hadrat Ali (as) says:

*“The best food for the pregnant woman is fresh dates, and there is no
medical treatment for her better than dates”.*[^9]

This is a Divine trial. The day when Mary was sound, a heavenly food was
sent down for her, but today, when she is pregnant and has no assistant,
she must shake the palm-tree to get some food.

However, the verse says:

***“Then (a voice) called out unto her from beneath her: ‘Grieve not!
Verily your Lord has made a stream to flow beneath you’.”***

Some commentators have said that the caller has been Jesus Himself (as),
who, from beneath her, called out that she should not be grieved (Grieve
not!), and she should not ask for death.

She ought to be sure that Allah would protect her from accusation and,
by the miracles of Jesus (as), He removes all accusations from her. One
of those miracles was that very spring which was found by one step of
Gabriel or that of Jesus, from which she both drunk and expurgated
herself.

Another miracle of Jesus (as) was that he called unto her to shake the
trunk of the palm-tree, which had been dead for years, in order to
become green alive again and give her fresh dates. Mary started at once
and found that tree. She shook it when some fresh dates fell down for
her.

The verse says:

***“And shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards yourself. It will drop
on you fresh ripe dates.”***

It seemed that Allah intended to show her that the similitude of her and
Jesus was the similitude of that palm-tree and the dates; meaning that
Allah is powerful to cause the fresh dates to fall from a dry dead
palm-tree, to gash water from a plain land, and He is powerful to bring
a complete human out of the womb of a husbandless woman during a few
hours.

This fact was made quietly manifest to Mary that that child was the
great sign of Allah and also His condescension unto her, but she was
amazed what to say to people so that it could remove the accusation from
her. Then, the command of Allah came to her that ‘she should eat and
drink’.

It is narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) that the best things which must be
given to the ladies who have already conceived is dates and the dates
produced in Medina in particular, but if it is not available, the fresh
dates from other places might be given to them, or at least, some
ordinary dates.[^10]

Mary was also commanded to drink the wholesome water of that spring, and
to refresh her eyes by looking at that newborn child. What a refreshment
of the eye can be better than this that Allah grants her a child with
the rank of prophethood.

A child who spoke at the beginning time of his birthday, and who had
great miracles such as restoring to life the dead, healing the blind,
and the like of them.[^11]

Surah Maryam – Verse 26
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلِي وَاشْرَبِي وَقَرّ‌ِي عَيْناً فَإِمَّا تَرَيِنَّ مِنَ الْبَشَرِ
أَحَداً فَقُولِي إِنّـِي نَذَرْتُ لِلرَّحْمَانِ صَوْماً فَلَنْ
اُكَلّـِمَ الْيَوْمَ إِنسِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***26. “So eat and drink and refresh your eye; and if you meet any
mortal, say: ‘Verily I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent (God), so
never shall I speak today with any human being’.”***

Mary’s keeping silence fasting before people was either for that they
had not the capacity of her answer, or speaking with them would result a
negative consequence, or in continuation of their questions and that
Mary gave them their answers, they might suggest some other questions
and new pretexts.

Imam Sadiq (as) said that fasting was not only an abstinence from eating
and drinking, and then he recited the verse under discussion.

In this holy verse, Allah, the Pure, commands Mary to eat from that
delicious and nutritive food and to drink from that wholesome water.

The verse says:

***“So eat and drink…”***

She was also commanded to refresh her eye by that newly born child and
not to be worried about the future; and if anybody asked her regarding
it, she would say by sign that she had kept fasting (a silence fasting)
for Allah, the Beneficent, and that was why she could speak with no one.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and refresh your eye; and if you meet any mortal, say: ‘Verily I
have vowed a fast to the Beneficent (God), so never shall I speak today
with any human being’.”***

Therefore, she should have peace of mind from any points of view and
should not let herself be grievous and sad.

From the text of the verse, it is understood that the fast of silence
was something familiar to that community, so they did not object to it
however this kind of fasting is not sanctioned in the religion of Islam.

It is narrated from Imam Ali-ibn-il-Hussayn (as) who said:

*“A fast of Silence is prohibited.”*

Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) has narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) who
said:

*“The first thing that a woman may eat after her delivery must be fresh
dates.”*

Some Islamic traditions denote that the best food for a pregnant woman,
and her drug, is fresh dates.

### Some Points

**1.** The hardships and inconveniences that Mary experienced during
that short time, and the wonderful things that occurred to her, by the
grace of Allah, trained her and made her prepared for fostering one of
the Arch-prophets of Allah, so that she could afford her maternal duty
in performing this great task very well.

The process of events led her up to the last stage of difficulties,
which was so exacting that she did not see the distance between life and
death to be more than one step. But suddenly the state of affairs
changed.

Everyone hastened to help her, and she was assured a calm atmosphere.
The command to shake the palm-tree to enjoy its fruit, teaches her, as
well as all other human beings, this lesson that effort and endeavour
should not be abandoned even in the most difficult moments of life.

This statement is an answer to those who think there should not have
been any necessity for Mary, who had just given birth, to stand up and
shake the palm-tree.

This view states that it would have been better if the same Lord, by
Whose command the spring had gushed forth in front of her, and by Whose
order the dry tree had yielded fruit, had sent a breeze to shake the
branch of the tree so that the dates would fall.

They say that when Mary was healthy, heavenly fruits were sent to her
sanctuary, and now when she was in dire physical and emotional
difficulties, she had to shake the tree and pick up the fruit herself.

The commandment is far from without wisdom, to recapitulate, it shows
that there is no bounty unless we use effort. In other words, when the
difficulties come forth, everybody must apply his utmost effort, and
that which is beyond his ability, he ought to seek it from Allah.

**2.** Why Mary hoped for Death? There is no doubt that hoping for death
is not a proper thing to do, but sometimes calamities and terrible
events occur in the course of a person’s life when the taste of life
becomes utterly bitter for him, especially when his own honour and
sacred aims are in danger and he does not have the ability to defend
them. In such circumstances he hopes for death in order to free himself
of his spiritual tortures.

What was on Mary’s mind from the beginning was that the birth of this
child could make her lose all her respect and honour in the eyes of
those mindless people, so she hoped for death and that she would be
forgotten. This itself is a proof of the fact that she valued chastity
and piety more than her very life, and would rather die that live
without honour.

These kinds of thoughts, however, bothered her only for a short time.
When she contemplated these couple of miracles of Allah, (gashing water
and fructification of the dry palm-tree), all her fears and anxieties,
disappeared and the light of certainty and tranquility filled her whole
heart.

**3. An Answer to a Question:** Some sceptics say if miracles are only
particular to prophets and Immaculate Imams, how could have those
miracles appeared for Mary?

To solve this problem, some commentators count these miracles as those
wrought by Jesus, and say that they were done as miracles preliminary to
prophethood, which in Arabic are called: /’irhadat/’.

But such questions need not be answered with answers such as these,
because it is possible for supernatural events to occur in connection
with people other than prophets and the Immaculate Imams. This is
exactly what we call /kiramat/ ‘extraordinary act’, whereas a miracle is
accompanied with /tahaddi/ ‘a challenge’ for it serves a proof for a
prophet or an Imam.

**4. The Fast of Silence:** The verses under discussion show that Mary
was held to a vow of silence and, by the command of Allah, she refrained
from speaking to the people for a particular duration until her child,
Jesus, began speaking and defended her chastity. This state was more
appropriate and effective from all respects.

The verse indicates that the vow of silence was a familiar habit for
those people and as such they did not object to it from her.

This kind of fasting, however, is not lawful in the religion of Islam.

It is narrated from Imam Ali-ibn-il-Hussayn (as) that he said:

*“The fast of silence is prohibited”.*[^12]

And this prohibition reflects the difference between the conditions
prevailing at that time and those at the time of the advent of Islam.

Nevertheless, one of the etiquettes of a perfect fast in Islam, of
course, is that, when fasting the believer should protect his tongue
from committing sins and doing what is disapproved and restrain his eyes
from looking at any corruption.

Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition has said:

*“Verily fasting is not merely to restrain oneself from eating and
drinking alone. Surely Mary said:*

***‘Verily I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent (God)’***, i.e. the
silence.

*Therefore (when you are in fasting) protect your tongue, restrain your
eyes from whatever is sin, be not envious of each other, and do not get
into conflict.”*[^13]

**5. A Nutritive Food:** The verses under discussion clearly say that
Allah sent fresh dates for Mary’s food at the time of childbirth. With
this in mind, commentators have said that the best food for women after
their childbirth is fresh dates.

This idea has been explicitly indicated as such in the Islamic
literature as well. Imam Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) has narrated from
the holy Prophet of Islam (S) who said:

 *“The first thing a woman is to eat after childbirth should be fresh
dates, since Allah told Mary:*

***‘And shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards yourself. It will drop
on you fresh ripe dates’.”***[^14]

The explanation in some commentaries that cite this tradition implies
that eating this food is not only useful for the mother, but will also
affect her milk.

Again, it is understood from some Islamic traditions that the best food
for a pregnant woman, as well as her medicine, is fresh dates,[^15] and,
if it is not available, ordinary dates can be used. But, moderation must
be observed in everything, even in this matter.

Some scientists and food specialists say that dates are abundant in
nutrition and have one of the healthiest sugars which can be used even
by some diabetic patients.

The same scientists say that there are 13 vital substances and five
kinds of vitamins found in dates, all of which make it a rich source of
food.[^16]

It is also well known that in such a state, women are intensely in need
of some nutritive food which are full of vitamins.

With the progress of medical science, the importance of dates as a
medicine has been proved.

Calcium is found in dates which is an important substance in
strengthening bones and teeth. There is also phosphorus which is one of
the main elements that make up man’s brain. It hinders neurasthenia and
fatigue. Dates contain potassium, the lack of which causes ulcers in the
stomach.

Surah Maryam – Verses 27 - 28
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَتَتْ بِهِ قَوْمَهَا تَحْمِلُهُ قَالُوا يَامَرْيَمُ لَقَدْ جِئْتِ
شَيْئاً فَرِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَااُخْتَ هَارُونَ مَا كَانَ أَبُوكِ امْرأَ سَوْءٍ وَمَا كَانَتْ
اُمُّكِ بَغِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***27. “Then she brought the child to her people, carrying him (in her
arms). They said: ‘Verily you have done a very indecent thing’.”***  
***28. “O sister of Aaron! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your
mother an unchaste woman.”***

The Arabic term /fariyya/ means ‘an indecency, a great sin’.

### Jesus Speaks in Cradle!

At last, Mary brought her child to her people, carrying him in her arms.
When those people saw a new-born- child in her bosom, they wondered so
that their mouths remained half open.

The verse says:

***“Then she brought the child to her people, carrying him (in her
arms). They said: ‘Verily you have done a very indecent thing’.”***

Some of them, who were hasty in judgment, said about Mary that it was a
pity with that glorious background and this pollution! And a thousand
pities her pure family who became so disgraced like that.

Then, as the verse says, they encountered her as follows:

***“…They said: ‘Verily you have done a very indecent thing’.”***

Some others, addressing Mary, told her:

***“O sister of Aaron! Your father was not a bad man, nor was your
mother an unchaste woman.”***

They addressed Mary by the phrase ‘O sister of Aaron’, because Aaron was
a pure and pious man, and he was so well known among the Children of
Israel for his piety that whenever they wanted to show how pious and
righteous a person was, they would address the one as a brother or
sister of Aaron.

### Some Verses and Traditions About Calumny

Allah, the Almighty, says:

*“And whoever commits a fault or a sin, then accuses an innocent person
of it, he has burdened (himself) with a calumny and a manifest
sin.”*[^17]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“When a believer accuses his brethren, faith will dissolve way from his
heart like salt is dissolved in water.”*[^18]

Imam Ali (as) said:

*“(The sin of) calumny charged against the pious is heavier than the
skies.”*[^19]

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Calumny against the pious is heavier than firm, (steady)
mountains.”*[^20]

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“A (true) believer does not deceive his brethren, is not treacherous to
him, does not abase him, does not denigrate him, and does not tell him
he hates him.”*[^21]

Imam Rida (as) narrated from the Prophet (S) who said:

*“He who belies a believing man or a believing woman, or says something
about him which is not in him, on the Day of Judgment Allah will make
him stand on a heap of Fire until he comes out of what he had said
against him.”*[^22]

Surah Maryam – Verses 29 - 30
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَشَارَتْ إِلَيْهِ قَالُوا كَيْفَ نُكَلّـِمُ مَن كَانَ فِي الْمَهْدِ
صَبِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنّـِي عَبْدُ اللَّهِ ءَاتَانِيَ الْكِتَابَ وَجَعَلَنِي
نَبِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***29. “Then Mary pointed to him. They said: ‘How shall we speak to one
who is (yet) a child in the cradle?’”***  
***30. “He (miraculously) said: ‘Verily I am a servant of Allah; He has
given me the Book and made me a prophet’.”***

Since Mary had observed a silence fasting, in order to fulfill her vow,
she signed instead of speaking.

The verse says:

***“Then Mary pointed to him. They said: ‘How shall we speak to one who
is (yet) a child in the cradle?’”***

The first word of Jesus (as) was about servitude unto Allah, but his
followers exaggerated and considered Jesus as God or God’s son.

Once Imam Baqir (as) was asked whether Hadrat Jesus (as) was also the
witness of Allah when Jesus was in cradle. Imam (as) said Jesus (as) was
a prophet then, but he was not a Messenger until when he was seven years
old. It was in that year that the rank of Messengership was bestowed on
him.[^23]

By a short sentence, Jesus (as) both banished the accusation from his
mother, and spoke about his own future, and pointed to the future duty
of people.

The verse in this regard says:

***“He (miraculously) said: ‘Verily I am a servant of Allah; He has
given me the Book and made me a prophet’.”***

However, the Qur’an in the first verse says that Mary was silent to obey
the command of Allah. The only thing she did was that she pointed to her
new-born-child, Jesus, when her action caused the people’s astonishment
more than before.

They told her:

***“How shall we speak to one who is (yet) a child in the cradle?”***

According to some other commentary books, they said to each other that
the mockery and ridicule of Mary was harder and heavier to them than her
deviation from the path of chastity.

But this situation did not last so long, because that new-born-child
started speaking, and said:

***“Verily I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and made me
a prophet.”***

Surah Maryam – Verses 31 - 32
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلَنِي مُبَارَكاً أَيْنَ مَا كُنتُ وَأَوْصَانِي بِالصَّلاَةِ
وَالزَّكَاةِ مَادُمْتُ حَيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَرّاً بِوَالِدَتِي وَلَمْ يَجْعَلْنِي جَبَّاراً شَقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***31. “And He has made me blessed wherever I may be and He has enjoined
on me prayer and almsgiving so long as I live.”***  
***32. “And (He has made me) kind to my mother, and He has not made me
arrogant unblessed.”***

The existence of Jesus (as) was a blessed thing in which there were a
lot of interests, education of others, and its continuation. Hadrat
Jesus (as) both lives a long blessed life which lasts until after the
reappearance of Imam Mahdi (as), and his followers are abundant and are
victorious against the infidels.

The origin of good things and blessings are mainly intentions, aims, and
innate modes and virtues.

Therefore, some people are blessed wherever they may be, as the verse,
concerning Jesus, says:

***“And He has made me blessed wherever I may be…”***

But, some others, because of their spiritual difficulties and their
separation from spirituality, are faced with their own evil qualities,
and usually they are not useful for others wherever they may be.

By mentioning the word ‘mother’, Jesus (as) has pointed to the chastity
of his mother, Mary, and his lack of father, when he says:

***“And (He has made me) kind to my mother…”***

Also, the Qur’an, from the tongue of Jesus, in this verse implies that
Allah has made him a blessed being, or a useful being for people,
wherever he may be, and He has enjoined him to prayer and almsgiving so
long as he is alive.

The verse, in this regard, continues saying:

***“…and He has enjoined on me prayer and almsgiving so long as I
live.”***

And, by the next verse, Jesus after implaying that Allah made him kind,
benevolent, and appreciative unto his mother, adds that He did not make
him arrogant and damned.

The verse continues saying;

***“…and He has not made me arrogant unblessed.”***

An Islamic tradition indicates that Jesus (as) has said:

*“My heart is mild and I humble myself to my self.”*

This statement is an indication to this fact that the opposite state of
‘being arrogant and unblessed’ is these two epithets.

### A Few Traditions About Prayer, Almsgiving, and Kindness to Parents

#### A. Prayer

1. Imam Baqir (as) said:

*“Islam has been founded on five things: prayer, almsgiving, Hajj,
fasting and the mastership (of Ahl-ul-Bayt).”*[^24]

2. The Prophet of Islam (S) said:

*“The most beloved things with Allah are prayer at its time, then
kindness to parents, then Holy Struggle in the way of Allah.”*[^25]

3. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The one who takes his prayer lightly is not of me. No, by Allah, such
a person will not reach me by the Houd, the pool of abundance.”*[^26]

#### B. Almsgiving

1. It is narrated from Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) who said:

*“The pillars of Islam are three, none of which is useful without the
other two. They are: Prayer, almsgiving, and the guardianship (of the
Ahl-ul-Bayt).”*[^27]

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Cure your patients by means of charity (sadaghah), and protect your
property by the alms tax (Zakat).”*

3. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“One who restrains paying as much as a Qirat (about 2 grams) of the
(obligatory) alms tax (Zakat), will die as a Jew or a Christian.”*[^28]

4. Imam Musa-ibn-Ja‘far (as) said:

*“Verily the Alms tax has been assigned as a provision for the poor and
as a means for the increase of their wealth.”*[^29]

However, communication with Allah (prayer) is not separate from
communication with the deprived (almsgiving).

#### C. Kindness to the Parents

1. Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The best deeds are: prayer in its time, kindness to parents, and Holy
Struggle in the way of Allah.”*[^30]

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“One who obeys the command of Allah regarding parents, two doors of the
Paradise will be opened for him; and if he obeys (the command of Allah
regarding) one of them, then one door will be opened (to him).”*[^31]

3. The holy Prophet (S) in a tradition has said:

*“He who obeys his parents and His Lord, will be in the highest position
(of Heaven in Hereafter).”*[^32]

4. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The person who pleases his parents, has pleased Allah; and the one who
discontents his parents, has discontented Allah.”*[^33]

5. The Prophet of Islam (S) said:

*“The person who likes his lifetime to be prolonged and his sustenance
to be increased, then he should be kind to his parents and visit his
kin.”*[^34]

Surah Maryam – Verse 33
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّلاَمُ عَلَيَّ يَوْمَ وُلِدتُّ وَيَوْمَ أَمُوتُ وَيَوْمَ
اُبْعَثُ حَيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***33. “And peace be on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and
the day I shall be raised alive.”***

Then, finally, from the tongue of this newborn Child (Hadrat Messiah)
the verse says:

***“And peace be on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the
day I shall be raised alive.”***

This statement has occurred both about Yahya (John)[^35] (as) and about
Jesus Christ (as).

Hadrat Imam Rida (as) said:

*“The most horrible days of a man are three days: the birth day, the day
of death, and the Day of Hereafter.”*[^36]

Surah Maryam – Verses 34 - 35
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ عِيسَي ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ قَوْلَ الْحَقّ‌ِ الَّذِي فِيهِ
يَمْتَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ لِلَّهِ أَن يَتَّخِذَ مِن وَلَدٍ سُبْحَانَهُ إِذَا قَضَي
أَمْراً فَإِنَّمَا يَقُولُ لَهُ كُن فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***34. “This is Jesus, son of Mary, a statement of truth, concerning
which they doubt.”***  
***35. “It is not befitting to Allah that He should beget a son. Glory
be to Him! When He decrees a thing, He only says unto it: ‘Be’, and it
is.”***

Formerly the Qur’an illustrated clearly the event of the birth of Jesus
through previous verses. Now, it refers to the negation of the
superstitions and the polytheistic words that they have said about Jesus
(as).

It says:

***“This is Jesus, son of Mary…”***

The Qur’an emphasizes on the fact that Jesus is the son of Mary, in
order to negate his being as the son of God, and then, it adds:

***“…a statement of truth, concerning which they doubt.”***

Then, in the next verse, it explicitly says:

***“It is not befitting to Allah that He should beget a son. Glory be to
Him!…”***

But, if He intends something and commands, He says to it ‘Be’ and it
will come into being, too.

The verse continues saying:

***“…When He decrees a thing, He only says unto it: ‘Be’, and it is.”***

This statement indicates that having son for Allah, in the form that the
Christians imagine it unto Him, does not fit the sanctity of the Rank of
Allah. On one side, its requisite is the existence of body, and on the
other side, there should be considered a limitation for Him, and on the
third side, Allah does not need anything.

The expression saying “‘***Be’ and it is***” is a very lively
illustration unto the vast power of Allah and His domination and
sovereignty over the subject of creation.

### Explanations

Jesus Christ (as) has been introduced through the afore mentioned verses
by seven outstanding epithets and two accomplishments.

#### A. The Epithets of Jesus Christ

1. To be a servant of Allah:

***“Verily am a servant of Allah.”***

2. To bring a heavenly Book:

***“…He has given me the Book.”***

3. To be a prophet:

***“…and made me a prophet.”***

4. To be blessed:

***“And He has made me blessed.”***

5. To be kind unto the mother:

***“And (He has made me) kind to my mother.”***

6. Not to be arrogant and unblessed:

***“He not made me arrogant and unblessed.”***

7. To be humble, gratitude, and prosperous:

***“And peace be on me.”***

#### B. Two Accomplishments

One of them is prayer and the other is almsgiving (zakat). The above
mentioned verse says that the truth about Jesus is just what Allah said:

***“This is Jesus, son of Mary”.***

In the holy Qur’an, the Christians have been repeatedly mentioned as
deviated whose belief about Christ, as the son of God, is wrong.

For example, in Surah Al-Ma’idah, No. 5, verse 73, it says:

***“certainly they disbelieve who say: ‘Verily Allah is the third of the
three’…”***

And, in Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 30, it says:

***“…and the Christians say: ‘The Messiah is the son of God’…”.***

But, this verse shows the correct argument in response to these
erroneous claims regarding the characteristics of Jesus.

There is no need to say that the Will of Allah comes into being, even
without the expression of ‘Be’, but Allah has described His Will for us
in this manner so that we could understand it.

Allah is Omnipotent, and He is not in need of anything or any means in
creating, His infinite Power is a reason why He is far exalted from
powerlessness and from begetting a son.

### The Qur’an and the Christ

As a result of the stiff pressure that the pagans of Mecca put upon the
followers of the Prophet of Islam (S), a group of Muslims, accompanied
by Ja‘far-ibn-Abitalib, by the order of the Prophet (S), migrated to
Ethiopia (Abyssinia).

The pagans of the Quraysh thought that if the Muslims could become
powerful there and form a government, they would be able to root out the
idolatry that the polytheists practiced.

They sent’Amru‘as and with a delegation to Ethiopia bearing presents for
the ministers of Najashi, the king of Abyssinia. Those ministers took
the presents from them to put Najashi to motion against the emigrant
Muslims.

But Najashi decided to personally summon the Muslims and hearken to
their sayings. Ja‘far, who was the representative of the Muslims, began
speaking at the presence of the king of Ethiopia.

He said his words about the wrongdoings of idolatry, superstitions and
transgressions of the Age of Ignorance. He informed Najashi of the
advent of Islam and luminosity of the religion of Hadrat Muhammad (S).
Ja‘far spoke so influentially that Najashi wept and sent the pagans’
presents back to them.

He said:

*“The Lord, Who gave me power, did not take bribery from me. Why should
I take bribery from you?”*

That meeting ended with the benefit of Muslims and the loss of infidels.
After this defeat, ‘Amru‘as contemplated and, on the following day,
offered the king a new suggestion. In order to excite the religious zeal
of Najashi, he told him that Muslims had some notions which were against
his belief. Najashi summoned Muslims once more and asked them their
belief about Messiah (as).

In answer to him, Ja‘far Tayyar recited some verses of the Qur’an from
Surah Maryam up to the verse which says:

*“This is Jesus, son of Mary, a statement of truth, concerning which
they doubt.”.*

By hearing the verses of the Qur’an, Najashi shed tears and said:

*“This is the truth”.*

After this second defeat, when ‘Amru‘as wanted to start another new
effort, Najashi raised his hand and gave him a sharp slap in his
face.[^37]

Surah Maryam – Verse 36
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبّـِي وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ
مُّسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***36. “And verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship (only)
Him. This is a straight path.”***

The persistence of Messiah (as) on Monotheism, and his emphasis that the
straight path is only this one, is an answer to the adherents of trinity
as well as others.

(A similar text to the abovementioned holy verse has also occurred in
Surah’Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 51, and Surah Az-Zukhruf, No. 43, verse
64).

Through introducing himself, Jesus (as) said he was a servant of Allah:

***“…Verily I am servant of Allah…”***[^38]***.***

Then, the first command he received was about prayer and worship:

***“…and He has enjoined on me prayer…”***[^39]***,***

and the first program he announced was worshipping Allah:

***“…So worship (only) Him…”.***

Thus taking Jesus as a Son of God is an alteration in religion which
causes blasphemy.

However, this verse implies that the last word of Jesus, after
introducing himself with the qualities which were previously referred
to, is the subject of Monotheism, specially on the field of worship, on
which he emphasized more.

By this verse, Jesus (as) says:

***“And verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship (only) Him.
This is a straight path.”***

Thus, from very beginning of his life, Messiah (as) struggled against
any blasphemy, and worshipping gods of dualism and polytheism, because
monotheism, and worshipping Allah, is the straight path, while the rest
paths are some deviated paths. (In the Qur’an, the path of Allah and His
Messenger, accompanied with worshipping Him, has been introduced as the
‘straight path’.)

Surah Maryam – Verses 37 - 38
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاخْتَلَفَ الاَحْزَابُ مِن بَيْنِهِمْ فَوَيْلٌ لّـِلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
مِن مَّشْهَدِ يَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْمِعْ بِهِمْ وَأَبْصِرْ يَوْمَ يَأْتُونَنَا لَكِنِ الظَّالِمُونَ
الْيَوْمَ فِي ضَلاَلٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***37. “Then the sects did differ among themselves; and woe to those who
disbelieved because of presence on the great day.”***  
***38. “How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us! But
the unjust (even) this day are in manifest straying.”***

‘A party’ is a group of people working with together and who have some
particular goals and position which are usually united.

The Arabic word /mašhad/ means either the site of the attendance of
people, or the place of bearing witness, because, on the Day of Judgment
both people attend there, and a lot of witnesses from angels and
prophets will testify upon the deeds of man.

Some people believed in Jesus as God, like the group of Ya‘qhubiyyah;
some others said that he was son of God, like the group of Nasturiyyah,
while some other people believed in trinity, like Israilliyyah. But, on
the Day of Resurrection, all of these groups will testify to the
falsehood of their beliefs.[^40]

Despite all the emphasis Jesus placed upon the subject of monotheism and
the worship of the One God, yet, after him, some groups among his
followers differed and expressed different ideas about the Messiah.

Referring to this the verse says:

***“Then the sects did differ among themselves; and woe to those who
disbelieved because of presence on the great day.”***

The history of Christianity is also good evidence proving that after the
Christ, they differed greatly about him and about the subject of
monotheism.

Some of them said:

 *“He is God who has come down on earth and has brought a group of
people to life and has caused others to die, then He ascended to
heaven.”*

Others said:

*“He is the son of God”,*

while others said:

*“He is one of the three persons: the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost.”*

Yet others said:

*“He is the third of the three. God is the object of worship, Jesus is
also an object of worship, and his mother also is an object of
worship.”*

Finally, some his followers said that he was the servant of Allah and
His Messenger.

Since deviation from the principle of Monotheism is counted as the
greatest deviation of the Christians, at the end of the verse they are
severely warned.

In the next verse, the Qur’an describes their state when they are
present at the gathering-place of resurrection.

It says:

***“How well they will hear and see on the day they come to Us!…”***

But, now that they are in this life, these cruel people are in a
manifest aberration busy with their transgression.

The verse continues saying:

***“…But the unjust (even) this day are in manifest straying.”***

In principal, the observation of that court in Hereafter and the effects
of the deeds, remove the sleep of negligence from the eyes and the ears
so that the blind-hearted ones will become aware and wise. But, what a
pity! This awareness will be of no avail to them.

Surah Maryam – Verses 39 - 40
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنذِرْهُمْ يَوْمَ الْحَسْرَةِ إِذْ قُضِيَ الاَمْرُ وَهُمْ فِي
غَفْلَةٍ وَهُمْ لاَ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَرِثُ الاَرْضَ وَمَنْ عَلَيْهَا وَإِلَيْنَا يُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***39. “And ware them of the Day of Regret, when the matter shall have
been decreed while they are (now) in negligence and they do not
believe.”***  
***40. “Verily We inherit the earth and all that are upon it and unto Us
they shall be returned.”***

The gate of all misfortunes is negligence: negligence from the Lord,
negligence from Hereafter, negligence from sins, negligence from plots,
negligence from the poor and the deprived, negligence from the history
and its courses, and negligence from adolescence, abilities, talents and
preparednesses of development.

One of the names of Hereafter is ‘the Day of Regret’, regret for the
missed opportunities and for the lost capitals. Death of a man in the
state of negligence and faithlessness, is a source of regret.

Therefore, this verse addresses the Prophet (S) and commands him to warn
the pagans of Mecca from the Day when the sinners will regret why they
had not done some more good deeds. This Day is the Day of Resurrection.
Some commentators say that in that Day only those who deserve punishment
will regret.

In Sahih-i-Muslim there has been narrated by Abu-Sa‘id-i-Khidri that the
Prophet of Islam said:

*“When the people of Heaven will enter Paradise and the people of Hell
will enter the Hell Fire, all of them will be called and, thus, their
attentions will be attracted. Then, the death will be shown to them and
they will be told: ‘Do you know death?’*

*They will say: ‘This is the death’, while they all know it. Then, the
death will be perished and the people of Paradise will be said to that
there will be no death and they are eternal; and the people of Hell will
also be said to that there will be no death and they are eternal. This
is the meaning of ‘And warn them of the Day of Regret’.”*

The believers in Imamate have narrated this tradition from Imam Baqir
(as) and Imam Sadiq (as) who had added at its end that:

*“The people of Paradise will become so happy that if there were death
there, all of them would die because of inconvenience.”*[^41]

The verse continues saying:

***“…when the matter shall have been decreed…”***

On that Day, the affairs will become one-sided. A group of people go
into Paradise while another group will be sent into Hell. Some
commentators say that it means that the life of this world has ended and
no one will come back to this world to recompense the events of the
last; and on that Day all people will be treated justly.

***“…while they are (now) in negligence and they do not believe.”***

In this world, people are busy with some vain affairs and often forget
the Hereafter.

In the next verse, Allah says that He will take up the inhabitants of
the earth from the earth and He will inherit the earth and those who are
on it, because there will remain no one on the earth to claim ownership
or to be able interfere in it. The return of them all, after death,
shall be to Him and none will govern them but Allah.

The verse says:

***“Verily We inherit the earth and all that are upon it and unto Us
they shall be returned.”***

[^1]: Surah Al-Mulk, No. 67, verse 1

[^2]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Al-Burhan, As-Safi, and some other commentaries

[^3]: The Commentary of Majma‘-ul-Bayan, as well as Al-Burhan and
As-Safi

[^4]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 2, p. 398

[^5]: Muntakhab-ul-Qurar, p. 159

[^6]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1, p. 386

[^7]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 2, p. 143

[^8]: Al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 22

[^9]: Tafsir-i-Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, Khisal by Saduq, p. 637

[^10]: Tafsir-i-‘Atyab-ul-Bayan, and Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^11]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary

[^12]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 7, p. 390

[^13]: Man-layahduruhul-Faghih, adapted from Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3,
p. 332

[^14]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 330

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: The First University and the Last Prophet, vol. 7, p. 65

[^17]: Surah-An-Nisa’, No.4 verse 112

[^18]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 3058

[^19]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 3, p. 102

[^20]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 72, p.194

[^21]: Ibid

[^22]: Ibid

[^23]: Tafsir-i-Kanz-ud-Daghayegh

[^24]: Bihar, vol. 82, p. 234

[^25]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol.7, tradition No.18897

[^26]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol.82, p. 224

[^27]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 68, p.386

[^28]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, p. 186

[^29]: Wasa’il-ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 6 p. 4

[^30]: Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol. 74, p. 85

[^31]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 16, p. 467

[^32]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 6, p. 468

[^33]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 16, p. 470

[^34]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 16, p. 475

[^35]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 15

[^36]: ‘Uyun’Akhbar-ir-Rida, vol. 1, p. 257

[^37]: Furugh-i-’Abadiyyat, vil.1, p.253 narrated from
Kamil-i-Ibn-i-’Athir, vol.2, p.54 & Bihar-ul-’Anwar, vol.18, p. 415

[^38]: Surah Maryam, No.19, verse 30

[^39]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 31

[^40]: Tafsir-i-’Atyab-ul-Bayan

[^41]: The commentary of As-Safi, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, and Al-Burhan


