Section 3: Abraham Preaches Unity of Allah
==========================================

Surah Maryam – Verse 41
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدّ‌ِيقاً
نَّبِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***41. “And mention Abraham in the Book; verily he was a truthful man, a
prophet.”***

The Arabic term /siddiq/ is applied for both the person who verifies the
truth very much, and the person whose all words and deeds are based upon
truthfulness. Such a person acts according to what he says, and speaks
according to what he acts.

This holy verse uncovers a part of the life of the hero of Monotheism,
Abraham the Friend of God, and emphasizes that the invitation of this
great prophet, as that of other Divine prophets, has begun from the
point of Monotheism.

The verse implies that Abraham should be mentioned in this Book, the
Qur’an, because he was a man of truth and an attester of the Divine
teachings and commandments. He was a prophet of Allah, too.

The verse says:

***“And mention Abraham in the Book; verily he was a truthful man, a
prophet.”***

In fact, this meaning is the most evident epithet of the godly prophets
and the bringers of the Divine revelations that they do convey the
command of Allah to the servants of God completely.

Surah Maryam – Verse 42
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَ لأَبِيهِ يَآ أَبَتِ لِمَ تَعْبُدُ مَا لاَ يَسْمَعُ وَلاَ
يُبْصِرُ وَلاَ يُغْنِي عَنكَ شَيْئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***42. “When he said to his father: ‘O my father! Why do you worship
that which neither hears nor sees, nor does avail you in aught?”***

When Abraham was preaching as a prophet, his father had died, and the
man whom has been introduced in the Qur’an as his father was his
guardian, his uncle’Azar, or his mother’s husband.[^1]

Some Islamic traditions also denote that Abraham’s father was a
monotheist, and the objective meaning of the Qur’anic word /’ab/, here,
is his uncle. In Arabic language the term /’ab/ has a vast meaning. It
is also applied for the teacher, the trainee, and even for the
father-in-law.

There is also a tradition narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) who
said:

*“I and Ali are the fathers of this Ummah (Muslim community).”*

Then, the verse points to the debate of Abraham and his father,’Azar.
(Father here is referred to the uncle).

It says:

***“When he said to his father: ‘O my father! Why do you worship that
which neither hears nor sees, nor does avail you in aught?”***

This short and expressive statement is one of the best evidences of the
negation of polytheism and idolatry. One of the man’s motives alongside
knowing Allah is the motive of benefit and loss. Abraham says to’Azar
why he relies on a deity which neither removes a difficulty from him,
nor it is able to hear and see.

### Explanations

1. The disputations of Abraham and his uncle are worthy of mentioning
and magnifying.

***“When he said…”***

2. In ‘forbidding of wrong’, you should begin from your own kin.

***(…O my father…)***

3. There is no age limitation for forbidding of wrong. (A son can forbid
the grand members of the family from doing evils, but he must observe
their respect and protect it.)

4. Perfection of persons does not always relate to their age. Sometimes
it happens that the child of a family understand the facts better than
the elders of that family.

5. In forbidding of wrong, it is better to begin from the creedal
indecencies. (Unfortunately we are often busy in the ethical and social
vices).

6. The path of truth should not be sacrificed for affections.
Relationship ought not to hinder the act of forbidding of wrong.

Surah Maryam – Verses 43 - 44
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَبَتِ إِنّـِي قَدْ جَآءَنِي مِنَ الْعِلْمِ مَا لَمْ يَأْتِكَ
فَاتَّبِعْنِي أَهْدِكَ صِرَاطاً سَوِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَبَتِ لاَ تَعْبُدِ الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّ الشَّيْطَانَ كَانَ
لِلرَّحْمنِ عَصِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***43. “O’ my father! There has come unto me of knowledge which has not
come unto you, so follow me, I will guide you on a right path.”***  
***44. “O’ my father! Serve not Satan. Verily Satan is disobedient unto
the Beneficent (Allah).”***

After that, Abraham (as) invites’Azar, with a clear logic in order that
he follows him (as) in that matter.

He (as) says:

***“O my father! There has come unto me of knowledge which has not come
unto you, so follow me, I will guide you on a right path.”***

That is, I have got a lot of knowledge by means of revelation, and I can
say with certainty that I will not go on a wrong way, so I will never
invite you unto a wrong way. I desire your felicity and your happiness,
then accept my invitation to become prosperous, and, by paving this
straight path, to reach the ideal destination.

Then, in the next verse, Abraham combines this positive aspect with the
negative aspect, and the consequences that the opposition with this
invitation produces, and says:

***“O’ my father! Serve not Satan. Verily Satan is disobedient unto the
Beneficent (Allah).”***

The objective meaning of “***Serve not Satan***” is the same as obeying
and following Satan which causes man to become its servant and slave.

Of course, it is evident that the purpose of service, here, is not a
service in the sense of prostration, prayer, and fasting performed for
Satan, but it is in the sense of obeying and following the command of
Satan which itself is counted a kind of service.

The meaning of ‘worship, or service’ is so vast that it encompasses even
the listening to the sayings of a person with the intention of acting
accordingly, and also putting the rule of a person to order, is counted
a kind of worshipping him.

It has been narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) who said:

*“He who listens to a speaker (willingly), he has worshipped him. Then,
if the speaker speaks from the side of Allah, the one has worshipped
Allah, and if the speaker speaks from the side of Iblis, the one has
worshipped Iblis.”*[^2]

However, Abraham wants to teach this fact to his father (uncle) that no
one can live without having a path, a policy. It may be either the path
of Allah and the straight way, or the path of Satan, the disobedient,
the astray. In this course, man should think correctly, take a decision
for himself, and, far from bigotries and blindly followings, choose his
good and benefit.

Surah Maryam – Verse 45
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَبَتِ إِنّـِي أَخَافُ أَن يَمَسَّكَ عَذَابٌ مِنَ الرَّحْمَنِ
فَتَكُونَ لِلشَّيْطَانِ وَلِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***45. “O my father! I fear lest a chastisement afflict you from the
Beneficent (Allah) so that you become a friend to Satan.”***

Through this holy verses once more Abraham attracts the attention
of’Azar to the evil sequels of polytheism and idolatry, when he says:

***“O my father! I fear lest a chastisement afflict you from the
Beneficent (Allah) so that you become a friend to Satan.”***

The statement of Abraham, here, before his uncle,’Azar, is very
attractive. On one side, he frequently addresses him with the phrase:
‘***O my father***’ which is a sign of respect and courtesy. On the
other side, the holy phrase ‘***I fear lest a chastisement afflict
you…***’ indicates that Abraham is worried that any disquiet
reaches’Azar.

And on the third side, the phrase ‘***a chastisement afflict you from
the Beneficent (Allah)***’ points to this matter that due to his
polytheism and idolatry,’Azar’s state has reached a point that Allah,
whose general compassion has encompassed everybody, becomes angry with
him and punishes him.

’Azar has to note what a horrible thing he does! And, on the fourth
said, his deed is an action of which is to go under the shade of the
friendship of Satan.

### Note

1. Allah (s.w.t.) says:

***“And as for those who belie Our Signs, chastisement shall afflict
them for what they were transgressing.”***[^3]

2. Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“…and We seized those who were unjust with a dreadful punishment for
the transgressions they used to commit.”***[^4]

3. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Whoever causes the most grievous torture for people in this life, he
will have the most grievous punishment with Allah on the Day of
Hereafter.”*[^5]

Surah Maryam – Verse 46
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَرَاغِبٌ أَنتَ عَنْ ءَالِهَتِي يَآ إِبْرَاهِيمُ لَئِن لَّمْ
تَنتَهِ لاَرْجُمَنَّكَ وَاهْجُرْنِي مَلِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***46. “He said: ‘Do you dislike my gods O’ Abraham? If you do not
desist, I will certainly stone you. Be gone from me for a long
time’.”***

In the former verses, the logical words of Abraham (as) alongside the
guidance of’Azar which were mixed with a particular compassion and
kindness, were referred to. Now, the turn is for the answers of’Azar to
those words, so that, by comparing them both, the fact may become
manifest.

The Qur’an implies that, not only the sympathetic and helpful statements
of Abraham did not affect on’Azar’s heart, but also, by hearing them, he
became very angry and said to Abraham whether he hated his gods.

***“He said: ‘Do you dislike my gods O Abraham? If you do not desist, I
will certainly stone you. Be gone from me for a long time’.”***

It is interesting that, firstly,’Azar was not even willing to hear the
denial upon the idols, or to utter any opposition and ill-speaking
against them, but he only said:

***“Do you dislike my gods?”***

lest the idols be aspersed. Secondly, when’Azar wanted to threaten
Abraham, he threatened him to stoning, and he emphasized on his action
by the word ‘***certainly***’; and we know that stoning is one of the
worst kind of slaying. Thirdly, he did not suffice to this conditioned
threat, but, at the same time, he considered Abraham as an unbearable
being when he told him:

***‘Be gone from me for a long time’.***

This is a very aspersive meaning that sometimes some angry persons use
against their opponents.

The Arabic term /maliyya/ is derived from /’imla’/ in the sense of ‘to
respite a long time’.

Surah Maryam – Verse 47
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكَ سَاَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكَ رَبّـِي إِنَّهُ كَانَ بِي
حَفِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***47. “He said: ‘Peace be upon you: I will ask my Lord to forgive you:
for verily He is ever affectionate to me’.”***

The word /haqq/ is applied for the person who regards the complete
goodness and benevolence unto another person;[^6] and sometimes it is
used in the sense of ‘a scholar’.

In these verses, the spiritual conditions of a believer and those of a
disbeliever are clearly seen in their disputes.

1. Abraham speaks affectionately, while his uncle speaks roughly.
Abraham addresses his uncle four times with the phrase “***O my
father!***” but his idolatrous uncle, even once, did not call him ‘*O my
son*’.

2. Abraham (as) speaks reasonably, while’Azar speaks without reasonless.

Abraham says:

***“Why do you worship that which neither hears nor sees…?”,***[^7]

but’Azar says

***“my gods”***[^8]

3. Abraham (as) speaks sympathetically, but’Azar answers with threat.

4. Abraham (as) greets his uncle, but’Azar orders him to get distance
with him by saying:

***“Be gone from me for a long time.”***[^9]

But, like all other divine prophets and leaders, Abraham controlled his
nervousness and, in spite of’Azar’s intensive harshness, he, with utmost
magnanimity, said:

***“He said: ‘Peace be upon you…”***

This salutation may be for farewell, by which and together with some
other words, Abraham left’Azar; or it may be a salutation which is said
for the end of disputation.

Then Abraham added:

***“…I will ask my Lord to forgive you: for verily He is ever
affectionate to me’.”***

Abraham (as) asked forgiveness for his idolatrous uncle for the sake
that he probabled that’Azar would be guided, but, as soon as he became
disappointed from his uncle’s guidance, he repudiated him.

Surah Maryam – Verse 48
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعْتَزِلُكُمْ وَمَا تَدْعُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَأَدْعُوا رَبّـِي
عَسَي اَلآَّ أَكُونَ بِدُعَآءِ رَبّـِي شَقِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***48. “And I will withdraw from you and what you call on besides Allah,
and I will call upon my Lord: may be I shall not remain unblessed in
calling upon my Lord.”***

In this holy verse, Allah, the Exalted, states the words of Abraham (as)
as follows:

***“And I will withdraw from you and what you call on besides Allah, and
I will call upon my Lord: may be I shall not remain unblessed in calling
upon my Lord.”***

This verse, in one side, indicates the courtesy of Abraham unto his
uncle,’Azar, that when he said:

***“Be gone from me”,***

Abraham accepted; and, on the other side, it defines his conclusiveness
in his belief. Abraham impliedly says that his separation from him
(’Azar) is not for the reason that he has renounced his firm belief in
Monotheism, but it is for the lack of preparation in’Azar unto accepting
the truth.

However, Abraham announces that if he calls upon his Lord, He answers
him, but how miserable they are that they call upon some more miserable
ones than themselves who never answer their prayer, nor they even hear
them.

### Explanations

Those young people who live among some deluded families, should follow
the line of Abraham:

1. Invitation together with courtesy:

***“O my father.”***

2. Sympathy accompanied with logic:

***“Why do you worship”.***

3. Warning followed by prayer:

***“I fear…I will seek forgiveness for you”.***

Greeting together with seeking forgiveness:

***“Peace be upon you. I will ask my Lord to forgive you…”.***

And, at the end, separation:

***“I will withdraw from you…”.***

4. Among the last stages of ‘forbidding from doing evils’ there is
breaking a communication:

***“And I will withdraw from you…”.***

If we are not able to change the defective environment, at least, we
must leave it.

5. One of the fundamental principals of the godly schools is repudiation
from infidels, since repudiation is before mastership. At first, we must
separate from infidelity, false deity, and corruption, then we may join
the truth.

Surah Maryam – Verse 49
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا اعْتَزَلَهُمْ وَمَا يَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ وَهَبْنَا
لَهُ إِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَكُلاًّ جَعَلْنَا نَبِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***49. “So when he withdrew from them and what they worshipped besides
Allah, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob and each (of them) We made a
prophet.”***

A godly action performed by a grandfather may bring the bounty of Allah
for a generation.

Abraham (as) kept his word and persisted fully on his own promise with
resistance. He was always the caller of Monotheism even though all the
members of the heretic society of that time raised against him, but,
finally, he did not remain alone.

A great many people became his followers during all centuries so that
all the theists of the world are proud of him. The Qur’an implies when
he withdrew from all the things they worshipped other than Allah, the
Lord bestowed on him Isaac and after Isaac his son Jacob, each of whom
were made a great prophet by Allah.

The verse says:

***“So when he withdrew from them and what they worshipped besides
Allah, We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob and each (of them) We made a
prophet.”***

This great bounty was the fruit of that resistance which Abraham showed
from himself in the way of struggling against idols and withdrawing from
that false creed.

### The Feature of Abraham

Abraham desisted from stars, moon, and sun, and won Allah’s favour.

He said:

***“…I do not like the setting ones.”***[^10]

He (as) left his deviated uncle and, consequently, became the father of
all people:

***“…the faith of your father Abraham…”***[^11]

His uncle was in ill terms with him by saying:

***“Be gone from me for a long time”***[^12]***,***

but Allah favoured him because Abraham said:

***“…for verily He is ever affectionate to me.”***[^13]

Abraham withdrew from them for the sake of Allah and said:

***“I will withdraw from you”***[^14]***,***

then he became famous in the world:

***“…and assigned unto them a high and true renown”.***[^15]

He run away from the temple of idols and he became the builder of the
House of Monotheism:

***“And (remember) when Abraham and Ishmael raised up the foundations of
the House…”***[^16]***.***

He sacrificed his life in the path of Allah, and, as a result of it, the
fire became safe and sound for him:

***“We said: ‘O fire be a comfort and peace to Abraham”***[^17]***.***

He prepared his son to be devouted as a sacrifice:

***“…he threw him down upon his forehead”***[^18]***,***

and Allah ransomed him with a great sacrifice which later became
obligatory in that place.

Abraham lived childless until nearly the end of his life but he was
content with it, so prophethood was assigned in his progeny.

He built the Ka‘bah in the most deserted place, but it became the most
attractive places all over the earth.

He was all alone in the desert when he called out, then there arrived
answers from throughout the world:

***“And proclaim among men the Pilgrimage.”***[^19]

He left out his thirsty little child there by the command of Allah, then
the water of Zamzam gushed and flowed forever.

He greeted before the threat of his idolatrous uncle:

***“He said: ‘Peace be upon you…”.***[^20]

Then Allah sent greeting to him when He said:

***“Peace be on Abraham”***[^21]

Abraham was a single person, but today all the heavenly schools relate
themselves to Abraham, in a manner that some pagans, the Jews, and the
Christians say that Abraham belongs to them.

The people of his time were his enemy, while Allah chose him as His
friend.

The Qur’an says:

***“And Allah took Abraham as a Friend.”***[^22]

Surah Maryam – Verse 50
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُمْ مِن رَّحْمَتِنَا وَجَعَلْنَا لَهُمْ لِسَانَ صِدْقٍ
عَلِيّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***50. “And We bestowed of Our Mercy on them, and assigned unto them a
high and true renown.”***

A righteous child is the reward of the godly efforts of the parents, and
more important than that is the child’s spiritual rank.

When Abraham (as) withdrew from those arrogant idol worshippers and went
toward the Holy Land, Allah bestowed on him Isaac as his son, and Jacoob
as his grandson, and He comforted him from the pain and of separation of
his relatives by bestowing children on him and ornamenting them with the
rank of prophethood.

Besides children and prophethood, Allah also bestowed on him some other
bounties and caused them to be honoured among people so that their good
names were mentioned respectfully by all people. The adherents of all
religions love Abraham and his progeny so that they pray for them and
consider them the followers of their own religion.

Some commentators say that the meaning of ‘high renown’ about them is
that Muhammad (S) and his community continue mentioning their good name
until the Day of Resurrection.[^23]

The application of /lisan/ in such contexts means a remembrance of a
person mentioned among people; and when it is added with the term /sidq/
it means ‘a good remembrance and fame among people’; and when it is
added with the term /‘aliyan/, which means ‘high, outstanding’, their
concept is that a very good thought and remembrance of a person remains
among people.

The verse says:

***“And We bestowed of Our Mercy on them, and assigned unto them a high
and true renown.”***

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) in a tradition says:

*“A good renown for a person which Allah assigns for him among people is
better than the (abundant) wealth which he consumes and devises”*[^24]

In principle, apart from the spiritual aspects, sometimes, good fame
among people can work as a great capital for a person and his children,
the examples of which have been seen frequently in the society.

Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

***“When Allah loves a servant, He may inspire uprightness in
him.”***[^25]

[^1]: Al-Mizan, the Commentary

[^2]: Safinat-ul-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 115

[^3]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No. 6, verse 49

[^4]: Surah Al-’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 165

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Fasahah, p. 59; & Kanz-ul-’Ummal, vol.3, p. 500

[^6]: Lesan-ul-‘Arab, an Arabic Dictionary

[^7]: The current Surah, verse 42

[^8]: The current Surah, verse 46

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Surah Al-’An‘am, No.6, verse 76

[^11]: Surah Al-Hajj, No. 22, verse 78

[^12]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 46

[^13]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 47

[^14]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 48

[^15]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 50

[^16]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No.2, verse 127

[^17]: Surah Al-’Anbiya, No. 21, verse 69

[^18]: Surah As-Saffat, No.37, verse 103

[^19]: Surah Al-Hajj

[^20]: Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 47

[^21]: Surah As-Saffat, No. 37, verse 109

[^22]: Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 125

[^23]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^24]: Usul-i-Kafi, acoording to the record of Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the
commentary, vol. 3, p.339.

[^25]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 3, p. 161


