Section 6: Intercession
=======================

Surah Maryam – Verses 83 - 84
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّآ أَرْسَلْنَا الشَّيَاطِينَ عَلَي الْكَافِرِينَ
تَؤُزُّهُمْ أَزّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ تَعْجَلْ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّمَا نَعُدُّ لَهُمْ عَدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “Have you not seen (how) We sent the Satans unto the disbelievers
to incite them with an incitement?”***  
***84. “So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a
number (of days).”***

Here, this fact is referred to that idols not only did not cause their
honour but also disgraced them.

The Qur’an by this holy verse says:

***“Have you not seen (how) We sent the Satans unto the disbelievers to
incite them with an incitement?”***

The incitement of Satans upon men is not an obligatory and unknown
incitement, but it is the men themselves who let Satans arrive inside
their hearts and souls.

In this holy verse, the Prophet (S) is addressed being told that he
should not haste against them, because Allah will minutely count their
deeds and record them for the Day when the Divine court of Justice will
be held in Hereafter.

The verse says:

***“So make no haste against them, for We but count out to them a number
(of days).”***

Upon the commentary of the verse there is also this probability that the
purpose of the phrase:

***“count out to them a number (of days)”***

is the counting the days of lifetime, or the number of their breaths,
which means that the length of their life is very short so that the
number the breaths of it can be counted.

However, the Arabic term /’azz/, used in the verse, means ‘to incite
severely’.

Surah Maryam – Verses 85 - 86
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نحْشُرُ الْمُتَّقِينَ إِلَي الرَّحْمَنِ وَفْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَسُوقُ الْـمُجْرِمِينَ إِلَي جَهَنَّمَ وِرْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***85. “On the day We muster the pious unto the Beneficent (Allah) (like
the guest) of honour.”***  
***86. “And We shall drive the sinners unto Hell thirsty.”***

The Arabic term /wafd/ is used for ‘a group of people who have just
arrived mounted for a pilgrimage or seeking something’. The Arabic word
/wird/ means ‘thirst’.

In this verse, the course of ‘the pious’ and ‘the sinners’ is stated
through some short and expressive sentences.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“On the day We muster the pious unto the Beneficent (Allah) (like the
guest) of honour.”***

Again, the Arabic word /wafd/ originally is used in the sense of ‘a
mission’ or ‘a group’ who go to some nobles in order to solve their
problems where they will be respected and honoured.

Thus, this word implicitly contains the meaning of ‘esteem’, and,
perhaps, it is for the same reason that some Islamic traditions denote
that the pious will ride on some easy-paced mounts and enter into
Paradise with much respect.

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Ali (as) asked the commentary of this verse from the Prophet (S), and
he answered:*

 *‘O’ Ali! ‘Al-wafd’ is surely said about those who ride on a mount.
These are they who are in awe of Allah, Almighty and Glorious. He loved
them and specialized them for Himself, and was pleased with their deeds
and named them ‘the pious’.”*

It is cited in Tafsir-i-Ali-ibn-Ebrahim Qummi that Hadrat Imam Sadiq
(as) said that Ali (as) asked the Prophet (S) who they were, (the
pious), and he (S) answered:

*“O’ Ali! They are your sincere followers, and you are their Imam.”*[^1]

Then in the next verse, the Qur’an says:

***“And We shall drive the sinners unto Hell thirsty.”***

The sinners will be driven toward Hell in the same manner that some
thirsty camels are driven unto the drinking place, but, here, there is
no water, there is Fire.

It should be noted that the Qur’anic term /wird/ means a ‘group of
people or animals who enter a drinking place’, and since such a group
are certainly thirsty, some of the commentators have taken the word,
hare, in the sense of ‘those parched with thirst’.

How long is the distance between those whom are lead to the Beneficent
Allah respectfully and with esteem in a circumstance that the angels
come to receive them and greet them, and the group whom are driven unto
Hell Fire like some thirsty animals, while they are bend there heads
because of shame, disgrace and worthlessness?

### Some Traditions Upon Paradise and Hell, and Their People

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Never will enter Paradise, but the one is a Muslim.”*[^2]

2. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Verily, in Heaven, (there are some things that), no eye has seen, no
ear has heard, and no heart has received.”*[^3]

3. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“The Messenger of Allah (S) told me ‘You are the first person who
enters Paradise’. Then I said: ‘O’ Messenger of Allah! Do I enter it
even before you?’ He said: ‘Yes, For you are my standard in Hereafter,
the same as you are my standard in the world, and the standard is always
placed before’.”*[^4]

4. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

 *“There is no price for your selves save Paradise, then, do not sell
your self but for it.”*[^5]

5. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“He who sells his self for other than Paradise, he has made his
affliction grievous”*[^6]

6. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Promise upon six things for me, then I will promise (and guarantee)
Paradise for you: Whenever one of you speaks, he should not tell a lie;
and when he is trusted, he should not be treacherous; and when he
promises, he should not breach; and lower your eyes (from forbidden
things); and hold your hands (from wrong); and guard your modesty.”*[^7]

7. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“Paradise is enclosed by pains and difficulties, and (falling in) Hell
is enclosed by lusts.”*[^8]

8. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) was speaking and he said:

*“Verily the people of Heaven look unto the houses (and places) of our
followers, as a person looks at the stars.”*[^9]

9. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“A span from Paradise (in comparison) is better than the world and
whatever is in it.”*[^10]

10. ‘Abdillah-ibn-Zayd-Mazini has narrated from the Messenger of Allah
(S) who said:

*“There is a garden from the gardens of Paradise between my house and my
pulpit.”*[^11]

11. ‘Abu-Hurayrah narrated from the Prophet (S) who said:

*“There is a garden from the gardens of Paradise between my house and my
pulpit, and my pulpit is upon my Houd.” These two traditions may
indicate to the place of Hadrat Fatimah’s grave.*[^12]

12. Allah, the Almighty, the Glorious, said:

***“Surely Hell lies in ambush”,***

***“For the transgressors a destination”.***[^13]

13. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“Hell is a Fire whose flame does not subside, whose capture does not
release and whose break does not close. Its heat is terrible, its depth
is far, and its water is pus.”*[^14]

14. Again, Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“Avoid the Fire whose heat is terrible, whose depth is far, and whose
ornament is iron.”*[^15]

15. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Avoid the Fire whose roar is forthcoming, whose flame is terrible, and
whose chastisement is fresh."*

16. Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) said:

*“How may I be patient of (Hell) Fire that if it casts a parcel unto the
earth, it will burn all its plants, and if a person refuges to a
mountain its heat will cook him thereon? Which is better for Ali: that
he becomes nigh stationed with Allah, or, because of his sins, he,
entangled in Fire, becomes far from the Mercy of Allah, driven away and
inflicted with His Wrath?”*[^16]

17. It is cited in Majma‘-ul-Bayan that one of the Immaculate ones (as)
upon the commentary of the Qur’anic phrase:

***“And when they are cast into a narrow place in it…”***[^17]

said:

*“By the One in Whose hand is my life, the people of Hell will be so
pressed in Fire as a nail is pressed in the wall.”*[^18]

18. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

*“The first person who will enter Hell-Fire is a dominant ruler who does
not administer justice, and the rich person who does not give the due of
his wealth, and the poor who is proud.”*[^19]

Thus, the key of Paradise is piety to Allah (s.w.t.), and the key of
Hell is sin, vice, and opposition against Allah and His Messenger.

Surah Maryam – Verse 87
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَّ يَمْلِكُونَ الشَّفَاعَةَ إِلاَّ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ عِندَ الرَّحْمَنِ
عَهْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “They shall not own any intercession, save he who has taken a
promise with the Beneficent (Allah).”***

On the Day of Resurrection, the wicked people are not able to intercede
any one, and also none my intercede them. On the contrary, the believers
will intercede each other and their intercession will be accepted.

The verse says:

***“They shall not own any intercession, save he who has taken a promise
with the Beneficent (Allah).”***

The Qur’an introduces some conditions for intercession and it is not so
that every body can take everything or everybody he desires as his
intercessor. In Hereafter, the infidels will try their best and ask
refuge from everybody, but they will be refused and they will receive
negative responds from them.

The objective meaning of the Arabic term /‘ahd/ (promise), mentioned in
the verse, may be the same promise of servitude unto Allah and
separation from Satan which the Qur’an refers to, where it says:

***“Did I not charge you, O children of Adam! that you should not
worship the Satan? Surely he is your open enemy”,***

***“And that you should worship Me, this is the Straight Path.”***[^20]

And in another occasion it says:

***“…shall no intercession avail except of him whom the Beneficent
(Allah) allows and whose word He is pleased with.”***[^21]

The Qur’anic term /‘ahd/ has been rendered into several meanings in the
Islamic literatures, including the following:

1. Promise to the mastership of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as)
and the immaculate Imams after him.[^22]

2. Making testament at the time of death, that a mortal gathers others
around him and says that he is charged to believe that ‘there is no god
but Allah’, ‘Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah’, and the rightfulness
of Paradise and Hell.[^23]

3. Engagement and protection to the statutory prayers.[^24]

Surah Maryam – Verses 88 - 89
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا اتَّخَذَ الرَّحْمَنُ وَلَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ جِئْتُمْ شَيْئاً إِدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “And they say: ‘The Beneficent (Allah) has taken (unto Himself) a
son’.”***  
***89. “Indeed you have put forth something hideous!”***

This verse refers to many groups of people in relation to their belief,
including the followings:

A. Polytheists: those who believed in angels as God’s daughters.

The Qur’an says:

***“…and (for Himself) taken daughters from among the angels…”***[^25]

B. The Jews: those who imagined Ezra (‘Uzayr) as God’s son.

The Qur’an says:

***“And the Jews say: ‘Ezra is the son of God’…”***[^26]

C. The Christians: those who considered Messiah as God’s Child.

The Qur’an says:

***“…and the Christians say: ‘The Messiah is the son of God’...”***[^27]

Therefore, at the end of this discussion, the Qur’an points to one the
subdivisions of polytheism, i.e., the belief in the existence of
offspring for Allah, and emphasizes on this statement with the utmost
emphasis.

It says:

***“And they say: ‘The Beneficent (Allah) has taken (unto Himself) a
son’.”***

Not only the Christians believed that Jesus (as) was the real child of
Allah, but also the Jews believed like that about Ezra, and polytheists
had such an idea about the angels and believed in angels as Allah’s
daughters.

Then, the Qur’an, with a beating tone, says:

***“Indeed you have put forth something hideous!”***

However, the Arabic term /’idd/ originally means an ugly noise which is
usually heard from a camel as a result of the sharp turning sound in its
throat. Then it has been applied for the ugly and horrible deeds.

Surah Maryam – Verses 90 - 92
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَكَادُ السَّمَاوَاتُ يَتَفَطَّرْنَ مِنْهُ وَتَنشَقُّ الاَرْضُ
وَتَخِرُّ الْجِبَالُ هَدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَن دَعَوْا لِلرَّحْمَنِ وَلَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يَنبَغِي لِلرَّحْمنِ أَن يَتَّخِذَ وَلَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***90. “At it the skies are about to burst, and the earth to split
asunder, and the mountains to fall down crashing.”***  
***91. “That they attributed a son to the Beneficent (Allah).”***  
***92. “When it is not worthy of the Beneficent (Allah) that He should
take (to Himself) a son.”***

The Arabic term /hadd/ means ‘to fall down’.

Since the attribution of polytheism is a disagreeable attribution which
contrasts to the principle of theism, it seems that the whole world of
existence, which has been founded on the basis of theism, sinks into a
horror and anxiety because of this undue attribution.

Therefore, the Qur’an announces:

***“At it the skies are about to burst, and the earth to split asunder,
and the mountains to fall down crashing.”***

The horrible effect of this statement, that Allah has a child, is so
great that it causes the mountains to fall down.

Again, for a more emphasis, and stating the importance of the matter,
the Qur’an says:

***“That they attributed a son to the Beneficent (Allah).”***

In fact, they have never known Allah; else they would have known that it
is not consonant with the majesty of the Most Gracious that He should
beget a son.

The verse says:

***“When it is not worthy of the Beneficent (Allah) that He should take
(to Himself) a son.”***

A person may desire to have one or some children for one of the
following things:

It is either for the sake that the one needs to have reproduction for
the duration of his seed; or he seeks for an assistant; or he is afraid
of loneliness. But none of these concepts is meaningful about Allah.
Neither His Power is limited; nor His life ends; nor any weakness or
feebleness befalls Him, nor He feels loneliness and need.

Surah Maryam – Verse 93
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن كُلُّ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ إِلآَّ ءَاتِي الرَّحْمَنِ
عَبْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***93. “There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the
Beneficent (Allah) as a servant.”***

All the world of existence and its creatures are wholly under the
command of Allah, and they are His servants. Why do you consider the
servant of Allah as His child?

It is for this reason that the Qur’an, concerning the matter, in this
holy verse, says:

***“There is none in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the
Beneficent (Allah) as a servant.”***

These servants obey Him, but in the meantime He does not need their
obedience. It is those creatures who are totally in need of Him.

Surah Maryam – Verses 94 - 95
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ أَحْصَاهُمْ وَعَدَّهُمْ عَدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُلُّهُمْ ءَاتِيهِ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فَرْداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***94. “Certainly He has counted them, and He has numbered them
exactly.”***  
***95. “And every one of them shall come to Him on the Day of
Resurrection, all alone.”***

He knows the exact number of all parts of the world of existence
entirely.

The knowledge of Allah (s.w.t.) encompasses not only the universals, but
He also knows the details of the matters.

The verse says:

***“Certainly He has counted them, and He has numbered them exactly.”***

That is, never think that with the existence of all these servants, how
He may know the account of them wholly.

Therefore, in the second holy verse, mentioned in the above, the Qur’an
says:

***“And every one of them shall come to Him on the Day of Resurrection,
all alone.”***

Thus, both Jesus, and Ezra, and angels, and all human beings are
involved in this general commandment. Yet, how disgrace is the
consideration of belief of a child for Him, and how low do we bring His
Pure Essence from the climax of Dignity and Grandeur!

Surah Maryam – Verse 96
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ سَيَجْعَلُ لَهُمُ
الرَّحْمَنُ وُدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***96. “Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds, soon the
Beneficent (Allah) will appoint love for them.”***

The words in this verse, as well as the next couple of verses, are about
the faithful believers and also about the faithless cruel unjust. The
contents of these verses are also upon the Qur’an and its glad tidings
and warnings.

At first, it says:

***“Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds, soon the Beneficent
(Allah) will appoint love for them.”***

Faith and righteous deed has a reflection as vast as the world of
existence, and the ray of love emerged from it can cover the whole
expansion of creation. Allah, the Pure Essence, loves such believing
people. They are beloved with all those who are in the skies. This
affection will brighten the hearts of men who are on the earth.

To be beloved is a divine bounty which may be given to the believers and
the righteous, as the Qur’an says:

***“…soon the Beneficent (Allah) will appoint love for them.”***

Yes, the one who loves only Allah will be loved heartily by all people
with the help of Allah. In general, he who remembers Allah, He will have
His favor upon him. The Qur’an says:

***“Therefore, remember Me, and I will remember you…”***[^28]

It is interesting that the Prophet (S) in a tradition says:

 *“When the Lord loves one of His servants, He says to His great angel,
Gabriel, that He loves so and so, then do love him. Gabriel will love
him and, then, he calls in the skies that Allah loves so and so, then do
love him; and thereafter, all those who are in the skies will love him,
and then the acceptance of this affection will reflect in the earth.*

*And when the Lord hates a person, He tells Gabriel to hate him, and
Gabriel hates him. After that he calls out among those who are in the
skies that Allah hates him, then do hate him. Thus, all those who are in
the skies will hate him, and afterward, the reflection of this hatred
will be found in the earth.”*

This tradition has been recorded in many Islamic traditional sources as
well as in many commentary books, but this is a tradition of the text
recorded in The Commentary of Fi-Zalal, vol. 5, p. 454 which is adopted
from Ahmad, Muslim, and Bukhari.

Verily, what a pleasure is better than this that a person feels that he
is beloved by all the pure and the righteous of the world of existence?
And how painful is that a person feels that the earth, the skies, the
angels and the believing people all hate him?

However, besides the books of Shi‘ah, there are numerous traditions
recorded in the books of tradition and commentary compiled by the
scholars of the Sunnite upon the occasion of revelation of the verse
under discussion, narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S), which denote
that this verse has been revealed mostly in regard to Ali-ibn-Abitalib
(as).

Among them are: Zamakhshari in Kashshaf; Sebtayn-ul-Jauzi in Tathkirah;
Ganji Shafi‘i; Qurtabi his famous book; Mu‘jab-ud-Din Tabari in
Zakha’ir-ul-‘Ughba; Neyshaburi in his well-known commentary
book;’Ibn-i-Sabbaq Maliki in Fusul-ul-Muhimmah, Suyuti in
Durr-ul-Manthur; Heythami in Sawa‘igh-ul-Muhraghah; and’Alusi in
Rouh-ul-Ma‘ani.

Some of these traditions are as follows:

1. Tha‘labi, in his commentary book, narrates from Bara’-ibn-‘Azib:

*“The Messenger of Allah (S) told Ali (as): ‘Say: O’ Allah! Appoint a
covenant for me with yourself, and set my love in the hearts of the
believers’. Then this verse was reveled.”*[^29]

This very statement exactly, or with a little difference, has been cited
in many other Islamic books.

2. In a lot of Islamic sources it has been narrated from’Ibn-‘Abbas who
said:

*“The verse:*

‘***Verily those who believe and do righteous deeds, soon the Beneficent
(Allah) will appoint love for them.***’

*has been revealed in regard to Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as), which means that
Allah appoints his love in the hearts of the believers.”*[^30]

3. Upon the commentary of this verse, it is cited in the book entitled
‘Sawa’igh’ that Muhammad-ibn-Hanafiyyah said:

*“There is no faithful believer but there is love of Ali and his
Ahl-ul-Bayt in his heart.”*[^31]

4. Maybe, for the same reason it has been cited in a correct and
authentic tradition narrated from Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) who said:

*“Even if I strike the nose of a believer with this, my sword, for
hating me, he will not hate me, and even if I pile all the wealth of the
world before a hypocrite in order that he loves me, he will not* *love
me. This is because it is a verdict pronounced by the tongue of the
unschooled Prophet (S) as he said: ‘O’ Ali! a believer will never hate
you and a hypocrite will never love you’.”*[^32]

5. Imam Sadiq (as) in a tradition said:

*“The Prophet (S) in his last prayer invocated in regard to
Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) so loudly that people could hear, saying: ‘O
Allah! Bestow the love of Ali upon the hearts of the believers, and
appoint his awe and greatness in the hearts of the hypocrites’. Then
this verse and the verse next to it were revealed.”*[^33]

It has also been narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“The love of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) is a reward that Allah gives to
the believers who have righteous deed.” A similar meaning to this
tradition has been narrated from the holy Prophet (S) in regard to the
love and affection of the believers unto Ali (as).*[^34]

However, as it was said in the commentary explanations of the
abovementioned verses, the revelation of this verse upon Ali, as a
complete example, does not contrast the generality of the meaning upon
the believers wholly, with a hierarchical order, of course.

Surah Maryam – Verse 97
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِنَّمَا يَسَّرْنَاهُ بِلِسَانِكَ لِتُبَشّـِرَ بِهِ الْمُتَّقِينَ
وَتُنذِرَ بِهِ قَوْماً لُّدّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***97. “So We have made it (The Qur’an) easy in your tongue that you may
give glad tidings thereby to the pious ones, and warn thereby stubborn
people.”***

Here, the verse has referred to the Qur’an, which is a source of
training, Faith, and righteous deed.

Allah (s.w.t.) in this verse says:

***“So We have made it (The Qur’an) easy in your tongue that you may
give glad tidings thereby to the pious ones, and warn thereby stubborn
people.”***

The term /yassarnah/, mentioned in the verse, is derived from the Arabic
infinitive /taysir/ in the sense of facilitation. This facilitation may
be from the different points of view:

1. It may be in this point of view that the Qur’an has been revealed in
Arabic, eloquent and perspicuous, whose tone is pleasant in the ears,
and whose recitation is easy for the tongues.

2. It may be from this view that Allah had given such a domination over
the verses of the Qur’an to His Prophet (S) that he could apply it
easily everywhere and for removing any difficulty, and he used to recite
them to the believers munificently.

3. It may be from the point of the content of the Qur’an which, with its
deep meanings, is easy to understand. Basically, those many great and
outstanding facts which have been arranged in the frame of limited mere
verbal utterances whose meanings can be understood easily, itself is an
evidence for what is recited in the abovementioned verse and the act of
which has been performed by the help of Allah.

In several verses of Surah Al-Qamar, No. 54, including verse 17, this
phrase has been repeated:

***“And certainly We have made the Qur’an easy for remembrance, but is
there anyone who will mind?”***

The Arabic word /ludd/ is the plural form of /’alad/ which means ‘an
enemy with intensive hostility’, and it is used for those who are
fanatic, obstinate, and irrational in enmity.

Surah Maryam – Verse 98
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَمْ أَهْلَكْنَا قَبْلَهُم مِن قَرْنٍ هَلْ تُحِسُّ مِنْهُم مِنْ
أَحَدٍ أَوْ تَسْمَعُ لَهُمْ رِكْزَاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***98. “And how many a generation before have We destroyed! Do you find
any one of them or hear a sound of them?”***

This is the last verse of Surah Maryam. This Surah was revealed in Mecca
at the time when Muslims were in a hard pressure. Keeping this matter in
mind, the verse was both as a comfort for the Prophet (S) and the
believers, and as a threat and warning against all hostile and obstinate
enemies of Islam.

It says:

***“And how many a generation before have We destroyed! Do you find any
one of them or hear a sound of them?”***

The Arabic term /rikz/ means ‘a faint sound, a whisper’, and, therefore,
the things which are hidden under the ground, (as ore), in Arabic are
called /rikaz/. Thus, the verse means that these cruel nations and the
hard enemies of the truth were so destroyed that even no faint sound is
heard from them now.

Imam Sadiq (as), in answer to Jabir concerning this verse, said:

*“The destroyed generation is Umayyads. You may find none of them in the
state of being hopeful or free from fear and horror.”*

Jabir has said that he asked whether that state could take place, and
the Imam replied:

*“It will happen very soon.”*[^35]

Supplication:

*O’ Lord! Brighten our hearts with the light of Faith, and fill the
entire of our entity with light of righteous deeds. Appoint us, please,
among the lovers of the believers and the righteous, specially the prior
of the pious, Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as), and cast the love
of us into the hearts of all believers.*

*O’ Allah! Our large Islamic society, with those abundant people and
plenty of material and spiritual abilities, is captured in the grips of
enemies and, because of disunity and separation of their rows, has
become feeble. Please gather them all around the torch of Faith and
righteous deed!*

*O’ Lord! As You destroyed and annihilated the former tyrannical
generations so that no faint sound is heard from them, annihilate the
most powerful unjust forces of our time, too. Remove their vice from the
oppressed communities and make the raise of believers against the
oppressors victorious! Amen. O’ Lord of the Worlds!*

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, the Commentary, vol. 3, p. 259, and
Tafsir-i-Ali-ibn-Ebrahin, under the verse.

[^2]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 1, p. 79

[^3]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, vol. 14, p. 645

[^4]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol.8, p. 6

[^5]: Tauhid-i-Sadug, p.29

[^6]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, vol. 1

[^7]: Kanz-ul-Ummal, vol. 14, p. 894

[^8]: Sahih-i-Muslim, vol. 4, p. 2174

[^9]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 148

[^10]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 8, p. 148 Kanz-ul-Ummal, vol. 14, p. 456

[^11]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 77

[^12]: Sahih-i-Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 77

[^13]: Surah An-Naba’, No. 78, verses 21 and 22

[^14]: Kanz-ul-‘Ummal, No. 44225

[^15]: Qurar-ul-Hikam, No. 2619

[^16]: ’Amali-us-Sadug, vol. 7, p. 496

[^17]: Surah Al-Furqan, No. 25, verse 13

[^18]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 4, p. 8 tradition 27

[^19]: ‘Uyun’Akhbar-ir-Rida, vol. 2, p. 28, tradition 20

[^20]: Surah Yasin, No. 36, verses 60 and 61

[^21]: Surah Taha, No. 20, verse 109

[^22]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan, Safi, Burhan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^23]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan

[^24]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan

[^25]: Surah Al-’Isra’, No. 17, verse 40

[^26]: Surah At-Taubah, No. 9, verse 30

[^27]: Ibid

[^28]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 152

[^29]: Ihghagh-ul-Haghgh, vol. 3, p.p.83-86

[^30]: According to’Ihghagh-ul-Haghgh, vol. 3, pp.83-86

[^31]: Ihghagh-ul-Haghgh, vol. 3, pp. 83-86

[^32]: Rauh-ul-Ma‘ani, vol. 16, p. 130; Majma‘-ul-Bayan, vol. 6, p. 533;
and Nahaj-ul-Balaqah, saying No. 45

[^33]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 363

[^34]: Al-Kafi vol. 1, p. 431, Tafsir-i-Furat, p. 247

[^35]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 46, p.30


