Section 1: Moses Commissioned with Apostleship
==============================================

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 1 - 4
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طه
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَآ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْءَانَ لِتَشْقَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ تَذْكِرَةً لِمَن يَخْشَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنزِيلاً مِمَّنْ خَلَقَ الاَرْضَ وَالسَّمَاوَاتِ الْعُلَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

***1. “Ta Ha”***  
***2. “We did not send down the Qur’an to you that you distress
yourself.”***  
***3. “But only as an admonition to him who fears (Allah).”***  
***4. “It has been sent down from Him Who created the earth and the high
heavens.”***

At the beginning of this Surah, again we are confronted the abbreviated
letters of the Qur’an, which excite the reader’s sense of curiosity.

It says:

“***Ta Ha***”

A tradition narrated from Imam Sadiq (as) indicates that ‘Ta Ha’ is one
of the names of holy Prophet (S), and it means: ‘O seeker of the truth
and the leader unto it’.

‘Ta Ha’ consists of two mystic letters, so that ‘Ta’ refers to the sense
of ‘seeker of Truth’ and ‘Ha’ indicates the meaning of ‘the leader unto
it’. It is well known that the usage of mystic letters, and
abbreviations has been very common since the old times, and they are
abundantly used nowadays in particular.

The term “Ta Ha”, similar to ‘Yasin’, in the course of time, has
gradually been applied as a proper name for the Prophet of Islam (S), so
far that the family of the Prophet (S) is called ‘’Al-i-Ta-Ha’ (the
family of Ta Ha). Also, in ‘Supplication of Nudbah’, Hadrat Mahdi (May
Allah hasten his glad advent) has been rendered into ‘Yabna-Ta-Ha’.

From the time of the descent of the Qur’an and its Divine revelation on,
the Prophet (S) used to worship very much. He specially accomplished his
worshipping in a ‘standing state’. He stood so much so that his feet
often were inflated. Then the verse was revealed, telling the Prophet
(S) that he should not impose upon himself so much trouble.

The verse says:

***“We did not send down the Qur’an to you that you distress
yourself.”***

It is true that worship is the best actions, but every thing must have a
limit. The Prophet (S) must not bear the task so much that his feet
inflate, and his power decreases too much for preaching and Holy
Struggle.

In the next verse, the goal of the descent of the Qur’an is explained,
as follows:

***“But only as an admonition to him who fears (Allah).”***

The expression /man yaxša/ (to him who fears Allah), denotes that a
person does not accept the facts unless there is a kind of feeling of
responsibility in him (that he fears).

Then the verse pays to introduce the Lord, the One Who has sent down the
Qur’an, so that, by means of knowing Him, the greatness of the Qur’an
would be made manifest more.

Concerning the Qur’an, it says:

***“It has been sent down from Him Who created the earth and the high
heavens.”***

In fact, this explanation is an indication to both the beginning and the
end of the descent of the Qur’an, whose end is the earth and its
beginning is heavens.

However, the Arabic word /tanzil/ means ‘a gradual descent’. That is,
the Qur’an was revealed during 23 years, in different occasions and for
various incidents. This meaning does not contrast to the revelation of
the Qur’an upon the holy heart of the Prophet (S) at once on the Night
of Qadr.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 5 - 7
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمَنُ عَلَي الْعَرْشِ اسْتَوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الاَرْضِ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا وَمَا
تَحْتَ الثَرَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِن تَجْهَرْ بِالْقَوْلِ فَإِنَّهُ يَعْلَمُ السّـِرَّ وَأَخْفَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***5. “The Beneficent (Allah Who) dominates on the ‘Arsh (the Throne of
existence).”***  
***6. “To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the
earth, and whatever is between them, and whatever is beneath the
ground.”***  
***7. “And if you utter aloud (or whisper, it is no matter): for verily
He knows the secret (of yours) and (that which is yet) more hidden.”***

In these few verses, four main attributes of Allah are referred to. They
are as follows:

1. His Creative Power (Divinity), where it says:

***“…Who created the earth and the high heavens.”***

2. His Sovereignty, where it says:

***“…dominates on ‘Arsh (the Throne of existence).”***

3. His Ownership, where it says:

***“To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the
earth…”.***

4. His Omniscience, where it says:

***“…He knows the secret (of yours) and (that which is yet) more
hidden.”***

The Sovereignty of Allah over ‘Arsh, which has been mentioned in some
other occurrences of the Qur’an with the phrase recited:

***“…He mounted the Throne (of authority)”,***

denotes to Allah’s authority over the world of existence. As an
instance, when it is said that so and so set on the throne, or so and so
was taken down from the throne, it means that he gained an authority, or
his authority was taken from him.

The Qur’anic phrase:

***“…He mounted the throne (of authority)”***

and the like of it, is usually followed with sentence which interprets
it. For example, in Surah’A‘raf, No. 7, verse 54, it says:

***“…Then He mounted the Throne (of authority). He covers the day with
the night…”.***

Or like Surah Yunus, No. 10, verse 3 which says:

***“…Then He established Himself on the Throne regulating all
things…”.***

Or like Surah Al-Hadid, No. 57, verse 4, which says:

***“…Then He established Himself on the Throne. He knows what enters
within the earth and what comes forth out of it…”.***

And like Surah As-Sajdah, No. 32, verse 4, where it says:

***“…Then He established Himself on the Throne. You have none besides
Him to protect or intercede (for you)…”.***

And in the verse under discussion, the Qur’an implies: the same
Beneficent Who dominates on the ‘Arsh (the Throne of existence).

The verse says:

***“The Beneficent (Allah Who) dominates on the ‘Arsh (the Throne of
existence).”***

The Arabic term /ara/ originally means ‘wet soil’, and since the low
level of the ground is often wet in Arabic it is called /ara/. Thus the
meaning of the phrase: /matahtaara/ (whatever is beneath the ground)
envelops all dead bodies, treasures, and whatever thing is hidden in the
depth of the ground.

Then, next to the Sovereignty of Allah over the world of existence, the
Qur’an refers to His Ownership.

It says:

***“To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the
earth, and whatever is between them, and whatever is beneath the
ground.”***

Up to here, three main attributes of Allah have been explained: the
first epithet is His Creative Power, the second epithet, is His
Sovereignty, and the third epithet is His Ownership.

In the next verse, the fourth epithet, His Omniscience, has been pointed
out. It implies that His knowledge is so vast that it encompasses every
thing you say manifestly or whatever you keep hidden, and He also knows
even the more secret than the secret.

The verse says:

***“And if you utter aloud (or whisper, it is no matter): for verily He
knows the secret (of yours) and (that which is yet) more hidden.”***

Imam Sadiq (as) said:

 *“The secret (thing) is what you hide in your heart, and more secret
than that is that which has passed from your mouth but you have
forgotten it. That is, not only it is hidden for others but you yourself
have neglected it.”*

Allah knows everything:

***“He knows the secret (of yours) and (that which is yet) more
hidden.”***[^1]

He knows the things which are not seen in the heavens and in the earth:

***“…I know the unseen things of the heavens and the earth…”.***[^2]

He knows what is in the womb of every female:

***“Allah knows what every female bears…”.***[^3]

He knows the aim and meaning of glances:

***“He knows the stealthy looks..”.***[^4]

He knows what passes in the hearts:

***“…Allah knows what is in your hearts…”.***[^5]

And there falls no leaf of a tree but He knows it:

***“…and no leaf (of a tree) drops down but He knows it…”.***[^6]

However, the domination of Allah over the world of existence is
accomplished mercifully, not mightily. And the revelation of the Qur’an
has been a sign of His Beneficence and His Authority upon the existence.

So, His Sovereignty over the whole existence is alike. He is both the
Creator of the world of existence and the Protector and Ruler of it. He
has also knowledge about whatever is visible and invisible and has
absolute ownership over all things.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 8
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ لَهُ الاَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***8. “Allah, there is no god but He. To Him belong the Most Beautiful
Names.”***

Through the contents of the abovementioned verses an epitome of
knowledge about the Sender of the Qur’an was delivered by referring to
Allah’s four attributes. They are: His Creative Power, His Sovereignty,
His Ownership, and His Omniscience.

And, perhaps, it is for the same reason that the Qur’an in this holy
verse says:

***“Allah, there is no god but He. To Him belong the Most Beautiful
Names.”***

The objective meaning of ‘the Most beautiful Names’ is the different
attributes of Allah (s.w.t.) all of which are good and are beautiful.

We know that Allah is: The Knower, The Powerful, The Sustainer, The
Just, The Benevolent, The Generous, and The Merciful. Besides them, He
has also many more good epithets similar to them.

The purpose of calling Allah by these Names is not only that we utter
them simply by the tongue, and we say, for example, O The knower, O The
Powerful, O The Most Merciful of all merciful, but, in fact, we must
settle these epithets in our selves as much as we can.

We must try to obtain a ray from His Knowledge, a reflection from His
Power, and a piece of His All-Embracing Mercy and practice them in
ourselves and our society.

In other words, we ought to be endowed with His Attributes and be
characterized by His character, so that, under the light of this
knowledge and power, and this justice and mercy, we can drive out
ourselves and the society wherein we live from the row of infernal
people.

However, there are some details about ‘the Most Beautiful Names’
recorded in the books of tradition and commentary, compiled by both
Sunnites and Shi‘ites, a substance of which will be offered here, as
follows:

No doubt the phrase ‘the Most Beautiful Names’ means ‘good names’, and
we know that all the names of Allah contain some good meanings,
therefore all His Names are the Most Beautiful Names.

They are irrespective of those which are the affirmed qualities of His
Pure Essence, like: The Knower, The Powerful; or those which are
negative qualities of His Holy Essence, like: The Most Holy; and those
which are the attributes of acts each of which denotes to one of His
acts, like: The Creator, The All-Forgiving, The Beneficent, and The
Merciful.

On the other hand, no doubt the attributes of Allah are not countable,
because His accomplishments are infinite. For each of His
accomplishments a Name and an Attribute can be chosen.

But, as it is understood from Some Islamic traditions, some of His
attributes are more significant than the others, and, perhaps, the
phrase ‘the Most Beautiful Names’ is an indication to this particular
group.

Among the traditions we have received from the Prophet (S) and the
Immaculate Imams (Ahlul-Bayt) (as) this meaning has repeatedly been said
that there are 99 Names for Allah and whoever calls Him by these Names
his prayer will be answered, and whoever counts them will enter
Paradise.

An example of the abovementioned traditions is the one that Sadugh has
narrated in his book, entitled Tauhid, from Imam Sadiq (as) from
Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) from the Prophet (S) who said:

 *“Verily there are ninety nine Names for Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted. He who counts them will enter Paradise”.*[^7]

Again, in the book of Tauhid, it is narrated from Imam
Ali-ibn-Musa-r-Rida (as), from his fathers, from Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as)
who said:

*“Verily there are ninety nine Names for Allah, Almighty and Glorious.
He who invocates by them it will be answered from him, and he who counts
them will enter Paradise”.*[^8]

In the books of Bukhari, Muslim, Tarmathi, and some other sources of
traditions compiled by the Sunnite scholars, this very meaning has also
been cited about the Names of Allah, saying that whoever calls Allah by
these ninety-nine Names his prayer will be answered, and whoever counts
them will enter Paradise.[^9]

Some Islamic traditions denote that these ninety-nine Names are found in
the Qur’an. For example, a tradition narrated by Ibn-Abbas indicates
that the Prophet (S) said:

*“There are ninety nine Names for Allah. Whoever counts them will enter
Paradise, and they are in the Qur’an.”*[^10]

Therefore, some of the Islamic scholars have tried to extract these
Names and Attributes from the Qur’an, but the Names of Allah mentioned
in the Qur’an are more than ninety nine Names. So, the Most Beautiful
Names may be among them, and thus, there are more than ninety nine Names
in the Qur’an concerning Allah.

Whatever is more important here, and we must be specially careful of it,
is that the purpose of calling Allah by these Names, or counting the
most Beautiful Names of Allah, is not that whoever utters these Names by
the tongue, and with no attention to their contents and concepts, he
merely pronounces them will be successful and prosperous, or his
invocation will be answered.

But the aim is that the person believes in these Names and Attributes,
and then he tries to reflect a ray of their meanings in his self; i.e.,
he should settle in himself some parts of the concepts of the
Attributes: The Knower, the Powerful, the Beneficent, the Merciful, the
Clement, All-Forgiving, the Strong, the Everlasting, the
Self-Sufficient, The Sustainer, and the like of them.

It is sure that such a person both will enter Paradise and his
invocation will be answered and will gain any goodness.

However, whatever was said makes it manifest that if, besides these
Names, some more Names are mentioned for Allah in some traditions or in
supplications, and even in some supplications[^11] the number of His
Names has reached to one thousand, it does not contrast to what was
explained in the above, because the Names of Allah are infinite and,
like the unending accomplishments of His Essence, they are unlimited,
although a number of these Names and Attributes have a kind of
preference.

And, also, when we recite in some traditions, like the one recorded in
Usul-i-Kafi, Imam Sadiq (as), commenting on the verse under discussion,
has said:

*“By Allah, we are the Most Beautiful Names (of Allah)”*,[^12]

it shows that a strong ray of these divine epithets has reflected in
their selves, and their knowledge helps them to the knowing of His Pure
Essence.

Also, some Islamic literatures indicate that all the Most Beautiful
Names are summarized in ‘pure monotheism’. This is because all His
attributes return to His Pure Essence, The One.

Fakhr-i-Razi, in his commentary book, points to a matter which, in one
respect, is important. He says that all the Attributes of Allah return
to two facts: either to His Omniscience, or the need of others to His
Pure Essence.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 9 - 12
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ مُوسَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ رَأَي نَاراً فَقَالَ لاَِهْلِهِ امْكُثُوْا إِنّـِي ءَانَسْتُ
نَاراً لَّعَلّـِي ءَاتِيكُم مّـِنْهَا بِقَبَسٍ أَوْ أَجِدُ عَلَي
النَّارِ هُدًي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّآ أَتَاهَا نُودِيَ يَامُوسَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنّـِي أَنَاْ رَبُّكَ فَاخْلَعْ نَعْلَيْكَ إِنَّكَ بِالْوَادِ
الْمُقَدَّسِ طُوًي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***9. “And has the story of Moses reached you?”***  
***10. “When he saw a fire, then he said to his family: ‘Wait (a
little)! Verily I perceive a fire; perhaps I can bring you a brand from
it, or may find some guidance at the fire’.”***  
***11. “Then when he came to the fire, he was called: ‘O Moses!”***  
***12. “Verily I am your Lord! Therefore take off your shoes! Verily you
are in the holy valley of Tuwa’.”***

The Arabic term /qabas/ means: a piece of fire apart from another.

Somewhere in the current Surah, a few points of the story of Moses (as)
have been stated in details. Among them are the followings:

1. The choice of Moses (as) for Messengership.

2. The invitation of Moses (as) from Pharaoh to accepting the Truth.

3. Moses’ coming out from Egypt and Pharaoh’s being drowned.

4. Calf worshipping of the Children of Israel.

Moses (as), accompanied with his pregnant wife, went on a trip, and they
lost their way in the desert. In the rainy, dark and cold desert, they
needed a fire for both its heat and light to find the way.

Then suddenly a fire was seen from the distance. In order to get the
fire to comfort his family, Moses (as) went toward the fire, where there
came a voice by which Allah elected Moses (as) as an apostle.[^13]

Yes, in order to save himself and his family, Moses (as) went toward the
fire, but Allah opened the path of saving others to him. Moses was
seeking for the road on the ground, while Allah showed him the spiritual
way and the path of happiness. He was looking for his personal way,
where Allah endowed him the way of guidance of the community.

In relation to this matter, the Qur’an, addressing the holy Prophet (S),
says:

***“And has the story of Moses reached you?”***

***“When he saw a fire, then he said to his family: ‘Wait (a little)!
Verily I perceive a fire; perhaps I can bring you a brand from it, or
may find some guidance at the fire’.”***

***“Then when he came to the fire, he was called: ‘O Moses!”***

***“Verily I am your Lord! Therefore take off your shoes! Verily you are
in the holy valley of Tuwa’.”***

By hearing that enlivening sound, addressing him:

***“Verily I am your Lord!”***

Moses (as) got very excited and an indescribable pleaure encompassed him
thoroughly.

He was commissioned to take off his shoes, because he had entered into a
holy land: a land wherein the light of Allah was seen, the Message of
Allah was heard, and he was to accept the responsibility of Apostleship.
He ought to step on this land with utmost humility and modesty. That was
why he should take off his shoes.

### Explanations

1. The appellation of Moses has been mentioned in 20 suras of the Qur’an
for 136 times. The story of Moses is the longest stories of the Qur’an,
because around nine hundred verses of the Qur’an concern to it.

2. The term /rabb/ (the Lord), which is one of ‘the Most Beautiful
Names’ of Allah, has occurred more than 970 times in the Qur’an, and in
His first manifestation to Moses (as), Allah introduced Himself by this
Name, saying:

***“Verily I am your Lord!”.***

And, since Moses’ prophethood began with the word of Allah,[^14] he was
entitled /kalimullah/ (the Interlocutor of Allah).

3. The phrase /wad-il-muqaddas/ (the holy valley) is used fore a place
far from defect and vice; and the word /tuwa/ means something or
somewhere which is blessed.

4. An Islamic tradition denotes that the purpose of ‘taking the shoes’
is detaching the heart from two anxieties: one of his anxieties was
about the situation of his wife in that cold desert; and his second
anxiety was about the evil of Pharaoh.[^15]

Some commentators also believe that this holy Qur’anic phrase points to
the wife and child, or to the love of the world and Hereafter.

The phrase under discussion has also occurred in the present Turah with
the same form of meaning.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 13 - 14
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَا اخْتَرْتُكَ فَاسْتَمِعْ لِمَا يُوحَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّنِي أَنَا اللَّهُ لآ إِلَهَ إِلآَّ أَنَاْ فَاعْبُدْنِي وَأَقِمِ
الصَّلاَةَ لِذِكْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***13. “And I myself have chosen you; therefore hearken unto what is
revealed.”***  
***14. “Verily I, I(alone), am Allah. There is no god save Me. So
worship (only) Me, and establish prayer for My remembrance.”***

Divine prophets have been appointed to prophethood by Allah, not by
people. Therefore, the words of revelation, sent to them, should be
heard and followed with whole the entity and heartily.

In this holy verse, Allah says that He Himself has chosen him to
Messengership, then he should hear His word and be steadfast on it. This
is the Divine revelation that he was commanded to hear.

The verse says:

***“And I myself have chosen you; therefore hearken unto what is
revealed.”***

Regarding Unity and sincere religion, Allah commanded him in this verse
as follows:

***“Verily I, I(alone), am Allah. There is no god save Me. So worship
(only) Me, and establish prayer for My remembrance.”***

In this verse Allah enjoins him to worship Him and to associate none in
worshipping unto Him and to establish prayer in order that in His
remembrance he glorifies and praises Him since prayer exists not save
for the remembrance of Allah.

Or the purpose of the content meaning in this holy verse is that he
should establish prayer so that He (s.w.t.) also remembers him in
praising.

In other words, in this holy verse, next to the statement of the most
importart principle of the prophets’ invitation, which is Unity, the
subject of worshipping the One God, as a fruit for the tree of Faith and
Unity, has been referred to.

And, immediately after it, He has enjoined prayer; i.e., the greatest
worship and the most important link between the servants and the
Creator, as well as the most effective means for that His Pure Essence
might not be forgotten.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 15 - 16
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ السَّاعَةَ ءَاتِيَةٌ أَكَادُ اُخْفِيهَا لِتُجْزَي كُلُّ نَفْسٍ
بِمَا تَسْعَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ يَصُدَّنَّكَ عَنْهَا مَن لاَّ يُؤْمِنُ بِهَا وَاتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ
فَتَرْدَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***15. “Verily the Hour (of Doom) is coming, (but) I will to keep it
hidden so that every soul may be rewarded for its endeavour.”***  
***16. “Therefore let him who believes not in it and follows his own
vain desires turn you away from it, lest you perish.”***

Monotheism and Resurrection are at the top of Allah’s Messages for
humankind. None is aware of the time of the event of Hereafter, save
Allah.

The occurrence of Resurrection is certain, but its time is hidden. In
Hereafter, the execution of Divine Law, and the accomplishment of
rewards and retributions, is the same for all.

After mentioning Unity and its explanation in the previous verse, here,
in this verse, the second basic principle, which is resurrection, is
referred to.

It says:

***“Verily the Hour (of Doom) is coming, (but) I will to keep it hidden
so that every soul may be rewarded for its endeavour.”***

According to this verse, the reason of keeping the exact time of
Resurrection hidden is cited that Allah wishes ‘to reward every person
for his effort and endeavour’, so that a freedom of action comes into
being for all human beings.

The next verse has pointed to a fundamental principle, which is a surety
of execution of all religious and training programs, where it says:

***“Therefore let him who believes not in it and follows his own vain
desires turn you away from it, lest you perish.”***

The prophet must stand firm before the faithless people and their evil
temptations. He must afraid neither of the large number of the opponents
nor be worried of their plots, nor be doubtful about the rightfulness of
his invitation and mobility of this Divine school.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 17 - 18
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تِلْكَ بِيَمِينِكَ يَامُوسَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هِيَ عَصَايَ أَتَوَكَّؤُا عَلَيْهَا وَأَهُشُّ بِهَا عَلَي
غَنَمِي وَلِيَ فِيهَا مَاَرِبُ اُخْرَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “And (Allah said) what is that in your right hand O Moses?”***  
***18. “He (Moses)said: ‘It is my rod: I lean on it, and I beat down
leaves with it for my sheep, and there are (also) other uses therein for
me’.”***

To show His power, Allah makes use of even the nearest and simplest
means of ordinary life.

### Moses’ Rod and White Hand!

No doubt the divine prophets need miracles to prove their communication
with Allah (s.w.t.), else everybody may claim prophethood.

Moses (as), after getting the command of prophethood, should receive its
divine proof, too. Therefore, in the same adventurous night, he received
two great miracles from the side of Allah (s.w.t.).

The Qur’an explains this event as follows:

***“And (Allah said) what is that in your right hand O Moses?”***

In answer to this question, Moses (as) said:

***“…‘It is my rod…”***

And, since Moses wished to continue his speech with his beloved Lord,
Who for the first time had opened that door to him, and also since maybe
he thought saying merely ‘***It is my rod***’ was not enough and the
purpose was to explain its usage, he added:

***“…I lean on it, and I beat down leaves with it for my sheep, and
there are (also) other uses therein for me’.”***

Moses (as) had gone in a deep astonishment that what a question it was
and what sort of reply he was answering!

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 19 - 21
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَلْقِهَا يَا مُوسَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَلْقَاهَا فَإِذَا هِيَ حَيَّةٌ تَسْعَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ خُذْهَا وَلاَ تَخَفْ سَنُعِيدُهَا سِيرَتَهَا الاُولَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “Said He: ‘Cast it down O Moses!”***  
***20. “Then he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent gliding.”***  
***21. “Said He: ‘Take it, and fear not, We will restore it to its first
state’.”***

In the first couple of holy verses, mentioned in the above, Moses is
commanded to throw down his rod and he immediately, and without wasting
any moment, threw his rod down, when suddenly it became a great snake
and began moving.

Here are the verses:

***“Said He: ‘Cast it down O Moses!”***

***“Then he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent gliding.”***

The Arabic term /tas‘a/ is derived from /sa‘y/ in the sense of ‘to walk
swiftly’, so that it does not reach to the state of running.

In the next holy verse, He told Moses to take the rod.

Here is the verse:

***“Said He: ‘Take it, and fear not, We will restore it to its first
state’.”***

Then, as soon as Allah, the Glorified, told him to take it and fear not,
his fear went away so that Moses (as) put his hand into the mouth of the
serpent and seized its neck; so the serpent changed into its first
state, i.e., a rod.[^16]

It is cited in Majma‘-ul-Bayan that this rod was made of a heavenly
piece of wood which the former prophets had inherited from Adam, and
Shu‘ayb (Jethro) had given it to Moses (as).

### Explanations

1. Human beings naturally are afraid of dangers and the causes of vice
and harm, and they avoid them. It is evident that Moses (as), who is a
man, also fears. What is criticized, and even disgraceful, here, is
heartily fear and anxiety from other than Allah, which is against
bravery and it is one of the evil qualities for the true believers, and
Moses (as), of course, had been far from it.

2. The fear of Moses (as), perhaps, was for the reason that he had
considered the command of ‘***cast it down***’, respectful, like the
command of ‘***take off your shoes***’, but when it changed into a
serpent, he surprised.

Intrinsically, this very fear is itself an evidence that that happening
was a miracle, otherwise, a sorcerer who himself knows that his sorcery
is not a fact, naturally is not afraid of his own magic.

3. In any moment, Allah gives life to millions of lifeless things, or He
takes the life of millions of living creatures. Here, He also gave life
to the lifeless rod and then He took it back from it when it became a
rod again. Keeping this event in mind, the question is: can He not cause
a living person to die, and then He restores him to his first
state?[^17]

Verily, when Allah’s view changes a rod into a serpent, then what
happens if He puts a graceful view upon us? And, when the favoured thing
of Allah can swallow all the magic of the sorcerers, will His favour
toward our hearts not swallow all the evil temptations?

4. At the first onset of the adventure of Moses, there happened two
miracles for him. The first was that his rod turned to be a serpent; and
the second was that the serpent was restored to its first state.

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 22 - 23
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاضْمُمْ يَدَكَ إِلَي جَنَاحِكَ تَخْرُجْ بَيْضَآءَ مِنْ غَيْرِ سُوءٍ
ءَايَةً اُخْرَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنُرِيَكَ مِنْ ءَايَاتِنَا الْكُبْري
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “And place your hand under your armpit, it will come forth white
(shining) without harm, (and this also is) another sign (miracle),”***  
***23. “That We may show you of Our greater signs.”***

Another miracle of Moses (as) was the ‘White Hand’, which has been
mentioned in three occurrences of the Qur’an.

One of them is where it says:

***“Enter your hand into the opening of your bosom…”***[^18]

Another one is the verse which says:

***“And enter your hand into the opening of your bosom…”***[^19]

And the third one is the abovementioned verse which says:

***“And place your hand under your armpit…”***

The meaning of these three verses can be gathered in a statement,
saying: ‘Enter your hand into the opening of your bosom as far as under
your armpit’, so that it comes out white and in perfect condition. This
is another Sign of Allah.

The verse continues saying:

***“…it will come forth white (shining) without harm, (and this also is)
another sign (miracle),”***

However, Allah is All-Mighty and whenever and by any means that He
intends He can manifest His Power. The miracles of the prophets can also
be counted as a part of His Signs and His Power.

Therefore, in the next verse, as a conclusion of the contents of the
previous verses, it implies that Allah gave these things to Moses in
order to show him His great signs.

In this regard, the verse says:

***“That We may show you of Our greater signs.”***

The objective meaning of the phrase: ‘greater signs, is those very
important miracles which were mentioned in the above.

### Explanations

1. In order to improve a society, the sources and the origins of
sedition and mischief should be rooted out.

2. The first struggle of prophets is standing against the illegitimate
rulers of their time.

3. Religion is not separate from policy. Moses (as) started improving
the government.

***“Go to Pharaoh…”***

4. Struggling against the illegitimate rulers is a Divine duty, not a
demonstration.

[^1]: Tafsir Safi

[^2]: Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 33

[^3]: Surah Ar-Ra‘d, No. 13, verse 8

[^4]: Surah Al-Mu’min, No. 40, verse 19

[^5]: Surah Al-’Ahzab, No. 33, verse 51

[^6]: Surah Al-’An’am, No. 6, verse 59

[^7]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^8]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^9]: Al-Mizan, Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^10]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, Nur-uth-Thaqalayn

[^11]: Such as the supplication of Joushan-Kabir

[^12]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 2, p. 103

[^13]: Majma’-ul-Bayan, the commentary

[^14]: Surah An-Nisa’, No. 4, verse 164 says: “…and Allah spoke directly
unto Moses a (peculiar) speech”.

[^15]: Nur-uth-Thaqalaym

[^16]: The Commentary of Jawami‘-ul-Jami‘

[^17]: The Commentary of Fi Zilal-il-Qur’an

[^18]: Surah Al-Qsas, No. 28, verse 32

[^19]: Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 12


