Section 4: The Children of Israel Follow Moses
==============================================

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 77 - 79
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَوْحَيْنَآ إِلَي مُوسَي أَنْ أَسْرِ بِعِبَادِي فَاضْرِبْ
لَهُمْ طَرِيقاً فِي الْبَحْرِ يَبَساً لاَّ تَخَافُ دَرَكاً وَلاَ
تَخْشَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَتْبَعَهُمْ فِرْعَوْنُ بِجُنُودِهِ فَغَشِيَهُم مِنَ الْيَمّ‌ِ مَا
غَشِيَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَضَلَّ فِرْعَوْنُ قَوْمَهُ وَمَا هَدَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***77. “And We indeed revealed unto Moses (saying:): ‘Take away My
servants by night, and strike for them a dry path in the sea, with no
fear of being overtaken (by Pharaoh) nor you be afraid (of being
drowned).”***  
***78. “Then Pharaoh pursued them with his armies so (the bellows) of
the sea covered them, as they were covered (completely drowned).”***  
***79. “And Pharaoh led his people astray and he did not guide them
(aright).”***

When the sorcerers and the people of Egypt believed in Moses (as) and
did not fear from the threats of Pharaoh, the gate of the helps of Allah
were opened to them and, after that Moses (as) was ordered to take
people out of Egypt by night, and that Allah made the sea dry for them
and secured them from the harm of Pharaoh.[^1]

The verse says:

***“And We indeed revealed unto Moses (saying:): ‘Take away My servants
by night…”***

Thus, the Children of Israel became ready to set out toward the Promised
Land (Palestine), but when they reached the shores of the Nile, the men
of Pharaoh were informed of the event and, therefore, Pharaoh,
accompanied with a large army, pursued them. New, the Children of Israel
found themselves surrounded by the sea and the enemy.

At this time Allah commanded Moses as follows:

***“…and strike for them a dry path in the sea…”***

The revelation, pointing to the dry path in the sea, informs Moses that
it is a path that when you step on it, you will be faced:

***“…with no fear of being overtaken (by Pharaoh) nor you be afraid (of
being drowned).”***

Therefore, Moses and the Children of Israel arrived to some paths which,
by going water aside, appeared inside the sea. At this time, Pharaoh and
his army reached beside the sea and were confronted such an amazing and
unexpectedly scene.

The verse says:

***“Then Pharaoh pursued them with his armies…”***

From one end, the last figure of the Pharaoh’s army entered the sea,
and, on the other end, the last figure of the Children of Israel went
out of the sea. At this moment, the pillars of water in the sea were
commanded to return to their first state. The walls of water waved and,
like an old building the base of which is broken, fell down all of a
sudden.

The verse says:

***“…so (the bellows) of the sea covered them, as they were covered
(completely drowned).”***

And, in this way, an unjust cruel power together with its powerful
forces were wholly covered by the masses of water in the sea and were
swallowed by the fish of that sea in the form of a ready made food.

Yes, it is true that the verse says:

***“And Pharaoh led his people astray and he did not guide them
(aright).”***

However, the Arabic word /’isra’/ means ‘to travel by night’. The word
/yabas/ is called to a place where it has become dry now. The term
/darak/ means the losses which encompasses a person. And, the objective
meaning of the Qur’anic term /‘ibadi/, mentioned in this holy verse, is
the Children of Israel.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 80
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي إِسْرَآئِيلَ قَدْ أَنجَيْنَاكُم مِنْ عَدُوِّكُمْ
وَوَاعَدْناكُمْ جَانِبَ الطُّورِ الاَيْمَنَ وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكُمُ
الْمَنَّ وَالسَّلْوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***80. “O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and We
made a covenant with you on the right side of Tur (the Mount Sinai), and
We sent down unto you Manna and quails.”***

The subject of the deliverance of the Children of Israel from the
cruelty of Pharaoh, and the descent of Manna and the quails for them
when they were wandering in the desert, have been mentioned in the
Qur’an several times.

The Arabic term /manna/ apparently means: ‘honey and hedysarum’, while
/salwa/ means ‘quails’, a kind of bird the meat of which is delicious
and lawful for eating.

The phrase:

“***and We made a covenant with you on the right side of Tur***”,

mentioned in the verse, is an indication to the event of the tryst of
Tur, the Mount Sinai, where Moses, accompanied with a group of the
Children of Israel, went. There, Allah sent down the Tablets of Turah to
Moses (as). Law is usually the most important necessity of a community
after dismissing the tyrannical ruler and formation of a government.

This holy verse addresses the Children of Israel and, in general, all
human being in any time, and reminds them the great bounties that Allah
has bestowed on them and leads them to the path of salvation.

At first it says:

***“O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy…”***

Then, the verse points to one of the spiritual bounties, when it says:

***“…and We made a covenant with you on the right side of Tur (the Mount
Sinai)…”***

As it was said in the above, this part of the verse points to the tryst
when Moses and some of the Children of Israel went to the Tur Mount. It
was in this very tryst that Allah sent down the Tablets of Moses and
spoke with him and all of them saw the special manifestation of Allah.

And, finally, the verse points to an important material bounty which
originated from the peculiar graces of Allah unto the Children of
Israel.

It says:

***“…and We sent down unto you Manna and quails.”***

They were wandering in a desert where they had no suitable food. Then
the grace of Allah helped them and He gave them some delightful and
delicious food to use, as much as they needed.

However, the spiritual bounty is prior to the material bounty.

At first He said:

***“We made a covenant with you on the right side of Tur”,***

which refers to the descent of the Turah. Next to that He said:

***“and We sent down unto you Manna and quails”,***

which refers to the food of the body.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 81
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُوا مِن طَيّـِبَاتِ مَا رَزَقْنَاكُمْ وَلاَ تَطْغَوْا فِيهِ
فَيَحِلَّ عَلَيْكُمْ غَضَبِي وَمَن يَحْلِلْ عَلَيْهِ غَضَبِي فَقَدْ
هَوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***81. “Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance, but
commit no excess therein, lest My Wrath should descend on you, and on
whomever My Wrath does descend, he is lost indeed.”***

After mentioning those three valuable bounties, this verse addresses
them and says:

***“Eat of the good things We have provided for your sustenance, but
commit no excess therein, lest My Wrath should descend on you…”***

Insolence, concerning the Divine bounties, is that a person, instead of
using them in the path of obedience of Allah and the path of his own
felicity, uses them as a means of sinning, ingratitude, disbelief,
obstinacy, and prodigality, as the Children of Israel did in the like
manner.

And, following that matter, the verse continues saying:

***“…and on whomever My Wrath does descend, he is lost indeed.”***

The Qur’anic term /hawa/ originally means: ‘to fall from a height down’,
the result of which is usually destruction. Moreover, here the term also
indicates to the fall of spiritual rank: separation from nearness of
Allah, and being sent away from His presence.

Yet, the real fall for a man is to be involved in the Wrath of Allah,
such as political failure, economical bankruptcy, and the like of them.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 82
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنّـِي لَغَفَّارٌ لِمَن تَابَ وءَامَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحاً ثُمَّ
اهْتَدَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***82. “And verily I am the most forgiving to him who repents and
believes and does righteous deed, and at last is guided.”***

Next to the previous verse, which ended with a warning, this verse
consists of the glad tidings of Allah, the good tidings to accepting
repentance and forgiveness. This style is seen in all occurrences of the
Qur’an concerning those occasions which are similar to this one.

Of course, repentance from any sin and fault should be proportional to
that very sin and fault. For example, the repentance of a person who has
not established a statutory prayer is that he should fulfill that
prayer; the repentance of hurting people is apology; the repentance of
concealment of a fact is its announcement; the repentance of polytheism
is belief in Allah; and the repentance of consuming people’s wealth is
to return the wealth to its owner(s).

And since warnings and threats should be followed by encouragement and
glad tidings, in order to equally remove the potential fear and hope,
which are the main factors of development, and to open the doors of
return to the repentant, in this verse, He says:

***“And verily I am the most forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does righteous deed, and at last is guided.”***

The application of the word /qaffar/ (The most forgiving) in this verse
is an indication to the fact that Allah forgives such people not only
once but also for many times.

Some Islamic traditions denote that the purpose of the word /’ihtada/,
mentioned in this verse, has also been rendered into the guidance toward
the mastership of Ahlul-Bayt (as) (the immaculate Imams).[^2]

The reason of this idea is that Faith and righteous deeds, without the
acceptance of the guidance of the Divine leaders, are not enough. (Yes,
When there are both Faith and righteous deeds in one believer but he
does not pave the path of guidance of the Divine leaders, he will become
the prey of others, such as Samiri and Bal‘am Ba‘ura.)

Thus, the phrase “***and at last is guided***” is an indication to the
necessity of the acceptance of mastership and obedience to the
leadership of the Divine leaders.

That is, repentance, faith, and righteous deeds are accepted and cause
felicity when they are under the light of the guidance of Divine
leaders. Once this guidance was at the time Moses (as), and another time
it was in the time of the Prophet of Islam (S); then it was at the time
of Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as); and today it relates to Hadrat Mahdi
(as).

The reason of it is that one of the principals of religion is the
acceptance of the invitation and the leadership of the Prophet (S) and
then the acceptance of the leadership of his true successors.

The Late Tabarsi, concerning the commentary of this verse, narrates a
tradition from Imam Baqir (as) who said:

*“The objective meaning of the phrase /ummahtada/ is the guidance unto
the leadership of Ahlul-Bayt (as)”*

Then he (as) added:

*“By Allah, if a man spends all his lifetime in Divine service (close to
the Ka‘bah) between ‘Rukn and Maqham (station of Abraham)’, then he dies
in the state that he has not accepted our mastership, Allah will throw
him by face into the Fire (of Hell).”*

Hakim Abul-Ghasim Huskani, The well-known scholar of hadith of the
Sunnites, has also narrated this tradition in his book.[^3]

There have been recorded many other traditions in this field narrated
from Imam Zayn-ul-‘Abidin (as), Imam Sadiq (as), and the Prophet himself
(S).

In order to know how deep the abandonment of this principal is
destructive, it is enough to study the following verses and see how the
Children of Israel were involved in worshipping the Calf, idolatry, and
infidelity as the result of abandonment of the mastership and leaving
the line of following Moses (as) and his successor Aaron.

However, to be a believer, and to become a believer, is important, but
remaining in Faith is more important.

***“…and at last is guided.”***

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 83 - 85
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَعْجَلَكَ عَن قَوْمِكَ يَا مُوسَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ هُمْ اُوْلآءِ عَلَي أَثَرِي وَعَجِلْتُ إِلَيْكَ رَبّ‌ِ لِتَرْضَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَإِنَّا قَدْ فَتَنَّا قَوْمَكَ مِن بَعْدِكَ وَأَضَلَّهُمُ
السَّامِرِيُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***83. “And (Allah said): ‘What caused you to hasten from your people,
O’ Moses?’”***  
***84. “Said (Moses): ‘They are upon my track, and I hastened unto You,
my Lord, that You might be pleased’.”***  
***85. “Said He: ‘Verily We have tested your people in your absence and
the Samiri has led them astray’.”***

Upon the commentary of these verses, Imam Sadiq (as) has illustrated the
feature of a lover as this:

*“A lover thinks neither of food, clothing, and residence, nor does he
have calmness and tranquility until he reaches what he is desirous to;
as Moses, desirous to receive revelation from the Lord, did neither
sleep nor feed, and he said to the Lord that he had come to Him sooner
than his people in order that He became pleased.”*[^4]

Then the Qur’an refers to another important part of the life of Moses
(as) and the Children of Israel, which relates to the time when he (as),
accompanied with a number of the representatives of the Children of
Israel, went to the tryst of Tur Mount, and, in their absence, the
Children of Israel committed Calf worship.

It was appointed that Moses (as) would go to Tur to take the laws of the
Turah, and some of the Children of Israel might also accompany him along
that way.

But, in view of the fact that the desire of conversation to Allah was
flaming in the heart of Moses, he went alone to the tryst of the Lord
before others.

Here, the revelation was sent down to him as follows:

***“And (Allah said): ‘What caused you to hasten from your people, O’
Moses?’”***

Then Moses immediately answered Him, as the verse says:

***“Said (Moses): ‘They are upon my track, and I hastened unto You, my
Lord, that You might be pleased’.”***

Moses implied that not only the love of conversation to Him and
listening to His statements had made him impatient, but also he had been
desirous to take His Laws and ordinances as soon as possible to convey
them to His servants, so that, by this manner, he could attract His
pleasure better. Yes, Moses was in love of Allah’s pleasure and was also
desirous to hear His command.

Yet, in this meeting, his tryst prolonged from thirty nights to forty
nights, and different grounds of aberration, which had existed among the
Children of Israel from before, manifested. Samiri, that heretic but
clever man, by means of some materials made a Calf and invited people to
worshipping it. Then, it was in the same tryst that Allah told Moses
that his people did not pass their trial well.

The verse says:

***“Said He: ‘Verily We have tested your people in your absence and the
Samiri has led them astray’.”***

With the presence of the leader in the society, the enemies cannot do
any thing. The heretic persons usually misuse the absence of the Divine
leader in the society.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 86
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرَجَعَ مُوسَي إِلَي قَوْمِهِ غَضْبَانَ أَسِفاً قَالَ يَاقَوْمِ
أَلَمْ يَعِدْكُمْ رَبُّكُمْ وَعْداً حَسَناً أَفَطَالَ عَلَيْكُمُ
الْعَهْدُ أَمْ أَرَدتُّمْ أَن يَحِلَّ عَلَيْكُمْ غَضَبٌ مِن
رَّبّـِكُمْ فَاَخْلَفْتُم مَّوْعِدِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***86. “Then Moses returned to his people angry and sad, saying: ‘O my
people! did not your Lord promise you a fair promise (the descent of the
Turah)? Did then the time (of my absence) seem so long to you? Or did
you desire that Wrath should descend from your Lord on you so that you
failed in your tryst with me?’”***

By hearing this matter, Moses became so angry that as if his whole
entity burnt. Perhaps he was saying to himself that he had worked and
tried studiously, confronted any danger and laboured for long years
until when that community became acquainted with Monotheism, but alas!
and alas again that because of a few days of his absence all his efforts
were lost. That was why he immediately returned to those people.

The verse says:

***“Then Moses returned to his people angry and sad…”***

When Moses saw the hideous scenery of Calf worship, he shouted at them:

***“…saying: ‘O my people! did not your Lord promise you a fair promise
(the descent of the Turah)?…”***

This ‘fair promise’, mentioned in the verse, was either the promise that
he had given to the Children of Israel upon the descent of the Turah and
the statement of heavenly ordinances in it; or the promise of victory
and delivering them from the people of Pharaoh and becoming the
inheritor of the earth; or the promise of forgiveness for the repentant,
or all of the abovementioned promises.

Then, Moses (as) added:

***“…Did then the time (of my absence) seem so long to you?…”***

Or, by means of this hideous action, they opposed him in their
appointment in order to cause the chastisement of Allah to be descended
on them.

The verse says:

***“…Or did you desire that Wrath should descend from your Lord on you
so that you failed in your tryst with me?’”***

There are two points here which must be noted. In this verse, two
promises have been referred to. One of them is the promise from the side
of Allah, i.e., the descent of the Turah; and the other is the promise
from the side of Moses (as) to his people that when he was absent they
should obey his brother Aaron, but the people, by their Calf worship,
ignored both them.

When Moses (as) was reprimanding them he questioned them, about their
aberration. He questioned whether their aberration was done deliberately
and they went toward the Wrath of Allah knowingly, or they did it
neglectfully. He also asked them whether they went astray for the reason
that his absence prolonged from thirty days to forty days.

In this verse, similar to the content of verse No. 81, the Wrath of
Allah has been pointed out, with a difference that: in that verse the
cause of the Wrath of Allah has been stated the disobedience of people,
while here its reason has been mentioned the people’s breach of promise.
These are the factors in which the secret of the defeat of the Children
of Israel is hidden.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 87
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا مَآ أَخْلَفْنَا مَوْعِدَكَ بِمَلْكِنَا وَلَكِنَّا حُمّـِلْنَآ
أَوْزَاراً مِن زِينَةِ الْقَوْمِ فَقَذَفْنَاهَا فَكَذَلِكَ اَلْقَي
السَّامِرِيُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***87. “They said: ‘We did not fail in our tryst with you of our own
accord, but we were laden with burdens of ornaments of the people, then
we cast them (in the fire), and thus did the Samiri suggest’.”***

In order to flee from punishment, sinners usually take refuge to some
pretexts, such as compulsion, aversion, and outward coercion. A society,
the Faith of which is feeble and it easily accepts an undue sovereignty,
by means of an adroit trick, may lose every thing it has.

It was for this reason that when the Children of Israel found themselves
before the intensive protest of Moses (as) and understood that they had
done an indecent action, tried to bring some pretexts.

The verse says:

***“They said: ‘We did not fail in our tryst with you of our own
accord…”***

That is, in fact, we ourselves did not tend to Calf worship by our will,
but it was Samiri who suggested it. The verse continues saying:

***“…but we were laden with burdens of ornaments of the people, then we
cast them (in the fire), and thus did the Samiri suggest’.”***

Surah Ta Ha – Verses 88 - 89
----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَخْرَجَ لَهُمْ عِجْلاً جَسَداً لَّهُ خُوَارٌ فَقَالُوا هَذَا
إِلَهُكُمْ وَإِلَهُ مُوسَي فَنَسِيَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلاَ يَرَوْنَ أَلاَّ يَرْجِعُ إِلَيْهِمْ قَوْلاً وَلاَ يَمْلِكُ
لَهُمْ ضَرّاً وَلاَ نَفْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***88. “Then he (Samiri) produced for them a (mere) body of a Calf that
lowed. So they said: ‘This is your god and the god of Moses’, but he
forgot (both the Lord and Moses’ teachings).”***  
***89. “Do they not see then that it (the Calf) returns to them no
saying and possesses neither harm nor profit for them?”***

One of the smartnesses of Samiri was that he did not show those people
how he constructed the Calf, and the people, all of a sudden, were faced
with a lowing Calf that Samiri had constructed.

The verse says:

***“Then he (Samiri) produced for them a (mere) body of a Calf that
lowed. So they said: “This is your god and the god of Moses’, but he
forgot (both the Lord and Moses’ teachings).”***

The Children of Israel did not contemplate that if that Calf were worthy
of worship, Samiri himself, who was the constructor of it, would be more
worthy of worship while they did not worship him.

However, as a blame and reprimand upon those idolaters, Allah says:

***“Do they not see then that it (the Calf) returns to them no saying
and possesses neither harm nor profit for them?”***

A real deity should at least be able to answer the questions of the
servants. Can the sound of lowing heard from the golden statue of a Calf
alone be an acceptable and sufficient reason for people to worship it?

Moreover, can a thing, which is not the possessor of the harm and the
profit of others, or even of itself, be an object of worship?

Besides, the intellect judges that the object of worship of a man should
be able to attract profit for him and to repel harms from him.

[^1]: The Commentary of Fi-Zilal-il-Qur’an

[^2]: Commentary of Burhan; and Kafi, vol. 8, p. 393

[^3]: Majma‘-ul-Bayan, the Commentary

[^4]: As-Safi, the Commentary, the explanation about the verse


