Section 8: The Times of the Daily Prayers
=========================================

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 130
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ عَلَي مَا يَقُولُونَ وَسَبّـِحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبّـِكَ قَبْلَ
طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ غُرُوبِهَا وَمِنْ ءَانآئِ اللَّيْلِ
فَسَبّـِحْ وَأَطْرَافَ النَّهَارِ لَعَلَّكَ تَرْضَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***130. “So be patient with what they say, and glorify your Lord by
praising Him before the rising of the sun and before its setting, and
during (some) hours of the night also glorify (Him) and during parts of
the day, that you may be pleased.”***

This verse, similar to verse No. 45 from Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, which
says:

***“And seek you help (from Allah) through patience and prayer…”,***

invites the Prophet (S) to patience and praise of the Lord. Of course,
the addressee of the verse is apparently the Prophet (S), but it is
evident that the content of the verse is for all.

Allah has enjoined the Prophet (S) to patience in nineteen occurrences
of the Qur’an.

According to some traditions and the viewpoint of some commentators,
this verse adapts to the statutory prayers; and the objective meaning of
‘during parts of the day’, mentioned in the verse, is the daily
supererogatory prayers.

However, the verse, addressing the Prophet of Islam (S), implies: now
that these wrong doers are not to be punished at once, he should be
patient with them.

The verse says:

***“So be patient with what they say…”***

So, in order to strengthen the spiritual conditions of the Prophet (S),
and to comfort him, He commands him to glorify his Lord through prayers.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and glorify your Lord by praising Him before the rising of the sun
and before its setting, and during (some) hours of the night also
glorify (Him) and during parts of the day, that you may be pleased.”***

This commandment was for the sake that the Prophet’s heart might not be
worried because of their hurtful sayings. No doubt, this glorification
and praising was a struggle against polytheism and idolatry, accompanied
with patience before the ill-speaking and evil words of the polytheists.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 131
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَمُدَّنَّ عَيْنَيْكَ إِلَي مَا مَتَّعْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجاً
مّـِنْهُمْ زَهْرَةَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا لِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ
وَرِزْقُ رَبّـِكَ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***131. “And do not stretch your eyes to that thing which We have given
parties of them to enjoy; (this is) the splendour of the life of the
world that We may try them in it; and the provision of your Lord is
better and more lasting.”***

There has been narrated a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) who said:

*“Whoever longs for the people’s help, his sorrow will prolong and his
rage will remain.”*[^1]

The Qur’an considers the wealth of the world as goodness, virtue, and
adornment and counts the enjoyment of it lawful and permissible, yet it
condemns intensive love unto it, because the life in this world is like
a bud or a blossom, which has a short lifetime and, with a faint wind or
breeze easily vanishes.

In this verse the Prophet (S) has been ordered some instructions which
are completive to the statement of patience that was mentioned in the
previous verse. These instructions, in fact, are for all Muslims.

At first, it says:

***“And do not stretch your eyes to that thing which We have given
parties of them to enjoy…”***

Yes, these worldly bounties are temporary and unstable. They are
blossoms of the life of this world, the blossoms which soon open, and
fade soon and fall on the ground. They remain stable only for a few
days.

The verse says:

***“…(this is) the splendour of the life of the world…”***

In the meantime, all these are for that they may be tried by them. The
verse continues saying:

***“…that We may try them in it…”***

And, however, whatever Allah has provided as sustenance for you is
better and is more lasting. The verse says:

***“…and the provision of your Lord is better and more lasting.”***

Allah has bestowed on you kinds of bounties and graces, including: Faith
and Islam, the Qur’an and Divine Signs, lawful and pure provisions, and
finally, the permanent blessings of the Hereafter. These provisions are
stable and everlasting.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 132
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأْمُرْ أَهْلَكَ بِالصَّلاَةِ وَاصْطَبِرْ عَلَيْهَا لاَ نَسْأَلُكَ
رِزْقاً نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُكَ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلتَّقْوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***132. “And bid your family to pray and be constant therein. We do not
ask you sustenance, (but) We give you sustenance, and the (good) end is
for (the people of) righteousness.”***

A considerable number of Islamic traditions indicate that after the
revelation of this verse, for several months the Prophet (S) used to
knock at the door of the house of Ali (as) and Fatimah (as), and loudly
said: /as-salat/ (prayer), then he began reciting the verse of
sanctification.[^2][^3]

Whenever the life of the Messenger of Allah (S) was straitened, he
recited the above-mentioned verse and then he told his family members to
establish prayer.[^4]

The Qur’anic phrase /’istabir ‘alayha/ (be constant therein) means that
you should be severe and constant both on keeping prayer and bidding
others to it.

In order to comfort the Prophet (S), and to strengthen his heart, in
this verse the Qur’an says:

***“And bid your family to pray and be constant therein...”***

The reason of it is that, this very prayer, for you and your household,
is the source of sanctification, serenity of the heart (mind),
strengthening of the spirit, and duration of the remembrance of Allah.

Then, the verse adds:

***“…We do not ask you sustenance, (but) We give you sustenance…”***

This prayer does not increase anything to the greatness of Allah, but it
is a great capital for the development of men and a high training class
for them.

And, at the end of the verse, it continues saying:

***“…and the (good) end is for (the people of ) righteousness.”***

That which that will remain with Allah (s.w.t.) and its end is useful,
constructive, and enlivening is piety and righteousness. Finally, the
pious people are victorious and impious ones are condemned to failure.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 133
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لَوْلاَ يَأْتِينَا بِاَيَةٍ مِن رَّبّـِهِ أَوَ لَمْ
تَأْتِهِم بَيّـِنَةُ مَا فِي الصُّحُفِ الأُولَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***133. “And they said: ‘Why does he not bring us a sign (a miracle)
from his Lord?’ Has there not come to them a clear proof of what is in
the former Books?”***

This verse points to one of the pretexts of the disbelievers. They said
why the Prophet (S) did not bring a miracle for them as they themselves
liked.

It says:

***“And they said: ‘Why does he not bring us a sign (a miracle) from his
Lord?’…”***

Then, the holy Qur’an immediately answers this question, implying that
whether the clear news of the former nations, which had been mentioned
in the former Divine Books, did not come to them that they repeatedly
did pretext and asked for bringing miracles, and after when they saw
those miracles they continued their disbelief and rejections for which
the grievous punishment of Allah encompassed them.

Do they not know that if they pave the same way they will confront the
same fate?

The verse continues saying:

***“…Has there not come to them a clear proof of what is in the former
Books?”***

Yes, there is the quality of the stubborn and proud persons that they
put aside the clear existing proofs and miracles of the Qur’an and
obstinately expect another miracle.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 134
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّآ أَهْلَكْنَاهُم بِعَذَابٍ مِن قَبْلِهِ لَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا
لَوْلآ أَرْسَلْتَ إِلَيْنَا رَسُولاً فَنَتَّبِعَ ءَايَاتِكَ مِن قَبْلِ
أَن نَذِلَّ وَنَخْزَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***134. “And had We destroyed them with a punishment before him (the
Messenger), they would certainly have said: ‘Our Lord! Why did You not
send us a Messenger so that we might have followed Your Signs before
that we were humiliated and disgraced.”***

The mission of the prophets to prophethood has been for completing the
argument so that people may not pretext their own unawareness.
Therefore, these seekers of pretexts are not some people who seek the
Truth.

They are ceaselessly in the thought of seeking a new pretext, even in a
state that, as Allah says:

***“And had We destroyed them with a punishment before him (the
Messenger), they would certainly have said: ‘Our Lord! Why did You not
send us a Messenger so that we might have followed Your Signs before
that we were humiliated and disgraced.”***

But, now that this great holy Prophet (S) with this magnificent Book,
the Qur’an, has come to them, every day they express a new vain
statement and, in order to escape from the truth, they bring a new
excuse.

Surah Ta Ha – Verse 135
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ كُلٌّ مُّتَرَبّـِصٌ فَتَرَبَّصُوا فَسَتَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَصْحَابُ
الصّـِرَاطِ السَّوِيّ‌ِ وَمَنِ اهْتَدَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***135. “Say: ‘Each one (of us) is awaiting, therefore do await, then
soon you will come to know who is the follower of the straight and even
way, and who is guided’.”***

The holy Prophet (S) is a missionary of warning. Therefore, in this
verse the Qur’an implies that he should tell them that all of you and us
are waiting. We are awaiting for the promises of Allah about you, and
you are awaiting that difficulties and calamities surround us.

The verse says:

***“Say: ‘Each one (of us) is awaiting…”***

Now that the case is like that, the verse continues saying :

***“…therefore do await…”***

***“…Then soon you will come to know who is the follower of the straight
and even way, and who is guided’.”***

And, by this decisive and expressive sentence, he concludes his speaking
here with these obstinate and disbelieving seekers of pretexts.

In short, since this Surah was sent down in Mecca, at the time when the
Prophet of Islam (S) and the Muslims were under a harsh pressure from
the side of the enemies of Islam, at the end of this Surah through some
revelations Allah comforts them. Sometimes He says that the wealth and
properties of the disbelievers, which are the fleeting capitals of this
world and are given to them for their trial, should not attract your
eyes to themselves.

Sometimes He orders them to establishing prayer and being constant in
order to strengthen their spiritual power in front of the mass of their
enemies.

And, at last, He gives glad tidings to the Muslims that if this group do
not believe, such people will have an evil and dark fate, for which hey
must wait.

However, the objective meaning of the Qur’anic phrase
/’ashab-us-sirat-is-sawiy/ mentioned in the holy verse is the immaculate
Imams and the purpose of the phrase /man-ihtada/ is their helpers.[^5]

Imam Kazim (as), upon the commentary of the last part of the verse,
said:

*“The straight path is the path of our Qa’im (as), and the guided one is
he who may be guided to obeying him.”*[^6]

O’ Lord! Set us among the guided ones and the people of the straight
path!

O Lord! Do bestow on us that power and bravery that we be afraid of
neither the mass of enemies nor do we fear from the dreadful events and
difficulties!

O Lord! Make separate the spirit of obstinacy and seeking pretexts from
us and bestow on us the succour of accepting the Truth.

[^1]: The Commentary of Al-Mizan

[^2]: Surah Al-Ahzah, No. 33, verse 33

[^3]: The Commentary of Fakhr-i-Razi, and the Commentaries of
Majma‘-ul-Bayan & Dur-rul-Manthur

[^4]: Commentary of Al-Mizan

[^5]: The Commentary of Furqan

[^6]: Ta’wil-ul-’Ayat, p. 317, & Tafsir-ul-Burhan, vol. 3, pp. 50, 51


