Section 3: The Sure Coming of the Resurrection Proved
=====================================================

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 17 - 18
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَي الشَّمْسَ إِذَا طَلَعَت تَزَاوَرُ عَن كَهْفِهِمْ ذَاتَ
الْيَـمِينِ وَإِذَا غَرَبَت تَقْرِضُهُمْ ذَاتَ الشّـِمالِ وَهُمْ فِي
فَجْوَةٍ مِنْهُ ذَلِكَ مِنْ ءَايَاتِ اللَّهِ مَن يَهْدِ اللَّهُ فَهُوَ
الْمُهْتَدِ وَمَن يُضْلِلْ فَلَن تَجِدَ لَهُ وَلِيّاً مُرْشِداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَحْسَبُهُمْ أَيْقَاظاً وَهُمْ رُقُودٌ وَنُقَلّـِبُهُمْ ذَاتَ
الْيَـمِينِ وَذَاتَ الشّـِمَالِ وَكَلْبُهُمْ بَاسِطٌ ذِرَاعَيْهِ
بِالْوَصِيدِ لَوِ اطَّلَعْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ لَوَلَّيْتَ مِنْهُمْ فِرَاراً
وَلَمُلِئْتَ مِنْهُمْ رُعْباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***17. “And (had you been there) you might have seen the sun when it
rose, declining from their Cave towards the right, and when it set,
leaving them away unto the left, and they were in a wide space thereof.
This is of the Signs of Allah, whomever Allah guides, he is rightly
guided, and whomever He leaves to stray, you shall never find for him
any guiding friend.”***  
***18. “And you might think them awake while they were asleep, and We
turned them unto the right and unto the left (sides), and their dog
stretching out his paws on the threshold. If you looked at them you
would certainly turn back from them in flight and you would certainly be
filled with terror of them.”***

Through these holy couple of verses, the Qur’an has referred to the
details of the wonderful life of the Companions of the Cave where it has
mentioned six specialties:

1. The doorway of the Cave was set toward the north, and since its
location had certainly been in the northern hemisphere, the sun did not
shine directly inside the Cave, as the holy verse says:

***“And (had you been there) you might have seen the sun when it rose,
declining from their Cave towards the right, and when it set, leaving
them away unto the left…”***

Thus, the direct sunshine, whose continuation might cause their bodies
to decay, did not meet them, but there was enough indirect light there
from the sun.

2. The verse continues saying:

***“…and they were in a wide space thereof...”***

This part of the verse is an indication that the arrival of the Cave,
which is usually strait, was not their dwelling-place, but they had
chosen the middle parts of the Cave to be both out of sight and out of
direct shining of the sun.

Here, the Qur’an ceases the thread of the current speech and pays to a
spiritual conclusion, because it is the main aim of the statement of all
these events.

It says:

***“…This is of the Signs of Allah, whomever Allah guides, he is rightly
guided, and whomever He leaves to stray, you shall never find for him
any guiding friend.”***

Yes, those who step in the way of Allah and struggle for Him, Allah will
help them with His Grace in every single of their steps. It is not only
for the basis of their work, but His Grace encompasses them in all their
affairs, too.

3. Their sleep was not an ordinary sleep, because if you looked at them
you might think that they were awake, but they had been sleeping.

The verse says:

***“And you might think them awake while they were asleep…”***

This exceptional case, perhaps, had been for the sake that harmful
animals would not approach them, or for the sake that their view might
become so dreadful that none would dare approach them, in a manner that
this circumstance could work as a protective shield for them.

4. In order that their bodies would not decay as a result of passing a
long time of years when they were in their sleep, they were turned unto
the right and unto the left sides, so that their bodies could remain
sound.

They were turned this side and that side for that the blood of their
bodies might not concentrate in one point of the body, and the pressure
and the height, which were on those muscles that were on the ground for
a long time, would not affect on the body harmfully.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and We turned them unto the right and unto the left (sides)…”***

5. Their dog had stretched forth his two fore-legs on the threshold of
the Cave, guarding them.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and their dog stretching out his paws on the threshold...”***

6. Another fact about them was that they had a dreadful sight, so that:

***“…If you looked at them you would certainly turn back from them in
flight and you would certainly be filled with terror of them.”***

### Explanations

1. The cave of the Companions of the Cave geographically was neither
toward the East nor toward the West, but it was toward the
North-eastern, where the sun would not shine into the depth of it in any
season.

The ideas are divided upon the sight of the Cave. Some commentators say
that it had been in the mountains around Syria which is now known as
‘the cave of the Companions of the Cave’.

Some others believe that it had been located around Omman, the capital
of Jordan, where several ancient graves are found and an engraving of a
dog is carved on the wall, upon which there is an old monastery, and
Muslims have built a mosque thereabout, too.

However, the peculiarities of the Cave are some examples of the grace of
Allah which were promised to in the previous verse

2. The Divine protection is not always seen in the form of a miracle,
but sometimes the natural factors work as a means of protection.

3. The succour of Faith, leaving the people of polytheism, and taking
refuge to a Cave, with those peculiarities, may not happen save by the
guidance of Allah.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verses 19 - 20
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ بَعَثْنَاهُمْ لِيَتَسَآءَلُوا بَيْنَهُمْ قَالَ قَآئِلٌ
مِنْهُمْ كَمْ لَبِثْتُمْ قَالُوا لَبِثْنَا يَوْماً أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ
قَالُوا رَبُّكُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا لَبِثْتُمْ فَابْعَثُوا أَحَدَكُم
بِوَرِقِكُمْ هَذِهِ إِلَي الْمَدِينَةِ فَلْيَنظُرْ أَيُّهَآأَزْكَي
طَعَاماً فَلْيَأْتِكُم بِرِزْقٍ مِنْهُ وَلْيَتَلَطَّفْ وَلاَ
يُشْعِرَنَّ بِكُمْ أَحَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ إِن يَظْهَرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ يَرْجُمُوكُمْ أَوْ يُعِيدُوكُمْ
فِي مِلَّتِهِمْ وَلَن تُفْلِحُوا إِذاً أَبَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***19. “And in like manner We did raise them that they might question
among themselves. One of them said: ‘How long have you tarried?’ They
said: ‘We have tarried a day, or part of a day’. (Finally) they said:
‘Your Lord knows best how long you have tarried. Therefore send one of
you with this money of yours to the city and let him see which of them
has purest food, and bring you provision from it, and let him behave
with (care and) gentleness, and let him not inform any one about
you.”***  
***20. “For verily if they prevail against you, they will stone you, or
turn you back to their religion, and then never will you succeed.”***

### Wakefulness After a Long Sleep!

When explaining the commentary of the coming verse, we will detail that
the Companions of the Cave’s sleep prolonged so much that it took about
309 years. Thus, it was a sleep like death, and its wakefulness was
rather similar to Resurrection.

Therefore, the Qur’an in this verse says:

***“And in like manner We did raise them…”***

This statement means that in like manner that Allah was able to put them
in such a long sleep, He returned them to wakefulness again.

The verse continues saying:

***“…that they might question among themselves. One of them said: ‘How
long have you tarried?’…”***

Then, the verse adds:

***“…They said: ‘We have tarried a day, or part of a day’...”***

But, finally, since they could not know precisely the length of their
sleep, they expressed as follows:

***“…(Finally) they said: ‘Your Lord knows best how long you have
tarried...”***

However, they felt a serious hunger and they needed to eat food, because
what they had in reserve in their bodies were consumed.

Therefore, their first suggestion was that they would give the silver
coins they had in their possession to one of their own members and send
him to the city to see which of the sellers of that city had the purest
food to bring them some of it enough for their provision.

The verse says:

***“…Therefore send one of you with this money of yours to the city and
let him see which of them has purest food, and bring you provision from
it…”***

Immediately after that, the verse adds:

***“…and let him behave with (care and) gentleness, and let him not
inform any one about you.”***

The reason of that precaution was that they thought if the people of the
city were informed of their position, and found them, they would stone
them and might bring them back to their own creed, (the creed of
idolatry).

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /wariq/, mentioned in the verse, had been called to
the silver coins which had the design of the king of that time on them.

2. The Qur’anic phrase /walyatalattaf/ has been occurred exactly in the
middle of the Qur’an. It means: ‘conciliation and spiritual intelligence
accompanied with kindness’, which itself is a grace that the middle-word
of the holy Qur’an has spiritually been made up of conciliation, mercy,
and kindness.

3. The wakefulness of the Companions of the Cave had two results. One of
them was for themselves that they asked question,

***“…that they might question…”,***

and the other was for others that they were an illustration of
Resurrection and raising in Hereafter.

4. No one should surprise upon the subject of Resurrection and being
raised, because every single wakefulness of men from sleep is a kind of
raising and Resurrection.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 21
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ أَعْثَرْنَا عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَعْلَمُوا اَنَّ وَعْدَ اللَّهِ
حَقٌّ وَاَنَ السَّاعَةَ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهَآ إِذْيَتَنَازَعُونَ
بَيْنَهُمْ أَمْرَهُمْ فَقَالُوا ابْنُوا عَلَيْهِمْ بُنْيَاناً
رَبُّهُمْ أَعْلَمُ بِهِمْ قَالَ الَّذِينَ غَلَبُوا عَلَيأَمْرِهِمْ
لَنَتَّخِذَنَ عَلَيْهِم مَّسْجِداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***21. “And in like manner We did make (the people) to get knowledge of
them that they might know that the promise of Allah is true, and that,
as for the Hour (of Judgment), there is no doubt about it. When they
disputed among themselves of their affair then they said: ‘Build a
building (monument) over them; their Lord best knows of them.’ Those who
prevailed over their affair said: ‘We will build over them a place of
worship’.”***

### The End of the Adventure of the Cave

It did not take so long that the story of the migration of those godly
gentlemen, the youths of that locality, spread everywhere, and the
tyrannical king of the country became very angry of the event.

Therefore, he ordered his men that some special functionaries should
search for them all the places, so that if they found any trace of them,
they would pursue them until they could capture them and punish them.
But the more they searched the less they found.

Now, we may trace the man who was commissioned to buy some food and see
what happened to him.

As soon as he entered the city, he terribly surprised, because the shape
of the buildings had utterly been changed, the features of people he saw
were all unfamiliar to him, their clothes had been altered into some new
models.

Even the method of their speaking, customs, and rules of civility were
not as before. The ruins of yesterday had given their places to castles,
and the castles of yesterday had been changed into ruins.

He still thought that their sleep in the cave lasted one day or half of
a day. In that case, he wondered why there were so many changes in the
city!

His wonder reached its climax when he put his hand in to his pocket to
pay the price of the food he had bought. The seller was watching a coin
which belonged to more than three hundred years before that time.

Perhaps, the name of Decianus, the tyrannical king of old time, was seen
on it. When the seller asked him to explain about that coin, the man
answered that he had obtained it not long ago.

Then, the man himself found out to what a deep and long sleep he and his
companions had gone.

This question became known in the city and the people of everywhere told
that story one another. A group of those people could not believe that a
man could be quickened again after his death. But the adventure of the
sleep of the Companions of the Cave became a firm reasoning for those
who were the adherents of the belief of resurrection of the body.

Therefore, the Qur’an in this verse says:

***“And in like manner We did make (the people) to get knowledge of them
that they might know that the promise of Allah is true…”***

And there is no doubt about the end of the world and the occurrence of
the Hereafter.

The verse continues saying:

***“…and that, as for the Hour (of Judgment), there is no doubt about
it...”***

This sleep and wakefulness, from some points of view, was more wonderful
than death and returning to life again, because there passed hundreds of
years upon them and their bodies did not decay, while they neither ate
any food nor did they drink any water.

Is not this event a proof to the Power of Allah (s.w.t.) upon everything
and every deed? Taking such an event in mind, the life after death is
certainly possible.

The man sent for buying food quickly returned to the Cave, and informed
his companions of the fact. All of them surprised deeply. It was hard
and difficult for them to bear that kind of life. They asked Allah that
they would forsake this world and transfer unto the neighbourhood of the
mercy of Allah, and it happened soon.

They passed away and their bodies were inside the Cave when the people
went to see them.

At that circumstance, there occurred a dispute between the adherents of
the belief of the resurrection of the bodies and their opponents. The
opponents tried that the problem of the sleep and wakefulness of the
Companions of the Cave to be forgotten and to take that firm proof from
the hands of its adherents.

The Qur’an in this regard implies that when they were disputing upon
their affair among themselves, some of them said that they should build
a monument over them so that they might disappear from the eyes and that
they spoke about them no longer, for their Lord is better aware of their
condition.

The verse says:

***“…When they disputed among themselves of their affair then they said:
‘Build a building (monument) over them; their Lord best knows of
them.’…”***

But those who became aware of their secret, and found it as a reasoning
for Resurrection, suggested that they would build a mosque beside their
graves, in order that their memory could not be forgotten.

The verse says:

***“…Those who prevailed over their affair said: ‘We will build over
them a place of worship’.”***

This meaning shows that building a tomb and a place of worship in
reverence of the graves of the saints of the religion not only is not
unlawful (haram) but also it is a worthy action with Allah (s.w.t.).

### Explanations

1. The Arabic term /’i‘ar/ is applied for an occasional information
which is obtained with no searching. In this event, people, without any
trouble, became cognizant of the important secret of the Age of the
Companions of the Cave by means of their silver coin.

2. In the story of the Companions of the Cave these subjects are
referred to:

The Will and Power of Allah, brevity, forsaking the world, migration,
concealing of faith, Allah’s succours, and lawful feeding (pure food).

3. None of Allah’s deeds is vain.

4. That ability which can keep those men alive for more than three
centuries without any food, is powerful to restore the dead to life,
too.

5. Sometimes human beings simply pass by some historical events while
they are neglectful of the training effects of those events. The
Companions of the Cave passed away after that their adventure was
revealed, but, in stead of taking a lesson from it, people were thinking
of building a monument over there.

Surah Al-Kahf – Verse 22
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَيَقُولُونَ ثَلاَثَةٌ رَابِعُهُمْ كَلْبُهُمْ وَيَقُولُونَ خَمْسَةٌ
سَادِسُهُمْ كَلْبُهُمْ رَجْماً بِالْغَيْبِ وَيَقُولُونَ سَبْعَةٌ
وَثَامِنُهُمْ كَلْبُهُمْ قُل رَبّـِي أَعْلَمُ بِعِدَّتِهِم مَا
يَعْلَمُهُمْ إِلاَّ قَلِيلٌ فَلاَ تُمَارِ فِيهِمْ إِلاَّ مِرَاءً
ظَاهِراً وَلاَ تَسْتَفْتِ فِيهِم مِنْهُمْ أَحَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***22. “Soon they will say: ‘(They were) three, the fourth of them was
their dog’; and (some) say: ‘Five, the sixth of them was their dog’,
guessing at the unseen, and (yet the others) say: ‘Seven, and the eighth
of them was their dog’. Say: ‘My Lord knows best their number, none
knows them but a few’. So do not dispute with them, except in outward
disputation, and do not ask any one for a pronouncement about them.”***

This verse points to some different ideas which exist among people about
the Companions of the Cave. Among them is the idea about the number of
them.

The holy verse in this concern says:

***“Soon they will say: ‘(They were) three, the fourth of them was their
dog’…”***

Here is the belief of another group of the people:

***“…and (some) say: ‘Five, the sixth of them was their dog’, guessing
at the unseen, and (yet the others) say: ‘Seven, and the eighth of them
was their dog’...”***

The verse of the Qur’an implies that all of these words are some
unreasonable statements that they say, and, save a small number of
people, no one knows their correct number.

The verse says:

***“…Say: ‘My Lord knows best their number, none knows them but a
few’...”***

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’an adds:

***“…So do not dispute with them, except in outward disputation…”***

That is, you should speak with them so logically and reasonably that
your logic be manifested. And you should ask no one of the people of the
Book about the number of the Companions of the Cave.

The verse says:

***“…and do not ask any one for a pronouncement about them.”***

### Explanations

1. In the text of the verse the conjunction ‘and’ has not been mentioned
upon the phrases “***fourth of them***” and “***sixth of them***”, but
with the phrase “***the eighth of them***” the conjunction ‘and’ has
been mentioned.

It is, perhaps, for the reason that the attitude of their number being
‘three’ or ‘five’ had been offered by some ungodly people that Allah has
rendered it into: “guessing at the unseen”. But the attitude of their
number being ‘seven’ is from the side of the believers, the people of
attention.

(This recent meaning is narrated from Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) by the
way of Ibn-‘Abbas).

That is why for these groups of people the Qur’an does not say “gussing
at the unseen”, but, in order to respect them, between the number of:
‘the Companions of the Cave’ and ‘their dog’ there has occurred the
conjunction ‘and’ in order to separate them from each other.

2. If the activities be valuable and human beings be with aim, their
dependents and their belongings, even the animals accompanied them,
should be counted, too, since being an animal and being unclean (najis)
is not a reason for them to be counted valueless.

In this verse, the word ‘dog’ has been mentioned in three occurrences.
The positive function of the ‘dog’ of the Companions of the Cave has
been referred to in verse No.18 of the current Surah.


