(B) Utilitarianism and notion of justice
========================================

Utilitarianism as an ethical political and legal theory is essentially a
product of the English mind. It is essentially associated with Jermy
Bentham and John Stuart Mill. The theory believes that man is social by
nature and is always motivated in life chiefly by the desire to obtain
happiness and avoid pain and that the happiness of each individual
involves relations with other individuals which necessitates state
regulation of mutual relations of men by legislation. Utilitarian
philosophy is thus closely associated with practical ethics and
practical politics. The object of legislation of the state is to promote
and secure the greatest happiness of the greatest number. The criterion
of right and wrong of good and bad which the state should apply is found
in happiness and not in divine revelation, dictates of conscience or in
the abstract principles of reason. It insisted that all political
institutions and public offices must be judged by their fruits and not
by their ideality, i.e., by their actual effects on the happiness of the
people and not by their conformity to the theories of natural rights or
absolute justice. Thus this theory is based on the psychological
doctrine of hedonism which proceeds on the assumption that man is a
sentient being, a creature of feeling and sensibility. The principle of
utility or the greatest happiness of the greatest number is the
measuring rod by which utilitarian measure and evaluate the public
policies and legislative enactments of governments. The state is a
necessity for the promotion of the greatest happiness of the greatest
number and it is a means, not an end in itself.

Thus, Bentham does not recognize individual's human rights and therefore
the idea of justice is merely a subordinate aspect of utility.5 His
principle of justice is an implicit part of utility as incorporated in a
legislation. It, therefore, seems that his theory of justice is justice
according to law as laid down in a legislation. He was not prepared to
recognize a general or specific human right to justice because he had no
respect for natural rights. In his "Anarchical Fallacies", Bentham
critically examined the French Declaration of the Rights of man and
dubbed them as simple nonsense rhetorical nonsense, "nonsense upon
stilts".6 Every just government, Bentham accordingly would have said,
had he been writing the American Declaration of Independence, deprives
its authority not from the consent of the governed but from the utility
of its acts in promoting the happiness of its subjects. The happiness of
the body politic consists in promoting security, substance, abundance
and equality and these are the objects which legislator should keep in
view while enacting a particular piece of legislation.

John Stuart Mill agreed generally with Bentham's doctrine but he
slightly modified it and included qualitative pleasure along with
quantitative one. He also insisted that the utilitarian doctrine of
happiness was altruistic rather than egoistic, since its ideal was the
happiness of all concerned. Within the utilitarians, one of the chief
issues of legal philosophy to which Mill suggested an approach different
from that of Bentham was the significance that should be attributed to
the concept of justice. Bentham had spoken of justice in a deprecatory
fashion and had subordinated it completely to the dictates of utility.
At one place he observed:

*"Sometimes in order the better to conceal the cheat (from their own
eyes doubtless as well as from others) they set up a phantom of their
own, which they call 'Justice': whose dictates are to modify (which
being explained means to oppose) the dictates of benevolence. But
justice in the only sense in which it has a meaning, is an imaginary
personage feigned for the convenience of discourse, whose dictates are
the dictates of utility applied to certain particular cases."* 7

Whereas Mill, although taking the position that the standard of justice
should be grounded on utility, believed that the origin of the sense of
justice must be sought in two sentiments other than utility namely, the
impulse of self defense and feeling of sympathy.8 Differently expressed
the feeling of justice is the urge to retaliate for a wrong, placed on a
generalized basis.9 This feeling rebels against an injury, not solely
for personal reasons, but also because it hurts other members of society
with whom we sympathize and identify ourselves. The sense of justice,
Mill pointed out, encompasses all those moral requirements, which are
most essential for the well being of mankind and which human beings
therefore regard as sacred and obligatory.10

Apart from the above differences, Bentham's notion of subordination of
justice to utility is further evident by the fact that he was opposed to
wide judicial discretion to be given to judges to interpret the laws. He
counsels that judicial interpretation should have no other role than
strict interpretation, not an activist interpretation which gets "rid of
the intention clearly and plainly expressed" and substitutes judicial
intention for the legislative one.11

Bentham has characterized an activist judge as a charlatan who nourishes
the spectators by making sweet and bitter run from the same cup.12 While
making a scathing attack of judicial activism, Bentham observed:

*"The serpent, it is said can pass his whole body whenever he can
introduce his head. As respects legal tyranny, it is this subtle head of
which we must take care, least presently we see it followed by all the
tortious fields of abuse.* 13

Prof. Upendra Baxi is of the opinion that Benthamite condemnation, of a
Judge as usurper, who substitutes his will for that of the legislatior
as a conscious overtaker who produces and reproduces arbitrariness is
clearly addressed to a context where the legislator has, in fact
followed Bentham's Counsel of producing clear laws. It is only in such
contexts that judicial activism, rightly thus stands condemned.14

Bentham's condemnation of Judges is not confined to mere usurpation of
powers but he also condemned the delay and denial of justice on the part
of Judges. He addressed them scomfully as "Judges and Co."15 and even
advocated the abolition of House of Lords and Monarchy.16

It is, therefore, submitted that although Bentham does not formulate
anywhere in the "Theory" a fully fledged justification of judicial
review, Prof. Baxi opines that it is embedded in the notion of
reciprocal dependence of three powers. "The principle of utility asks us
to guard against all forms of usurpation of political (legislative)
power.17

Thus, while recapitulating our discussion on Bentham's notion of
justice, it is submitted that there is no elaborate and systematic
theory of justice given by Bentham. His theory of justice is grounded in
the happiness of individual and not that of society, which he never
recognized. However, notwithstanding its incomplete and insufficient
notion of justice it is submitted that the utilitarian concept of
justice is a landmark in the evolution of the theory of justice. Its
value lies in starting a rational inquiry with logical and analytical
approach to the realization of truth and reality. It also gives
objective and scientific approach to the concept of justice, which
throws and opens the avenues for reform development and progress even by
socialization of its shortcomings, errors and failures.

The great merit of utilitarian approach to justice is that it
dissociates justice from theology, mysticism, imagination and
speculation which leads to illusions unreal apprehensions and
frustrations.


