(C) Notion of Justice and other Modern Approaches
=================================================

According to Kelson the longing for justice is men's eternal longing for
happiness. It is happiness that man can not find alone, as an isolated
individual and hence seeks in society. Justice is social happiness
guaranteed by social order.18

The idea of attaining the just society is deeply problematic in
modernity. In Nietzschean terms a settled conception of justice is
difficult for the modern because the modern knows too much as a result
finds pluralism and perspectivism in short, pragmatism towards truth. We
are an historical epch tht knows the inevitability of change over
stability whatever its theories of justice, late modernity is doomed to
dynamic as opposed to static justice.19

(C) (1) - John Rawls Theories of Justice and Utilitarianism
-----------------------------------------------------------

One of the earliest thinking about justice is found in Aristotle. It was
he who distinguished "Corrective Justice" and "Distributive Justice".
However, the most contemporary writing about justice is about absolute
justice, about the appropriate distribution of goods, which may be
distributed according to needs or desert or moral virtue.20 One of the
most interesting modern attempts to defend principles of justice are
found in John Rawls: A Theory of Justice21 , as now reformulated in
political liberalism. John Rawls sets out two basic moral principles of
justice which a constitutional democracy should satisfy:

1- the maximization of liberty are essential for the protection of
liberty itself;

2- equality for all, both in the basic liberties of social life and also
in distribution of all other forms of social goods, subject only to the
exception that inequalities may be permitted if they produce the
greatest possible benefit for those least well off in a given scheme of
inequality (the difference principle); and

3- fair equality of opportunity and the elimination of all inequalities
of opportunity based on birth or wealth. Rawls theory differs from
utilitarianism in three significant ways22 :

First, utilitarians can accept inequalities, social arrangements in
which some benefits at the expense of others provided the benefits (or
pleasures) exceed the costs (or pains) so that the outcome is the
maximization of overall welfare level (the greatest happiness of the
greatest number), secondly, while utilitarians defend liberty and
political rights, they have no objection to limiting liberty or
restricting political rights, provided doing so would promote greater
well being. Rawls first principle (the equal maximization liberty
principle) means that there are some rights

freedom of speech & association the right to vote and stand for public
office liberty of conscience & freedom of thought, freedom of the person
and the right to hold personal property, freedom from arbitrary arrest,
which every system must respect. These are rights that may not be
sacrificed to increase the aggregate welfare level.

Thirdly, Rawls conception of benefits is different from utilitarianism
which is concerned with welfare. Rawls by contrast defines benefits in
terms of "primary goods": liberty and opportunity, income and wealth and
the bases of self respect. These need not be considered desirable in
themselves but they give persons the opportunities rationally to further
their own autonomy.

The above discussion has revealed that Rawls seems to lay down a
contractarian theory of justice in which participation in the
understanding of justice as fairness makes a type of government called
constitutional democracy. The model which Rawls proposes as satisfying
has two principles of justice. It is a constitutional democracy in which
the government regulates a free economy in a certain way. More fully, if
law and government act effectively to keep market competitive, resources
fully employed, property and wealth widely distributed overtime and to
maintain the appropriate social minimum, then if there is equality of
opportunity, underwritten by education for all the resulting
distribution will be just.23

The idea of distributive justice in Rawls theory in simple terms
requires that the courts should take a liberal view of the premises of
law and so interpret them as to distribute benefits to the largest
number of people so that the harsh effects of the technicalities of law
are contained within the narrowest limits.24

Thus, Rawls believes that a fully satisfying existential life requires
justice. But an obvious problem arises: how are we to require whether
the arrangements of any particular social ordering are just or unjust?
Rawls intellectual predecessors are Kant (who provides among other
things the idea of the primacy of the right over the good and the
regulatory idea of the social contract) and John Stuart Mill (who
provides the spirit of tolerance). Rawls thus chooses the right over the
good - Kant wins over the Bentham.25

In nutshell, Rawls is trying to balance the need for growth in wealth,
with respect for the least well off in the society. Whilst the general
aim of utilitarian justice is to maximize social wealth. Rawls holds his
basic principles of justice based also upon a deontological respect for
autonomy as checks upon such maximization.26

(C) (ii) - Robert Nozick’s Concept of Justice
---------------------------------------------

As opposed to utilitarian thinkers, libertarian thinker like Nozick
share, a profound distaste for all theories which promote any idea of a
social group which legitimates centralized social administration. The
political jurisprudence of Robert Nozick, characterized by is book
‘Anarchy, State and Utopia (1974)’ is the best known of the libertarian
theories of justice. Nozick’s writings develop a theory of justice which
reinforces a radical free market approach and fits a so-called minimal
or night watchman state. It is no surprise that he concludes: “The
minimal state is the most extensive state than can be justified. Any
state more extensive violates peoples rights.27 Nozick develops an
entitlement theory of justice, whereby economic goods arise in society
already encumbered with rightful claims to their ownership.28 The
minimal state is limited in its legitimation of force to the protection
of certain basic rights: it is the night watchman state of classical
liberalism. Under utilitarianism, or the later theory of Rawls, we could
have redistribution policies but no redistribution is legitimate in the
minimal state.

In this context, Prof. Hart has rightly observed that “with the arrival
of right based theories from thinkers like Robert Nozick and R. Dworkin,
it may be that the epoch which Bentham opened is now closing: certainly
among American political and legal philosophers. Utilitarianism is on
the

detensive, if not on the run, in the face of theories of justice which
in many ways resemble the doctrine of unalienable rights of man, and
there are important conceptual connections between law and morality
obscured by the positivistic tradition.”29

(C) (iii) - Ronald Dworkin’s Notion of Justice
----------------------------------------------

For both Rawls and Nozick, there is clear relationship between justice
and rights, but it is Ronald Dworkin who can be said most clearly to
ground justice in rights. To Dworkin rights are “trumps”. They are
grounded in a principle of equal concern and respect, so for a Judge to
make a mistake about a legal right is “a matter of injustice.” Further,
the whole institution of rights rests on the convictin that “the
invasion of relatively important right is a grave injustice. Dworkin
sees rights as safeguards inserted into political and legal morality to
prevent the conception of the equalitarian character of welfarist
calculations by the introduction of external preferences.30
Utilitarianism, Dworkin argues assigns critical weight to external
preferences: it is accordingly not equalitarian since it will not
respect the right of every one to be treated with equal concern and
respect.31

In view of above right and goal based dichotomy pertaining to the notion
of justice, it is submitted that if the weakness of utilitarian theories
lies in their readiness to sacrifice individual rights on the altar of
maximizing happiness that of right based moral theories are also
experiencing great difficulties in producing arguments for the existence
of rights.

(C) (iv) - Views of Communitarian Jurists and Displacement of Debate
--------------------------------------------------------------------

over the respective priority of the Right and the Good

Communitarian Jurists like Michael Sandel has observed: "For liberals of
the Kantian type such as Rawls, the priority of the right over the good
means not only that one can not sacrifice individual rights in the name
of the general good, but also that principles of justice can not be
derived from a particular conception of the good lite."32 This is a
cardinal principle of liberalism, according to which there can not be a
sole conception of eudemonia, i.e., of happiness.

The communitarians argue that one can not define the right prior to the
good, since it is only through our participation in a community which
defines the good that we can have a sense of what the right is and
attain a living conception of justice, outside community there is no god
and no right.33 Communitarian therefore assert it is only within a
specific community, defining itself by the good that it postulates that
an individual with his rights can exist. It appears necessary for
liberals to specify that the search for justice is partly a question of
actively working for and intellectually defending particular images of
political community.

They (i.e., communitarians) rightfully assert that "Justice is not a
philosophical conception but it is an existential goal."34

(C) (v) - Karl Marx Notions of Justice
--------------------------------------

Among the goal based theories of Justice, there are some commonalities
between Bentham and Karl Marx. First, their tasks as social thinkers
were to

clear men's minds as to the true character of human society and
secondly, that human society and its legal structure which had worked so
much human misery had been protected from criticism by myths, mysteries
and illusions, not all of them intentionally generated, yet all of them
profitable to interested parties.35

However, while Bentham was a liberal and individualistic whereas Marx
was a revolutionary communist. Marx's view of justice emerges most
clearly in capital and the critique of the Gotha programme.

Both Bentham and Marx are opposed to the natural law conceptions of
"Rights", however Marx differed from Bentham in the realm of
distributive justice and opined that from each according to his ability
to each according to his needs." On the notion of human rights Marx
wrote of the so called rights of man as simply the rights of a member of
a civil society, that is of egoistic man and separated from other man
and from the community. Whereas Bentham's principles of justice are
grounded in utility and in the greatest happiness of the greatest number
ushered by parliamentary legislations. Marx talks of withering away of
state as the promise of Marxism is that we may attain a state of being
beyond justice, beyond any rational ideal.


