المرحلة التاسعة في السبق و اللحوق و القدم و الحدوث
==================================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها ثلاثة فصول
</p>

CHAPTER NINE: Priority and Posteriority, Qidam and Huduth
=========================================================

3 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في معنى السبق و اللحوق و أقسامهما و المعية
------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إن من عوارض الموجود بما هو موجود السبق و اللحوق و ذلك أنه ربما كان
لشيئين بما هما موجودان نسبة مشتركة إلى مبدإ وجودي لكن لأحدهما منها ما
ليس للآخر كنسبة الاثنين و الثلاثة إلى الواحد لكن الاثنين أقرب إليه فيسمى
سابقا و متقدما و تسمى الثلاثة لاحقة و متأخرة و ربما كانت النسبة المشتركة
من غير تفاوت بين المنتسبين فتسمى حالهما بالنسبة إليه معية و هما معان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد عدوا للسبق و اللحوق أقساما عثروا عليها بالاستقراء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها السبق الزماني و هو السبق الذي لا يجامع فيه السابق اللاحق كتقدم
أجزاء الزمان بعضها على بعض كالأمس على اليوم و تقدم الحوادث الواقعة في
الزمان السابق على الواقعة في الزمان اللاحق و يقابله اللحوق الزماني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق بالطبع و هو تقدم العلة الناقصة على المعلول كتقدم الاثنين
على الثلاثة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق بالعلية و هو تقدم العلة التامة على المعلول.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق بالماهية و يسمى أيضا التقدم بالتجوهر و هو تقدم علل القوام
على معلولها كتقدم أجزاء الماهية النوعية على النوع و عد منه تقدم الماهية
على لوازمها كتقدم الأربعة على الزوجية و يقابله اللحوق و التأخر بالماهية
و التجوهر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تسمى هذه الأقسام الثلاثة أعني ما بالطبع و ما بالعلية و ما بالتجوهر
سبقا و لحوقا بالذات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق بالحقيقة و هو أن يتلبس السابق بمعنى من المعاني بالذات و
يتلبس به اللاحق بالعرض كتلبس الماء بالجريان حقيقة و بالذات و تلبس
الميزاب به بالعرض و يقابله اللحوق بذاك المعنى و هذا القسم مما زاده صدر
المتألهين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق و التقدم بالدهر و هو تقدم العلة الموجبة على معلولها لكن لا
من حيث إيجابها لوجود المعلول و إفاضتها له كما في التقدم بالعلية بل من
حيث انفكاك وجودها و انفصاله عن وجود المعلول و تقرر عدم المعلول في مرتبة
وجودها كتقدم نشأة التجرد العقلي على نشأة المادة و يقابله اللحوق و التأخر
الدهري.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا القسم قد زاده السيد الداماد ره بناء على ما صوره من الحدوث و القدم
الدهريين و سيجي‏ء بيانه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق و التقدم بالرتبة أعم من أن يكون الترتيب بحسب الطبع أو بحسب
الوضع و الاعتبار فالأول كالأجناس و الأنواع المترتبة فإنك إن ابتدأت آخذا
من جنس الأجناس
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كان سابقا متقدما على ما دونه ثم الذي يليه و هكذا حتى ينتهي إلى النوع
الأخير و إن ابتدأت آخذا من النوع الأخير كان الأمر في التقدم و التأخر
بالعكس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الثاني كالإمام و المأموم فإنك إن اعتبرت المبدأ هو المحراب كان الإمام
هو السابق على من يليه من المأمومين ثم من يليه على من يليه و إن اعتبرت
المبدأ هو الباب كان أمر السبق و اللحوق بالعكس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يقابل السبق و التقدم بالرتبة اللحوق و التأخر بالرتبة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها السبق بالشرف و هو السبق في الصفات الكمالية كتقدم العالم على
الجاهل و الشجاع على الجبان.
</p>

9. l. THE MEANING OF PRIORITY, POSTERIORITY AND COEXISTENCE
-----------------------------------------------------------

Priority (sabq) and posteriority (luhûq) are among the characteristics
of existents qua existents. That is because two entities often share, as
existents, a relation to a source of existence that is not the same for
each of them. An example of it is the relation of ‘two’ and ‘three’ to
‘one;’ ‘two’ being closer to ‘one’ than ‘three’ is called prior and
antecedent, and ‘three’ is called posterior and subsequent. At times the
common relation is the same for both the things, in which case they are
called ‘coexistent’ and their condition is called ‘coexistence’
(ma’iyyah).

The metaphysicians have mentioned several kinds of priority and
posteriority derived through induction.

(i) Temporal priority (al-sabq al-zamânî), in which the prior and the
posterior are not contemporaneous. An example of it is the priority of
some parts of time to other parts, such as that of yesterday to today
and the priority of events of a preceding period to those of a
subsequent period. Its opposite is temporal posteriority (al-luhûq
al-zamânî).

(ii) Priority by nature (al-sabq bi al-thab’) is the priority of the
incomplete cause to the effect, like the priority of two to three.

(iii) Priority by causality (al-sabq bi al-’illiyyah) is the priority of
the complete cause to its effect.

(iv) Priority by virtue of quiddity (al-sabq bi al-mâhiyyah, also called
al-taqaddum bi al-tajawhur) is the priority of the constituting causes
of quiddity to their effects, like the priority of the parts of a
specific quiddity (i.e. genus and differentia) to the species. The
priority of a quiddity to its propria (lawâzim), such as the priority of
four to evenness, has also been considered as belonging to this kind.
Its opposite is posteriority by virtue of quiddity (al-luhûq bi
al-mâhiyyah or al-ta’akhkhur bi al-tajawhur).

The above three kinds, viz. priority by nature, priority by causality
and priority by virtue of quiddity, are called ‘priority by virtue of
essence’ (al-sabq bi al-dzât).

(v) Priority by virtue of laterality (al-sabq bi al-haqîqah) is when
what is ‘prior’ has a quality that is accidentally (i.e. figuratively)
ascribed to what is ‘posterior.’ An example of it is water flowing in a
channel: water literally possesses the flow, and this flow is ascribed
accidentally to the channel in which it flows. Its opposite is
posteriority by virtue of literality. This kind has been added by Sadr
al-Muta’allihîn.

(vi) Meta-temporal priority (al-sabq bi-dahr) is the priority of the
necessitating cause over its effect, though not in respect of its
necessitating the existence of the effect and bringing it into being, as
mentioned under priority by causality, but in the respect that its
existence is separate and detached from the existence of the effect. By
virtue of the cause existing on a higher existential plane than the
effect, the effect is non-existent at the existential plane of the
cause, such as the priority of the immaterial world of the Intellect
over the world of matter. Its opposite is meta-temporal posteriority
(al-ta’akkkhur al-dahrî).

This kind has been added by Mir Dâmâd, may God’s mercy be upon him, on
the basis of his conception of meta-temporal hudûts and qidam, which
will be explained later on.’

(vii) Priority by rank (al-sabq bi al-rutbah) occurs in hierarchies
based on nature, position and convention. An example of the first kind
is the hierarchy of genera and species. If one were to begin at the
highest genus, a higher genus will be prior to the one below it, which
in its turn will be prior to the one below it until the ultimate species
is reached. But if one were to begin at the ultimate species, the order
of priority will be reversed.

The imam or the prayer leader and those who follow him in a
congregational prayer offer an example of the second kind. If one were
to begin at the prayer niche, the imam will be seen to be prior to those
in the row behind him, and those in the first row will be prior to those
in the second, and so on and so forth. But if one were to begin from the
last row, the order of priority and posteriority will be reverse.
Opposed to this kind of priority is posteriority in terms of rank.

(viii) Priority by virtue of superiority (al-sabq bi al-syaraf) depends
on worth and merit, such as the priority of a knowledgeable person over
an ignorant one and a courageous person over a coward.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في ملاك السبق في أقسامه
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هو الأمر المشترك فيه بين المتقدم و المتأخر الذي فيه التقدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ملاك السبق في السبق الزماني هو النسبة إلى الزمان سواء في ذلك نفس الزمان
و الأمر الزماني و في السبق بالطبع هو النسبة إلى الوجود و في السبق
بالعلية هو الوجوب و في السبق بالماهية و التجوهر هو تقرر الماهية و في
السبق بالحقيقة هو مطلق التحقق الأعم من الحقيقي و المجازي و في السبق
الدهري هو الكون بمتن الواقع و في السبق بالرتبة النسبة إلى مبدإ محدود
كالمحراب أو الباب في الرتبة الحسية و كالجنس العالي أو النوع الأخير في
الرتبة العقلية و في السبق بالشرف هو الفضل و المزية.
</p>

9.2. THE CRITERION OF PRIORITY
------------------------------

It is something that is common to the prior and the posterior and by
virtue of which priority exists.

The criterion in temporal priority is the relation to time, regardless
of whether what is prior is time itself or something existing in it. The
criterion in priority by nature is the relation to existence. In
priority by causality, it is necessity. In priority by quiddity it is
the. constitution of the quiddity. In priority by virtue of literality,
it is realization in general, including the literal and the
metaphorical. In meta-temporal priority, it depends on an entity’s
situation in the existential context. In priority by rank, it depends on
the point of reference, such as the niche or the mosque entrance in the
example pertaining to a sensible hierarchy, and the highest genus or the
ultimate species in a conceptual hierarchy. In priority by virtue of
superiority, it is merit and advantage.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في القدم و الحدوث و أقسامهما
-----------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كانت العامة تطلق اللفظتين القديم و الحادث على أمرين يشتركان في الانطباق
على زمان واحد إذا كان زمان وجود أحدهما أكثر من زمان وجود الآخر فكان
الأكثر زمانا هو القديم و الأقل زمانا هو الحادث و الحديث و هما وصفان
إضافيان أي إن الشي‏ء الواحد يكون حادثا بالنسبة إلى شي‏ء و قديما بالنسبة
إلى آخر فكان المحصل من مفهوم الحدوث هو مسبوقية الشي‏ء بالعدم في زمان و
من مفهوم القدم عدم كونه مسبوقا بذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم عمموا مفهومي اللفظين بأخذ العدم مطلقا يعم العدم المقابل و هو العدم
الزماني الذي لا يجامع الوجود و العدم المجامع الذي هو عدم الشي‏ء في حد
ذاته المجامع لوجوده بعد استناده إلى العلة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فكان مفهوم الحدوث مسبوقية الوجود بالعدم و مفهوم القدم عدم مسبوقيته
بالعدم و المعنيان من الأعراض الذاتية لمطلق الوجود فإن الموجود بما هو
موجود إما مسبوق بالعدم و إما ليس بمسبوق به و عند ذلك صح البحث عنهما في
الفلسفة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فمن الحدوث الحدوث الزماني و هو مسبوقية وجود الشي‏ء بالعدم الزماني
كمسبوقية اليوم بالعدم في أمس و مسبوقية حوادث اليوم بالعدم في أمس و
يقابله القدم الزماني و هو عدم مسبوقية الشي‏ء بالعدم الزماني كمطلق الزمان
الذي لا يتقدمه زمان و لا زماني و إلا ثبت الزمان من حيث انتفى هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من الحدوث الحدوث الذاتي و هو مسبوقية وجود الشي‏ء بالعدم في ذاته كجميع
الموجودات الممكنة التي لها الوجود بعلة خارجة من ذاتها و ليس لها في
ماهيتها و حد ذاتها إلا العدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت الماهية ليس لها في حد ذاتها إلا الإمكان و لازمه تساوي نسبتها إلى
الوجود و العدم و خلو الذات عن الوجود و العدم جميعا دون التلبس بالعدم كما
قيل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلت الماهية و إن كانت في ذاتها خالية عن الوجود و العدم مفتقرة في تلبسها
بأحدهما إلى مرجح لكن عدم مرجح الوجود و علته كاف في كونها معدومة و بعبارة
أخرى خلوها في حد ذاتها عن الوجود و العدم و سلبهما عنها إنما هو بحسب
الحمل الأولى و هو لا ينافي اتصافها بالعدم حينئذ بحسب الحمل الشائع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يقابل الحدوث بهذا المعنى القدم الذاتي و هو عدم مسبوقية الشي‏ء بالعدم
في حد ذاته و إنما يكون فيما كانت الذات عين حقيقة الوجود الطارد للعدم
بذاته و هو الوجود الواجبي الذي ماهيته إنيته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من الحدوث الحدوث الدهري الذي ذكره السيد المحقق الداماد ره و هو مسبوقية
وجود مرتبة من مراتب الوجود بعدمه المتقرر في مرتبة هي فوقها في السلسلة
الطولية و هو عدم غير مجامع لكنه غير زماني كمسبوقية عالم المادة بعدمه
المتقرر في عالم المثال و يقابله القدم الدهري و هو ظاهر.
</p>

9.3. QIDAM AND HUDÛTH, AND THEIR KINDS
--------------------------------------

In common usage the words qadîm (lit. old) and hadîts (lit. new or
recent) were originally applied to two contemporaneous things. When the
period of existence of one of them was greater than that of the other,
the one which had existed for a longer period was called qadîm and the
one which had existed for a shorter period was called hadîts or hadith.
Hence they were relative attributes, in the sense that a single thing
could be hadîts in relation to one thing and qadîm in relation to
another. That which was implied in the concept of hudûts was the prior
non-existence of a thing in a certain period of time, and qidam implied
that a thing was not preceded by non-existence in a given period of
time.

Then a more general meaning was given to these two words by giving
‘non-existence’ (‘adam) a more general sense that included non-existence
as opposed to existence - that is non-existence in time, which does not
cohabit with existence - as well as the non-existence that cohabits with
existence. The latter of kind of non-existence is a thing’s essential
non-being that accompanies its existence after its being brought into
existence by the cause.

Thus the meaning of hudûts became ‘existence posterior to non-existence’
and the meaning of qidam ‘non-precedence of existence by non-existence.’
These two concepts are essential (dzâtî) characteristics of existence in
general, for an existent qua existent is either preceded by
non-existence or it is not. Thereupon, these concepts became fit for
philosophical discussion.

(i) Thus one kind of hudûts is ‘temporal hudûts’ or hudûts in terms of
time [al- hudûts al-zamânî), which means a thing’s existence being
posterior to its non-existence, such as today’s being posterior to its
non-existence yesterday, or the posteriority of today’-s events to their
non-existence yesterday. Opposed to it is qidam in terms of time
(al-qidam al-zamânî), which is a thing’s not being posterior to
non-existence in time, like the qidam of time itself which is neither
preceded by a time nor anything temporal - for other- wise it would
imply the subsistence of time when it does not exist, and this involves
a contradiction.

(ii) Another kind of hudûts is ‘essential hudûts’ (al-hudûts al-dzâtî),
which means non-existence’s being prior to the existence of a thing at
the plane of its essence, as is the case with all contingent existents,
which owe their existence to a cause beyond themselves with nothing in
their quiddities and essences except non-existence.

One may raise an objection here that quiddity in itself does not possess
anything but contingency. That means the equality of its relation to
existence and non-existence and its being devoid of both of them. Thus
it is devoid of non-existence, as mentioned.

The answer is that it is true that quiddity by itself is devoid of
existence and non-existence. In order to assume one of these it stands
in need of something to tilt the scale one way or the other; the
non-existence of such a preponderant and cause is sufficient to make it
non-existent. In other words, its being devoid in itself of existence
and non-existence and its being divested of these two is in the sense of
primary predication (i.e. as a

concept). That does not contradict its being characterized with
non-existence in the sense of common predication (i.e. in external
reality).

The opposite of hudûts in this sense is ‘essential qidam’ [al-qidam
al-dzâtî), which means non-precedence of a thing by non-existence at the
plane of its essence (dzât). That is only true of an entity whose
essence is the very reality of existence, an entity that dispels
non-existence by its very essence. That is the Necessary Being, whose
essence is Its existence.

(iii) A third kind of hudûts is ‘meta-temporal hudûts’ (al-hudûts
al-dahrî), mentioned by Mir Dâmâd - may God’s mercy be upon him. It
means the posteriority of the existence of an existential plane to its
non-existence at a higher plane in the vertical hierarchy of existence.
That kind of non-existence does not cohabit (ghayr mujâmi’) with
existence, though it is non-temporal. An instance of it is the
posteriority of the material world to its nonexistence at the plane of
the imaginal world (‘âlam al-mitsâl). Opposed to it is ‘meta-temporal
qidam’
