المرحلة العاشرة في القوة و الفعل
================================

<p dir="rtl">
وجود الشي‏ء في الأعيان بحيث يترتب عليه آثاره المطلوبة منه يسمى فعلا و
يقال إن وجوده بالفعل و إمكانه الذي قبل تحققه يسمى قوة و يقال إن وجوده
بالقوة بعد و ذلك كالماء يمكن أن يتبدل هواء فإنه ما دام ماء ماء بالفعل و
هواء بالقوة فإذا تبدل هواء صار هواء بالفعل و بطلت القوة فمن الوجود ما هو
بالفعل و منه ما هو بالقوة و القسمان هما المبحوث عنهما في هذه المرحلة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها ستة عشر فصلا
</p>

CHAPTER TEN: Actuality and Potentiality
=======================================

***The existence of a thing in external reality, wherein it possesses
the external properties (atsâr) expected of it, is called ‘act,’ and it
is to exist in actuality (bi al-fi’l). The potential that precedes its
actualization is called ‘potentiality’ (quwwah), and before it has
actualized it is said to be in potentiality. For instance, water has the
potential to change into vapour. As long as it is water, it is water in
actuality and vapour potentially. However, when it has changed into
vapour, it becomes vapour in actuality and the potentiality is annulled.
Hence there is existence in actuality and existence in potentiality, and
these two divisions are discussed in this chapter.***

16 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول كل حادث زماني مسبوق بقوة الوجود
-------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كل حادث زماني فإنه مسبوق بقوة الوجود لأنه قبل تحقق وجوده يجب أن يكون
ممكن الوجود يجوز أن يتصف بالوجود كما يجوز أن لا يوجد إذ لو كان ممتنع
الوجود استحال تحققه كما أنه لو كان واجبا لم يتخلف عن الوجود لكنه ربما لم
يوجد و إمكانه هذا غير قدرة الفاعل عليه لأن إمكان وجوده وصف له بالقياس
إلى وجوده لا بالقياس إلى شي‏ء آخر كالفاعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا الإمكان أمر خارجي لا معنى عقلي اعتباري لاحق بماهية الشي‏ء لأنه
يتصف بالشدة و الضعف و القرب و البعد فالنطفة التي فيها إمكان أن يصير
إنسانا أقرب إلى الإنسانية من الغذاء الذي يتبدل نطفة و الإمكان فيها أشد
منه فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إذ كان هذا الإمكان أمرا موجودا في الخارج فليس جوهرا قائما بذاته و هو
ظاهر بل هو عرض قائم بشي‏ء آخر فلنسمه قوة و لنسم موضوعه مادة فإذن لكل
حادث زماني مادة سابقة عليه تحمل قوة وجوده.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يجب أن تكون المادة غير آبية عن الفعلية التي تحمل إمكانها فهي في ذاتها
قوة الفعلية التي فيها إمكانها إذ لو كانت ذات فعلية في نفسها لأبت عن قبول
فعلية أخرى بل هي جوهر فعلية وجوده أنه قوة الأشياء و هي لكونها جوهرا
بالقوة قائمة بفعلية أخرى إذا حدثت الفعلية التي فيها قوتها بطلت الفعلية
الأولى و قامت مقامها الفعلية الحديثة كالماء إذا صار هواء بطلت الصورة
المائية التي كانت تقوم المادة الحاملة لصورة الهواء و قامت الصورة
الهوائية مقامها فتقومت بها المادة التي كانت تحمل إمكانها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و مادة الفعلية الجديدة الحادثة و الفعلية السابقة الزائلة واحدة و إلا
كانت حادثة بحدوث الفعلية الحادثة فاستلزمت إمكانا آخر و مادة أخرى و هكذا
فكانت لحادث واحد مواد و إمكانات غير متناهية و هو محال و نظير الإشكال
لازم فيما لو فرض للمادة حدوث زماني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد تبين بما مر أيضا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أولا: أن كل حادث زماني فله مادة تحمل قوة وجوده.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: أن مادة الحوادث الزمانية واحدة مشتركة بينها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا: أن النسبة بين المادة و قوة الشي‏ء التي تحملها نسبة الجسم
الطبيعي و الجسم التعليمي فقوة الشي‏ء الخاص تعين قوة المادة المبهمة كما
أن الجسم التعليمي تعين الامتدادات الثلاث المبهمة في الجسم الطبيعي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رابعا: أن وجود الحوادث الزمانية لا ينفك عن تغير في صورها إن كانت جواهر
أو في أحوالها إن كانت أعراضا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و خامسا: أن القوة تقوم دائما بفعلية و المادة تقوم دائما بصورة تحفظها
فإذا حدثت صورة بعد صورة قامت الصورة الحديثة مقام القديمة و قومت المادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و سادسا: يتبين بما تقدم أن القوة تتقدم على الفعل الخاص تقدما زمانيا و أن
مطلق الفعل يتقدم على القوة بجميع أنحاء التقدم من علي و طبعي و زماني و
غيرها.
</p>

10.1 A TEMPORAL HADITH IS PRECEDED BY POTENTIALITY
--------------------------------------------------

Everything that comes into existence in time [hadits zamânî) is preceded
by a potentiality for existence. For before it actualizes, it necessary
that its existence be contingent, that is, it should be capable of being
qualified with existence or non-existence. For if it were impossible,
its actualization would not be possible. Similarly it were necessary, it
would not fail to exist. This potential is something other than the
agent’s power over it, for its potential for existence is an attribute
of it with reference to its own existence, not to something else such as
the agent. This potential is something external and not a derivative
concept (i’tibâr ‘aqlî) associated with the thing’s quiddity, for it is
characterized with strength and weakness, proximity and remoteness. For
instance, an embryo possessing the potential to become a human being is
closer to humanity than a lump of food, which assesses the potential for
changing into an embryo, and the potential possessed by the former is
greater than what is possessed by food.

It is obvious that this potential, which is something existing in
external reality, is not something substantial (jawhar) subsisting bv
itself. Rather, it is an accident that subsists through something else.
We will call it ‘potentiality’ (quwwah) and its substratum, ‘matter’
(mâddah). Thus everything that comes into existence in time consists of
‘matter’ that precedes it and carries the potentiality of its existence.

It is necessary that ‘matter’ should not be unreceptive to the actuality
whose potential it bears. Hence it is in itself the potentiality for
receiving the actuality whose potential it bears. For if matter were to
have an actuality of its own, it would refuse to accept any other
actuality. Thus it is a substance (jawhar) whose intrinsic actuality is
the potentiality for things. However, in order to be a substance endowed
with potentiality, it subsists through another actuality. When the
actuality for which it has the potentiality comes into being, the
earlier actuality disappears, giving its place to the new actuality. An
example of it is water. When it changes into vapour, its aqueous form -
which earlier sustained the matter that now bears the form of vapour -
disappears and is replaced by the gaseous form through which the matter
that earlier bore the potential to become vapour is now sustained.

The matter of the new emergent actuality and that of the earlier defunct
actuality is one, for otherwise we would have to regard it as coming
into being with the emergent actuality. This would necessitate another
potential and another matter, and this entails an indefinite regress.
Thus a single emergent thing would require an infinite number of
potentials and matters, and this is inadmissible. A similar difficulty
arises if we consider matter as having come into existence in time
(hadits zamânî).

From the above discussion it becomes clear that, first, everything that
comes into existence in time has a ‘matter’ that bears the potentiality
for its existence.

Second, the matter of things that come into existence in time is one and
common to them.

Third, the relation between ‘matter’ and the potentiality it bears for
becoming something is one that exists between a physical body and its

three-dimensional geometrical form (*al-jism al-ta’lîmî* ). Hence, the
potentiality for a particular thing delimits the indefinite potentiality
of matter, in the same way as a three-dimensional geometrical form
defines the indefinite threefold dimensions of a physical mass.

Fourth, the existence of entities that come into existence in time
inseparable from the change in their forms if they are substances, and
in their states if accidents.

Fifth, potentiality always subsists through actuality, and matter
subsists continually through a form that sustains it. Thus when a – form
takes the place of an earlier one, the subsequent form takes the place
of the preceding one in sustaining matter.

Sixth, it becomes clear from what has been mentioned that potentiality
temporally precedes only a particular actuality; otherwise actuality
when taken in an absolute manner precedes potentiality respect of all
forms of priority: causal, temporal, by nature, etc.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في تقسيم التغير
----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد عرفت أن من لوازم خروج الشي‏ء من القوة إلى الفعل حصول التغير إما في
ذاته أو في أحوال ذاته فاعلم أن حصول التغير إما دفعي و إما تدريجي و
الثاني هو الحركة و هي نحو وجود تدريجي للشي‏ء ينبغي أن يبحث عنها من هذه
الجهة في الفلسفة الأولى.
</p>

10.2. THE KINDS OF CHANGE
-------------------------

We have seen that a thing’s motion from potentiality to actuality ails
change, either in its essence or its states. Change is either
instantaneous or gradual. Gradual change is called motion (harakah),
which is a thing’s gradual mode of existence (i.e. extended over time).
As it relates to a mode of being, it deserves to be a subject of
metaphysical study in this respect.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في تحديد الحركة
----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تبين في الفصل السابق أن الحركة خروج الشي‏ء من القوة إلى الفعل تدريجا
و إن شئت فقل هي تغير الشي‏ء تدريجا و التدريج معنى بديهي التصور بإعانة
الحس عليه و عرفها المعلم الأول بأنها كمال أول لما بالقوة من حيث إنه
بالقوة و توضيحه أن حصول ما يمكن أن يحصل للشي‏ء كمال له و الشي‏ء الذي
يقصد بالحركة حالا من الأحوال كالجسم مثلا يقصد مكانا ليتمكن فيه فيسلك
إليه كان كل من السلوك و التمكن في المكان الذي يسلك إليه كمالا لذلك الجسم
غير أن السلوك كمال أول لتقدمه و التمكن كمال ثان فإذا شرع في السلوك فقد
تحقق له كمال لكن لا مطلقا بل من حيث إنه بعد بالقوة بالنسبة إلى كماله
الثاني و هو التمكن في المكان الذي يريده فالحركة كمال أول لما هو بالقوة
بالنسبة إلى الكمالين من حيث إنه بالقوة بالنسبة إلى الكمال الثاني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد تبين بذلك أن الحركة تتوقف في تحققها على أمور ستة المبدأ الذي منه
الحركة و المنتهى الذي إليه الحركة و الموضوع الذي له الحركة و هو المتحرك
و الفاعل الذي يوجد الحركة و هو المحرك و المسافة التي فيها الحركة و
الزمان الذي ينطبق عليه الحركة نوعا من الانطباق و سيجي‏ء توضيح ذلك.
</p>

10.3. THE DEFINITION OF MOTION
------------------------------

It was said above that motion is a thing’s transition from potentiality
to actuality in a gradual manner. One may also call it ‘gradual change.’
(Gradual transition is a self-evident concept, whose formation in the
mind is assisted by sense-experience.) Aristotle defined it as “the
first perfection (kamâl awwal) for that which is in a state of
potentiality qua something in potentiality.” To explain, the acquisition
of what a thing may possibly acquire is a perfection for it. For a thing
in its movement towards a certain state - for instance, a body moving
towards a certain location to become situated in it - its movement as
well as its establishment in the location towards which it moves are
perfections for that body, with difference, however, that its movement
is the first perfection and its establishment in that location the
second perfection.

Hence, when it starts its movement, a perfection is realized for it,
though not absolutely but in the sense that it is still in a state of
potentiality in relation to its second perfection, which is
establishment in the sought destination. Thus, motion is a first
perfection for that which is in a state of potentiality in relation to
the two perfections, in the respect that it is in a state of
potentiality in relation to the second perfection.

From this it becomes clear that motion depends for its actualization on
six things: (i) the origin (mabda’), from which motion starts, (ii) the
end (muntahâ) towards which motion is directed, (iii) the moving subject
(mawdhû’) or ‘the moved’ (mutaharrik), (iv) the ‘agent’ that causes the
motion, or the ‘mover’ (muharrik), (v) the course (masâfah) of motion,
and (vi) the time to which motion corresponds in some manner. These will
be explained below.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في انقسام الحركة إلى توسطية و قطعية
------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تعتبر الحركة بمعنيين أحدهما: كون الجسم بين المبدإ و المنتهى بحيث كل حد
فرض في الوسط فهو ليس قبله و لا بعده فيه و هو حالة بسيطة ثابتة لا انقسام
فيها و تسمى الحركة التوسطية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيهما: الحالة المذكورة من حيث لها نسبة إلى حدود المسافة من حد تركها
و من حد لم يبلغها أي إلى قوة تبدلت فعلا و إلى قوة باقية على حالها بعد
يريد المتحرك أن يبدلها فعلا و لازمه الانقسام إلى الأجزاء و الانصرام و
التقضي تدريجا كما أنه خروج من القوة إلى الفعل تدريجا و تسمى الحركة
القطعية و المعنيان جميعا موجودان في الخارج لانطباقهما عليه بجميع
خصوصياتهما.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الصورة التي يأخذها الخيال من الحركة بأخذ الحد بعد الحد من الحركة و
جمعها فيه صورة متصلة مجتمعة منقسمة إلى الأجزاء فهي ذهنية لا وجود لها في
الخارج لعدم جواز اجتماع الأجزاء في الحركة و إلا كان ثباتا لا تغيرا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد تبين بذلك أن الحركة و نعني بها القطعية نحو وجود سيال منقسم إلى
أجزاء تمتزج فيه القوة و الفعل بحيث يكون كل جزء مفروض فيه فعلا لما قبله
من الأجزاء و قوة لما بعده و ينتهي من الجانبين إلى قوة لا فعل معها و إلى
فعل لا قوة معه.
</p>

10.4. MEDIATING AND TRAVERSING MOTION
-------------------------------------

There are two conceptions of motion. In one of them, the moving thing is
conceived as being between the origin and the end, in the sense that if
it is supposed to be at a certain limit in the middle, it is neither
before it nor after it: it is a simple static state which is indivisible
and is called ‘mediating motion’ (al-harakah al-tawassutiyyah).

In the second conception, it is the above-mentioned state of being
between the origin and the end, along with its relation to the limits of
the course of motion, the limit that it has left and the one that it has
not reached, or the potentiality transformed into actuality and the
potentiality that still remains in its state and which the moving
subject seeks to transform into actuality. Implied in this conception of
motion is division into parts and gradual transition and passage, as it
is a gradual transition from potentiality to actuality. It is called
‘traversing motion’ (al-harakah al-qath’iyyah), and both of these
meanings exist in external reality, for they correspond to it with all
their characteristics.

However, as to the picture of motion derived from imagination, by taking
one limit after another from motion and combining them in the form of a
continuous aggregate divisible into parts, it is something purely mental
having no existence in external reality; co-presence of parts is
impossible in motion, for otherwise it would be something static, not
dynamic.

From this, it becomes clear that motion - i.e., traversing motion - is a
fluid mode of existence, divisible into parts, wherein potentiality and
actuality intermingle in the sense that every one of a assumed parts is
actuality for its preceding part and potentiality for the succeeding
part, terminating on one side in potentiality unaccompanied by actuality
and on the other in actuality unaccompanied by potentiality.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في مبدإ الحركة و منتهاها
-------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد عرفت: أن في الحركة انقساما لذاتها فاعلم أن هذا الانقسام لا يقف على حد
نظير الانقسام الذي في الكميات المتصلة القارة من الخط و السطح و الجسم إذ
لو وقف على حد كان جزءا لا يتجزأ و قد تقدم بطلانه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا: هو انقسام بالقوة لا بالفعل إذ لو كان بالفعل بطلت الحركة لانتهاء
القسمة إلى أجزاء دفعية الوقوع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بذلك يتبين: أنه لا مبدأ للحركة و لا منتهى لها بمعنى الجزء الأول الذي
لا ينقسم من جهة الحركة و الجزء الآخر الذي كذلك لما عرفت آنفا أن الجزء
بهذا المعنى دفعي الوقوع غير تدريجية فلا ينطبق عليه حد الحركة لأنها
تدريجية الذات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما ما تقدم: أن الحركة تنتهي من الجانبين إلى قوة لا فعل معها و فعل لا
قوة معه فهو تحديد لها بالخارج من ذاتها.
</p>

10.5. THE ORIGIN AND END OF MOTION
----------------------------------

We saw that motion is essentially subject to division. However, it
should be noted that this division does not stop at any limit like the
division in static continuous quantities, as in the case of geometric
line, plane and body. For were it to stop at a limit, that would result
in an indivisible part, whose inadmissibility was mentioned earlier.

Furthermore, it is a division that is potential, not actual, for were it
actual there would be no motion due to the division leading up to
instantaneous parts.

From this it becomes clear that there is no beginning or end of motion,
in the sense that it should have a first, or last, indivisible part from
the aspect of motion, as mentioned above. That is because a part in this
sense is something instantaneous, not gradual, so the definition of
motion as something essentially gradual would not apply to it.

As to that which was mentioned above, that motion ends in two sides - on
the one side in a potentiality unaccompanied by actuality and on the
other in an actuality unaccompanied by potentiality - that is a
delimitation of it by something external to it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في موضوع الحركة و هو المتحرك الذي يتلبس بها
--------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد عرفت: أن الحركة خروج الشي‏ء من القوة إلى الفعل تدريجا و أن هذه القوة
يجب أن تكون محمولة في أمر جوهري قائمة به و هذا الذي بالقوة كمال بالقوة
للمادة متحد معها فإذا تبدلت القوة فعلا كان الفعل متحدا مع المادة مكان
القوة فمادة الماء مثلا هواء بالقوة و كذا الجسم الحامض حلو بالقوة فإذا
تبدلت الماء هواءا و الحموضة حلاوة كانت المادة التي في الماء هي المتلبسة
بالهوائية و الجسم الحامض هو المتلبس بالحلاوة ففي كل حركة موضوع تنعته
الحركة و تجري عليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يجب أن يكون موضوع الحركة أمرا ثابتا تجري و تتجدد عليه الحركة و إلا كان
ما بالقوة غير ما يخرج إلى الفعل فلم تتحقق الحركة التي هي خروج الشي‏ء من
القوة إلى الفعل تدريجا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يجب أن لا يكون موضوع الحركة أمرا بالفعل من كل جهة كالعقل المجرد إذ لا
حركة إلا مع قوة ما فما لا قوة فيه فلا حركة له و لا أن يكون بالقوة من
جميع الجهات إذ لا وجود لما هو كذلك بل أمرا بالقوة من جهة و بالفعل من جهة
كالمادة الأولى التي لها قوة الأشياء و فعلية أنها بالقوة و كالجسم الذي هو
مادة ثانية لها قوة الصور النوعية و الأعراض المختلفة و فعلية الجسمية و
بعض الصور النوعية.
</p>

10.6. THE SUBJECT OF MOTION
---------------------------

We saw above that motion is the gradual transition of a thing from
potentiality to actuality. We also noted that it is necessary that this
potentiality be borne by and subsist through something substantial. We
further noted that that which is in potency is a potential perfection
for matter and united with it. So when potentiality changes into
actuality, actuality becomes united with matter in the place of
potentiality. An example of this is the matter of water, which is
potentially vapour. Another is that of a sour body, e.g., an apple,
which is potentially sweet. When water changes into vapour and sourness
into sweetness, the matter of water assumes the form of vapour and that
of the sour body the form of sweetness. Hence there is a subject in
every motion that is qualified with motion and in which motion occurs.

It is necessary that the subject of motion be something enduring that
undergoes motion. Otherwise that which possessed potentiality would be
something other than that which assumes actuality, in which case motion,
which is a thing’s transition from potentiality to act, would not be
realized.

It is also necessary that the subject of motion should not something
that has actuality in all respects, such as an immaterial Intellect, for
there can be no motion without some kind of potentiality. Hence that
which has no potentiality has no motion. Also, it should not be in
potentiality in all respects, for that which is such has no existence.
Hence, it should be something that is potential in some aspect and
actual in some aspect, such as prime matter, which possesses the
potentiality for all things and whose actuality is its potentiality, or
a body that is secondary matter, which possesses the potentiality for
various specific forms and accidents along with the actuality of
bodiness and some specific form.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في فاعل الحركة و هو المحرك
---------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يجب أن يكون المحرك غير المتحرك إذ لو كان المتحرك هو الذي يوجد الحركة في
نفسه لزم أن يكون شي‏ء واحد فاعلا و قابلا من جهة واحدة و هو محال فإن
حيثية الفعل هي حيثية الوجدان و حيثية القبول هي حيثية الفقدان و لا معنى
لكون شي‏ء واحد واجدا و فاقدا من جهة واحدة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا: المتحرك هو بالقوة بالنسبة إلى الفعل الذي يحصل له بالحركة و فاقد
له و ما هو بالقوة لا يفيد فعلا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يجب أن يكون الفاعل القريب للحركة أمرا متغيرا متجدد الذات إذ لو كان
أمرا ثابت الذات من غير تغير و سيلان كان الصادر منه أمرا ثابتا في نفسه
فلم يتغير جزء من الحركة إلى غيره من الأجزاء لثبات علته من غير تغير في
حالها فلم تكن الحركة حركة هذا خلف
</p>

10.7. THE AGENT OF MOTION, THE MOVER
------------------------------------

It is necessary that the mover should be other than the moved, for if
the moved itself were the creator of motion, that would imply a single
thing being active (fâil) and passive (qâbil) in a single aspect. This
is impossible, because the mode of action (fi’l) is the mode of
possession, whereas the mode of receptivity is the mode of privation,
and it is meaningless to say that a single thing is in possession and
privation in the same aspect.

Moreover, the subject is in potentiality in relation to the actuality
attained by it through motion, an actuality which it lacks, and that
which is in potentiality cannot provide actuality. It is necessary that
the proximate agent of motion should be something undergoing change and
renewal, for if it were something stable in itself and without change
and flux, that which it produces would also be stable in itself. As a
result, no part of motion will give way to another part due to the
stability of the cause and absence of change in its state, whereupon
motion would not be motion, which is a self-contradiction.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في ارتباط المتغير بالثابت
--------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ربما قيل: إن وجوب استناد المتغير المتجدد إلى علة متغيرة متجددة مثله يوجب
استناد علته المتغيرة المتجددة أيضا إلى مثلها في التغير و التجدد و هلم
جرا و يستلزم ذلك أما التسلسل أو الدور أو التغير في المبدإ الأول تعالى عن
ذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب: بأن التجدد و التغير ينتهي إلى جوهر متحرك بجوهره فيكون التجدد
ذاتيا له فيصح استناده إلى علة ثابتة توجد ذاته لأن إيجاد ذاته عين إيجاد
تجدده
</p>

10.8. THE RELATION OF THE CHANGEABLE TO THE UNCHANGING
------------------------------------------------------

It has been said that the necessity of dependence of something
undergoing renewal and change on a cause subject to renewal and change
like itself requires the dependence of the renewing and changing cause
in its turn upon something else subject to renewal and change like
itself, and so on and so forth. That implies either an indefinite
regress or a vicious circle, or changeability in the First Source, whose
exalted station lies beyond such an attribution.

The answer that has been given to this objection is that renewal and
change originate in a substance that is essentially mobile. Renewal
being essential to it, it is correct to ascribe it to an unchanging
cause that brings it into existence, for its creation is the same as the
creation of its changeability.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع في المسافة التي يقطعها المتحرك بالحركة
---------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مسافة الحركة هي: الوجود المتصل السيال الذي يجري على الموضوع المتحرك و
ينتزع منه لا محالة مقولة من المقولات لكن لا من حيث إنه متصل واحد متغير
فإن لازمه وقوع التشكيك في الماهية و هو محال بل من حيث إنه منقسم إلى
أقسام آنية الوجود كل قسم منه نوع من أنواع المقولة مبائن لغيره كنمو الجسم
مثلا فإنه حركة منه في الكم يرد عليه في كل آن من آنات الحركة نوع من أنواع
الكم المتصل مبائن للنوع الذي ورد عليه في الآن السابق و النوع الذي سيرد
عليه في اللاحق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فمعنى حركة الشي‏ء في المقولة أن يرد على الموضوع في كل آن نوع من أنواع
المقولة مبائن للنوع الذي يرد عليه في آن غيره.
</p>

10.9. THE COURSE OF MOTION
--------------------------

The ‘course’ of motion is the continuous flux of existence through which
the moving subject passes. Unavoidably, it yields to the abstraction of
some of the categories, though not from the aspect that it is a
continuous changing unity, for that would entail the occurrence of
gradation in quiddity, which is impossible. Rather, that is from the
aspect that the course is divisible into instantaneously existing
divisions, each of which is a species from among the species of the
category and different from other species. An example of it is a growing
body whose motion is in quantity. At every instant of its motion, it is
affected by a species from among the species of continuous quantity,
different from the species that affected it in a preceding instant as
well as those that will affect it in a succeeding instant.

Hence the meaning of a thing’s motion in a certain category b that the
subject is affected at every instant by a species from among the species
of the category, which is different from the species that affect it at
any other instant.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في المقولات التي تقع فيها الحركة
---------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
المشهور بين قدماء الفلاسفة أن المقولات التي تقع فيها الحركة أربع مقولات
الأين و الكيف و الكم و الوضع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الأين: فوقوع الحركة فيه ظاهر كالحركات المكانية التي في الأجسام لكن
في كون الأين مقولة برأسها كلام و إن كان مشهورا بينهم بل الأين ضرب من
الوضع و عليه فالحركة الأينية ضرب من الحركة الوضعية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الكيف: فوقوع الحركة فيه و خاصة في الكيفيات غير الفعلية كالكيفيات
المختصة بالكميات كالاستواء و الاعوجاج و نحوهما ظاهر فإن الجسم المتحرك في
كمه يتحرك في الكيفيات القائمة بكمه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الكم: فالحركة فيه تغير الجسم في كمه تغيرا متصلا بنسبة منتظمة
تدريجا كالنمو الذي هو زيادة الجسم في حجمه زيادة متصلة منتظمة تدريجا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد أورد عليه: أن النمو إنما يتحقق بانضمام أجزاء من خارج إلى أجزاء
الجسم فالكم الكبير اللاحق هو الكم العارض لمجموع الأجزاء الأصلية و
المنضمة و الكم الصغير السابق هو الكم العارض لنفس الأجزاء الأصلية و
الكمان متباينان غير متصلين لتباين موضوعيهما فلا حركة في كم بل هو زوال كم
و حدوث آخر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه: أن انضمام الضمائم لا ريب فيه لكن الطبيعة تبدل الأجزاء
المنضمة بعد الضم إلى صورة الأجزاء الأصلية و لا تزال تبدل و تزيد كمية
الأجزاء الأصلية تدريجا بانضمام الأجزاء و تغيرها إلى الأجزاء الأصلية
فيزداد الكم العارض للأجزاء الأصلية زيادة متصلة تدريجية و هي الحركة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الوضع: فالحركة فيه أيضا ظاهر كحركة الكرة على محورها فإنه تتبدل بها
نسبة النقاط المفروضة عليها إلى الخارج عنها و هو تغير تدريجي في وضعها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا :و لا تقع حركة في باقي المقولات و هي الفعل و الانفعال و متى و
الإضافة و الجدة و الجوهر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الفعل و الانفعال :فإنه قد أخذ في مفهوميهما التدريج فلا فرد آني
الوجود لهما و وقوع الحركة فيهما يقتضي الانقسام إلى أقسام آنية الوجود و
ليس لهما ذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و كذا الكلام في متى فإنه الهيأة الحاصلة من نسبة الشي‏ء إلى الزمان فهي
تدريجية تنافي وقوع الحركة فيها المقتضية للانقسام إلى أقسام آنية الوجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الإضافة :فإنها انتزاعية تابعة لطرفيها فلا تستقل بشي‏ء كالحركة و
كذا الجدة فإن التغير فيها تابع لتغير موضوعها كتغير النعل أو القدم عما
كانتا عليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الجوهر :فوقوع الحركة فيه يستلزم تحقق الحركة من غير موضوع ثابت و قد
تقدم أن تحقق الحركة موقوف على موضوع ثابت باق ما دامت الحركة.
</p>

10.10. THE CATEGORIES WHEREIN MOTION OCCURS
-------------------------------------------

In accordance with the opinion prevailing amongst the earlier
philosophers, belonging to the period before Mullâ Shadrâ, the
categories in which motion occurs are four: place, quality, quantity,
and position.

As to place, it is obvious that motion takes place in it, like the
motion of bodies in respect to location. However, there are certain
reservations in considering place as a category in its own right, though
such a view has been commonly held. Rather, place is a kind of position;
accordingly, a motion in place is a kind of motion in position.

As to quality, it is obvious that motion occurs in it, especially in
non-active qualities like the qualities associated with quantities, such
as straightness and crookedness and the like; for a body moving in terms
of quantity also moves in the qualities that depend on its quantity.

As to quantity, the motion in it is defined as gradual change in a
body’s quantity that is continuous, proportionate and orderly. One
example is the case of biological growth, which is a gradual, continuous
and orderly increase in a body’s volume.

An objection has been raised against this definition. It is pointed out
that growth takes place through the annexation of parts from outside to
the parts of the growing body. Thus the resulting larger quantity is an
accident of the collection of the original and the annexed parts,
whereas the previous smaller quantity was an accident of the original
parts. These two quantities are separate and discontinuous due to the
difference of their subjects. Hence, there is no motion but the
disappearance of one quantity and the emergence of another.

The answer that has been given to this objection is that there is no
doubt that there is an annexation of the annexed parts; however, the
‘nature’ (i.e. the specific form) transforms the annexed part after
assimilation into the form of the original parts. It continues to
transform and increase the bulk of the original parts gradually by
assimilating parts from outside and changing them into the original
parts. Thus the quantity accidental to the original parts increases in a
gradual and continuous manner, and this is what motion is.

As to position, the occurrence of motion in it is obvious, such is the
rotary motion of a sphere on its axis, as a result of which me
relationship of any point on its surface changes with its surroundings.
This is a gradual change in its position.

The philosophers were of the opinion that there is no motion in the
remaining categories, which consist of action, affection, time,
relation, possession and substance.

As to action and affection, gradualness is included in their conception.
They do not have instantaneously existing individuals and occurrence of
motion in them requires division into instantaneously existing
divisions, which they do not have.

A similar observation applies to the category of ‘time,’ which is
defined as a mode resulting from a thing’s relation to time. It is
gradual and so precludes the occurrence of motion in it, which requires
divisibility into instantaneously existing divisions.

As to relation, it is an abstraction dependent upon its two sides and,
like motion, is not independently associated with a single thing. The
same applies to ‘possession,’ any change wherein is dependent upon the
change of its two subjects, like the change occurring in the shoe or the
foot from their prior state.

As to substance, the earlier philosophers believed that the occurrence
of change in it entails the actualization of motion in that which is not
a fixed subject, and, as mentioned earlier, the actualization of motion
depends on a fixed subject that persists as long as motion continues.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر في تعقيب ما مر في الفصل السابق
-----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ذهب صدر المتألهين ره إلى وقوع الحركة في مقولة الجوهر و استدل عليه بأمور
أوضحها أن وقوع الحركة في المقولات الأربع العرضية يقضي بوقوعها في مقولة
الجوهر لأن الأعراض تابعة للجواهر مستندة إليها استناد الفعل إلى فاعله
فالأفعال الجسمانية مستندة إلى الطبائع و الصور النوعية و هي الأسباب
القريبة لها و قد تقدم أن السبب القريب للحركة أمر تدريجي كمثلها فالطبائع
و الصور النوعية في الأجسام المتحركة في الكم و الكيف و الأين و الوضع
متغيرة سيالة الوجود كأعراضها و لو لا ذلك لم يتحقق سبب لشي‏ء من هذه
الحركات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أورد عليه أنا ننقل الكلام إلى الطبيعة المتجددة كيف صدرت عن المبدإ
الثابت و هي متجددة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه بأن الحركة لما كانت في جوهرها فالتغير و التجدد ذاتي لها و
الذاتي لا يعلل فالجاعل إنما جعل المتجدد لا أنه جعل المتجدد متجددا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أورد عليه أنا نوجه استناد الأعراض المتجددة إلى الطبيعة بهذا الوجه
بعينه من غير حاجة إلى جعل الطبيعة متجددة فالتجدد ذاتي للعرض المتجدد و
الطبيعة جعلت العرض المتجدد و لم تجعل المتجدد متجددا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه :بأن الأعراض مستندة في وجودها إلى الجوهر و تابعة له فالذاتية
لا بد أن تتم في الجواهر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أورد عليه أيضا :أن القوم صححوا ارتباط هذه الأعراض المتجددة إلى المبدإ
الثابت من طبيعة و غيرها بنحو آخر و هو أن التغير لاحق لها من خارج كتجدد
مراتب قرب و بعد من الغاية المطلوبة في الحركات الطبيعية و كتجدد أحوال
أخرى في الحركات القسرية التي على خلاف الطبيعة و كتجدد إرادات جزئية
منبعثة من النفس في كل حد من حدود الحركات النفسانية التي مبدؤها النفس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه: بأنا ننقل الكلام إلى هذه الأحوال و الإرادات المتجددة من أين
تجددت فإنها لا محالة تنتهي في الحركات الطبيعية إلى الطبيعة و كذا في
القسرية فإن القسر ينتهي إلى الطبيعة و كذا في النفسانية فإن الفاعل
المباشر للتحريك فيها أيضا الطبيعة كما سيجي‏ء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يمكن أن يستدل على الحركة في الجوهر بما تقدم أن وجود العرض من مراتب
وجود الجوهر من حيث كون وجوده في نفسه عين وجوده للجوهر فتغيره و تجدده
تغير للجوهر و تجدد له.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتفرع على ما تقدم أولا أن الصور الطبيعية المتبدلة صورة بعد صورة على
المادة بالحقيقة صورة جوهرية واحدة سيالة تجري على المادة و ينتزع من كل حد
من حدودها مفهوم مغاير لما ينتزع من غيره.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هذا في تبدل الصور الطبيعية بعضها من بعض و هناك حركة اشتدادية جوهرية أخرى
هي حركة المادة الأولى إلى الطبيعية ثم النباتية ثم الحيوانية ثم
الإنسانية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: أن الجوهر المتحرك في جوهره متحرك بجميع أعراضه لما سمعت من حديث
كون وجود الأعراض من مراتب وجود الجوهر الموضوع لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لازم ذلك: كون حركة الجوهر في المقولات الأربع أو الثلاث من قبيل الحركة
في الحركة و على هذا ينبغي أن تسمى هذه الحركات الأربع أو الثلاث حركات
ثانية و ما لمطلق الأعراض من الحركة بتبع الجوهر لا بعرضه حركات أولى.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا: أن العالم الجسماني بمادته الواحدة حقيقة واحدة سيالة متحركة
بجميع جواهرها و أعراضها قافلة واحدة إلى غاية ثابتة لها الفعلية المحضة.
</p>

10.11. CONTINUATION OF THE ABOVE DISCUSSION
-------------------------------------------

Shadr al-Muta’allihîn, may God’s mercy be upon him, came to ho A that
motion occurs in the category of substance. Among the various arguments
that he advanced in favour of this view, the most persuasive is that the
occurrence of motion in the four accidental categories requires that
motion occur in the category of substance, because the accidents are
dependent upon the substance in the way an action depends upon its
agent. Thus physical actions depend on the natures or specific forms,
which are the proximate causes of them. As mentioned earlier, the
proximate cause of motion is something gradual like it. Thus the natures
and specific forms in bodies moving in respect of quantity, quality,
place and position are changeable with a fluid existence like the
accidents: otherwise there would not actualize any cause of these
motions.

An objection against this argument states: If we transfer our argument
to the renewing nature, the question still remains as to how something
changeable can emanate from an unchanging source.

The answer to this is that since motion occurs within the substance of
the changeable ‘nature,’ change and renewal are essential to it, and
that which is essential to something does not stand in need of a cause.
The ‘maker’ has made it changeable, not that he first made it and then
made it changeable.

This answer may be contested with the following remark. The same thing
may be asserted concerning the dependence of changeable accidents on the
‘nature’ without making the ‘nature’ changeable; hence changeability is
essential to changeable accidents and the nature made the changeable
accident; not that it made the accident and then caused it to change.

The answer to this is that accidents depend for their existence on the
substance and are subject to it. Hence it is necessary that their
essentiality should culminate in the substance.

Another objection that has been raised is that the relation between the
changing accidents and the unchanging source - a nature or something
else - can be explained in another manner. According to this
explanation, change is produced in the accidents from outside, for
instance, by the varying degrees of proximity and distance from
destination in physical motions, by the changing states in coercive
motions which are opposite to nature, and by the succession of
particular acts of will produced in the soul at very stage of psychic
motions whose source is the soul.

The answer to this is that, transferring our argument to these
successive states or acts of will, we may ask: What is it that makes
them successive? For they unavoidably culminate, in the case of physical
motions, in a nature. The same is true of coercive motions, for coercion
culminates in a nature. The same applies to psychic motions, wherein the
immediate agent of motion is the nature, as will be explained later on.

One may also argue in favour of substantial motion on the basis of what
was mentioned earlier,” that the existence of the accident is a plane
from among the planes of the existence of substance, in the respect that
its existence-in-itself is identical with its
existence-for-the-substance. Hence its change and renewal are change and
renewal in the substance.

It follows from the above discussion, first, that the changing natural
forms that appear one after another in matter are in reality a single
substantial form in flux through which matter passes, and from each of
whose limits is abstracted an idea different from what is abstracted
from another limit.

This was concerning change in natural forms (e.g. water into vapour and
vapour into water), which is change within a single form in flux. But
there are other evolutionary substantial motions represented by the
motion of prime matter towards physical form, followed by vegetative,
animal and human forms.

Second, in its substantial motion the moving substance moves with all
its accidents, for, as mentioned, the existence of accidents is a plane
of the existence of the substance, which is their substratum.

A consequence of this is that the motion of substance in the four - or
the three’ - categories is a kind of motion within motion. On this
basis, these fourfold or threefold motions may be called ‘secondary
motions,’ and the motions that relate absolutely to the accidents in
subordination to the substance - not parallel to it - may be termed
‘primary motions.’

Third, the physical world with its one matter is a single reality in
flux. With all its substances and accidents, it is a single caravan
moving towards its fixed end of an absolute actuality.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني عشر في موضوع الحركة الجوهرية و فاعلها
--------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا :إن موضوع هذه الحركة هو المادة المتحصلة بصورة ما من الصور
المتعاقبة المتحدة بالاتصال و السيلان فوحدة المادة و شخصيتها محفوظة بصورة
ما من الصور المتبدلة و صورة ما و إن كانت مبهمة لكن وحدتها محفوظة بجوهر
مفارق هو الفاعل للمادة الحافظ لها و لوحدتها و شخصيتها بصورة ما فصورة ما
شريكة العلة للمادة و المادة المتحصلة بها هي موضوع الحركة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا كما أن القائلين بالكون و الفساد النافين للحركة الجوهرية قالوا أن
فاعل المادة هو صورة ما محفوظة وحدتها بجوهر مفارق يفعلها و يفعل المادة
بواسطتها فصورة ما شريكة العلة بالنسبة إلى المادة حافظة لتحصلها و وحدتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و التحقيق: أن حاجة الحركة إلى موضوع ثابت باق ما دامت الحركة إن كانت لأجل
أن تنحفظ به وحدة الحركة و لا تنثلم بطرو الانقسام عليها و عدم اجتماع
أجزائها في الوجود فاتصال الحركة في نفسها و كون الانقسام وهميا غير فكي
كاف في ذلك و إن كانت لأجل أنها معنى ناعتي يحتاج إلى أمر موجود لنفسه حتى
يوجد له و ينعته كما أن الأعراض و الصور الجوهرية المنطبعة في المادة تحتاج
إلى موضوع كذلك توجد له و تنعته فموضوع الحركات العرضية أمر جوهري غيرها و
موضوع الحركة الجوهرية نفس الحركة إذ لا نعني بموضوع الحركة إلا ذاتا تقوم
به الحركة و توجد له و الحركة الجوهرية لما كانت ذاتا جوهرية سيالة كانت
قائمة بذاتها موجودة لنفسها فهي حركة و متحركة في نفسها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إسناد الموضوعية إلى المادة التي تجري عليها الصور الجوهرية على نحو
الاتصال و السيلان لمكان اتحادها معها و إلا فهي في نفسها عارية عن كل
فعلية.
</p>

10.12. THE SUBJECT OF SUBSTANTIAL MOTION AND ITS AGENT
------------------------------------------------------

It has been held by philosophers of the post-Shadrâ period that the
subject in this motion is the matter actualized in one or the other of
successive forms united by continuity and flux. Thus the unity of matter
and its individuality are preserved through one or the other of the
changing forms. The unity of the changing form, though indefinite, is
preserved by an immaterial substance, which is the agent of matter. This
agent preserves matter and its unity and individuality through some form
or another. Thus the form, whatsoever, participates in the cause of
matter and the matter actualized through it is the subject of motion.

This is similar to the opinion of those who reject substantial motion
and believe in continuous coming into being and annihilation (al-kawn wa
al-fasâd). They state that the agent of matter is some form whatsoever,
whose unity is preserved by an immaterial substance that creates form
and matter through its mediation. Thus some form whatsoever participates
in the cause in relation to matter and preserves its actualization and
unity.

The correct position is that motion’s need for a fixed subject remains
as long as motion continues. Should a fixed subject be needed to
preserve the unity of motion, in order that motion may not fall apart
through divisibility and for the reason that its parts are not
co-present in existence, it is the continuity of motion in itself and
its divisibility in imagination, not external fact, which is sufficient
for its unity. Should the need for a fixed subject be for the reason
that motion is something predicative that stands in need of an entity
existent-in-itself, in order to exist for it and to characterize it - as
in the case of accidents and substantial forms impressed in matter,
which also stand in need of a substratum for which they may exist and
which they may characterize - the subject of accidental motions is
something other that is substantial, and the subject of substantial
motion is motion itself. For we do not mean by ‘subject of motion’
anything except an entity through which motion may subsist and for which
“it may exist, and substantial motion, being a flowing and substantial
entity, is subsistent through itself and for itself. Thus it is motion
and the moving in. itself.

Matter, which undergoes substantial forms in a continuous and flux-like
manner, is referred to as ‘subject’ due to its union with forms;
otherwise, in itself it is devoid of all actuality.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث عشر في الزمان
--------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إنا نجد الحوادث الواقعة تحت الحركة منقسمة إلى قطعات لا تجامع قطعة منها
القطعة الأخرى في فعلية الوجود لما أن فعلية وجود القطعة المفروضة ثانيا
متوفقة على زوال الوجود الفعلي للقطعة الأولى ثم نجد القطعة الأولى المتوقف
عليها منقسمة في نفسها إلى قطعتين كذلك لا تجامع إحداهما الأخرى و هكذا
كلما حصلنا قطعة قبلت القسمة إلى قطعتين كذلك من دون أن تقف القسمة على حد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لا يتأتى هذا إلا بعروض امتداد كمي على الحركة تتقدر به و تقبل الانقسام
و ليس هذا الامتداد نفس حقيقة الحركة لأنه امتداد متعين و ما في الحركة في
نفسها امتداد مبهم نظير الامتداد المبهم الذي في الجسم الطبيعي و تعينه
الذي هو الجسم التعليمي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فهذا الامتداد الذي به تعين امتداد الحركة كم متصل عارض للحركة نظير الجسم
التعليمي الذي به تعين امتداد الجسم الطبيعي للجسم الطبيعي إلا أن هذا الكم
العارض للحركة غير قار و لا يجامع بعض أجزائه المفروضة بعضا بخلاف كمية
الجسم التعليمي فإنها قارة مجتمعة الأجزاء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا هو الزمان العارض للحركة و مقدارها و كل جزء منه من حيث أنه متوقف
عليه الآخر متقدم بالنسبة إليه و من حيث إنه متوقف متأخر بالنسبة إلى ما
توقف عليه و الطرف منه الحاصل بالقسمة هو الآن.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد تبين بما تقدم أولا :أن لكل حركة زمانا خاصا بها هو مقدار تلك الحركة
و قد أطبق الناس على تقدير عامة الحركات و تعيين النسب بينها بالزمان العام
الذي هو مقدار الحركة اليومية لكونه معروفا عندهم مشهودا لهم كافة و قد
قسموه إلى القرون و السنين و الشهور و الأسابيع و الأيام و الساعات و
الدقائق و الثواني و غيرها لتقدير الحركات بالتطبيق عليها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الزمان الذي له دخل في الحوادث الزمانية عند المثبتين للحركة الجوهرية هو
زمان الحركة الجوهرية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: أن التقدم و التأخر ذاتيان بين أجزاء الزمان بمعنى أن كون وجود
الزمان سيالا غير قار يقتضي أن ينقسم لو انقسم إلى جزء يتوقف على زواله
وجود جزء آخر بالفعل و المتوقف عليه هو المتقدم و المتوقف هو المتأخر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا: أن الآن و هو طرف الزمان و الحد الفاصل بين الجزءين لو انقسم هو
أمر عدمي لكون الانقسام وهميا غير فكي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رابعا: أن تتالي الآنات و هو اجتماع حدين عدميين أو أكثر من غير تخلل جزء
من الزمان فاصل بينهما محال و هو ظاهر و مثله الكلام في تتالي الآنيات
المنطبقة على طرف الزمان كالوصول و الافتراق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و خامسا: أن الزمان لا أول له و لا آخر له بمعنى الجزء الذي لا ينقسم من
مبتدئه أو منتهاه لأن قبول القسمة ذاتي له.
</p>

10.13. TIME
-----------

We find that events occurring as a result of motion, are divisible into
segments, of which no segment is co-present with another in respect of
actual existence. For the actual existence of any posterior segment
under consideration depends on the termination of foe actual existence
of the prior segment. Moreover, we find that the prior segment is itself
divisible into similar segments none of which is co-present with the
other. We can go on bisecting segments in this way, and whenever we
reach a segment it would be visible into two parts in the aforementioned
manner without the division ever stopping at any limit.

This division is not possible without the application of quantitative
extension to motion, by which motion becomes measurable and divisible.
However, that extension does not represent the reality of motion itself,
for it is something determinate whereas motion in itself has only an
indeterminate extension, like the indefinite shape of a physical mass,
which is defined by a three dimensional geometrical form.

This extension, through which the extension of motion is determined, is
a continuous quantity corresponding to motion, like a three-dimensional
geometrical form through which the dimensions of a physical mass become
determinate, with the difference that this quantity corresponding to
motion is non-static and its parts are not co-present with one another,
as opposed to a three dimensional geometrical form in which the parts
are static and co-present.

This quantity is time, which corresponds to motion and constitutes its
extent. Every part of it is prior in relation to the part that depends
upon it, and it is posterior in relation to the part on whose
termination it depends. The extremities that result from the division of
time into segments are called ‘instants.’

The following conclusions are drawn from this discussion.

(i) For every motion there is a time particular to it, which is the
extent of that motion. People have adopted ordinary time, which is the
extent of diurnal motion, as a convention for the measurement of motions
in general and for the determination of the relationships between them.
This is because ordinary time is commonly known and observable. They
have divided it into centuries, years, months, weeks, days, hours,
minutes, seconds, etc., in order to measure motions by their means.

For those who uphold substantial motion, the time that is relevant in
temporal events is the time of substantial motion (not accidental
motions, like the earth’s rotation, for they are derived from
substantial motion).

(ii) Priority and posteriority are essential to the parts of time, in
the sense that the existence of time is flowing, non-static. This
requires that it be divisible, if divided, into a part on whose
termination depends the actual existence of another part, the former
being prior and the latter posterior.

(iii) The instant, which is the extremity of a period of time and the
dividing limit between two parts of it, if divided, is something unreal
(i.e. imaginary), because the division is imaginary.

(iv) The succession of instants, which is the co-presence of two or more
unreal limits without any intervening segment of time separating them,
is

obviously impossible. The same observation applies to succession of
instantaneous events, which correspond extremities of segments of time,
e.g. reaching and separating.

(v) There is no beginning or end for time, in the sense that there may
be an indivisible part at its beginning or end; that is because
divisibility is essential to it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع عشر في السرعة و البطؤ
----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إذا فرضنا حركتين و اعتبرنا النسبة بينهما فإن تساوتا زمانا فأكثرهما قطعا
للمسافة أسرعهما و إن تساوتا مسافة فأقلهما زمانا أسرعهما فالسرعة قطع
مسافة كثيرة في زمان قليل و البطؤ خلافه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا :إن البطؤ ليس بتخلل السكون بأن تكون الحركة كلما كان تخلل السكون
فيها أكثر كانت أبطأ و كلما كان أقل كانت أسرع و ذلك لاتصال الحركة بامتزاج
القوة و الفعل فيها فلا سبيل إلى تخلل السكون فيها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قالوا :إن السرعة و البطؤ متقابلان تقابل التضاد و ذلك لأنهما وجوديان
فليس تقابلهما تقابل التناقض أو العدم و الملكة و ليسا بالمتضائفين و إلا
كانا كلما ثبت أحدهما ثبت الآخر و ليس كذلك فلم يبق إلا أن يكونا متضادين و
هو المطلوب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه :أن من شرط المتضادين أن يكون بينهما غاية الخلاف و ليست بمتحققة بين
السرعة و البطؤ إذ ما من سريع إلا و يمكن أن يفرض ما هو أسرع منه و كذا ما
من بطي‏ء إلا و يمكن أن يفرض ما هو أبطأ منه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق :أن السرعة و البطؤ وصفان إضافيان فسرعة حركة بالنسبة إلى أخرى بطؤ
بعينها بالنسبة إلى ثالثة و كذلك الأمر في البطؤ و السرعة بمعنى الجريان و
السيلان خاصة لمطلق الحركة ثم تشتد و تضعف فيحدث بإضافة بعضها إلى بعض
السرعة و البطؤ الإضافيان.
</p>

10.14. FASTNESS AND SLOWNESS
----------------------------

If we consider two motions occurring in equal time, that which covers a
longer course is the one that is faster.

If two motions cover an equal course, the one that takes lesser time is
the faster. Thus fastness lies in covering a relatively longer distance
in lesser time, and slowness is its opposite.

The philosophers state that slowness does not consist of intervening
rests, so that one may say that a motion is slower because of a greater
number of intervening rests, and faster when they are fewer. That is
because motion is a continuity in which potentiality and actuality
intermingle. Hence there is no room for intervening rest in it.

They further state that fastness and slowness are opposites, in the
sense of contrariety. That is because both of them are positive and the
opposition between them is neither one of contradiction, nor that of
possession and privation, nor are they correlatives; otherwise, whenever
one of them exists the other would also exist, which is not the case.
This does not leave any alternative except to consider them as
contraries.

However, a difficulty that lies in this view is that a condition for the
contraries is that there should be an extreme difference between them -
something which is not present between fastness and slowness; for it is
always possible to assume something faster in that which is fast, and,
similarly, something slower than that which is slow.

The truth is that fastness (sur’ah; also means speed) and slowness
[buth’) are relative attributes; what is fast in relation to a certain
motion may be slow in relation to a third one. The same applies to
slowness. Sur’ah (speed) in the sense of transition and flow is peculiar
to all motion and is characterized by intensity and weakness. Relative
fastness and slowness derive from comparison between different speeds.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس عشر في السكون
--------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يطلق السكون على خلو الجسم من الحركة قبلها أو بعدها و على ثبات الجسم على
حاله التي هو عليها و الذي يقابل الحركة هو المعنى الأول و الثاني لازمه و
هو معنى عدمي بمعنى انعدام الصفة عن موضوع قابل هو الجسم فيكون هو عدم
الحركة عما من شأنه أن يتحرك فالتقابل بينه و بين الحركة تقابل العدم و
الملكة و لا يكاد يخلو عن الحركة جسم أو أمر جسماني إلا ما كان آني الوجود
كالوصول إلى حد المسافة و انفصال شي‏ء من شي‏ء و حدوث الأشكال الهندسية و
نحو ذلك.
</p>

10.15. REST
-----------

The term ‘rest’ is applied to a body’s state of being devoid of motion,
before or after being in motion. It is also applied to a body’s
remaining unchanged in its state. That which is opposed to motion is the
first meaning. The second one is implied by it. Rest has the negative
sense of absence of a quality from the subject, which is a body capable
of possessing it. Thus it means absence of motion in something that
generally moves. Hence the opposition between it and motion is that of
privation and possession. A body, or anything physical, cannot be devoid
of motion, except what is instantaneous, such as reaching the limit of a
journey, separation of a thing from another, the formation of geometric
figures and the like.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس عشر في انقسامات الحركة
-----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنقسم الحركة بانقسام الأمور الستة التي تتعلق بها ذاتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فانقسامها بانقسام المبدإ و المنتهى كالحركة من مكان كذا إلى مكان كذا و
الحركة من لون كذا إلى لون كذا و حركة النبات من قدر كذا إلى قدر كذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و انقسامها بانقسام الموضوع: كحركة النبات و حركة الحيوان و حركة الإنسان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و انقسامها بانقسام المقولة: كالحركة في الكيف و الحركة في الكم و الحركة
في الوضع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و انقسامها بانقسام الزمان :كالحركة الليلية و الحركة النهارية و الحركة
الصيفية و الحركة الشتوية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و انقسامها بانقسام الفاعل :كالحركة الطبيعية و الحركة القسرية و الحركة
الإرادية و يلحق بها بوجه الحركة بالعرض فإن الفاعل إما أن يكون ذا شعور و
إرادة بالنسبة إلى فعله أم لا و الأول هو الفاعل النفساني و الحركة نفسانية
كالحركات الإرادية التي للإنسان و الحيوان و الثاني إما أن تكون الحركة
منبعثة عن نفسه لو خلي و نفسه و إما أن تكون منبعثة عنه لقهر فاعل آخر إياه
على الحركة و الأول هو الفاعل الطبيعي و الحركة طبيعية و الثاني هو الفاعل
القاسر و الحركة قسرية كالحجر المرمي إلى فوق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا: إن الفاعل القريب للحركة في جميع هذه الحركات هو طبيعة المتحرك عن
تسخير نفساني أو اقتضاء طبيعي أو قهر الطبيعة القاسرة لطبيعة المقسور على
الحركة و المبدإ المباشر المتوسط بين الفاعل و بين الحركة هو مبدأ الميل
الذي يوجده الفاعل في طبيعة المتحرك و تفصيل الكلام فيه في الطبيعيات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
### خاتمة
</p>

###

ليعلم: أن القوة أو ما بالقوة كما تطلق على حيثية القبول كذلك تطلق على
حيثية الفعل إذا كانت شديدة و كما تطلق على مبدإ القبول القائم به ذلك كذلك
تطلق على مبدإ الفعل كما تطلق القوى النفسانية و يراد بها مبادي الآثار
النفسانية من إبصار و سمع و تخيل و غير ذلك و كذلك القوى الطبيعية لمبادي
الآثار الطبيعية.

<p dir="rtl">
و هذه القوة الفاعلة إذا قارنت العلم و المشية سميت قدرة الحيوان و هي علة
فاعلة تحتاج في تمام عليتها و وجوب الفعل بها إلى أمور خارجة كحضور المادة
القابلة و صلاحية أدوات الفعل و غيرها تصير باجتماعها علة تامة يجب معها
الفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من هنا يظهر أولا :عدم استقامة تحديد بعضهم للقدرة بأنها ما يصح معه
الفعل و الترك فإن نسبة الفعل و الترك إلى الفاعل إنما تكون بالصحة و
الإمكان إذا كان جزءا من العلة التامة لا يجب الفعل به وحده بل به و ببقية
الأجزاء التي تتم بها العلة التامة و أما الفاعل التام الفاعلية الذي هو
وحدة علة تامة كالواجب تعالى فلا معنى لكون نسبة الفعل و الترك إليه
بالإمكان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لا يوجب كون فعله واجبا أن يكون موجبا مجبرا على الفعل غير قادر عليه إذ
هذا الوجوب لاحق بالفعل من قبله و هو أثره فلا يضطره إلى الفعل و لا أن
هناك فاعلا آخر يؤثر فيه بجعله مضطرا إلى الفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: بطلان ما قال به قوم إن صحة الفعل متوقفة على كونه مسبوقا بالعدم
الزماني فالفعل الذي لا يسبقه عدم زماني ممتنع و هو مبني على القول بأن علة
الاحتياج إلى العلة هي الحدوث دون الإمكان و قد تقدم إبطاله و إثبات أن علة
الحاجة إلى العلة هو الإمكان دون الحدوث على أنه منقوض بنفس الزمان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا: بطلان قول من قال إن القدرة إنما تحدث مع الفعل و لا قدرة على فعل
قبله و فيه أنهم يرون أن القدرة هي كون الشي‏ء بحيث يصح منه الفعل و الترك
فلو ترك الفعل زمانا ثم فعل صدق عليه قبل الفعل أنه يصح منه الفعل و الترك
و هي القدرة.
</p>

10.16. DIVISIONS OF MOTION
--------------------------

Motion is divided into various kinds on the basis of the six factors
that relate to it:

On the basis of origin and end; e.g., the motion from one place to
another, the motion from one colour to another and a plant’s motion from
a certain extent to another.

On the basis of the subject; e.g., the motions of a plant, the motions
of an animal, the motions of a human being.

On the basis of category; e.g., motion in quality, motion in quantity
and motion in position.

On the basis of time; e.g. nocturnal motion, diurnal motion, summer and
winter motion.

On the basis of agent; i.e. (i) natural motion, (ii) coercive motion and
(iii) voluntary motion. Related with these in a certain aspect is motion
by accident. The basis for this threefold division is that the agent
either possesses knowledge and will in relation to his act or he does
not. In the first case, the agent is conscious (nafsânî) and so is the
motion, e.g. the voluntary motions of a human being or an animal. In the
second case, the motion either arises from the agent by itself, or due
to some other agent, which compels it to move. In the first case, the
agent is a natural agent and the motion a natural motion. In the second
case, the agent is a coercive one and the motion is a coercive motion,
e.g. a stone thrown upwards.

The philosophers state that the proximate agent in all these motion is
the moving ‘nature,’ which moves either as a result of subjection to a
soul, or by natural disposition, or under the compulsion of a coercing
‘nature’ that compels the coerced ‘nature’ to move. The immediate
‘source’ between the agent and the motion the inclination that the agent
produces in the moving ‘nature.’ The related details are given in works
on traditional physics.

### Conclusion

###

Some points may be noted here concerning the terms quwwah (potentiality)
and mâ bil-quwwah (the object possessing potentiality). In the same way
as these terms are applied to the mode of receptivity, they are also
applied to the mode of action, when strong. In the same way as these
terms are applied to the source of receptivity (mabda’ al-qabûl, i.e.
prime matter) through which receptivity subsists, they are also applied
to the source of action (mabda’ al-fi’l), as in the case of the
faculties of the soul (al-quwâ al-nafsâniyyah), by which are meant the
‘sources’ of the soul’s properties, such as sight, hearing, imagination,
etc., and the natural forces (such as gravity), which are ‘sources’ of
natural phenomena.

This active quwwah (al-quwwah al-fâ’iliyyah) when accompanied with
knowledge and will is called qudrat al-hayawân (vital power), which is
an efficient cause that stands in need of external factors, such as the
presence of receptive matter and proper implements of action, etc., for
the completion of its causal efficiency and necessitation of action by
it. When these are all present, it becomes a complete cause on whose
presence the action becomes necessary. The following points become clear
in the light of the above discussion.

(i) The first point is the incorrectness of the definition advanced by
some theologians for ‘power’ (qudrah) as something in whose presence the
execution of an action or its omission is possible. For the execution of
an action or its omission is contingent on the agent when the agent is
only part of the complete cause, so that the action is not necessitated
by the agent alone but through its agency as well as that of the
remaining factors which make up the complete cause together. However, an
agent whose efficiency is complete is a complete cause, as in the case
of the exalted Necessary Being. Hence it is meaningless to characterize
with contingency such an agent and its action or omission of action
(i.e. to say that an agent that is a complete cause of its action may or
may not carry out the action).

The necessary character of its action does not imply that the agent is
compelled to carry it out and that it has no power over its own action;
for this necessity, which inheres in the action, derives from the agent
itself. The action is the agent’s effect and cannot compel it to action,
nor is there any other agent that may influence it and compel it to
carry out the action.

(ii) It makes evident the invalidity of the view advanced by some
theologians that the contingency of an action depends on its being
preceded by temporal non-existence (al-’adam al-zamânî); hence an action
that is not preceded by temporal non-existence is impossible. This view
is based on the belief that the reason for a thing’s need for a cause is
its coming into existence (hudûts), not its contingency (imkân). We have
refuted this belief earlier’ and proved that the reason for the need for
a cause is contingency, not hudûts. Moreover, their theory is
invalidated by the instance of time itself (which is not hâdits).

(iii) It discloses the invalidity of the view advanced by those
theologians who have held that ‘power’ emerges along with action and
that there is no power for an action prior to it. The inconsistency of
this view is made evident by the fact that they themselves define
‘power’ as ‘the capacity to act or not to act.’ Now, if the agent ceases
the action for some time to resume it, it would be right to ascribe to
it the capacity to act or not to act before the resumption of action.
This is what ‘power’ is according to their definition.
