المرحلة الحادية عشر في العلم و العالم و المعلوم
===============================================

<p dir="rtl">
قد تحصل مما تقدم أن الموجود ينقسم إلى ما بالقوة و ما بالفعل و الأول هو
المادة و الماديات و الثاني غيرهما و هو المجرد و مما يعرض المجرد عروضا
أوليا أن يكون علما و عالما و معلوما لأن العلم كما سيجي‏ء بيانه حضور وجود
مجرد لوجود مجرد فمن الحري أن نبحث عن ذلك في الفلسفة الأولى
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها اثنا عشر فصلا.
</p>

CHAPTER ELEVEN: Knowledge, Knower, and the Known
================================================

***In the last chapter we saw that existence is divided into that which
has potentiality and that which has (absolute) actuality, and that the
former consists of matter and material things and the latter of
immaterial (mujarrad) existents. Of the primary (i.e. essential)
accidents of immaterial being is to be knowledge, knower, and known. For
knowledge, as will be explained later on, consists of the presence
(hudhûr) of an immaterial existent for another immaterial existent.
Accordingly, it is proper to discuss it in metaphysics.***

12 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في تعريف العلم و انقسامه الأولى
-------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حصول العلم لنا ضروري و كذلك مفهومه عندنا و إنما نريد في هذا الفصل معرفة
ما هو أظهر خواصه لنميز بها مصاديقه و خصوصياتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فنقول: قد تقدم في بحث الوجود الذهني أن لنا علما بالأمور الخارجة عنا في
الجملة بمعنى أنها تحصل لنا و تحضر عندنا بماهياتها لا بوجوداتها الخارجية
التي تترتب عليها الآثار فهذا قسم من العلم و يسمى علما حصوليا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من العلم: علم الواحد منا بذاته التي يشير إليها بأنا فإنه لا يغفل عن
نفسه في حال من الأحوال سواء في ذلك الخلاء و الملاء و النوم و اليقظة و
أية حال أخرى.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ليس ذلك بحضور ماهية ذاتنا عندنا حضورا مفهوميا و علما حصوليا لأن
المفهوم الحاضر في الذهن كيفما فرض لا يأبى الصدق على كثيرين و إنما يتشخص
بالوجود الخارجي و هذا الذي نشاهده من أنفسنا و نعبر عنه بأنا أمر شخصي
لذاته لا يقبل الشركة و التشخص شأن الوجود فعلمنا بذواتنا إنما هو بحضورها
لنا بوجودها الخارجي الذي هو ملاك الشخصية و ترتب الآثار و هذا قسم آخر من
العلم و يسمى العلم الحضوري.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذان قسمان ينقسم إليهما العلم قسمة حاصرة فإن حصول المعلوم للعالم: إما
بماهيته أو بوجوده و الأول هو العلم الحصولي و الثاني هو العلم الحضوري.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن كون العلم حاصلا لنا معناه حصول المعلوم لنا لأن العلم عين المعلوم
بالذات إذ لا نعني بالعلم إلا حصول المعلوم لنا و حصول الشي‏ء و حضوره ليس
إلا وجوده و وجوده نفسه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لا معنى لحصول المعلوم للعالم إلا اتحاد العالم معه سواء كان معلوما
حضوريا أو حصوليا فإن المعلوم الحضوري إن كان جوهرا قائما بنفسه كان وجوده
لنفسه و هو مع ذلك للعالم فقد اتحد العالم مع نفسه و إن كان أمرا وجوده
لموضوعه و المفروض أن وجوده للعالم فقد اتحد العالم مع موضوعه و العرض أيضا
من مراتب وجود موضوعه غير خارج منه فكذلك مع ما اتحد مع موضوعه و كذا
المعلوم الحصولي موجود للعالم سواء كان جوهرا موجودا لنفسه أو أمرا موجودا
لغيره و لازم كونه موجودا للعالم اتحاد العالم معه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على: أنه سيجي‏ء أن العلم الحصولي علم حضوري في الحقيقة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فحصول العلم للعالم من خواص العلم لكن لا كل حصول كيف كان بل حصول أمر
بالفعل فعلية محضة لا قوة فيه لشي‏ء مطلقا فإنا نشاهد بالوجدان أن المعلوم
من حيث هو معلوم لا يقوى على شي‏ء آخر و لا يقبل التغير عما هو عليه فهو
حصول أمر مجرد عن المادة خال من غواشي القوة و نسمي ذلك حضورا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فحضور المعلوم يستدعي كونه أمرا تاما في فعليته من غير تعلق بالمادة و
القوة يوجب نقصه و عدم تمامه من حيث كمالاته التي بالقوة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و مقتضى حضور المعلوم أن يكون العالم الذي يحصل له العلم أمرا فعليا تام
الفعلية غير ناقص من جهة التعلق بالقوة و هو كون العالم مجردا عن المادة
خاليا عن القوة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقد بان: أن العلم حضور موجود مجرد لموجود مجرد سواء كان الحاصل عين ما حصل
له كما في علم الشي‏ء بنفسه أو غيره بوجه كما في علم الشي‏ء بالماهيات
الخارجة عنه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تبين أيضا أولا: أن المعلوم الذي هو متعلق العلم يجب أن يكون أمرا مجردا
عن المادة و سيجي‏ء معنى تعلق العلم بالأمور المادية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: أن العالم الذي يقوم به العلم يجب أن يكون مجردا عن المادة أيضا.
</p>

11.l. DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE AND ITS FIRST DIVISIONS
-----------------------------------------------------

That we acquire a ‘knowledge’ of things is self-evident, and so is the
concept of it. In this section our purpose is to identify its salient
properties in order to differentiate between its various forms and their
characteristics.

It was stated in the discussion on mental existence that we possess a
certain knowledge of external things, in the sense that we cognize them
and they are present for us with their quiddities , though not with
their external existence and its accompanying external properties. This
is one of the kinds of knowledge, called ‘mediated knowledge’ (‘ilm
hushûlî, lit. acquired knowledge).

Another kind of knowledge is the knowledge that each of us has of his
own self, to which he refers as his ‘I’ One cannot fail to be conscious
of his own self in any circumstance, in solitude or in company, in sleep
or in wakefulness, or in any other state.

This consciousness is not by virtue of the presence of the quiddity of
the self for us; it is not present as a concept, or known through
mediated knowledge. That is because a mental concept, of whatever kind,
is always capable of corresponding to a multiplicity of objects, and
[when considered as referring to a particular object] its individuality
is only due to the external existent [to which it corresponds]. Now what
we cognize in relation to ourselves - i.e., what we refer to as ‘I’ - is
something essentially individuated, incapable of corresponding to
multiple things. Individuality is a property of existence; hence our
knowledge of our selves is by virtue of their presence for us with their
very external existence, which is the ground of individuation and
external properties. This is another kind of knowledge, called
‘immediate’ knowledge (‘Ilm hudhûrî, lit., ‘knowledge by presence’).

These two divisions of knowledge are exhaustive, for the cognition of
the known by the knower is either through the former’s quiddity or by
its existence. The first is ‘mediated’ and the second is ‘immediate’
knowledge.

Furthermore, attainment of knowledge means apprehension (hushûl) of the
known by the knower; for knowledge is identical with that which is known
by itself, because we do not mean anything by knowledge except the
apprehension of the known by us. The apprehension of a thing and its
presence is nothing except its existence, and its existence is itself.

The apprehension of the known by the knower does not mean anything
except its union (ittihâd) with the knower, whether the known is
immediate or mediated. Thus if the immediately known is a substance
subsisting by itself, its existence is for-itself (wujûd li nafsihi)
while at the same time it is for-the-knower, and hence the knower is
united with it. If the immediately known is something
existent-for-its-subject, as the known’s existence is
existence-for-the-knower, the knower is united with its subject.
Moreover, an accident is one of the planes of the existence of its
subject, no-something extraneous to it. Hence it is likewise in relation
to something united with its subject. Similarly, the mediated known is
existent-for-the-knower, irrespective of whether it is a substance
existing-for-itself or something existent-for-other-than-itself. An
implication of its existence for the knower is the knower’s union with
it.

This is because, as will be explained later on,’ mediated knowledge in
fact involves immediate knowledge.

Accordingly, apprehension (hushûl) by the knower is a property of
knowledge, though not every kind of apprehension, but an apprehension of
something that is in pure actuality and absolutely devoid of all
potentiality. That is because we know intuitively that the known qua
known has no potentiality to become another thing; it is not susceptible
to change, nor can it become something diet than what it is.
Accordingly, it involves the apprehension of something that is
immaterial and free from all traces of potentiality. This we call
‘immediacy’ (hudhûr, lit. ‘presence’).

The immediacy of the known requires it to be something possessing
complete actuality, free from any association with matter and
potentiality that may make it deficient and incomplete in relation to
its potential perfections.

Further, the immediacy of the known requires that the knower rearing its
knowledge should also possess complete actuality, not being deficient in
any respect arising from association with matter. Hence, the knower is
also immaterial and free from potentiality.

From the above discussion it becomes clear that knowledge is the
‘presence’ of an immaterial existent for an immaterial existent, nether
what is apprehended is the same as that which apprehends - as in the
case of a thing’s knowledge of itself- - or is something else, as in the
case of thing’s knowledge of quiddities external to it.

It also becomes clear, in the first place, that the known, to which
knowledge pertains, must necessarily be something immaterial. The
meaning of knowledge of material things shall be explained below.

Second, the knower, through whom knowledge subsists, must also
necessarily be immaterial.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني ينقسم العلم الحصولي إلى كلي و جزئي
-----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الكلي ما لا يمتنع فرض صدقه على كثيرين كالعلم بماهية الإنسان و يسمى
عقلا و تعقلا و الجزئي ما يمتنع فرض صدقه على كثيرين كالعلم بهذا الإنسان
بنوع من الاتصال بمادته الحاضرة و يسمى علما إحساسيا و كالعلم بالإنسان
الفرد من غير حضور مادته و يسمى علما خياليا و عد هذين القسمين ممتنع الصدق
على كثيرين إنما هو من جهة اتصال أدوات الإحساس بالمعلوم الخارجي في العلم
الإحساسي و توقف العلم الخيالي على العلم الإحساسي و إلا فالصورة الذهنية
كيفما فرضت لا تأبى أن تصدق على كثيرين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و القسمان جميعا مجردان عن المادة لما تقدم: من فعلية الصورة العلمية في
ذاتها و عدم قبولها للتغير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا: الصورة العلمية كيفما فرضت لا تمتنع عن الصدق على كثيرين و كل أمر
مادي متشخص ممتنع الصدق على أزيد من شخص واحد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا: لو كانت الصورة الحسية أو الخيالية مادية منطبعة بنوع من الانطباع
في جزء بدني لكانت منقسمة بانقسام محلها و لكان في مكان و زمان و ليس كذلك
فالعلم لا يقبل القسمة و لا يشار إليه إشارة وضعية مكانية و لا أنه مقيد
بزمان لصحة تصورنا الصورة المحسوسة في وقت بعد أمد بعيد على ما كانت عليه
من غير تغير فيها و لو كانت مقيدة بالزمان لتغيرت بتقضيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ما يتوهم: من مقارنة حصول العلم للزمان إنما هو مقارنة شرائط حصول
الاستعداد له لا نفس العلم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما توسط أدوات الحس في حصول الصورة المحسوسة و توقف الصورة الخيالية على
ذلك فإنما هو لحصول الاستعداد الخاص للنفس لتقوى به على تمثيل الصورة
العلمية و تفصيل القول في علم النفس و مما تقدم يظهر أن قولهم : إن التعقل
إنما هو بتقشير المعلوم عن المادة و الأعراض المشخصة له حتى لا يبقى إلا
الماهية المعراة عن القشور كالإنسان المجرد عن المادة الجسمية و المشخصات
الزمانية و المكانية و الوضعية و غيرها بخلاف الإحساس المشروط بحضور المادة
و اكتناف الأعراض و الهيئات الشخصية و الخيال المشروط ببقاء الأعراض و
الهيئات المشخصة من دون حضور المادة قول على سبيل التمثيل للتقريب و إلا
فالمحسوس صورة مجردة علمية و اشتراط حضور المادة و الاكتناف بالأعراض
المشخصة لحصول الاستعداد في النفس للإحساس و كذا اشتراط الاكتناف بالمشخصات
للتخيل و
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كذا اشتراط التقشير في التعقل للدلالة على اشتراط تخيل أزيد من فرد واحد في
حصول استعداد النفس لتعقل الماهية الكلية المعبر عنه بانتزاع الكلي من
الأفراد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تبين مما تقدم أيضا: أن الوجود ينقسم من حيث التجرد عن المادة و عدمه إلى
ثلاثة عوالم كلية أحدها عالم المادة و القوة و الثاني عالم التجرد عن
المادة دون آثارها من الشكل و المقدار و الوضع و غيرها ففيه الصور
الجسمانية و أعراضها و هيئاتها الكمالية من غير مادة تحمل القوة و الانفعال
و يسمى عالم المثال و البرزخ بين عالم العقل و عالم المادة و الثالث عالم
التجرد عن المادة و آثارها و يسمى عالم العقل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد قسموا عالم المثال إلى :المثال الأعظم القائم بذاته و المثال الأصغر
القائم بالنفس الذي تتصرف فيه النفس كيف تشاء بحسب الدواعي المختلفة الحقة
و الجزافية فتأتي أحيانا بصور حقة صالحة و أحيانا بصور جزافية تعبث بها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و العوالم الثلاثة المذكورة مترتبة طولا: فأعلاها مرتبة و أقواها و أقدمها
وجودا و أقربها من المبدإ الأول تعالى عالم العقول المجردة لتمام فعليتها و
تنزه ذواتها عن شوب المادة و القوة و يليه عالم المثال المتنزه عن المادة
دون آثارها و يليه عالم المادة موطن كل نقص و شر و لا يتعلق بما فيه علم
إلا من جهة ما يحاذيه من المثال و العقل.
</p>

11.2. THE DIVISION OF MEDIATED KNOWLEDGE INTO UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR
----------------------------------------------------------------------

A universal (kullî) is that which is capable of corresponding to a
multiplicity of instances, such as the knowledge of the quiddity of man.
This kind of knowledge is called ‘aql or ta’aqqul (intellection). A
particular (juz’î) is that which is incapable of corresponding to a
multiplicity of things, such as the knowledge of a particular person
with some kind of association with a present matter, which called
‘sensory’ knowledge (al-’ilm al-ihsâsî), or the knowledge a human
individual without there being any present matter. The latter kind is
called ‘imaginary’ knowledge (al-’ilm al-khâyalî). These two kinds are
considered incapable of corresponding to a multiplicity of referents
only from the aspect of connection between the sense organs and the
external object of knowledge, in the ca, of sensory knowledge, and for
the reason of dependence ‘imaginary’ knowledge on sensory knowledge.
Otherwise. the mental impression itself (al-shûrat al-dzihniyyah), of
whatever kind not incapable of corresponding to a multiplicity of
objects.

On the basis of that which has been said above, both kinds are
immaterial due to the essential actuality of the cognitive form
(al-shûrat al-’ilmiyyah) and its being unsusceptible to change.

Also, the cognitive form, of whatever kind, is not incapable of
corresponding to a multiplicity of objects; anything that is mater and
individuated is incapable of corresponding to more than one individual.

Furthermore, had the sensory or the imaginal form been something
material, impressed in some manner in a part of the body, would have
been divisible due to the divisibility of its location and would have
been in space and time. However, such is not the case. Hence knowledge
is neither susceptible to division nor capable of attribution to a
physical location. Also, it is not subject to time, for a sensory form
cognized at a certain time remains valid and unchanged even after the
passage of a long period of time and had it been time-bound it would
change with the passage time.

There has been a misconception arising from the contiguity the
acquisition of knowledge to time. This contiguity (muqâranah) merely
relates to the conditions for the attainment of the potential (isti’dâd)
for receiving knowledge, not to knowledge itself.

As for the mediating role of the sense organs in the apprehension of the
sensible form and the dependence of the imaginary form on it, that
merely pertains to the attainment of a specific capacity in the soul
enabling it to evoke the cognitive form. T related details are to be
found in works on traditional psychology (‘ilm al-nafs).

There is a theory according to which the formation of concepts occurs
through a process in which the known object is divested of matter and
its characteristic material accidents, until there remains nothing
except a quiddity stripped of its material shell (e.g. the concept of
man stripped of all physical matter and its accompanying characteristics
relating to time, space, position, and so on). This process is different
from sense perception, wherein matter and its accompanying accidents and
individuating features are present. It is also different from
imagination, wherein the accidents associated with matter and its
individuating features survive without the

presence of matter itself. However, from the above discussion it becomes
clear that such a theory can be justified only as a metaphorical aid to
understanding. Otherwise, the perceived form is also immaterial; the
requirement of the presence of matter and its accompanying individuating
accidents is in order to prepare the soul for perception. The same
applies to the requirement of accompanying particular features in
imagination, as well as the requirement of ‘divesting’ in conception,
wherein the imagination of more than an individual prepares the soul for
conceiving the universal quiddity - a process referred to as ‘the
abstraction of the universal from individuals.’

From what has been said it also becomes clear that existence is
divisible into three realms in respect of freedom from matter and its
absence. One of them is the world of matter and potentiality. The second
realm is the one in which matter is absent, though not some of its
properties such as shape, quantity, position, etc. It contains physical
forms and their accidents and features of perfection without the
presence of any matter possessing potentiality and passivity. It is
called the ‘imaginal’ or the ‘intermediate’ world (‘âlam al-mitsâl, or
al-barzakh), which lies between the world of the Intellect (‘âlam
al-’aql) and the world of matter (‘âlam al-mâddah). The third is the
immaterial world (‘âlam al-tajarrud), which is absolutely free from
matter and its properties. It is called the world of the Intellect
(‘âlam al-’aql).

The metaphysicians have further divided the imaginal world into the
‘macrocosmic’ (or objective) imaginal world (al-mitsâl al-a’zham), which
is a self-subsisting realm by itself, and the ‘microcosmic’ (or
subjective) imaginal world (al-mitsâl al-asghar), which subsists through
the soul and governs it in any manner it wishes according to its
motives, rightful or extravagant, producing s times real and healthy
forms and at other times fantastic form, which the soul creates for the
sake of diversion.

These three worlds constitute a hierarchy. Amongst them the highest of
them in rank and, existentially, the strongest and the prior-most, as
well as nearest to the First Source, is the world of the immaterial
Intellects (‘âlam al-’uqûl al-mujarradah), due to the completeness of
their actuality and freedom of their essences from all traces of matter
and potentiality. Below it lies the (macrocosmic or objective) imaginal
world, which is free from matter though not some of its properties.
Further below is the world o matter, the abode of all deficiency and
evil. Knowledge does not pertain to that which is in it except through
what corresponds it in the imaginal world and the world of the
Intellect.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث ينقسم العلم انقساما آخر إلى كلي و جزئي
---------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و المراد بالكلي ما لا يتغير بتغير المعلوم بالعرض كصورة البناء التي
يتصورها البناء في نفسه ليبنى عليها فالصورة عنده على حالها قبل البناء و
مع البناء و بعد البناء و إن خرب و انهدم و يسمى علم ما قبل الكثرة و
العلوم الحاصلة من طريق العلل كلية من هذا القبيل دائما كعلم المنجم بأن
القمر منخسف يوم كذا ساعة كذا إلى مدة كذا يعود فيه الوضع السماوي بحيث
يوجب حيلولة الأرض بينه و بين الشمس فعلمه ثابت على حاله قبل الخسوف و معه
و بعده.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و المراد بالجزئي :ما يتغير بتغير المعلوم بالعرض كما إذا علمنا من طريق
الإبصار بحركة زيد ثم إذا وقف عن الحركة تغيرت الصورة العلمية من الحركة
إلى السكون و يسمى علم ما بعد الكثرة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت: التغير لا يكون إلا بقوة سابقة و حاملها المادة و لازمه كون
العلوم الجزئية مادية لا مجردة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلنا : العلم بالتغير غير تغير العلم و المتغير ثابت في تغيره لا متغير و
تعلق العلم به أعني حضوره عند العالم من حيث ثباته لا تغيره و إلا لم يكن
حاضرا فلم يكن العلم حضور شي‏ء لشي‏ء هذا خلف.
</p>

11.3. ANOTHER DIVISION OF KNOWLEDGE INTO UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR
-----------------------------------------------------------------

That which is meant by ‘universal’ knowledge here is the knowledge that
does not change with the accidental object of knowledge (al-ma’lûm bi
al-’arad). An instance of it is the form of a structure conceived by an
architect in order to build an actual one similar to it. The conceived
form remains as it was before, during, and after the structure’s
construction, even though the actual structure should collapse or be
razed to the ground. This kind of knowledge is called ‘knowledge prior
to multiplicity’ (‘ilrn mâ qabl al katsrah) The knowledge acquired
through the means of universal causes is of this kind, such as an
astronomer’s knowledge that lunar eclipse would occur on a certain day
at a certain time for certain period during which there would occur an
astronomical configuration in which the earth will intervene between the
sui and the moon. In this case, his knowledge remains unchanged before,
during, and after the eclipse.

By ‘particular’ knowledge here is meant the knowledge that changes with
the change in the accidental object of knowledge. An example of it is
our knowledge obtained through eyesight of Zayd’s movements: when Zayd
stops moving, the perceived impression changes from motion to rest. This
kind of knowledge is called ‘knowledge posterior to multiplicity’ (‘ilm
mâ ba’da al-katsrah).

Here someone may say that change does not occur without prior
potentiality, which is borne by matter, and that requires that the
object of particular knowledge be material, not immaterial. The answer
is that knowledge of change is not change of knowledge. The changing
object undergoes a fixed course of change, which does not change itself.
The knowledge of it - that is, its presence before the knower - is from
the aspect of its fixity not its change, for otherwise it would not be
present and knowledge would not be the presence of an entity for another
entity. This involves a contradiction.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في أنواع التعقل
----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ذكروا أن التعقل على ثلاثة أنواع:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدها : أن يكون العقل بالقوة أي لا يكون شيئا من المعقولات بالفعل و لا له
شي‏ء من المعقولات بالفعل لخلو النفس عن عامة المعقولات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني: أن يعقل معقولا أو معقولات كثيرة بالفعل مميزا لبعضها من بعض مرتبا
لها و هو العقل التفصيلي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالث: أن يعقل معقولات كثيرة عقلا بالفعل من غير أن يتميز بعضها من بعض و
إنما هو عقل بسيط إجمالي فيه كل التفاصيل و مثلوا له بما إذا سألك سائل عن
عدة من المسائل التي لك علم بها فحضرك الجواب في الوقت فأنت في أول لحظة
تأخذ في الجواب تعلم بها جميعا علما يقينيا بالفعل لكن لا تميز لبعضها من
بعض و لا تفصيل و إنما يحصل التميز و التفصيل بالجواب كان ما عندك منبع
تنبع و تجري منه التفاصيل و يسمى عقلا إجماليا.
</p>

11.4. KINDS OF INTELLECTION
---------------------------

The metaphysicians mention three kinds of intellection (*ta’aqqul* ).

One of them is potential intellection (*al-’aql bi al-quwwah* ), wherein
the ‘intellect’ neither actually cognizes the intelligibles, nor does it
apprehend any ‘intelligibles in act’ due to the soul’s being devoid of
all intelligibles.

The second is wherein the intellect intellects one or many intelligibles
in act differentiating them from one another and conceiving them in an
orderly manner. This is called ‘detailed intellection’ (*al-’aql
al-tafshîlî* ).

In the third kind of intellection, the mind intellects many
intelligibles in act without differentiating them from one another. It
is a simple, undifferentiated form of intellection wherein all the
details are contained. An example that has been given of it is when one
is asked concerning several issues of which one has knowledge. The
answer immediately comes to one’s mind. At the very first moment one has
the answer wherein one actually knows all of them for certain without
sorting them out or their details from one another. The sorting out and
the details come only in the process of answering, as if one had a store
from which the details flow out. This kind of intellection is called
‘non-differentiated intellection’ (*al-’aql al-ijmâlî* ).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في مراتب العقل
---------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ذكروا أن مراتب العقل أربع:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إحداها: كونه بالقوة بالنسبة إلى جميع المعقولات و يسمى عقلا هيولانيا
لشباهته في خلوه عن المعقولات الهيولى في كونها بالقوة بالنسبة إلى جميع
الصور
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيتها: العقل بالملكة و هي المرتبة التي تعقل فيها الأمور البديهية من
التصورات و التصديقات فإن تعلق العلم بالبديهيات أقدم من تعلقه بالنظريات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثتها :العقل بالفعل و هو تعلقه النظريات بتوسيط البديهيات و إن كانت
مرتبة بعضها على بعض.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رابعتها :عقله لجيمع ما استفاده من المعقولات البديهية و النظرية
المطابقة لحقائق العالم العلوى و السفلى باستحضاره الجميع و التفاته إليها
بالفعل فيكون عالما علميا مضاهيا للعالم العيني و يسمى العقل المستفاد.
</p>

11.5. PLANES OF THE INTELLECT
-----------------------------

The metaphysicians mention four planes of the intellect.

One of them is that which is in a state of potentiality in relation to
all intelligibles. It is called the material intellect (*al-’aql
al-hayûlânî* ) on account of its similarity to prime matter (*hayûlâ* )
in being devoid of intelligibles and with respect to its potentiality in
relation to all forms.

The second is the ‘intellect by proficiency’ (*al-’aql bi al-malakah*
which is the plane wherein it intellects self-evident concepts
(tasawwurât) and judgements (*tashdîqât* ); for the knowledge of
self-evident matters (*badîhiyyât* ) precedes the knowledge of
‘speculative’ matters (*nazhariyyât* ).

The third is the ‘intellect in act’ which intellects speculative matters
through the mediation of self-evident concepts and judgements, though
some of them are based on the others.

The fourth is the intellect that partakes of all self-evident and
speculative intelligibles corresponding to the realities of the higher
and lower realms of existence by virtue of having all of them present
before it and its actual consciousness of them. Thus it is a ‘knowing
world’ similar to the external world, and is called the ‘acquired
intellect’ (*al-’aql al-mustafâd* ).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في مفيض هذه الصور العلمية
--------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الصور العقلية الكلية فإن مفيضها المخرج للإنسان مثلا من القوة إلى
الفعل عقل مفارق للمادة عنده جميع الصور العقلية الكلية و ذلك أنك قد عرفت
أن هذه الصور بما أنها علم مجردة عن المادة على أنها كلية تقبل الاشتراك
بين كثيرين و كل أمر حال في المادة واحد شخصي لا يقبل الاشتراك فالصورة
العقلية مجردة عن المادة ففاعلها المفيض لها أمر مجرد عن المادة لأن الأمر
المادي ضعيف الوجود فلا يصدر عنه ما هو أقوى منه وجودا على أن فعل المادة
مشروط بالوضع الخاص و لا وضع للمجرد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ليس هذا المفيض المجرد هو النفس العاقلة لهذه الصور المجردة العلمية
لأنها بعد بالقوة بالنسبة إليها و حيثيتها حيثية القبول دون الفعل و من
المحال أن يخرج ما بالقوة نفسه من القوة إلى الفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فمفيض الصورة العقلية جوهر عقلي مفارق للمادة فيه جميع الصور العقلية
الكلية على نحو ما تقدم من العلم الإجمالي العقلي تتحد معه النفس المستعدة
للتعقل على قدر استعدادها الخاص فيفيض عليها ما تستعد له من الصور العقلية
و هو المطلوب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بنظير البيان السابق يتبين أن مفيض الصور العليمة الجزئية جوهر مثالي
مفارق فيه جميع الصور المثالية الجزئية على نحو العلم الإجمالي تتحد معه
النفس على قدر ما لها من الاستعداد.
</p>

11.6. THE EMANATING SOURCE OF THE INTELLIGIBLE FORMS
----------------------------------------------------

As to the universal intelligible forms, which bring man, for instance,
from potentiality to actuality, its source of emanation (mufîdh) is an
immaterial Intellect which possesses all the universal intelligible
forms. That is because, as we have seen, these forms constitute
knowledge and are immaterial. Moreover, by virtue of their universality
they are capable of corresponding to a multiplicity of objects, whereas
everything impressed in matter is an individual incapable of such
correspondence. Therefore, the intelligible forms are immaterial,
created by an agent that is an immaterial source, for a material entity
is existentially weak and incapable of producing something existentially
stronger. In addition, the action of matter is conditioned by a
particular [physical] configuration (wadh’) and an immaterial entity
does not have a [physical] position or location.

This immaterial source is not the soul itself, which intellects these
immaterial cognitive forms, for it is still in potentiality in relation
to these forms and its mode is passive, not active; it is impossible
that something in potentiality should by itself make the transition from
potentiality to actuality.

Therefore, the source of the intelligible form is an immaterial
intelligent substance that possesses all the universal intelligible ::ms
in the manner of non-differentiated knowledge. The soul assessing
potential unites with it in order to intellect in accordance with its
particular potential, whereupon the source of emanation creates in it
the intelligible form for whose reception it possesses the potential.

A similar explanation in relation to particular intelligible forms would
make clear that their source is an imaginal immaterial substance which
possesses all the particular imaginal forms in the manner of
non-differentiated knowledge, and that the soul unites pith them in
accordance with its potential.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع ينقسم العلم الحصولي إلى تصور و تصديق
-------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لأنه إما صورة حاصلة من معلوم واحد أو كثير من غير إيجاب أو سلب و يسمى
تصورا كتصور الإنسان و الجسم و الجوهر و إما صورة حاصلة من معلوم معها
إيجاب شي‏ء لشي‏ء أو سلب شي‏ء عن شي‏ء كقولنا الإنسان ضاحك و قولنا ليس
الإنسان بحجر و يسمى تصديقا و باعتبار حكمه قضية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن القضية بما تشتمل على إثبات شي‏ء لشي‏ء أو نفي شي‏ء عن شي‏ء مركبة من
أجزاء فوق الواحد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و المشهور أن القضية الموجبة مؤلفة من الموضوع و المحمول و النسبة الحكمية
و هي نسبة المحمول إلى الموضوع و الحكم باتحاد الموضوع مع المحمول هذا في
الهليات المركبة التي محمولاتها غير وجود الموضوع و أما الهليات البسيطة
التي محمولها وجود الموضوع كقولنا الإنسان موجود فأجزاؤها ثلاثة الموضوع و
المحمول و الحكم إذ لا معنى لتخلل النسبة و هي الوجود الرابط بين الشي‏ء و
نفسه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و: أن القضية السالبة مؤلفة من الموضوع و المحمول و النسبة الحكمية
الإيجابية و لا حكم فيها لا أن فيها حكما عدميا لأن الحكم جعل شي‏ء شيئا و
سلب الحكم عدم جعله لا جعل عدمه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق: أن الحاجة إلى تصور النسبة الحكمية إنما هي من جهة الحكم بما هو
فعل النفس لا بما هو جزء القضية أي إن القضية إنما هي الموضوع و المحمول و
الحكم و لا حاجة في تحقق القضية بما هي قضية إلى تصور النسبة الحكمية و
إنما الحاجة إلى تصورها لتحقق الحكم من النفس و جعلها الموضوع هو المحمول و
يدل على ذلك تحقق القضية في الهليات البسيطة بدون النسبة الحكمية التي تربط
المحمول بالموضوع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقد تبين بهذا البيان :أولا أن القضية الموجبة ذات أجزاء ثلاثة الموضوع و
المحمول و الحكم و السالبة ذات جزءين الموضوع و المحمول و أن النسبة
الحكمية تحتاج إليها النفس في فعلها الحكم لا القضية بما هي قضية في
انعقادها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا :أن الحكم فعل من النفس في ظرف الإدراك الذهني و ليس من الانفعال
التصوري في شي‏ء و حقيقة الحكم في قولنا زيد قائم مثلا أن النفس تنال من
طريق الحس موجودا واحدا هو زيد القائم ثم تجزئه إلى مفهومي زيد و القائم و
تخزنهما عندها ثم إذا أرادت حكاية ما وجدته في الخارج أخذت صورتي زيد و
القائم من خزانتها و هما اثنتان ثم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
جعلتهما واحدا ذا وجود واحد و هذا هو الحكم الذي ذكرنا أنه فعل للنفس تحكى
به الخارج على ما كان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالحكم :فعل للنفس و هو مع ذلك من الصور الذهنية الحاكية لما وراءها و لو
كان الحكم تصورا مأخوذا من الخارج كانت القضية غير مفيدة لصحة السكوت كما
في كل من المقدم و التالي في القضية الشرطية و لو كان تصورا أنشأته النفس
من عندها من غير استعانة من الخارج لم يحك الخارج
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا :أن التصديق يتوقف على تصور الموضوع و المحمول فلا تصديق إلا عن
تصور.
</p>

11.7. THE DIVISION OF MEDIATED KNOWLEDGE INTO CONCEPTION AND JUDGEMENT
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The mere knowledge of the form (shûrah) of the known object, whether one
or multiple, regardless of affirmation or negation, is ailed conception
(tashawwur), such as the concepts of ‘man,’ ‘body’ and ‘substance.’ If
the form of the known is accompanied by an affirmation or negation of
something concerning something, such s in the sentence, ‘Man is risible’
or ‘Man is not stone,’ it is an assertion’ (tashdîq; lit. affirmation),
and in consideration of the judgement that it contains is called
‘qadhiyyah’ (proposition). Further, a proposition comprises more than
one part as it contains the affirmation or negation of something
concerning something.

According to the prevalent view among metaphysicians, an affirmative
proposition comprises a subject (mawdhû’), a predicate (mahmûl) and the
‘relation of judgement’ (al-nisbah al-hukmiyyah), which is the
predicate’s relation to the subject and the judgement (hukm) of the
subject’s oneness with the predicate. This is the case in ‘composite
statements’ (al-halliyyat al-murakkabah) wherein the predicate is not
the existence of the subject. But in ‘simple statements’ (al-halliyyat
al-basîthah), in which the predicate is the existence of the subject -
such as in the statement ‘Man is existent’ -  there are three parts: the
subject, the predicate and the judgemenr there is no sense in a
relation - which is a copulative existent -  intervening between a thing
and itself.

Furthermore, a negative proposition is made up of a subject, a predicate
and an affirmative relation of judgement (al-nisbah ai-hukmiyyah
al-îjâbiyyah). There is no judgement in it, and no negative judgement,
for a judgement consists of affirming something of something; the
withholding of judgement is the absence of it, not the positing of its
absence.

The truth is that the need for conceiving the relation of judgement is
only from the aspect of the judgement being an act of the soul, not
because it is part of the proposition. For a proposition consists only
of the subject, the predicate, and the judgement, and the formation of a
proposition as such does not require the conception of the relation of
judgement. The need for conceiving it arises for the formation of
judgement by the soul in identifying the subject with the predicate.
This is also confirmed by the formation of the proposition in simple
statements without the relation of judgement that relates the predicate
to the subject.

It becomes clear from this discussion that, first, an affirmative
proposition (al-qadhiyyah al-mûjibah) consists of three parts: subject,
predicate, and judgement. A negative proposition consists of two parts:
subject and predicate, and the relation of judgement is needed by the
soul in making the judgement, not for the formation of the proposition
as such.

Second, judgement is an act of the soul in the context of mental
cognition, not a passive act of conception. When we say ‘Zayd is
standing,’ for instance, the soul cognizes through sensory means a
single entity which is ‘the standing Zayd.’ Then it analyzes it into two
concepts ‘Zayd’ and ‘standing’ and stores them. Thereafter, when it
wants to describe what it finds in external reality, it takes the forms
of ‘Zayd’ and ‘standing’ from its memory as two different notions and
combines them into a unity with a

single existence. This is judgement, which we have described as the act
of the soul, by means of which it represents external reality as it is.

Hence, judgement is an act of the soul and, at the same time, a mental
form that represent something beyond itself. Were judgement a conception
abstracted from outside, the proposition would not make a complete
statement to which nothing needs to be added, as in the case of each
part of a hypothetical proposition. Also, were judgement a concept
formulated by the soul without recourse to external reality, it would
not represent external reality.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن و ينقسم العلم الحصولي إلى بديهي و نظري
---------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و البديهي منه: ما لا يحتاج في تصوره أو التصديق به إلى اكتساب و نظر كتصور
مفهوم الشي‏ء و الوحدة و نحوهما و كالتصديق بأن الكل أعظم من جزئه و أن
الأربعة زوج و النظري ما يتوقف في تصوره أو التصديق به على اكتساب و نظر
كتصور ماهية الإنسان و الفرس و التصديق بأن الزوايا الثلاث من المثلث
مساوية لقائمتين و أن الإنسان ذو نفس مجردة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و العلوم النظرية تنتهي إلى العلوم البديهية و تتبين بها و إلا ذهب الأمر
إلى غير النهاية ثم لم يفد علما على ما بين في المنطق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و البديهيات كثيرة مبينة في المنطق و أولاها بالقبول الأوليات و هي القضايا
التي يكفي في التصديق بها تصور الموضوع و المحمول كقولنا الكل أعظم من جزئه
و قولنا الشي‏ء لا يسلب عن نفسه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أولى الأوليات بالقبول :قضية استحالة اجتماع النقيضين و ارتفاعهما و هي
قضية منفصلة حقيقية إما أن يصدق الإيجاب أو يصدق السلب و لا تستغنى عنها في
إفادة العلم قضية نظرية و لا بديهية حتى الأوليات فإن قولنا الكل أعظم من
جزئه إنما يفيد علما إذا كان نقيضه و هو قولنا ليس الكل بأعظم من جزئه
كاذبا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فهي أول قضية مصدق بها لا يرتاب فيها ذو شعور و تبتنى عليها العلوم فلو وقع
فيها شك سرى ذلك في جميع العلوم و التصديقات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تتمة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
السوفسطي المنكر لوجود العلم غير مسلم لقضية أولى الأوائل إذ في تسليمها
اعتراف بأن كل قضيتين متناقضتين فإن إحداهما حقة صادقة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم السوفسطي المدعي لانتفاء العلم و الشاك في كل شي‏ء إن اعترف بأنه يعلم
أنه شاك فقد اعترف بعلم ما و سلم قضية أولى الأوائل فأمكن أن يلزم بعلوم
كثيرة تماثل علمه بأنه شاك كعلمه بأنه يرى و يسمع و يلمس و يذوق و يشم و
أنه ربما جاع فقصد ما يشبعه أو ظمأ فقصد ما يرويه و إذا ألزم بها ألزم بما
دونها من العلوم لأن العلم ينتهي إلى الحس كما تقدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إن لم يعترف بأنه يعلم أنه شاك بل أظهر أنه شاك في كل شي‏ء و شاك في شكه
لا يدري شيئا سقطت معه المحاجة و لم ينجع فيه برهان و هذا الإنسان إما
مبتلى بمرض أورثه اختلالا في الإدراك فليراجع الطبيب و إما معاند للحق يظهر
ما يظهر لدحضه فليضرب و
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ليؤلم و ليمنع مما يقصده و يريده و ليؤمر بما يبغضه و يكرهه إذ لا يرى
حقيقة لشي‏ء من ذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نعم ربما راجع بعضهم هذه العلوم العقلية و هو غير مسلح بالأصول المنطقية و
لا متدرب في صناعة البرهان فشاهد اختلاف الباحثين في المسائل بين الإثبات و
النفي و الحجج التي أقاموها على كل من طرفي النقيض و لم يقدر لقلة بضاعته
على تمييز الحق من الباطل فتسلم طرفي النقيض في مسألة بعد مسألة فأساء الظن
بالمنطق و زعم أن العلوم نسبية غير ثابتة و الحقيقة بالنسبة إلى كل باحث ما
دلت عليه حجته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ليعالج أمثال هؤلاء بإيضاح القوانين المنطقية و إراءة قضايا بديهية لا
تقبل الترديد في حال من الأحوال كضرورة ثبوت الشي‏ء لنفسه و استحالة سلبه
عن نفسه و غير ذلك و ليبالغ في تفهيم معاني أجزاء القضايا و ليؤمروا أن
يتعلموا العلوم الرياضية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هاهنا طائفتان أخريان من الشكاكين فطائفة يتسلمون الإنسان و إدراكاته و
يظهرون الشك في ما وراء ذلك فيقولون نحن و إدراكاتنا و نشك فيما وراء ذلك و
طائفة أخرى تفطنوا بما في قولهم نحن و إدراكاتنا من الاعتراف بحقائق كثيرة
من أناسي و إدراكات لهم و تلك حقائق خارجية فبدلوا الكلام بقولهم أنا و
إدراكاتي و ما وراء ذلك مشكوك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يدفعه: أن الإنسان ربما يخطي في إدراكاته كما في موارد أخطاء الباصرة و
اللامسة و غيرها من أغلاط الفكر و لو لا أن هناك حقائق خارجة من الإنسان و
إدراكاته تنطبق عليها إدراكاته أو لا تنطبق لم يستقم ذلك بالضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ربما قيل :إن قول هؤلاء ليس من السفسطة في شي‏ء بل المراد أن من المحتمل
أن لا تنطبق الصور الظاهرة للحواس بعينها على الأمور الخارجية بما لها من
الحقيقة كما قيل إن الصوت بما له من الهوية الظاهرة على السمع ليس له وجود
في خارجه بل السمع إذا اتصل بالارتعاش بعدد كذا ظهر في السمع في صورة الصوت
و إذا بلغ عدد الارتعاش كذا ارتعاشا ظهر في البصر في صورة الضوء و اللون
فالحواس التي هي مبادي الإدراك لا تكشف عما وراءها من الحقائق و سائر
الإدراكات منتهية إلى الحواس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه :أن الإدراكات إذا فرضت غير كاشفة عما وراءها فمن أين علم أن هناك
حقائق وراء الإدراك لا يكشف عنها الإدراك ثم من أدرك أن حقيقة الصوت في
خارج السمع ارتعاش بعدد كذا و حقيقة المبصر في خارج البصر ارتعاش بعدد كذا
و هل يصل الإنسان إلى الصواب الذي يخطى فيه الحواس إلا من طريق الإدراك
الإنساني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بعد ذلك كله تجويز أن لا ينطبق مطلق الإدراك على ما وراءه لا يحتمل إلا
السفسطة حتى أن قولنا يجوز أن لا ينطبق شي‏ء من إدراكاتنا على الخارج لا
يؤمن أن لا يكشف بحسب مفاهيم مفرداته و التصديق الذي فيه عن شي‏ء.
</p>

11.8. DIVISION OF MEDIATED KNOWLEDGE INTO SELF-EVIDENT AND SPECULATIVE
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Something is said to be ‘self-evident’ (badîh) that does not stand in
need of reflection and speculative reasoning (nazhar) for the formation
of its conception or for the making of a judgement concerning it, e.g.
the concepts of ‘thing,’ ‘unity’ and so on, or such assertions as ‘The
whole is greater than any of its parts’ or Tour is an even number.’ A
‘speculative’ conception or judgement is one which depends on reflective
effort, e.g. the conception of the quiddity of man and horse, or such
assertions as, ‘The three angles of a triangle equal two right angles,’
or ‘Man has an immaterial soul.’

The speculative sciences derive from self-evident knowledge effort, and
their elaboration rests on the basis of what is self-evident. Otherwise
the matter would lead to an indefinite regress, and no knowledge would
be possible, as explained in logic.

Self-evident assertions, as explained in logic, are many, and the
foremost of them are the so-called the basic self-evident propositions
(awwaliyyât), which are propositions for whose confirmation the mere
conception of the subject and the predicate is sufficient, e.g. such
statements as ‘The whole is greater than any of its parts’ and ‘A thing
cannot be divested from itself.’

The foremost of the primarily self-evident propositions is the principle
of contradiction, which is a proper disjunctive proposition: ‘Either the
affirmation or negation of a proposition is true.’ No self-evident or
speculative proposition, even the primarily self-evident propositions,
can do without contradiction in order to bring knowledge. Thus the
statement, ‘The whole is greater than any of its parts’ brings knowledge
only if its contradictory. ‘It is not the case that the whole is greater
than any of its parts.’ is false.

Hence this principle is the most primary proposition to be affirmed, and
no sane person can doubt it. All sciences are based upon it and were any
doubt cast upon it, it would pervade to d sciences and judgements.

A Complementary Note

The sophist, who denies the possibility of knowledge, does not affirm
the validity of the principle of contradiction; for his acceptance of it
would amount to an admission that one out of every pair of contradictory
propositions is true.

However, should the sophist who denies the possibility of knowledge and
is skeptical of everything admit to be a skeptic, it means that he
admits the possibility of at least some kind of knowledge and thereby
affirms the principle of contradiction Then it becomes possible to make
him admit the possibility of knowledge of many things similar to his
knowledge of being a skeptic, such as his knowledge that he sees, hears,
has sensations of touch, taste and smell, that when he feels hungry he
looks for something that would satisfy his hunger, or quench his thirst
when he feels thirsty. When he accepts these, he can be led to admit
that he possesses the knowledge of other things as well, for all
knowledge, as said earlier,’ terminates in sense-experience (al-hiss).

However, should he refuse to admit that he knows that he is a skeptic
and declare that he is skeptical of everything, even of his own
skepticism, and

knows nothing, there can be no debate with him and no argument will work
upon him. This kind of person either suffers from a disease affecting
his mental faculty, in which case he should see a physician, or he is
one hostile to the truth, seeking to refute it. The latter should be
chastened, made to feel pain, kept from what he desires and seeks and
compelled to experience what he dislikes and detests, for he does not
consider any of these to have reality.

Yes, often some persons of this kind who turn to the rational sciences
without the necessary training in the principles of logic and the
techniques of reasoning, on observing the contradictory opinions of
thinkers on various problems and the arguments they advance in support
of each of their mutually exclusive positions, cannot make a distinction
between the true and the false due to me inadequacy of their
intellectual means. Such a person concedes to each of the contradictory
opinions on one issue after another, and thereafter becomes suspect of
all logic, claiming that the sciences are relative, not absolute, and
the truth for every thinker is what his arguments lead him to.

The remedy for this kind of skeptic is to fully clarify for him the
principles of logic and to demonstrate for him the self-evident
principles which are beyond doubt in all circumstances, such as the
principle of identity and so on. Utmost effort should be made to explain
to him the elements of a proposition, and he should be directed to study
the mathematical sciences.

There are two other groups of skeptics. One of them accepts man’s
perceptions but doubts what lies beyond them. “We can know only what we
perceive, and that which lies beyond our perceptions is uncertain,” they
declare. There is another group, which, having noticed that the
statement, “We can know only what we perceive” implies the admission of
many other truths -  namely, the existence of other persons and their
experiences, which are external facts - re-state their position and say,
“I can be certain only of my perceptions. Anything that lies beyond them
is uncertain.”

In refuting such a position it may be said that occasionally there do
occur errors of cognition - as in cases of errors of vision and Tactual
sense and errors of reasoning - but if there were no external realities
beyond one’s self and one’s perceptions, realities which either
correspond to these perceptions or do not, there would obviously be no
room for error.

It may be said that the opinion of this group is not a total negation of
knowledge. What they mean is that the forms presented to the senses may
not exactly conform to external facts as they are. For instance, it has
been pointed out that sound as it appears to hearing does not exist in
external reality. Rather, when it reaches a certain frequency it becomes
audible to hearing in the form at audible sound. Similarly, when the
frequency of electromagnetic waves reaches a certain number it appears
to vision in the form of visible light and colours. Hence the senses,
which are the source of perception, do not reveal the realities
transcending them, and all other contents of cognition terminate in the
senses.

However, if perception is assumed to be incapable of revealing the
reality transcending it, where does this knowledge come from that there
does exist such a reality beyond perception, a reality which perception
fails to reveal?

Who has cognized that external sound consists of vibrations of a certain
frequency and visible light has such and such a frequency in external
reality? Does man discover the real external facts except through the
faculties of perception, the same external facts in perceiving which the
senses make errors?

In view of what has been said above, the suggestion that perception may
not conform absolutely to what lies beyond it only amounts to a denial
of the possibility of knowledge. Then, even the statement, “Our
perceptions may not conform to anything in external reality” will not be
secure from failing to reveal anything in respect of the individual
concepts and the judgement involved in it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع و ينقسم العلم الحصولي إلى حقيقي و اعتباري
------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحقيقي: هو المفهوم الذي يوجد تارة بوجود خارجي فيترتب عليه آثاره و
تارة بوجود ذهني لا يترتب عليه آثاره و هذا هو الماهية و الاعتباري ما كان
بخلاف ذلك و هو إما من المفاهيم التي حيثية مصداقها حيثية أنه في الخارج
كالوجود و صفاته الحقيقية كالوحدة و الفعلية و غيرهما فلا يدخل الذهن و إلا
لانقلب و إما من المفاهيم التي حيثية مصداقها حيثية أنه في الذهن كمفهوم
الكلي و الجنس و النوع فلا يوجد في الخارج و إلا لانقلب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذه المفاهيم إنما يعملها الذهن بنوع من التعمل و يوقعها على مصاديقها
لكن لا كوقوع الماهية و حملها على أفرادها بحيث تؤخذ في حدها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و مما تقدم يظهر أولا :أن ما كان من المفاهيم محمولا على الواجب و الممكن
معا كالوجود و الحياة فهو اعتباري و إلا لكان الواجب ذا ماهية تعالى عن
ذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا: أن ما كان منها محمولا على أزيد من مقولة واحدة كالحركة فهو
اعتباري و إلا كان مجنسا بجنسين فأزيد و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا: أن المفاهيم الاعتبارية لا حد لها و لا تؤخذ في حد ماهية من
الماهيات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و للاعتباري معان أخر خارجة عن بحثنا منها الاعتباري مقابل الأصيل كالماهية
مقابل الوجود و منها الاعتباري بمعنى ما ليس له وجود منحاز مقابل ما له
وجود منحاز كالإضافة الموجودة بوجود طرفيها مقابل الجوهر الموجود بنفسه و
منها ما يوقع و يحمل على الموضوعات بنوع من التشبيه و المناسبة للحصول على
غاية عملية كإطلاق الرأس على زيد لكون نسبته إلى القوم كنسبة الرأس إلى
البدن حيث يدبر أمرهم و يصلح شأنهم و يشير إلى كل بما يخصه من واجب العمل.
</p>

11.9. DIVISION OF MEDIATED KNOWLEDGE INTO HAQÎQÎ AND I’TIBÂRÎ
-------------------------------------------------------------

The term ‘real’ (haqîqî) refers to concepts which [that is, whose
referents], when existing externally, exist with their external
properties, and which exists in the mind without those external
properties. Such concepts pertain to quiddity (*mâhiyyah* ). Opposed to
them are concepts that are denoted by the termed ‘derivative’
(*i’tibârî* ). It refers either to concepts the mode (*haytsiyyah* ) of
whose referent is externality only, such as ‘existence’ and its real
characteristics, such as ‘unity,’ ‘actuality’ and so on. That which is
denoted by such concepts does not enter the mind, for otherwise it would
involve a violation of the law of identity (*inqilâb* ). Or it refers to
concepts the mode of whose referent is mental, such as the oncepts of
‘universal,’ ‘genus’ and ‘species,’ which are not to be found
externally, for otherwise that will involve a violation of the of
identity.

The so-called i’tibârî concepts are formulated by the mind through a
kind of contemplative effort and applied to their referents, though not
in the way quiddity is applied to and predicated of its individuals and
taken within their confines.

From what has been said it first becomes clear that the concepts which
are predicated of the Necessary Being and contingent existents, such as
existence and life, are i’tibârî; for otherwise the Necessary Being
would have quiddity.

Second, the concepts which are predicated of more than one category,
such as motion, are i’tibârî; for otherwise they would belong to two or
more genera, and that is inadmissible.

Third, the i’tibârî concepts do not have any definitions (i.e. genus and
species), nor are they confined to any particular quiddity.

It is important to note that there are other meanings of the term
i’tibârî which are not relevant to our discussion, (i) One of these is
the sense of i’tibârî as opposed to ‘fundamentally real’ (*ashîl* ),
such s quiddity in opposition to existence, (ii) Another sense of it is
meant when i’tibârî is used for something which does not have an
independent existence of its own, as opposed to something which exists
independently, as in the case of a relation, which exists trough the
existence of its two sides as opposed to substance, which exists by
itself, (iii) Another meaning of i’tibârî is that which is applied to
and predicated of subjects in a figurative and metaphorical sense with a
practical end in view, such as the application f the word ‘head’ to Zayd
as someone whose relation to his people is like the relation of the head
to the body because he manages r.eir affairs, solves their problems and
assigns to everyone his particular duties and tasks.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في أحكام متفرقة
----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها: أن المعلوم بالعلم الحصولي ينقسم إلى معلوم بالذات و معلوم بالعرض و
المعلوم بالذات هو الصورة الحاصلة بنفسها عند العالم و المعلوم بالعرض هو
الأمر الخارجي الذي يحكيه الصورة العلمية و يسمى معلوما بالعرض و المجاز
لاتحاد ما له مع المعلوم بالذات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها :أنه تقدم أن كل معقول فهو مجرد كما أن كل عاقل فهو مجرد فليعلم أن
هذه المفاهيم الظاهرة للقوة العاقلة التي تكتسب بحصولها لها الفعلية حيث
كانت مجردة فهي أقوى وجودا من النفس العاقلة التي تستكمل بها و آثارها
مترتبة عليها فهي في الحقيقة موجودات مجردة تظهر بوجوداتها الخارجية للنفس
العالمة فتتحد النفس بها إن كانت صور جواهر و بموضوعاتها المتصفة بها إن
كانت أعراضا لكنا لاتصالنا من طريق أدوات الإدراك بالمواد نتوهم أنها نفس
الصور القائمة بالمواد نزعناها من المواد من دون آثارها المترتبة عليها في
نشأة المادة فصارت وجودات ذهنية للأشياء لا يترتب عليها آثارها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقد تبين بهذا البيان: أن العلوم الحصولية في الحقيقة علوم حضورية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بان أيضا: أن العقول المجردة عن المادة لا علم حصوليا عندها لانقطاعها عن
المادة ذاتا و فعلا.
</p>

11.10. SOME MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES
--------------------------------

That which is known through mediated knowledge is divisible ito that
which is known by itself (*ma’lûm bi al-dzât* ) and that which is known
by accident (*ma’lûm bi al-’arad* ). The known-by-itself is the form
apprehended by the knower. The known-by-accident is the external object
represented by the cognitive form, it is called the ‘accidentally known’
(ma’lûm bi al-arad) or the ‘figuratively known’ (*ma’lûm bi al-majâz* )
due to its association with the known-by-itself.

Another issue is that, as said earlier, every intelligible is immaterial
in the same way as every intelligence is immaterial. Hence the concepts
presented to the intellectual faculty, by apprehending which it acquires
actuality, being immaterial, are existentialliy stronger than the
intelligent soul, which develops through then means and is affected by
them. Hence they are, in fact, immaterial existents that manifest
themselves to the knowing soul through their external existence, and the
soul unites with them when they are the forms of substances and with
their substrata if they are accidents. However, due to our contact with
matter through the means of the sensory organs, we imagine that the
substratum of these forms is matter and that we abstract them from
matter and the material properties possessed by them in their material
state, whereupon they become mental existents representing external
things without bearing their external properties.

From this discussion it becomes clear that mediated knowledge, in fact,
involves immediate knowledge.

It also becomes clear that immaterial Intellects do not possess any
mediated knowledge due to their total separation from matter  - a
separation which is essential as well as actual.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر كل مجرد فهو عاقل
---------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لأن المجرد تام ذاتا لا تعلق له بالقوة فذاته التامة حاضرة لذاته موجودة
لها و لا نعني بالعلم إلا حضور شي‏ء لشي‏ء بالمعنى الذي تقدم هذا في علمه
بنفسه و أما علمه بغيره فإن له لتمام ذاته إمكان أن يعقل كل ذات تام يمكن
أن يعقل و ما للموجود المجرد بالإمكان فهو له بالفعل فهو عاقل بالفعل لكل
مجرد تام الوجود كما أن كل مجرد فهو معقول بالفعل و عقل بالفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت: مقتضى ما ذكر كون النفس الإنسانية عاقلة لكل معقول لتجردها و هو
خلاف الضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلت: هو كذلك لكن النفس مجردة ذاتا لا فعلا فهي لتجردها ذاتا تعقل ذاتها
بالفعل لكن تعلقها فعلا يوجب خروجها من القوة إلى الفعل تدريجا بحسب
الاستعدادات المختلفة فإذا تجردت تجردا تاما و لم يشغلها تدبير البدن حصلت
لها جميع العلوم حصولا بالعقل الإجمالي و تصير عقلا مستفادا بالفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و غير خفي: أن هذا البرهان إنما يجري في الذوات المجردة الجوهرية التي
وجودها لنفسها و أما أعراضها التي وجودها لغيرها فلا بل العاقل لها
موضوعاتها.
</p>

11.11. EVERY IMMATERIAL BEING IS INTELLIGENT
--------------------------------------------

That is because anything that is essentially and completely immaterial
(mujarrad tâm dzâtan) has no association with potentiality. Therefore,
its immaterial essence (dzât) is present and existent for itself. That
is so because by knowledge we do not mean anything except a thing’s
presence for a thing in the aforementioned sense. This pertains to its
knowledge of itself. As to its knowledge of entities other than itself,
it is possible for it, by virtue of its essential immateriality, to
intellect every immaterial being that can be intellected; and for an
immaterial existent that which is possible is actual. Hence it
intellects in actuality every immaterial existent, in the same way as
every immaterial being is intelligible in actuality as well as
intelligent in actuality.

If it is said that this implies that the human soul, being immaterial,
intellects every intelligible, which is obviously not admissible. The
answer is that the soul is immaterial essentially, not in actuality; by
virtue of its essential immateriality it intellects its own essence in
act, but its actual association [with matter] necessitates its gradual
transition from potentiality to act in accordance with different degrees
of preparedness. And when it attains to complete immateriality and is no
more preoccupied with the regulation of the body’s functions, it
apprehends all knowables in the manner of non-differentiated knowledge,
becoming an acquired intellect in act (‘aql mustafâd bi al-fi’l).

It is evident that this argument applies to immaterial essences which
are substances and are existent-for-themselves, not to accidents, whose
existence is for-other-than-themselves; that which intellects them is
their substratum.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني عشر في العلم الحضوري و أنه لا يختص بعلم الشي‏ء بنفسه
-----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تقدم: أن الجواهر المجردة لتمامها و فعليتها حاضرة في نفسها لنفسها فهي
عالمة بنفسها علما حضوريا فهل يختص العلم الحضوري بعلم الشي‏ء بنفسه أو
يعمه و علم العلة بمعلولها إذا كانا مجردين و بالعكس المشاءون على الأول و
الإشراقيون على الثاني و هو الحق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذلك: لأن وجود المعلول كما تقدم رابط لوجود العلة قائم به غير مستقل عنه
فهو إذا كانا مجردين حاضر بتمام وجوده عند علته لا حائل بينهما فهو بنفس
وجوده معلوم لها علما حضوريا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و كذلك: العلة حاضرة بوجودها لمعلولها القائم بها المستقل باستقلالها إذا
كانا مجردين من غير حائل يحول بينهما فهي معلومة لمعلولها علما حضوريا و هو
المطلوب.
</p>

11.12. IMMEDIATE KNOWLEDGE IS NOT LIMITED TO SELF-KNOWLEDGE
-----------------------------------------------------------

It was said earlier that immaterial substances are in themselves
present-for-themselves by virtue of their immateriality and actuality.
However, is immediate knowledge confined to an entity’s knowledge of
itself? Or does it include a cause’s knowledge of its effect and vice
versa, when both of them are immaterial? The Peripatetics subscribe to
the former position and the Emanationists subscribe to the latter view,
which is the correct one.

That is so because the existence of the effect is dependent, as
mentioned earlier, on the existence of the cause, which sustains it. It
is not independent of the cause. Hence when the cause and effect are
immaterial, the effect is present with all its being for the cause,
without there being any barrier between them. It is known with immediacy
to the cause through its existence itself.

Similarly, when the cause and effect are immaterial, the cause present
with its existence for its effect, which is sustained by being
independent through the independence of the cause, and there is no
barrier separating them. Hence it is known to its effect with an
immediate knowledge.
