المرحلة الثانية عشر فيما يتعلق بالواجب تعالى من إثبات ذاته و صفاته و أفعاله
===========================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها أربعة عشر فصلا
</p>

CHAPTER TWELVE: The Necessary Being, the Proofs of Its Existence, Its Attributes and Acts
=========================================================================================

12 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في إثبات ذاته تعالى
-------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حقيقة الوجود التي هي أصيلة لا أصيل دونها و صرفة لا يخالطها غيرها لبطلان
الغير فلا ثاني لها كما تقدم في المرحلة الأولى واجبة الوجود لضرورة ثبوت
الشي‏ء لنفسه و امتناع صدق نقيضه و هو العدم عليه و وجوبها إما بالذات أو
بالغير لكن كون وجوبها بالغير خلف إذ لا غير هناك و لا ثاني لها فهي واجبة
الوجود بالذات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
### <p dir="rtl">
حجة أخرى
</p>
</p>

###

الماهيات الممكنة المعلولة موجودة فهي واجبة الوجود لأن الشي‏ء ما لم يجب
لم يوجد و وجوبها بالغير إذ لو كان بالذات لم يحتج إلى علة و العلة التي
بها يجب وجودها موجودة واجبة و وجوبها إما بالذات أو بالغير و ينتهي إلى
الواجب بالذات لاستحالة الدور و التسلسل.

12.1. THE PROOFS OF ITS EXISTENCE
---------------------------------

The reality of existence is necessarily existent, for it is fundamental
(there being nothing fundamental except it) and absolute (shirf) (for it
is not mingled with anything other than itself, as it has no other or
second, as mentioned in Chapter One). This is so because it is necessary
for a thing to be what it is and impossible for it to be its own
contradictory, which is non-existence in this case. Further, this
necessity (wujûb) derives either from itself (bi al-dzât) or from
something else (bi al-ghayr). However, it is self-contradictory to
regard this necessity as deriving from something else, for, in this
case, there is no ‘other,’ nor a second. Hence it is necessarily
existent-by-itself (wâjib al-wujûd bi al-dzât).

### Another Proof

###

The quiddities, which are caused (ma’lûl) and contingent (mumkin)
existents, also exist by necessity, for a thing does not come into being
unless it is necessitated. However, their necessity is by virtue of
something else; because were they necessary-by-themselves, they would
not stand in need of a cause. Now the cause that necessitates their
existence is also existent by necessity. This necessity is either
by-itself or by-something-else, and this line of reasoning leads to that
which is necessarily existent by-itself, because of the inadmissibility
of a vicious circle or an indefinite regress.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في إثبات وحدانيته تعالى
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كون واجب الوجود تعالى حقيقة الوجود الصرف التي لا ثاني لها يثبت وحدانيته
تعالى بالوحدة الحقة التي يستحيل معها فرض التكثر فيها إذ كل ما فرض ثانيا
لها عاد أولا لعدم الميز بخلاف الوحدة العددية التي إذا فرض معها ثان عاد
مع الأول اثنين و هكذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجة أخرى
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لو كان هناك واجبان فصاعدا امتاز أحدهما من الآخر بعد اشتراكهما في وجوب
الوجود و ما به الامتياز غير ما به الاشتراك بالضرورة و لازمه تركب ذاتهما
مما به الاشتراك و ما به الامتياز و لازم التركب الحاجة إلى الأجزاء و هي
تنافي الوجوب الذاتي الذي هو مناط الغنى الصرف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تتمة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أورد ابن كمونة على هذه الحجة أنه لم لا يجوز أن يكون هناك هويتان بسيطتان
مجهولتا الكنه مختلفتان بتمام الماهية يكون كل منهما واجب الوجود بذاته و
يكون مفهوم واجب الوجود منتزعا منهما مقولا عليهما قولا عرضيا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه: بأن فيه انتزاع مفهوم واحد من مصاديق مختلفة بما هي مختلفة و
هو غير جائز.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على :أن فيه إثبات الماهية للواجب و قد تقدم إثبات أن ماهيته تعالى وجوده و
فيه أيضا اقتضاء الماهية للوجود و قد تقدم أصالته و اعتباريتها و لا معنى
لاقتضاء الاعتباري للأصيل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتفرع على وحدانيته تعالى بهذا المعنى :أن وجوده تعالى غير محدود بحد
عدمي يوجب انسلابه عما وراءه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتفرع أيضا: أن ذاته تعالى بسيطة منفي عنها التركيب بأي وجه فرض إذ
التركيب بأي وجه فرض لا يتحقق إلا بأجزاء يتألف منها الكل و يتوقف تحققه
على تحققها و هو الحاجة إليها و الحاجة تنافي الوجوب الذاتي.
</p>

12.2. THE PROOF OF ITS UNITY
----------------------------

As the Necessarily Existent Being [*wâjib al-wujûd* , henceforth
referred to as “the Necessary Being”] is the reality of absolute
existence (al-wujûd al-shirf), which has no other, this establishes Its
unity, which is ‘true unity’ [al-wahdat al-haqqah) wherein it is
impossible to assume any multiplicity. For if the reality of absolute
existence were assumed to have a second, this second will turn out to be
the first one due to the absence of any distinction, contrary to the
case of numerical unity wherein a second, when assumed, makes it a
duality, and so on and so forth.

### Another Proof

###

If there were two or more Necessary Beings, each of them would be
distinct from the other while sharing the quality of being necessarily
existent. Now the factor that makes them distinct from one another has,
of necessity, to be other than what they hold in common, and this
entails that their essences be composed of what they hold in common and
what makes them distinct from one another. This composition entails the
need for parts - something that contradicts their being
necessary-by-themselves (al-wujûb al-dzâtî, henceforth translated as
‘essential necessity’], a condition that is the criterion of absolute
self-sufficiency (*al-ghinâ al-shirf* ).

### A Supplementary Note

###

Ibn Kammûnah has formulated an objection that contests this proof. Why
should it be inadmissible to suppose two simple entities (huwiyyatân) of
unknown nature that differ from one another with all their quiddities,
while each of them is a self-existing necessary being, so that the
concept of existential necessity be abstracted from each of them in an
accidental manner? The answer to this is that it is inadmissible because
it involves the abstraction of a single concept from different entities
qua different entities.

Moreover, this line of reasoning ascribes quiddity to the Necessary
Being, and it was established earlier that Its quiddity is Its
existence. Furthermore, it involves the derivation of existence from
quiddity, whereas, as mentioned earlier, existence is fundamental
(ashîl) and quiddity derived (i’tibârî), and the derivation of something
fundamental from that which is derived makes no sense.

It follows from the unity of the Necessary Being - i.e., in this
particular sense of unity - that Its existence is not limited by any
limit of privation (hadd ‘adamî) so as to exclude anything beyond It.

It also follows from it that Its essence is simple, without composition
of any kind; for composition, whatever its form, does not occur without
parts that make up the whole, whose actualization depends on the
actualization of the parts that it needs, and need contradicts essential
necessity.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في أن الواجب تعالى هو المبدأ المفيض لكل وجود و كمال وجودي
----------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كل موجود غيره تعالى ممكن بالذات لانحصار الوجوب بالذات فيه تعالى و كل
ممكن فإن له ماهية هي التي تستوي نسبتها إلى الوجود و العدم و هي التي
تحتاج في وجودها إلى علة بها يجب وجودها فتوجد و العلة إن كانت واجبة
بالذات فهو و إن كانت واجبة بالغير انتهى ذلك إلى الواجب بالذات فالواجب
بالذات هو الذي يفيض عنه وجود كل ذي وجود من الماهيات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
### و من طريق آخر
</p>

###

ما سواه تعالى من الوجودات الإمكانية فقراء في أنفسها متعلقات في حدود
ذواتها فهي وجودات رابطة لا استقلال لها حدوثا و لا بقاء و إنما تتقوم
بغيرها و ينتهي ذلك إلى وجود مستقل في نفسه غني في ذاته لا تعلق له بشي‏ء
تعلق الفقر و الحاجة و هو الواجب الوجود تعالى و تقدس.

<p dir="rtl">
فتبين أن الواجب الوجود تعالى هو المفيض لوجود ما سواه و كما أنه مفيض لها
مفيض لآثارها القائمة بها و النسب و الروابط التي بينها فإن العلة الموجبة
للشي‏ء المقومة لوجوده علة موجبة لآثاره و النسب القائمة به و مقومة لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فهو تعالى وحده المبدأ الموجد لما سواه المالك لها المدبر لأمرها فهو رب
العالمين لا رب سواه.
</p>

### <p dir="rtl">
تتمة
</p>

###

قالت الثنوية :إن في الوجود خيرا و شرا و هما متضادان لا يستندان إلى مبدإ
واحد فهناك مبدئان مبدأ الخيرات و مبدأ الشرور.

<p dir="rtl">
و عن أفلاطون في دفعه :أن الشر عدم و العدم لا يحتاج إلى علة فياضة بل علته
عدم الوجود و قد بين الصغرى بأمثلة جزئية كالقتل الذي هو شر مثلا فإن الشر
ليس هو قدرة القاتل عليه فإنه كمال له و لا حدة السيف مثلا و صلاحيته للقطع
فإنه كمال فيه و لا انفعال رقبة المقتول من الضربة فإنه من كمال البدن فلا
يبقى للشر إلا بطلان حياة المقتول بذلك و هو أمر عدمي و على هذا القياس في
سائر الموارد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عن أرسطو: أن الأقسام خمسة ما هو خير محض و ما خيره كثير و شره قليل و ما
خيره و شره متساويان و ما شره كثير و خيره قليل و ما هو شر محض و أول
الأقسام موجود كالعقول المجردة التي ليس فيها إلا الخير و كذا القسم الثاني
كسائر الموجودات المادية التي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فيها خير كثير بالنظر إلى النظام العام فإن في ترك إيجاده شرا كثيرا و أما
الأقسام الثلاثة الباقية فهي غير موجودة إما ما خيره و شره متساويان فإن في
إيجاده ترجيحا بلا مرجح و أما ما شره كثير و خيره قليل فإن في إيجاده ترجيح
المرجوح على الراجح و أما ما هو شر محض فأمره واضح و بالجملة لم يستند
بالذات إلى العلة إلا الخير المحض و الخير الكثير و أما الشر القليل فقد
استند إليها بعرض الخير الكثير الذي يلزمه.
</p>

12.3. THE NECESSARY BEING IS THE SOURCE OF EVERY BEING AND EVERY EXISTENTIAL PERFECTION
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Every existent other than It is essentially contingent (mumkin bi
al-dzât). That is because essential necessity is exclusive to It. Every
contingent being has a quiddity which is indifferent to existence and
non-existence. Therefore, it needs a cause to exist. The cause
necessitates its existence, whereupon it comes into being. If this cause
be an existent necessary-by-itself, the argument ends there; but if it
is necessary-by-something-else, the chain must ultimately terminate in
that which is necessary-by-itself. Hence the Essentially Necessary Being
(al-wâjib bi al-dzât) is that from which emanates the existence of every
existent from among the quiddities.

### Another Proof

###

As opposed to God, the Exalted, all contingent beings (al-wujûdât
al-imkâniyyah) are needy in themselves, dependent in their very essence.
Hence they are relational existents (wujûdât râbithah), which have no
independence, neither for coming into being nor for continuing to exist.
They subsist through something other than themselves. This chain of
dependence leads up to a being that is independent in itself,
self-sufficient, free from need or dependence on anything. That being is
the exalted and holy Necessary Being.

This shows that the Exalted Necessary Being is the source of emanation
(mufîdh) of everything else. In the same way that It is the source of
their being, it is also the source of the properties (âtsâr) that
subsist through them as well as the relations and connections between
them. That is so because the cause, which necessitates a thing and
sustains its existence, is also the necessitating cause of its
properties and their sustainer, as well as of the relations sustained by
it.

Hence the Exalted Necessary Being is the sole originating source of
everything else, its owner (mâlik) and governor (mudabbir). Thus He is
the Sustainer of the worlds and there is no sustainer besides Him.

### A Supplementary Note

###

The dualists hold being to consist of good and evil, as two opposites
that do not derive from a single source. They believe in two sources: a
source of all that is good and a source of all that is evil.

Plato, in refuting them, has offered the following argument: All evil is
non-being. That which is non-existent does not need a cause; rather, its
‘cause’ is absence of existence. He has illustrated the minor premise
with examples, such as that of homicide, which is regarded as something
evil. The evil in this case is not the killer’s capacity to carry out
the act of killing, for it is a perfection (kamâl) in him. Nor is it the
sharpness of the sword, for instance, and its ability to cut, which is a
perfection in it. Nor is it the passivity of the victim’s neck in
relation to the blow, which is a perfection in the body. Hence, there
remains no evil except the ceasing of the victim’s life as a result of
the act. This is something involving non-being. The same reasoning
applies to other instances of evil.

According to Aristotle, five possibilities are conceivable in this
regard: (i) that which is purely good; (ii) that whose good is greater
than its evil; (iii) that whose good and evil are equal; (iv) that whose
evil is greater than its good; and (v) that which is sheer evil. The
first kind exists, such as the immaterial Intellect, which is wholly
good. So also does the second kind, such as all the material existents,
whose good is preponderant in view of the order of the universe. Had
they not come into existence, a greater evil would have resulted. As to
the three remaining possibilities, they do not exist. The creation of
that whose good is equal to its evil would involve preponderance without
a preponderant. As to that whose evil is greater than its good, its
creation involves the preponderance of the non-preponderant over what is
preponderant. As to that which is sheer evil, its matter is quite
obvious. In summary, nothing except that which is purely good or
predominantly good essentially derives from the Cause. As to that whose
evil is lesser, it derives from the Cause together with the predominant
good that accompanies it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في صفات الواجب الوجود تعالى و معنى اتصافه بها
----------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنقسم الصفات الواجبية بالقسمة الأولية إلى ما تكفي في ثبوته الذات
المتعالية من غير حاجة إلى فرض أمر خارج كحياته تعالى و علمه بنفسه و تسمى
الصفة الذاتية و ما لا يتم الاتصاف به إلا مع فرض أمر خارج من الذات كالخلق
و الرزق و الإحياء و تسمى الصفة الفعلية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الصفات الفعلية كثيرة و هي على كثرتها منتزعة من مقام الفعل خارجة عن
الذات و الكلام في هذه الفصول في الصفات الذاتية فنقول:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد عرفت أنه تعالى هو المبدأ المفيض لكل وجود و كمال وجودي و قد ثبت في
المباحث السابقة أن العلة المفيضة لشي‏ء واجدة لحقيقة ذلك الشي‏ء بنحو أعلى
و أشرف فمعطي الشي‏ء غير فاقد له فله سبحانه اتصاف ما بصفات الكمال كالعلم
و القدرة و الحياة فلننظر في أقسام الصفات و نحو اتصافه بها فنقول :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنقسم الصفة إلى ثبوتية كالعالم و القادر و سلبية تفيد معنى سلبيا لكنك
عرفت آنفا أنه لا يجوز سلب كمال من الكمالات منه تعالى لكونه مبدأ كل كمال
فصفاته السلبية ما دل على سلب النقص و الحاجة كمن ليس بجاهل و من ليس بعاجز
و ما ليس بجوهر و لما كان النقص و الحاجة في معنى سلب الكمال كانت الصفة
السلبية المفيدة لسلب النقص راجعة إلى سلب سلب الكمال و هو إيجاب الكمال
فمعنى ليس بجاهل سلب سلب العلم و معناه إيجاب العلم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم الصفات الثبوتية تنقسم إلى حقيقية كالعالم و إضافية كالقادرية و
العالمية و تنقسم الحقيقية إلى حقيقية محضة كالحي و حقيقية ذات إضافة
كالعالم بالغير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لا ريب في زيادة الصفات الإضافية على الذات المتعالية لأنها معان
اعتبارية و جلت الذات أن تكون مصداقا لها و الصفات السلبية ترجع إلى
الثبوتية الحقيقية فحكمها حكمها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الصفات الحقيقية أعم من الحقيقية المحضة و الحقيقية ذات الإضافة
ففيها أقوال:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدها: أنها عين الذات المتعالية و كل منها عين الأخرى
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيها: أنها زائدة على الذات لازمة لها فهي قديمة بقدمها
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثها: أنها زائدة على الذات حادثة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رابعها: أن معنى اتصاف الذات بها كون الفعل الصادر منها فعل من تلبس بها
فمعنى كونها عالمة أنها تفعل فعل العالم في إتقانه و إحكامه و دقة جهاته و
هكذا فالذات نائبة مناب الصفات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق هو الأول المنسوب إلى الحكماء لما عرفت أن ذاته المتعالية مبدأ لكل
كمال وجودي و مبدأ الكمال غير فاقد له ففي ذاته حقيقة كل كمال يفيض عنه و
هو العينية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم حيث كانت كل من صفات كماله عين الذات الواجدة للجميع فهي أيضا واجدة
للجميع و عينها فصفات كماله مختلفة بحسب المفهوم واحدة بحسب المصداق الذي
هو الذات المتعالية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قول بعضهم: إن علة الإيجاد مشيئته و إرادته تعالى دون ذاته كلام لا محصل
له فإن الإرادة عند هذا القائل إن كانت صفة ذاتية هي عين الذات كانت نسبة
الإيجاد إلى الإرادة عين نسبته إلى الذات فلم يأت بطائل و إن كانت من صفات
الفعل المنتزعة من مقام الفعل فللفعل تقدم عليها و استناده في وجوده إليها
تقدم المعلول على العلة و هو محال على أن لازم هذا القول كون نسبة الإيجاد
و الخلق إليه تعالى مجازا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما القول الثاني و هو منسوب إلى الأشاعرة ففيه أن هذه الصفات و هي على
ما عدوها الحياة و القدرة و العلم و السمع و البصر و الإرادة و الكلام إما
أن تكون معلولة أو غير معلولة لشي‏ء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن لم تكن معلولة لشي‏ء و كانت موجودة في نفسها واجبة في ذاتها كانت هناك
واجبات ثمان و هي الذات و الصفات السبع و أدلة وحدانية الواجب تبطله.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إن كانت معلولة فإما أن تكون معلولة لغير الذات المتصفة بها أو معلولة
لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و على الأول كانت واجبة بالغير و ينتهي وجوبها بالغير إلى واجب بالذات غير
الواجب بالذات الموصوف بها و أدلة وحدانية الواجب تبطله كالشق السابق على
أن فيه حاجة الواجب الوجود لذاته في اتصافه بصفات كماله إلى غيره و هو
محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و على الثاني يلزم كون الذات المفيضة لها متقدمة عليها بالعلية و هي فاقدة
لما تعطيه من الكمال و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على :أن فيه فقدان الواجب في ذاته صفات الكمال و قد تقدم أنه صرف الوجود
الذي لا يشذ عنه وجود و لا كمال وجودي هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما القول الثالث و هو منسوب إلى الكرامية فلازم ما فيه من كون الصفات
زائدة حادثة كون الذات المتعالية ذات مادة قابلة للصفات التي تحدث فيها و
لازمة تركب الذات و هو محال و كون الذات خالية في نفسها عن الكمال و هو
محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما القول الرابع و هو منسوب إلى المعتزلة فلازم ما فيه من نيابة الذات
عن الصفات خلوها عنها و هو كما عرفت وجود صرف لا يشذ عنه وجود و لا كمال
وجودي هذا خلف.
</p>

12.4. THE ATTRIBUTES OF THE NECESSARY BEING AND THE MEANING OF THEIR ATTRIBUTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Attributes of the Necessary Being are divided, first, into (i) the
Attributes of Essence and (ii) the Attributes of Act. The Attributes of
Essence are those that relate solely to the Essence, without the need to
take into account anything extraneous to It such as Its life and Its
knowledge of Itself. The Attributes of Act are those which cannot be
ascribed to It without taking into account what is extraneous to It,
such as creation, giving life and providing.

The Attributes of Act are many, which are abstracted in their
multiplicity from Divine activity and are extraneous to the Divine
Essence. Our discussion in these sections relates to the Attributes of
Essence.

As we have seen above, the Exalted Necessary Being is the source of all
existence and all existential perfections. It was established in the
foregoing discussions that the creative cause of a thing possesses the
reality of that thing to a higher and superior degree, for the giver
cannot be devoid of what he gives. Hence He, the Glorious One,
possesses, in some way or other, certain attributes of perfection such
as knowledge, power and life.

As for the kinds of Attributes of Essence and His manner of possessing
them, it may be observed that the Attributes are divided into (ia) the
positive attributes (such as knowledge and power) and (ib) the negative
attributes, the latter implying a negation. However, as we saw in the
foregoing discussion, one may not negate any of the perfections in
relation to God, the Exalted, for He is the source of all perfections.
Hence His negative attributes signify the negation of deficiency (naqsh)
and need (hâjah) in relation to Him, such as the negation of ignorance,
incapacity and substantiality. Since deficiency and need imply the
negation of perfection, a negative attribute signifies negation of the
negation of perfection, which is affirmation of perfection. Hence the
negation of ignorance means negation of the negation of knowledge, which
implies affirmation of knowledge.

Further, the positive Attributes are divided into (ia 1) those that are
‘intrinsic’ (haqîqiyyah; lit., real), such as ‘the knowing,’ and (ia 2)
those that are ‘relative’ (idhâfiyyah), such as ‘possessing power over’
and ‘possessing knowledge of.’ The intrinsic Attributes are in turn
divided into (ia 1a) the ‘absolutely intrinsic’ ones (haqîqiyyah
mahdhah) such as life and (ia lb) the ‘relatively intrinsic’ ones
(haqîqiyyah dzât idhâfah) such as His knowledge of things other than
Himself. There is no doubt that the relative Attributes are additional
to the Divine Essence, for they are i’tibâri concepts and are not
applicable to the Exalted Essence. The negative Attributes derive from
the positive intrinsic Attributes, and that which applies to the latter
is also true of them.

There are various views concerning the intrinsic Attributes, including
the absolutely intrinsic and the relatively intrinsic attributes.

One of these views is that they are identical with the Essence and each
of them is identical with the other [in respect of its referent].

A second view is that they are additional to the Essence and accompany
It, being eternal like the Essence.

A third view holds that they are additional to the Essence, but not
eternal.

A fourth view is that the meaning of the possession of the Attributes by
the Essence is that Its acts are such as are performed by one who has
these attributes. Thus, the statement ‘He is knowing’ means that His
acts, in respect of their perfection, purposefulness, and precision are
like the acts of someone who acts with knowledge. The same applies to
the other attributes. Hence the Essence is represented in the
Attributes.

The first view, which is ascribed to the philosophers, is the right one.
As we have seen, the Exalted Essence is the source of every existential
perfection, and the source of perfection cannot be devoid of it. Hence
His Essence possesses the reality of every perfection emanating from
Him, and this is what is meant by the identity of the Attributes and the
Essence.

Further, as each of His Attributes of perfection is identical with the
Essence, which possesses alb of them, It includes all the Attributes and
is identical with them. Hence the Attributes differ from one another in
regard to their meaning, but are one in respect to their referent, which
is the Exalted Essence.

The view held by some that the cause of creation is His volition
(masyiyyah) and will (irâdah), not His Essence, is of no consequence.
For if the will be an attribute of the Essence and identical with It,
the ascription of creation to will amounts to its ascription to the
Essence, and this view has nothing enlightening to offer. If it be an
attribute of Act (shifat al-fi’l), abstracted on the plane of Act, the
Act would precede the will, and its dependence on the Act for coming
into existence implies the precedence of the effect to the cause, which
is impossible. Moreover, such a view implies that the ascription of
creation and bringing into existence to God be metaphorical.

As to the second view, which is ascribed to the Ash’arites, the question
arises whether or not these Attributes - which according to them are:
life, power, knowledge, hearing, sight, will and speech - are caused by
something. If they are not caused by anything and are self-existent and
necessary in themselves, there would be eight necessary beings: the
Essence and the seven Attributes. Such a view stands refuted by the
proofs of the Unity of the Necessary Being.

If these are caused, they are either caused by the Essence or by
something else. If caused by something else, they would be
necessary-by-something-else, and this necessity ultimately leads up to a
being that is necessary-in-itself, other than the Necessary Being of
whom they are attributes. This conclusion, like the former one, is also
refuted by the proof of the Unity of the Necessary Being. Moreover, it
implies that the Necessary Being stands in need of something else to
possess its attributes of perfection, which is impossible.

The second case [i.e. if the Attributes are supposed to have been caused
by the Essence] implies that their cause precedes them in terms of
causality while it is itself devoid of the perfections emanating from
it, which is impossible.

Moreover, this view implies that the Essence of the Necessary Being is
devoid of the attributes of perfection, whereas, as mentioned earlier,
It is

absolute existence, which is not devoid of existence or any existential
perfection, and this involves a contradiction.

As to the third view, which is ascribed to the Karrâmiyyah, that the
Attributes are additional and non-eternal, it implies that the Exalted
Essence possesses a matter that receives these Attributes that come to
exist in It. This implies that the Essence is composite - which is
impossible - and in itself devoid of perfection, which is also
impossible.

As to the fourth view - that the Essence is represented by the
Attributes - which is ascribed to the Mu’tazilah, it also implies that
the Essence is devoid of them, whereas, as we have seen, It is absolute
existence, which cannot be devoid of existence or any existential
perfection. Hence this view involves a contradiction.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في علمه تعالى
--------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تقدم :أن لكل مجرد عن المادة علما بذاته لحضور ذاته عند ذاته و هو علمه
بذاته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تقدم أيضا: أن ذاته المتعالية صرف الوجود الذي لا يحده حد و لا يشذ عنه
وجود و لا كمال وجودي فما في تفاصيل الخلقة من وجود أو كمال وجودي بنظامها
الوجودي فهو موجود عنده بنحو أعلى و أشرف غير متميز بعضها من بعض فهو معلوم
عنده علما إجماليا في عين الكشف التفصيلي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن الموجودات بما هي معاليل له قائمة الذوات به قيام الرابط بالمستقل
حاضرة بوجوداتها عنده فهي معلومة له علما حضوريا في مرتبة وجوداتها المجردة
منها بأنفسها و المادية منها بصورها المجردة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقد تحقق: أن للواجب تعالى علما حضوريا بذاته و علما حضوريا تفصيليا
بالأشياء في مرتبة ذاته قبل إيجادها و هو عين ذاته و علما حضوريا تفصيليا
بها في مرتبتها و هو خارج من ذاته و من المعلوم أن علمه بمعلولاته يستوجب
العلم بما عندها من العلم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تتمة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لما كانت حقيقة السمع و البصر هي العلم بالمسموعات و المبصرات كانا من
مطلق العلم و ثبتا فيه تعالى فهو تعالى سميع بصير كما أنه عليم خبير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنبيه و إشارة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
للناس في علمه تعالى أقوال مختلفة و مسالك متشتتة أخر نشير إلى ما هو
المعروف منها:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدها: أن لذاته تعالى علما بذاته دون معلولاته لأن الذات أزلية و لا معلول
إلا حادثا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن العلم بالمعلول في الأزل لا يستلزم وجوده في الأزل بوجوده الخاص
به كما عرفت.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني: ما نسب إلى المعتزلة أن للماهيات ثبوتا عينيا في العدم و هي التي
تعلق بها علمه تعالى قبل الإيجاد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أنه تقدم بطلان القول بثبوت المعدومات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالث :ما نسب إلى الصوفية أن للماهيات الممكنة ثبوتا علميا بتبع الأسماء
و الصفات هو المتعلق لعلمه تعالى قبل الإيجاد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن القول بأصالة الوجود و اعتبارية الماهيات ينفي أي ثبوت مفروض
للماهية قبل وجودها العيني الخاص بها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الرابع: ما نسب إلى أفلاطن أن علمه تعالى التفصيلي بالأشياء هو المفارقات
النورية و المثل الإلهية التي تتجمع فيها كمالات الأنواع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن ذلك على تقدير ثبوتها إنما يكفي لتصوير العلم التفصيلي بالأشياء
في مرتبتها لا في مرتبة الذات فتبقى الذات خالية من الكمال العلمي و هو
وجود صرف لا يشذ عنه كمال وجودي هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الخامس: ما نسب إلى شيخ الإشراق و تبعه جمع من المحققين أن الأشياء بأسرها
من المجردات و الماديات حاضرة بوجودها عنده تعالى غير غائبة عنه و هو علمه
التفصيلي بالأشياء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن المادية لا تجامع الحضور كما تقدم في مباحث العلم و المعلوم على
أنه إنما يكفي لتصوير العلم التفصيلي في مرتبة الأشياء فتبقى الذات خالية
في نفسها عن الكمال العلمي كما في القول الرابع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
السادس: ما نسب إلى ثاليس المطلي و هو أنه تعالى يعلم العقل الأول و هو
المعلول الأول بحضور ذاته عنده و يعلم سائر الأشياء بارتسام صورها في العقل
الأول.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أنه يرد عليه ما ورد على سابقه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
السابع :قول بعضهم إن ذاته تعالى علم تفصيلي بالمعلول الأول و إجمالي بما
دونه و ذات المعلول الأول علم تفصيلي بالمعلول الثاني و إجمال بما دونه و
هكذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه ما في سابقه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثامن :ما نسب إلى فرفوريوس أن علمه تعالى باتحاده مع المعقول.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أنه إنما يكفي لبيان نحو تحقق العلم و أنه بالاتحاد دون العروض و
نحوه و أما كونه علما تفصيليا بالأشياء قبل الإيجاد مثلا فلا ففيه ما في
سابقه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
التاسع: ما نسب إلى أكثر المتأخرين أن علمه بذاته علم إجمالي بالأشياء فهو
تعالى يعلم الأشياء كلها إجمالا بعلمه بذاته و أما علمه بالأشياء تفصيلا
فبعد وجودها لأن العلم تابع للمعلوم و لا معلوم قبل وجود المعلوم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: ما في سابقه على أن كون علمه تعالى على نحو الارتسام و الحصول ممنوع
كما سيأتي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
العاشر: ما نسب إلى المشاءين أن علمه تعالى بالأشياء قبل إيجادها بحضور
ماهياتها على النظام الموجود في الوجود لذاته تعالى لا على نحو الدخول فيها
و الاتحاد بها بل على نحو قيامها بها بالثبوت الذهني على وجه الكلية بمعنى
عدم تغير العلم بتغير المعلوم فهو علم عنائي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حصوله العلمي مستتبع لحصوله العيني و قد جرى على هذا القول أكثر المتكلمين
و إن خطئوه و طعنوا فيه من حيث إثبات الكلية في العلم فإنهم جروا على كونه
علما حصوليا قبل الإيجاد و أنه على حاله قبل وجود الأشياء و بعده.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: ما في سابقه على أن فيه إثبات العلم الحصولي لموجود مجرد ذاتا و
فعلا و قد تقدم في مباحث العلم و المعلوم أن الموجود المجرد ذاتا و فعلا لا
يتحقق فيه علم حصولي على أن فيه إثبات وجود ذهني من غير وجود عيني يقاس
إليه و لازمه أن يعود وجودا عينيا آخر للموجود الخارجي قبل وجوده العيني
الخاص به و منفصلا عنه تعالى و يرجع لا محالة إلى القول الرابع.
</p>

12.5. GOD’S KNOWLEDGE
---------------------

It was mentioned earlier that every immaterial being has knowledge of
itself, which is the presence of its essence for itself, or
self-knowledge.

It was also mentioned that the Exalted Essence is absolute existence not
bounded by any limit, nor is it devoid of existence or any existential
perfection. Hence all the details of creation, of existence and
existential perfections, with their existential order, exist in It in
their highest and noblest form without being separate from one another.
Hence he knows them with an undifferentiated knowledge, which at the
same time discloses details (‘ilman ijmâliyyan fî ‘ayn al-kasyf
al-tafshîlî).

Further, all existents, being Its effects, depend upon It with the
dependence of something relative (râbith) on that which is independent,
and they are present for It with their existence. Hence It knows them
with an immediate knowledge on the plane of their existences, the
immaterial among them with their very being and the material ones
through their immaterial forms.

This establishes that the Exalted Necessary Being has an immediate
knowledge (‘ilrn hudhârî) of Itself and a detailed immediate knowledge
of the things before their creation on the plane of Its Essence, and
that this knowledge is identical with Its Essence. It also has a
detailed immediate knowledge of them on their own plane, extraneous to
Its Essence. It is evident that Its knowledge of things implies also the
knowledge of their knowledge [of themselves and other things].

A Supplementary Note

As hearing and seeing consist of the knowledge of that which is audible
and visible, they are included in knowledge in general. Thus the
attributes related to seeing and hearing have subsistence in God, the
Exalted, who is the hearer and the seer in the same way as He is the
knower.

Some Related Views

There are various views concerning Divine knowledge; we shall review
some of the well known among them in the following:

(i) One of these views is that the Divine Being has knowledge of Its own
Essence, not of Its effects, because Its Essence is pre-eternal (azalî)
and the existence of every effect is preceded by its non-existence
(hadîts).

This viewpoint, however, is not correct, because knowledge of the effect
in pre-eternity does not imply that the effect existed in pre-eternity
with it particular existence, as we saw above.

(ii) A second view, which is attributed to the Mu’tazilah, is that
quiddities do have a kind of objective subsistence (tsubût ‘aynî) daring
their non-existence (‘adam), and it is to this that God’s knowledge
pertains before their coming into being.

However, as discussed earlier, the notion of subsistence of
non-existents is an invalid idea.

(iii) The third view, which has been ascribed to the Sufis, is that the
contingent quiddities (al-mâhiyyât al-mumkinah) have an epistemic
subsistence (tsubût ‘ilmî) subsumed in the Names and the Attributes, and
it is to this that God’s knowledge pertains before creation.

However, the view that existence is fundamental and quiddities are
derivative precludes the assumption of any kind of subsistence for
quiddity prior to its particular external existence.

(iv) The fourth view is ascribed to Plato, who held that God’s detailed
knowledge of things consists of immaterial Ideas and divine archetypes
that possess all the perfections of the species.

This view is also inadequate, because even if such archetypes are
assumed to exist, that only helps in conceiving God’s detailed knowledge
of things on their own plane, not on the plane of the Essence, leaving
It devoid of knowledge, whereas God is absolute existence, which is not
without any existential perfection. Hence it leads to contradiction.

(v) The fifth view is attributed to Suhrawardî, who is followed by a
number of authorities in holding it. According to it, all things,
material and immaterial, are present with their very existence for God,
the Exalted, not being hidden from Him. This constitutes His detailed
knowledge of things.

The problem with this view is that presence is inconsistent with
materiality, as mentioned in the discussion on knowledge and the known.
Moreover, it helps solely in conceiving God’s detailed knowledge of
things on their own plane, and, like the fourth theory, it leaves the
Essence devoid of the perfection of knowledge.

(vi) The sixth view, which is ascribed to Thales of Miletus, holds that
God knows the First Intellect, which is the first effect, by virtue of
the presence of its essence for Him. Other things are known to Him
through the reflection of their forms in the First Intellect.

The objections mentioned in relation with the previous theory apply to
this view also.

(vii) The seventh view holds that God’s essence has a detailed knowledge
of the first effect and a non-detailed knowledge (‘ilm ijmâlî) of things
below it. The essence of the first effect has a detailed knowledge of
the second effect and a non-detailed knowledge of things below it, and
so on. The above-mentioned objections apply here also.

(viii) The eighth view, which has been attributed to Porphyry, is that
God’s knowledge is through His union (ittihâd) with the known.

The problem with this theory is that it only explains the manner in
which God’s knowledge is realized, namely, that it involves union, not
accidence (‘urûdh) or something of the kind. But it does not explain
God’s detailed knowledge of things prior to their creation. Hence it
suffers from the inadequacy of the previous theories.

(ix) The ninth theory, which is ascribed to most of the later
philosophers, is that God’s knowledge of His own Essence is as well a
non-detailed knowledge of things. Hence He knows all things in a
non-detailed manner through His knowledge of His own Essence. His
detailed knowledge of things is posterior to their existence, for
knowledge is incident to the known and there is nothing to be known
prior to the existence of the known.

This theory also suffers from the inadequacy of the previous theories.
Moreover, as will be explained later on, it is inadmissible to regard
God’s knowledge as acquired, and obtained through perceived forms.

(x) The tenth theory, which is ascribed to the Peripatetics, states that
God’s knowledge of things prior to their creation is by presence in His
Essence of their quiddities, as per the existing order of being, not in
the manner of a union (ittihâd) or penetration (dukhûl), but as
universals sustained by the Essence through a mental subsistence. It is
universal in the sense that it does not

change with the changes of the known thing. Hence it is a fore-knowledge
(‘ilm ‘inâ’î) wherein cognitive apprehension is accompanied by its
objective realization. This view is subscribed to by

most of the theologians (mutakallimûn), though they have [erroneously]
faulted it in respect of its assertion of universality in Divine
knowledge [due to their misunderstanding of the term ‘universal’].

Thus they hold God’s knowledge to be an acquired one prior to creation,
remaining unchanged before and after the existence of things.

This theory suffers from the inadequacies of the previous ones, in
addition to the fact that it ascribes acquired knowledge to an existent
that is immaterial in essence and actuality. However, as mentioned in
the discussions on knowledge and the known, an existent that is
immaterial in its essence and in actuality cannot have acquired
knowledge. Moreover, this view posits mental existence without there
being any external existent to which it should correspond, which entails
another objective existence of the external existent prior to its
particular objective existence separate, from God. Hence it boils down
to the fourth view mentioned above.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في قدرته تعالى
---------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تقدم: أن القدرة كون الشي‏ء مصدرا للفعل عن علم و من المعلوم أن الذي
ينتهي إليه الموجودات الممكنة هو ذاته المتعالية إذ لا يبقى وراء الوجود
الممكن إلا الوجود الواجبي من غير قيد و شرط فهو المصدر للجميع و علمه عين
ذاته التي هي المبدأ لصدور المعاليل الممكنة فله القدرة و هي عين ذاته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت: أفعال الإنسان الاختيارية مخلوقة لنفس الإنسان لأنها منوطة
باختياره إن شاء فعل و إن لم يشأ لم يفعل و لو كانت مخلوقة لله سبحانه
مقدورة له كان الإنسان مجبرا على الفعل لا مختارا فيه فأفعال الإنسان
الاختيارية خارجة عن تعلق القدرة فالقدرة لا تعم كل شي‏ء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلت: ليس معنى كون الفعل اختياريا تساوى نسبته إلى الوجود و العدم حتى حين
الصدور فمن المحال صدور الممكن من غير ترجح و تعين لأحد جانبي وجوده و عدمه
بل الفعل الاختياري لكونه ممكنا في ذاته يحتاج في وجوده إلى علة تامة لا
يتخلف عنها نسبته إليها نسبة الوجوب و أما نسبته إلى الإنسان الذي هو جزء
من أجزاء علته التامة فبالإمكان كسائر الأجزاء التي لها من المادة القابلة
و سائر الشرائط الزمانية و المكانية و غيرها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالفعل الاختياري لا يقع إلا واجبا بالغير كسائر المعلولات و من المعلوم أن
الوجوب بالغير لا يتحقق إلا بالانتهاء إلى واجب بالذات و لا واجب بالذات
إلا هو تعالى فقدرته تعالى عامة حتى للأفعال الاختيارية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من طريق آخر: الأفعال كغيرها من الممكنات معلولة و قد تقدم في مرحلة
العلة و المعلول أن وجود المعلول رابط بالنسبة إلى علته و لا يتحقق وجود
رابط إلا بالقيام بمستقل يقومه و لا مستقل بالذات إلا الواجب بالذات فهو
مبدأ أول لصدور كل معلول متعلق الوجود بعلة و هو على كل شي‏ء قدير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت: الالتزام بعموم القدرة للأفعال الاختيارية التزام بكونها جبرية
فإن لازمه القول بتعلق الإرادة الإلهية بالفعل الاختياري و هي لا تتخلف عن
المراد فيكون ضروري الوقوع و يكون الإنسان مجبرا عليه لا مختارا فيه و بوجه
آخر ما وقع من الفعل متعلق لعلمه تعالى فوقوعه ضروري و إلا عاد علمه جهلا
تعالى عن ذلك فالفعل جبري لا اختياري.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلت: كلا فالإرادة الإلهية إنما تعلقت بالفعل على ما هو عليه في نفسه و
الذي عليه الفعل هو أنه منسوب إلى الإنسان الذي هو جزء علته التامة
بالإمكان و لا يتغير بتعلق
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإرادة عما هو عليه فقد تعلقت الإرادة بالفعل من طريق اختيار الإنسان و
مراده تعالى أن يفعل الإنسان الفعل الفلاني باختياره و من المحال أن يتخلف
مراده تعالى عن إرادته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عن الاحتجاج بتعلق العلم الأزلي بالفعل كالجواب عن تعلق الإرادة
به فالعلم إنما تعلق بالفعل على ما هو عليه و هو أنه فعل اختياري يتمكن
الإنسان منه و من تركه و لا يخرج العلم المعلوم عن حقيقته فلو لم يقع
اختياريا كان علمه تعالى جهلا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن قلت: السلوك إلى بيان عموم القدرة من طريق توقف وجود المعلول الممكن
على وجوبه بالغير و انتهاء ذلك إلى الواجب بالذات ينتج خلاف المطلوب فإن
كون فعله تعالى واجبا يستلزم كونه تعالى موجبا بفتح الجيم أي واجبا عليه
الفعل ممتنعا عليه الترك و لا معنى لعموم القدرة حينئذ.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قلت: الوجوب كما تعلم منتزع من الوجود فكما أن وجود المعلول من ناحية العلة
كذلك وجوبه بالغير من ناحيتها و من المحال أن يعود الأثر المترتب على وجود
الشي‏ء مؤثرا في وجود مؤثرة فالإيجاب الجائي من ناحيته تعالى إلى فعله
يستحيل أن يرجع فيوجب عليه تعالى فعله و يسلب عنه بذلك عموم القدرة و هي
عين ذاته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتبين بما تقدم: أنه تعالى مختار بالذات إذ لا إجبار إلا من أمر وراء
الفاعل يحمله على خلاف ما يقتضيه أو على ما لا يقتضيه و ليس وراءه تعالى
إلا فعله و الفعل ملائم لفاعله فما فعله من فعل هو الذي تقتضيه ذاته و
يختاره بنفسه.
</p>

12.6. THE ATTRIBUTE OF POWER
----------------------------

As mentioned earlier, the attribute of power means that an entity be a
knowing source of its acts. It is known that contingent existents derive
from the Divine Essence, for there is nothing beyond contingent
existents except the unconditioned Necessary Being. Hence God is the
source of everything and His knowledge is identical with His Essence,
which is the source of contingent effects. He has power and it is
identical with His Essence.

Now if someone were to say that a human being’s voluntary actions are a
creation of the human soul, for they are incident to his will - he
performs them if he likes and refrains from performing them if he so
wills. Had they been created by God and determined by Him, man would be
compelled (mujbir) in his acts, not a free actor who acts out of his
free choice (mukhtâr). Hence man’s voluntary acts (al-af’âl
al-ikhtiyâriyyah) lie outside the ambit of Divine power, which does not
encompass everything.

The answer to this is that the meaning of the voluntary character of an
act is not that it remains neutral in its relation to existence and
non-existence until its coming into being; for it is impossible for a
contingent to come into being without there being a preponderant on the
side of existence or that of non-existence. Rather, by virtue of its
essential contingency, a voluntary action requires a complete cause for
coming into existence. Hence when the cause exists it cannot fail to
exist, for its relation to the cause is one of necessity. However, its
relation to man - who is a part from among the parts of a complete
cause - is one of contingency, similar to that of its other parts such
as a receptive matter, other temporal and spatial conditions and so on.

Hence the voluntary act does occur without becoming
necessary-by-something-else, like all other effects, and it is evident
that something that is necessary-by-something-else does not actuate
without ultimately terminating in that which is necessary-by-itself.
There is nothing necessary-by-itself except God, the Exalted. Hence His
power is all-encompassing and includes even the acts of free will.

Considering the same problem from another angle, voluntary acts, like
other contingents, are caused, and, as mentioned in the chapter on cause
and effect,’ the existence of an effect is relative (râbith) in relation
to its cause, and is not realized except through dependence on something
independent that may sustain it. There is nothing that is
independent-in-itself except that which is necessary-in-itself. Hence
God is the primary source of all effects dependent for their existence
on a cause, and He has power over all things.

Now if someone were to say: that if the acts of free will were subject
to Divine power it would imply that they are compelled (jabarî); for it
means that voluntary actions depend on the Divine will, which is never
frustrated. Hence their occurrence is necessary, and, as a result, man
is compelled in his voluntary acts and not free.

Also, considering the issue from yet another angle, since God has prior
knowledge of every act that takes place, its occurrence is necessary;
for otherwise it would not be knowledge but ignorance, which is far from
God’s station. Hence the voluntary acts are compelled, not free.

Our answer is that the case is indeed not such, because the Divine will
relates to man’s actions as they are in themselves, and as such they
remain

attributed to the person who is part of the complete cause. Their being
subject to the Divine will does not change what they are. Hence the
subjection of the actions to the Divine will is through man’s free
choice. It was God’s will that man should perform such and such acts out
of his own free will, and it is impossible for His will to be
frustrated.

A similar answer may be given to the objection based on the subjection
of voluntary acts to God’s pre-eternal knowledge. For acts of free will
are subject to God’s knowledge as they are, that is, as voluntary
actions which one can perform or refrain from performing, and the
knowledge of something does not alter its reality. Hence, if the act
were to occur without the exercise of free will, that would imply
ignorance on God’s behalf.

Someone might say that this explanation of Divine power - i.e. on the
basis of the dependence of the existence of a contingent effect on its
becoming necessary-by-something-else and the termination of this
necessity in that which is necessary-in-itself -  leads to a conclusion
contrary to what was intended. That is because the necessity of God’s
acts implies that He is compelled by necessity. In other words, His acts
are forced upon Him by necessity and it is impossible for Him not to
carry them out. In view of this, Divine omnipotence becomes meaningless.

The answer to this is that necessity, as we know, is abstracted from
existence. In the same way as the effect’s existence is derived from the
cause, so also its necessity-by-something-else derives from the cause,
and it is impossible that a property characterizing a thing’s existence
should in turn affect the existence of the cause that creates the
property in it. Hence it is impossible that the necessity that God’s
acts derive from Him should in turn make the act necessary upon Him and
deprive Him of His omnipotence, which is identical with His Essence.

From what has been said, it becomes clear that God, the Exalted, is a
free actor by essence; for there can be no compulsion except from
something extraneous to an agent that may force it to act contrary to
its will, and there is nothing extraneous to God except His Act, which
is in harmony with the agent. Hence, His Acts are what His Essence
requires and chooses.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في حياته تعالى
---------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الحي عندنا هو الدراك الفعال فالحياة مبدأ الإدراك و الفعل أي مبدأ العلم و
القدرة أو أمر يلازمه العلم و القدرة و إذ كانت الحياة تحمل علينا و العلم
و القدرة فينا زائدتان على الذات فحملها على ما كانتا فيه موجودتين للذات
على نحو العينية كالذات الواجبة الوجود بالذات أولى و أحق فهو تعالى حياة و
حي بالذات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على: أنه تعالى مفيض لحياة كل حي و معطي الشي‏ء غير فاقد له.
</p>

12.7. THE ATTRIBUTE OF LIFE
---------------------------

For us something ‘living’ means a conscious agent (al-darrâk al-fa’’âl).
That is, life is the source of consciousness and activity, or the source
of knowledge and power, or anything associated with knowledge and power.
If the predicate ‘living’ is applicable to us as human beings, while
knowledge and power are additional to our essences, it is predicable,
with greater reason, of the Essence of the Necessary Being in whom they
exist with their very reality. Hence God, the Exalted, is Life and is
the Living One by virtue of His Essence.

Moreover, God, the Exalted, is the source of the life of every living
being, and the giver of a thing cannot be devoid of it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في إرادته تعالى و كلامه
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا: إرادته تعالى علمه بالنظام الأصلح و بعبارة أخرى علمه بكون الفعل
خيرا فهي وجه من وجوه علمه تعالى كما أن السمع بمعنى العلم بالمسموعات و
البصر بمعنى العلم بالمبصرات وجهان من وجوه علمه فهو عين ذاته تعالى.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قالوا: الكلام فيما نتعارفه لفظ دال على ما في الضمير كاشف عنه فهناك
موجود اعتباري و هو اللفظ الموضوع يدل دلالة وضعية اعتبارية على موجود آخر
و هو الذي في الذهن و لو كان هناك موجود حقيقي دال بالدلالة الطبعية على
موجود آخر كذلك كالأثر الدال على مؤثره و صفة الكمال في المعلول الكاشفة عن
الكمال الأتم في علته كان أولى و أحق بأن يسمى كلاما لقوة دلالته و لو كان
هناك موجود أحدي الذات ذو صفات كمال في ذاته بحيث يكشف بتفاصيل كماله و ما
يترتب عليه من الآثار عن وجوده الأحدي و هو الواجب تعالى كان أولى و أحق
باسم الكلام و هو متكلم لوجود ذاته لذاته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أقول: فيه إرجاع تحليلي لمعنيي الإرادة و الكلام إلى وجه من وجوه العلم و
القدرة فلا ضرورة تدعو إلى إفرادهما عن العلم و القدرة و ما نسب إليه تعالى
في الكتاب و السنة من الإرادة و الكلام أريد به صفة الفعل بالمعنى الذي
سيأتي إن شاء الله
</p>

12.8. THE ATTRIBUTES OF WILL AND SPEECH
---------------------------------------

The metaphysicians state that God’s will (irâdah) is His knowledge of
the best [possible] order of the universe. In other words, it is His
knowledge that a certain act is good. Hence in the same way as His being
the ‘hearer’ and the ‘seer’ (i.e. having knowledge of that which is
audible and visible) are two aspects of His knowledge, His will is also
an aspect of His knowledge, which is identical with His Essence.

It is also said that speech, as we know it, consists of words, which
signify meanings in one’s mind. Hence a word is a ‘conventional
existent’ (mawjûd i’tibârî), which by virtue of conventional
signification (dalâlah wad’iyyah) signifies another existent in the
mind. Should there be a real existent that signifies another existent
with a ‘natural’ signification (dalâlah thab’iyyah) - such as an effect,
which signifies its own cause - and should its attribute of perfection
manifest the consummate perfection of its cause, then it can be called a
‘word’ (kalâm) with greater reason due to the strength of its
signification. If it were a being unitary in its essence (ahadî
al-dzât)P whose essential attributes of perfection, which by virtue of
the details of its perfection and effects (âtsâr) manifest that unitary
being, which is the Necessary Being, it is worthier of being called a
‘speaker.’ Hence He is the ‘Speaker’ (mutakallim) by virtue of the
existence of His Essence for Himself.

I say: In this view, the concepts of Divine will and speech are reduced
to an aspect of knowledge and power. Accordingly, it is not necessary to
consider them in separation from knowledge and power. As to the will and
speech that are attributed to God, the Exalted, in the Qur’ân and the
Sunnah, they refer to the attributes of Act, in the sense to be
explained shortly, God willing.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع في فعله تعالى و انقساماته
--------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لفعله تعالى بمعنى المفعول و هو الوجود الفائض منه انقسامات بحسب ما تحصل
من الأبحاث السابقة كانقسامه إلى مجرد و مادي و انقسامه إلى ثابت و سيال و
إلى غير ذلك و المراد في هذا الفصل الإشارة إلى ما تقدم سابقا أن العوالم
الكلية ثلاثة عالم العقل و عالم المثال و عالم المادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فعالم العقل مجرد عن المادة و آثارها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عالم المثال مجرد عن المادة دون آثارها من الأبعاد و الأشكال و الأوضاع و
غيرها ففيه أشباح جسمانية متمثلة في صفة الأجسام التي في عالم المادة على
نظام يشبه نظامها في عالم المادة غير أن تعقب بعضها لبعض بالترتب الوجودي
بينها لا بتغير صورة إلى صورة أو حال إلى حال بالخروج من القوة إلى الفعل
من طريق الحركة على ما هو الشأن في عالم المادة فحال الصور المثالية في
ترتب بعضها على بعض حال الصور الخيالية من الحركة و التغير و العلم مجرد لا
قوة فيه و لا تغير فهو علم بالتغير لا تغير في العلم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عالم المادة بجواهرها و أعراضها مقارن للمادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و العوالم الثلاثة مترتبة وجودا فعالم العقل قبل عالم المثال و عالم المثال
قبل عالم المادة وجودا و ذلك لأن الفعلية المحضة التي لا تشوبها قوة أقوى و
أشد وجودا مما هو بالقوة محضا أو تشوبه قوة فالمفارق قبل المقارن للمادة ثم
العقل المفارق أقل حدودا و قيودا و أوسع و أبسط وجودا من المثال المجرد و
كلما كان الوجود أقوى و أوسع كانت مرتبته في السلسلة المترتبة من حقيقة
الوجود المشككة أقدم و من المبدإ الأول الذي هو وجود صرف ليس له حد يحده و
لا كمال يفقده أقرب فعالم العقل أقدم وجودا من الجميع و يليه عالم المثال و
يليه عالم المادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتبين بما ذكر: أن الترتيب المذكور ترتيب في العلية أي إن عالم العقل علة
مفيضة لعالم المثال و عالم المثال علة مفيضة لعالم المادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتبين أيضا بمعونة ما تقدم من أن العلة مشتملة على كمال المعلول بنحو
أعلى و أشرف أن العوالم الثلاثة متطابقة متوافقة ففي عالم المثال نظام
مثالي يضاهي النظام المادي و هو أشرف منه و في عالم العقل ما يطابقه لكنه
موجود بنحو أبسط و أجمل و يطابقه النظام الربوبي الموجود في علم الواجب
تعالى.
</p>

12.9. THE DIVINE ACT AND ITS DIVISIONS
--------------------------------------

God’s Act (i.e. creation), in the sense of existence emanating from Him,
has various divisions in accordance with the conclusions of the previous
discussions, such as its division into material and immaterial,
changeable and unchangeable, and so on.

Our purpose here is to make a passing reference to that which has
already been mentioned,’ that there are three realms: the realm of the
Intellect (‘âlam al-’aql), the imaginal realm (‘âlam al-mitsâl), and the
material realm (‘âlam al-mâddah).

The realm of the Intellect is immaterial and without matter and its
properties (âtsâr).

The imaginal world is also devoid of matter without, however, being
devoid of its properties, such as spatial dimension, shape,
configuration and so on. It contains bodily images (asbbdh) which are
analogous in their characteristics to bodies in the material realm and
with an order that is similar to their order in the material world. But
they do not succeed one another in respect of existence, nor do they
change from one form to another or from one state to another by passing
from potentiality to actuality by motion, as is the case in the material
world. Thus the imaginal forms in their succeeding one another are
similar to the subjective imaginary forms in respect of change and
motion. As knowledge is immaterial and there is no potentiality or
change in it, it is knowledge of change, not change of knowledge.

The material world, together with its substances and accidents, is
associated with matter.

These threefold realms stand in an existential hierarchy. Thus the realm
of the Intellect existentially precedes the imaginal world, and the
imaginal world existentially precedes the material world.

That is because absolute actuality, without any trace of potentiality,
is existentially stronger and more powerful than that which has either
pure potentiality or traces of potentiality in it. Hence that which is
immaterial has existential precedence over that which is associated with
matter.

Further, the immaterial Intellect is least bound by limits and
conditions and is existentially more expansive and simpler than the
immaterial imaginal form (al-mitsâl al-mujarrad). Whenever an existent
is stronger and more expansive, its precedence is greater in the graded
hierarchy of existence and it is nearer to the First Source, which is
absolute existence, without any limits and not lacking any perfection.
Hence the world of the Intellect existentially precedes all being, and
below it is the imaginal world, below which is the material world.

From what has been said it becomes clear that the above-mentioned
hierarchy is one based on causality. That is, the world of the Intellect
is the emanating cause (mufîdh) of the imaginal world and the imaginal
world is the emanating cause of the material world.

It also becomes clear from that which was stated earlier - that the
cause possesses the perfection of its effect to a higher and superior
degree - that the threefold worlds correspond to one another. Thus the
imaginal world has an imaginal order corresponding to the material order
while being superior

to it, and the world of Intellect has an order corresponding to it while
being simpler and more undifferentiated (ajmal), and to it corresponds
the divine order (al-nizhâm al-rabawî) that exists in the knowledge of
the Exalted Necessary Being.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في العقل المفارق و كيفية حصول الكثرة فيه لو كانت فيه كثرة
----------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ليعلم :أن الماهية لا تتكثر تكثرا إفراديا إلا بمقارنة المادة و البرهان
عليه إن الكثرة العددية إما أن تكون تمام ذات الماهية أو بعض ذاتها أو
خارجة من ذاتها إما لازمة أو مفارقة و الأقسام الثلاثة الأول يستحيل أن
يوجد لها فرد إذ كلما وجد لها فرد كان كثيرا و كل كثير مؤلف من آحاد و
الواحد منها يجب أن يكون كثيرا لكونه مصداقا للماهية و هذا الكثير أيضا
مؤلف من آحاد فيتسلسل و لا ينتهي إلى واحد فلا يتحقق لها واحد فلا يتحقق
كثير هذا خلف فلا تكون الكثرة إلا خارجة مفارقة يحتاج لحوقها إلى مادة
قابلة فكل ماهية كثيرة الأفراد فهي مادية و ينعكس عكس النقيض إلى أن كل
ماهية غير مادية و هي المجردة وجودا لا تتكثر تكثرا إفراديا و هو المطلوب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
نعم تمكن الكثرة الأفرادية في العقل المفارق فيما لو استكملت أفراد من نوع
مادي كالإنسان بالحركة الجوهرية من مرحلة المادية و الإمكان إلى مرحلة
التجرد و الفعلية فتستصحب التميز الفردي الذي كان لها عند كونها مادية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إنه لما استحالت الكثرة الأفرادية في العقل المفارق فلو كانت فيه كثرة
فهي الكثرة النوعية بأن توجد منه أنواع متباينة كل نوع منها منحصر في فرد و
يتصور ذلك على أحد وجهين إما طولا و إما عرضا و الكثرة طولا أن يوجد هناك
عقل ثم عقل إلى عدد معين كل سابق منها علة فاعلة للاحقه مباين له نوعا و
الكثرة عرضا أن يوجد هناك أنواع كثيرة متباينة ليس بعضها علة لبعض و لا
معلولا و هي جميعا معلولات عقل واحد فوقها.
</p>

12.10. THE IMMATERIAL INTELLECTS AND THE POSSIBLE MANNER OF THEIR MULTIPLICITY
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It should be known that without association with matter quiddity is not
subject to multiplicity in terms of individuation. The proof of it is
that numerical multiplicity is either (i) by virtue of complete quiddity
or (ii) part of it, or (iii) by virtue of a non-separable accident or
(iv) by a separable accident. It is impossible for a quiddity to have
any individuals in the first three cases, for in each of these cases an
individual would itself be multiple when found, and every multitude is
composed of individuals. Thus each of the individuals would necessarily
have to be a multiplicity in order to be an instance of its quiddity,
whereas this multiplicity in turn would be comprised of individuals.
This leads to an indefinite regress and does not yield an individual
member. Therefore, its individual cannot actualize, and hence
multiplicity, too, remains non-actualized. This involves a
contradiction. Therefore, multiplicity does not occur except by virtue
of a separable accident, which requires a receptive matter for its
association with quiddity. Hence every quiddity possessing a
multiplicity of individuals is material; conversely, every immaterial
quiddity, which is existentially immaterial, does not have multiple
individuals.

Yes, there can be a multiplicity of individuals in the immaterial
Intellects where an individual from a material species, such as man,
develops by substantial motion from the plane of materiality and
potentiality to the plane of immateriality and actuality, whereat its
distinctive individual characteristics associated with its material
origin accompany it.

Further, since it is impossible that there should be a multiplicity of
individuals in the immaterial Intellect, any multiplicity therein would
be a multiplicity of species, in the sense that each separate species of
it will be confined to a unique individual. This is conceivable in two
ways, vertical and horizontal. As to vertical multiplicity, it means
that there are a definite number of Intellects, each of which is the
efficient cause of the succeeding Intellect of a different species. In
horizontal multiplicity, there would be different multiple species none
of whom is the cause or the effect of another and all of whom are
effects of the Intellect above them.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر في العقول الطولية و أول ما يصدر منها
-----------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لما كان الواجب تعالى واحدا بسيطا من جميع الجهات امتنع أن يصدر منه الكثير
سواء كان الصادر مجردا كالعقول العرضية أو ماديا كالأنواع المادية لأن
الواحد لا يصدر عنه إلا الواحد فأول صادر منه تعالى عقل واحد يحاكي بوجوده
الواحد الظلي وجود الواجب تعالى في وحدته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لما كان معنى أوليته هو تقدمه في الوجود على غيره من الوجودات الممكنة و
هو العلية كان علة متوسطة بينه تعالى و بين سائر الصوادر منه فهو الواسطة
في صدور ما دونه ما ليس في ذلك تحديد القدرة المطلقة الواجبية التي هي عين
الذات المتعالية على ما تقدم البرهان عليها و ذلك لأن صدور الكثير من حيث
هو كثير من الواحد من حيث هو واحد ممتنع على ما تقدم و القدرة لا تتعلق إلا
بالممكن و أما المحالات الذاتية الباطلة الذوات كسلب الشي‏ء عن نفسه و
الجمع بين النقيضين و رفعهما مثلا فلا ذات لها حتى تتعلق بها القدرة
فحرمانها من الوجود ليس تحديدا للقدرة و تقييدا لإطلاقها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن العقل الأول و إن كان واحدا في وجوده بسيطا في صدوره لكنه لمكان
إمكانه تلزمه ماهية اعتبارية غير أصيلة لأن موضوع الإمكان هي الماهية و من
وجه آخر هو يعقل ذاته و يعقل الواجب تعالى فيتعدد فيه الجهة و يمكن أن يكون
لذلك مصدرا لأكثر من معلول واحد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لكن الجهات الموجودة في عالم المثال الذي دون عالم العقل بالغة مبلغا لا
تفي بصدورها الجهات القليلة التي في العقل الأول فلا بد من صدور عقل ثان ثم
ثالث و هكذا حتى تبلغ جهات الكثرة عددا يفي بصدور العالم الذي يتلوه من
المثال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فتبين: أن هناك عقولا طولية كثيرة و إن لم يكن لنا طريق إلى إحصاء عددها.
</p>

12.11. THE VERTICAL INTELLECTS AND THE FIRST OF THEM
----------------------------------------------------

Since the Necessary Being is one and simple in all respects, it is
impossible for something multiple to emanate from It, irrespective of
whether it is immaterial, such as the horizontal Intellects, or
material, like the material species. That is because nothing except what
is one can emanate from that which is one. Hence the first to emanate
from God is the Intellect that with its ‘quasi-unitary existence’ (wujûd
al-wâhid al-zhillî) reflects the existence of the Necessary Being in Its
unity.

As its being the first means its existential precedence over other
contingent existents, it is the intermediate cause between God and other
endues to emanate from Him. In this there is no limiting of the absolute
power of the Necessary Being, which is identical with its exalted
Essence in accordance with the proof mentioned earlier. That is because,
as mentioned before, it is impossible that something multiple qua
multiple should emanate from something one qua one, and power relates
only to that which is possible. That which is essentially impossible,
being intrinsically void, has no reality to be the subject of Divine
power - such as a thing’s not being what it is, and the simultaneous
truth or falsehood of two contradictories, for instance. Hence their
impossibility of existence does not imply a limitation on God’s power or
its absoluteness.

Further, the First Intellect, though one in its being and simple in its
emanation, has a quiddity - which is derivative and non-fundamental - by
virtue of its contingency, for quiddity is the locus of contingency.
Considering the matter from yet another angle, since the First Intellect
intellects its own essence as well as the Necessary Being, it has
multiple aspects, and for this reason it can be the source of more than
a single effect.

However, the aspects (jihât) existent in the imaginal world, which is
below the world of the Intellect, are so numerous that the few aspects
of the First Intellect are not sufficient to emanate it. Hence it has to
bring into being the Second Intellect, then the Third Intellect and so
on and so forth until the number of aspects of multiplicity reaches the
number necessary for the creation of the imaginal realm below it.

From this, it becomes clear that there are multiple vertical Intellects
(al-’uqûl al-thûliyyah), although there is no way of determining their
number.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني عشر في العقول العرضية
----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أثبت الإشراقيون في الوجود عقولا عرضية لا علية و لا معلولية بينها هي
بحذاء الأنواع المادية التي في هذا العالم المادي يدبر كل منها ما يحاذيه
من النوع و تسمى أرباب الأنواع و المثل الأفلاطونية لأنه كان يصر على القول
بها و أنكرها المشاءون و نسبوا التدابير المنسوبة إليها إلى آخر العقول
الطولية الذي يسمونه العقل الفعال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد اختلفت أقوال المثبتين في حقيقتها و أصح الأقوال فيها على ما قيل هو
أن لكل نوع من هذه الأنواع المادية فردا مجردا في أول الوجود واجدا بالفعل
جميع الكمالات الممكنة لذاك النوع يعتني بأفراده المادية فيدبرها بواسطة
صورته النوعية فيخرجها من القوة إلى الفعل بتحريكها حركة جوهرية بما يتبعها
من الحركات العرضية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد احتجوا لإثباتها بوجوه:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها: أن القوى النباتية من الغاذية و النامية و المولدة أعراض حالة في جسم
النبات متغيرة بتغيره متحللة بتحلله ليس لها شعور و إدراك فيستحيل أن تكون
هي المبادئ الموجدة لهذه التراكيب و الأفاعيل المختلفة و الأشكال و
التخاطيط الحسنة الجميلة على ما فيها من نظام دقيق متقن تتحير فيه العقول و
الألباب فليس إلا أن هناك جوهرا مجردا عقليا يدبر أمرها و يهديها إلى
غايتها فتستكمل بذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن من الجائز أن ينسب ما نسبوه إلى رب النوع إلى غيره فإن أفعال كل
نوع مستندة إلى صورته النوعية و فوقها العقل الأخير الذي يثبته المشاءون و
يسمونه العقل الفعال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها: أن الأنواع الواقعة في عالمنا هذا على النظام الجاري في كل منها
دائما من غير تبدل و تغير ليست واقعة بالاتفاق فلها و لنظامها الدائمي
المستمر علل حقيقية و ليست إلا جواهر مجردة توجد هذه الأنواع و تعتني
بتدبير أمرها دون ما يتخرصون به من نسبة الأفاعيل و الآثار إلى الأمزجة و
نحوها من غير دليل بل لكل نوع مثال كلي يدبر أمره و ليس معنى كليته جواز
صدقه على كثيرين بل إنه لتجرده تستوي نسبته إلى جميع الأفراد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن الأفعال و الآثار المترتبة على كل نوع مستندة إلى صورته النوعية
و لو لا ذلك لم تتحقق نوعية لنوع فالأعراض المختصة بكل نوع هي الحجة على أن
هناك صورة جوهرية هي المبدأ القريب لها كما أن الأعراض المشتركة دليل على
أن هناك موضوعا مشتركا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ففاعل النظام الجاري في النوع هو صورته النوعية و فاعل الصورة النوعية كما
تقدم جوهر مجرد يفيضها على المادة المستعدة فتختلف الصور باختلاف
الاستعدادات و إما أن هذا
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الجوهر المجرد عقل عرضي يخص النوع و يوجده و يدبر أمره أو أنه جوهر عقلي من
العقول الطولية إليه ينتهي أمر عامة الأنواع فليست تكفي في إثباته هذه
الحجة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها: الاحتجاج على إثباتها بقاعدة إمكان الأشرف فإن الممكن الأخس إذا
وجد وجب أن يوجد الممكن الأشرف قبله و هي قاعدة مبرهن عليها و لا ريب في أن
الإنسان المجرد الذي هو بالفعل في جميع الكمالات الإنسانية مثلا أشرف وجودا
من الإنسان المادي الذي هو بالقوة في معظم كمالاته فوجود الإنسان المادي
الذي في هذا العالم دليل على وجود مثاله العقلي الذي هو رب نوعه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه: أن جريان قاعدة إمكان الأشرف مشروط بكون الأشرف و الأخس مشتركين في
الماهية النوعية حتى يدل وجود الأخس في الخارج على إمكان الأشرف بحسب
ماهيته و مجرد صدق مفهوم على شي‏ء لا يستلزم كون المصداق فردا نوعيا له كما
أن صدق مفهوم العلم على العلم الحضوري لا يستلزم كونه كيفا نفسانيا فمن
الجائز أن يكون مصداق مفهوم الإنسان الكلي الذي نعقله مثلا عقلا كليا من
العقول الطولية عنده جميع الكمالات الأولية و الثانوية التي للأنواع
المادية فيصدق عليه مفهوم الإنسان مثلا لوجدانه كماله الوجودي لا لكونه
فردا من أفراد الإنسان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بالجملة صدق مفهوم الإنسان مثلا على الإنسان الكلي المجرد الذي نعقله لا
يستلزم كون معقولنا فردا للماهية النوعية الإنسانية حتى يكون مثالا عقليا
للنوع الإنساني.
</p>

12.12. THE HORIZONTAL INTELLECTS
--------------------------------

The Emanationists posit the existence of the horizontal Intellects
(al-‘uqûl al-‘aradiyyah), between whom there is no relation of causality
and which correspond to the material species in the material world, each
of them governing its respective species. They are called the ‘lords of
the species’ (arbâb al-anwâ’), or Platonic Ideas, so called because
Plato was persistent in his advocacy of them. The Peripatetics reject
them and attribute their governing function to the last of the vertical
Intellects, which they call ‘the Active Intellect’ (al-’aql al-fa’’âl).

However, those who posit the reality of the horizontal Intellects differ
in their views concerning them. According to the soundest of them, as
reported, at the outset of its existence each material species has an
immaterial individual possessing all the possible perfections of that
species in actuality. It attends to the material individuals of its
species and governs them through the means of its specific form. Thus it
develops them from potentiality to actuality by impelling them in their
substantial motion by virtue of its subordinate accidental motions.

They have advanced various arguments in favour of their view. According
to one of them the vegetative faculties (al-quwâ al-nabâtiyyah), such as
those of nourishment, growth, and reproduction, are accidents in the
bodies of the plants. These faculties undergo change with changes
occurring in their bodies, and disintegrate with their disintegration.
The plants have no consciousness or cognition, and it is impossible that
they themselves should be the generative source of these varied
compositions and activities, and the source of the beautiful shapes and
graceful contours that accord with a precise and perfect order that
confounds the human mind. Hence, there must be an immaterial intelligent
substance that governs them and guides them towards their goal of
perfection.

However, the problem with this view is that it is also possible to
ascribe to something else the acts that they attribute to the ‘lord of
the species,’ for the functions of every species depend on its specific
form and, it may be said, that above it is the last vertical Intellect
posited by the Peripatetics, which they call the ‘Active Intellect.’

Another argument they have advanced is that the species found in this
world of ours, with their constant and unchanging order, are not
creatures of accident. Hence this permanent and unceasing order has real
causes which are nothing but the immaterial substances that bring the
species into being and attend to them and govern them, not as imagined
by some people who, on the basis of an unfounded conjecture, ascribe
them to the actions and properties of the temperaments (amzijah) and the
like. Rather, every species has a universal archetype (mitsâl kullî)
that governs it. What is meant by ‘universality’ here is not
correspondence to a multiplicity of referents. Rather, by virtue of its
immateriality, the archetype has an equal relation to all the
individuals of its species.

The difficulty with this view is that the actions and properties
associated with every species derive from its specific form, and had it
not been for this, the specificity of the species would not have
actualized. Hence the accidents particular to every species are evidence
that there exists a substantial form

which is their immediate source, in the same way as common accidents are
evidence that there is a common substratum.

Hence the agent of the prevailing order in a species is the specific
form, and the agent of the specific form, as mentioned earlier, is an
immaterial substance that brings it into being in a matter possessing
potential (isti’dâd). Hence the forms differ with the differing levels
of potential. However, this argument is not sufficient to establish
whether this immaterial substance that brings the species into being and
governs it is a horizontal Intellect associated with a certain species,
or a vertical Intellect presiding over all the species.

Another argument that has been advanced by the proponents of this view
rests on the basis of the ‘principle of the nobler contingent’ (qâ’idah
imkân al-asyraf). There is an established philosophical principle
according to which whenever there exists a baser contingent (al-mumkin
al-akhass), it is necessary for a nobler contingent (al-mumkin
al-asyraf) to exist prior to it. There is no doubt that the immaterial
man, for instance, who possesses all the perfections of

humanity in act, is existentially nobler than the material human being,
which is in potentiality in relation to most of its perfections. Hence,
the existence of the material human being found in this world is the
evidence of its archetype (mitsâl) in the realm of the Intellect, which
is the lord of its species.

However, the condition for the application of the principle of nobler
contingent is that the baser and the nobler share a common specific
quiddity, so that the base existence of the baser may imply the
possibility of the nobler in external reality in accordance with its
quiddity. The mere applicability of a conception to something does not
necessarily make its referent an individual of its species, in the same
manner as the application of the conception of knowledge to immediate
knowledge does not imply its being a psychic quality. Therefore it is
possible that a universal Intellect (‘aql kullî) from among the vertical
Intellects may be the referent, for instance, of the conception of
universal man intellected by us. That universal Intellect may possesses
all the primary and secondary perfections of the material human species,
so that the conception of ‘man’ may be applicable to it due to its
possessing the existential perfection of man, though not because it is a
member of the human species.

In short, the applicability of the concept of man, for instance, to the
immaterial universal man intellected by us does not imply that the
object of our intellection is an individual possessing the quiddity of
man so that it be regarded as an archetype of the human species in the
realm of the Intellect.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث عشر في المثال
--------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يسمى البرزخ لتوسطه بين العقل المجرد و الجوهر المادي و الخيال المنفصل
لاستقلاله عن الخيال الحيواني المتصل به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هو كما تقدم مرتبة من الوجود مفارق للمادة دون آثارها و فيه صور جوهرية
جزئية صادرة من آخر العقول الطولية و هو العقل الفعال عند المشاءين أو من
العقول العرضية على قول الإشراقيين و هي متكثرة حسب تكثر الجهات في العقل
المفيض لها متمثلة لغيرها بهيئات مختلفة من غير أن ينثلم باختلاف الهيئات
في كل واحد منها وحدته الشخصية.
</p>

12.13. THE IMAGINAL WORLD
-------------------------

It is also called the ‘intermediate realm’ (barzakh, lit. barrier) due
to its being situated between the immaterial realm of the Intellect and
the realm of material substances. It is also referred to as al-khiyâl
al-munfashil (lit. ‘separate imagination,’ that is an imaginal realm
separate from and independent of an imagining subject) due to its being
independent of animal imagination (al-khiyâl al-hayawânî), which is a
subjective faculty.

As mentioned, it is a plane of immaterial existence possessing material
properties. In it are particular substantial forms created by the last
of the vertical Intellects - the ‘Active Intellect’ of the
Peripatetics - or one of the horizontal Intellects of the Emanationists.
They are a multitude in accordance with the multiplicity of aspects of
the Intellect that emanates them. These forms appear to others as
different shapes without this difference of shapes compromising the
individual unity of any of them.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع عشر في العالم المادي
---------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هو العالم المشهود أنزل مراتب الوجود و أخسها و يتميز من غيره بتعلق
الصور الموجودة فيه بالمادة و ارتباطها بالقوة و الاستعداد فما من موجود
فيه إلا و عامة كمالاته في أول وجود بالقوة ثم يخرج إلى الفعلية بنوع من
التدريج و الحركة و ربما عامة من ذلك عائق فالعالم عالم التزاحم و التمانع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد تبين بالأبحاث الطبيعية و الرياضية إلى اليوم شي‏ء كثير من أجزاء هذا
العالم و الأوضاع و النسب التي بينها و النظام الحاكم فيها و لعل ما هو
مجهول منها أكثر مما هو معلوم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا العالم بما بين أجزائه من الارتباط الوجودي واحد سيال في ذاته متحرك
بجوهره و يتبعه أعراضه و على هذه الحركة العامة حركات جوهرية خاصة نباتية و
حيوانية و إنسانية و الغاية التي تقف عندها هذه الحركة هي التجرد التام
للمتحرك كما تقدم في مرحلة القوة و الفعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لما كان هذا العالم متحركا بجوهره سيالا في ذاته كانت ذاته عين التجدد و
التغير و بذلك صح استناده إلى العلة الثابتة فالجاعل الثابت جعل المتجدد لا
أنه جعل الشي‏ء متجددا حتى يلزم محذور استناد المتغير إلى الثابت و ارتباط
الحادث بالقديم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تم الكتاب و الحمد لله و وقع الفراغ من تأليفه في اليوم السابع
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
من شهر رجب من شهور سنة ألف و ثلاث مائة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تسعين قمرية هجرية في العتبة المقدسة الرضوية
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على صاحبها أفضل السلام و التحية
</p>

12.14. THE MATERIAL WORLD
-------------------------

It is the world that we perceive, at the lowest and the basest plane of
existence. The association with matter of the forms that exist in it and
its association with potentiality (quwwah) and potential (isti’dâd)
distinguish it from the other realms. The perfections of every existent
in it are in potentiality at the beginning, after which it advances by
gradual motion towards actuality, from which obstacles often hamper it.
Hence it is a world of interference and conflict.

Physical investigations and mathematical studies that have been carried
out up to the present have revealed many things about the parts of this
world and their configurations, relations and prevailing order. Perhaps
that which remains unknown far exceeds what is known.

This world with the existential relation between its parts is
essentially a unity in flux, moving with its substance and accompanying
accidents. Superimposed on this general motion are the particular
substantial motions of plants, animals and human beings. The final end,
where this motion will cease, is complete immateriality, as mentioned in
the chapter on actuality and potentiality.

Since this world is in motion with its substance and essentially in
flux, its essence is identical with renewal and change. Hence it is
valid to consider it as deriving from a fixed cause. The fixed
unchanging agent has created its renewing being, not that it first
brought it into existence and then caused its being to undergo renewal.
Such a picture avoids the problems that may arise from the notion of the
dependence of the changeable on the unchangeable and the relation of
something temporal (hâdits) to the eternal (qadîm).

***Here the book concludes, and all praise belongs to Allah. Its
compilation was completed on the seventh day of Rajab in the year 1390 H
/ [September 8, 1970] in the sacred shrine of al-Imam al-Ridhâ, may the
best of salutations and blessings be upon him.***
