INTRODUCTION
============

*In the Name of God, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful.*

*All praise belongs to God and to Him refers all eulogy in its reality.*

*May benedictions and peace be upon Muhammad,*

*His Apostle and the best of His creation,*

*and upon the Pure Ones of his family and progeny.*

### THE DEFINITION, SUBJECT AND END OF HIKMAH

###

Metaphysics (*al-hikmat al-ilahiyyah* , literally, ‘divine wisdom’) is a
discipline that discusses being (*mawjud* ) qua being. Its subject deals
with the essential properties of being qua being. Its end is to achieve
a general knowledge of existents and to distinguish them from that which
is not really existent.

To explain, when man considers himself, he finds his own self as
possessing a reality. Ke also finds that there is a reality lying beyond
liis self that is within the reach of his knowledge. Accordingly, when
he seeks something, that is because it is what it is, and when he avoids
something or runs away from something, that is because it is what it is.
For instance, an infant groping for its mother’s breast seeks real not
imaginary milk. Similarly, a man running away from a lion, runs away
from what he considers to be a real wild beast, not something imaginary.

However, at times he may mistakenly regard something unreal as existing
in external reality; for instance, luck and giants. Or, at times, he may
consider something existing in external reality as unreal; for instance,
the immaterial soul (*al-nafs al-mujarradah* ) and the immaterial
Intellect (*al-‘aql al-mujarrad* ). Hence it is necessary, first of all,
to recognize the characteristics of being qua being in order to
distinguish it from that which is not such. The science that discusses
these matters is metaphysics.

Metaphysics is also called the First Philosophy and the Higher Science
(*al-‘ilm al-a’la* ). Its subject is being qua being and its end is to
distinguish real existents from that which is not real, and to recognize
the higher causes (*al-‘ilal al-‘aliyah* ) of existence, especially the
First Cause (*al-‘illat al-ula* ), in which terminates the entire chain
of existents, and Its most beautiful Names and sublime Attributes; that
is, Allah, exalted is His Name.


