المرحلة الأولى في كليات مباحث الوجود
====================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها اثنا عشر فصلا
</p>

CHAPTER ONE: THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXISTENCE
================================================

12 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في بداهة مفهوم الوجود
---------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
مفهوم الوجود بديهي معقول بنفس ذاته لا يحتاج فيه إلى توسيط شي‏ء آخر فلا
معرف له من حد أو رسم لوجوب كون المعرف أجلى و أظهر من المعرف فما أورد في
تعريفه من أن الوجود أو الموجود بما هو موجود هو الثابت العين أو الذي يمكن
أن يخبر عنه من قبيل شرح الاسم دون المعرف الحقيقي على أنه سيجي‏ء أن
الوجود لا جنس له و لا فصل له و لا خاصة له بمعنى إحدى الكليات الخمس و
المعرف يتركب منها فلا معرف للوجود
</p>

1.1. THE SELF-EVIDENT CHARACTER OF THE MEANING OF EXISTENCE
-----------------------------------------------------------

The concept of ‘existence’ is a self-evident one and needs no mediating
terms. Hence it has no explanatory terms (*mu’arrif* ) in the form of a
definition (*hadd* ) or description (*rasm* ), because its meaning is
more obvious than that of any explanatory term. Such definitions as
“Existence is what subsists in reality,” or “Existence is that which
allows of predication” are explications of the word, not true
definitions.

Moreover, as will be explained later, existence has neither any genus
(*jins* ), nor differentia (*fasl* ), nor any proprium (*khassah* ) in
the sense of one of the five universals (*al-kulliyyat al-khams* ). As
all explanatory terms are based on these, existence can have no
definition or description.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في أن مفهوم الوجود مشترك معنوي
-------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يحمل الوجود على موضوعاته بمعنى واحد اشتراكا معنويا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من الدليل عليه أنا نقسم الوجود إلى أقسامه المختلفة كتقسيمه إلى وجود
الواجب و وجود الممكن و تقسيم وجود الممكن إلى وجود الجوهر و وجود العرض ثم
وجود الجوهر إلى أقسامه و وجود العرض إلى أقسامه و من المعلوم أن التقسيم
يتوقف في صحته على وحدة المقسم و وجوده في الأقسام.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من الدليل عليه أنا ربما أثبتنا وجود شي‏ء ثم ترددنا في خصوصية ذاته كما
لو أثبتنا للعالم صانعا ثم ترددنا في كونه واجبا أو ممكنا و في كونه ذا
ماهية أو غير ذي ماهية و كما لو أثبتنا للإنسان نفسا ثم شككنا في كونها
مجردة أو مادية و جوهرا أو عرضا مع بقاء العلم بوجوده على ما كان فلو لم
يكن للوجود معنى واحد بل كان مشتركا لفظيا متعددا معناه بتعدد موضوعاته
لتغير معناه بتغير موضوعاته بحسب الاعتقاد بالضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من الدليل عليه أن العدم يناقض الوجود و له معنى واحد إذ لا تمايز في
العدم فللوجود الذي هو نقيضه معنى واحد و إلا ارتفع النقيضان و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و القائلون باشتراكه اللفظي بين الأشياء أو بين الواجب و الممكن إنما ذهبوا
إليه حذرا من لزوم السنخية بين العلة و المعلول مطلقا أو بين الواجب و
الممكن و رد بأنه يستلزم تعطيل العقول عن المعرفة فإنا إذا قلنا الواجب
موجود فإن كان المفهوم منه المعنى الذي يفهم من وجود الممكن لزم الاشتراك
المعنوي و إن كان المفهوم منه ما يقابله و هو مصداق نقيضه كان نفيا لوجوده
تعالى عن ذلك و إن لم يفهم منه شي‏ء كان تعطيلا للعقل عن المعرفة و هو خلاف
ما نجده من أنفسنا بالضرورة
</p>

1.2. THE CONCEPT OF EXISTENCE IS UNIVOCAL
-----------------------------------------

Existence is predicated of different existents in a single sense, i.e.,
univocally (*ishtirak ma’nawi* ).

A proof of it is that we divide existence into its different categories,
such as the existence of the Necessary Being (*wujud al-wajib* ) and the
existence of the contingent being (*wujud al-mumkin* ). The existence of
the contingent is divided into that of substance (wujud al-jawhar) and
that of accident (*wujud al-mumkin* ). The existence of substance and
the existence of accident are again divided into their various kinds. It
is evident that the validity of a division depends on the unity of what
is being divided and on its presence in all its divisions.

Another proof of it is that after positing the existence of something,
at times we have doubts about its essential characteristics. For
instance, after affirming the existence of a creator for the world, we
may have doubts as to whether the creator is a necessary (*wajib* ) or a
contingent (*mumkin* ) being, or as to whether or not he is
characterized with quiddity (mahiyyah). Or, for instance, after
affirming that man has a soul (*nafs* ), we may have doubts as to
whether it is material (*maddi* ) or immaterial (*mujarrad* ), a
substance (jawhar) or an accident (‘arad). Hence, if ‘existence’ were
not univocal in the different instances and were it an equivocal or
homonymous term with disparate meanings (*mushtarak lafzi* ), its
meaning would necessarily vary from one subject of which it is
predicated to another.

Another proof is that non-existence (*‘adam* ) is the contradictory of
existence (*wujud* ): non-existence is univocal, because there, are no
distinctions (*tamayuz* ) in non-existence. Hence, existence, which is
the contradictory of non-existence, is also univocal, for otherwise it
would imply a violation of the law of contradiction, which is
impossible.

Those who have held that ‘existence’ is equivocal in relation to
different existents, i.e. in relation to the Necessary Being and
contingent beings, have done so in order to avoid the conclusion that
there is a similarity (*sinkhiyyah* ) between cause and effect, or
between the Necessary Being and contingent existents. However, such a
position stands refuted, because it amounts to suspending the
intellect’s cognitive faculties. To elaborate, if in the statement, ‘The
Necessary Being exists,’ we understand ‘existence’ to mean the same as
what it means in a statement asserting the existence of a contingent
being, it implies that ‘existence’ is univocal (*mushtarak ma’nawi* ).
If what is understood in the former statement [by ‘existence’] were the
opposite of that which is understood in the latter, being the
contradictory of the latter, the statement ‘The Necessary Being exists,’
would amount to the negation of Its existence.

Finally, if nothing were understandable from it, that would amount to a
suspension of the intellect’s cognitive faculties, which is not however
the state in which we find ourselves.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في أن الوجود زائد على الماهية عارض لها
---------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بمعنى أن المفهوم من أحدهما غير المفهوم من الآخر فللعقل أن يجرد الماهية و
هي ما يقال في جواب ما هو عن الوجود فيعتبرها وحدها فيعقلها ثم يصفها
بالوجود و هو معنى العروض فليس الوجود عينا للماهية و لا جزءا لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الدليل عليه أن الوجود يصح سلبه عن الماهية و لو كان عينا أو جزءا لها لم
يصح ذلك لاستحالة سلب عين الشي‏ء و جزئه عنه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا حمل الوجود على الماهية يحتاج إلى دليل فليس عينا و لا جزءا لها لأن
ذات الشي‏ء و ذاتياته بينة الثبوت له لا تحتاج فيه إلى دليل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا الماهية متساوية النسبة في نفسها إلى الوجود و العدم و لو كان
الوجود عينا أو جزءا لها استحالت نسبتها إلى العدم الذي هو نقيضه
</p>

1.3. EXISTENCE IS ADDITIONAL TO QUIDDITY
----------------------------------------

A thing’s existence is additional to its quiddity, in the sense, that
each of them [i.e. ‘existence’ and ‘quiddity’] signifies something not
understandable from the other. From existence, the intellect first
abstracts [or divests] quiddity, which is represented by the answer to
the question, ‘What is it?’ Then the intellect considers it in isolation
and attributes existence to it. This is what is meant by predication
[*‘urud* , i.e. ascription of existence to quiddity]. Hence existence is
neither identical with quiddity nor a part of it.

A proof of it is that one may properly negate existence in relation to
quiddity. Had it been identical with quiddity, or a part of it, such a
negation would have been invalid, for it is impossible to negate
something in regard to a thing which is identical with it or a part of
it.

Also, a proof is required if existence is to be predicated of a
quiddity; therefore, it is neither identical with quiddity nor a part of
it, because a thing’s essence (*dhat* ) and its essential
characteristics [i.e. genus and differentia] are self-evident and do not
stand in need of a proof.

Moreover, quiddity is in itself indifferent (*mutasawiyat al-nisbah* ,
lit. ‘equally related’) to existence and non-existence. Were existence
identical with quiddity or a part of it, it would be impossible to
attribute to it non-existence, which is its contradictory.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في أصالة الوجود و اعتبارية الماهية
-----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إنا لا نرتاب في أن هناك أمورا واقعية ذات آثار واقعية ليست بوهم الواهم ثم
ننتزع من كل من هذه الأمور المشهودة لنا في عين أنه واحد في الخارج مفهومين
اثنين كل منهما غير الآخر مفهوما و إن اتحدا مصداقا و هما الوجود و الماهية
كالإنسان الذي في الخارج المنتزع عنه أنه إنسان و أنه موجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد اختلف الحكماء في الأصيل منهما فذهب المشاءون إلى أصالة الوجود و نسب
إلى الإشراقيين القول بأصالة الماهية و أما القول بأصالتهما معا فلم يذهب
إليه أحد منهم لاستلزام ذلك كون كل شي‏ء شيئين اثنين و هو خلاف الضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق ما ذهب إليه المشاءون من أصالة الوجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و البرهان عليه أن الماهية من حيث هي ليست إلا هي متساوية النسبة إلى
الوجود و العدم فلو لم يكن خروجها من حد الاستواء إلى مستوى الوجود بحيث
تترتب عليها الآثار بواسطة الوجود كان ذلك منها انقلابا و هو محال بالضرورة
فالوجود هو المخرج لها عن حد الاستواء فهو الأصيل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ما قيل إن الماهية بنسبة مكتسبة من الجاعل تخرج من حد الاستواء إلى مرحلة
الأصالة فتترتب عليها الآثار مندفع بأنها إن تفاوتت حالها بعد الانتساب فما
به التفاوت هو الوجود الأصيل و إن سمي نسبة إلى الجاعل و إن لم تتفاوت و مع
ذلك حمل عليها أنها موجودة و ترتبت عليها الآثار كان من الانقلاب كما تقدم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر الماهيات مثار الكثرة و الاختلاف بالذات فلو لم يكن الوجود أصيلا
لم تتحقق وحدة حقيقية و لا اتحاد بين ماهيتين فلم يتحقق الحمل الذي هو
الاتحاد في الوجود و الضرورة تقضي بخلافه فالوجود هو الأصيل الموجود بالذات
و الماهية موجودة به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر الماهية توجد بوجود خارجي فتترتب عليها آثارها و توجد بعينها
بوجود ذهني كما سيأتي فلا يترتب عليها شي‏ء من تلك الآثار فلو لم يكن
الوجود هو الأصيل و كانت الأصالة للماهية و هي محفوظة في الوجودين لم يكن
فرق بينهما و التالي باطل فالمقدم مثله.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر الماهية من حيث هي تستوي نسبتها إلى التقدم و التأخر و الشدة و
الضعف و القوة و الفعل لكن الأمور الموجودة في الخارج مختلفة في هذه
الأوصاف فبعضها متقدم أو قوي كالعلة و بعضها بخلاف ذلك كالمعلول و بعضها
بالقوة و بعضها بالفعل فلو لم يكن الوجود هو الأصيل كان اختلاف هذه الصفات
مستندة إليها و هي متساوية النسبة إلى الجميع هذا خلف و هناك حجج أخرى
مذكورة في المطولات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و للقائلين بأصالة الماهية و اعتبارية الوجود حجج مدخولة كقولهم لو كان
الوجود أصيلا كان موجودا في الخارج فله وجود و لوجوده وجود فيتسلسل و هو
محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أجيب عنه بأن الوجود موجود لكن بنفس ذاته لا بوجود آخر فلا يذهب الأمر
إلى غير النهاية
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يظهر مما تقدم ضعف قول آخر في المسألة منسوب إلى المحقق الدواني و هو
أصالة الوجود في الواجب تعالى و أصالة الماهية في الممكنات و عليه فإطلاق
الموجود على الواجب بمعنى أنه نفس الوجود و على الماهيات بمعنى أنها منتسبة
إلى الوجود كاللابن و التامر بمعنى المنتسب إلى اللبن و التمر هذا و أما
على المذهب المختار فالوجود موجود بذاته و الماهية موجودة بالعرض.
</p>

1.4. THE FUNDAMENTAL REALITY OF EXISTENCE
-----------------------------------------

We have no doubt that there are real things out there in external
reality possessing certain real properties (athar), and that they are
not illusory. In regard to each of the things that we observe -  which
is a single reality in the external world - we form two concepts
different from one another, though they pertain to a single thing. These
two concepts are ‘existence’ and ‘quiddity.’ For instance, in regard to
a person existing in external reality, we posit his/her quiddity as a
‘human being’ and that he/she exists.

The philosophers (hukama) have differed as to which of the two concepts
is fundamental (asil). The Peripatetics (al-Mashsha’un) hold existence
to be fundamentally real (asalat al-wujud). The belief in the
fundamentality of quiddity (asalat al-mahiyyah) has been ascribed to the
Emanationists (al-Ishraqiyyun). The view that both of them may be
regarded as fundamentally real is one which no one has held, for that
would imply that every thing is two things, which is logically
inadmissible.

The Peripatetics are right in holding existence to be fundamentally
real. A proof of it is that quiddity as such is indifferent to [or
stands in equal relation to] existence and non-existence, and were it
capable by itself of emerging from this state of indifference [or
neutrality] and assuming existence along with its properties (athar),
that would amount to a violation of the law of identity (inqilab; lit.
‘mutation’), which is impossible. Hence it is existence that brings
quiddity out of its state of indifference and is fundamentally real.

As to that which some have said, that quiddity emerges from its state of
indifference to assume reality through the relation that it acquires
with the Maker, such an argument stands refuted. Because the difference
in the state of quiddity after its relation with the Maker amounts to
existence, though it should be called ‘a relation with the Maker.’ And
should there occur no difference in its state, and should existence
nevertheless be predicated of it, that would amount to a violation of
the law of identity, as mentioned.

Another proof is that quiddities are the source of multiplicity and
diversity. Had existence not been fundamentally real, there would have
been no real unity, nor any union between two quiddities [in one thing].
As a consequence, there would be no predication, which signifies unity
in existence [as in a proposition of the type, ‘A is B’], and logical
necessity requires the contrary of it. Hence existence is fundamentally
real, existing by itself, and quiddity exists through it.

Another proof is that when quiddity exists externally, it possesses the
properties (athar) expected of it. But when quiddity exists through
mental existence (wujud dhihni) (which will be dealt with later on), it
does not possess any of these properties. So if existence were not real,
and were quiddity  -  which is there in both modes of being - real,
there would be no difference between these two modes. Since this
consequent premise is invalid, the antecedent must also be such.

Another proof is that quiddity as such is indifferent in its relation to
priority (taqaddum) and posteriority (ta’khkhur), strength (shiddah) and
weakness (da’f), actuality (fi’l) and potentiality (quwwah). However,
things existing in external reality differ in regard to these
characteristics. Some of

them are prior and strong, such as the cause (‘illah), and some are the
opposite of that, such as the effect (ma’lul). Some of them have
actuality and some of them possess potentiality. Were existence not
fundamentally real, the difference in respect to these characteristics
would be attributable to quiddity, which is indifferent in relation to
all of them. This involves a contradiction. There are other proofs
besides the ones given here and they are mentioned in detailed works.

Those who believe in the fundamental reality of quiddity arid consider
existence to be derivative (i’tibari), have offered certain infirm
arguments, like the one which says, ‘If existence were fundamentally
real, it would exist externally; from which it follows that it has an
existence, and that existence again has another existence, and so on ad
infinitum. This involves an infinite regress, which is inadmissible.’

The answer to such an argument is that existence does indeed exist; but
it exists by itself, not by another existence. So the matter does not
lead to an infinite regress.

In the light of what has been said, the infirmity of another view,
ascribed to Dawwani, also becomes evident. That view ascribes
fundamental reality to existence with respect to the Necessary Being,
and to quiddity with respect to contingent beings. According to it,
existence is attributable to the Necessary Being in the sense that It is
existent by Itself and to quiddities in the sense that they have only a
relation with being, such as the relation between the ‘milkman’ (labin)
and ‘milk’ (laban) and the ‘date seller’ (tamir) and ‘dates’ (tamr).
However, in accordance with the doctrine endorsed by us, existence
exists by itself (bi dhatih) and quiddity exists accidentally (bi
al-‘arad).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في أن الوجود حقيقة واحدة مشككة
-------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اختلف القائلون بأصالة الوجود فذهب بعضهم إلى أن الوجود حقيقة واحدة مشككة
و هو المنسوب إلى الفهلويين من حكماء الفرس فالوجود عندهم لكونه ظاهرا
بذاته مظهرا لغيره من الماهيات كالنور الحسي الذي هو ظاهر بذاته مظهر لغيره
من الأجسام الكثيفة للأبصار.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فكما أن النور الحسي نوع واحد حقيقته أنه ظاهر بذاته مظهر لغيره و هذا
المعنى متحقق في جميع مراتب الأشعة و الأظلة على كثرتها و اختلافها فالنور
الشديد شديد في نوريته التي يشارك فيها النور الضعيف و النور الضعيف ضعيف
في نوريته التي يشارك فيها النور الشديد فليست شدة الشديد منه جزءا مقوما
للنورية حتى يخرج الضعيف منه و لا عرضا خارجا عن الحقيقة و ليس ضعف الضعيف
قادحا في نوريته و لا أنه مركب من النور و الظلمة لكونها أمرا عدميا بل شدة
الشديد في أصل النورية و كذا ضعف الضعيف فللنور عرض عريض باعتبار مراتبه
المختلفة بالشدة و الضعف و لكل مرتبة عرض عريض باعتبار القوابل المختلفة من
الأجسام الكثيفة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كذلك الوجود حقيقة واحدة ذات مراتب مختلفة متمايزة بالشدة و الضعف و التقدم
و التأخر و غير ذلك فيرجع ما به الامتياز فيها إلى ما به الاشتراك و ما به
الاختلاف إلى ما به الاتحاد فليست خصوصية شي‏ء من المراتب جزءا مقوما
للوجود لبساطته كما سيجي‏ء و لا أمرا خارجا عنه لأن أصالة الوجود تبطل ما
هو غيره الخارج عنه بل الخصوصية في كل مرتبة مقومة لنفس المرتبة بمعنى ما
ليس بخارج منها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لها كثرة طولية باعتبار المراتب المختلفة الآخذة من أضعف المراتب و هي
التي لا فعلية لها إلا عدم الفعلية و هي المادة الأولى الواقعة في أفق
العدم ثم تتصاعد المراتب إلى أن تنتهي إلى المرتبة الواجبة لذاتها و هي
التي لا حد لها إلا عدم الحد و لها كثرة عرضية باعتبار تخصصها بالماهيات
المختلفة التي هي مثار الكثرة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذهب قوم من المشاءين إلى كون الوجود حقائق متباينة بتمام ذواتها أما كونه
حقائق متباينة فلاختلاف آثارها و أما كونها متباينة بتمام الذوات فلبساطتها
و على هذا يكون مفهوم الوجود المحمول عليها عرضيا خارجا عنها لازما لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق أنه حقيقة واحدة مشككة أما كونها حقيقة واحدة فلأنه لو لم تكن كذلك
لكانت حقائق مختلفة متباينة بتمام الذوات و لازمه كون مفهوم الوجود و هو
مفهوم واحد كما تقدم منتزعا من مصاديق متباينة بما هي متباينة و هو محال
بيان الاستحالة أن المفهوم و المصداق واحد ذاتا و إنما الفارق كون الوجود
ذهنيا أو خارجيا فلو انتزع الواحد بما هو واحد من الكثير بما هو كثير كان
الواحد بما هو واحد كثيرا بما هو كثير و هو محال
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا لو انتزع المفهوم الواحد بما هو واحد من المصاديق الكثيرة بما هي
كثيرة فإما أن تعتبر في صدقه خصوصية هذا المصداق لم يصدق على ذلك المصداق و
إن اعتبر فيه خصوصية ذاك لم يصدق على هذا و إن اعتبر فيه الخصوصيتان معا لم
يصدق على شي‏ء منهما و إن لم يعتبر شي‏ء من الخصوصيتين بل انتزع من القدر
المشترك بينهما لم يكن منتزعا من الكثير بما هو كثير بل بما هو واحد كالكلي
المنتزع من الجهة المشتركة بين الأفراد الصادق على الجميع هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما أن حقيقته مشككة فلما يظهر من الكمالات الحقيقية المختلفة التي هي
صفات متفاضلة غير خارجة عن الحقيقة الواحدة كالشدة و الضعف و التقدم و
التأخر و القوة و الفعل و غير ذلك فهي حقيقة واحدة متكثرة في ذاتها يرجع
فيها كل ما به الامتياز إلى ما به الاشتراك و بالعكس و هذا هو التشكيك.
</p>

1.5. EXISTENCE IS ONE GRADATIONAL REALITY
-----------------------------------------

The believers in the fundamental reality of existence disagree amongst
themselves. Some of them regard existence as a single gradational
reality (haqiqah mushakkakah wahidah). This view is ascribed to the
Fahlaviyyun, philosophers of [ancient] Iran. Existence, according to
them, is self-manifesting and makes other things - i.e. quiddities -
manifest. It may be likened to sensible light, which is self-manifesting
and makes other things, such as opaque bodies, manifest to vision.

Sensible light is a single species. Its reality is that it is
self-manifesting and manifests things other than itself. This feature
applies to all the different grades of light and shade with their
multiplicity and diversity. Hence a strong light shares its luminous
nature with a weak light, and a weak light shares its luminous nature
with a strong one. The strength of a strong light is neither the
constituting differentia (juz muqawwim) of its luminous nature, so as to
negate the luminous character of weak light, nor is it an accident
extraneous to its reality. The weakness of a weak light neither negates
its luminous nature, nor is it a compound of light and darkness, for
darkness is non-existence of light. The intensity of a strong light
inheres in its luminous nature, and so does the weakness of a weak
light. Light possesses a wide range in accordance with its various
degrees of intensity and weakness, and there is a wide range associated
with each of its degrees depending on the varying receptivity of opaque
bodies [as in reflection and refraction].

Similarly, existence is one reality with various degrees differentiated
by intensity and weakness, priority and posteriority, etc. That which
differentiates these degrees of existence is exactly that which is
common to them, and that which makes them different is exactly that
which makes them one. Hence the particularity of any of these degrees is
not a constituting differentia of existence, by virtue of the simplicity
(basatah) of existence  - as will be explained later on - nor is it
anything extraneous to it. This is because the fundamental reality of
existence precludes that there should be anything other than it or
external to it. Rather, the particularity of every degree is what
constitutes that degree itself and is not something other than it.

The multiplicity in existence pertains to its various vertical (tuli)
degrees, beginning from the weakest of degrees  - represented by prime
matter, which exists on the verge of non-existence -  where it has no
actuality except the absence of actuality. From there it rises in
degrees to the level of the Necessary Being, which has no limit except
the absence of limit. Also, existence has a horizontal (‘aradi)
multiplicity particularized by the various quiddities, quiddity being
the source of multiplicity.

A group of Peripatetics have held the view that existence consists of
entities essentially disparate  - disparate in their entirety -  from
each other (haqa’iq mutabayinah bi tamami dhawatiha). They are disparate
because their properties are disparate. The disparity is essential and
complete, by virtue of the simplicity of their essences. On the basis of
this position, the predication of existence in regard to these entities
becomes, of necessity, something accidental and extrinsic to them (for,
were it intrinsic to them, it would be a constituent, and this
contradicts simplicity).

The truth is that existence is one graded reality. Were it not one
reality, entities would have been disparate from one another with the
totality of their essences (dhawat). That would entail that the concept
of existence, which is a single concept, as said, has been abstracted
from disparate things qua disparate things [having no unifying aspect].
This is impossible. To explain, there is an essential unity between a
concept and that to which it refers. The factor of disparity lies in
existence being mental or external. Were something which is one, qua
one, capable of being abstracted from that which is many, qua many, one
qua one would be the same as many qua many, which is impossible.

Also, suppose that a single concept were abstracted from a multiplicity
of referents qua disparate things. If the concept represented a certain
characteristic of one referent, it would not be predicable of a second
referent. If the concept represented some characteristic of the second
referent, it would not correspond to the first referent. If the
characteristics of both the referents were represented in it, it would
not correspond to either of the referents; and should none of these two
characteristics be taken into consideration and the concept were to
represent that which is common to the two referents, such an abstraction
could not have been possible from different things qua different things,
but from their unifying aspect, such as the abstraction of universals
from the common aspect shared by all individuals covered by that
universal. This, however, contradicts the assumption.

As to existence being a gradational reality, since it manifests various
real perfections that make up the distinctive attributes that are not
extraneous” to the single reality of existence, such as intensity and
weakness, priority and posteriority, potentiality and actuality, etc.,
existence is a single reality multiple in its essence, wherein all that
makes existents differ refers to what is common to them, and vice versa.
This is what is called gradation (tashkik).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في ما يتخصص به الوجود
----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
### تخصص الوجود بوجوه ثلاثة :
</p>

###

أحدها تخصص حقيقته الواحدة الأصلية بنفس ذاتها القائمة بذاتها

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيها تخصصها بخصوصيات مراتبها غير الخارجة عن المراتب
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثها تخصص الوجود بإضافته إلى الماهيات المختلفة الذوات و عروضه لها
فيختلف باختلافها بالعرض.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عروض الوجود للماهية و ثبوته لها ليس من قبيل العروض المقولي الذي يتوقف
فيه ثبوت العارض على ثبوت المعروض قبله فإن حقيقة ثبوت الوجود للماهية هي
ثبوت الماهية به لأن ذلك هو مقتضى أصالته و اعتباريتها و إنما العقل لمكان
أنسه بالماهيات يفترض الماهية موضوعه و يحمل الوجود عليها و هو في الحقيقة
من عكس الحمل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بذلك يندفع الإشكال المعروف في حمل الوجود على الماهية من أن قاعدة
الفرعية أعني أن ثبوت شي‏ء لشي‏ء فرع ثبوت المثبت له توجب ثبوتا للمثبت له
قبل ثبوت الثابت فثبوت الوجود للماهية يتوقف على ثبوت الماهية قبله فإن كان
ثبوتها عين ثبوته لها لزم تقدم الشي‏ء على نفسه و إن كان غيره توقف ثبوته
لها على ثبوت آخر لها و هلم جرا فيتسلسل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد اضطر هذا الإشكال بعضهم إلى القول بأن القاعدة مخصصة بثبوت الوجود
للماهية و بعضهم إلى تبديل الفرعية بالاستلزام فقال الحق أن ثبوت شي‏ء
لشي‏ء مستلزم لثبوت المثبت له و لو بهذا الثابت و ثبوت الوجود للماهية
مستلزم لثبوت الماهية بنفس هذا الوجود فلا إشكال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بعضهم إلى القول بأن الوجود لا تحقق له و لا ثبوت في ذهن و لا في خارج و
للموجود معنى بسيط يعبر عنه بالفارسية ب هست و الاشتقاق صوري فلا ثبوت له
حتى يتوقف على ثبوت الماهية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بعضهم إلى القول بأن الوجود ليس له إلا المعنى المطلق و هو معنى الوجود
العام و الحصص و هو المعنى العام مضافا إلى ماهية ماهية بحيث يكون التقييد
داخلا و القيد خارجا و أما الفرد و هو مجموع المقيد و التقييد و القيد فليس
له ثبوت.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و شي‏ء من هذه الأجوبة على فسادها لا يغني طائلا و الحق في الجواب ما تقدم
من أن القاعدة إنما تجري في ثبوت شي‏ء لشي‏ء لا في ثبوت الشي‏ء و بعبارة
أخرى مجرى القاعدة هو الهلية المركبة دون الهلية البسيطة كما في ما نحن فيه
</p>

1.6. THAT WHICH PARTICULARIZES EXISTENCE
----------------------------------------

### Existence is particularized in three aspects:

###

(1) as a single fundamental reality in itself, which is self-subsistent
[unlike quiddity]; (2) in accordance with the characteristics of its
degrees, which are not extraneous to it; (3) in accordance with the
different quiddities to which existence pertains and which differentiate
it accidentally in accordance with their difference.

The manner in which existence pertains to quiddity and gives it
subsistence (thubut) is not the kind peculiar to categories [like
accidents in relation to substance], wherein the subsistence of a
quality depends on the prior subsistence of its subject. That is because
the meaning of existence of quiddity is its subsistence through
existence. This follows from the fundamental reality of existence and
the derivative (i’tibari) character of quiddity. It is the intellect
which, by virtue of its familiarity with quiddities, supposes quiddity
to be the subject to which predicates existence. However, the matter is
the inverse of this predication in concrete reality.

This explanation serves to answer the well-known objection concerning
the predication of existence in relation to quiddity. It is said that in
accordance with the Rule of Subordination (qaidat al-far’iyyah), the
subsistence (thubut) of some quality (q) of a thing (A) is subordinate
to that thing’s subsistence, which makes it necessary that the thing of
which the property is posited subsist prior to the quality posited of
it. Hence the subsistence of existence in relation to quiddity depends
on the prior subsistence of quiddity. For should the subsistence of
quiddity be the same as the subsistence of existence, that would imply
something being prior to itself; and should it be different, the
subsistence of existence in relation to quiddity would depend on another
subsistence of quiddity, and so on. This results in an infinite regress.

This objection has forced some philosophers to admit an exception to the
rule in the case of subsistence of existence in relation to quiddity.
Some of them have been forced to change posteriority into concomitance.
They state: ‘The truth is that the subsistence of one thing [quality] in
relation to another [subject] is concomitant with the subsistence of the
subject, though it be through the subsistence of the former. The
subsistence of existence in relation to quiddity is concomitant with the
subsistence of quiddity through this existence itself. Hence there
remains no room for an objection.”

Some of them have been compelled by this objection into holding that
existence has no entity or subsistence, either in the mind or in
external reality. ‘Being’ has a simple meaning represented in Farsi by
the word hast (‘is’). This derivation [of a substantive from a verb] is
merely verbal, and existence has no subsistence at all so as to depend
on the subsistence of quiddity.

Some others have been led to hold that ‘existence’ has nothing but a
general meaning, signifying existence in general and its parts, which is
the same general meaning appended to quiddity, in the sense that the
conditioning is internal while the condition is external. The
individual, which is the totality of the conditioned, the conditioning,
and the condition, has no subsistence.

These attempts to solve the difficulty are invalid, like the earlier
one. The correct solution is the one suggested by the foregoing
discussion, that the Rule of Subordination applies to the subsistence of
a thing in relation to another thing (thubutu shay’in li shay), not to a
thing’s subsistence (thubutu al-shay’). In other words, the rule applies
to composite propositions [e.g., ‘A has the quality q’], not to simple
propositions [e.g., ‘A exists’], as is the matter in the present case.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في أحكام الوجود السلبية
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها أن الوجود لا غير له و ذلك لأن انحصار الأصالة في حقيقته يستلزم بطلان
كل ما يفرض غيرا له أجنبيا عنه بطلانا ذاتيا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أنه لا ثاني له لأن أصالة حقيقته الواحدة و بطلان كل ما يفرض غيرا
له ينفى عنه كل خليط داخل فيه أو منضم إليه فهو صرف في نفسه و صرف الشي‏ء
لا يتثنى و لا يتكرر فكل ما فرض له ثانيا عاد أولا و إلا امتاز عنه بشي‏ء
غيره داخل فيه أو خارج عنه و المفروض انتفاؤه هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أنه ليس جوهرا و لا عرضا أما أنه ليس جوهرا فلأن الجوهر ماهية إذا
وجدت في الخارج وجدت لا في الموضوع و الوجود ليس من سنخ الماهية و أما أنه
ليس بعرض فلأن العرض متقوم الوجود بالموضوع و الوجود متقوم بنفس ذاته و كل
شي‏ء متقوم به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أنه ليس جزءا لشي‏ء لأن الجزء الآخر المفروض غيره و الوجود لا غير
له.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ما قيل إن كل ممكن زوج تركيبي من ماهية و وجود فاعتبار عقلي ناظر إلى
الملازمة بين الوجود الإمكاني و الماهية لا أنه تركيب من جزءين أصيلين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أنه لا جزء له لأن الجزء إما جزء عقلي كالجنس و الفصل و إما جزء
خارجي كالمادة و الصورة و إما جزء مقداري كأجزاء الخط و السطح و الجسم
التعليمي و ليس للوجود شي‏ء من هذه الأجزاء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الجزء العقلي فلأنه لو كان للوجود جنس و فصل فجنسه إما الوجود فيكون
فصله المقسم مقوما لأن الفصل بالنسبة إلى الجنس يفيد تحصل ذاته لا أصل ذاته
و تحصل الوجود هو ذاته هذا خلف و إما غير الوجود و لا غير للوجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الجزء الخارجي و هو المادة و الصورة فلأن المادة و الصورة هما الجنس
و الفصل مأخوذين بشرط لا فانتفاء الجنس و الفصل يوجب انتفاءهما.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الجزء المقداري فلأن المقدار من عوارض الجسم و الجسم مركب من المادة
و الصورة و إذ لا مادة و لا صورة للوجود فلا جسم له و إذ لا جسم له فلا
مقدار له
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و مما تقدم يظهر أنه ليس نوعا لأن تحصل النوع بالتشخص الفردي و الوجود
متحصل بنفس ذاته‏
</p>

1.7. NEGATIVE PROPERTIES OF EXISTENCE
-------------------------------------

One of the properties of existence is that it has no ‘other.’ Since its
reality exhausts all fundamental reality, this necessitates the
essential vacuity of anything that may be supposed as being alienated
from it or besides it.

Another of these properties is that it has no second, for the oneness of
its fundamental reality and the vacuity of anything else that may be
supposed, precludes its possessing any ingredient within it or appended
to it. It is absolute (sirf), and a thing in its absoluteness does not
yield to duplication or repetition. Any second that may be assumed for
it would be either identical with the first, or differ from it due to
something intrinsic or extrinsic that is other than it, and the
supposition (that there is nothing except existence) negates any other.

Another of these properties is that existence is neither substance nor
accident. It is not substance, because substance is a quiddity that does
not require a subject to subsist in external reality, while existence is
not of the order of quiddity. As to its not being an accident, that is
because an accident subsists through its subject and existence is
self-subsisting and everything else subsists through it.

Another of these properties is that existence is not a part of anything,
because the other supposed part will be something other than existence,
while existence has no other.

As to the statement that ‘every contingent existent (mumkin) is a
duality composed of quiddity and existence’ [which apparently implies
that existence is a part of something], that is merely one of the
intellect’s constructs (i’tibar ‘aqli) representing the necessary
relation between contingent existence and quiddity. It does not mean
that it is a compound made up of two parts possessing fundamental
reality.

Another of these properties is that existence has no constituents.
Constituents may be: (i) conceptual, such as genus and differentia; (ii)
external, such as matter and form; or (iii) quantitative, such as
length, area, and volume. Existence possesses none of these parts.

As to the absence of conceptual constituents in existence, were there a
genus and differentia for existence, the genus would be either existence
or something else. If the genus were existence, its differentia, which
divides the genus, would constitute it, for the differentia in relation
to the genus actualizes the genus [through species]; it does not
constitute the essence of the genus itself. Existence, however,
actualizes itself. The genus cannot be something other than existence,
because existence has no other.

As to external constituents, i.e. matter and form, they are genus and
differentia, though like genus and differentia they are not predicable
of each other. The negation of genus and differentia in regard to
existence necessarily implies the negation of these also.

As to quantitative constituents, magnitude is a property of bodies,
which are composed of matter and form. Since existence has neither
matter nor form, it follows that it has neither bodiness, nor, as
consequence, magnitude.

From what has been said, it become evident that existence has no species
either, for a species is actualized by individuation, and existence is
actualized by itself.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في معنى نفس الأمر
------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد ظهر مما تقدم أن لحقيقة الوجود ثبوتا و تحققا بنفسه بل الوجود عين
الثبوت و التحقق و أن للماهيات و هي التي تقال في جواب ما هو و توجد تارة
بوجود خارجي فتظهر آثارها و تارة بوجود ذهني فلا تترتب عليها الآثار ثبوتا
و تحققا بالوجود لا بنفس ذاتها و إن كانا متحدين في الخارج و أن المفاهيم
الاعتبارية العقلية و هي التي لم تنتزع من الخارج و إنما اعتبرها العقل
بنوع من التعمل لضرورة تضطره إلى ذلك كمفاهيم الوجود و الوحدة و العلية و
نحو ذلك أيضا لها نحو ثبوت بثبوت مصاديقها المحكية بها و إن لم تكن هذه
المفاهيم مأخوذة في مصاديقها أخذ الماهية في أفرادها و في حدود مصاديقها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا الثبوت العام الشامل لثبوت الوجود و الماهية و المفاهيم الاعتبارية
العقلية هو المسمى بنفس الأمر التي يعتبر صدق القضايا بمطابقتها فيقال إن
كذا كذا في نفس الأمر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
توضيح ذلك أن من القضايا ما موضوعها خارجي بحكم خارجي كقولنا الواجب تعالى
موجود و قولنا خرج من في البلد و قولنا” الإنسان ضاحك بالقوة “ صدق الحكم
فيها بمطابقته للوجود العيني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها ما موضوعها ذهني بحكم ذهني أو خارجي مأخوذ بحكم ذهني كقولنا الكلي
إما ذاتي أو عرضي و الإنسان نوع و صدق الحكم فيها بمطابقته للذهن لكون موطن
ثبوتها هو الذهن و كلا القسمين صادقان بمطابقتهما لنفس الأمر فالثبوت النفس
الأمري أعم مطلقا من كل من الثبوت الذهني و الخارجي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قيل إن نفس الأمر عقل مجرد فيه صور المعقولات عامة و التصديقات الصادقة
في القضايا الذهنية و الخارجية تطابق ما عنده من الصور المعقولة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه أنا ننقل الكلام إلى ما عنده من الصور العلمية فهي تصديقات تحتاج في
صدقها إلى ثبوت لمضامينها خارج عنها تطابقه.
</p>

1.8. THE MEANING OF ‘THE DOMAIN OF FACTUALITY’
----------------------------------------------

From what has been said above,’ it becomes clear that existence has
reality and actuality by itself, or, rather, existence is reality and
actuality itself. Quiddities  - which are represented by the reply to
the question ‘What is it?’ -  either occur as external existence, in
which case they possess certain properties, or as mental existence, in
which case they do not possess those properties. They obtain reality and
actuality through existence, not by themselves, though the two of them,
existence and quiddity, are united in external reality.

The derivative (i’tibarí) concepts formulated by the intellect, e.g.
existence, unity, causality and the like, are those that have not been
abstracted from external reality. The intellect formulates them through
a kind of analysis into which it is forced by necessity. Moreover, these
concepts have a kind of subsistence (thubut) by virtue of the
subsistence of the instances to which they refer, although they are not
abstracted from their instances in the way quiddities are abstracted
from their individual instances and their limits.

Subsistence in general, including the subsistence of existence,
quiddity, and i’tibari concepts, is called ‘fact’ (nafs al-amr). It is
that to which a proposition must correspond in order to be true, as when
one says, “The case is such and such in fact.”

To explain, some propositions pertain to external reality, as when we
say, “The Necessary Being exists,” or when we say, “The townspeople have
left the city,” or when we say, “Man is potentially risible (capable of
laughing).” The truth of these propositions depends on their
correspondence to external reality.

There are other propositions that pertain to the mind, in that they
pertain to the mind’s formulations even if they should involve concepts
abstracted from external reality, such as the propositions, “A universal
is either essential or accidental,” and “Man is a species.” The
criterion of truth in these cases is their correspondence to the mind,
wherein they find subsistence. In each of the above cases, truth depends
on correspondence to ‘fact.’ Hence ‘fact’ is more general than external
or mental subsistence (al-thubût al-dhihni wa al-khârijî).

Some philosophers have said that ‘fact’ is an immaterial intellect (‘aql
mujarrad), which contains the general forms of the intelligibles. True
judgements relating to propositions pertaining to the mind and external
reality correspond to its intelligible forms.

This is not admissible, for when we shift our discussion to the
immaterial Intellect and its intelligible forms, we see that they are
also judgements which in order to be true stand in need of
correspondence of their contents to what is external to it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع الشيئية تساوق الوجود
---------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الشيئية تساوق الوجود و العدم لا شيئية له إذ هو بطلان محض لا ثبوت له
فالثبوت و النفي في معنى الوجود و العدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عن المعتزلة أن الثبوت أعم مطلقا من الوجود فبعض المعدوم ثابت عندهم و هو
المعدوم الممكن و يكون حينئذ النفي أخص من العدم و لا يشمل إلا المعدوم
الممتنع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عن بعضهم أن بين الوجود و العدم واسطة و يسمونها الحال و هي صفة الموجود
التي ليست بموجودة و لا معدومة كالعالمية و القادرية و الوالدية من الصفات
الانتزاعية التي لا وجود منحازا لها فلا يقال إنها موجودة و الذات الموجودة
تتصف بها فلا يقال إنها معدومة و أما الثبوت و النفي فهما متناقضان لا
واسطة بينهما و هذه كلها أوهام يكفي في بطلانها قضاء الفطرة بأن العدم
بطلان لا شيئية له.
</p>

1.9. THINGNESS AND EXISTENCE
----------------------------

Thingness (shay’iyyah) is identical with existence, and non-existence
has no entity, being sheer vacuity with no subsistence whatsoever. Hence
subsistence [thubut) means existence, and ‘negation’ (nafy) means
non-existence.

According to the Mu’tazilah, ‘subsistence’ (thubut) is more general than
existence. They regard some non-existents - namely, ‘non-existent
contingents’ (al-ma’dum al-mumkin) - as possessing a kind of
subsistence. Hence, according to them, ‘negation’ has a narrower meaning
than non-existence, not including anything except impossible
non-existents (al-ma’dum al-mumtani’).

According to some of them, there is a middle stage between existents and
non-existents which they call ‘state’ {hat), which is the attribute of a
being that is neither existent nor non-existent, such as
‘knowledgeability’ (‘ilmiyyah), ‘fatherhood’ and ‘strength,’ which are
abstracted qualities that have no independent existence. Hence they may
not be said to exist, though existents possess these [relations and
qualities]. Neither may they be said to be non-existent. As to
subsistence (thubut) and negation (nafy), they are contradictories,
there being no intermediary between them.

Such ruminations are mere fancies. The self-evident judgement, based on
sound natural sense that non-existence is vacuity and has no entity,
suffices to refute them.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في أنه لا تمايز و لا علية في العدم
-----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما عدم التمايز فلأنه فرع الثبوت و الشيئية و لا ثبوت و لا شيئية في العدم
نعم ربما يتميز عدم من عدم بإضافة الوهم إياه إلى الملكات و أقسام الوجود
فيتميز بذلك عدم من عدم كعدم البصر و عدم السمع و عدم زيد و عدم عمرو و أما
العدم المطلق فلا تميز فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما عدم العلية في العدم فلبطلانه و انتفاء شيئيته و قولهم عدم العلة علة
لعدم المعلول قول على سبيل التقريب و المجاز فقولهم مثلا لم يكن غيم فلم
يكن مطر معناه بالحقيقة أنه لم يتحقق العلية التي بين وجود الغيم و وجود
المطر و هذا كما قيل نظير إجراء أحكام القضايا الموجبة في السالبة فيقال
سالبة حملية و سالبة شرطية و نحو ذلك و إنما فيها سلب الحمل و سلب الشرط.
</p>

1.10. ABSENCE OF DISTINCTION AND CAUSAL RELATIONSHIP
----------------------------------------------------

IN NON-EXISTENCE

As to the absence of distinction (tamayuz), distinction is something
that derives from subsistence and being, while non-existence has no
existence or being. Of course, at times, [absolute] non-existence is
distinguished from the non-existence related by the mind to certain
faculties and kinds of existents, such as non-existence of vision or
hearing, or non-existence of Zayd and ‘Amr. However, there are no
distinctions in absolute non-existence.

As to the absence of causality in non-existence, that is on account of
its vacuity and nonentity. As to such statements as, “The non-existence
of cause is the cause of non-existence of the effeet,” they involve
loose and metaphoric expression. Hence when it is said, for instance,
“There were no ciouds, and therefore there was no rain,” it means that
the causal relation between the existence of clouds and the existence of
rain did not materialize. This case, as has been pointed out, is similar
to the application of the classification of affirmative propositions to
negative ones, which are classified as “negative predicative
propositions” and “negative implicative propositions,” and so on,
although they involve the negation of predication and implication,
respectively.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر في أن المعدوم المطلق لا خبر عنه
------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتبين ذلك بما تقدم أنه بطلان محض لا شيئية له بوجه و إنما يخبر عن شي‏ء
بشي‏ء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الشبهة بأن قولهم المعدوم المطلق لا يخبر عنه يناقض نفسه فإنه بعينه
إخبار عنه بعدم الإخبار فهي مندفعة بما سيجي‏ء في مباحث الوحدة و الكثرة من
أن من الحمل ما هو أولي ذاتي يتحد فيه الموضوع و المحمول مفهوما و يختلفان
اعتبارا كقولنا الإنسان إنسان و منه ما هو شائع صناعي يتحدان فيه وجودا و
يختلفان مفهوما كقولنا الإنسان ضاحك و المعدوم المطلق معدوم مطلق بالحمل
الأولي و لا يخبر عنه و ليس بمعدوم مطلق بل موجود من الموجودات الذهنية
بالحمل الشائع و لذا يخبر عنه بعدم الإخبار عنه فلا تناقض.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بهذا التقريب يندفع الشبهة عن عدة قضايا توهم التناقض كقولنا الجزئي جزئي
و هو بعينه كلي يصدق على كثيرين و قولنا شريك الباري ممتنع مع أنه معقول في
الذهن فيكون موجودا فيه ممكنا و قولنا الشي‏ء إما ثابت في الذهن أو لا ثابت
فيه و اللا ثابت في الذهن ثابت فيه لأنه معقول.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وجه الاندفاع أن الجزئي جزئي بالحمل الأولي كلي بالشائع و شريك الباري شريك
الباري بالحمل الأولي و ممكن مخلوق للباري بالشائع و اللا ثابت في الذهن
كذلك بالحمل الأولي و ثابت فيه بالشائع.
</p>

1.11. ABSOLUTE NON-EXISTENCE ALLOWS OF NO PREDICATION
-----------------------------------------------------

From what was said earlier’ it becomes clear that non-existence is sheer
vacuity, without any kind of entity, and only an entity can be
predicated of an entity.

However, a doubt has been raised here by those who state that the
statement, “Non-existence allows of no predication,” is
self-contradictory, for non- predicability is predicated of it. This
argument stands refuted on the basis of the forthcoming discussion on
unity and multiplicity.” To mention it briefly here, predication is
either intensional (al-haml al-awwali al-dhati, lit. ‘primary essential
predication’) or extensional (al-haml al-sha’i’ al-sina’i, lit. ‘common
technical predication’). In intensional predication, the subject and
predicate are intensionally (mafhuman) one [as is the case with all
tautologies and definitions], though they are different from the
viewpoint of conceptual consideration (i’tibarari), as when we say, ‘Man
is man.’ In extensional predication, the two are united in concrete
reality (wujudan) but differ intensionally (mafhuman), as when we say,
‘Man is a risible being.’ Absolute non-existence is absolute
non-existence from the viewpoint of intensional predication and does not
allow of any predication, but is not absolute non-being from the
viewpoint of extensional predication, but a [conceptual] entity present
in the mind of which unpredicability is predicated. Hence no
contradiction is involved here.

In the light of this explanation, ambiguity is removed from a number of
propositions that have been imagined to be paradoxical, e.g. ‘The
particular is particular,’ ‘A deity besides God is impossible,’ and ‘A
thing is either subsistent in the mind or non-subsistent in it.’ One may
point out that the particular is a universal in that it applies to a
multiplicity of objects, that ‘a deity besides God’ is an intelligible
in the mind and has an entity there, that ‘what is non-subsistent in the
mind’ subsists in the mind, which apprehends it.

These apparent paradoxes are resolved when we recognize that the
particular is a particular from the viewpoint of intensional predication
and a universal from the viewpoint of extensional predication. ‘A deity
besides God’ is such from the viewpoint of intensional predication and a
creature of God and a contingent being [existing in the mind] from the
viewpoint of extensional predication. The ‘non-subsistent in the mind’
is such from the viewpoint of intensional predication, and subsistent in
the mind from the viewpoint of extensional predication.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني عشر في امتناع إعادة المعدوم بعينه
----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالت الحكماء إن إعادة المعدوم بعينه ممتنعة و تبعهم فيه بعض المتكلمين و
أكثرهم على الجواز.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد عد الشيخ امتناع إعادة المعدوم ضروريا و هو من الفطريات لقضاء الفطرة
ببطلان شيئية المعدوم فلا يتصف بالإعادة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و القائلون بنظرية المسألة احتجوا عليه بوجوه :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها أنه لو جاز للمعدوم في زمان أن يعاد في زمان آخر بعينه لزم تخلل العدم
بين الشي‏ء و نفسه و هو محال لأنه حينئذ يكون موجودا بعينه في زمانين
بينهما عدم متخلل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجة أخرى لو جازت إعادة الشي‏ء بعينه بعد انعدامه جاز إيجاد ما يماثله من
جميع الوجوه ابتداء و استئنافا و هو محال أما الملازمة فلأن حكم الأمثال
فيما يجوز و فيما لا يجوز واحد و مثل الشي‏ء ابتداء و معاده ثانيا لا فرق
بينهما بوجه لأنهما يساويان الشي‏ء المبتدأ من جميع الوجوه و أما استحالة
اللازم فلاستلزام اجتماع المثلين في الوجود عدم التميز بينهما و هو وحدة
الكثير من حيث هو كثير و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجة أخرى إن إعادة المعدوم توجب كون المعاد هو المبتدأ و هو محال لاستلزامه
الانقلاب أو الخلف بيان الملازمة أن إعادة المعدوم بعينه يستلزم كون المعاد
هو المبتدأ ذاتا و في جميع الخصوصيات المشخصة حتى الزمان فيعود المعاد عين
المبتدأ و هو الانقلاب أو الخلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حجة أخرى لو جازت الإعادة لم يكن عدد العود بالغا معينا يقف عليه إذ لا فرق
بين العودة الأولى و الثانية و هكذا إلى ما لا نهاية له كما لم يكن فرق بين
المعاد و المبتدإ و تعين العدد من لوازم وجود الشي‏ء المتشخص.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
احتج المجوزون بأنه لو امتنعت إعادة المعدوم لكان ذلك إما لماهيته و إما
للازم ماهيته و لو كان كذلك لم يوجد ابتداء و هو ظاهر و إما لعارض مفارق
فيزول الامتناع بزواله.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رد بأن الامتناع لأمر لازم لكن لوجوده و هويته لا لماهيته كما هو ظاهر من
الحجج المتقدمة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و عمدة ما دعاهم إلى القول بجواز الإعادة زعمهم أن المعاد و هو مما نطقت به
الشرائع الحقة من قبيل إعادة المعدوم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يرده أن الموت نوع استكمال لا انعدام و زوال.
</p>

1.12. WHAT HAS CEASED TO EXIST DOES NOT COME BACK ITSELF
--------------------------------------------------------

The philosophers have held that something that has ceased to exist
cannot come back itself. Some theologians have followed them in this
belief, but most of them consider it possible.

Ibn Sina considered the impossibility of the return of what has ceased
to exist to be self-evident, for the intellect regards what has ceased
to exist as a nonentity and vacuity, which cannot be characterized with
return.

Others [who do not consider the impossibility as self-evident],
considering it to be based on inference, have offered certain arguments
in this regard.

(i) One of their arguments is that if it were admitted that something
that has ceased to exist in a certain period of time can itself return
in another period of time, non-existence would intervene between the
thing and itself, which is impossible, because then it would exist in
two periods separated by non-existence.

(ii) Another argument is that if the return of a thing after its ceasing
to exist were possible, we would also have to allow the possibility of a
thing having another entity identical to itself in all respects during
the first and the second periods, which is impossible. To explain, there
is a rule that all identical things are to be judged equally with regard
to what is possible for them and what is impossible for them. There is
no difference in any respect between a thing’s ‘double’ in the first
period and its returning counterpart in the second period, because they
are supposedly identical to the first thing in all aspects. However, the
coexistence of two existents identical in all respects necessarily
implies the absence of distinction between them. This amounts to oneness
of many qua many, which is impossible.

(iii) Another argument is that the return of a thing that has ceased to
exist requires that the returning counterpart be identical with the
first thing, which is impossible because it implies a violation of the
law of identity and a contradiction. To explain, the return of a thing
that has itself ceased to exist entails that the returning counterpart
should be the same as the first thing in respect of quiddity and all its
individualizing qualities, even time, so that the returning thing be
identical with the first, which involves a violation of the law of
identity and a contradiction.

(iv) Another argument is that if the return of a thing that has ceased
to exist were admissible, there would be no definite limit to the number
of returns. Then there would be no difference between the first, second,
and the consecutive returns ad infinitum, in the same way as there is
supposedly no difference between the first thing and its returning
counterpart. However, determinate number is a necessary condition for
the existence of an individual thing.

Those who regard such a comeback as admissible advance the argument that
should the coming back of a thing after ceasing to exist be impossible,
that impossibility must inhere either in its quiddity or in a proprium
associated with its quiddity. Evidently, if the case were such, the
thing would not come into existence in the first place. Should the
impossibility be

due to a separable accident*(‘arad mufariq* ), the impossibility would
disappear on its disappearance.

This argument is refutable on the ground that the impossibility is
inherent in the thing’s existence and ipseity, not in its quiddity, as
is evident from the above-mentioned arguments.

The main reason that has led the believers in the possibility of a
thing’s return after ceasing to exist is their belief that the doctrine
of resurrection preached by the true heavenly religions involves belief
in the return of things after their having ceased to exist.

Such a notion is refutable on the ground that death is a kind of
progression (istikmal), which does not involve extinction and cessation
of existence.
