المرحلة الثانية في انقسام الوجود إلى خارجي و ذهني
=================================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها فصل واحد
</p>

CHAPTER TWO: The Division of Existence into External and Mental
===============================================================

1Unit

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في الوجود الخارجي و الوجود الذهني
---------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
المشهور بين الحكماء أن للماهيات وراء الوجود الخارجي و هو الوجود الذي
يترتب عليها فيه الآثار المطلوبة منها وجودا آخر لا يترتب عليها فيه الآثار
و يسمى وجودا ذهنيا فالإنسان الموجود في الخارج قائم لا في موضوع بما أنه
جوهر و يصح أن يفرض فيه أبعاد ثلاثة بما أنه جسم و بما أنه نبات و حيوان و
إنسان ذو نفس نباتية و حيوانية و ناطقة و يظهر معه آثار هذه الأجناس و
الفصول و خواصها و الإنسان الموجود في الذهن المعلوم لنا إنسان ذاتا واجد
لحده غير أنه لا يترتب عليه شي‏ء من تلك الآثار الخارجية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذهب بعضهم إلى أن المعلوم لنا المسمى بالموجود الذهني شبح الماهية لا
نفسها و المراد به عرض و كيف قائم بالنفس يباين المعلوم الخارجي في ذاته و
يشابهه و يحكيه في بعض خصوصياته كصورة الفرس المنقوشة على الجدار الحاكية
للفرس الخارجي و هذا في الحقيقة سفسطة ينسد معها باب العلم بالخارج من
أصله.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذهب بعضهم إلى إنكار الوجود الذهني مطلقا و أن علم النفس بشي‏ء إضافة
خاصة منها إليه و يرده العلم بالمعدوم إذ لا معنى محصلا للإضافة إلى
المعدوم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و احتج المشهور على ما ذهبوا إليه من الوجود الذهني بوجوه الأول أنا نحكم
على المعدومات بأحكام إيجابية كقولنا بحر من زيبق كذا و قولنا اجتماع
النقيضين غير اجتماع الضدين إلى غير ذلك و الإيجاب إثبات و إثبات شي‏ء
لشي‏ء فرع ثبوت المثبت له فلهذه الموضوعات المعدومة وجود و إذ ليس في
الخارج ففي موطن آخر و نسميه الذهن.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني أنا نتصور أمورا تتصف بالكلية و العموم كالإنسان الكلي و الحيوان
الكلي و التصور إشارة عقلية لا تتحقق إلا بمشار إليه موجود و إذ لا وجود
للكلي بما هو كلي في الخارج فهي موجودة في موطن آخر و نسميه الذهن.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالث أنا نتصور الصرف من كل حقيقة و هو الحقيقة محذوفا عنها ما يكثرها
بالخلط و الانضمام كالبياض المتصور بحذف جميع الشوائب الأجنبية و صرف
الشي‏ء لا يتثنى و لا يتكرر فهو واحد وحدة جامعة لكل ما هو من سنخه و
الحقيقة بهذا الوصف غير موجودة في الخارج فهي موجودة في موطن آخر نسميه
الذهن.
</p>

2.1: The External Existence and Mental Existence
------------------------------------------------

The prevalent view among the metaphysicians is that quiddities, besides
their external existence (al-wujûd al-khârijî), wherein they possess the
properties (âthâr) expected of them, have another existence called
‘mental existence.” However, they do not possess those properties in
their mental mode of existence. For instance, the human being exists in
external reality and, being a substance, it exists there without the
need of a subject (mawdû). As a body (jism), it is valid to ascribe to
it three dimensions. Moreover, as a ‘living thing,’ ‘animal’ and ‘human
being,’ it manifests the properties and characteristics of these genera
and differentiae. However, the human being existing in the mind, though
it fulfils the definition of ‘human being,’ does not possess any of
these external properties.

However, some of them hold that what we know (the so-called ‘mental
existence’) is a resemblance (shabah) of the quiddity, not the quiddity
itself. It is an accident (‘arad) and a quality (kayf) subsisting
through the soul (nafs). In its essence (dhât) it differs from the
external thing known, only resembling it and representing some of its
characteristics. It is like the picture of a horse painted on a wall
that represents the horse existing in external reality. Such a view in
fact boils down to a denial of the possibility of knowledge, for it
totally closes the door to the knowledge of external reality.”

Some others have been led to deny mental existence altogether, holding
that the soul’s knowledge of an external object is a special relation
between it and the soul. Such a position is refuted by the knowledge of
anything non-existent; for the soul’s relation to something non-existent
is meaningless.

Those who believe in mental existence have advanced the following
arguments in its favour.

(i) We make affirmative judgements concerning non-existents, as about a
“sea of mercury,” or posit such propositions as “The co-existence of two
contradictories (naqîdayn) is different from the co-existence of two
contraries (diddayn)” and the like. Affirmation means to posit the
subsistence of something. The affirmation of one thing (B) in regard to
another thing (A) is subordinate to the subsistence of A. Hence subjects
that are non-existent [in external reality] have an existence. Since
they have no existence in external reality, they must have an existence
somewhere else, that is, the mind.

(ii) We conceptualize certain notions possessing universality
(kulliyyah), such as the universals ‘man’ and ‘animal.’ A concept is a
rational pointer that has no significance unless it points to an
existent. Since the universals qua universals do not exist in external
reality, they must have existence somewhere. That somewhere is the mind.

(iii) We can conceive every reality in the state of absolute simplicity
wherein it is divested of everything that may be mixed with it or
appended to it [in external reality]. For instance, there is the concept
of ‘whiteness,’ which is divested of everything other than whiteness.
Every thing in its absoluteness (sirf al-shay’) does not allow of
duality and multiplicity. It is one and encompasses in its unity every
thing of its kind. A reality with such

a characteristic does not exist in the external world. Hence it must
exist in an other locus, which we call ‘the mind.’

<p dir="rtl">
### تتمة
</p>

###

قد استشكل على وجود الماهيات في الذهن بمعنى حصولها بأنفسها فيه إشكالات:

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال الأول أن القول بحصول الماهيات بأنفسها في الذهن يستلزم كون الشي‏ء
الواحد جوهرا و عرضا معا و هو محال بيان الملازمة أن الجوهر المعقول في
الذهن جوهر بناء على انحفاظ الذاتيات و هو بعينه عرض لقيامه بالنفس قيام
العرض بمعروضه و أما بطلان اللازم فللزوم كونه قائما بالموضوع و غير قائم
به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال الثاني أن الماهية الذهنية مندرجة تحت مقولة الكيف بناء على ما
ذهبوا إليه من كون الصور العلمية كيفيات نفسانية ثم إنا إذا تصورنا جوهرا
كان مندرجا تحت مقولة الجوهر لانحفاظ الذاتيات و تحت مقولة الكيف كما تقدم
و المقولات متباينة بتمام الذوات فيلزم التناقض في الذات و كذا إذا تصورنا
مقولة أخرى غير الجوهر كانت الماهية المتصورة مندرجة تحت مقولتين و كذا لو
تصورنا كيفا محسوسا كان مندرجا تحت الكيف المحسوس و الكيف النفساني و هو
اندراج شي‏ء واحد تحت نوعين متباينين من مقولة و استحالته ضرورية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قالوا و هذا الإشكال أصعب من الأول إذ لا كثير إشكال في كون شي‏ء واحد
جوهرا و عرضا لأن التباين الذاتي الذي بين المقولات إنما هو بين الجوهر و
الكيف و الكم و غيرها و أما مفهوم العرض بمعنى القائم بالموضوع فهو عرض عام
صادق على تسع من المقولات و من الجائز أن يعم الجوهر الذهني أيضا و يصدق
عليه لأن المأخوذ في رسم الجوهر أنه ماهية إذا وجدت في الخارج وجدت لا في
موضوع فمن الجائز أن يقوم في الذهن في موضوع و هو إذا وجد في الخارج كان لا
في موضوع هذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما دخول الماهية الواحدة تحت مقولتين كالجوهر و الكيف و كالكم و الكيف و
المقولات متباينات بتمام الذوات فاستحالته ضرورية لا مدفع لها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بالتوجه إلى ما تقدم من الإشكال و نحوه ذهب بعضهم إلى إنكار الوجود
الذهني من أصله بالقول بأن العلم بإضافة من النفس إلى الخارج فالمعلوم
مندرج تحت مقولته الخارجية فقط و قد عرفت ما فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بعضهم إلى أن الماهيات الخارجية موجودة في الذهن بأشباحها لا بأنفسها و
شبح الشي‏ء يغاير الشي‏ء و يباينه فالصورة الذهنية كيفية نفسانية و أما
المقولة الخارجية فغير باقية فيها فلا إشكال و قد عرفت ما فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
#### و قد أجيب عن الإشكال بوجوه :
</p>

####

منها ما عن بعضهم أن العلم غير المعلوم فعند حصول ماهية من الماهيات
الخارجية في الذهن أمران أحدهما الماهية الحاصلة نفسها على ما كانت عليه في
الخارج و هو المعلوم و هو غير قائم بالنفس بل قائم بنفسه حاصل فيه حصول
الشي‏ء في الزمان و المكان و الآخر صفة حاصلة للنفس قائمة بها يطرد بها
عنها الجهل و هو العلم و على هذا فالمعلوم مندرج تحت مقولته الخارجية من
جوهر أو كم أو غير ذلك و العلم كيف نفساني فلا اجتماع أصلا لا لمقولتين و
لا لنوعين من مقولة.

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه أنه خلاف ما نجده من أنفسنا عند العلم فإن الصورة الحاصلة في نفوسنا
عند العلم بشي‏ء هي بعينها التي تطرد عنا الجهل و تصير وصفا لنا نتصف به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها ما عن بعض القائلين بأصالة الماهية أن الصورة الحاصلة في الذهن
منسلخة عن ماهيتها الخارجية و منقلبة إلى الكيف بيان ذلك أن موجودية
الماهية متقدمة على نفسها فمع قطع النظر عن الوجود لا ماهية أصلا و الوجود
الذهني و الخارجي مختلفان بالحقيقة فإذا تبدل الوجود بصيرورة الوجود
الخارجي ذهنيا جاز أن تنقلب الماهية بأن يتبدل الجوهر أو الكم أو غير ذلك
كيفا فليس للشي‏ء بالنظر إلى ذاته حقيقة معينة بل الكيفية الذهنية إذا وجدت
في الخارج كانت جوهرا أو غيره و الجوهر الخارجي إذا وجد في الذهن كان كيفا
نفسانيا و أما مباينة الماهية الذهنية للخارجية مع أن المدعى حصول الأشياء
بأنفسها في الذهن و هو يستدعي أصلا مشتركا بينهما فيكفي في تصويره أن يصور
العقل أمرا مبهما مشتركا بينهما يصحح به أن ما في الذهن هو الذي في الخارج
كما يصور المادة المشتركة بين الكائن و الفاسد الماديين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه أولا : أنه لا محصل لما ذكره من تبدل الماهية و اختلاف الوجودين في
الحقيقة بناء على ما ذهب إليه من أصالة الماهية و اعتبارية الوجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا :أنه في معنى القول بالشبح بناء على ما التزم به من المغايرة
الذاتية بين الصورة الذهنية و المعلوم الخارجي فيلحقه ما لحقه من محذور
السفسطة و منها ما عن بعضهم أن العلم لما كان متحدا بالذات مع المعلوم
بالذات كان من مقولة المعلوم إن جوهرا فجوهر و إن كما فكم و هكذا و أما
تسميتهم العلم كيفا فمبني على المسامحة في التعبير كما يسمى كل وصف ناعت
للغير كيفا في العرف العام و إن كان جوهرا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بهذا يندفع إشكال اندراج المقولات الآخر تحت الكيف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إما إشكال كون شي‏ء واحد جوهرا و عرضا معا فالجواب عنه ما تقدم أن مفهوم
العرض عرض عام شامل للمقولات التسع العرضية و للجوهر الذهني و لا إشكال
فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيه أن مجرد صدق مفهوم مقولة من المقولات على شي‏ء لا يوجب اندراجه تحتها
كما ستجي‏ء الإشارة إليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على : أن كلامهم صريح في كون العلم الحصولي كيفا نفسانيا داخلا تحت مقولة
الكيف حقيقة من غير مسامحة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها ما ذكره صدر المتألهين ره في كتبه و هو الفرق في إيجاب الاندراج بين
الحمل الأولي و بين الحمل الشائع فالثاني يوجبه دون الأول بيان ذلك أن مجرد
أخذ مفهوم جنسي أو نوعي في حد شي‏ء و صدقه عليه لا يوجب اندراج ذلك الشي‏ء
تحت ذلك الجنس أو النوع بل يتوقف الاندراج تحته على ترتب آثار ذلك الجنس أو
النوع الخارجية على ذلك الشي‏ء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فمجرد أخذ الجوهر و الجسم مثلا في حد الإنسان حيث يقال الإنسان جوهر جسم
نام حساس متحرك بالإرادة ناطق لا يوجب اندراجه تحت مقولة الجوهر أو جنس
الجسم حتى يكون موجودا لا في موضوع باعتبار كونه جوهرا و يكون بحيث يصح أن
يفرض فيه الأبعاد الثلاثة باعتبار كونه جسما و هكذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و كذا مجرد أخذ الكم و الاتصال في حد السطح حيث يقال السطح كم متصل قار
منقسم في جهتين لا يوجب اندراجه تحت الكم و المتصل مثلا حتى يكون قابلا
للانقسام بذاته من جهة أنه كم و مشتملا على الفصل المشترك من جهة أنه متصل
و هكذا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لو كان مجرد صدق مفهوم على شي‏ء موجبا للاندراج لكان كل مفهوم كلي فردا
لنفسه لصدقه بالحمل الأولي على نفسه فالاندراج يتوقف على ترتب الآثار و
معلوم أن ترتب الآثار إنما يكون في الوجود الخارجي دون الذهني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فتبين : أن الصورة الذهنية غير مندرجة تحت ما يصدق عليها من المقولات لعدم
ترتب آثارها عليها لكن الصورة الذهنية إنما لا تترتب عليها آثار المعلوم
الخارجي من حيث هي وجود مقيس إلى ما بحذائها من الوجود الخارجي و أما من
حيث إنها حاصلة للنفس حالا أو ملكة تطرد عنها الجهل فهي وجود خارجي موجود
للنفس ناعت لها يصدق عليه حد الكيف بالحمل الشائع و هو أنه عرض لا يقبل
قسمة و لا نسبة لذاته فهو مندرج بالذات تحت مقولة الكيف و إن لم يكن من جهة
كونه وجودا ذهنيا مقيسا إلى الخارج داخلا تحت شي‏ء من المقولات لعدم ترتب
الآثار اللهم إلا تحت مقولة الكيف بالعرض.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بهذا البيان يتضح اندفاع ما أورده بعض المحققين على كون العلم كيفا
بالذات و كون الصورة الذهنية كيفا بالعرض من أن وجود تلك الصور في نفسها و
وجودها للنفس واحد و ليس ذلك الوجود و الظهور للنفس ضميمة تزيد على وجودها
تكون هي كيفا في النفس لأن وجودها الخارجي لم يبق بكليته و ماهياتها في
أنفسها كل من مقولة خاصة و باعتبار وجودها الذهني لا جوهر و لا عرض و
ظهورها لدى النفس ليس سوى تلك الماهية و ذلك الوجود إذ ظهور الشي‏ء ليس
أمرا ينضم إليه و إلا لكان ظهور نفسه و ليس هناك أمر آخر و الكيف من
المحمولات بالضميمة و الظهور و الوجود للنفس لو كان نسبة مقولية كان ماهية
العلم إضافة لا كيفا و إذا كان إضافة إشراقية كان وجودا فالعلم نور و ظهور
و هما وجود و الوجود ليس ماهية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وجه الاندفاع : أن الصورة العلمية هي الموجودة للنفس الظاهرة لها لكن لا من
حيث كونها موجودا ذهنيا مقيسا إلى خارج لا تترتب عليها آثاره بل من حيث
كونها حالا أو ملكة للنفس تطرد عنها عدما و هي كمال للنفس زائد عليها ناعت
لها و هذا أثر خارجي مترتب عليها و إذا كانت النفس موضوعة لها مستغنية عنها
في نفسها فهي عرض لها و يصدق عليها حد الكيف و دعوى أن ليس هناك أمر زائد
على النفس منضم إليها ممنوعة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فظهر : أن الصورة العلمية من حيث كونها حالا أو ملكة للنفس كيف حقيقة و
بالذات و من حيث كونها موجودا ذهنيا كيف بالعرض و هو المطلوب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال الثالث أن لازم القول بالوجود الذهني و حصول الأشياء بأنفسها في
الأذهان كون النفس حارة باردة عريضة طويلة متحيزة متحركة مربعة مثلثة مؤمنة
كافرة و هكذا عند تصور الحرارة و البرودة إلى غير ذلك و هو باطل بالضرورة
بيان الملازمة أنا لا نعني بالحار و البارد و العريض و الطويل و نحو ذلك
إلا ما حصلت له هذه المعاني و قامت به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عنه أن المعاني الخارجية كالحرارة و البرودة و نحوهما إنما تحصل
في الأذهان بماهياتها لا بوجوداتها العينية و تصدق عليها بالحمل الأولي دون
الشائع و الذي يوجب الاتصاف حصول هذه المعاني بوجوداتها الخارجية و قيامها
بموضوعاتها دون حصول ماهياتها لها و قيام ما هي هي بالحمل الأولي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال الرابع أنا نتصور المحالات الذاتية كشريك الباري و اجتماع النقيضين
و ارتفاعهما و سلب الشي‏ء عن نفسه فلو كانت الأشياء حاصلة بأنفسها في
الأذهان استلزم ذلك ثبوت المحالات الذاتية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عنه أن الحاصل من المحالات الذاتية في الأذهان مفاهيمها بالحمل
الأولي دون الحمل الشائع فشريك الباري في الذهن شريك الباري بالحمل الأولي
و أما بالحمل الشائع فهو كيفية نفسانية ممكنة مخلوقة للباري و هكذا في سائر
المحالات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال الخامس أنا نتصور الأرض بما رحبت بسهولها و جبالها و براريها و
بحارها و ما فوقها من السماء بأرجائها البعيدة و النجوم و الكواكب بأبعادها
الشاسعة و حصول هذه المقادير العظيمة في الذهن بمعنى انطباعها في جزء عصبي
أو قوة دماغية كما قالوا به من انطباع الكبير في الصغير و هو محال و دفع
الإشكال بأن المنطبع فيه منقسم إلى غير النهاية لا يجدي شيئا فإن الكف لا
تسع الجبل و إن كانت منقسمة إلى غير النهاية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عنه أن الحق كما سيأتي أن الصور الإدراكية الجزئية غير مادية بل
مجردة تجردا مثاليا فيها آثار المادة من مقدار و شكل و غيرهما دون نفس
المادة فهي حاصلة للنفس في مرتبة تجرده المثالي من غير أن تنطبع في جزء
بدني أو قوة متعلقة بجزء بدني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الأفعال و الانفعالات الحاصلة في مرحلة المادة عند الإحساس بشي‏ء أو
عند تخيله فإنما هي معدات تتهيأ بها النفس لحصول الصور العلمية الجزئية
المثالية عندها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال السادس أن علماء الطبيعة بينوا أن الإحساس و التخيل بحصول صور
الأجسام المادية بما لها من النسب و الخصوصيات الخارجية في الأعضاء الحاسة
و انتقالها إلى الدماغ مع ما لها من التصرف فيها بحسب طبائعها الخاصة و
الإنسان ينتقل إلى خصوصية مقاديرها و أبعادها و أشكالها بنوع من المقايسة
بين أجزاء الصورة الحاصلة عنده على ما فصلوه في محله و مع ذلك لا مجال
للقول بحضور الماهيات الخارجية بأنفسها في الأذهان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عنه أن ما ذكروه من الفعل و الانفعال المادي عند حصول العلم
بالجزئيات في محله لكن هذه الصور المنطبعة المغايرة للمعلومات الخارجية
ليست هي المعلومة بالذات بل هي معدات تهيى‏ء النفس لحضور الماهيات الخارجية
عندها بوجود مثالي غير مادي و إلا لزمت السفسطة لمكان المغايرة بين الصور
الحاصلة في أعضاء الحس و التخيل و بين ذوات الصور.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بل هذا من أقوى الحجج على حصول الماهيات بأنفسها عند الإنسان بوجود غير
مادي فإن الوجود المادي لها كيفما فرض لم يخل عن مغايرة ما بين الصور
الحاصلة و بين الأمور الخارجية ذوات الصور و لازم ذلك السفسطة ضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإشكال السابع أن لازم القول بالوجود الذهني كون الشي‏ء الواحد كليا و
جزئيا معا و بطلانه ظاهر بيان الملازمة أن ماهية الإنسان المعقولة مثلا من
حيث تجويز العقل صدقها على كثيرين كلية و من حيث حصولها لنفس عاقلها
الشخصية و قيامها بها جزئية متشخصة بتشخصها متميزة من ماهية الإنسان
المعقولة لغير تلك النفس من النفوس فهي كلية و جزئية معا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الجواب عنه أن الجهة مختلفة فهي من حيث إنها وجود ذهني مقيس إلى الخارج
كلية تقبل الصدق على كثيرين و من حيث إنها كيفية نفسانية من غير مقايسة إلى
الخارج جزئية.
</p>

### A SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSION

###

Certain objections have been raised against the notion of existence of
quiddities in the mind, in the sense that they exist there by
themselves.

#### First Objection

####

The view that quiddities exist in the mind by themselves implies that a
single thing should be both a substance and an accident at the same
time, which is impossible. To explain, the substance (jawhar)
intellected by the mind is a substance in accordance with the principle
of retention of the essentials (dhatiyyât). However, the same substance
is also an accident (‘arad), because it subsists through the soul in
much the same way as an accident subsists, through its substratum
(ma‘rûd). This is self-contradictory, because it implies that a thing be
both independent of a subject (mawdû’) and depend on a subject at the
same time.

#### Second Objection

####

The mental quiddity belongs to the category (maqûlah) of quality
(kayf),’ in accordance with the view that the intelligible forms
(al-suwar al-‘ilmiyyah) are qualities of the soul (kayfiyyât
nafsâniyyah). When we conceive a substance, that conception would fall
under the category of substance, on the basis of the principle of
retention of the essentials (dhatiyyât). At the same time, as said, it
falls under the category of quality, while the categories are mutually
exclusive. This implies a contradiction in the essence of the mental
existent. Similarly, when we conceive something belonging to a category
other than that of substance, the conceived quiddity would fall under
two categories. This is true also when the conception is that of a
sensible quality (kayf mahsûs), for it will fall under the category of
sensible quality as well as that of psychic quality (kayf nafsânî). In
all these cases, a single thing falls under two mutually exclusive
categories, which is logically impossible.

The philosophers who believe in mental existence admit that the second
objection poses a greater difficulty than the first one. The idea that a
single thing may be a substance as well as an accident does not pose
much of a difficulty, because the essential difference between the
categories is the one between substance, quality, quantity and so on.
For the notion of accident - as something that subsists through its
subject - is a general one that applies to the nine categories. It may
validly include mental substance as well and apply to it. Moreover, in
accordance with the definition of substance as ‘a quiddity which does
not require a subject to exist externally,’ it may validly subsist in
the mind through a subject, for it is while existing externally that it
does, not require a subject. However, the falling of a single quiddity
under two categories  - such as substance and quality or quantity and
quality - is necessarily impossible, for the categories are mutually
exclusive with respect to essence.

#### The Attempts to Address the Two Objections

####

In view of the above and similar objections, some (viz. al-Râzî) have
been led to an outright denial of mental existence, holding that
knowledge is

a relation between the soul and external reality. Accordingly, that
which is known falls solely under the category of external entities.
However, we have shown the inadmissibility of such a position. Some
others have been led to hold that external quiddities existing in the
mind are resemblances (asybâh), not the quiddities themselves. A thing’s
resemblance is something other than and different from the thing itself.
Hence the intellected forms are qualities of the soul, which do not
retain the character of the external categories, and no difficulty
arises on the basis of this view.

However, we have shown that this position implies a denial of the
possibility of knowledge.

Several other attempts have been made to resolve the above-mentioned
difficulties, which are as follow:

\` (i) Some of them (viz. al-Qawshajî) have said that knowledge (‘ilm)
is different from the known (ma’lûm). The cognition (hushûl) of an
external quiddity by the mind involves two things. One is the
intellected quiddity itself as it was in external reality. That is the
known, and it does not subsist through the soul but is self-subsisting,
being present in the mind like a thing present in space and time. The
other is a quality present in the soul and subsisting through it. That
is knowledge, and it is by virtue of it that ignorance is removed from
the soul. Accordingly, the known - whether substance, quantity or
something else - falls under an external category, whereas knowledge is
a quality of the soul. Thus understood, the difficulty posed by
coincidence of two categories or two kinds of one category does not
arise.

However, such a description is contrary to what introspection reveals to
us during cognition. The form of something present in the soul during
cognition is exactly what relieves the soul of ignorance and afford us
the knowledge of that thing.

(ii) Some others who believe in the fundamental reality of quiddity
(viz. al-Sayyid al-Sanad Shadr al-Dîn al-Syirâzî) have been led to hold
that the forms intellected by the mind are divested from their
corresponding external quiddities and transformed into qualities. To
explain, since the external existence of quiddity is prior to the
[mental existence of] quiddity itself, aside from existence there will
be no quiddity at all. Mental existence and external existence are
different from one another with a real difference, so that when
existence is transformed through an external existent becoming a mental
existent, there is no reason why quiddity too should not be transformed
by the transformation of substance, quantity or any other category into
the category of quality. Hence a thing itself has no definite reality
with regard to itself. Rather, when a mental quality occurs in the
external world it is either substance or some other category, and when
an external substance occurs in the mind it becomes transformed into a
mental quality. Given the difference between mental and external
quiddities (as a result of the above-mentioned transformation), the
claim that things themselves come into the mind requires that there
should be a common principle between the two. To conceive such a
principle, it is sufficient for the intellect to conceptualize something
indefinite and common between the two - like the conception of a matter
common to a material body and its

disintegrated form - so that what is in the mind should correspond to
what is in external reality.

The above theory is fruitless, first because the belief in the
transformation of quiddity and of a real difference between the two
modes of existence (external and mental) is inconsistent with the
doctrine subscribed to by its proponent, that quiddity is fundamentally
real and existence is a derivative construct.

Second, since it implies an essential difference between the mental form
and the external object known, it boils down to a theory of resemblances
and skepticism.

(iii) Some others (viz. al-Dawwânî) have stated that since knowledge is
essentially identical with the object of knowledge, it belongs to the
same category as the known object. Thus if the latter happens to be a
substance, the former is also a substance, and if the latter is a
quantity it is also a quality, and so on. As to naming knowledge a
‘quality’ by the philosophers, it is based on a somewhat loose
expression, similar to the common usage wherein an attribute
representing a substance is called a quality when applied to something
else. With this, they claim, the second difficulty is overcome
concerning the falling of other categories under the category of
quality.

As to the first difficulty, that a single thing should be a substance
and accident simultaneously, its solution - as mentioned earlier - is
that ‘accident’ in its general sense includes the nine accidental
categories as well as mental substance. Hence it does not constitute any
difficulty.

The difficulty inherent in this view is that the mere applicability of
the concept of one of the categories to a thing, as we shall explain
later, does not justify its being classed under that category.

Moreover, the philosophers are explicit in their statement that
‘acquired knowledge’ (al- ‘ilm al-hushûlî) is a psychic quality that
really falls under the category of quality and there is no looseness of
expression involved.

(iv) Then there is the theory of Shadr al-Muta’allihin - may God’s mercy
be upon him - which has been set forth by him in his books. The theory
is based on a distinction between two forms of predication (haml):
‘primary essential predication’ and ‘common predication.’ It is the
second kind of predication that implies that the intelligible form falls
under an external category. To explain, the mere inclusion of a generic
or specific concept in the definition of a thing and its applicability
to it does not require that thing to be classed under that genus or
species. Such a classification depends on the thing’s possessing the
properties possessed externally by that genus or species. Hence the mere
inclusion of the concepts of ‘substance’ or ‘body,’ for instance, in the
definition of the human being (according to which the human being is
defined as ‘a substance that is a growing, sensate body capable of
voluntarily motion and possess¬ing rationality) does not entail its
falling under the category of substance, or under the genus ‘body,’
unless it occurs as a concrete substance, without needing a subject, or
as a body possessing three dimensions.

Similarly, the inclusion of ‘quantity’ and ‘continuity’ in the
definition of ‘surface’ (which is defined as ‘a static, two-dimensional
continuous

quantity’) does not necessitate its inclusion under ‘quantity’ and
‘continuous extension,’ unless as a concrete quantity it is susceptible
to division and possesses the property of continuity.

Were the mere correspondence of a concept to a thing to require its
inclusion under the category of that thing, then every universal would
itself be an individual, as it applies to itself through primary
predication. Hence inclusion under a category requires the possession of
external properties and it is obvious that such properties exist in
external existence, not in mental existence.

This shows that mentaj forms do not fall under the categories to which
they correspond, for they do not possess the [external] properties
expected of them. However, though the mental form does not possess the
properties of the corresponding external object known, as a state (hât)
or habit (malakah) present for the soul, from which it dispels
ignorance, it is an ‘external’ existent existing for the soul, which
possesses it as an attribute. The definition of quality is applicable to
it through common predication, as quality is therefore defined as “an
accident which is not subject to division or relation.” Hence the mental
form as such falls under the category of quality, though from the
viewpoint of its being a mental existent corresponding to external
reality it does not fall-due to the absence of external properties -
under any category except perhaps the category of quality-by-accident.

The above explanation reveals the inadmissibility of the objection of
some thinkers who have taken exception to the statement that knowledge
is an essential quality (kayf bi al-dzâf) and the mental form an
accidental quality (kayf bi al-‘arad). Their argument is that the very
existence of those forms and their existence for the soul are one and
the same. They argue that the existence and manifestation of the mental
forms for the soul are nothing additional to their existence, so that
they may be a quality in the soul, because their externality has ceased
in its entirety; furthermore, their quiddities in themselves each belong
to a particular category, while with regard to their mental existence
they are neither substances nor accidents. Moreover, their manifestation
for the soul is nothing but that quiddity and that existence, since the
manifestation of a thing is not something additional to it, otherwise it
would have a manifestation of itself, whereas there is nothing else. As
to quality, it is of such a nature that it is predicated of its subject
by inherence. If manifestation and existence for the soul were a
categorical relation, the quiddity of knowledge would be relation not
quality. But since it is an emanative relation (i.e. the creative
relation between a cause and its effect) originating in the soul, it is
existence. Therefore, knowledge is light and manifestation (zhuhûr), and
the latter are both existence, and existence is not quiddity.

This objection is not valid because though the cognitive form is
existent for the soul and manifest for it, that is not on account of its
being a mental existent corresponding to an external reality without
possessing its properties, but due to its being a state or ‘habit’ for
the soul that dispels privation (i.e. ignorance) from it, and as such it
is a perfection (kamâl) for the soul, additional to it, and possessed by
it as an attribute. That is an

extraneous effect produced on the soul. Since the soul is the subject
for the cognitive form and independent of it in itself, the latter is
its accident and the definition of quality is applicable to it. Hence
the claim that there is nothing additional to the soul, which is united
with it, is inadmissible.

Therefore, it is clear that the cognitive form, being a state or habit
of the soul, is a quality in essence, and it is a quality by accidence
due to its being a mental existent.

#### Third Objection:

####

The doctrine of mental existence and presence of the very (quiddities
of) things in the mind implies that the soul, while conceiving heat and
cold, width and length, motion and rest, triangle and rectangle, etc.,
should simultaneously become hot and cold, wide and long, triangular and
rectangular and so on. That is because we do not call to mind anything
hot or cold, wide or long, and so on, without the soul acquiring these
opposite attributes, which subsist through it.

The answer is that such external notions like heat and cold and the like
become present in the mind with their quiddities, not with their actual
existences, and correspond to them in the sense of primary predication,
not common predication. That which necessitates things becoming
attributed with these qualities does so by acquiring them with their
external existences and subsisting through their subjects, not by
conceiving their quiddities and their subsistence in the sense of
primary predication.

#### Fourth Objection

####

We conceive things that are essentially impossible, such as ‘God’s
partner’ (sharîk al-Bârî), the simultaneous co-existence or
non-existence of two contradictories, and the negation of a thing’s
identity with itself. Should things be themselves present in the mind,
such essential impossibilities would obtain subsistence.

The answer is that the essential impossibilities are present in the mind
in the sense of primary predication, not in that of common predication.
Hence ‘God’s partner’ is ‘God’s partner’ in the mind in the sense of
primary predication, but from the viewpoint of common predication it is
a contingent (mumkin), a quality of the soul, and a creature of God. The
same applies to other impossibilities.

#### Fifth Objection

####

We do conceive the earth with its great expanse, its plains, mountains,
continents and oceans, as well as the great distances of space together
with the planets and the stars with their huge dimensions. The
impression of these huge dimensions in the mind, or in a part of the
nervous system - according to physiologists -  amounts to the impression
of something big in something small, which is impossible. That which is
said in response to this objection - that the receiving agent is
infinitely divisible - is inadmissible, because a small area about that
of one’s palm, though it should be infinitely divisible, cannot contain
a mountain.

The answer to this objection is that the particular perceived forms are
in fact immaterial, as will be discussed later on.’ Their immateriality
is imaginal (mitsâlî), wherein such material properties as dimension,
geometric form, etc., are retained, but not matter itself. Hence they
are present in the soul on the plane of imaginal immateriality (tajarrud
mitbâli) without being imprinted on a bodily organ or a faculty related
to it. As to the actions and reactions that occur on a material plane
during the process of sensation or perception, they are the preparatory
means for the soul for apprehending the particular imaginal cognitive
forms.

#### Sixth Objection

####

The physiologists state that sensation and perception involve the
formation in the sense organs of impressions (shuwar) of physical bodies
with all their external relations and characteristics. The sense organs
modify the impressions in accordance with their particular nature and
convey them to the brain. Man cognizes their sizes, dimensions, and
shapes through a kind of comparison between the parts of the impressions
apprehended. This description does not leave any room for the belief in
presence of external quiddities themselves in the mind.

The answer is that the physiologists do indeed speak of certain physical
actions and reactions involved in perception. However, these physical
impressions, which differ from the external things perceived, are not
what constitute the perceived form itself. Rather they constitute a
preparatory stage that prepares the soul for the presence before it of
the external quiddities with an imaginal (mitsâlî), not a material,
existence. Otherwise the disparity between the impressions in the organs
of sensation and perception and the external objects represented by
these impressions will amount to negation of the possibility of
knowledge.

In fact this is one of the strongest proofs of the immaterial presence
of the quiddities themselves for the mind. That is because should we
assume them to have some kind of material existence - in whatever
manner - that cannot get rid of disparity between the apprehended forms
and the external realities they represent, thus necessarily implying a
denial of the possibility of knowledge.

#### Seventh Objection

####

The doctrine of mental existence implies that a single thing should
simultaneously be a particular and a universal. This is obviously
inadmissible. To explain, the intellected quiddity of ‘man,’ for
instance, is a universal in so far as it is applicable to a multiplicity
of persons. At the same time it is a particular in so far as it is
present in a particular soul through which it subsists, thus becoming
particularized through its particularity, being different from the
quiddity of ‘man’ intellected by other souls. Hence it is simultaneously
a particular and a universal.

The answer is that there are two different aspects (jihât) involved
here. The intellected quiddity is a universal in so far as it is a
mental existent corresponding to external reality and applicable to a
multiplicity of objects.

And in so far as it is a quality of the soul - aside from its
correspondence to external reality - it is a particular.
