المرحلة الثالثة في انقسام الوجود إلى ما في نفسه و ما في غيره و انقسام ما في نفسه إلى ما لنفسه و ما لغيره
========================================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها ثلاثة فصول
</p>

CHAPTER THREE: The Division of Existence into Existence-in-itself and Existence-in-something-else, and of Existence-in-itself into Existence-for-itself and Existence-for-something-else
========================================================================================================================================================================================

3 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول الوجود في نفسه و الوجود في غيره
-------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
من الوجود ما هو في غيره و منه خلافه و ذلك أنا إذا اعتبرنا القضايا
الصادقة كقولنا الإنسان ضاحك وجدنا فيها وراء الموضوع و المحمول أمرا آخر
به يرتبط و يتصل بعضهما إلى بعض ليس يوجد إذا اعتبر الموضوع وحده و لا
المحمول وحده و لا إذا اعتبر كل منهما مع غير الآخر فله وجود ثم إن وجوده
ليس ثالثا لهما واقعا بينهما مستقلا عنهما و إلا احتاج إلى رابطين آخرين
يربطانه بالطرفين فكان المفروض ثلاثة خمسة ثم الخمسة تسعة و هلم جرا و هو
باطل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فوجوده قائم بالطرفين موجود فيهما غير خارج منهما و لا مستقل بوجه عنهما لا
معنى له مستقلا بالمفهومية و نسميه الوجود الرابط و ما كان بخلافه كوجود
الموضوع و المحمول و هو الذي له معنى مستقل بالمفهومية نسميه الوجود
المحمولي و الوجود المستقل فإذن الوجود منقسم إلى مستقل و رابط و هو
المطلوب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يظهر مما تقدم
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أولا أن الوجودات الرابطة لا ماهية لها لأن الماهية ما يقال في جواب ما هو
فلها لا محالة وجود محمولي ذو معنى مستقل بالمفهومية و الرابط ليس كذلك.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا أن تحقق الوجود الرابط بين أمرين يستلزم اتحادا ما بينهما لكونه
واحدا غير خارج من وجودهما.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا أن الرابط إنما يتحقق في مطابق الهليات المركبة التي تتضمن ثبوت
شي‏ء لشي‏ء و أما الهليات البسيطة التي لا تتضمن إلا ثبوت الشي‏ء و هو ثبوت
موضوعها فلا رابط في مطابقها إذ لا معنى لارتباط الشي‏ء بنفسه و نسبته
إليها
</p>

3.1. EXISTENCE-IN-ITSELF AND EXISTENCE-IN-SOMETHING-ELSE
--------------------------------------------------------

Existence is either existence-in-something-else or its opposite [i.e.
existence-in-itself]. To explain, when we consider a true proposition,
for instance, ‘Man is a biped,’ we find that there is something in it
[i.e. the verb “to be” used as a copula] besides the subject and the
predicate that relates them to each other. This relation is absent when
we consider solely the subject or the predicate, or when each of them is
conceived along with some other thing. Hence that something has
existence. Moreover, its existence is not something additional to the
existence of the two sides, or something situated between them and
existing independently of them, for otherwise it would require two other
copulas to relate it to each of the two sides. Then the three would
become five and the five would similarly become nine and so on ad
infinitum.

Hence its existence inheres in the two sides and depends on them, not
being extraneous to or independent of them. It has no independent
meaning of its own as a concept. We call it “copulative existence”
(al-wujûd al-râbith). That which is not such - such as the existence of
the subject and that of the predicate - and has an independent meaning
as a concept, is called “substantive existence” (al-wujûd al-mahmûlî,
lit. predicative existence) or “independent existence” (al-wujud
al-mustaqil). Hence existence is divisible into independent and
copulative as stated.

From what has been said, it becomes clear that:

(i) copulative existents have no quiddity; for the quiddity of a thing
is what is mentioned in answer to the question, ‘What is it?’ Quiddity
has a substantive existence and independent meaning as a concept.
Copulative existence is not such.

(ii) Second, the occurrence of a copulative existent between two things
necessitates a unity between them, for it is united with them and is not
external to their existence.

(iii) Third, the copulative existent occurs in facts corresponding to
“composite propositions” (al-halliyyât al-murakkabah, i.e. propositions
of the type ‘A is B’) wherein a thing is affirmed of another thing. Às
to “simple propositions” (al-halliyyât al-basîthah, i.e. propositions of
the type ‘A is’ or ‘A exists’), in which merely the subsistence of the
subject is affirmed, there occurs no copulative existence in the
corresponding fact, for there is no sense in a thing’s relation with
itself.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني كيفية اختلاف الرابط و المستقل
------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اختلفوا في أن الاختلاف بين الوجود الرابط و المستقل هل هو اختلاف نوعي
بمعنى أن الوجود الرابط ذو معنى تعلقي لا يمكن تعقله على الاستقلال و
يستحيل أن يسلخ عنه ذلك الشأن فيعود معنى اسميا بتوجيه الالتفات إليه بعد
ما كان معنى حرفيا أو لا اختلاف نوعيا بينهما.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق هو الثاني لما سيأتي في مرحلة العلة و المعلول أن وجودات المعاليل
رابطة بالنسبة إلى عللها و من المعلوم أن منها ما وجوده جوهري و منها ما
وجوده عرضي و هي جميعا وجودات محمولية مستقلة تختلف حالها بالقياس إلى
عللها و أخذها في نفسها فهي بالنظر إلى عللها وجودات رابطة و بالنظر إلى
أنفسها وجودات مستقلة فإذن المطلوب ثابت.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يظهر مما تقدم أن المفهوم تابع في استقلاله بالمفهومية و عدمه لوجوده
الذي ينتزع منه و ليس له من نفسه إلا الإبهام
</p>

3.2. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN COPULATIVE AND INDEPENDENT EXISTENCE
----------------------------------------------------------------

The metaphysicians differ concerning the character of the difference
between copulative and independent existence, as to whether it is a
specific difference. That is, is copulative existence a relational
concept inconceivable as a substantive and independent notion, in the
sense that it is impossible to divest it of this character by conceiving
it as a substantive after its being a non-substantive notion (ma’nî
harfî)? Or is it the case that there is no specific difference between
it and independent existence?

The truth lies with the latter position, for, as will be seen later on
in the chapter on cause and effect, the existence of the effect is
copulative (râbith) in relation to its cause, although, as we know,
effects consist of substances and accidents, both of which have
predicative and independent existence. They are copulative existents
when viewed in relation to their causes, but are independent existents
when considered by themselves.

It becomes clear from what has been said that every concept is subject
in the independence of its meaning, or the lack of it, to the existence
from which it is abstracted, and is in itself indefinite.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث من الوجود في نفسه ما هو لغيره و منه ما هو لنفسه
------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و المراد بكون وجود الشي‏ء لغيره أن يكون الوجود الذي له في نفسه و هو الذي
يطرد عن ماهيته العدم هو بعينه يطرد عدما عن شي‏ء آخر لا عدم ذاته و ماهيته
و إلا كان لوجود واحد ماهيتان و هو كثرة الواحد بل عدما زائدا على ذاته و
ماهيته له نوع مقارنة له كالعلم الذي يطرد بوجوده العدم عن ماهيته الكيفية
و يطرد به بعينه عن موضوعه الجهل الذي هو نوع من العدم يقارنه و كالقدرة
فإنها كما تطرد عن ماهية نفسها العدم تطرد بعينها عن موضوعها العجز.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الدليل على تحقق هذا القسم وجودات الأعراض فإن كلا منها كما يطرد عن
ماهية نفسه العدم يطرد بعينه عن موضوعه نوعا من العدم و كذلك الصور النوعية
الجوهرية فإن لها نوع حصول لموادها تكملها و تطرد عنها نقصا جوهريا و هذا
النوع من الطرد هو المراد بكون الوجود لغيره و كونه ناعتا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يقابله ما كان طاردا لعدم نفسه فحسب كالأنواع التامة الجوهرية كالإنسان و
الفرس و يسمى هذا النوع من الوجود وجودا لنفسه فإذن المطلوب ثابت و ذلك ما
أردناه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ربما يقسم الوجود لذاته إلى الوجود بذاته و الوجود بغيره و هو بالحقيقة
راجع إلى العلية و المعلولية و سيأتي البحث عنهما.
</p>

3.3. EXISTENCE-IN-ITSELF-FOR-ITSELF AND EXISTENCE-IN-ITSELF-FOR-SOMETHING-ELSE
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

By ‘existence for something else’ is meant an existent by itself that in
addition to dispelling non-being from its own quiddity, removes a
non-being from another thing, though not from its essence and quiddity;
for otherwise one existent will possess two quiddities, which implies
the multiplicity of that which is one. Hence the non-being removed is
one that is extraneous to the thing’s essence and quiddity, having a
kind of association with it. An example of it is knowledge, whose
existence, in addition to removing non-being from its quiddity, removes
ignorance from its subject, ignorance being a kind of non-being
associated with the subject. Similar is ability, which in addition to
removing non-being from its own quiddity removes disability from its
subject.

The evidence for this kind of existent is provided by accidents
(a’râdh), each one of which dispels a kind of non-being from its
subject, in addition to dispelling non-being from its own quiddity. The
same is true of each of the substantial specific forms (al-shuwar
al-naw’iyyah al-jawhariyyah), which in a way actualize their matters
(mawâdd), complete them and dispel their substantial deficiency. This is
the kind of removal of non-being that is meant by ‘existence for
something else’ (al-wujûd li ghayrih) and its being ‘attributive.’

It stands opposed to what is called ‘existence for itself (wujûd li
nafsih), which dispels non-being solely from itself, like the various
kinds of complete specific substances, such as man, horse, etc.

Often metaphysicians divide existence for itself further into that which
is existence by itself and existence by something else, but this
division relates to causality, which will be discussed later.
