المرحلة الرابعة في المواد الثلاث الوجوب و الإمكان و الامتناع
============================================================

<p dir="rtl">
و البحث عنها في الحقيقة بحث عن انقسام الوجود إلى الواجب و الممكن و البحث
عن الممتنع تبعي
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها تسعة فصول
</p>

CHAPTER FOUR: The Three Modes: Necessity, Contingency and Impossibility
=======================================================================

9 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في تعريف المواد الثلاث و انحصارها فيها
--------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كل مفهوم إذا قيس إلى الوجود, فإما أن يجب له فهو الواجب; أو يمتنع, و هو
الممتنع; أو لا يجب له و لا يمتنع, و هو الممكن; فإنه إما أن يكون الوجود
له ضروريا, و هو الأول; أو يكون العدم له ضروريا, و هو الثاني; و إما أن لا
يكون شي‏ء منهما له ضروريا, و هو الثالث.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما احتمال كون الوجود و العدم كليهما ضروريين, فمرتفع بأدنى التفات.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هي بينة المعاني, لكونها من المعاني العامة التي لا يخلو عن أحدها مفهوم
من المفاهيم; و لذا كانت لا تعرف إلا بتعريفات دورية; كتعريف الواجب ب “ما
يلزم من فرض عدمه محال” ثم تعريف المحال و هو الممتنع ب “ما يجب أن لا
يكون” أو “ما ليس بممكن و لا واجب” و تعريف الممكن ب “ما لا يمتنع وجوده و
عدمه.”
</p>

4.1. THE THREEFOLD MODES AND THEIR DEFINITIONS
----------------------------------------------

Every idea when considered from the viewpoint of existence is either
necessary (wâjib), impossible (mumtani’), or contingent (mumkin), i.e.
neither necessary nor impossible. In the first case, existence is a
necessity; in the second, non-existence is a necessity; in the third,
neither existence nor non-existence is a necessity.

The meaning of these three modes is self-evident and they are so
pervasive that no idea is devoid of any one of them. Hence they cannot
be defined, and the definitions that have been offered are circular
(like the one that defines the necessary as “a thing the supposition of
whose non-existence entails an impossibility,” the impossible as “that
whose non-existence is necessary” or “that which is neither possible nor
necessary,” and the contingent as “that whose existence or non-existence
is not impossible”).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني انقسام كل من المواد إلى ما بالذات و ما بالغير و ما بالقياس
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
كل واحدة من المواد ثلاثة أقسام: ما بالذات, و ما بالغير, و ما بالقياس إلى
الغير; إلا الإمكان, فلا إمكان بالغير و المراد بما بالذات: أن يكون وضع
الذات كافيا في تحققه, و إن قطع النظر عن كل ما سواه; و بما بالغير; ما
يتعلق بالغير; و بما بالقياس إلى الغير: أنه إذا قيس إلى الغير كان من
الواجب أن يتصف به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالوجوب بالذات كما في الواجب الوجود, تعالى, فإن ذاته بذاته يكفي في ضرورة
الوجود له من غير حاجة إلى شي‏ء غيره.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الوجوب بالغير كما في الممكن الموجود الواجب وجوده بعلته
</p>

.

و الوجوب بالقياس إلى الغير كما في وجود أحد المتضائفين إذا قيس إلى وجود
الآخر, فإن وجود العلو إذا قيس إليه وجود السفل يأبى إلا أن يكون للسفل
وجود, فلوجود السفل وجوب بالقياس إلى وجود العلو, وراء وجوبه بعلته.

<p dir="rtl">
و الامتناع بالذات, كما في المحالات الذاتية, كشريك الباري, و اجتماع
النقيضين; و الامتناع بالغير, كما في وجود المعلول الممتنع لعدم علته, و
عدمه الممتنع لوجود علته, و الامتناع بالقياس إلى الغير, كما في وجود أحد
المتضائفين إذا قيس إلى عدم الآخر, و في عدمه إذا قيس إلى وجود الآخر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الإمكان بالذات, كما في الماهيات الإمكانية, فإنها في ذاتها لا تقتضي
ضرورة الوجود و لا ضرورة العدم; و الإمكان بالقياس إلى الغير, كما في
الواجبين بالذات المفروضين, ففرض وجود أحدهما لا يأبى وجود الآخر و لا
عدمه, إذ ليس بينهما علية و معلولية و لا هما معلولا علة ثالثة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الإمكان بالغير فمستحيل, لأنا إذا فرضنا ممكنا بالغير, فهو في ذاته
إما واجب بالذات, أو ممتنع بالذات, أو ممكن بالذات, إذ المواد منحصرة في
الثلاث, و الأولان يوجبان الانقلاب, و الثالث يوجب كون اعتبار الإمكان
بالغير لغوا.
</p>

4.2. THE SUB-DIVISIONS OF EACH OF THE MODES
-------------------------------------------

Each of the three modes is divisible into three kinds: (i) essential (bi
al-dzât), i.e., that which is such (i.e. necessary, contingent or
impossible) by-itself, (ii) accidental (bi al-ghayr), i.e., that which
is such by something else, and (iii) relative (bi al-qiyâs ila
al-ghayr), i.e., that which is such in relation to something else. An
exception here is the ‘contingent,’ for which there is no such
subdivision as ‘contingent by something else.’

The exalted Necessary Being, whose existence is necessary by itself,
without standing in need of anything else, represents essential
necessity.

By ‘accidentally contingent’ is meant the contingent whose existence
becomes necessary upon the existence of its cause.

Relative necessity applies to the existence of each of two correlatives
(mutadhâ‘afayn), whose existence is necessary in relation to that of the
other correlative, like the higher one and the lower one, the existence
of each of which is necessary in relation to that of the other, apart
from the necessity arising from their cause.

Examples of the essentially impossible are such essential
impossibilities as God’s partner (sharîk al-Bârî) and the coming
together of two contradictories (ijtimâ’ al-naqidhayn). An example of
accidental impossibility is the impossibility of the existence of an
effect arising from the non-existence of its cause, and the
impossibility of its non-existence upon the existence of its cause. An
example of relative impossibility is the impossibility of the existence
of one of the two correlatives in relation to non-existence of the
other, and that of its non-existence in relation to existence of the
other correlative.

As to essential contingency (imkân dzâtt), it applies to the contingent
quiddities, which in themselves are neither necessarily existent nor
necessarily non-existent. As to relative contingency, it applies to two
hypothetical necessary beings each of which is essentially necessary,
because the supposition of one of them does not preclude the existence
or non-existence of the other; for there is neither any relation of
causality between them, nor are they effects of a third cause.

As to accidental contingency, it is impossible; for if we assume
something that is accidentally contingent, it should itself be either:
(i) essentially necessary; (ii) essentially impossible; or (iii)
essentially contingent, for here the modes are confined to these three.
The first two assumptions entail a violation of the law of identity, and
the third leads to the absurdity of considering what is essentially
contingent as being accidentally contingent.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث واجب الوجود ماهيته إنيته
-------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واجب الوجود ماهيته إنيته بمعنى أن لا ماهية له وراء وجوده الخاص به; و ذلك
أنه لو كانت له ماهية و ذات وراء وجوده الخاص به, لكان وجوده زائدا على
ذاته عرضيا له, و كل عرضي معلل بالضرورة, فوجوده معلل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و علته إما ماهيته أو غيرها, فإن كانت علته ماهيته -و العلة متقدمة على
معلولها بالوجود بالضرورة- كانت الماهية متقدمة عليه بالوجود; و تقدمها
عليه إما بهذا الوجود, و لازمه تقدم الشي‏ء على نفسه و هو محال; و إما
بوجود آخر, و ننقل الكلام إليه و يتسلسل; و إن كانت علته غير ماهيته, فيكون
معلولا لغيره و ذلك ينافي وجوب الوجود بالذات. و قد تبين بذلك: أن الوجوب
بذاته وصف منتزع من حاق وجود الواجب, كاشف عن كون وجوده بحتا في غاية الشدة
غير مشتمل على جهة عدمية, إذ لو اشتمل على شي‏ء من الأعدام, حرم الكمال
الوجودي الذي في مقابله; فكانت ذاته مقيدة بعدمه, فلم يكن واجبا بالذات
صرفا له كل كمال.
</p>

4.3. QUIDDITY AND THE NECESSARY BEING
-------------------------------------

The essence of the Necessary Being is Its existence, in the sense that
It has no quiddity besides Its particular existence; for were It to have
a quiddity besides Its particular existence, its existence would be
additional and accidental to Its essence. Since everything accidental is
necessarily caused (ma’lûl), Its existence too would be something
caused, its cause being either Its quiddity or something else.

Were Its quiddity Its cause, that quiddity would precede It in
existence, as the cause is necessarily prior to its effect in terms of
existence. This priority of Its quiddity to Its existence would be
either with this existence or with another. The first alternative
necessarily entails a thing being prior to itself, which is impossible.
The second leads to an infinite regress when the same argument is
shifted to it.

Were Its cause something other than Its quiddity, It would be an effect
of something else, which contradicts Its essential necessity.

The above discussion reveals that essential necessity is a
characteristic derived from the very reality of the Necessary Being,
which shows that It is absolute existence, at the extreme of splendour,
without possessing any aspect of privation (non-being). For did It
possess any kind of privation, it would be devoid of the existential
perfection that stands opposed to such a privation, and Its essence
would be limited by the absence of that perfection and, consequently, it
would not be essentially necessary and absolute, possessing every kind
of perfection.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع واجب الوجود بالذات واجب الوجود من جميع الجهات
----------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إذ لو كان غير واجب بالنسبة إلى شي‏ء من الكمالات التي تمكن له بالإمكان
العام, كان ذا جهة إمكانية بالنسبة إليه, فكان خاليا في ذاته عنه متساوية
نسبته إلى وجوده و عدمه, و معناه تقيد ذاته بجهة عدمية و قد عرفت في الفصل
السابق استحالته.
</p>

4.4. THE NECESSARY BEING IS NECESSARY IN ALL RESPECTS
-----------------------------------------------------

If the Necessary Being were to have a relation of non-necessity with
anything pertaining to Its possible perfections, It would have an aspect
of contingency in relation to it. That is, in Itself It would be devoid
of it, being indifferent to its existence and non-existence. This
entails a limit involving privation for Its essence, which is impossible
as shown in the preceding section.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في أن الشي‏ء ما لم يجب لم يوجد و بطلان القول بالأولوية
-------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لا ريب أن الممكن, الذي يتساوى نسبته إلى الوجود و العدم عقلا, يتوقف وجوده
على شي‏ء يسمى علة و عدمه على عدمها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هل يتوقف وجود الممكن على أن يوجب العلة وجوده, و هو الوجوب بالغير؟ أو
أنه يوجد بالخروج عن حد الاستواء, و إن لم يصل إلى حد الوجوب؟ و كذا القول
في جانب العدم, و هو المسمى بالأولوية; و قد قسموها إلى الأولوية الذاتية و
هي التي يقتضيها ذات الممكن و ماهيته, و غير الذاتية و هي خلافها, و قسموا
كلا منهما إلى “كافية” في تحقق الممكن و “غير كافية.”
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الأولوية بأقسامها باطلة:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الأولوية الذاتية فلأن الماهية قبل الوجود باطلة الذات لا شيئية لها
حتى تقتضي أولوية الوجود كافية أو غير كافية; و بعبارة أخرى: الماهية من
حيث هي ليست إلا هي, لا موجودة و لا معدومة و لا أي شي‏ء آخر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الأولوية الغيرية, و هي التي تأتي من ناحية العلة, فلأنها لما لم تصل
إلى حد الوجوب لا يخرج بها الممكن من حد الاستواء, و لا يتعين بها له
الوجود أو العدم, و لا ينقطع بها السؤال: إنه لم وقع هذا دون ذاك؟; و هو
الدليل على أنه لم تتم بعد للعلة عليتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فتحصل: أن الترجيح إنما هو بإيجاب العلة وجود المعلول, بحيث يتعين له
الوجود و يستحيل عليه العدم, أو إيجابها عدمه; فالشي‏ء -أعني الممكن- ما لم
يجب لم يوجد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
خاتمة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ما تقدم من الوجوب هو الذي يأتي الممكن من ناحية علته; و له وجوب آخر يلحقه
بعد تحقق الوجود أو العدم, و هو المسمى بالضرورة بشرط المحمول; فالممكن
الموجود محفوف بالضرورتين: السابقة و اللاحقة.
</p>

4.5. A THING DOES NOT EXIST UNLESS IT BECOMES NECESSARY
-------------------------------------------------------

There is no doubt that the contingent, which is indifferent to both
existence and non-existence, depends for its existence on that which is
called the ‘cause,’ without which it cannot exist. Does the existence of
the contingent depend on being necessitated by its cause, which makes it
accidentally necessary, or does it come into existence by merely
emerging out of the state of indifference (to existence and
non-existence) without reaching the limit of necessity? The same
question can be framed in regard to its non-existence. The ‘theory of
preponderance’ (awlawiyyah) upholds the latter view. Its proponents
classify ‘preponderance’ into essential and accidental. The former is
said to be what is required by the quiddity and essence of a contingent.
They further divide each of these kinds into that which is sufficient to
actualize the contingent and that which is insufficient.

However, the idea of preponderance with all its divisions is a false
notion.

As to ‘essential preponderance,’ the quiddity of a thing prior to its
existence is a vacuity having no entity, so as to require any
preponderance, sufficient or insufficient, in favour of its existence.
In other words, quiddity as such is neither existent nor non-existent,
nor is it anything else. As to accidental preponderance, which derives
from the cause, it cannot bring the contingent out of its state of
indifference as long as it does not reach the point of necessity. By
itself it cannot determine the contingent’s existence or non-existence,’
and the question as to why this has actualized instead of that remains
open, which proves that the cause is not yet complete.

To sum up, preponderance lies solely in the cause necessitating the
existence or non-existence of the effect, in the sense that when the
cause determines its existence its non-existence is impossible, and when
the cause necessitates non-existence of the contingent, its existence
does not become necessary. Hence a thing - that is a contingent - does
not exist unless necessitated.

Conclusion

The aforementioned necessity is one that the contingent derives from its
cause. It has another necessity attending its existence or
non-existence. This necessity is called ‘necessity imposed by the
predicate’ [i.e. existence or non-existence, in the present case].

Thus a contingent is bracketed by two kinds of necessity: prior and
attendant.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في معاني الإمكان
-----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الإمكان المبحوث عنه هاهنا هو لا ضرورة الوجود و العدم بالنسبة إلى الماهية
المأخوذة من حيث هي, و هو المسمى ب “الإمكان الخاص” و “الخاصي”.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد يستعمل الإمكان بمعنى سلب الضرورة عن الجانب المخالف, سواء كان الجانب
الموافق ضروريا أو غير ضروري; فيقال: الشي‏ء الفلاني ممكن أي ليس بممتنع; و
هو المستعمل في لسان العامة, أعم من الإمكان الخاص; و لذا يسمى “إمكانا
عاميا” و “عاما”.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد يستعمل في معنى أخص من ذلك, و هو سلب الضرورات الذاتية و الوصفية و
الوقتية; كقولنا: الإنسان كاتب بالإمكان, حيث إن الإنسانية لا تقتضي ضرورة
الكتابة, و لم يؤخذ في الموضوع وصف يوجب الضرورة, و لا وقت كذلك; و تحقق
الإمكان بهذا المعنى في القضية بحسب الاعتبار العقلي, بمقايسة المحمول إلى
الموضوع, لا ينافي ثبوت الضرورة بحسب الخارج بثبوت العلة; و يسمى “الإمكان
الأخص”.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد يستعمل بمعنى سلب الضرورة من الجهات الثلاث و الضرورة بشرط المحمول
أيضا كقولنا “زيد كاتب غدا بالإمكان” و يختص بالأمور المستقبلة التي لم
تتحقق بعد حتى يثبت فيها الضرورة بشرط المحمول و هذا الإمكان إنما يثبت
بحسب الظن و الغفلة عن أن كل حادث مستقبل إما واجب أو ممتنع لانتهائه إلى
علل موجبة مفروغ عنها و يسمى “الإمكان الاستقبالي”.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد يستعمل الإمكان بمعنيين آخرين:
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدهما: ما يسمى الإمكان الوقوعي, و هو كون الشي‏ء بحيث لا يلزم من فرض
وقوعه محال, أي ليس ممتنعا بالذات أو بالغير; و هو سلب الامتناع عن الجانب
الموافق, كما أن الإمكان العام سلب الضرورة عن الجانب المخالف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيهما: الإمكان الاستعدادي, و هو, كما ذكروه, نفس الاستعداد ذاتاً, و
غيره اعتبارًا, فإن تهيؤ الشي‏ء لأن يصير شيئا آخر, له نسبة إلى الشي‏ء
المستعِدّ, و نسبة إلى الشي‏ء المستعَدّ له; فبالاعتبار الأول يسمى
“استعدادا” فيقال مثلا: النطفة لها استعداد أن تصير إنسانا; و بالاعتبار
الثاني يسمى “الإمكان الاستعدادي” فيقال: الإنسان يمكن أن يوجد في النطفة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الفرق بينه و بين الإمكان الذاتي: أن الإمكان الذاتي, كما سيجي‏ء, اعتبار
تحليلي عقلي يلحق الماهية المأخوذة من حيث هي, و الإمكان الاستعدادي صفة
وجودية تلحق الماهية الموجودة فالإمكان الذاتي يلحق الماهية الإنسانية
المأخوذة من حيث هي و الإمكان الاستعدادي يلحق النطفة الواقعة في مجرى تكون
الإنسان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لذا كان الإمكان الاستعدادي قابلا للشدة و الضعف, فإمكان تحقق الإنسانية
في العلقة أقوى منه في النطفة; بخلاف الإمكان الذاتي فلا شدة و لا ضعف فيه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لذا أيضا كان الإمكان الاستعدادي, يقبل الزوال عن الممكن, فإن الاستعداد
يزول بعد تحقق المستعد له بالفعل; بخلاف الإمكان الذاتي فإنه لازم الماهية,
هو معها حيثما تحققت.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لذا أيضا كان الإمكان الاستعدادي, و محله المادة بالمعنى الأعم, يتعين
معه الممكن المستعد له, كالإنسانية التي تستعد لها المادة; بخلاف الإمكان
الذاتي الذي في الماهية, فإنه لا يتعين معه لها الوجود أو العدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الفرق بين الإمكان الاستعدادي و الوقوعي: أن الاستعدادي إنما يكون في
الماديات و الوقوعي أعم موردا.
</p>

4.6. SOME OTHER MEANINGS OF IMKÂN
---------------------------------

The imkân discussed above is in the sense of non-necessity of existence
or non-existence in relation to quiddity when taken as such. It is
called al-imkân al-khâshsh or al-khâshshî (special possibility).

(i) However, the word imkân is also used in the sense of negation of
necessity in relation to the contrary of something, irrespective of
whether it be necessary or not. For example, when it is said that such
and such a thing is possible, what is meant is that it is not
impossible. In this common usage, imkân has a wider meaning than
contingency. Hence it is called imkân âmm or âmmî (general possibility).

(ii) The word imkân is also used in a narrower sense than that of
contingency to mean absence of the threefold logical necessities
(darûrah). essential (dzâtiyyah), attributive (wasfiyyah) and time-bound
(waqtiyyah). For instance, in the statement, ‘Man may be a writer,’
being human does not necessarily require the ability to write; nor is
there a quality that may entail that such a necessity is subsumed in the
subject, nor is any particular time associated with it that may entail
such a necessity. Possibility, in this sense, arises in a proposition on
account of a conceptual consideration wherein the predicate is related
to the subject; it does not negate the actualization of necessity in the
external world due to the actualization of the cause. Possibility in
this sense is called al- imkân al-akhashsh (more special possibility).

(iii) Imkân is also used in the sense of absence of necessity imposed by
predication and the absence of the three kinds of necessity mentioned
above, as in the statement ‘Zayd may be a writer tomorrow.’ It pertains
to circumstances pertaining to the future that have not yet occurred so
that necessity imposed by the predicate may apply to them. This kind of
possibility derives from conjecture and from inattention to the fact
that every future event is either necessary or impossible because of its
dependence on the presence or absence of its causes. This kind of
possibility is called al- imkân al-istiqbâlî (future possibility).’

(iv) The word imkân is also used in two other senses. One of them is the
so-called al-imkan al-wuqû’î (possibility of occurrence), which applies
to a thing the assumption of whose occurrence does not entail an
impossibility. That is, it is neither impossible in itself nor by virtue
of something else. It involves a negation of impossibility in regard to
the affirmative side of the proposition (e.g. in the proposition ‘A’s
existence is possible,’ impossibility is negated in regard to A’s
existence), whereas ‘general possibility’ involves a negation of
necessity in regard to the converse side. (In the above proposition, the
negation of necessity will be in regard to A’s non-existence.)

(v) The second is imkân al-isti’dâdî (potential), which, as mentioned by
metaphysicians, is essentially a thing’s potential (e.g., the seed’s
potential to become a tree), differing from it only in respect of
consideration. The potential of a thing for becoming another thing can
be considered in two ways: (i) in relation to the thing possessing that
potential and (ii) in relation to that which it has the potential to
become. In the first case, it is called ‘potential.’ Hence one may, for
instance, say, ‘The embryo has the potential

to become a human being.’ In the second, it is called ‘possibility by
virtue of potential (al-imkân al-isti’dâdî).’ Hence, in the above
example, one may say, ‘It is possible for a human being to come forth
from the embryo.’

Following are some points of difference between this kind of possibility
and essential contingency (al-imkân al-dzâtî), which will be discussed
in the next section:

(i) Essential contingency is a rational analytic concept (i’tibâr
tahlîlî ‘aqlî) associated with quiddity qua quiddity, whereas
‘possibility by virtue of potential’ is an existential quality
associated with an existing quiddity. Hence essential contingency is
associated with man’s quiddity conceived as such, whereas possibility by
virtue of potential is associated with the embryo in the process of
becoming a human being.

(ii) Accordingly, possibility by virtue of potential is subject to
various degrees of strength and weakness, as this possibility is greater
in a developed foetus than one in the early stages, unlike essential
contingency, which does not vary.

(iii) Also, possibility by virtue of potential can disappear with the
disappearance of the potential after the thing actually becomes what it
had the potential for, unlike essential contingency, which clings to
quiddity and remains with it even when it is actualized.

(iv) Furthermore, possibility by virtue of potential is found in
‘matter,’ in its most general sense. This possibility determines the end
product of the potential, like the human form determined by the
potential of the matter (in the form of the embryo). On the contrary,
essential contingency, which is associated with quiddity, does not
determine its existence or non-existence.

The difference between ‘possibility by virtue of potential’ and
‘possibility of occurrence’ is that the former relates solely to
material beings, while the latter applies to material as well as
immaterial things.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في أن الإمكان اعتبار عقلي, و أنه لازم للماهية
----------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما أنه اعتبار عقلي, فلأنه يلحق الماهية المأخوذة عقلا مع قطع النظر عن
الوجود و العدم, و الماهية المأخوذة كذلك اعتبارية بلا ريب, فما يلحق بها
بهذا الاعتبار كذلك بلا ريب; و هذا الاعتبار العقلي لا ينافي كونها بحسب
نفس الأمر إما موجودة أو معدومة, و لازمه كونها محفوفة بوجوبين أو
امتناعين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما كونه لازما للماهية, فلأنا إذا تصورنا الماهية من حيث هي, مع قطع
النظر عن كل ما سواها, لم نجد معها ضرورة وجود أو عدم, و ليس الإمكان إلا
سلب الضرورتين, فهي بذاتها ممكنة. و أصل الإمكان و إن كان هذين السلبين,
لكن العقل يضع لازم هذين السلبين, و هو استواء النسبة, مكانهما; فيعود
الإمكان معنى ثبوتيا, و إن كان مجموع السلبين منفيا.
</p>

4.7. CONTINGENCY IS ESSENTIAL TO QUIDDITY
-----------------------------------------

Contingency is a conceptual construct (i’tibâr ‘aqlî), for it is
associated with quiddity as conceived by the intellect without taking
existence or non-existence into account. Quiddity conceived in this
manner is undoubtedly a conceptual construct; hence that which is
associated with it is also undoubtedly a mental construct. However,
being a conceptual construct does not preclude quiddity’s existence or
non-existence in actual fact, nor does being bracketed by two
necessities or impossibilities.

As to contingency being inseparable from quiddity, when we conceive
quiddity as such without taking into account anything else, we do not
find in it either the logical necessity of existence or that of
non-existence. Contingency is nothing except negation of the two
necessities. Hence quiddity is contingent in its essence. Although there
are two negations involved here, the intellect substitutes them with
their implication - that is, equality of relation to existence and
non-existence - and thus contingency becomes a positive concept (ma‘nâ
tsubûtiyyan) despite the negative import of the two negations.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في حاجة الممكن إلى العلة و ما هي علة احتياجه إليها؟
----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حاجة الممكن إلى العلة من الضروريات الأولية, التي مجرد تصور موضوعها و
محمولها كاف في التصديق بها; فإن من تصور الماهية الممكنة المتساوية النسبة
إلى الوجود و العدم, و تصور توقف خروجها من حد الاستواء إلى أحد الجانبين
على أمر آخر يخرجها منه إليه لم يلبث أن يصدق به.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هل علة حاجة الممكن إلى العلة هي الإمكان, أو الحدوث؟ الحق هو الأول, و
به قالت الحكماء.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و استدل عليه بأن الماهية باعتبار وجودها ضرورية الوجود, و باعتبار عدمها
ضرورية العدم, و هاتان الضرورتان بشرط المحمول, و ليس الحدوث إلا ترتب إحدى
الضرورتين على الأخرى, فإنه كون وجود الشي‏ء بعد عدمه, و معلوم أن الضرورة
مناط الغنى عن السبب و ارتفاع الحاجة, فما لم تعتبر الماهية بإمكانها لم
يرتفع الوجوب, و لم تحصل الحاجة إلى العلة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر: إن الماهية لا توجد إلا عن إيجاد من العلة, و إيجاد العلة لها
متوقف على وجوب الماهية المتوقف على إيجاب العلة, و قد تبين مما تقدم و
إيجاب العلة متوقف على حاجة الماهية إليها و حاجة الماهية إليها متوقفة على
إمكانها; إذ لو لم تمكن بأن وجبت أو امتنعت استغنت عن العلة بالضرورة;
فلحاجتها توقف ما على الإمكان بالضرورة; و لو توقفت مع ذلك على حدوثها, و
هو وجودها بعد العدم, سواء كان الحدوث علة و الإمكان شرطا, أو عدمه مانعا,
أو كان الحدوث جزء علة و الجزء الآخر هو الإمكان, أو كان الحدوث شرطا, أو
عدمه الواقع في مرتبته مانعا, فعلى أي حال يلزم تقدم الشي‏ء على نفسه
بمراتب. و كذا لو كان وجوبها أو إيجاب العلة لها هو علة الحاجة بوجه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فلم يبق إلا أن يكون الإمكان وحده علة للحاجة, إذ ليس في هذه السلسلة
المتصلة المترتبة عقلا قبل الحاجة إلا الماهية و إمكانها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و بذلك يندفع ما احتج به بعض القائلين بأن علة الحاجة إلى العلة هو الحدوث
دون الإمكان, من أنه لو كان الإمكان هو العلة دون الحدوث, جاز أن يوجد
القديم الزماني, و هو الذي لا أول لوجوده و لا آخر له; و معلوم أن فرض دوام
وجوده يغنيه عن العلة, إذ لا سبيل للعدم إليه حتى يحتاج إلى ارتفاعه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وجه الاندفاع: أن المفروض أن ذاته هو المنشأ لحاجته, و الذات محفوظة مع
الوجود الدائم, فله على فرض دوام الوجود حاجة دائمة في ذاته, و إن كان مع
شرط الوجود له بنحو الضرورة بشرط المحمول مستغنيا عن العلة, بمعنى ارتفاع
حاجته بها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا سيجي‏ء: أن وجود المعلول سواء كان حادثا أو قديما, وجود رابط, متعلق
الذات بعلته, غير مستقل دونها; فالحاجة إلى العلة ذاتية ملازمة له.
</p>

4.8. THE CONTINGENT’S NEED FOR A CAUSE
--------------------------------------

The contingent’s need for a cause is one of the primary self-evident
propositions, wherein the mere conception of the subject and the
predicate is sufficient to affirm its validity. For if one were to
conceive the contingent quiddity, which is equally related to existence
and non-existence, and its dependence on something else for drawing it
from this state of equality toward one of the two sides, one would
affirm its need for a cause.

However, what is it that makes the contingent require a cause? Is it
contingency, or is it coming into existence after being non-existent
(hudûts)? The truth is that it is contingency, and this is the view of
the philosophers.

An argument in favour of this view is that quiddity is necessarily
existent when considered in relation to its existence, and necessarily
non-existent when considered in relation to its non-existence, each of
these necessities being conditioned by predicate; hudûts is nothing
except one of these necessities followed by the other, for hudûts means
a thing’s coming into existence after being non-existent. It is obvious
that necessity is the criterion for the absence of need for a cause.
Hence so long as quiddity is not conceived with its contingency,
necessity does not disappear and the need for a cause does not
actualize.

Another argument is that a quiddity does not come into existence unless
brought into existence by the cause. Its being brought into existence by
the cause depends on the quiddity’s existence becoming necessary, which
again depends on its being necessitated by the cause. From what was said
earlier, it becomes clear that the cause’s making its existence
necessary depends on the quiddity’s need for it and the quiddity’s need
for it depends on its contingency. For were it not contingent, and were
it necessary or impossible, of necessity it would not need any cause.
Hence its need depends necessarily on its contingency. Moreover, if it
were to depend as well on its hudûts, i.e., its coming into existence
after non-existence, that would entail a thing being prior to itself. To
explain, irrespective of whether we consider hudûts as the cause and
contingency as a condition; hudûts as the cause and non-existence of
contingency as an obstacle; whether hudûts is considered as forming a
part of the cause with contingency as the other part; whether we
consider contingency as the cause and hudûts as a condition, or
contingency; or something else, as the cause and the non-existence of
hudûts as an obstacle, every one of these cases necessitates a thing
preceding itself by several stages. The same is true of the case when
its necessity or the cause’s necessitating it is assumed to be the
reason for its need for a cause.

Hence there remains no alternative except to consider contingency as the
sole ground of its need, for in this interlinked sequence there is no
rational stage prior to the need except that of quiddity and its
contingency.

On this basis, the argument offered by some theologians that the ground
of the need for cause is huduth and not contingency, stands refuted.
Their argument is that if the need for cause were due to contingency,
the existence of entities without a beginning or end in time (al-qadîm
al-zamânî) would be admissible. The assumption of their eternal
existence exempts them from

the need for a cause, for it is never non-existent so as to be brought
into existence by a cause.

The answer to this objection is as follows. The assumption is that it is
a thing’s essence that is the source of the need for a cause, and it
retains this essence throughout its eternal existence. If it is assumed
to exist eternally, then its need for a cause, which inheres in its
essence, will be eternal, though given the condition of existence by way
of necessity conditioned by the predicate (al-darûrah bi syarth
al-mahmûl) it would not require a cause in the sense of removal of the
need for it.

Moreover, as will be discussed later on, the existence of an effect
(wujûd al-ma’lûl), irrespective of whether it is eternal or comes into
existence after being non-existent, is a relative existence (wujûd
râbith) essentially dependent on its cause with no independence of its
own. Hence the need for a cause is essential to it and inseparable from
it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع الممكن محتاج إلى علته بقاء كما أنه محتاج إليها حدوثا
-----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذلك: لأن علة حاجته إلى العلة إمكانه اللازم لماهيته, و هي محفوظة معه في
حال البقاء, كما أنها محفوظة معه في حال الحدوث, فهو محتاج إلى العلة حدوثا
و بقاء, مستفيض في الحالين جميعا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر: أن وجود المعلول -كما تكررت الإشارة إليه و سيجي‏ء بيانه- وجود
رابط, متعلق الذات بالعلة, متقوم بها غير مستقل دونها; فحاله في الحاجة إلى
العلة حدوثا و بقاء واحد و الحاجة ملازمة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد استدلوا: على استغناء الممكن عن العلة في حال البقاء بأمثلة عامية;
كمثال البناء و البناء, حيث إن البناء يحتاج في وجوده إلى البناء, حتى إذا
بناه استغنى عنه في بقائه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ردّ: بأن البناء ليس علة موجدة للبناء: بل حركات يده علل مُعِدّة لحدوث
الاجتماع بين أجزاء البناء; و اجتماع الأجزاء علة لحدوث شكل البناء, ثم
اليبوسة علة لبقائه مدة يعتد بها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
خاتمة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تبين من الأبحاث السابقة: أن الوجوب و الإمكان و الامتناع كيفيات ثلاث
لنسب القضايا; و أن الوجوب و الإمكان أمران وجوديان, لمطابقة القضايا
الموجهة بهما للخارج مطابقة تامة بما لها من الجهة; فهما موجودان لكن بوجود
موضوعهما لا بوجود منحاز مستقل, فهما كسائر المعاني الفلسفية, من الوحدة و
الكثرة, و القدم و الحدوث, و القوة و الفعل, و غيرها, أوصاف وجودية موجودة
للموجود المطلق, بمعنى كون الاتصاف بها في الخارج و عروضها في الذهن; و هي
المسماة ب “المعقولات الثانية” باصطلاح الفلسفة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ذهب بعضهم إلى كون الوجوب و الإمكان موجودين في الخارج بوجود منحاز
مستقل. و لا يعبؤ به. هذا في الوجوب و الإمكان, و أما الامتناع فهو أمر
عدمي بلا ريب.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
هذا كله بالنظر إلى اعتبار العقل الماهيات و المفاهيم موضوعات للأحكام; و
أما بالنظر إلى كون الوجود هو الموضوع لها حقيقة لأصالته, فالوجوب: كون
الوجود في نهاية الشدة قائما بنفسه مستقلا في ذاته على الإطلاق كما تقدمت
الإشارة إليه; و الإمكان: كونه متعلق النفس بغيره متقوم الذات بسواه, كوجود
الماهيات, فالوجوب و الإمكان وصفان قائمان بالوجود غير خارجين من ذات
موضوعهما.
</p>

4.9. THE CONTINGENT NEEDS A CAUSE EVEN IN CONTINUANCE
-----------------------------------------------------

The reason for the contingent’s need for a cause is contingency, which
is inseparable from quiddity, and thac need remains with it in the state
of continuance in the same way that it accompanies it while coming into
existence (hudûts). Hence it needs the cause for coming into existence
as well as for continuance, being dependent on it in both the states.

Another proof of it is that the existence of the effect, as mentioned
repeatedly earlier and as will be explained further later on, is a
relative existence, essentially dependent on the cause and subsisting
through it, having no independence of its own. Hence its state of need
for the cause is the same in coming into existence as well as
continuance, being inseparable from it.

Those who consider the contingent’s need for a cause to lie in its
hudûts have argued by advancing such commonplace analogies as that of a
building and its builder, suggesting that the building needs the builder
for coming into existence, but once it is built it does not need him for
continuing to exist.

But the fact is that the builder is not the creative cause of the
building. Rather the movements of his hands are the preparatory causes
for bringing together the parts of the building. The bringing together
of the parts is the cause for the coming into existence of the
building’s form. Thereafter its continuance for any considerable period
of time depends on its rigidity and resistance to destructive elements
such as moisture, etc.

Conclusion

It becomes clear from the above discussions that necessity, contingency
and impossibility are threefold modes for propositions and that
necessity and contingency are existential features. That is because
modal propositions completely correspond to external reality in respect
of their mode. Hence the two are existent but their existence is
implicit in their subject, not something separate and independent.
Therefore, they are like other philosophical concepts such as unity and
multiplicity, qidam and hudûts, potentiality and actuality, and so on,
which are existential attributes that relate to absolute existence, in
the sense that the attribution is there in external reality and their
predication occurs in the mind. They are called ‘secondary’
intelligibles or concepts (ma‘qûlât al-tsâniyyah) in the terminology of
philosophy.

Some thinkers have held that necessity and contingency exist externally
as separate and independent existents. No serious notice need be taken
of this opinion. This was concerning necessity and contingency; as to
impossibility, there is no doubt that it is derives from non-existence.

The entire discussion above was from the viewpoint of the intellect’s
consideration of quiddities and concepts as subjects in judgements.
However, from the viewpoint of existence with its fundamental reality
being the subject, necessity means: the being of existence at its
ultimate strength, self-subsisting, and absolutely independent in
itself, as pointed out earlier. Also contingency means: the essential
dependence of an existent on something else that sustains it, as in the
case of quiddities. Hence necessity

and contingency are two qualities that depend on existence, and they are
not extraneous to the essence of their subjects.
