المرحلة الخامسة في الماهية و أحكامها
====================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها ثمانية فصول
</p>

CHAPTER FIVE: Quiddity and Its Properties
=========================================

8 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول الماهية من حيث هي ليست إلا هي
-----------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الماهية و هي ما يقال في جواب ما هو لما كانت تقبل الاتصاف بأنها موجودة أو
معدومة أو واحدة أو كثيرة أو كلية أو فرد و كذا سائر الصفات المتقابلة كانت
في حد ذاتها مسلوبة عنها الصفات المتقابلة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالماهية من حيث هي ليست إلا هي لا موجودة و لا لا موجودة و لا شيئا آخر و
هذا معنى قولهم إن النقيضين يرتفعان عن مرتبة الماهية يريدون به أن شيئا من
النقيضين غير مأخوذ في الماهية و إن كانت في الواقع غير خالية عن أحدهما
بالضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فماهية الإنسان و هي الحيوان الناطق مثلا و إن كانت إما موجودة و إما
معدومة لا يجتمعان و لا يرتفعان لكن شيئا من الوجود و العدم غير مأخوذ فيها
فللإنسان معنى و لكل من الوجود و العدم معنى آخر و كذا الصفات العارضة حتى
عوارض الماهية فلماهية الإنسان مثلا معنى و للإمكان العارض لها معنى آخر و
للأربعة مثلا معنى و للزوجية العارضة لها معنى آخر.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و محصل القول إن الماهية يحمل عليها بالحمل الأولى نفسها و يسلب عنها بحسب
هذا الحمل ما وراء ذلك.
</p>

5.1. QUIDDITY QUA ITSELF IS NOTHING BUT ITSELF
----------------------------------------------

The quiddity of a thing is that which is mentioned in answer to the
question, ‘What is it?’ As it is capable of accepting such attributes as
‘existent’ or ‘non-existent,’ ‘one’ or ‘many,’ ‘universal’ or
‘particular,’ and yields to other such opposite descriptions, it is
devoid of all opposite attributes in the definition of its essence.

Therefore, quiddity qua itself is nothing but itself. It is neither
existent nor non-existent, nor is it anything else. Hence the statement
of the philosophers: “Both the contradictories are negated at the plane
of quiddity.” It means that nothing pertaining to any of the
contradictories is subsumed in the concept of quiddity, though in the
external world of necessity, quiddity cannot be devoid of either of
them.

Thus the quiddity of man, for instance, is ‘rational animal,’ and it is
either existent or non-existent. These two attributes cannot be affirmed
or negated of it simultaneously. However, the notion of existent or
non-existent is not subsumed in the concept of ‘man,’ and hence ‘man’
has a meaning that is different from that of ‘existence’ or
‘non-existence.’ The same applies to accidental characteristics, even
those that are predicable of quiddity. Hence the quiddity of ‘man,’ for
instance, is one concept, and contingency, with which it is
characterized, is another concept. ‘Four,’ for instance, is a concept
different from that of ‘evenness,’ with which the former is
characterized.

That which can be concluded from the above statements is that quiddity
is predicated of itself with primary predication (*al-haml al-awwalî* ;
as in the statement, ‘Man is a rational animal’) and in respect of this
predication everything else is negated of it.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في اعتبارات الماهية و ما يلحق بها من المسائل
---------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
للماهية بالإضافة إلى ما عداها مما يتصور لحوقه بها ثلاث اعتبارات إما أن
تعتبر بشرط شي‏ء أو بشرط لا أو لا بشرطي شي‏ء و القسمة حاصرة
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الأول فإن تؤخذ بما هي مقارنة لما يلحق بها من الخصوصيات فتصدق على
المجموع كالإنسان المأخوذ مع خصوصيات زيد فيصدق عليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الثاني فإن يشترط معها أن لا يكون معها غيرها و هذا يتصور على قسمين
أحدهما أن يقصر النظر في ذاتها و أنها ليست إلا هي و هو المراد من كون
الماهية بشرط لا في مباحث الماهية كما تقدم و ثانيهما أن تؤخذ الماهية
وحدها بحيث لو قارنها أي مفهوم مفروض كان زائدا عليها غير داخل فيها فتكون
إذا قارنها جزء من المجموع مادة له غير محمولة عليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما الثالث فأن لا يشترط معها شي‏ء بل تؤخذ مطلقة مع تجويز أن يقارنها
شي‏ء أو لا يقارنها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالقسم الأول هو الماهية بشرط شي‏ء و تسمى المخلوطة و القسم الثاني هو
الماهية بشرط لا و تسمى المجردة و القسم الثالث هو الماهية لا بشرط و تسمى
المطلقة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الماهية التي هي المقسم للأقسام الثلاثة هي الكلي الطبيعي و هي التي
تعرضها الكلية في الذهن فتقبل الانطباق على كثيرين و هي موجودة في الخارج
لوجود قسمين من أقسامها أعني المخلوطة و المطلقة فيه و المقسم محفوظ في
أقسامه موجود بوجودها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الموجود منها في كل فرد غير الموجود منها في فرد آخر بالعدد و لو كان
واحدا موجودا بوحدته في جميع الأفراد لكان الواحد كثيرا بعينه و هو محال و
كان الواحد بالعدد متصفا بصفات متقابلة و هو محال.
</p>

5.2. DIFFERENT CONSIDERATIONS (I’TIBARAT) OF QUIDDITY
-----------------------------------------------------

Quiddity can be considered in three different ways in relation to
anything else that may be conceived as being associated with it. It may
be considered either as being conditioned by something (bi syarthi
shay’); with a negative condition (bi syarthi lâ, i.e. with the
condition of being dissociated from something); or conceived in a
non-conditioned manner (lâ bi syarth). This division is exhaustive.

In the first consideration it is taken along with some associated
qualities so that it corresponds to the aggregate of them, such as where
the quiddity of ‘man’ in combination with the attributes of a particular
individual Zayd corresponds to him.

In the second consideration, there is a condition that it is not to be
accompanied with anything else. There are two aspects to this
consideration. In the first, one’s view is confined to quiddity qua
itself and as nothing but itself. It was in this negatively conditioned
sense (al-mahiyyah bi syarthi lâ) that we dealt with quiddity in the
preceding chapter. In the second consideration, quiddity is taken alone,
in the sense that any other assumed concept accompanying it would be
extraneous and additional to it, whereupon quiddity would be part of the
whole and ‘matter’ for it and incapable of being predicated of it (i.e.
the whole).

In the third consideration, no condition accompanies quiddity, and it is
taken in an absolute manner, wherein something may or may not accompany
it.

In the first consideration, quiddity is called ‘mixed’ quiddity
(makhlûthah), or ‘quiddity conditioned by something.’ In the second, it
is called ‘divested quiddity’ or ‘negatively conditioned quiddity’
(mujarradah). In the third, it is called ‘absolute quiddity’ or
‘non-conditioned quiddity’ (muthlaqah). The quiddity of which these
three kinds are sub-classes is the ‘natural universal’ (al-kullî
al-thabî’i), which possesses universality in the mind and is capable of
corresponding to a multiplicity of things. It exists in the external
world, for two of its divisions, that is, ‘mixed’ and ‘absolute,’ exist
there, and a class is preserved in its sub-classes and exists where its
sub-classes are found.

However, its existence in any individual to which it corresponds is not
numerically other than its existence in other individuals. For if
something that is one were to exist despite its unity, in all
individuals, what is one would be many, and what is numerically one
would possess opposite qualities, both of which are impossible.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في معنى الذاتي و العرضي
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
المعاني المعتبرة في الماهيات المأخوذة في حدودها و هي التي ترتفع الماهية
بارتفاعها تسمى الذاتيات و ما وراء ذلك عرضيات محمولة فإن توقف انتزاعها و
حملها على انضمام سميت محمولات بالضميمة كانتزاع الحار و حملها على الجسم
من انضمام الحرارة إليه و إلا فالخارج المحمول كالعالي و السافل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الذاتي يميز من غيره بوجوه من خواصه :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
منها أن الذاتيات بينة لا تحتاج في ثبوتها لذي الذاتي إلى وسط
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أنها غنية عن السبب بمعنى أنها لا تحتاج إلى سبب وراء سبب ذي الذاتي
فعله وجود الماهية بعينها علة أجزائها الذاتية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و منها أن الأجزاء الذاتية متقدمة على ذي الذاتي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الإشكال في تقدم الأجزاء على الكل بأن الأجزاء هي الكل بعينه فكيف تتقدم
على نفسها مندفع بأن الاعتبار مختلف فالأجزاء بالأسر متقدمة على الأجزاء
بوصف الاجتماع و الكلية على أنها إنما سميت أجزاء لكون الواحد منها جزءا من
الحد و إلا فالواحد منها عين الكل أعني ذي الذاتي.
</p>

5.3. THE MEANING OF ‘ESSENTIAL’ AND ‘ACCIDENTAL’
------------------------------------------------

The concepts which enter into the definition of a certain quiddity,
without which the quiddity cannot be conceived, are called its
‘essential parts’ or ‘essentials’ (al-dzâtiyyât, i.e. its genus and
differentia). Any besides these are ‘accidental qualities’ (‘aradiyyât),
which may be predicated of it. If their abstraction from a subject and
their predication depends on their union with the subject, they are
called ‘predicates by way of union’ (mahmulât bi al-dhamîmah), such as
when ‘hotness’ is abstracted from a hot body and predicated of it by
relating hotness to it. Otherwise they are called ‘extraneous to the
subject’ (al-khârij al-mahmûl), such as ‘high’ and ‘low.’

There are certain properties that distinguish the ‘essentials’ from
whatever is not such.

One of these properties is that the ‘essentials’ are self-evident and do
not require any intermediary terms in order to be affirmed of that to
which they belong.

A second property is that they do not require any cause (sabab), in the
sense that they need no cause in addition to the cause of that to which
they pertain. Hence the cause of a quiddity’s existence is itself the
cause of its essentials.

A third property is that the essentials are prior to that to which they
belong.

An objection has been set forth to the priority of the essentials. It
says, “The parts are the same as the whole; how can they be prior to
themselves?” It is refuted on the ground that the difference is that of
consideration (i’tibâr); hence the parts taken individually are prior to
parts when taken collectively and as making the whole. Moreover, they
have been named ‘parts’ because each one of them is a part of the
definition; otherwise, each of them is identical with the whole, of
which it is an essential part.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في الجنس و الفصل و النوع و بعض ما يلحق بذلك
--------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الماهية التامة التي لها آثار خاصة حقيقية من حيث تمامها تسمى نوعا
كالإنسان و الفرس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إنا نجد بعض المعاني الذاتية التي في الأنواع يشترك فيه أكثر من نوع
واحد كالحيوان المشترك بين الإنسان و الفرس و غيرهما كما أن فيها ما يختص
بنوع كالناطق المختص بالإنسان و يسمى المشترك فيه جنسا و المختص فصلا و
ينقسم الجنس و الفصل إلى قريب و بعيد و أيضا ينقسم الجنس و النوع إلى عال و
متوسط و سافل و قد فصل ذلك في المنطق
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إنا إذا أخذنا ماهية الحيوان مثلا و هي مشترك فيها أكثر من نوع و
عقلناها: بأنها جسم نام حساس متحرك بالإرادة جاز أن نعقلها وحدها بحيث يكون
كل ما يقارنها من المفاهيم زائدا عليها خارجا من ذاتها و تكون هي مباينة
للمجموع غير محمولة عليه كما أنها غير محمولة على المقارن الزائد كانت
الماهية المفروضة مادة بالنسبة إلى ما يقارنها و علة مادية للمجموع و جاز
أن نعقلها مقيسة إلى عدة من الأنواع كان نعقل ماهية الحيوان بأنها الحيوان
الذي هو إما إنسان و إما فرس و إما بقر و إما غنم فتكون ماهية ناقصة غير
محصلة حتى ينضم إليها فصل أحد تلك الأنواع فيحصلها نوعا تاما فتكون هي ذلك
النوع بعينه و تسمى الماهية المأخوذة بهذا الاعتبار جنسا و الذي يحصله
فصلا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الاعتباران في الجزء المشترك جاريان بعينهما في الجزء المختص و يسمى
بالاعتبار الأول صورة و يكون جزءا لا يحمل على الكل و لا على الجزء الآخر و
بالاعتبار الثاني فصلا يحصل الجنس و يتمم النوع و يحمل عليه حملا أوليا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يظهر مما تقدم أولا أن الجنس هو النوع مبهما و أن الفصل هو النوع محصلا و
النوع هو الماهية التامة من غير نظر إلى إبهام أو تحصيل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا أن كلا من الجنس و الفصل محمول على النوع حملا أوليا و أما النسبة
بينهما أنفسهما فالجنس عرض عام بالنسبة إلى الفصل و الفصل خاصة بالنسبة
إليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثالثا أن من الممتنع أن يتحقق جنسان في مرتبة واحدة و كذا فصلان في مرتبة
واحدة لنوع لاستلزام ذلك كون نوع واحد نوعين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و رابعا أن الجنس و المادة متحدان ذاتا مختلفان اعتبارا فالمادة إذا أخذت
لا بشرط كانت جنسا كما أن الجنس إذا أخذ بشرط لا كان مادة و كذا الصورة فصل
إذا أخذت لا بشرط كما أن الفصل صورة إذا أخذ بشرط لا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و اعلم أن المادة في الجواهر المادية موجودة في الخارج على ما سيأتي و أما
الأعراض فهي بسيطة غير مركبة في الخارج ما به الاشتراك فيها عين ما به
الامتياز و إنما العقل يجد فيها مشتركات و مختصات فيعتبرها أجناسا و فصولا
ثم يعتبرها بشرط لا فتصير مواد و صورا عقلية.
</p>

5.4. GENUS, DIFFERENTIA AND SPECIES
-----------------------------------

A complete quiddity - i.e., one which possesses certain real special
properties, e.g. ‘man,’ ‘horse,’ etc. - is called species (naw’).

We find that there are some essential concepts shared by several
species, such as the concept of ‘animal’ which is common to ‘man,’
‘horse’ and other animals. Also, there are essential concepts that are
special to each of the species, such as ‘rationality,’ which is specific
to man. That which is common to several species is called genus (jins)
and that which is specific to each of them is called differentia
(fashl). Genus and differentia are divided into ‘proximate’ and
‘remote'; similarly, genus and species are divisible into ‘highest,’
‘middle,’ and ‘lowest,’ as is discussed in detail in books on logic.

Furthermore, when we consider the quiddity ‘animal,’ for instance, which
is shared by several species, and conceive it as ‘a growing, sensate
body capable of voluntary movement,’ it may be conceived in isolation so
that any concept associated with it would be additional and extraneous
to its essence. Then it would be different from the aggregate and
incapable of becoming its predicate as well as that of anything
associated with it and additional to it, and the supposed quiddity would
be ‘matter’ in relation to that which is associated with it and the
‘material cause’ of the aggregate.

We may conceive this quiddity in comparison to a number of species, as
when we conceive the quiddity ‘animal,’ which may be either ‘man’ or
‘horse’ or ‘cow’ or ‘sheep.’ Then it would be an incomplete quiddity,
which is not actualized until we unite the differentia of one of these
species with it. When that is done, it would be actualized in a complete
species and become identical with that species. The supposed quiddity
when considered in this manner is the genus and that which actualizes it
is the differentia.

These two considerations pertaining to the common part apply in an
identical manner to the specific ‘part,’ which in view of the first
consideration is called ‘form’ (shûrah), in which case it is a ‘part’
that cannot be predicated either of the whole or the other part. In view
of the second consideration, it is called ‘differentia,’ which
actualizes the genus and completes the species and is predicared of it
with a primary predication.

From what has been said, the following points become clear:

First, genus is undetermined species and differentia is determinate
species. The species is a complete quiddity without taking into view
determination or non-determination.

Second, each of genus and differentia is predicable of the species with
primary predication. However, as to the relation between the two, the
genus is a ‘general accident’ (‘arad ‘âmm) in relation to the
differentia, and differentia is a ‘special accident’ or proprium
(khâshshah) in relation to the genus.

Third, it is impossible that there should be two genera or two
differentiae at one level, for that implies that one species should be
two.

Fourthly, genus and ‘matter’ are one is essence, being different from
the viewpoint of consideration (i’tibâran). Thus when ‘matter’ is
conceived in a non-conditioned sense it becomes genus, and genus when
conceived in a negatively conditioned manner becomes ‘matter.’ The same
applies to ‘form’ which when conceived in a non-conditioned manner is
differentia,

and the differentia when conceived in a negatively conditioned manner is
‘form’.

It should be known that ‘matter’ in ‘material substances’ exists in the
external world, as will be discussed later.” As to the accidents, they
are simple and non-composite in external reality. That is because what
they share in (mâ bihi al-isytirâk) is identical with that by which they
are distinguished from one another (mâ bihi al-imtiyâz). However, the
intellect finds common and specific aspects in them and conceives them
as genus and differentia. Then it views them in a negatively conditioned
manner, turning them conceptually into ‘forms’ and ‘matters.’

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في بعض أحكام الفصل
-------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ينقسم الفصل نوع انقسام إلى المنطقي و الاشتقاقي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالفصل المنطقي هو أخص اللوازم التي تعرض النوع و أعرفها و هو إنما يؤخذ و
يوضع في الحدود مكان الفصول الحقيقية لصعوبة الحصول غالبا على الفصل
الحقيقي الذي يقوم النوع كالناطق للإنسان و الصاهل للفرس فإن المراد بالنطق
مثلا إما النطق بمعنى التكلم و هو من الكيفيات المسموعة و إما النطق بمعنى
إدراك الكليات و هو عندهم من الكيفيات النفسانية و الكيفية كيفما كانت من
الأعراض و العرض لا يقوم الجوهر و كذا الصهيل و لذا ربما كان أخص اللوازم
أكثر من واحد فتوضع جميعا موضع الفصل الحقيقي كما يؤخذ الحساس و المتحرك
بالإرادة جميعا فصلا للحيوان و لو كان فصلا حقيقيا لم يكن إلا واحدا كما
تقدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الفصل الاشتقاقي مبدأ الفصل المنطقي و هو الفصل الحقيقي المقوم للنوع
ككون الإنسان ذا نفس ناطقة في الإنسان و كون الفرس ذا نفس صاهلة في الفرس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن حقيقة النوع هي فصله الأخير و ذلك لأن الفصل المقوم هو محصل نوعه فما
أخذ في أجناسه و فصوله الآخر على نحو الإبهام مأخوذ فيه على وجه التحصل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتفرع عليه أن هذية النوع به فنوعية النوع محفوظة به و لو تبدل بعض
أجناسه و كذا لو تجردت صورته التي هي الفصل بشرط لا عن المادة التي هي
الجنس بشرط لا بقي النوع على حقيقة نوعيته كما لو تجردت النفس الناطقة عن
البدن.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن الفصل غير مندرج تحت جنسه بمعنى أن الجنس غير مأخوذ في حده و إلا
احتاج إلى فصل يقومه و ننقل الكلام إليه و يتسلسل بترتب فصول غير متناهية.
</p>

5.5. SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF DIFFERENTIA
----------------------------------------

According to one classification, differentia is divided into two kinds:

logical (manthiqî) and derivative (isytiqâqî). The logical differentia
consists of one of the more special and well-known properties associated
with a certain species. It is taken and substituted in definitions for
the real differentia often due to the difficulty of obtaining the real
differentia that gives subsistence to a species. Examples of logical
differentiae are ‘rational’ (nâthiq; derived from nuthq which means
‘speech’ as well as ‘rationality’) for man and ‘neighing’ for the horse.
However, if by ‘nuthq,’ for instance, is meant speech, it is an audible
quality, and if what is meant by it is ‘rationality’ in the sense of the
faculty of cognition of universals, it is regarded by the philosophers
as one of the ‘psychic qualities.’ Quality, of whatever kind, is an
accident, and an accident does not give subsistence to a substance. The
same applies to ‘neighing’ as the differentia of ‘horse,’ defined as a
‘neighing animal.’ Often such special properties are more than one, and
they are together substituted for the real differentia, as is the case
with ‘sensate’ and ‘voluntarily mobile’ which are taken together as the
differentia of ‘animal.’ But had they been the real differentia, they
would not have been more than one, as stated in the preceding section.

The ‘derivative’ differentia (al-fashl al-isytiqâqî) is the source of
the logical differentia. It is the real differentia that gives
subsistence to the species, like the ‘rational soul’ in the case of
‘man’ and the ‘neighing soul’ in the case of the horse.

The reality of a species is realized by its ultimate differentia, for
the differentia that gives subsistence to a species is the one that
actualizes it, and that which is subsumed in its other genera and
differentiae in an undetermined manner is subsumed in it in a determined
way.

A corollary to the above is that the identity of a species is due to the
ultimate differentia by which its specificity (naw‘iyyah) is maintained,
and should any of its genera undergo a change, or should its form - that
is, differentia negatively conditioned - separate from its ‘matter’ -
that is, genus negatively conditioned - the species maintains its
specific identity, as in the case of the rational soul on separation
from the body.

Further, the differentia does not fall under its genus, in the sense
that genus is not subsumed in its definition; otherwise it would require
a differentia to give it subsistence and that, on transferring our
argument to it, results in an indefinite regress requiring an infinite
number of differentiae.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في النوع و بعض أحكامه
----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الماهية النوعية توجد أجزاؤها في الخارج بوجود واحد لأن الحمل بين كل منها
و بين النوع أولي و النوع موجود بوجود واحد و أما في الذهن فهي متغايرة
بالإبهام و التحصل و لذلك كان كل من الجنس و الفصل عرضيا للآخر زائدا عليه
كما تقدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من هنا ما ذكروا أنه لا بد في المركبات الحقيقية أي الأنواع المادية
المؤلفة من مادة و صورة أن يكون بين أجزائها فقر و حاجة من بعضها إلى بعض
حتى ترتبط و تتحد حقيقة واحدة و قد عدوا المسألة ضرورية لا تفتقر إلى
برهان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يمتاز المركب الحقيقي من غيره بالوحدة الحقيقية و ذلك بأن يحصل من تألف
الجزئين مثلا أمر ثالث غير كل واحد منهما له آثار خاصة غير آثارهما الخاصة
كالأمور المعدنية التي لها آثار خاصة غير آثار عناصرها لا كالعسكر المركب
من أفراد و البيت المؤلف من اللبن و الجص و غيرهما.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من هنا أيضا يترجح القول بأن التركيب بين المادة و الصورة اتحادي لا
انضمامي كما سيأتي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن من الماهيات النوعية ما هي كثيرة الأفراد كالأنواع التي لها تعلق ما
بالمادة مثل الإنسان و منها ما هو منحصر في فرد كالأنواع المجردة تجردا
تاما من العقول و ذلك لأن كثرة أفراد النوع إما أن تكون تمام ماهية النوع
أو بعضها أو لازمة لها و على جميع هذه التقادير لا يتحقق لها فرد لوجوب
الكثرة في كل ما صدقت عليه و لا كثرة إلا مع الآحاد هذا خلف و إما أن تكون
لعرض مفارق يتحقق بانضمامه و عدم انضمامه الكثرة و من الواجب حينئذ أن يكون
في النوع إمكان العروض و الانضمام و لا يتحقق ذلك إلا بمادة كما سيأتي فكل
نوع كثير الأفراد فهو مادي و ينعكس إلى أن ما لا مادة له و هو النوع المجرد
ليس بكثير الأفراد و هو المطلوب.
</p>

5.6. SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SPECIES
------------------------------------

The parts of a specific quiddity (al-mâhiyyât al-naw’iyyah) exist in
external reality with a single existence, for the predication between
each of them and the species is of the primary kind and the species
exists with a single existence. However, in the mind they are
distinguished from each other by being indefinite and determinate, and
hence each of the two, genus and differentia, is an accident in relation
to the other and additional to it, as explained earlier.’

Hence the metaphysicians state that there exists a mutual need between
the parts in the ‘real composites’ (al-murakkabât al-haqqiyyah), that
is, the material species, which are composed of ‘matter’ and ‘form,’ so
that they may join and unite to form a.single entity. They consider this
as a self-evident truth that does not stand in need of a proof.

The ‘real composites’ are distinguished from other kinds of composites
by a real union wherein two constituents, for instance, combine to
produce a third entity different from either of the two and possessing
properties different from those belonging to each. An example of this
kind of union is provided by chemical compounds, which possess
properties different from their constituent elements. It is not like the
composition of an army, which is made up of individual soldiers, nor
like that of a house, which is made up of bricks, mortar, etc.

This lends weight to the opinion that the combination of matter and form
is a union, not a composition, as will be explained later.

Furthermore, there are some specific quiddities that have a multiplicity
of individuals, like the species associated with matter, e.g. ‘man.’
There are some of them that are confined to a single individual, such as
the immaterial species (al-anwâ’ al-mujarradah), which are completely
immaterial (i.e. in essence and in act); e.g. the Immaterial Intellects
(‘uqûl). That is because a species has a multiplicity of individuals
either as a result of multiplicity constituting the totality of its
quiddity, or a part of it, or its proprium or a separable accident. In
the first three assumptions, individuation is never realized, as
multiplicity will be necessary in anything that corresponds to it. Yet
multiplicity cannot be realized without individuals and the
impossibility of individuation contradicts the assumption. Since the
above three assumptions are inadmissible, multiplicity must arise in
separable accidents (‘arâd mufâriq) and their association or absence of
association with the quiddity. However, in this case it is necessary
that there exists the capacity (imkân isti’dâdî) for such association in
the species, and such a capacity is not realized except in matter, as
will be explained later on. Hence every species with a multiplicity of
individuals is material. From this follows the converse that immaterial
species, which are devoid of ‘matter,’ do not have a multiplicity of
individuals.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في الكلي و الجزئي و نحو وجودهما
--------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ربما ظن أن الكلية و الجزئية إنما هما في نحو الإدراك فالإدراك الحسي لقوته
يدرك الشي‏ء بنحو يمتاز من غيره مطلقا و الإدراك العقلي لضعفه يدركه بنحو
لا يمتاز مطلقا و يقبل الانطباق على أكثر من واحد كالشبح المرئي من بعيد
المحتمل أن يكون هو زيدا أو عمرا أو خشبة منصوبة أو غير ذلك و هو أحدها
قطعا و كالدرهم الممسوح القابل الانطباق على دراهم مختلفة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يدفعه أن لازمه أن لا يصدق المفاهيم الكلية كالإنسان مثلا على أزيد من
واحد من أفرادها حقيقة و أن يكذب القوانين الكلية المنطبقة على مواردها
اللا متناهية إلا في واحد منها كقولنا الأربعة زوج و كل ممكن فلوجوده علة و
صريح الوجدان يبطله فالحق أن الكلية و الجزئية نحوان من وجود الماهيات.
</p>

5.7. THE UNIVERSAL, AND THE PARTICULAR AND THEIR MODES OF EXISTENCE
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Some have thought that the universal and the particular are two
different modes of cognition. In sense perception (al-idrâk al-hissî),
they say, due to its being strong and vivid, a thing is perceived in
such a way that it is absolutely distinguished from anything else.
However, in rational cognition (al-idrâk al-‘aqlî), due to its being
weak and vague, a thing is apprehended in such a way that it is not
absolutely distinguishable and so is capable of corresponding to more
than one thing. It is like an apparition seen from a far distance which
may be either Zayd or ‘Amr or the stump of a tree or something else, but
is definitely only one of them, or like an abraded coin which may
resemble different coins of its type.

This view stands refuted, for it implies that the universals, such as
‘man,’ do not really correspond to more than one member of their class
and that universal laws, such as ‘All fours are even’ and ‘Every
contingent needs a cause to exist,’ which apply to an unlimited number
of their instance, be false except only in one of those instances. Both
of these implications are false prima facie.

The truth is that the universal and the particular are two different
modes of existence of quiddity.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في تميز الماهيات و تشخصها
--------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تميز ماهية من ماهية أخرى بينونتها منها و مغايرتها لها بحيث لا تتصادقان
كتميز الإنسان من الفرس باشتماله على الناطق و التشخص كون الماهية بحيث
يمتنع صدقها على كثيرين كتشخص الإنسان الذي هو زيد.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من هنا يظهر أولا أن التميز وصف إضافي للماهية بخلاف التشخص فإنه نفسي
غير إضافي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ثانيا أن التميز لا ينافي الكلية فإن انضمام كلي إلى كلي لا يوجب الجزئية
و لا ينتهي إليها و إن تكرر بخلاف التشخص.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن التميز بين ماهيتين إما بتمام ذاتيهما كالأجناس العالية البسيطة إذ
لو كان بين جنسين عاليين مشترك ذاتي كان جنسا لهما واقعا فوقهما و قد فرضا
جنسين عاليين هذا خلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إما ببعض الذات و هذا فيما كان بينهما جنس مشترك فتتمايزان بفصلين
كالإنسان و الفرس.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إما بالخارج من الذات و هذا فيما إذا اشتركتا في الماهية النوعية
فتتمايزان بالأعراض المفارقة كالإنسان الطويل المتميز بطوله من الإنسان
القصير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هاهنا قسم رابع أثبته من جوز التشكيك في الماهية و هو اختلاف نوع واحد
بالشدة و الضعف و التقدم و التأخر و غيرها في عين رجوعها إلى ما به
الاشتراك و الحق أن لا تشكيك إلا في حقيقة الوجود و فيها يجري هذا القسم من
الاختلاف و التمايز.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما التشخص فهو في الأنواع المجردة من لوازم نوعيتها لما عرفت أن النوع
المجرد منحصر في فرد و هذا مرادهم بقولهم إنها مكتفية بالفاعل توجد بمجرد
إمكانها الذاتي و في الأنواع المادية كالعنصريات بالأعراض اللاحقة و عمدتها
الأين و متى و الوضع و هي تشخص النوع بلحوقها به في عرض عريض بين مبدإ
تكونه إلى منتهاه كالفرد من الإنسان الواقع بين حجم كذا و حجم كذا و مبدأ
زماني كذا إلى مبدإ زماني كذا و على هذا القياس هذا هو المشهور عندهم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق كما ذهب إليه المعلم الثاني و تبعه صدر المتألهين أن التشخص بالوجود
لأن انضمام الكلي إلى الكلي لا يفيد الجزئية فما سموها أعراضا مشخصة هي من
لوازم التشخص و أماراته.
</p>

5.8. DISTINCTION AND INDIVIDUATION
----------------------------------

The distinction (tamayyuz) between one quiddity and another lies in its
being different from others, so that two of them do not correspond to
one thing, like the distinction of ‘man’ from ‘horse’ by virtue of the
former’s ‘rationality.’ Individuation (tasyakhkhush) means quiddity’s
being such that its correspondence to a multiplicity of individuals be
impossible, like the individuality of a particular man Zayd.

From this the following points become clear.

First, distinction is a relative attribute of a quiddity, as opposed to
individuation, which is due to itself and non-relative.

Second, distinction is not incompatible with universality, for appending
one universal to another does not lead to particularity (juziyyah), not
even when the process of adding further universals is repeated
indefinitely. This is not the case with individuation.

Furthermore, the distinction between two quiddities can possibly be
conceived as arising in one or more of the following four ways:

(i) Either with the totality of their essential parts, as in the case of
the highest simple genera (i.e. substance and the accidents); for if two
highest genera were to have common essential parts, there would be a
genus above them, and this contradicts the supposition that the two
genera are the highest ones.

(ii) The distinction between them is by virtue of one of their essential
parts, as is the case when they have a common genus and are made
distinct by two differentiae, for instance, ‘man’ and ‘horse.’

(iii) The distinction is by virtue of something extraneous to their
essence, as when they share a common specific quiddity and are
distinguished from one another by virtue of separable accidents like
‘tall man’ distinguished from ‘short man’ on account of height.

(iv) There is a fourth kind of distinction believed in by those who
consider gradation (tasykîk) in quiddity as permissible. Gradation is a
distinction introduced in a species due to strength and weakness,
priority and posteriority and so on, while that which is common to it is
maintained. But the truth is that there is no gradation except in
existence from which this kind of difference and distinction derives.

As to individuation, it may pertain to material and immaterial species.
In immaterial species, it is implied in its specificity, for, as we have
seen, an immaterial species is confined to one individual, and this is
what is meant by the statement of the metaphysicians that “All they
require is the agent, and their mere essential contingency is enough to
bring them into existence.”

As to the material species, such as the elements, individuation arises
in them by the associated accidents (al-a’râd al-lâhiqah), which are
mainly: ‘where,’ ‘when’ and ‘position,’ and these are what individualize
the species by being associated with it (e.g. ‘Man in such and such a
place and such and such a time’ as the description of a certain
individual). This is the prevalent view among the metaphysicians.

However, the correct view, as held by Farabi, who was followed therein
by Sadr al-Mutaallihîn, is that individuation is produced by existence;
for

the annexation of a universal to another does not produce particularity,
and the so-called ‘individuating accidents’ are inseparable implications
of individuation and its signs.
