المرحلة السادسة في المقولات العشر وهي الأجناس العالية التي إليها تنتهي أنواع الماهيات
=====================================================================================

<p dir="rtl">
وفيها أحد عشر فصلا
</p>

CHAPTER SIX: The Categories
===========================

11 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول تعريف الجوهر والعرض - عدد المقولات
----------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنقسم الماهية – إنقساما أوليا – إلى جوهر وعرض ، فإنها إما أن تكون بحيث ”
إذا وجدت في الخارج وجدت لا في موضوع مستغن عنها في وجوده ” ، سواء وجدت لا
في موضوع أصلا كالجواهر العقلية القائمة بنفسها ، أو وجدت في موضوع لا
يستغني عنها في وجوده كالصور العنصرية المنطبعة في المادة المتقومة بها ،
وإما أن تكون بحيث ” إذا وجدت في الخارج وجدت في موضوع مستغن عنها ” كماهية
القرب والبعد بين الأجسام وكالقيام والقعود والاستقبال والاستدبار من
الانسان .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ووجود القسمين في الجملة ضروري ، فمن أنكر وجود الجوهر لزمه جوهرية الأعراض
، فقال بوجوده من حيث لا يشعر .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والأعراض تسعة ، هي المقولات والأجناس العالية ، ومفهوم العرض عرض عام لها
، لا جنس فوقها ، كما أن المفهوم من الماهية عرض عام لجميع المقولات العشر
، وليس بجنس لها .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والمقولات التسع العرضية هي : الكم ، والكيف ، والأين ، ومتى ، والوضع ،
والجدة ، والإضافة ، وأن يفعل ، وأن ينفعل هذا ما عليه المشاؤون من عدد
المقولات ، ومستندهم فيه الاستقراء .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وذهب بعضهم إلى أنها أربع ، بجعل المقولات النسبية – وهي المقولات السبع
الأخيرة – واحدة وذهب شيخ الإشراق إلى أنها خمس ، وزاد على هذه الأربعة
الحركة .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والأبحاث في هذه المقولات وانقساماتها إلى الأنواع المندرجة تحتها طويلة
الذيل جدا ، ونحن نلخص القول على ما هو المشهور من مذهب المشائين ، مع
إشارات إلى غيره .
</p>

6.1. DEFINITIONS OF SUBSTANCE AND ACCIDENT AND THE NUMBER OF THE CATEGORIES
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Quiddity is divided in the first classification into substance and
accident. That is, it is either such that, when existing externally, it
does not exist in a locus that has no need of it for existing. This is
irrespective of whether it does not exist in a locus at all (as in the
case of self-sustaining intellectual substances), or exists in a locus
that needs it for existing (as in the case of the elemental forms
impressed in the ‘matter,’ which sustains them). Or, it is such that
when existing externally it exists in a locus that does not need it for
existing, such as the quiddities of ‘nearness’ and ‘remoteness’ between
bodies, and ‘standing’ and ‘sitting,’ ‘facing’ and ‘having one’s back
towards something’ for man.

The existence of these two kinds is necessary, and one who denies the
existence of the substance is forced to consider accident as substances,
thus unwittingly admitting its existence.

The accidents are nine. They are categories and constitute the highest
genera. Their common name ‘accident’ is a general accident for them and
there is no genus above them,’ in the same way as the concept ‘quiddity’
is a general accident for all the ten categories, which do not have a
genus.

The nine accidental categories are: ‘quantity,’ ‘quality,’ ‘place.’
‘time,’ ‘position,’ ‘possession,’ ‘relation,’ ‘action’ and ‘affection.’
This is the opinion of the Peripatetics concerning the number of the
categories and inductive evidence forms its basis.

Some philosophers have held the accidents to be four. They put the
relative categories, the last seven, into one group. Suhrawardi held
them to be five, adding the category of motion to these four.’

The discussions concerning the categories and their classification into
the kinds that fall under them are very elaborate and here we will give
a summary based on the prevailing opinion amongst the Aristotelians,
while referring to the other positions.

<p dir="rtl">
[الفصل الثاني  [ في أقسام الجوهر
--------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قسموا الجوهر – تقسيما أوليا – إلى خمسة أقسام : المادة والصورة والجسم
والنفس والعقل ومستند هذا التقسيم في الحقيقة استقراء ما قام على وجوده
البرهان من الجواهر فالعقل هو : ” الجوهر المجرد عن المادة ذاتا وفعلا ” ،
والنفس هي : ” الجوهر المجرد عن المادة ذاتا المتعلق بها فعلا ” ، والمادة
هي : ” الجوهر الحامل للقوة ” ، والصورة الجسمية هي : ” الجوهر المفيد
لفعلية المادة من حيث الامتدادات الثلاثة ” ، والجسم هو : ” الجوهر الممتد
في جهاته الثلاث ” .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ودخول الصورة الجسمية في التقسيم دخول بالعرض ، لأن الصورة هي الفصل مأخوذا
بشرط لا ، وفصول الجواهر غير مندرجة تحت مقولة الجوهر ، وإن صدق عليها
الجوهر كما عرفت في بحث الماهية ، ويجري نظير الكلام في النفس
</p>

6.2. THE CLASSIFICATION OF SUBSTANCE
------------------------------------

The metaphysicians first divide substance into five kinds: ‘matter’
(mâdddah), ‘form’ (shûrah), ‘body’ (jism), ‘soul’ (nafs) and ‘intellect’
(‘aql). Inductive evidence for the existence of these substances forms
the basis of this classification.

‘Intellect’ is a substance devoid of ‘matter’ both in its essence and in
act. ‘Soul’ is a substance devoid of ‘matter’ essentially but associated
with it in act. ‘Matter’ is a substance that possesses potentiality.
‘Bodily form’ (al-shûrat al-jismiyyah) is a substance that gives
actuality to ‘matter’ in respect to the three dimensions. ‘Body’ is a
substance extended in three dimensions.

The inclusion of ‘bodily form’ in this classification is an accidental
one, for ‘form’ is differentia negatively conditioned and the
differentiae of substances do not fall under the category of substance,
though the term substance may be predicable of it (in the sense of
technical predication), as was seen in the discussion on quiddity.” The
same applies to ‘soul.’

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في الجسم
---------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
لا ريب أن هناك أجساما مختلفة تشترك في أصل الجسمية التي هي الجوهر الممتد
في الجهات الثلاث ، فالجسم بما هو جسم قابل للانقسام في جهاته المفروضة ،
وله وحدة اتصالية عند الحس فهل هو متصل واحد في الحقيقة كما هو عند الحس أو
مجموعة أجزاء ذات فواصل على خلاف ما عند الحس ؟
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وعلى الأول ، فهل الأقسام التي له بالقوة متناهية ، أو غير متناهية ؟ وعلى
الثاني ، فهل الأقسام التي هي بالفعل – وهي التي انتهى التجزي إليها – لا
تقبل الانقسام خارجا ، لكن تقبله وهما وعقلا ، لكونها أجساما صغارا ذوات
حجم ، أو أنها لا تقبل الانقسام لا خارجا ولا وهما ولا عقلا ، لعدم
اشتمالها على حجم ، وإنما تقبل الإشارة الحسية ، وهي متناهية أو غير
متناهية ؟ ولكل من الشقوق المذكورة قائل .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالأقوال خمسة .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الأول : أن الجسم متصل واحد بحسب الحقيقة ، كما هو عند الحس ، وله أجزاء
بالقوة متناهية ، ونسب إلى الشهرستاني.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني : أنه متصل حقيقة كما هو متصل حسا ، وهو منقسم انقسامات غير متناهية
– بمعنى لا يقف – ، أي إنه يقبل الانقسام الخارجي بقطع أو باختلاف عرضين
ونحوه ، حتى إذا لم يعمل الآلات القطاعة في تقسيمه لصغره ، قسمه الوهم ،
حتى إذا عجز عن تصوره لصغره البالغ ، حكم العقل كليا بأنه كلما قسم إلى
أجزاء كان الجزء الحاصل – لكونه ذا حجم ، له طرف غير طرف – يقبل القسمة من
غير وقوف ، فإن ورود القسمة لا يعدم الحجم ، ونسب إلى الحكماء .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالث : أنه مجموعة أجزاء صغار صلبة لا تخلو من حجم ، تقبل القسمة الوهمية
والعقلية ، دون الخارجية ، ونسب إلى ذي مقراطيس .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الرابع : أنه مؤلف من أجزاء لا تتجزأ ، لا خارجا ولا وهما ولا عقلا ، وإنما
تقبل الإشارة الحسية ، وهي متناهية ذوات فواصل في الجسم ، تمر الآلة
القطاعة من مواضع الفصل ، ونسب إلى جمهور المتكلمين .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الخامس : تأليف الجسم منها – كما في القول الرابع – إلا أنها غير متناهية
ويدفع القولين الرابع والخامس : أن ما ادعي من الأجزاء التي لا تتجزأ ، إن
لم تكن ذوات حجم ، امتنع أن يتحقق من اجتماعها جسم ذو حجم بالضرورة ، وإن
كانت ذوات حجم ، لزمها الانقسام الوهمي والعقلي بالضرورة ، وإن فرض عدم
انقسامها الخارجي لنهاية صغرها .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
على أنها لو كانت غير متناهية كان الجسم المتكون من اجتماعها غير متناهي
الحجم بالضرورة وقد أقيمت على بطلان الجزء الذي لا يتجزأ وجوه من البراهين
مذكورة في المطولات .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ويدفع القول الثاني وهن الوجوه التي أقيمت على كون الجسم البسيط ذا اتصال
واحد جوهري من غير فواصل كما هو عند الحس ، وقد تسلم علماء الطبيعة أخيرا
بعد تجربات علمية ممتدة أن الأجسام مؤلفة من أجزاء صغار ذرية مؤلفة من
أجزاء أخرى ، لا تخلو من نواة مركزية ذات جرم ، وليكن أصلا موضوعا لنا .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ويدفع القول الأول : أنه يرد عليه ما يرد على القول الثاني والرابع والخامس
، لجمعه بين القول باتصال الجسم بالفعل ، وبين انقسامه بالقوة إلى أجزاء
متناهية تقف القسمة دونها على الإطلاق .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالجسم الذي هو جوهر ذو اتصال يمكن أن يفرض فيه الامتدادات الثلاثة ، ثابت
لا ريب فيه ، لكن مصداقه الأجزاء الأولية التي يحدث فيها الامتداد الجرمي
وإليها تتجزأ الأجسام النوعية ، دون غيرها على ما تقدمت الإشارة إليه ، وهو
قول ذي مقراطيس مع إصلاح ما .
</p>

6.3. BODY
---------

There is no doubt that there are various bodies sharing in bodiness as
substances extended in three dimensions. Hence body qua body is
divisible in the supposed dimensions and is perceived as having a
continuous unity by the senses. But is it really a single continuum as
it appears to the senses or a collection of particles separated by
interstices, contrary to what is perceived by the senses?

If it is a continuous unit, are its potential divisions finite or
infinite? If it is a collection of discrete particles, are its actual
divisions - i.e. the smallest particles which represent a limit to
division, not being susceptible to further division externally - capable
of further division in the imagination on account of their being small
bodies with a certain volume? Or are they incapable of any further
division, externally as well as in the imagination, due to not
possessing any volume, though they are capable of being pointed at
sensibly? Further, in the last case, is their number finite or infinite?
Each of these alternatives has had supporters.

In all there are five theories.

(i) According to one of the views, bodies are in fact continuous units
as they appear to the senses and consist of potentially finite parts.
This view is ascribed to Shahristani.

(ii) According to a second view, bodies are really the continuous units
they appear to be to the senses and susceptible to an indefinite number
of divisions. When actual division stops due to the smallness of size
and the inadequacy of cutting instruments, they can be divided in the
imagination, and when imagination fails as a result of extreme
smallness, they are susceptible to division by the intellect in
accordance with its universal judgement that whenever anything is
divided into parts, the resulting parts are divisible as they possess
volume and two distinct sides. Thus there is no end to this process, for
division does not exhaust volume. This opinion has been ascribed to the
philosophers.

(iii) According to a third view, a body is a collection of small
unbreakable particles that are not devoid of volume. They are
susceptible to division in the imagination and the intellect though not
in external reality. This theory has been ascribed to Democritus.

(iv) A fourth view is that bodies are composed of parts that are
indivisible, externally as well as in the imagination and the intellect.
They are susceptible to being pointed at sensibly and are finite,
separated by interstices through which the cutting instrument passes.
This opinion is ascribed to a majority of the theologians
(mutakallimûn).

(v) According to a fifth view, bodies are composed as described in the
fourth theory, with the difference that it holds the particles to be
infinite in number.

The fourth and the fifth views stand refuted on the ground that if the
indivisible particles they hypothesize do not have any volume, their
aggregate, of necessity, cannot produce a body possessing volume, and if
they possess volume, they are of necessity susceptible to further
division by the imagination and the intellect if, supposedly, their
external division is not possible due to extreme smallness.

Further, if the particles were infinite in number, the body formed by
their collection would also necessarily have an infinite volume. Other
arguments have been advanced against the theory of indivisible particles
in elaborate works.

As to the second theory, it is unacceptable due to the weakness of
reasons advanced to prove that simple bodies’ are substances consisting
of a single continuum without interstices, as they appear to be to the
senses. In recent times physicists have accepted after extensive
experiments that bodies are composed of small atomic parts, which are
themselves constituted by other particles and have a nucleus possessing
mass at their centre. However, this is a premise derived from
disciplines outside philosophy.

The first view is also unacceptable as it is prone to the objections
that arise against the second, fourth and fifth views, for it relieves
in the actual continuity of a body and its potential divisibility into a
finite number of parts whereat division ceases absolutely (i.e.
externally as well in the imagination and the intellect).

Hence the existence of ‘body’ as a continuous substance extended in
three dimensions is undoubtedly affirmed, but this conception
corresponds only to the fundamental particles possessing extended mass,
into which all specific bodies are reducible, as pointed out above. This
is same as the view of Democritus with some modification.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع في إثبات المادة الأولى والصورة الجسمية
---------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إن الجسم من حيث هو جسم – ونعني به ما يحدث فيه الامتداد الجرمي أولا
وبالذات – أمر ” بالفعل ” ، ومن حيث ما يمكن أن يلحق به شئ من الصور
النوعية ولواحقها أمر ” بالقوة ” ، وحيثية الفعل غير حيثية القوة ، لأن
الفعل متقوم بالوجدان ، والقوة متقومة بالفقدان ففيه جوهر هو قوة الصور
الجسمانية ، بحيث إنه ليس له من الفعلية إلا فعلية أنه قوة محضة ، وهذا نحو
وجودها ، والجسمية التي بها الفعلية صورة مقومة لها ، فتبين أن الجسم مؤلف
من مادة وصورة جسمية ، والمجموع المركب منهما هو الجسم تتمة : فهذه هي
المادة الشائعة في الموجودات الجسمانية جميعا ، وتسمى : ” المادة الأولى ”
و ” الهيولى الأولى ” ثم هي مع الصورة الجسمية مادة قابلة للصور النوعية
اللاحقة ، وتسمى : ” المادة الثانية ”
</p>

6.4 PRIME MATTER AND BODILY FORM
--------------------------------

Body qua body - i.e., that which primarily and essentially possesses
extended mass - has an actuality, and it has a potentiality n insofar as
it can receive specific forms (al-shûwar al-naw’iyyah) and their
properties. The mode of actuality is different from the mode of
potentiality, for actuality is marked by possession and potentiality by
non-possession. Hence there is a substance in body with the potentiality
for receiving specific forms, and it is such that it has no actuality
except sheer potentiality and that is its mode of existence. The
‘bodiness’ by virtue of which it has actuality is a form that gives
subsistence to that potentiality. This shows that ‘body’ is composed of
‘matter’ and ‘bodily form,’ the aggregate of two.

This ‘matter’ is present in all bodily existents and is called ‘prime
matter’ (al-mâddât al-ûlâ or hayûlâ). Moreover, ‘prime matter’ along
with ‘bodily form’ constitutes a ‘matter’ for receiving ‘specific
forms,’ and is called ‘second matter’ (al-mâddât al-tsâniyah).

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في إثبات الصور النوعية
-----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الأجسام الموجودة في الخارج تختلف اختلافا بينا من حيث الأفعال والآثار ،
وهذه الأفعال لها مبدأ جوهري لا محالة ، وليس هو المادة الأولى ، لأن شأنها
القبول والانفعال دون الفعل ، ولا الجسمية المشتركة ، لأنها واحدة مشتركة
وهذه الأفعال كثيرة مختلفة ، فلها مباد مختلفة ، ولو كانت هذه المبادئ
أعراضا مختلفة وجب انتهاؤها إلى جواهر مختلفة ، وليست هي الجسمية ، لما
سمعت من اشتراكها بين الجميع ، فهي جواهر منوعة تتنوع بها الأجسام ، تسمى :
” الصور النوعية ” .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تتمة :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أول ما تتنوع الجواهر المادية – بعد الجسمية المشتركة – إنما هو بالصور
النوعية التي تتكون بها العناصر ، ثم العناصر مواد لصور أخرى تلحق بها ،
وكان القدماء من علماء الطبيعة يعدون العناصر أربعا ، وأخذ الإلهيون ذلك
أصلا موضوعا ، وقد أنهاها الباحثون أخيرا إلى ما يقرب من مائة وبضع عنصر .
</p>

6.5. SPECIFIC FORMS
-------------------

The bodies existing in the external world differ manifestly from one
another in respect of their properties and actions. These actions must
inevitably originate in some substance that cannot be prime matter, for
its main feature is receptivity and affection, not action. Neither can
it be their common bodiness, for it is a feature in which they share
while the actions are multiple and various. Hence they must originate in
different sources. If these sources were different accidents, they would
yield different substances, and, as said, the cause of variance cannot
be bodiness, which is common to them all. Hence it is the variety of
substances that produces the variety of bodies. These substances are
called ‘specific forms.’

The first variety of material substances, following their common
bodiness, is the one produced by specific forms, which give rise to the
elements. The elements then form ‘matters’ for other forms that unite
with them. The ancients considered the elements to be four, and the
metaphysicians took it as an extra-philosophical postulate. Recent
research has brought the number of elements to more than a hundred.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس في تلازم المادة والصورة
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
المادة الأولى والصورة متلازمتان ، لا تنفك إحداهما عن الأخرى .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما أن المادة لا تتعرى عن الصورة ، فلأن المادة الأولى حقيقتها أنها
بالقوة من جميع الجهات ، فلا توجد إلا متقومة بفعلية جوهرية متحدة بها ، إذ
لا تحقق لموجود إلا بفعلية ، والجوهر الفعلي الذي هذا شأنه هو الصورة ،
فإذن المطلوب ثابت .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما أن الصورة التي من شأنها أن تقارن المادة لا تتجرد عنها ، فلأن شيئا
من الأنواع التي ينالها الحس والتجربة لا يخلو من قوة التغير وإمكان
الانفعال ، وهذا أصل موضوع مأخوذ من العلوم الطبيعية ، وما فيه القوة
والإمكان لا يخلو من مادة ، فإذن المطلوب ثابت .
</p>

6.6. THE INSEPARABILITY OF MATTER AND FORM
------------------------------------------

Prime matter and form are inseparable from each other. Matter cannot be
without form, because prime matter is potentiality in all aspects. It is
not found but as subsisting by the means of the actuality of a substance
united with it, for an existent is not actualized except with actuality,
and the actual substance that possesses this feature is form, Q.E.D.

As to the forms that are inherently associated with matter, they cannot
be dissociated from it, for none of the kinds accessible to perception
and experience is without the potential for change and Affection - a
postulate derived from the natural sciences - and that which possesses
potentiality and potential for change is not devoid of matter.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في أن كلا من المادة والصورة محتاجة إلى الأخرى
----------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
بيان ذلك أما إجمالا : فإن التركيب بين المادة والصورة تركيب حقيقي إتحادي
، ذو وحدة حقيقية ، وقد تقدم أن بعض أجزاء المركب الحقيقي محتاج إلى بعض .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما تفصيلا : فالصورة محتاجة إلى المادة في تعينها ، فإن الصورة إنما
يتعين نوعها باستعداد سابق تحمله المادة ، وهي تقارن صورة سابقة ، وهكذا .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأيضا : هي محتاجة إلى المادة في تشخصها ، أي في وجودها الخاص بها ، من حيث
ملازمتها للعوارض المسماة ب‍ ” العوارض المشخصة ” من الشكل والوضع والأين
ومتى وغيرها .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما المادة ، فهي متوقفة الوجود حدوثا وبقاء على صورة ما من الصور الواردة
عليها ، تتقوم بها ، وليست الصورة علة تامة ولا علة فاعلية لها ، لحاجتها
في تعينها وفي تشخصها إلى المادة ، والعلة الفاعلية إنما تفعل بوجودها
الفعلي ، فالفاعل لوجود المادة جوهر مفارق للمادة من جميع الجهات ، فهو عقل
مجرد أوجد المادة ، وهو يستحفظها بالصورة بعد الصورة التي يوجدها في المادة
.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فالصورة جزء للعلة التامة ، وشريكة العلة للمادة ، وشرط لفعلية وجودها وقد
شبهوا استبقاء العقل المجرد المادة بصورة ما بمن يستحفظ سقف بيت بأعمدة
متبدلة فلا يزال يزيل عمودا وينصب مكانه آخر .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واعترض عليه : بأنهم ذهبوا إلى كون هيولى عالم العناصر واحدة بالعدد ، فكون
صورة ما – وهي واحدة بالعموم – شريكة العلة لها يوجب كون الواحد بالعموم
علة للواحد بالعدد وهو أقوى وجودا من الواحد بالعموم ، مع أن العلة يجب أن
تكون أقوى من معلولها .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ولو أغمضنا عن ذلك ، فلا ريب أن تبدل الصور يستوجب بطلان الصورة السابقة
وتحقق اللاحقة في محلها ، وإذ فرض أن الصورة جزء العلة التامة للمادة ،
فبطلانها يوجب بطلان الكل – أعني العلة التامة – ويبطل بذلك المادة ، فأخذ
صورة ما شريكة العلة لوجود المادة يؤدي إلى نفي المادة .
</p>

والجواب : أنه سيأتي في مرحلة القوة والفعل أن تبدل الصور في الجواهر
المادية ليس بالكون والفساد وبطلان صورة وحدوث أخرى ، بل الصور المتبدلة
موجودة بوجود واحد سيال يتحرك الجوهر المادي فيه ، وكل واحد منها حد من
حدود هذه الحركة الجوهرية ، فهي موجودة متصلة واحدة بالخصوص وإن كانت وحدة
مبهمة ( 5 ) تناسب إبهام ذات المادة

<p dir="rtl">
التي هي قوة محضة ، وقولنا : ” إن صورة ما واحدة بالعموم شريكة العلة
للمادة ” إنما هو باعتبار ما يطرأ عليها من الكثرة بالانقسام .
</p>

6.7. MUTUAL NEED BETWEEN MATTER AND FORM
----------------------------------------

To explain briefly, the composition of matter and form is a real
composition by the way of union, possessing a real unity, and, as
explained earlier,’ there is a mutual need between the parts of a real
composite (al-murakkab al-haqîqî).

To give a more elaborate explanation, form needs matter for its
determination, for its species is determined by the prior potential
(isti’dâd) carried by matter, which is again associated with its prior
form. The same is true of the prior form, and so on and so forth.

Also, form needs matter for its individuation, that is, for existing as
a particular individual with its accompanying accidents, called
‘individuating accidents’ (al-‘awârid al-musyakhkhishah) such as shape,
position, place, time, etc.

For coming into existence and for continuing to exist, the existence of
matter depends on some form or another from among the forms that it
assumes and which it sustains. The form is neither a ‘complete cause’
nor an ‘efficient cause’ of matter, for it Deeds matter for its own
determination and individuation. The efficient cause is one that acts
with its actual existence. Accordingly, the ‘agent’ responsible for
bringing matter into existence an immaterial substance, immaterial in
all aspects. Hence it is an immaterial Intellect that creates matter and
preserves it through consecutive forms it creates therein.

Thus form is part of the complete cause and a participant in the cause
of matter, as well as the condition for the actuality of its existence.
The sustaining of matter by the immaterial Intellect through some form
or another has been likened to keeping a tent erect while changing its
poles: whenever a pole is removed, another replaces it.

An objection has been raised here. The metaphysicians hold prime matter
of the world of elements to be a numerical unity They make form, which
is a ‘general unity’ participate in its cause thus making a general
unity the cause of a numerical unity, although the latter is stronger in
respect of existence than a general unity and the cause must necessarily
be stronger than its effect.

Moreover, even if the above difficulty is overlooked, there is doubt
that the change of forms necessitates the disappearance of a preceding
form and the appearance of the succeeding one in its place. However,
when form is supposed to be part of matter’s complete cause, the
disappearance of the preceding form necessitates the disappearance of
the whole, the complete cause, which leads to the disappearance of
matter. Hence taking form as a participant in the cause of existence of
matter leads to its negation.

The answer to this objection is that, as will be explained in the
chapter on potentiality and actuality,’ the change of forms in material
substances is not by the way of coming into existence and going out of
existence and through the disappearance of a certain form and the
appearance of another form. Rather, the changing forms exist through one
fluid existence in which the material substance moves. Each of the forms
is a limit along the course of this substantial movement. Hence the
forms make up a continuum that is a ‘particular unity,’ though that
unity is ambiguous in proportion to the

essential ambiguity of matter, which is pure potentiality. As to the
statement that form, which is a ‘general unity.’ participates in the
cause of matter, that generality is cast upon it due to the multiplicity
introduced by division of what is a single continuum.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن النفس والعقل موجودان
---------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما النفس – وهي الجوهر المجرد من المادة ذاتا المتعلق بها فعلا – فلما نجد
في النفوس الانسانية من خاصة العلم ، وسيأتي في مرحلة العاقل والمعقول أن
الصور العلمية مجردة من المادة موجودة للعالم حاضرة عنده ، ولولا تجرد
العالم بتنزهه عن القوة ومحوضته في الفعلية ، لم يكن معنى لحضور شئ عنده ،
فالنفس الانسانية العاقلة مجردة من المادة ، وهي جوهر لكونها صورة لنوع
جوهري ، وصورة الجوهر جوهر على ما تقدم .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما العقل ، فلما سيأتي أن النفس في مرتبة العقل الهيولاني أمر بالقوة
بالنسبة إلى الصور المعقولة لها ، فالذي يفيض عليها الفعلية فيها يمتنع أن
يكون نفسها وهي بالقوة ، ولا أي أمر مادي مفروض ، فمفيضها جوهر مجرد منزه
عن القوة والإمكان ، وهو العقل .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأيضا ، تقدم أن مفيض الفعلية للأنواع المادية بجعل المادة والصورة
واستحفاظ المادة بالصورة ، عقل مجرد ، فالمطلوب ثابت .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وعلى وجودهما براهين كثيرة اخر ، ستأتي الإشارة إلى بعضها .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
خاتمة :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
من خواص الجوهر أنه لا تضاد فيه ، لأن من شرط التضاد تحقق موضوع يعتوره
الضدان ، ولا موضوع للجوهر .
</p>

6.8. SOUL AND INTELLECT
-----------------------

The soul is a substance essentially devoid of matter but dependent upon
it in action. We find in human souls the property of knowledge, and - as
will be explained later on in the chapter on the knower and the known’ -
the intelligible forms are immaterial, existing for the knower and
present for him. If the knower were Dot immaterial by virtue of his
being devoid of potentiality and his possession of sheer actuality,
there would be no sense in anything being present for him. Hence the
intelligent human soul is immaterial. It is a substance because it is
the form of a substantial species, the form of substance being a
substance, as mentioned above.”

As will be explained later on,”” the soul on the plane of the material
intellect (al-‘aql al-hayûlânî) is something in potentia in relation to
its intelligible forms. That which gives it actuality in their respect
cannot be the soul itself while it is in potentia, nor can it be
anything material that may be supposed. Hence that which produces
intelligible forms in the soul is a immaterial substance free from
potentiality, and that is the Intellect.

Also that which gives actuality to the material species, by creating
matter and form and preserving matter through form, is an immaterial
Intellect.

There are many other proofs for existence of the soul and the intellect,
and later on we will refer to some of them.

Conclusion

Of the properties of substance is that there is no contrariety (tadhâdd)
in it, for the condition for contrariety is the existence of a locus
(mawdû’) that alternates between two contraries, and substance has no
locus.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع في الكم وانقساماته وخواصه
--------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الكم عرض يقبل القسمة الوهمية بالذات. وقد قسموه قسمة أولية إلى المتصل
والمنفصل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والمتصل ما يمكن أن يفرض فيه أجزاء بينها حد مشترك والحد المشترك ما إن
اعتبر بداية لأحد الجزئين أمكن أن يعتبر بداية للآخر ، وإن اعتبر نهاية
لأحدهما أمكن أن يعتبر نهاية للآخر ، كالنقطة بين جزئي الخط ، والخط بين
جزئي السطح ، والسطح بين جزئي الجسم التعليمي ، والآن بين جزئي الزمان .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والمنفصل ما كان بخلافه ، كالخمسة مثلا ، فإنها إن قسمت إلى ثلاثة واثنين
لم يوجد فيها حد مشترك ، وإلا فإن كان واحدا منها عادت الخمسة أربعة ، وإن
كان واحدا من خارج عادت ستة ، هذا خلف .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني – أعني المنفصل – هو العدد الحاصل من تكرر الواحد ، وإن كان الواحد
نفسه ليس بعدد ، لعدم صدق حد الكم عليه ، وقد عدوا كل واحدة من مراتب العدد
نوعا على حدة ، لاختلاف الخواص .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والأول – أعني المتصل – ينقسم إلى : قار وغير قار والقار : ” ما لأجزائه
المفروضة اجتماع في الوجود ” كالخط مثلا وغير القار بخلافه ، وهو الزمان ،
فإن كل جزء منه مفروض لا يوجد إلا وقد انصرم السابق عليه ولما يوجد الجزء
اللاحق .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والمتصل القار على ثلاثة أقسام : جسم تعليمي ، وهو الكمية السارية في
الجهات الثلاث من الجسم الطبيعي المنقسمة فيها ، وسطح ، وهو نهاية الجسم
التعليمي المنقسمة في جهتين ، وخط ، وهو نهاية السطح المنقسمة في جهة واحدة
.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وللقائلين بالخلاء – بمعنى الفضاء الخالي من كل موجود شاغل يملؤه – شك في
الكم المتصل القار ، لكن الشأن في إثبات الخلاء بهذا المعنى .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تتمة :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يختص الكم بخواص : الأولى : أنه لا تضاد بين شئ من أنواعه ، لعدم اشتراكها
في الموضوع ، والاشتراك في الموضوع من شرط التضاد .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثانية : قبول القسمة الوهمية بالفعل كما تقدم .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالثة : وجود ما يعده – أي يفنيه بإسقاطه منه مرة بعد مرة – ، فالكم
المنفصل – وهو العدد – مبدؤه الواحد ، وهو عاد لجميع أنواعه ، مع أن بعض
أنواعه عاد لبعض ، كالاثنين للأربعة ، والثلاثة للتسعة ، والكم المتصل
منقسم ذو أجزاء ، فالجزء منه يعد الكل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الرابعة : المساواة واللا مساواة ، وهما خاصتان للكم ، وتعرضان غيره بعرضه
.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الخامسة : النهاية واللانهاية ، وهما كسابقتيهما .
</p>

6.9. QUANTITY, ITS KINDS AND PROPERTIES
---------------------------------------

Quantity is an accident that is essentially susceptible to division in
the imagination.’ The metaphysicians divide it in a first classification
into continuous and discrete.

A continuous quantity is that which can be supposed to have parts with a
common boundary. The common boundary is that which, if considered the
extremity of one of the two parts, can be considered to be the extremity
of the other part as well - such as a point between two parts of a line,
a line between two parts of a plane, a plane between two parts of a
three-dimensional geometrical form and an instant between two parts of
time.

A discrete quantity is the contrary of a continuous quantity, and is
represented by integers, such as 5, which if divided into 3 and 2 does
not have a common boundary. Otherwise, if the common boundary be a unit
from among them, the rest would be four, while if it be a unit from
outside, the whole would be 6. But both cases would contradict our
original supposition.

The discrete quantity is a number obtained through the repetition of
‘one,’ although ‘one’ itself is not a number because the definition of,
quantity (as something essentially susceptible to imaginary division)
does not apply to it. The metaphysicians have counted every one of the
numbers as a separate species due to their different characteristics.

The continuous quantity is divided into ‘static’ (qârr) and ‘non-static’
(ghayr qârr). A static quantity is one all of whose supposed parts
coexist, e.g. a line. A ‘non-static’ quantity is its contrary and is
represented by time, for each of its supposed parts comes into being
when the preceding part has elapsed and its subsequent part has not yet
come into being.

The static continua are of three kinds: three-dimensional geometrical
form overlapping a natural body divisible in the three dimensions;
plane, which is the extremity of a three-dimensional geometrical body
divided in two directions; line, which is the extremity of a plane
divided in one direction.

Those who believe in the existence of vacuum, in the sense of a space
devoid of any existent that may occupy it, question the existence of
static continuous quantities. But it is difficult to establish the
existence of vacuum in this sense.

Quantity has certain properties.

(i) There is no contrariety (tadhâdd) between any of its kinds, for they
do not pertain to the same object (mawdhû’), and a condition of :
contrariety is that there should be a common object.

(ii) It accepts actual imaginary division, as mentioned earlier.

(iii) It has a unit of measurement, i.e. something that exhausts its on
repetition. The source of a discrete quantity is the ‘unit,’ which
measures all kinds of it, though some of them measure some others, e.g.
‘two’ is a measure for ‘four’ and ‘three’ for ‘nine.’ As for a
continuous quantity, it is divisible into parts and a part of it serves
is die measuring unit for the whole.

(iv) Equality and non-equality are characteristics of quantity, which
also apply to anything marked by quantity.

(v) The same is true of finiteness and infiniteness.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في الكيف
---------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وهو ” عرض لا يقبل القسمة ولا النسبة لذاته “. وقد قسموه بالقسمة الأولية
إلى أربعة أقسام :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدها : الكيفيات النفسانية ، كالعلم والإرادة والجبن والشجاعة واليأس
والرجاء .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وثانيها : الكيفيات المختصة بالكميات ، كالاستقامة والانحناء والشكل مما
يختص بالكم المتصل ، وكالزوجية والفردية في الأعداد مما يختص بالكم المنفصل
.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وثالثها : الكيفيات الاستعدادية ، وتسمى أيضا : ” القوة واللا قوة ”
كالاستعداد الشديد نحو الانفعال كاللين ، والاستعداد الشديد نحو اللا
انفعال كالصلابة وينبغي أن يعد منها مطلق الاستعداد القائم بالمادة ونسبة
الاستعداد إلى القوة الجوهرية التي هي المادة نسبة الجسم التعليمي الذي هو
فعلية الامتداد في الجهات الثلاث إلى الجسم الطبيعي الذي فيه إمكانه .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ورابعها : الكيفيات المحسوسة بالحواس الخمس الظاهرة ، وهي إن كانت سريعة
الزوال كحمرة الخجل وصفرة الوجل ، سميت : ” انفعالات ” ، وإن كانت راسخة ،
كصفرة الذهب وحلاوة العسل ، سميت : ” انفعاليات ” .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ولعلماء الطبيعة اليوم تشكيك في كون الكيفيات المحسوسة موجودة في الخارج
على ما هي عليه في الحس ، مشروح في كتبهم .
</p>

6.10. QUALITY
-------------

Quality (kayfiyyah) is an accident essentially unsusceptible to division
or relation. The metaphysicians divide it in a primary classification
into four kinds.

(i) The psychic qualities (al-kayfiyyât al-nafsâniyyah), e.g. knowledge,
will, cowardice, courage, hope and despair.

(ii) The qualities associated with quantities (al-kayfiyyât
al-mukhtashshah bil-kammiyyât), e.g. straightness, curvature, figure
shape) and whatever is associated with continuous quantities, as well as
qualities associated with numbers and discrete quantities, such as
evenness and oddness.

(iii) The ‘qualities of potency’ (al-kayfiyyât al-isti’dâdiyyah), also
referred to as ‘potency’ (quwwah) and impotency (lâ quwwah), such as the
receptivity associated with plasticity and the absence of it associated
with rigidity. In fact one may include among these absolutely all the
potencies that are sustained by matter. The relation of this potency to
the substantial potentiality represented by prime matter is similar to
the relation between a three-dimensional geometrical body, as the
actuality of extension in three dimensions, to a physical mass
possessing the potential for it. ‘

(iv) The sensible qualities (al-kayfiyyât al-mahsûsah), which are
perceived through the five senses. If transitory - as in the case a
blush arising from bashfulness, or a paleness resulting from fear - they
are called ‘affections’ (infi’âlât). But if they are stable, such as the
yellowness of gold and the sweetness of honey, the’ are called
‘dispositions’ (infi’âliyyât).

Nowadays natural scientists have cast doubts on the belief heir earlier
that the sensible qualities exist externally in the manner they appear
to exist to the senses. The related details can be found in their books.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر في المقولات النسبية
------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وهي : الأين ، ومتى ، والوضع ، والجدة ، والإضافة ، والفعل ، والانفعال .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما الأين : فهو هيئة حاصلة من نسبة الشئ إلى المكان
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما متى : فهو هيئة حاصلة من نسبة الشئ إلى الزمان ، وكونه فيه أعم من
كونه في نفس الزمان ، كالحركات ، أو في طرفه ، وهو الآن ، كالموجودات
الآنية الوجود ، من الاتصال والانفصال والمماسة ونحوها ، وأعم أيضا من كونه
على وجه الانطباق ، كالحركة القطعية ، أو لا على وجهه ، كالحركة التوسطية .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما الوضع : فهو هيئة حاصلة من نسبة أجزاء الشئ بعضها إلى بعض ، والمجموع
إلى الخارج ، كالقيام الذي هو هيئة حاصلة للإنسان من نسبة خاصة بين أعضائه
نفسها ، وبينها وبين الخارج ، من كون رأسه إلى فوق وقدميه إلى تحت .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما الجدة – ويقال لها : ” الملك ” – : فهي هيئة حاصلة من إحاطة شئ بشئ ،
بحيث ينتقل المحيط بانتقال المحاط ، سواء كانت الإحاطة إحاطة تامة ،
كالتجلبب ، أو إحاطة ناقصة ، كالتقمص والتنعل .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما الإضافة : فهي هيئة حاصلة من تكرر النسبة بين شيئين ، فإن مجرد النسبة
لا يوجب إضافة مقولية ، وإنما تفيدها نسبة الشئ الملحوظ من حيث إنه منتسب
إلى شئ هو منتسب إليه لهذا المنتسب ، كالأب المنسوب – من حيث إنه أب لهذا
الابن – إليه من حيث إنه ابن له .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وتنقسم الإضافة إلى متشابهة الأطراف كالاخوة والاخوة ، ومختلفة الأطراف
كالأبوة والبنوة ، والفوقية والتحتية .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ومن خواص الإضافة : أن المضافين متكافئان وجودا وعدما ، وفعلا وقوة ، لا
يختلفان من حيث الوجود والعدم ، والفعل والقوة .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
واعلم أن المضاف قد يطلق على نفس الإضافة كالأبوة والبنوة ، ويسمى : ”
المضاف الحقيقي ” ، وقد يطلق على معروضها كالأب والإبن ، ويسمى : ” المضاف
المشهوري ” .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما الفعل : فهو الهيئة الحاصلة من تأثير المؤثر ما دام يؤثر ، كالهيئة
الحاصلة من تسخين المسخن ما دام يسخن .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
وأما الانفعال : فهو الهيئة الحاصلة من تأثر المتأثر ما دام يتأثر ،
كالهيئة الحاصلة من تسخن المتسخن ما دام يتسخن واعتبار التدرج في تعريف
الفعل والانفعال لاخراج الفعل
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
والانفعال إلا بداعيين ، كفعل الواجب ( تعالى ) باخراج العقل المجرد من
العدم إلى الوجود ، وانفعال العقل بخروجه من العدم إلى الوجود بمجرد إمكانه
الذاتي .
</p>

6.11. THE RELATIVE CATEGORIES
-----------------------------

These are: ‘place,’ ‘time,’ ‘position,’ ‘possession,’ ‘relation,’
‘action’ and ‘affection.’

‘Place’ is a mode that arises from a thing’s relation to place.

‘Time’ is a mode that arises from a thing’s relation to time and its
being in it, both when it is in a duration of time, as is the case with
all motions, and when it is instantaneous, as in the case of such
instantaneous events as reaching, separating, touching and the like.
Further, it includes both its being by way of correspondence, as in the
case of ‘traversing motion’ (al-harakât al-qath’iyyah) and otherwise, as
in the case of ‘mediating motion’ (al-harakât al-tawassutiyyah)’

‘Position’ is a mode of being which arises from the relation of a
thing’s parts to each other and the relation of the aggregate to its
external surroundings, e.g. ‘standing,’ which is a mode that arises for
a man due to the particular relation it brings about between his bodily
members themselves and between them and the external surroundings, due
to his head being above and his feet being below.

‘Possession’ (jidah, also called mulk) is a mode that arises due to a
thing’s being surrounded by something else, so that the thing that
surrounds it moves along with it, whether the envelopment is complete,
as in the case of a woman wearing chariot, or incomplete, as with
someone wearing a shirt or shoe.

Categorical relation’ (idhâfah) is a mode of being that arises from k
reciprocity of relation (nisbah) between two things, for a mere don is
not necessarily categorical. It means that the referent is related to
the relatum, which in turn is related to the referent; e.g. a father’s
relation to his son.

Relations are either symmetrical (e.g. the relation between two
brothers) or asymmetrical (e.g. the relation between a father and a, and
the relation between something higher and something lower).

A property of the categorical relation is that there is a parity between
the referent and the relatum (together referred to as mudhâfayn) in
terms of existence and non-existence, actuality and potentiality, and
they do not differ in respect of existence and a- existence, actuality
and potentiality.

It should be known that the term mudhâf also applied to the relation
itself, e.g. that of fatherhood and sonhood, whereat it is called
al-mudhâf al-haqîqî. The term is applied as well to the referent id
relatum - father and son, in the example - whereat it is called
al-mudhâf al-masyhûri.

‘Action’ is a mode that arises in something affecting something se as
long as it continues to affect the latter, like the act of heating by a
heater, as long as it continues to heat.

‘Affection’ is a mode that arises from being affected, as long as le
thing affected continuous to be affected, such as the heating f
something as long as it continues to be heated. The ‘gradualneess”
(tadrîj, i.e. a process extended in time) which is subsumed in le
definitions of ‘action’ and ‘affection’ is for the sake of excluding
‘creative action’ and ‘creative affection’ - such as the action of the
exalted Necessary Being in bringing into existence the immaterial
Intellect from non-existence, and the

‘affection’ of the Intellect in emerging from non-existence into
existence solely by virtue of its essential contingency.
