المرحلة السابعة في العلة و المعلول
==================================

<p dir="rtl">
و فيها أحد عشر فصلا
</p>

CHAPTER SEVEN: The Cause and the Effect
=======================================

11 Units

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الأول في إثبات العلية و المعلولية و أنهما في الوجود
---------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
قد تقدم أن الماهية في ذاتها ممكنة تستوي نسبتها إلى الوجود و العدم و أنها
في رجحان أحد الجانبين محتاجة إلى غيرها و عرفت أن القول بحاجتها في رجحان
عدمها إلى غيرها نوع تجوز و إنما الحاجة في الوجود فلوجودها توقف على
غيرها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا التوقف لا محالة على وجود الغير فإن المعدوم من حيث هو معدوم لا
شيئية له فهذا الموجود المتوقف عليه في الجملة هو الذي نسميه علة و الماهية
المتوقفة عليه في وجودها معلولتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ثم إن المجعول للعلة و الأثر الذي تضعه في المعلول إما أن يكون هو وجوده أو
ماهيته أو صيرورة ماهيته موجودة لكن يستحيل أن يكون المجعول هو الماهية لما
تقدم أنها اعتبارية و الذي للمعلول من علته أمر أصيل على أن الذي تستقر فيه
حاجة الماهية المعلولة و يرتبط بالعلة هو وجودها لا ذاتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يستحيل أن يكون المجعول هو الصيرورة لأنها معنى نسبي قائم بطرفيه و من
المحال أن يقوم أمر أصيل خارجي بطرفين اعتباريين غير أصيلين فالمجعول من
المعلول و الأثر الذي تفيده العلة هو وجوده لا ماهيته و لا صيرورة ماهيته
موجودة و هو المطلوب.
</p>

7.1. CAUSALITY INHERES IN EXISTENCE
-----------------------------------

It was mentioned earlier that quiddity is contingent in its essence,
i.e. indifferent to existence and non-existence, and that it needs
something else in order to incline it towards one of these two sides. It
was noted earlier that there is a kind of figurative usage involved in
speaking of quiddity as needing something other than itself in its
non-existence, for need resides in existence. Hence it is the existence
of quiddity that depends on something other than itself.

That dependence also inevitably relates to the existence of the other
thing, for a non-existent as such has no entity (syay’iyyah, thingness).
The existent on which the existence of quiddity depends is called the
‘cause’ (‘illah), and the quiddity whose existence depends on it is
called the ‘effect’ (ma’lûl, lit. caused).

Furthermore, that which the cause brings about and the result it leaves
on the effect is either (i) the existence of the effect, or (ii) its
quiddity, or (iii) its quiddity’s becoming existent. But it is
impossible that what is caused be the quiddity, for, as mentioned
earlier, it is derivative (i’tibârî), whereas what is caused by the
cause is something fundamental, because that in which the need of the
effect-quiddity resides and which is related to the cause is the
existence of the quiddity, not it essence (dzât, that is because
quiddity in itself is what it is without being related to anything
beyond itself)

Also it is impossible that what is caused by the cause be the quiddity’s
becoming (shayrûrah) existent, for becoming is a relative concept that
depends on its two sides and it is impossible that something fundamental
with an external reality should depend on two sides that are derivative
(i’tibârî) and non-fundamental (ghayr ashîl). Hence what the cause
brings about in respect to the effect and the outcome produced by the
cause in it is the existence of the effect, neither its quiddity nor its
quiddity’s becoming existent.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثاني في انقسامات العلة
------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
تنقسم العلة إلى تامة و ناقصة فإنها إما أن تشتمل على جميع ما يتوقف عليه
وجود المعلول بحيث لا يبقى للمعلول معها إلا أن يوجد و هي العلة التامة و
إما أن تشتمل على البعض دون الجميع و هي العلة الناقصة و تفترقان من حيث إن
العلة التامة يلزم من وجودها وجود المعلول و من عدمها عدمه و العلة الناقصة
لا يلزم من وجودها وجود المعلول و لكن يلزم من عدمها عدمه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تنقسم أيضا إلى الواحدة و الكثيرة و تنقسم أيضا إلى البسيطة و هي ما لا
جزء لها و المركبة و هي بخلافها و البسيطة إما بسيطة بحسب الخارج كالعقل
المجرد و الأعراض و أما بحسب العقل و هي ما لا تركيب فيه خارجا من مادة و
صورة و لا عقلا من جنس و فصل و أبسط البسائط ما لم يتركب من وجود و ماهية و
هو الواجب عز اسمه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تنقسم أيضا إلى قريبة و بعيدة و القريبة ما لا واسطة بينها و بين معلولها
و البعيدة بخلافها كعلة العلة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تنقسم العلة إلى داخلية و خارجية و العلل الداخلية و تسمى أيضا علل
القوام هي المادة و الصورة المقومتان للمعلول و العلل الخارجية و تسمى أيضا
علل الوجود و هي الفاعل و الغاية و ربما سمي الفاعل ما به الوجود و الغاية
ما لأجله الوجود.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و تنقسم العلة إلى العلل الحقيقية و المعدات و في تسمية المعدات عللا تجوز
فليست عللا حقيقية و إنما هي مقربات تقرب المادة إلى إفاضة الفاعل كورود
المتحرك في كل حد من حدود المسافة فإنه يقربه إلى الورود في حد يتلوه و
كانصرام القطعات الزمانية فإنه يقرب موضوع الحادث إلى فعلية الوجود.
</p>

7.2. KINDS OF CAUSES
--------------------

Causes are classified into complete and incomplete. If a cause includes
all the prerequisites upon which the existence of the effect depends, so
that the effect cannot fail to exist when it is there, it is a complete
cause. If a cause includes only some of those prerequisites it is an
incomplete cause. The two differ in the respect that the existence of a
complete cause necessitates the existence of the effect, and its
non-existence the non-existence of the effect. But the existence of an
incomplete cause does not necessitate the effect’s existence, though its
non-existence does necessitate the effect’s non-existence.

Similarly, causes are classified into ‘single’ (wâhid) and ‘multiple’
(katsîr) and into ‘simple’ (basîth) and ‘composite’ (murakkab). A simple
cause is one that has no parts, and a composite cause is its contrary. A
simple cause is either simple in respect of external reality such as the
immaterial Intellect and the accidents, or it is simple from the
viewpoint of the Intellect, i.e. neither composed of matter and form in
external reality nor of genus and differentia in the intellect. The
simplest of entities is that which is not composed of existence and
quiddity, and that is the Necessary Being, exalted is His Name.

Causes are also classified into ‘proximate’ and ‘remote.’ A proximate
cause is one in which there is no intermediary term between it and its
effect. A remote cause, such as the cause of a cause, is its contrary.

Causes are also classified into ‘internal’ and ‘external.’ The internal
causes (al-‘ilal al-dâkhiliyyah, also called ‘ilal al-qiwâm, i.e., the
constituting causes) are matter and form, whereby the effect is
constituted and sustained. The external causes (al- ‘ilal
al-khârijiyyah, also called ‘ilal al-wujûd, the causes of existence) are
the ‘agent’ (al-fail, i.e. efficient cause) and the ‘end’ (al-ghâyah,
i.e. the final caust) The agent is sometimes called ‘mâ bihi al-wujûd
(that on which the effect’s existence depends) and the end is called ‘mâ
li ajalihi wujûd (the raison d’etre).

Cause are also classified into ‘real’ (al-‘ilal al-haqîqiyyah) and
‘preparatory’ causes (al-mu’iddât). There is a kind of figurative usage
involved in naming the preparatory factors as ’causes,’ for they not
real causes. They are only facilitating factors (muqarribât) that bring
matter closer to efficient action by the agent, such as the entry of a
moving thing into a certain stage of its track which brings it closer to
its entry in the succeeding stage, or the passage of intervals of time
which brings an expected event closer to the actuality of its existence.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثالث في وجوب المعلول عند وجود العلة التامة و وجوب وجود العلة عند وجود المعلول
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
إذا كانت العلة التامة موجودة وجب وجود معلولها و إلا جاز عدمه مع وجودها و
لازمه تحقق عدمه المعلول لعدم العلة من دون علة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إذا كان المعلول موجودا وجب وجود علته و إلا جاز عدمها مع وجود المعلول و
قد تقدم أن العلة سواء كانت تامة أو ناقصة يلزم من عدمها عدم المعلول.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و من هنا يظهر أن المعلول لا ينفك وجوده عن وجود علته كما أن العلة التامة
لا تنفك عن معلولها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فلو كان المعلول زمانيا موجودا في زمان بعينه كانت علته موجودة واجبة في
ذلك الزمان بعينه لأن توقف وجوده على العلة في ذلك الزمان فترجيح العلة
لوجوده و إفاضتها له في ذلك الزمان و لو كانت العلة موجودة في زمان آخر
معدومة في زمان وجود المعلول و الإفاضة قائمة بوجودها كانت مفيضة للمعلول و
هي معدومة هذا محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
برهان آخر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
حاجة الماهية المعلولة إلى العلة ليست إلا حاجة وجودها إلى العلة و ليست
الحاجة خارجة من وجودها بمعنى أن يكون هناك وجود و حاجة بل هي مستقرة في حد
ذات وجودها فوجودها عين الحاجة و الارتباط فهو وجود رابط بالنسبة إلى علته
لا استقلال له دونها و هي مقومة له و ما كان هذا شأنه استحال أن يوجد إلا
متقوما بعلته معتمدا عليها فعند وجود المعلول يجب وجود علته و هو المطلوب.
</p>

7.3. MUTUAL NECESSITY BETWEEN CAUSE AND EFFECT
----------------------------------------------

When the complete cause exists, the existence of its effect becomes
necessary; otherwise its non-existence would be admissible despite the
existence of the cause, which implies that the non-existence of the
effect, which is caused by the non-existence of the cause, actualizes
without a cause.

Also, when the effect exists, the existence of its cause becomes
necessary; otherwise its non-existence would be admissible despite the
effect’s existence. As mentioned above, the non-existence of the cause,
whether complete or incomplete, necessitates the non-existence of the
effect.

From this it becomes clear that the existence of the effect is
inseparable from that of its cause, in the same way as the complete
cause is inseparable from its effect.

Hence if the effect is temporal and exists in time, its cause should
also necessarily exist in the same time, for the existence of the effect
depends on the cause’s being in that time; for it is in that
(particular) time that the cause bestows existence upon it. If the cause
were to exist in some other period of time, being non-existent during
the period of existence of the effect, which receives its existence from
the existence of the cause, it would be giving existence to the effect
while it is itself non-existence, and this is impossible.’

Another Proof

The need of the effect-quiddity for the cause is nothing except the need
of its existence for the cause, and that need is not separate from its
existence. Rather, the need resides within the very essence of its
existence; hence its existence is need and relation per se. Hence the
effect is a ‘relative existence’ (wujûd râbith) in relation to its
cause. It does not possess any independence of its own and in isolation
from the cause, which sustains it. Something that is such cannot exist
without being sustained by its cause and without depending on it. Hence
when the effect exists, it is necessary for its cause also to exist.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الرابع قاعدة الواحد
-------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الواحد لا يصدر عنه إلا الواحد و ذلك أن من الواجب أن يكون بين العلة و
معلولها سنخية ذاتية ليست بين الواحد منهما و غير الآخر و إلا جاز كون كل
شي‏ء علة لكل شي‏ء و كل شي‏ء معلولا لكل شي‏ء ففي العلة جهة مسانخة
لمعلولها هي المخصصة لصدوره عنها فلو صدرت عن العلة الواحدة و هي التي ليست
لها في ذاتها إلا جهة واحدة معاليل كثيرة بما هي كثيرة متباينة غير راجعة
إلى جهة واحدة بوجه من الوجوه لزمه تقرر جهات كثيرة في ذاتها و هي ذات جهة
واحدة و هذا محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يتبين بذلك أن ما يصدر عنه الكثير من حيث هو كثير فإن في ذاته جهة كثرة و
يتبين أيضا أن العلل الكثيرة لا تتوارد على معلول واحد.
</p>

7.4. THE RULE OF THE ONE
------------------------

Nothing except ‘one’ can emanate from ‘one.’ That is because it is
necessary that there be an essential affinity (sinkhiyyah) between die
cause and the effect, which none of them shares with something else.
Otherwise anything could be the cause of anything, and anything could be
the effect of any thing. Hence there is an aspect of affinity between
the cause and its effect that particularly marks the latter’s emanation
(shudûr) from the former. Therefore, if multiple effects - as multiple
and disparate entities whose multiplicity is irreducible to any single
aspect whatsoever - were to emanate from a cause which is ‘one,’ which
in itself has only a single ontological aspect, it would imply that
something which has a single aspect should incorporate multiple aspects
within itself, and this is impossible.

From this it follows that a cause from which multiple effects qua
multiple entities emanate, possesses an aspect of multiplicity in its
essence. It also follows from the above that multiple causes do not give
rise to an effect that is ‘one.’

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الخامس في استحالة الدور و التسلسل في العلل
------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما استحالة الدور و هو توقف وجود الشي‏ء على ما يتوقف عليه وجوده إما بلا
واسطة و هو الدور المصرح و إما بواسطة أو أكثر و هو الدور المضمر فلأنه
يستلزم توقف وجود الشي‏ء على نفسه و لازمه تقدم الشي‏ء على نفسه بالوجود
لتقدم وجود العلة على وجود المعلول بالضرورة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما استحالة التسلسل و هو ترتب العلل لا إلى نهاية فمن أسد البراهين
عليها ما أقامه الشيخ في إلهيات الشفاء و محصله أنا إذا فرضنا معلولا و
علته و علة علته و أخذنا هذه الجملة وجدنا كلا من الثلاثة ذا حكم ضروري
يختص به فالمعلول المفروض معلول فقط و علته علة لما بعدها معلولة لما قبلها
و علة العلة علة فقط غير معلولة فكان ما هو معلول فقط طرفا و ما هو علة فقط
طرفا آخر و كان ما هو علة و معلول معا وسطا بين طرفين ثم إذا فرضنا الجملة
أربعة مترتبة كان للطرفين ما تقدم من حكم الطرفين و كان الاثنان الواقعان
بين الطرفين مشتركين في حكم الوسط و هو أن لهما العلية و المعلولية معا
بالتوسط بين طرفين ثم كلما زدنا في عدد الجملة إلى ما لا نهاية له كان
الأمر جاريا على مجرى واحد و كان مجموع ما بين الطرفين و هي العدة التي كل
واحد من آحادها علة و معلول معا وسطا له حكمه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فلو فرضنا سلسلة من العلل مترتبة إلى غير النهاية كان ما وراء المعلول
الأخير من الجملة غير المتناهية وسطا لا طرف له و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هذا البرهان يجري في كل سلسلة مترتبة من العلل التي لا تفارق وجودها وجود
المعلول سواء كانت تامة أو ناقصة دون العلل المعدة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و يدل على وجوب تناهي العلل التامة خاصة ما تقدم أن وجود المعلول وجود رابط
بالنسبة إلى علته فإنه لو ترتبت العلية و المعلولية في سلسلة غير متناهية
من غير أن تنتهي إلى علة غير معلولة كانت وجودات رابطة متحققة من غير وجود
نفسي مستقل تقوم به و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لهم على استحالة التسلسل حجج أخرى مذكورة في المطولات.
</p>

7.5. IMPOSSIBILITY OF AN INFINITE REGRESS AND VICIOUS CIRCLE IN CAUSALITY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

A vicious circle (dawr)  - which means a thing’s dependence for its
existence on something whose existence depends on it - may be either
with or without an intermediary. If there is no intermediary; it is
called an ‘overt circle’ (al-dawr al-musharrath), and if there are one
or more intermediaries it is called a ‘covert circle’ (al-dawr
al-mudhmir). It is considered logically impossible because it
necessarily implies the dependence of a thing’s existence on itself,
which implies a thing’s preceding itself existentially, for the
existence of the cause necessarily precedes the existence of the effect.

As to the impossibility of an infinite regress - which means an endless
series of causes dependent on one another - the most conclusive of
arguments concerning it is the one offered by Ibn Sina in his work
al-Syifâ’, in the part on metaphysics. The gist of’ this argument is
that when we consider an effect, its cause and the cause of its cause,
we find that there is a necessary rule that applies specifically to each
term of this set. The supposed effect is solely an effect; its cause is
the cause of its subsequent term and the effect of its preceding term.
The cause of the cause is solely a cause and not an effect of anything.
Hence that which is solely an effect stands on one side and that which
is solely a cause stands on the other side. That which is both a cause
and an effect lies between the two sides. Now when we assume a set of
four consecutive terms, the rule applicable to the two sides in the
above case will apply to the two sides in this case also. The rule
applicable to the middle terms will apply to both the middle terms in
this case. That is, as intermediary terms, they will be both causes and
effects. When the number of terms in the supposed set is increased
indefinitely, the same rule will continue to apply; the group between
the two extreme sides, which consists of terms each of which is both a
cause and an effect, will make up the middle and share in the rule
applicable to middle terms.

But when we assume a series of infinite number of causes, the entire
group of an infinite number of causes will make up a middle that has no
side except the last effect and this is impossible.

This argument applies to every series of consecutive causes whose
existence is not separable from the existence of the effect, respective
of whether they are complete or incomplete causes (though it does not
apply to preparatory causes).

The necessity of the finiteness of the series of complete causes is
particularly borne out by the remark made earlier’ that the existence of
an effect is relative in relation to its cause. If an infinite causal
series were not to end in a cause that is not an effect, it would mean
that relative existents can actualize without needing a self-subsisting
and independent existent that might sustain them, and this is
impossible.

The metaphysicians have offered other proofs in favour of the
impossibility of an infinite regress that are mentioned in elaborate
works.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السادس العلة الفاعلية و أقسامها
-------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
العلة الفاعلية و هي التي تفيض وجود المعلول و تفعله على أقسام و قد ذكروا
في وجه ضبطها أن الفاعل إما أن يكون له علم بفعله أو لا و الثاني إما أن
يلائم فعله طبعه و هو الفاعل بالطبع أو لا يلائم و هو الفاعل بالقسر و
الأول و هو الذي له علم بفعله إن لم يكن فعله بإرادته فهو الفاعل بالجبر و
إن كان بها فإما أن يكون علمه بفعله في مرتبة فعله بل عين فعله و هو الفاعل
بالرضا و إما أن يكون علمه بفعله قبل فعله و حينئذ إما أن يكون علمه مقرونا
بداع زائد و هو الفاعل بالقصد و إما أن لا يكون علمه مقرونا بداع زائد بل
يكون نفس العلم فعليا منشأ لصدور المعلول و حينئذ فإما أن يكون علمه زائدا
على ذاته و هو الفاعل بالعناية أو غير زائد على ذاته و هو الفاعل بالتجلي و
الفاعل في ما تقدم إذا نسب إلى فعله من جهة أنه و فعله فعل لفاعل آخر كان
فاعلا بالتسخير.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فللفاعل أقسام ثمانية :
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أحدها الفاعل بالطبع و هو الذي لا علم له بفعله مع كون الفعل ملائما لطبعه
كالنفس في مرتبة القوى البدنية الطبيعية تفعل أفعالها بالطبع.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثاني الفاعل بالقسر و هو الذي لا علم له بفعله و لا فعله ملائم لطبعه
كالنفس في مرتبة القوى عند المرض فإن الأفعال تنحرف فيه عن مجرى الصحة
لعوامل قاسرة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثالث الفاعل بالجبر و هو ما له علم بفعله و ليس بإرادته كالإنسان يكره
على فعل ما لا يريده.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الرابع الفاعل بالرضا و هو الذي له إرادة و علمه التفصيلي بالفعل عين الفعل
و ليس له قبل الفعل إلا علم إجمالي به بعلمه بذاته كالإنسان يفعل الصور
الخيالية و علمه التفصيلي بها عينها و له قبلها علم إجمالي بها بعلمه بذاته
و كفاعلية الواجب للأشياء عند الإشراقيين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الخامس الفاعل بالقصد و هو الذي له إرادة و علم بفعله قبل الفعل بداع زائد
كالإنسان في أفعاله الاختيارية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
السادس الفاعل بالعناية و هو الذي له إرادة و علم سابق على الفعل زائد على
ذات الفاعل نفس الصورة العلمية منشأ لصدور الفعل من غير داع زائد كالإنسان
الواقع على جذع عال فإنه بمجرد توهم السقوط يسقط على الأرض و كالواجب في
إيجاده على قول المشائين.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
السابع الفاعل بالتجلي و هو الذي يفعل الفعل و له علم سابق تفصيلي به هو
عين علمه الإجمالي بذاته كالنفس الإنسانية المجردة فإنها لما كانت الصورة
الأخيرة لنوعها كانت على بساطتها هي المبدأ لجميع كمالاتها و آثارها
الواجدة لها في ذاتها و علمها الحضوري بذاتها علم بتفاصيل كمالاتها و إن لم
يتميز بعضها من بعض و كالواجب تعالى بناء على ما سيجي‏ء من أن له تعالى
علما إجماليا في عين الكشف التفصيلي.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
الثامن الفاعل بالتسخير و هو الفاعل إذا نسب إليه فعله من جهة أن لنفس
الفاعل فاعلا آخر إليه يستند هو و فعله فهو فاعل مسخر في فعله كالقوى
الطبيعية و النباتية و الحيوانية المسخرة في أفعالها للنفس الإنسانية و
كالفواعل الكونية المسخرة للواجب تعالى في أفعالها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و في كون الفاعل بالجبر و الفاعل بالعناية مباينين للفاعل بالقصد مباينة
نوعية على ما يقتضيه التقسيم كلام.
</p>

7.6. THE EFFICIENT CAUSE AND ITS KINDS
--------------------------------------

The efficient cause, i.e. one that gives existence to the effect, has
various kinds. According to the metaphysicians, the ‘agent’ has either
knowledge of its action or it does not. In the latter case, the agent is
either such that its action accords with its ‘nature’ or it does not. In
the first case, it is called an ‘agent by nature,’ and in the second an
‘agent by constraint.’ An agent that has knowledge of its action is
either such that its action is willed by it, or it is not.

If it is not, it is an ‘agent by coercion.’ If its action is willed by
it, either (i) its knowledge of its action coincides with its action or,
rather, is the same as its action, in which case it is an ‘agent by
agreement;’ (ii) its knowledge of its action precedes its action. In the
latter case, its knowledge is either linked to an additional ‘motive,’
in which case it is an ‘agent by intention,’ or it is not linked to such
an additional ‘motive,’ i.e. the very active knowledge of the action’ is
the source of emanation of the effect. In this case, either that
knowledge is something additional to the essence (dzât) jf the agent, or
it is not. If it is, then the agent is an ‘agent by foreknowledge;’ if
not, it is an ‘agent by manifestation.’ In the foregoing, if the agent
is associated with its action in such a manner that itself and its
action are actions of another agent, it is an ‘agent by subjection.’

Thus there are eight kinds of agents.

(i) The ‘agent by nature’ (al-fâ’il bi al-thab) is one which has no
knowledge of its action though it accords with its nature. An example of
it is the soul on the plane of its natural bodily faculties: it performs
its actions in accordance with its nature.

(ii) The ‘agent by constraint’ (al-fâ’il bi al-qasr) is one which has no
knowledge of its action and its action does not accord with its nature.
An example of it is the soul on the plane of its faculties at the time
of illness, during which its actions are disoriented from their healthy
course due to constraining factors.

(iii) The ‘agent by coercion’ (al-fâ’il bi al-jabr) is one which has
knowledge of its action but carries it out unwillingly. An example of it
is a person who is forced to do something he does not want to do.

(iv) The ‘agent by agreement’ (al-fâ’il bi al-ridhâ) is one which has
will, and its detailed knowledge of its action is the same as its
action. Before the action it does not possess any except a non-detailed
knowledge of it, a knowledge that the agent possesses by virtue of its
own essence. Divine creativity is of this kind in the view of the
Emanationists.

(v) The ‘agent by intention’ (al-fâ’il bi al-qashd) is one which has
will and foreknowledge of its action along with an additional motive for
acting. An example of it is man in his voluntary actions.

(vi) The ‘agent by foreknowledge’ (al-fâ’il bi al-‘inâyah) has will and
a foreknowledge of its action additional to the agent’s essence. The
very intelligible form (al-shûrat al-‘ilmiyyah) is the source of
emergence of the action without there being any additional motive. An
example of it is a man standing on a high tower, the very idea of
falling being sufficient to make him fall to the ground. Divine creation
is of this kind in the opinion of the Peripatetics.

(vii) The ‘agent by manifestation’ (al-fâ’il bi al-tajallî) has detailed
foreknowledge of its action, a foreknowledge that is the same as the
‘simple’ knowledge that it possesses of its essence. An example of it is
the immaterial human soul, which, being the ultimate form for its
species, despite its simplicity, is the source of all its perfections
and properties that it possesses in its essence. Its immediate knowledge
(‘ilm hudhûrî) of itself is a detailed knowledge of its perfections,
though they are not distinguished from one an-other. Another example is
the exalted Necessary Being in accordance with that which will be
mentioned later on,’ that the Necessary Being possesses an
undifferentiated knowledge that at the ; same time discloses details
(‘ilman ijmâliyyan fî ‘ayn al-kasyf al-tafshîlî).

(viii) The ‘agent by subjection’ (al-fâ’il bi al-taskhîr) is one whose
action is ascribed to it from the point of view that the agent itself is
an act of another agent, on which the agent itself and its action
depend. Therefore such an agent is subject in its action to the higher
agent. Examples of it are the physical, vegetative and animal faculties
subject to the human soul in their actions, and the cosmic agents
subject in their actions to the Necessary Being.

However, we have reservations in regarding ‘agent by coercion’ and
‘agent by foreknowledge’ as being different in kind from ‘agent by
intention,’ as implied by the above division.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل السابع في العلة الغائية
-----------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و هي الكمال الأخير الذي يتوجه إليه الفاعل في فعله.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإن كان لعلم الفاعل دخل في فاعليته كانت الغاية مرادة للفاعل في فعله و إن
شئت فقل كان الفعل مرادا له لأجلها و لهذا قيل إن الغاية متقدمة على الفعل
تصورا و متأخرة عنه وجودا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إن لم يكن للعلم دخل في فاعلية الفاعل كانت الغاية ما ينتهي إليه الفعل و
ذلك أن لكمال الشي‏ء نسبة ثابتة إليه فهو مقتض لكماله و منعه من مقتضاه
دائما أو في أكثر أوقات وجوده قسر دائمي أو أكثري ينافي العناية الإلهية
بإيصال كل ممكن إلى كماله الذي أودع فيه استدعاؤه فلكل شي‏ء غاية هي كماله
الأخير الذي يقتضيه و أما القسر الأقلي فهو شر قليل يتداركه ما بحذائه من
الخير الكثير و إنما يقع فيما يقع في نشأة المادة بمزاحمة الأسباب
المختلفة.
</p>

7.7. THE FINAL CAUSE
--------------------

It is its ultimate perfection (kamâl) towards which the agent is
oriented in its action. If the agent’s knowledge has a role in its
efficiency, the end is the agent’s purpose in his action. Alternately,
one may say that his purpose is the action for the sake of reaching die
end. Hence it is said that end precedes action conceptually but follows
it externally. But if knowledge has no role in the agent’s efficiency,
the end is that in which the action ultimately terminates. To explain, a
thing’s perfection has a permanent relationship with it, and it requires
that perfection. Restraining it from attaining that requirement of its
nature either always (i.e., through a permanent restraint) or through
most of its lifespan (i.e. through a major restraint) contradicts Divine
Providence, which makes every contingent attain the perfection that it
seeks. Hence everything has an end that is the ultimate perfection it
requires. As to a minor restraint (which restrains a thing from
attaining perfection during a minor part of its life), it is a minor
evil that is compensated by an abundance of good. Moreover, this
restraint, in cases where it is present, occurs only in the realm of
matter due to disparate conflicting factors.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الثامن في إثبات الغاية فيما يعد لعبا أو جزافا أو باطلا و الحركات الطبيعية و غير ذلك
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ربما يظن أن الفواعل الطبيعية لا غاية لها في أفعالها ظنا أن الغاية يجب أن
تكون معلومة مرادة للفاعل لكنك عرفت أن الغاية أعم من ذلك و أن للفواعل
الطبيعية غاية في أفعالها هي ما ينتهى إليه حركاتها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ربما يظن أن كثيرا من الأفعال الاختيارية لا غاية لها كملاعب الصبيان
بحركات لا غاية لهم فيها و كاللعب باللحية و كالتنفس و كانتقال المريض
النائم من جانب إلى جانب و كوقوف المتحرك إلى غاية عن غايته بعروض مانع
يمنعه عن ذلك إلى غير ذلك من الأمثلة.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق أن شيئا من هذه الأفاعيل لا يخلو عن غاية توضيح ذلك أن في الأفعال
الإرادية مبدأ قريبا للفعل هو القوة العاملة المنبثة في العضلات و مبدأ
متوسطا قبله و هو الشوق المستتبع للإرادة و الإجماع و مبدأ بعيدا قبله هو
العلم و هو تصور الفعل على وجه جزئي الذي ربما قارن التصديق بأن الفعل خير
للفاعل.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لكل من هذه المبادي الثلاثة غاية و ربما تطابقت أكثر من واحد منها في
الغاية و ربما لم يتطابق.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فإذا كان المبدأ الأول و هو العلم فكريا كان للفعل الإرادي غاية فكرية و
إذا كان تخيلا من غير فكر فربما كان تخيلا فقط ثم تعلق به الشوق ثم حركت
العاملة نحوه العضلات و يسمى الفعل عندئذ جزافا كما ربما تصور الصبي حركة
من الحركات فيشتاق إليها فيأتي بها و ما انتهت إليه الحركة حينئذ غاية
للمبادي كلها.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و ربما كان تخيلا مع خلق و عادة كالعبث باللحية و يسمى عادة و ربما كان
تخيلا مع طبيعة كالتنفس أو تخيلا مع مزاج كحركات المريض و يسمى قصدا ضروريا
و في كل من هذه الأفعال لمباديها غاياتها و قد تطابقت في أنها ما انتهت
إليه الحرة و أما الغاية الفكرية فليس لها مبدأ فكري حتى تكون له غايته.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و كل مبدإ من هذه المبادي إذا لم يوجد غايته لانقطاع الفعل دون البلوغ إلى
الغاية بعروض مانع من الموانع سمي الفعل بالنسبة إليه باطلا و انقطاع الفعل
بسبب مانع يحول بينه و بين الوصول إلى الغاية غير كون الفاعل لا غاية له في
فعله.
</p>

7.8. THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE FINAL CAUSE
----------------------------------------

At times it is imagined that physical agents have no end in their
actions. It is presumed that an end necessarily involves conscious
purpose on the agent’s part. However, as we have seen, the idea of end
is more general than that, and the end of physical agents in their
actions is that in which their motions terminate.

Sometimes it is imagined that many voluntary actions have no end, such
as children in play, wherein their movements have no final goal. Other
instances of it are such acts as stroking one’s beard, breathing, the
listless movements of a sick person in sleep turning from one side to
another, the interruption of an object’s movement in the middle of its
journey towards its destination.

Actually none of these agents are devoid of an end. To explain, there
are three causal sources involved in voluntary actions. The proximate
source of action is the motor faculty present in the muscles. Then there
is the intermediate source, which precedes the first one. It is desire,
followed by will and execution. The remote causal source is ideation,
which entails the formation of the particular idea of the action in the
mind, which is also often accompanied by a judgement that the action
entails some benefit for the agent.

Every one of these sources possesses an end. Often there is a
coincidence of ends in one or more of these sources, and at times there
is no such coincidence.

Hence if the first stage involves ideation, which is knowledge, the
voluntary action will have a ideated end. But if it involves only
imagination, without there being any forethought, and is followed by
desire and motor action of the muscles, the action is called a
‘capricious act.’ This happens in the case of play, where a child first
fancies some activity, then its desire is aroused to perform it,
whereupon it proceeds to carry it out. That in which the movements
terminate is then the end of all the three causal sources.

At times, imagination is accompanied with disposition and habit, as in
the case of stroking one’s beard. Then the act resulting is called
‘habitual’ (al-‘âdah). At times, imagination is accompanied with nature
(tabî’ah), as in the case of voluntary breathing. At other times,
imagination is accompanied by a disturbed condition of the health, as in
the case of the actions of a sick person, in which case it is called
‘action by natural intention.’ In each of these actions there are causal
sources with ends, and they all correspond to that in which the action
terminates. As to a ideated end, these actions do not have an ideational
causal source that may have such an end.

When the end is not realized for any of these causal sources due to the
interruption of the action by some hindrance that stops it short of its
end, the action is named ‘vain’ (bathîl) in relation to the end. The
interruption of action due to a hindrance that keeps it from reaching
its end is something other than the agent not possessing an end in its
action.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل التاسع في نفي القول بالاتفاق و هو انتفاء الرابطة بين ما يعد غاية للأفعال و بين العلل الفاعلية
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ربما يظن أن من الغايات المترتبة على الأفعال ما هي غير مقصودة لفاعلها و
لا مرتبطة به و مثلوا له بمن يحفر بئرا ليصل إلى الماء فيعثر على كنز و
العثور على الكنز ليس غاية لحفر البئر مرتبطة به و يسمى هذا النوع من
الاتفاق بختا سعيدا و بمن يأوي إلى بيت ليستظل فينهدم عليه فيموت و يسمى
هذا النوع من الاتفاق بختا شقيا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و على ذلك بنى بعض علماء الطبيعة كينونة العالم فقال إن عالم الأجسام مركبة
من أجزاء صغار ذرية مبثوثة في خلاء غير متناه و هي دائمة الحركة فاتفق أن
تصادمت جملة منها فاجتمعت فكانت الأجسام فما صلح للبقاء بقي و ما لم يصلح
لذلك فنى سريعا أو بطيئا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الحق أن لا اتفاق في الوجود و لنقدم لتوضيح ذلك مقدمة هي أن الأمور
الكائنة يمكن أن تتصور على وجوه أربعة منها ما هو دائمي الوجود و منها ما
هو أكثري الوجود و منها ما يحصل بالتساوي كقيام زيد و قعوده مثلا و منها ما
يحصل نادرا و على الأقل كوجود الإصبع الزائد في الإنسان.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و الأمر الأكثري الوجود يفارق الدائمي الوجود بوجود معارض يعارضه في بعض
الأحيان كعدد أصابع اليد فإنها خمسة على الأغلب و ربما أصابت القوة المصورة
للإصبع مادة زائدة صالحة لصورة الإصبع فصورتها إصبعا و من هنا يعلم أن كون
الأصابع خمسة مشروط بعدم مادة زائدة و أن الأمر بهذا الشرط دائمي الوجود لا
أكثريه و أن الأقلي الوجود مع اشتراط المعارض المذكور أيضا دائمي الوجود لا
أقليه و إذا كان الأكثري و الأقلي دائميين بالحقيقة فالأمر في المساوي ظاهر
فالأمور كلها دائمية الوجود جارية على نظام ثابت لا يختلف و لا يتخلف.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و إذا كان كذلك فلو فرض أمر كمالي مترتب على فعل فاعل ترتبا دائميا لا
يختلف و لا يتخلف حكم العقل حكما ضروريا فطريا بوجود رابطة وجودية بين
الأمر الكمالي المذكور و بين فعل الفاعل رابطة تقضي بنوع من الاتحاد
الوجودي بينهما ينتهي إليه قصد الفاعل لفعله و هذا هو الغاية.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و لو جاز لنا أن نرتاب في ارتباط غايات الأفعال بفواعلها مع ما ذكر من دوام
الترتب جاز لنا أن نرتاب في ارتباط الأفعال بفواعلها و توقف الحوادث و
الأمور على علة فاعلية إذ
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
ليس هناك إلا ملازمة وجودية و ترتب دائمي و من هنا ما أنكر كثير من
القائلين بالاتفاق العلة الفاعلية كما أنكر العلة الغائية و حصر العلية في
العلة المادية و ستجي‏ء الإشارة إليه.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
فقد تبين من جميع ما تقدم أن الغايات النادرة الوجود المعدودة من الاتفاق
غايات دائمية ذاتية لعللها و إنما تنسب إلى غيرها بالعرض فالحافر لأرض
تحتها كنز يعثر على الكنز دائما و هو غاية له بالذات و إنما تنسب إلى
الحافر للوصول إلى الماء بالعرض و كذا البيت الذي اجتمعت عليه أسباب
الانهدام ينهدم على من فيه دائما و هو غاية للمتوقف فيه بالذات و إنما عدت
غاية للمستظل بالعرض فالقول بالاتفاق من الجهل بالسبب.
</p>

7.9. REFUTATION OF CHANCE
-------------------------

At times it is conjectured that there are some ends that are unwittingly
achieved by an agent’s action without being aimed at by it. This is
illustrated by the example of a man who digs a well for water but comes
upon a treasure trove. Finding a treasure is not consequential to one’s
digging a well. These kinds of occurrences are called cases of ‘good
luck.’ Another example is the case of a man who takes shelter under a
roof for the sake of its shade and is killed due to the roof collapsing
upon him. Such occurrences are called incidents of ‘bad luck.’

Some natural philosophers have based their view of the universe on this
conjecture, holding that the world of physical bodies was composed of
small atomic particles scattered in an infinite space in which they were
in constant motion. By chance a group of them collided and collocated to
form the bodies, of which those that are capable of enduring endure
while others are subject to rapid or gradual annihilation.

The truth is that there is no chance in the world of existence. Here it
will be beneficial to give a brief introduction for the sake of
explanation. We can conceive phenomena as falling into four classes. A
group of them occurs invariably. Another group of them consists of those
that occur most of the time. Some ail those that occur half of the time
(like someone’s standing or sitting), while there are others that occur
only rarely (like the possession of a sixth finger on one’s hand).

Those which occur most of the time differ from those which occur always
due to the occasional existence of a conflicting factor, as in the case
of the number of fingers on the hand, which is five most of the time.
However, occasionally, the fashioning principle of the fingers (in the
foetus) comes upon a surplus matter possessing the capacity to assume
the form of a finger and it shapes that into a finger. From this it is
known that the fingers’ being five is conditional upon the non-existence
of surplus matter, and this phenomenon with this condition occurs
invariably, not most of the time. That which occurs rarely will also
occur invariably and always on condition of presence of the conflicting
factor. Hence if the phenomena that occur mostly or rarely in fact occur
invariably on the presence of the requisite conditions, the case of the
phenomena that occur half of the time is quite obvious. Hence all
phenomena involve causal invariability and follow a fixed system that
neither changes nor is violated.

Such being the case, if we suppose a certain perfection to be
unalterably and inexorably consequential to the action of an agent, the
natural and self-evident judgement of the intellect is that there exists
an existential relationship implying a kind of existential union between
the agent and that perfection. That perfection is what the agent aims at
by its action, and this is what ‘the end’ means.

If we may entertain a doubt concerning the existence of relationship
between ends of actions and their agents despite what has been said
concerning the invariability of this relationship, we may as well doubt
concerning the relationship of actions to their agents and the
dependence of events and phenomena upon efficient causes, for here too
there is nothing except an invariable association and a mutual
existential necessity between

the agent and its action. It is for this reason that many of those who
believe in chance have denied the existence of the efficient cause in
the same way as they have rejected the final cause, confining causality
exclusively to material causes, as will be pointed out in the next
section.

From the above discussion it becomes clear that the rare outcomes that
are reckoned as instances of chance are invariable and essential ends of
their causes, which are only accidentally ascribed to something else.
Hence one who digs the ground under which a treasure lies invariably
finds the treasure, and that is an essential end of his action, though
it is accidentally ascribed to one digging for water. Similarly, a roof
that possesses all the prerequisites for collapsing collapses invariably
over someone under it, and that is the essential end of his action,
though it is accidentally reckoned is the end of one seeking shelter
from the sun. On the basis of this, the belief in chance arises from
ignorance of causes.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل العاشر في العلة الصورية و المادية
---------------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
أما العلة الصورية فهي الصورة بمعنى ما به الشي‏ء هو هو بالفعل بالنسبة إلى
النوع المركب منها و من المادة فإن لوجود النوع توقفا عليها بالضرورة و أما
بالنسبة إلى المادة فهي صورة و شريكة العلة الفاعلية على ما تقدم و قد تطلق
الصورة على معان أخر خارجة من غرضنا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أما العلة المادية فهي المادة بالنسبة إلى النوع المركب منها و من الصورة
فإن لوجود النوع توقفا عليها بالضرورة و أما بالنسبة إلى الصورة فهي مادة
قابلة معلولة لها على ما تقدم.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و قد حصر قوم من الطبيعيين العلة في المادة و الأصول المتقدمة ترده فإن
المادة سواء كانت الأولى أو الثانية حيثيتها القوة و لازمها الفقدان و من
الضروري أنه لا يكفي لإعطاء فعلية النوع و إيجادها فلا يبقى للفعلية إلا أن
توجد من غير علة و هو محال.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا قد تقدم أن الشي‏ء ما لم يجب لم يوجد و الوجوب الذي هو الضرورة و
اللزوم لا مجال لاستناده إلى المادة التي حيثيتها القبول و الإمكان فوراء
المادة أمر يوجب الشي‏ء و يوجده و لو انتفت رابطة التلازم التي إنما تتحقق
بين العلة و المعلول أو بين معلولي علة ثالثة و ارتفعت من بين الأشياء بطل
الحكم باستتباع أي شي‏ء لأي شي‏ء و لم يجز الاستناد إلى حكم ثابت و هو خلاف
الضرورة العقلية و للمادة معان أخر غير ما تقدم خارجة من غرضنا.
</p>

7.10. FORMAL AND MATERIAL CAUSE
-------------------------------

The formal cause (al-‘illat al-shûriyyah) is the ‘form,’ which makes a
thing what it is in actuality. It is a ’cause’ in relation to the
species, which is a composite of form and matter, for the existence of
species necessarily depends upon it. However, in relation to ‘matter’ it
is ‘form’ and a participant in the efficient cause, as mentioned
earlier.’ There are other meanings of the term ‘form’ with which we are
not concerned here.

The material cause (al-‘illat al-mâddiyyah) is ‘matter’ in relation to
the species, which is a composite of it and ‘form,’ for the existence of
species necessarily depends upon it. However, in relation to the ‘form’
it is ‘matter,’ which receives it and is its effect, as mentioned
earlier.

A group of natural philosophers have confined causation to matter, but
the above-mentioned principles refute such a view. That is because
matter, whether ‘prime’ or ‘secondary’ (e.g. sperm or seed), is the
bearer of potentiality, which necessarily entails ‘privation’ (fuqdân),
and it is self-evident that it is not sufficient to give actuality to
the species and bring it into existence. (Thus if the role of the
efficient, final and formal causes is denied), the only alternative that
remains is to admit that actuality comes into being without a cause,
which is impossible.

Moreover, as mentioned earlier, a thing does not come into existence
until it is necessitated, and there remains no ground for deriving such
a necessity except matter, whose mode of being is receptivity and
potentiality. Therefore, there must be something beyond matter that
necessitates the thing and brings it into existence. If the nexus of
necessity between the cause and the effect or between two effects of a
third cause be eliminated from things, everything would be the cause of
everything else, the law of causality would be invalid and one could not
take recourse in any fixed law. Such a position is contrary to what is
regarded as self-evident by the intellect. There are other meanings of
the tern: ‘matter’ with which we are not concerned here.

<p dir="rtl">
الفصل الحادي عشر في العلة الجسمانية
-----------------------------------
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
العلل الجسمانية متناهية أثرا من حيث العدة و المدة و الشدة قالوا لأن
الأنواع الجسمانية متحركة بالحركة الجوهرية فالطبائع و القوى التي لها
منحلة منقسمة إلى حدود و أبعاض كل منها محفوف بالعدمين محدود ذاتا و أثرا.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
و أيضا العلل الجسمانية لا تفعل إلا مع وضع خاص بينها و بين المادة قالوا
لأنها لما احتاجت في وجودها إلى المادة احتاجت في إيجادها إليها و الحاجة
إليها في الإيجاد هي بأن يحصل لها بسببها وضع خاص مع المعلول و لذلك كان
للقرب و البعد و الأوضاع الخاصة دخل في تأثير العلل الجسمانية.
</p>

7.11. THE BODILY CAUSE
----------------------

The bodily causes have a limited efficiency from the viewpoint of
number, duration and existential intensity (of the effects they can
produce). The metaphysicians hold that bodily species are in substantial
motion (al-harakât al-jawhariyyah); hence their specific forms and
faculties are divisible and analyzable into limits and stages, each of
which is bracketed by two non-beings. They are finite in themselves as
well as in their external effects.

Also, bodily causes do not act without there being a special
configuratation between them and the matter of the thing affected. The
metaphysicians state that since the bodily cause needs matter for its
existence, it also needs matter for bringing something else into
existence. Its need for matter in bringing into existence lies in its
attaining through matter a special position in relation to the thing
affected. Hence proximity and remoteness and special configurations
interfere in the effectiveness of bodily causes.
