Supplement 1
============

Tyranny and injustice are among the major sins. Allah does not guide
the tyrant, on the contrary He sends down His chastisement upon him.
Tyranny and injustice are the root cause of all sins and transgression,
as Quran proclaims, "And certainly We did destroy generations before you
when they were unjust." (Yunus : 13)

Injustice can be broadly divided under three categories.

First is 'Shirk' i.e. to take some associate for Allah. 'Shirk' is so
heinous that it has been dubbed by the Quran as the 'zulm azeem' Second
is to do injustice to oneself through sins and transgression.

The third category involves injustice to others, by usurping their
rights or encroaching upon their property. Another form of injustice
involves doubting and questioning a tenet or , fundamental of religion
(please refer Tafsire Ayyashi under Chapter of Anam, verse 82). One must
never employ coercion with the old and defenceless. That is why Ameerul
Mo'mineen (a.s.) exhorts us thus, "When your hand advances to perpetrate
injustice remember the justice of Allah. And when you wrest control over
someone remember the control Allah exercises over you.'
(Behaarul Anwaar vol. 75, page 322)

One who does injustice or commits theft will find himself in a very
wretched state on the Day of Judgement. Allah asserts in the Quran "And
the day when the unjust one shall bite his hands, saying: O! Would that
I had taken a way with the Apostle." (Furqan : 27)

'And lower our gaze at scenes of transgression and treachery.'

This statement endorses the verse of the chapter of Nur, wherein Allah
commands the believers, men as well as women, to lower their gaze.
Indeed among the miracles of Quran is how it has succinctly outlined a
mode of living for mankind that is in perfect harmony with his inherent
nature and at the same time in line with his spiritual needs. No other
philosopher or thinker of any age or school of thought has ever
formulated (nor will he ever formulate) a mode of lifestyle that even
remotely resembles the one advocated by the Quran.

Islam has forbidden Muslims from casting a glance on the na-mahram.
Indeed this is the transgression and treachery of the eyes. On the Day
of Judgement all eyes will weep save those that when they are confronted
with the forbidden, lower their gaze. Those eyes that are habituated to
looking at na-mahram will in the hereafter find rods of blazing fire
being driven in their eyes. Looking at the forbidden is a potent poison
with which Satan spoils the faith of the believer.

On the other hand, the fear of Allah is the anti-dote to this poison.
Indeed, the Shia must reflect on it here and now, during the period
ofoccultation. If he desires to look at the forbidden he will never be
able to cherish the sight of the luminous countenance oflmame Asr
(a.t.f.s.).

\*Refrain our hearing from vain talks and backbiting.' Quran declares
'And who keep aloof from what is vain.' (Mo'minoon: 3)

All talks that do not involve some discussion about Allah or His
Prophet (s.a.w.s.) or the Able Bayt (a.s.), can be accounted as vain.
Even music is classified as vain and listening to it is forbidden. One
who forsakes vain talks will find an elevation in his honour and
esteem.

'Ghibat' means to muse over the shortcomings and flaws of a believer in
his absence. If indeed those flaws are present in the believer then it
constitutes 'ghibat' (backbiting), else it takes the form of 'bohtan'
(accusation). Quran has prohibited the believers from backbiting thus;
"Not let some of you backbite others. Does one of you like to eat the
flesh of his dead brother?"
(Hujrat : 12)

Thus as per the Quran, backbiting of a believer is tantamount to eating
the dead brother's flesh. Not only is speaking evil of a believer
prohibited, but even lending one's ears to the slanderous talks of the
backbiter is forbidden. If it is possible for us, then we should
immediately refrain the person from going on any further, and remind him
of Allah's displeasure in this regard.

'And bless our scholars and the learned with piety and the ability to
give sound advice.'

Indeed if all the scholars of the Islamic nation strive and endeavour
in the way of Allah, then most of our problems will be solved. In this
supplication Imame Asr (a.s.) beseeches Allah to bestow His grace and
benevolence upon the scholars of the Islamic nation. Indeed if the
learned of this nation do not propagate Islam with intensity, and do not
exhort the Muslims towards goodness and refrain them from evil, then the
only logical consequence will be sedition and disputes.

'And grant inclination to the seekers of knowledge to struggle hard in
their quest for knowledge.'

Here there is one thing that must always be kept in mind. The sole
objective of acquiring knowledge must be to seek Allah's pleasure and
satisfaction. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.) declares that one who seeks
knowledge for four reasons shall be worthy of a place in Hell, viz., one
who seeks knowledge merely to debate with the scholars, or solely to
have some vain talks with the fools and simpletons or some aimless
discussions, or to invite the people towards oneself or to acquire some
wealth from the affluent.

(Behaarul Anwaar vol 2, vase 38)

'And bless the listeners so that they may respond to invitations of
truth and righteousness and lend their ears to sound advice and
admonitions.' One must always endeavour to obey and abide by Allah's
commands. As Allah asserts in the Quran in the chapter of Baqarah, verse
38 "Then whoever follows My guidance, no fear shall come upon them nor
shall they grieve.'

Indeed admonitions keep alive the heart and dispel unawareness and
incognizance. The best admonisher is the Quran. Hence we must endeavour
to be constantly in touch with this miracle that has come for man's
guidance.

'And grant relief and tranquillity to the ailing.'

'And bestow Your mercy and pardon on the dead.'

In the above two statements of the supplication, Imame Asr (a.t.f.s.)
implores Allah to reform the condition of the afflicted and dead among
the Muslims. These invocations only serve to remind us of our
obligations towards the sick and dead amongst us. Indeed in our busy
lives today, we seem to have overlooked these two sections of the
community. Keeping in mind the implorations of Imam (a.s.) for the
indisposed and the dead, we must take out time to visit the ailing and
pray for their relief and comfort. And as far as the dead are concerned,
we should recite the Quran on their behalf and visit their graves
regularly and pray for the forgiveness of their sins.

'And bestow dignity and serenity upon our elders'

The elders play a very pivotal role in the progress of the community.
The enthusiasm and fervour of the youth can only be reined in by the
experience and foresight of the senior citizens of the nation. However,
the elders must work alongside the youth keeping in mind their own
dignity and honour. Then they should not do anything to violate this
respect and esteem. Indeed the similitude of the senior members of
society is that of captain of ship, who even in the storm, does not lose
his bearings, but musters up all his experience and expertise, steering
the ship towards the shore.'

'And endow the youth with a feeling of repentance and contrition.

A man's youth is a period of craze and abandon. The youth should
therefore observe caution in this age by obeying Allah, falling in line
with His commands and tenets. The juveniles must always bear in mind the
transience of their youth, that will soon be replaced with old age and
fatigue. That is why the period of one's youth must be used most
judiciously. Surely the fervour and intensity of youth is fleeting, and
man must exploit it before it is taken away.

Indeed Imam Baqir's admonitions in this regard are most striking. Imam
declares, "If I find a youth not engaged in the acquisition of religious
knowledge, I will beat him." Surely, Imame Asr (a.s.) when he reappears,
will punish all those youths who are incognizant of their religious
obligations. O Shia youths!

If your lives have been steeped in sins till now, turn to Allah and
seek pardon with sincerity, so that you may be acquainted with the true
essence of religion.

'And grant our women modesty and chastity.'

Surely Imame Asr (a.s.) is distressed when he observes the outrageous
spectacle of the women of our society with their heads unveiled and
exposed. This display of immodesty provokes him into beseeching Allah
for instilling modesty among the women. Traditions warn that even if a
single strand of hair (of a woman) stands exposed to men, she will on
the Day of Judgement be dangled in Hell by that very strand of hair,
(provided of course that this exposure was intentional on her part).

However, in their attempt to ape the West, we find people who not only
flagrantly violate the Islamic tenets, but on the contrary are not
willing to accept the Islamic injunction on the veil and demand evidence
from the Quran and traditions in this regard. The Islamic veil
constitutes an independent topic by itself and is beyond the scope of
this treatise.

Suffice it is to say that both the Quran and traditions of Ahle Bayt
(a.s.) have been most vehement in this regard. For further deliberation
on this topic, readers are welcome to correspond with our organisation.
Quran proclaims "Do not advance your opinion where you do not have the
knowledge." Modesty is a sign of faith and honour. Chastity is the best
form of worship. Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) narrates,

"Chastity is the zakaat of beauty and grace." (Ghuraral Hekam) 'And
confer humility and generosity on the affluent and wealthy'

Wealth and riches must at no point of time instill any pride and
arrogance in us. This is because abundance is like any other bounty of
Allah and He can take it away whenever He pleases. In this regard,
history is witness over the fate of Qarun and Firaun. When Allah has
bestowed wealth to one section of the community, then they should
endeavour to share their good fortune with those who are deprived of it,
for tradition exhorts us thus, 'And do good to the people like Allah has
done good with you.' Never we should deem our intellect, efforts and
capabilities responsible for our wealth and fortune. Tradition declares,
'Allah bestows wealth on a fool so that the wise can perceive Allah's
role in apportioning sustenance and the helplessness of their own
intellect in its provision.'

'And bestow patience and contentment on the poor and needy.'

Imame Asr (a.t.f.s.) on the one hand exhorts the wealthy to act with
humility and on the other hand urges the needy to deal with patience.
This is so because Allah has examined the former by their wealth, while
the latter have been tried with their poverty and indigence. Man should
never complain to Allah about his destitution and penury. On the
contrary he should struggle to acquire his livelihood and thank Allah
under all circumstances. This is because contentment by itself is good
fortune. Contentment is akin to gratitude and protestation to
ingratitude. That is why Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) says,

'The contented man is wealthy even while he is hungry and naked.'
(Ghuraral Hikam)

Contentment elevates a man's honour and esteem. Allah accepts easily
whatever little deeds such a man has to offer. And it is worth noting
that one who is not content in scarcity will never be so in abundance.
'And arm our warriors with (Your) aid and make them victorious.'

This part of Imam's supplication pertains to those warriors who
relinquish the comforts of day and forsake their sleep at night only to
serve Allah and safeguard His religion.

'And grant respite and succour to the captives.' Indeed no one is more
aware of the helplessness and powerlessness of the captives than Imame
Asr (a.t.f.s.), who has seen so many of his forefathers brave captivity
and imprisonment for long periods of time.

'And assist the judges to perform (their duties) with justice and
compassion.' 'And induce the citizens to act with fairness and good
ethics.'

Indeed if we act as per the exhortations of Imame Asr (a.t.f.s.), we
shall find the world a place of shelter and asylum. 'And bless the
pilgrims and visitors (of graves of Imams)/ And assist them in their
pilgrimage that you have made as an obligation upon them. By Your Grace
and Mercy, O Most Merciful'

In the end, Imame Asr (a.t.f.s.) prays for the pilgrims and visitors
(of graves of Imams) and beseeches Allah to increase their sustenance
and provisions so that they can easily discharge their religious
obligations. We conclude this brief exposition with a tradition from
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the visitation (Ziarat) of Imam Hussain
(a.s.), the Doyen of Martyrs.

'When Allah wishes goodness and happiness for someone, He instills in
his heart love for Imam Hussain (a.s.), and an inclination for his
visitation.'


