Love and Attachment With Imam-e-zaman
=====================================

Every living being is overwhelmed with emotions of love and attachment.
These are emotions that man is very familiar with, and everyone has
experienced these strong emotions at some stage in his life. However,
those who reflect on these emotions are few. Even fewer are those who
comprehend the reality and foundation of the emotions.

We all understand that love can increase and decrease as well. An
intense feeling of love and attachment can melt the most hardened of
hearts. It can make a person weep and it can also make a person smile.
Love can be witnessed in the battlefield, over there it can be heard
from the resonance of swords and spears striking each other. It can also
be witnessed in more peaceful and secure times.

Indeed love can have a powerful influence on an individual. An incident
in this regard from the highly acclaimed compilation - Najmus Saqib (by
Muhaddiss-e-Noori) is worth mentioning over here. Once a group of people
belonging to a nomadic Qazaak tribe had lost its way in the desert. They
were totally exhausted from trying to find a way out of the desert.
Suddenly they saw some smoke emanating from a hillock at a distance. Out
of curiosity they went towards the hillock and saw a caravan on the
other side. The leader of the caravan was very benevolent and generous
and seeing their worn out condition invited them for a meal.

When the Qazaaki group had their fill they left. But seeing the wealth
of the caravan, they were tempted and they turned back in order to
plunder the caravan. The leader of the caravan was quick to discern
their intentions and he drew his sword from its sheath.

He drew a line on the ground and announced in an awesome tone, 'If
anyone tries to cross this line, I will behead him.' His voice was so
terrifying, that the group of Qazaakis fell down from their mounts. May
the lives of our parents be sacrificed upon the benevolent and generous
leader of the caravan. 0 the avenger of Imam Husain's (a.s.) blood! Love
can be an overwhelmingly powerful emotion. Love has in it the ability to
drown the person with its intensity and force.

However, love has several levels and grades. It has ways and it has
gateways; each gateway has its own peculiarities and a different
approach should be adopted for every gateway. Likewise, the gateway of
Imam's (a.t.f.s.) love has its own peculiarities and requires a
completely different approach. We must try to discern the path towards
Imam's (a.t.f.s.) love and attachment.

We must try to gauge the different levels of his love and the
difficulties involved in the path of his love. We must try to assess the
requirements and prerequisites of the love and whether we find those
criteria in ourselves. Only after understanding all the prerequisites
and conditions involved in Imam's (a.t.f.s.) love, we might claim - We
love Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.). But if negligence overpowers us, then it
can expel us from the domain of Imam's (a.t.f.s.) love and attachment.

That is why it is crucial that we understand this love and its
criteria. The love of Imam (a.t.f.s.) resides in the heart. For this
love to grow and be nurtured, the heart must be clean and pure from all
corruption. We have to see how Allah, the Benevolent and the Merciful,
has guided us towards his love. Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the last
successor and vicegerent of the Chief of the Apostles (a.s.) and the
Seal of the Prophets (a.s.).

He is Allah's Proof upon His creatures. Therefore we should also assess
the relationship between love and the raising of Prophets (a.s.). We
should see how Imam (a.t.f.s.) reminds men of Allah's signs, how he
purifies the souls, how he illumines man's existence with the radiance
of love.

We should see how our teachers and guides have prepared us for
purification with love and how they have awakened us for this love. Only
then will we understand that we can never adequately return Imam's
(a.t.f.s.) love for us and fall woefully short in this regard. However,
history does throw up instances of several personalities who were from
an immaculate and cultured background, who possessed amazing prowesses
and had.

remarkable accomplishments to their credit and were supported by an
unseen force in their efforts. These personalities tread the path of
love and affection for Imam (a.t.f.s.). It is not easy to tread on the
path which they strode, however it is not impossible either.

That's why we say - we can never'adequately' return Imam's (a.t.f.s.)
love. However, even the inadequate love and attachment that we have for
Imam (a.t.f.s,) is very powerful and carries tremendous impact To reach
that position requires a Herculean effort. Let us take a look at what
the scholars have had to say in this regard.

Scholars assert that love is an emotion that can only be experienced.
It is inherent in man's nature. It is an emotion that cannot be defined
by mere phrases. Love is too profound for that. However for the sake of
litterateurs and writers we can state the definition of love in
dictionary is described as, 'Love is an emotion that introduces
gentleness and harmony in man's nature. That emotion which inculcates
harshness and severity in man's nature is called hatred. Love flows from
recognition and comprehension. Therefore as recognition increases, love
also increases.

The above definition outlines the meaning of love and hatred. Both
these emotions are closely linked to man's conscience and heart. It is a
widely accepted fact that Allah has introduced love to the human heart.
Here we are discussing two emotions - love and hatred.

To sustain love it is important that man refrains from certain actions
and performs others. So every despicable act must be condemned and one
must not think of performing such actions, since it will have a
destructive effect on man's ability to love. On the other hand, every
praiseworthy act must be lauded and man must try his best to rush
towards that action, as this will give a fillip to love in his heart.

The illustrious scholar and prolific writer Allamah Murtuza Mutahhari
has dealt with this topic in detail in his renowned book, "Polarization
around the character of Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.)". However, to discuss
details of the book over here is beyond the scope of this short
treatise. In brief, it is imperative for us to act on the obligations
and necessary conditions of love, to identify the pre-requisites of love
and to discharge them in the best possible manner.

Indeed these are the necessary qualifications of love and we must abide
by them if we want love to blossom in our hearts. At the same time, we
must not ignore the other prerequisite of love - avoiding all such
actions that support and give a fillip to hatred.

These actions not only further hatred in a person, but also inhibit the
emotion of love.Mankind, Allah's most noble creation has derived its
Arabic term. Allah, Who has created man, has outlined adequate means for
his survival and progress. Let us glance at the Holy Quran anwhat it has
indicated in this regard. Allah, the Almighty, has announced in the
Quran "Surely the (true) religion with Allah is In order to proclaim His
path and religion, Allah, the Almighty, raised a number of prophets
(a.s.), who guided man towards the divine command.

Finally, Allah raised His greatest Apostle, Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
and announced in the Quran "He it is Who raised among the illiterates an
Apostle from among themselves, who recites to them His communications
and purifies them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although
they were before certainly in clear error." (Surah Jumah : 2)

In Islam, it is important to purify the self by reciting the Quranic
verses. If the self is not purified, then wisdom and Quranic teachings
will be of no benefit. Indeed only if the self is purified, will the
brilliance of wisdom and the Quran will permeate in the self and
illumine the dark recesses of the heart. With this, man's faith and
certainty in Allah increases manifold. With the increase in certainty
and faith in Allah, man testifies to Allah's Word and his nature is
overwhelmed with love for Allah. Allah declares, Those who believe are
stronger in love for Allah (Surah Baqarah : 165)

This is the reason why Imam Husain (a.s.) most willingly sacrificed his
life in the way of his Lord out of sheer love and devotion. His face
bore a striking radiance with the love of his Lord. Since our discussion
is veering from Islam to faith (eemaan) and from faith to love, it is
imperative to see how often Allah has discussed love in the Holy Quran.
Love - and attachment are two words very closely linked to each other.
Both these terms have been used in the Quran extensively.

We see the word love appearing in the Quran 115 times, while attachment
is repeated 28 times. And these words are always used in relation to and
as an interpretation of faith and love. Another version of the love has
not been used in the Quran at all. However, we see this word appearing
in the traditions of the infallibles (a.s.). For instance, the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) declares 'The best of men is the one who loves
worship.' (Usul-e-Kafi, vol. 2, Chapter of Worship, trad. 3) The word
Ishq means 'excessive love'.

Litterateurs believe that this word is more often used to convey
illicit and forbidden love. However, the prophetic tradition we have
narrated earlier negates this view, as the word has been used to convey
love for excessive worship, which is a commendable action'. We have also
used this word to convey similar implications, never alluding to the
illegitimate form of love. Love for Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) is the
cause of our existence, the most important objective of our lives and
the aim of our creation.

We love our Imam (a.t.f.s.) and are intensely attached to him. Indeed
this is what the religion of Islam instructs us. When the early Muslims
wanted to thank the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) for his efforts in the way
of Islam, they approached him (s.a.w.a.) and said, '0 Prophet of Allah
(s.a.w.a.), indeed you have taken us out from the darkness of ignorance
and we had the taufeeq of accepting Islam at your hands and thereby we
were illumined with the light of faith. We were disgraced but you
honoured us. We were deviated but you guided us.

With your grace and favours, Allah gave peace to our distressed hearts.
How can we repay you for your efforts in the propagation of the
prophetic message?' Allah revealed to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.), 'Say:
1 do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives'
(Surah Shura: 23)

Then those who understood the underlying message behind this Quranic
verse acted upon it. There were others who ignored this command. But the
true lovers did not let anything come in between their love and
attachment for the Ahle Bait (a.s.). One such group of lovers were in
Karbala. They were so intense in their attachment, that Imam Husain
(a.s.) proclaimed, 'I have got companions that neither my grandfather
(s.a.w.a.), nor my father (a.s.) nor my brother (a.s.) could get.' These
were the companions who repaid the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) for his
efforts towards Islam, by attaching themselves to his progeny.

They acted on this Quranic verse 'those who believe are stronger in
love for Allah' (Surah Raqarah : 165) In fact, they gave ample proof of
this by shedding their blood in the way of Islam. And Allah addressed
their leader (Imam Husain (a.s.)) as Allah, the Almighty, declares in
the Quran that a favour can be repaid only with another favour. The
grace and favour of the Prophet (s.a.w.a.) in his propagation of Islam
is something that can never be truly repaid by us. Love is the only
thing that makes understand the importance of this favour and helps us
adorn our character.

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) used to beseech Allah '0 Allah! Don't let a
transgressor confer a favour upon me, thereby introducing his love in my
heart.' This tradition highlights an important fact that conferring a
favour leads to love, even if that favour is from a disbeliever. Indeed
humanity and Islam owe their existence to Imam Husain (a.s.). If the
incident of Karbala had not occurred, Islam's appearance would have
changed completely and it would have been unrecognisable from the
Prophet's (s.a.w.a.) Islam.

If Karbala had not been there true faith would have been considered as
what Yazid was observing, Allah forbid! Many of the prohibited acts
would have been made permissible and many of the permissible acts would
have been made prohibited. Indeed love for Imam Husain (a.s.) is the
reward of the prophethood of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

This is because Imam (a.s.) rescued Islam, Allah's chosen religion,
which was propagated by his grandfathel, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.). 0
lovers of Imam Husain (a.s.)! The criterion for love is to follow the
beloved in letter and in spirit and to give preference to his wishes and
desires over our own. We should pay attention to what Imam Husain (a.s.)
has said concerning his ninth son, Allah's last proof, and we should try
to act upon it. We should mould our behaviour and disposition according
to it and we should be careful that we are not accounted among the
ungrateful ones. Abdul Rahman b. Sulait narrates that Imam Husain (a.s.)
said, 'There will be twelve guides from amongst us.

The first one is Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) - Ali b. Abi Talib (a.s.),
while the last one is my ninth son the Qaim (a.t.f.s.). Through him
Allah will enliven the dead earth and will make the rightful religion
subdue all other religions even if this displeases the apostates. There
is an occultation for him, which will be the cause of one group of
Muslims rejecting him and returning to disbelief after belief, while
another group will continue to believe in him and will remain steadfast
in their faith.

Those who will remain steadfast will become the target of taunts and it
will be said to them, if reappearance is indeed a promise then when will
the promise be fulfilled. Those who are patient and steadfast on the
intense difficulties ofoccultation will attain the status of a warrior
who has done jehad alongside the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) against the
infidels. (Kamalucldin, vol. 1, chapter 30) The above tradition related
by Imam Husain (a.s.) highlights a few very pertinent points.


A) Allah's final proof will be the ninth son of Imam Husain (a.s.).
B) He will rise one day after his occultation.
C) His occultation will be prolonged.
D) Allah shall subdue all other religions with the religion of truth.
E) He shall enliven the earth after its deterioration.
F) The nation shall be divided in two sections.One shall steadfastly
believe in him while the other shall reject him.
G) The steadfast ones shall be subjected tointense difficulties and
calamities.
H) The steadfast group shall enjoy the sameposition as that of the
early Muslims who did jehad alongside the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.)
against the apostates.


