Supplement 2
============

This tradition underlines the importance of love for Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.). The bond of love must be firm and resolute. It should not be
that we accept Imam (a.t.f.s.) by our tongues and fall short in our
actions. It should not be that we become despair about the rise of the
nation. Even if we aren't struck by pessimism and doubt, it should not
be that we believe in Imam (a.t.f.s.) as if it is folklore of a person
who will rise one day and will establish truth and justice and will
usher in an era of goodness where no evil will exist and in this entire
affair we don't have to do anything except sit and watch.

This is the time when we should sit back and reflect on ourselves. We
should for a moment consider the loyal companions of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) who accompanied him (s.a.w.a.) in the battles and willingly
gave up their lives to attain martyrdom.

Indeed their character, certainty, determination, faith, love for Allah
and love for His Apostle were so firm and unshakeable that we get some
idea of what is expected from us. Then we realise that we have not
fulfilled the obligations of love. We have not honoured the
pre-requisites of attachment.

And if it is not so then why is the occultation of Imam (a.t.f.s.)
being prolonged to such an extent? Imam's (a.t.f.s.) reappearance
depends upon the steadfast ones of the Islamic nation who are being
disgraced but are patient and steadfast on difficulties and everyday
recite the verse 'I bear witness in letter and in spirit thatcertainly
you are Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).' (Ziyarate Salaamullahil Kaamil,
Mafaateehul Jcnaan)

To perform religious obligations today is a himalayan task. To strive
and struggle with the self against the calamities and disputes in this
age and to nurture love and affection (for Imam (a.t.f.s.)) is indeed
difficult. We are passing through the era about which Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) had said (when the earth shall be filled with injustice and
oppression). Satan is working overtime to deviate the people. Man is
involved in all kinds of diseases, related to the body and the soul.
There are new calamities emerging every day. The prophesies of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) about the last era are unfolding in front of our
eyes.

There are a thousand means of deviation and destruction but hardly any
source of survival. Man's intellect is stumped and the whole society is
engulfed in this epidemic and is unable to decide on a particular course
of action, no matter how simple it is. Let us have a glance of the past
and the-present.

We are living in an age far worso.than the age of the Ummayyads and the
Abbasides. Despite the torment and persecution of those eras, the people
had the good fortune of witnessing the Imams (a.s.) in their midst. They
could approach the Imams (a.s.) and reap the benefits of their radiant
teachings. The glorious traditions of the infallibles (a.s.) and their
guidance illumined the darkest recesses of their existence. The love of
the Imams (a.s.) in the hearts of the Shias overcame every other
distraction, be it wealth, status or the love of this world.

The Shias ignored everything else in favour of the Imams (a.s.) and
their teachings. There was a poor and destitute companion of Imam Sadiq
(a.s.). One day in the presence of Imam (a.s.), he made mention of his
poverty and compared it to the wealth of the attendants of the
Abbasides. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) on hearing of this comparison removed a bag
of gold coins and gave it to the companion and said, 'You can take this,
however, I would like you to return the love and attachment that you
have for me in your heart.'

The companion immediately realised the fallacy in his comparison
(between himself and the Abbaside attendants) and continued to lead the
rest of his life in poverty and thanked Allah for the love of the Ahle
Bait (a.s.). Similarly the companions of Imam Husain (a.s.) must have
been deeply stirred and roused by this statement of their master, '0
Allah! Indeed what has one gained by losing You?

And what has one lost after gaining You?' (Dua-e-Arafah) Today the
comparison between the lovers (of the Ahle Bait (a.s.)) and the rich
will show even more disparity and the lovers will be outnumbered by the
rich by a large margin. However, the chain of Aal-e-Muhammad (a.s.) is
continuing till date. It is not over as yet. Not only are the Shias
saying this, but even the renowned and illustrious scholars of the Ahle
Sunnah have admitted this in their compilations.

They have recorded thousands of traditions to support their belief.
Today Allah's Proof on the earth exists and is a means of security from
disasters.

Those who hold on to his support understand this only too well. Those
who don't understand it can try taking the name of Imam (a.t.f.s.) and
they will also see the results. Indeed the lovers of Imam (a.t.f.s.)
have found a strange soothing effect in his name that helps them
overcome the most trying of calamities. The path towards the love of
Imam (a.t.f.s.) is strewn with thorns. It is an examination for those
who claim to tread the path of his love.

It is a path with many temptations and distractions. It is slippery and
beguiling. It has dangerous twists and turns. However, Imam (a.t.f.s.)
has not deserted his lovers. His help and guidance always helps them
negotiate the perils of this path. A small ray of his light is
sufficient to ease the murkiness and gloom of this path. The strong bond
of love can help the lovers overcome every hurdle on the path. The
(readers of this path must understand the prerequisites and conditions
of love so as to reach Imam (a.t.f.s.). We have only briefly outlined a
few of those pre-requisites.

1. Seeking favours only from the beloved: One of the most important
prerequisites of sincere love is that one does not go to anyone else to
seek his demands. He only approaches the beloved in this regard.

2. To maintain contact We must maintain close contact with our beloved
ones - our relatives, our friends, our immediate family members, our
brethren-in-faith. A companion of Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked him, 'One
believer is drowning and another is being deviated by some people. Who
should we rescue?' Imam (a.s.) replied, 'Go to the rescue of the one who
is being deviated.' Then Imam (a.s.) elaborated, 'Keep close contact
with the one whose faith is exposed to danger, always maintain close
relations with him.

Rescue his hereafter.' This is the need of the hour today - to keep in
contact with the believers in distant areas and to introduce the Imam of
their time (a.t.f.s.) to them. This is our most important duty today. It
is not a difficult task, provided we work with dedication and an
unshakeable spirit of sacrifice.

3. Patience and forbearance Love is the greatest test of patience and
forbearance. Even death does not act as a hurdle for the person. Love is
such a powerful force that it takes a person towards his beloved, step
by step, ignoring all obstacles in the path.

4. Maintaining relations Maintaining relations with the relatives is an
important duty and benefits the society as a whole. It is a crucial
responsibility in this period and a fundamental proof of love for Imam
(a.t.f.s.).

5. Acquiring knowledge Love for Imam (a.t.f.s.) and ignorance about him
are two opposite events. It is not possible for both these events to
occur simultaneously in a person. Imam (a.t.f.s.) is the pillar of
knowledge and invites others towards knowledge of Allah and His
religion. If we call ourselves his Shias, it is critical for us to
acquire this knowledge. If we fail in this duty then we run the risk of
being termed (they don't perceive, they don't comprehend).

And the element of love will subside. Moreover our actions lose their
significance as to act without recognition (marefat) is futile. Even our
love for Imam (a.t.f.s.) will amount to nothing. Therefore we should
struggle and endeavour constantly in our uest for knowledge. The thirst
for this knowledge can be quenched only at the doorstep of the Ahle Bait
(a.s.) otherwise love will be injured and the pain will be unbearable.

6. Activity Laziness, negligence and lethargy are detrimental to love.
To reach towards the object of our love we must be active and energetic.
We must fulfill our religious obligations. We must be cautious of
Satanic whisperings and be vigilant of his devious charms. A believer
must fast in the days and maintain vigil in the nights (. Indeed this is
the ascension (Meraj) of a believer.

7. Struggle (Jehad) One who loves Imam (a.t.f.s.) must be prepared to
struggle and labour with his self, his pen and his wealth in the way of
Imam (a.t.f.s.).

8. Constant remembrance (Zikr) Traditions highlight that remembrance.is
the key that increases love and affection. We should remember and
discuss about Imam (a.t.f.s.) excessively that even if our tongues tire,
our hearts should not be satiated and our thirst should not be
quenched.

9. Gifts To present the beloved with gifts is a proof of love and
attachment. The gift must be presented keeping in mind the stature,
position and preferences of the person. For instance, we should perform
recommended namaz, fasts, recite Quran, etc. for Imam (a.t.f.s.) with
utmost sincerity and devotion.

10. Charity and supplications We should constantly pray for the
protection and security of Imam (a.t.f.s.) and invoke divine help for
his affairs. We must give charity on his behalf to ensure his safety. To
supplicate for his earliest reappearance must be a part of our daily
schedule. We must complain to Allah about his prolonged absence and must
re-affirm our pledge with him.

11. Awaiting the reappearance (Intezar) Imam (a.t.f.s.) shall spread
justice and equity across the length and breadth of this world - We must
await this era eagerly and always endeavor to be included among the true
and sincere awaiting ones. We must never despair of Imam's (a.t.f.s.)

reappearance, as despair and despondence are satanic traits. There are
other obligations and duties to be discharged to fulfill the demands of
love and affection, but we have sufficed with the few mentioned above.
Finally we plead with Allah and beseech Him to bestow us with true
recognition of Imam (a.t.f.s.).

This recognition alone will inspire sincere love and attachment for
Imam (a.t.f.s.) in our hearts. We pray to Allah to make steadfast our
faith, which is the root of love as the Quranic verse proclaims 'Those
who believe are intense in their love for Allah.


