Propogate the Remembernece of Yusuf-e-zahra (a.t.f.s.)
======================================================

The Divine Personality of the last nominee of the last Prophet of Islam
(A.s.), will spread the teachings of Islam in the four corners of the
world. He will change the strife-torn, miserable, unjust and tyrannical
world into a garden of peace, justice and tranquility virtue and
righteousness.

He will gather all the disintegrated true believers on the platform of
purity and righteous persons, their due status & honour in the society,
whilst the enemies, the unjust and evil persons will be degraded and
dishonored.

He is the son of Ummul-Momineen Hazrat Khadija (S.A.), the Queen among
the Arab ladies, He is the apple of the eyes of Hazrat Fatima Zahra
(S.A.) the lady of the two worlds - This and the hereafter - and Ali
(A.S.), the magnificent, leader of the Pious Believers. He is the chosen
son of the Holy Prophet of Islam Mohammad-e-Mustafa (Pbuh) the last
jewel in the crown of Prophethood. He is the one who is the responsible
personality of Islam, the only divine representative on this earth. He
is none other than Hazrat Hujjat Ibnil Hasan-Al-Askari, Mahdi,
Aakhrezzaman.


**The Meaning of The Title Imam-E-Zaman (A.S.)**


A title reflects the personality of man. His characteristics and
qualities are projected through it. Nowadays such instances are
extremely numerous where this dictum rarely comes true. The titles are
some times promiscuous bestowed without knowing the actual meaning by
the patrons and by the patronized which is out of context here.

The Prophets of God are familiar by the titles added with their names
which throw light on their prolity and innate qualities endowed in them
by the creator. The prophet Moses (A.S.) is addressed as "Kaleem-Ullah"
as he had conversation with the Creator of the world, while our last
prophet as is specifically mentioned in the Holy Book is known as
Rehmatullil Alamin - the one whose existence is a source and fountain of
blessings in this world and in the world here after. Like - wise his
progeny is also profusely blessed.

Unlike others, the appellations of dignity of Imame-e-Zaman (A.S.) have
each got their own significance separately. Janab Muhaddis Noori (may
God shower His blessings on him) the author of the book "Najm us Saquib"
has mentioned one hundred eighty two names and titles of Imam-e-Zamana
with positive references.

Those who are fond of reciting prayers (Dua) not only for consecration
and happiness but with a view to attain and get mastery of the
philosophy and high ideals taught by the descendents of the Holy
Prophet, are fully aware of innumerable titles of Imam-e-Zaman (A.S.)
mentioned in those prayers (Dua). In this context, Dua Nudbah and
Ziyarat-e-Al-e-Yasin etc deserve special attention. All those Dua are
collected and have found place in Mafateehul Jinan. In this article we
will throw light in detail only on one title.

**IMAM\_E\_ZAMANA (A.S.)**

In our prayers (Dua) and in day to day conversation this assumed name
is directly and closely linked with our exalted Imam Mahdi (A.S.). No
sooner as we hear or utter this noble appellation attention is at once
drawn to the Awaited Imam (A.S.). Imam-e-Zaman, Imam-e-Asr, Saheb-e-Asr
and Vali-e-Asr are all synonyms and directly attached with the last
Saviour. We have become accustomed to hear them but have never bothered
to know the facts related with them. It is because of this reason that
doubts are germinating in our minds. Once the actual meaning is grasped
our minds will never be clouded with such notions.

This assumed name is combination of two words, first is Imam, Saheb and
Wali while the second is Zaman and Asr. An Imam is called so as he is
always ahead of every body except God while other are always behind. He
always leads while others are directed ad guided by him. This particular
point becomes clear when we pray together (Namaz-e-Jamaat) where all the
gesture of Imam are strictly followed by his followers. When he performs
"Rukoo" it is copied as it is by his followers, when he prostrates they
also prostrate : In short and Imam holds sway over his followers over
the Imam. Saheb and Wali means master and commander. So the followers
are dictated by the master.

We address him as Imam-e-Zaman not due to conviction in regard to
religion. It is based on facts and has solid foundations and thick back
ground. Zamana means the sphere of existence or the whole creation. all
the creatures except God are covered in this sphere and nothing under
the sky and on earth is beyond the sphere of existence.

The above exegesis explains that the whole creation-the earth, the sky,
the moon and the stars, is in the domain of Hazrat Mahdi (A.S.). The
universe is in motion at his instance. The time can be changed by him
and not he by the time and environment.

After the revelation of these facts one can understand easily the
secret of Imam's longevity and youthful exuberance. All the creatures
have to go beyond the frontiers of life to the great unknown first by
jumping in the vanguard of youth and then to the tail end of the life
called old age by evolutions but the Imam (A.S.) is undisputedly
invariable with this evolution and would remain young.

The above points are supported by the Holy Quran in Suratul Asr which
runs as follows. "I swear by the Time; Surely man is in loss. Except
those who believed and did good deeds and advise for the truth and
advise for the patience".

Whatever gain and loss is mentioned in the above Sura are for the
individuals to face in the hereafter those who are indulging in all the
vices; enjoying the colorful life and doing things which are out of tune
with the spirit of the religion. Imam-e-Asr (A.S.), Vali-e-Asr (A.S.)
and other spiritual leaders (Imams) are undoubtedly above all those
things, though they lived and are living in this world. Such type of
question can never be raised in the mind against them.

A question that generally pricks the minds of the people is that a
being who is high in place of excellence and whose gandeur is beyond the
imagination of mankind and for whom this world inspite of all its
vastness and attractions nothing but trash why then such a being with
all sublimity is kept out of view ?

Among all the Prophets of God, the foremost and the last is Hazrat
Mohammad Mustafa (SAW)

who came into being to elevate the minds and to place the mankind in an
honoured position. The mission was accomplished to a greater extent in
his life time but the whole-some results could not be achieved in spite
of the struggle of his predecessors due to intrigues, so the very
purpose of his teaching and preaching to place the mankind could not be
achieved as desired. The reappearance of our last savior is motivated
with an object to fulfil the un accomplished mission of the last Prophet
of Islam. "The Awaited" one would fill the world with justice as it was
full of tyranny and oppressions." So his noble existence is meant to
achieve a destined end.

It is now evident that Imam (A.S.) is root (base) and the world is the
tree spread in branches. Imam (A.S.) is before all others in time while
the world is last in time. It is a folly to treat it as exaggeration. It
is because of him the world is existing and the creatures owe their
substances to him only. He is the source of substances for the
destitute. The sky and the earth also owe their sustenance to him.

To keep this point ever green in memory, it would not be out of way to
repeat the narrations of Ayatullah Waheed Khurasani referred to him
Mirza Ahmed son of Akhund Khurasani the author of "Kefayat". He narrates
that "my mother was unwell. Day by day her illness was getting worse.

We were very much puzzled. The doctors were in a fix. One day we
received the news of the arrival of an elderly person in Najaf-e-Ashraf
expert in astronomy. My brother Mirza Mohammad and I went to him and met
him in the Holy tomb of Hazrat Amir-al-Momineen (A.S.). We told him that
we have come to inquire about an urgent thing from you.

We will concentrate on that problem conscientiously and you give us the
reply. The elderly man moved the heads of rosary and said that the
disease had spread all over the body of the patient for whom you want to
enquire from me. The chance of recovery are very weak and within a day
or two the patient would die.. Our intention was to inquire about the
reason of illness of our mother. Second time my brother thought
conscientiously and requested the saint to tell about it. The heads of
rosary were again moved by him but his facial expression suddenly
changed. This process was thrice repeated and all the three times he
seemed to be much worried.

He then said that the man about whom they wanted to know was first seen
in Lebanon and then was found in Kaba, now he is found in Madina. He
moved once again the heads of rosary said that I have witnessed that the
sun was circling around his head and he is Imam-e-Zamana (A.S.)" This
point is pertinent as the Imam (A.S.) is the centre of the universe so
the sun has to circle around him.

Today we are living in the domain of such a noble and exalted Imam
(A.S.). It is a pity that we are claiming to be his followers but have
departed form the ways dictated and directed by him. If we are sincere
in claiming to be his followers, we must be attached to him spiritually
to free ourselves form the hardship of this world and the world
here-after.

May Allah increase our marefat about Imam-e-Mahdi (A.S)


