Sadaqah For the Safety of Imam-e-zamana (a.t.f.s.)
==================================================

In today's world of science and technology, doctors have found
solutions to numerous diseases which were once considered as incurable
and fatal. Inventions of sophisticated devices and formulation of new
life saving drugs have helped them in their cause. Yet, we find Muslims
who say that a person's life and sustenance can be increased and
calamities averted merely by giving alms.

Sadaqah is derived from the word Sadq i.e. to be righteous, truthful,
alms-giving. We will focus our attention on its third meaning i.e.
alms-giving and discuss about it. While going through the pages of
history - which are full of incidents about the benefits of giving
alms - one incident stands apart.

It is narrated that once Hazrat Isa (a.s.) was passing by a house along
with his companions. Celebrations were going on in that house on the
occasion of a marriage. Hazrat Isa (a.s.) pointed out to his companions
that tomorrow, (the people of) this house will aggrieved. On the morrow,
the companions of Hazrat Isa (a.s.) informed him that nothing like what
he had predicted had occurred in that house.

Hazrat Isa (a.s.) decided to visit that house and find out the reason
due to which the calamity was averted. On inquiry, the newly married
bride of the house spoke about the events of the previous night. She
said that last night she had given bread to a beggar who had come to
their house. After knowing this Hazrat Isa (a.s.) lifted the bed and
they saw that there was a snake with a bread in its mouth. Hazrat Isa
(a.s.) showed them that the alms which was given in the form of bread by
the bride had saved them from death.

The traditions of the infallibles (a.s.) too speak about the advantages
of giving alms. Discussing all of them is beyond the scope of this
article. We will restrict our discussion in reviewing only a few of
them. It has been narrated from Imam Baqir (a.s.) that giving of alms
prolongs one's life and saves a person from seventy types of
difficulties at the time of death. (Man la Yahzorohul Faqih p 34 H. No.
1729)

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says, 'Allah will keep away all the difficulties
which descend from the sky in the daytime, if one gives alms early in
the morning. And Allah will keep away all the difficulties which will
descend from the sky in the night, if one gives alms in the early hours
of night." (Ibid., H. No. 1733)

Hazrat Ali (a.s.) says, "In order to be exon-erated of your sins and be
included under the grace and love of Allah, give alms and observe the
bonds of relationship." (Ghurarul Hekam by Abdul Waahid Aamudi)

A tradition from Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) summarises all the benefits of
giving alms. He (s.a.w) says, 'There is no god except Allah, giving alms
saves a person from sickness, plague, fire, drowning, falling and
madness." Then Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) counted seventy difficulties from
which a person can be saved by giving alms. (Man la Yahzorohul Faqih, p
35, H. No. 1734)

Now that we are familiar with the benefits and effects of giving alms,
the question which comes to our mind is "How can the giving of alms by
us be the cause of safety of our last Imam, Imam-e-Zamana (a.s.)?"All
human relations, actions, etc. are based on the natural instincts of
love and attach-ment. This attachment and love may be for worldly gains
or for the hereafter. Islam, the last and the perfect religion of Allah
in based on attachment. Thus we find in Quran:"And those who believe,
love Allah the most." (Baqarah: 165).

The point to be noted here is that when a person shows interest or love
towards something, then he will show his love and attachment for
everything related to that particular thing. We see in our daily lives
that if a person is interested in a particular field of study,
engineering for instance, he will not only be interested in the area of
his specialization but he will also be interested in all those areas
which are related to it. On the basis of the above principle, we know
that the most esteemed and honored from among the creatures, in front of
Allah, the Almighty, are the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the infallible
Imams (a.s.).

We see in a tradition from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) that he said, "The
faith of no one is acceptable to Allah except for him who loves me more
than himself, my family more than his family, my descendants more than
his own descendants and myself more than his own self."

It is crystal clear from this tradition that a true Muslim is filled
with the love of Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and his descendants and
especially in the present age, with the love of our beloved master,
Imam-e-Zamana (a.s.). Also we see a tradition from Imam Mahdi (a.s.) who
relates from his father, Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.): "0 my son know
that the hearts of the obedient and sincere people will turn to you as
birds turn to their nests."(Kamaluddin, p. 448)

But, only verbal claim that we love the Holy Prophet (s.a.) and our
Imam (a.s.) is no proof. Rather, the proof of our love lies in our
behavior, manners, dealings, etc. It is but natural that a lover likes
the safety and security of the one whom he loves. A

person can protect his beloved in two ways, directly or indirectly.
Directly means himself protecting and indirectly means by arranging some
protection for the beloved. In our age where it is not possible for us
to physically see whether our beloved master. Imam Mahdi (a.s.) is
protected or not (because of the barrier of occultation) there is no
need to lose heart as we can lways take the indirect way i.e. giving
alms for his safety. A tradition from Ameerul Momineen Alt (a.s.) says
(a.s.), "Giving alms dispels calamity."

When we go through the books of history, we realize that the great
scholars of Islam have devoted a lot of pages on this topic. One such
scholar is Sayyed Ibne Ta'oos (r.a.). He is one of the great Shiite
personalities of 7th century hijri. He writes in his will to his son
regarding the responsibilities towards Imam (a.s.) that, "Give priority
to Imam's need before asking your request.

Donate alms and charity for his glorious being before you do for your
own self or for your family and offer supplications for him before
remembering yours. In short, in all your good and recommended deeds,
give priority to his pious and precious being because this attracts the
attention of Imam (a.s.) towards you and will increase his generosity
and kindness upon you."

At this juncture, one question might intrigue you and that is, "Does
Imam (a.s.), who is having all the blessings, knowledge and kindness of
Allah need the alms of a few pennies given by us?"

The answer is certainly not. But as we have seen in the foregoing
paragraphs, that when you love someone, that love should be manifested
in your behavior, dealings and manners. By giving money in charity, we
are manifesting our love towards our Imam (a.s.) and fulfilling the
condition of the tradition of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w) that says, "The
faith of no one is acceptable to Allah except for him who loves me more
than himself......." And also we have to keep this point in mind that
Imam-e- Zamana (a.s.) himself says, "Pray more for my early
reappearance. Indeed, in it there is salvation for you."

We find that there are many supplications which have been narrated by
our Imams (a.s.) to pray for Imam Mahdi (a.s.) in the time of
occultation. For more details about invocations refer to the book of
Mafateeh-ul-Jinan by Shaykh Abbas Qummi. We also see that Imam (a.s.)
himself has asked us to pray for his early reappearance though he is in
no need of our invocations. It (reciting invocation) is a sign and
manifestation of our love towards him.

Now, after understanding why alms should be given for the safety of
Imam (a.s.), the question which arises is "What should we do with money
collected as alms? " The reply to this lies in a tradition from Imam
Sadiq (a.s.) who says 'If a person is not near and cannot send his gifts
to us, then he should give it to our pious Shias. He will get the same
reward of giving it to us..." (Man la yahzorohul faqih)

In the end we pray to Allah, the Almighty, to increase our grace and
provide us opportunities so that we can manifest our love towards Imam
al-Muntazar al-Mahdi (a.s.) by giving alms for his safety and performing
only those deeds which bring us closer.


