Voice of Karbala
================

Historian Tabari recorded a sentence from the martyr of Karbala; Hz
Abis bin Abi Shabeeb Shakari (as). It is a great honor and blessing for
us to be able to start our book with this sacred sentence.

In this one sentence this sacred martyr explained the whole purpose of
Karbala. The people who are always in search of the truth regarding what
is religion will understand its full meaning from this one single
sentence. In the history of Tabari Fourth Edition page no.

249, Hz Abis (as) says to his slave whom he has liberated, "Today is
that day where we must take as many blessings as we can because after
this day, we will never again have any other chance because the Day of
Judgment will come."

This is the truth, spirit, and summary of religion. There is nothing
other than this. Nothing remained after Karbala except Karbala itself.
If you want to learn what tawheed is, then you must learn it from
Karbala.

If you want to know what prophet hood is, consult Karbala. If you want
to follow imamate, look at Karbala. If you want to gain marifat of the
secrets of wilayat, reflect immensely upon Karbala.

If you want to see the Day of Judgment in this world, feel the pain of
Karbala. You will be able to feel the pain of the Day of Judgment in
your heart Without having love in your heart for the Family (as) which
gave Islam to this world, who are the companions of Quran until the day
of judgment, and whose love Allah has made wajib upon us, then all of
your religion, your iman (faith), or any act of worship which you
perform will never be accepted by Allah.

He was brutally martyred on the plains of Karbala. O?people, you have
absolutely no idea who was martyred in Karbala. Imam Hussain (as) did
not get martyred in Karbala. The whole of Islam was martyred in Karbala.
Allah was martyred in Karbala. RasoolAllah (saw) was martyred in
Karbala.

Moula Ali (as) was martyred in Karbala. Imam Hasan (as) was martyred in
Karbala. Not only this, but the one whose door was burnt yesterday, the
people martyred Syeda (sa) in Karbala.

After this what has survived? People will keep wandering in the search
of Islam and iman (faith) until the day of judgment. They will not be
able to even smell the aroma of Islam and iman. Now Islam and iman can
only be found in those hearts in which Karbala lives.

If you specifically look at your own religion, you will immediately
know the whole of your religion is based upon Karbala. The people
whatever they say or write other than Karbala is nothing except doubts
and uncertainties. Their only purpose is to divide the people. In this
act, their survival lies.

They fulfill their personal interests by doing this. All the meanwhile,
Karbala gathers its lovers to one side. Those lucky momin who believe
Karbala is their religion are standing on Siratul Mustaqeem (true path).
Nothing is able to take their iman from them.

The people who just believe in Karbala by their tongues or are forced
to believe in Karbala due to social pressure, they will never be able to
be united until the day of judgment.

They will always be divided into sects and begging at the doors of
others. We perform our sajdas on the clay of Karbala and will keep doing
this throughout our whole life. This is the only way for us and our
religion to survive. We live for Karbala, and inshaAllah we will always
do so.

Karbala has provided us with such a platform, the likes of which no
other nation in this world today has. Today you hear the fazail of
Ameerul Momineen (as) and chant the slogans of "Ali (as) Ali (as)" only
because of Karbala.

Karbala gives us the strength and faith to save our life and our
beliefs in a time where we would be killed simply for being Shia.
Without Karbala we would never have been given this chance.


**Azadari**

The way we feel after the loss of a beloved, dear relative or friend is
called grief. When this emotion occurs amongst a group of people in a
gathering, it is called "aza? (mourning). It has three aspects; spirit
of aza, customs of aza, and preaching of aza.


