Spirit of Aza
=============

This is the true grief which lies in one?s heart. It cannot be
expressed in any specific way. As the famous poet ,Ghalib said, There is
no specific way of mourning When a person loses something dear, he does
not care in what way He expresses his grief because his grief tells him
how to express itself.

These are such feelings which can be felt throughout one?s whole body.
Even if one is surrounded by worldly pleasures, he will still be able to
feel this grief in his heart. When he will look at his young son, he
will remember the youth of Hz Ali Akbar (as).

When he will look at his newborn baby, he will remember that infant
child who was trembling with pain in the lap of His father. When he
drinks water, he remembers the hunger and thirst of the children of Imam
Hussain (as).

When he walks through briar and thorn covered earth, he remembers his
Mazloom Imam (as) who had to walk 1700 miles with heavy chains.

We watered the garden of Islam with Our blood In this situation we are
not dependent upon a majalis, scholar, or book. Our bed becomes the
resting place of azadari. When we remember Karbala, we cry over our
Mazloom Imam (as). This is the spirit of aza (mourning).

It is based upon love. It is human nature to cry whenever the masaib
(sufferings) of Imam Hussain (as) is read. For some people simply
reading a book or watching a movie can make them cry.

This is not aza. This is human nature. This is why it has been said; a
momin cries when he listens to fazail(attributes) and at the remembrance
of masaib(sufferings).


**Customs of Aza**

Customs of aza are of extreme importance and absolutely compulsory.
When someone dies in this world, his relatives cry because this is grief
which comes from love. They also put tents so the people who come to
offer their condolences will be able to sit there.

The people who come to offer their condolences show their grief to the
relatives of the one who has died. Every nation has their own way of
mourning. Mulla who is an enemy of aza (mourning) of Imam Hussain (as)
always objects to the customs of aza (mourning). Because he does not
have such courage to say any word against the aza of Imam Hussain (as),
so he issues fatwas against the customs of aza themselves.

He uses his so called sharia. The customs of azadari can be found in
every nation. They do it in their own way. However, we have never seen
any mulvi oppose these customs when one from his own family dies. Even
he himself will act upon these customs.

For azadari he objects to everything. The purpose of the customs of
azadari is to remember the one who has died. When we observe this grief
collectively, we do it in a specific way. The first purpose is to
express our condolences to Ahlul Bayt (as) and the other purpose is to
refresh Their remembrance in our minds so that worldly affairs cannot
make us negligent in this grief.

Arranging majalis in the houses and imambargahs, inviting people, and
scholars or zakirs, doing matam in groups, reciting nohays, distributing
niaz, these are all customs of aza. Every nation observes these customs
differently. No one can extinguish these customs and inshaAllah until
the day of judgment no one will ever be able to do so.

These customs are ever lasting because the reason for doing them is
ever lasting. Syeda Zainab (sa) is the founder of these customs, and all
other Aimmah (as) observed them. When the news of Karbala began to
spread throughout the whole world, each nation established their own
customs and ways of observing azadari. Moula Ameerul Momineen (as) said,
"Whenever anyone establishes a good custom, he will receive its reward
as long as that custom exists."

Ghana (Singing)

The first objection on the majalis of Imam Hussain (as) started with
marsiya and nohay. The people rejected them by saying this is ghana
(singing).

While in reality, this was their own shaitani nature which objected to
these customs of azadari. They are not such simpletons that they cannot
tell the difference between music and singing.

These people call themselves experts in Arabic. Ghana (singing) is a
kind of music which creates lusty emotions in the human. Allah made it
haram. While having a beautiful toned voice is beloved by Allah. Hz
Dawood (as) was given a beautiful sounding voice as a miracle.

Reading Quran in a beautiful voice is considered as a good act. Allah
did not make any part of the human body worthless. Humans can use it as
they wish. In order to use it properly, Allah placed certain conditions,
and it is wajib (compulsory) upon us to follow these conditions. If you
examine the vocal cords and see its relation with the diaphragm, then
you will understand it is all about having a beautiful sounding voice.

It all depends upon how one uses these things. If you use them for any
worldly purpose, then certainly it is haram. If you use it for the
masaib of Imam Hussain (as), then certainly without any doubt it is an
act of worship. Once I met Syed Muhammad Amrohi Mujtihid. I asked him
about the explanation of ghana (singing). He told me an incident from
his childhood. He said once his father took him to a majalis. The
majalis starts in this order:

First of all rubai (poetry in the praise of Imam Hussain as) is
recited. Then souz (a group of people who recite the sufferings of
Karbala in a specific way). Then salam (poetry in the praise of Imam
Hussain as). In the end marsya (one person who recites the sufferings of
Imam Hussain as).

Moulana said when the marsya khawn (one who recites marsya) started
reciting the rubai, his father took his hand and led him to the back
rows. He said to me "Son, this is ghana (singing). We will not listen to
it." When he started reciting marsya, my father took my hand, and we
went back and sat inside the majalis again.

He said to me, " This is marsya. We will listen to it." When I heard
this story, I said to Moulana, "The way he recited rubai, souz, and
salam is the same way he recited marsya and made people cry. If I or you
had recited that marsya, no one would have cried. The thing you are
calling "ghana? is present in both places. One you have declared to be
haram. The other you have declared as halal.

How is this possible?" Upon hearing this, Moulana looked at me angrily,
but did not reply. I say; the best way to use your eyes is to read about
the attributes of Masoomeen (as), the best way to use your ears is to
listen to the attributes of Masoomeen (as) being recited, and the best
use of your voice is to recite the fazail (attributes) and masaib
(sufferings) of Masoomeen (as).

Only the enemies of the remembrance of Masoomeen (as) can call this
ghana (singing). When we look at the history, we see Masoomeen (as) not
only gave Their permission but also Themselves listened to these types
of recitations.

Here we present an extract from "Shahadatay Uzma page no. 338". It will
clear up any misunderstandings you may have.

"Once poet Abu Haroon Maktoof came to Imam Jafar Sadiq (as). Imam (as)
asked him to recite the poetry of his marsya which he (poet) had written
regarding Imam Hussain (as). Abu Haroon said, "When I started marsya
without first reciting souz, Imam (as) said " Do not recite in this
way.

Recite the way you read for yourself, and the way you read at the grave
of Imam Hussain (as)." Abu Haroon said, "When I recited marsya after
having recited souz, Imam (as) shed a great many tears and asked me to
recite more. Even the family of Imam (as) who were sitting behind the
veil shed a great many tears. "


