Preaching of Aza
================

The third aspect of azadari is its preaching. All the azadars
(mourners) of Imam Hussain (as) came out of their houses and imambargahs
and marched into the streets, roads, and bazaars.

They do matam, zanjeer, and qama zani while being barefoot and having
bare dust covered heads. They march from one street to another. The
chant of "Ya Hussain (as)" can be heard on every street.

It seems as if every single living being on this earth is chanting "Ya
Hussain (as)". This is the way to express one?s grief and protest. Every
one who sees this scene is forced to think; there must be a very
important reason to make these people act this way.

Who on this earth likes to give himself pain or put himself
intentionally into the difficulties of this world? They ask each other
"What has happened?" They were told the day of judgment before the day
of judgment has occurred.

That Nabi (saw) which they follow, His Son (as) and His Son?s whole
family (as) were brutally martyred in Karbala. His Daughters (sa) were
taken bareheaded into the bazaars and courts. All of this was done by
the so called followers of this Prophet (saw).

Anyone, who has even a little iman (faith), will be unable to bear
hearing this. He will then join the mourners by doing tabarra
(disassociating himself from the enemies of Ahlul Bayt as) on the
enemies of His Prophet (saw). Believe me when I say the mulvi (scholars)
did not convert the people to Shia.

Even if they did cause someone to become Shia, it is like they have
taken him out of kufr (disbelief) and entered him in the deviation.

This is a great miracle of azadari of Imam Hussain (as). The one who
becomes Shia because of azadari gives his whole life to Imam Hussain
(as). The azadari of Imam Hussain (as) is the great source which caused
a revolution to spread throughout the whole world.

The enemies of Imam Hussain (as) became so afraid that they made plans
to end the whole of azadari of Imam Hussain (as) but especially the
juloos e aza (procession of mourners).

In order to fulfill their shaitani purpose, they started attacking the
procession of Ashura every year. History is a witness that as the
violence increased, the attendance of these processions also
increased.

The glory of the processions reached its highest peak. The enemies of
Imam Hussain (as) immediately realized it is impossible to harm these
processions from the outside. So they found people within the Shia
religion whom they could use to fulfill their shaitani purposes.
Obviously common Shia are not fit for this job. So they selected only
those people who wore the label of religion and who had great influence
over the masses of common Shia. People follow their fatwas.

These people were the owners of religion and of sharia (Islamic law)
themselves. These people joined the ranks of the enemies of Imam Hussain
(as) and raised the banner of "Ittehad bain ul muslimeen" (unity amongst
muslims). Then they came to their true purpose which was how to shatter
the power of the processions of azadari. To achieve their goal, they
decided it was best to not do this all at once, but in different
stages.

**First Stage**

The first thing they decided to break was the temp of the processions
which would cause the participants to not have their usual feelings of
enthusiasm. Its participants come from miles and miles away, despite the
thousands of dangers, they come only to attend the procession of azadari
of Imam Hussain (as).

So they planned to stop the matam and to silence the noha khawns. So
they invented a custom. When the time of zuhr prayer approaches, they
immediately stop the procession and stand for prayer. The end result of
this was the tempo of the juloos became broken. A lot of people would go
and drink tea or smoke cigarettes. Many people divided into smaller
groups and busied themselves in gossips. A lot of people can be seen
laughing.

Zuljenah is stopped and Alams are lowered. By doing this, the honor and
respect of the juloos is lost. We see such attendees at the juloos who
are not there for mourning, but for enjoying themselves. Even after
seeing all of this, the people?s faith still does not force them to
stand up and say, "O?ignorants! The government gave us license and route
permits for juloos not for prayer".

This prayer which you are offering on the roads is not only a violation
of route permit but completely against sharia. You cannot offer prayers
on the road because prayer cannot be performed in a place that is a walk
through for the people.

How can this sharia, which takes immense care of its people, bear
having its name used by those who are simply performing prayer for the
purposes of being seen by others and for breaking the tempo of the
juloos so the mourners will stop performing matam? If anyone wants to
pray at that time, he could very easily go to any mosque or return to
his own house to pray.

People must think Allah ordered His Prophet (saw) to stop His prayer
for Imam Hussain (as). If anyone stops the juloos of Imam Hussain (as)
simply to perform prayers so the people can see them, then it is
completely against the will of Allah. When we see such scenes,

our tongues immediately start saying "Ajal Allah talla farajaka" (May
Allah hasten the reappearance of our Imam ajf). May Allah bring that day
soon. When Imam Zamana (ajf) will take revenge on the people who offer
the prayer of Lashker yazid (la) (army of yazid la). Ameen !


