Qadqamatis Salat
================

This is the point where people try to damage the foundation of Karbala.
Those so called scholars whom people practically worship, when they got
power they started saying (maaz?Allah) the reason Imam Hussain (as) went
against yazid (la) was to gain the power of government. You can read its
details in our book "Kashaful Haqaiq".

When the people saw their so called scholars saying such evil things,
they also did the same. They even openly insult Imam (as) in the
imambargahs. Some people say (maaz?Allah) Imam Hussain (as) waged a war
against yazid (la) without any planning. This is why He was unsuccessful
and the Islamic government did not become established.

This claim was so dangerous; if it had gained even a little popularity
(may Allah forbid), then there would be no sign of azadari today. People
would instead be arranging condolence seminars and political gatherings,
but no one can vanquish the Noor of Allah with their words.

Allah has taken the responsibility of the remembrance of Imam Hussain
(as) upon Himself. It is not the responsibility of the creation. The
greatest azadar (mourner) of Imam Hussain (as) is Allah Himself. Allah
is the one who will take the revenge of the blood that was spilled from
Imam Hussain (as).

Imam Hussain (as) did not stand against yazid (la) in 60 Hijra. It was
decided upon the day of creation. From that moment, the preparations for
this event began. Every Nabi (as) knew of the details of Karbala. Every
prophet and his successor wept over Imam Hussain (as) throughout their
whole lives. Every one is aware that all the prophets came to teach
people about the oneness of Allah.

Tawheed can only be known and recognized through wilayat. In order to
recognize and understand Allah, it is necessary to call upon Him using
different names such as Rahman (Merciful), Raheem (Gracious), Ghaffar
(Forgiving), Sattar ( ) etc. We cannot recognize and remember Him
without these names. All of these names are related to His attributes.

All of His attributes are under wilayat. In order to understand
tawheed, you must understand wilayat. The mahzer (manifestation) of the
wilayat of Allah is Moula Ameerul Momineen Ali (as) ibn Abi Talib (as).
The summary of religion is to gain the marifat (recognition) of the
wilaya t e Ameerul Momineen (as). No one can understand tawheed and
become the follower of tawheed without gaining the marifat of Ameerul
Momineen (as).

This is why Ameerul Momineen (as) said, "All the nations were forgiven
because of Me. All the nations were destroyed because of Me." This
process kept going until it reached RasoolAllah (saw). Because He was
the seal of all prophets, He was given the responsibility to deliver the
message of the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as) to the people until the
day of judgment.

He officially announced the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as). After
RasoolAllah (saw) officially announced the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen
(as), Allah declared His religion to be complete and informed the people
the beginning and end of religion is wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as).
Wilayat is the key of tawheed. Without it, tawheed ceases to exist.
Those who were Muslim in name only and in reality were enemies of Allah
completely refused to accept the wilayat of Moula Ali (as), and they
waged a war against tawheed.

These people had a psychological disease, and the hatred of Moula Ali
(as) was its foundation. Its only treatment was the blood of Imam
Hussain (as). This disease kept increasing. It reached its climax on the
day of Saqifa. No expert surgeon will operate on a wound until it
reaches a point where it is suitable for operation.

This is why Ameerul Momineen (as) bore every oppression with great
patience and did not take out His sword. In the war of Siffeen, when the
victory was only moments away and Hz Malik ul Ashtar (ra) had reached
close to the tent of muawiya (la), Ameerul Momineen (as) called him
back. When he came back, he was sobbing intensely.

Moula (as) gave him courage and said, "O?Malik! Now it will be decided
in Karbala." The reason being this wound was not yet treatable. For the
same reason Imam Hasan (as) did not stand against muawiya (la) and
kicked the power of government away from Himself.

It was the responsibility of Imam Hussain (as) to operate on this
wound. Finally that day which everyone was waiting for came. People?s
denials of wahi (revelation), Quran, tawheed (oneness), and their
attempts to vanquish the wilayat of Ameerul Momineen (as) had reached
their climax.

24 The war of Karbala was fought on the basis of the wilayat of Ali
(as). The proof of this is when anyone would come out of Imam Hussain
(as)?s army, he would be chanting this slogan "I am on the religion of
Ali (as)". Anyone who would come out from yazid (la)?s army would be
chanting "I am on the religion of muawiya (la)".

Imam Hussain (as) practically proved wilayat in Karbala. This wilayat
is mixed in the blood of every soldier, female, and child of Imam
Hussain (as). This is the only war in which those who were oppressed
defeated the oppressor. The meanings of defeat and triumph were changed
in this war. In Karbala, the slain were victorious, and those who slay
them were defeated.


