Second Example
==============

On the day of Ashura, which is in reality the Day of Judgment, we tear
our clothes, put dust on our heads, and such strange scenes can be seen
on that day. On the Taboot of Imam Hussain (as), which is suppose to be
a replica of His funeral, we see apples stuck on the taboot. They are
called "mannati apples".

If our mannat is fulfilled, then next year we will give more apples.
Zuljenah is a replica of that horse who gave the news of Imam Hussain
(as)?s martyrdom to His Family. People will hold the legs of Zuljenah
and make different duas.

People will bring their unmarried daughters especially to the juloos
and majalis of Imam Hussain (as) and put the mehndi which is taken out
in the remembrance of Hz Qasim (as) on their daughter?s hands so that
their daughters will get married. Now tell me honestly. Do mourners
behave like this? Do the loyal people act like this? I am very sorry but
I must say these people are like those who go to the place of an
accident and while helping the injured, they steal the watches and money
from the pockets of the injured. It is really very shameful. Only Allah
knows who established these evil customs.


**Third Example**

The previous examples were related to common people. Now we come to the
scholars and zakireen who use fake narrations to make people cry. Even
though Imam Mazloom (as) said, "One who narrates such sufferings which
We did not face is considered amongst Our killers".

When the people use fake narrations, in reality they are saying they
wish the Imam (as) would have suffered in this way. Then we would have
found another way to make the people cry. The people also read such fake
narrations which clearly insult Ahlul Bayt (as).

We will present two examples. Every scholar and zakir reads these fake
narrations. Before we describe the first narration, we want to write a
brief incident which is related with Hz Ameer Mukhtar (ra). Then
everything will become clear.

When Ameer Mukhtar (ra) was a teenager, his father took him to see
Ameerul Momineen (as). Moula Ali (as) lovingly put His hand on the head
of Ameer Mukhtar (ra) and said, "This boy will kill 100,000 people from
Bani Ummah".

After a long time, Ameer Mukhtar (as) was arrested by the accursed
Hajjaj bin Yousuf (la). He ordered Ameer Mukhtar (ra) to be killed.
Mukhtar?s head was fixed in the guitine. Hajjaj (la) saw Mukhtar
laughing. Hajjaj (la) became so amazed and thought, "This man is about
to die but he is still laughing".

He (la) asked Mukhtar ,"Why are you laughing?" Mukhtar replied, "I am
laughing because you are arranging for my murder, but you will never be
able to kill me".

Hajjaj (la) became infuriated and asked, "Why can I not kill you"?
Mukhtar replied, "My Moula (as) told me I will kill 100,000 people from
Bani Ummah. If you kill me now, then who will kill those 100,000 from
Bani Ummayah? My Moula (as) is the Lord of Truth. Whatever He said to
me, it will become truth."

The purpose of narrating this incident was to tell you Moula (as)?s
ordinary slave has such belief on the sayings of Moula (as) that even in
such occasions where a normal person would lose his mind from fear and
anguish, he remained without any fear or worry.

Now we come to those narrations which all the scholars and zakirs often
read. When Hz Abbas (as) was going to the battlefield, Syeda Zainab (sa)
gathered all the women and said, "When I left Medina, I was responsible
for the protection of Your veils. Now I take this responsibility back.

When I was a child, one day I was sitting on My Father?s lap, and My
Father was kissing My arms. When I asked Him why He was doing this, My
Father said, "Your arms will be tied with ropes." I use to think I have
a brother such as Abbas (as). Who on this earth has the courage to tie
My arms with ropes in the presence of Abbas (as)? Now when Abbas (as) is
going, I am sure My arms will be tied with ropes."

We wrote the whole incident word by word. Now if your iman lets you
believe in this. Then we will keep quiet. Those who have great iman and
intellect will definitely think an ordinary slave of Moula Ali (as) had
undoubtable belief in the words of Moula (as) and was laughing while
looking death in the eye, but the Daughter of Moula Ali (as) such as
Syeda Zainab (sa) (maaz?Allah) She is not ready to believe in the words
of Her Father.

Our heart cries tears of blood when we hear such fake narrations in the
majalis. I can only request and beg to our scholars and zakirs not to
read fake narrations in majalis. The second narration which often is
read in the majalis is when Ahlul Bayt (as) were released from the
prison of Shaam and all the heads of the martyrs were brought to one
house.

When the heads of the martyrs were brought, every Bibi (as) took the
head of Their child and wept. Only two heads were left sitting and no
one was crying over Them. Narrator asks, "Did the Mother of these
children die"? Syeda Zainab (sa) replied, "No. I am Their Mother, but I
will not cry over Them. I will cry on My Brother Hussain (as)." This
narration is mentioned to make people cry.

They do not realize when they mention this narration they make the Holy
Bibis (as) who were weeping become disloyal to Imam Hussain (as).

The people who have marifat (recognition) of these loyals will
certainly think how is it possible the females of Imam Hussain (as)?s
family would have left the head of Imam Hussain (as) alone and start
crying over Their children? If They had such love for Their children,
then why did They prepare Their children themselves to be sent into the
battlefield in order to help Imam Hussain (as)?


