Fourth Example
==============

This example is related to the so called worshippers. They already have
a very bad reputation. Their only purpose is to divert people?s thoughts
from Ahlul Bayt (as) and busy the people in pretend worships.

They show the same behavior regarding azadari. In Ramadan, Shab e
Zarbart and Shab e Shahadat are the nights of qiyamat (day of judgment).
In those nights only the martyrdom of Ameerul Momineen (as) is in our
minds. When we imagine how the Ahlul Bayt (as) would be feeling during
those nights, our hearts become filled with pain.

This pain does not allow us to sleep. We cry and do matam the whole
night during those nights. These so called scholars gather the people in
masjids during those nights to put Quran on their heads and ask Allah
for the forgiveness of their sins and they forget the martyrdom of Moula
Ali (as).

On the night and day of Ashura, our hearts cry tears of blood. We put
dust on our heads and tear our clothes and chant "Ya Hussain (as) Ya
Hussain (as)". We go from one imambargah to the next. We give our
condolences to the Mother of Imam Hussain (as) for the brutal slaughter
of Her Family.

We forget everything in the grief of Imam Hussain (as). We forget if we
need to eat. We forget if we even exist. We forget even about our
children. The mothers of newborn babies do not feed their children
because the thirst and hunger of the children of Imam Hussain (as) is in
their minds.

In order to shatter such devotion, amal e Shab e Ashur and amal e Shab
e Asr e Ashur were invented. So that people forget Imam Hussain (as) and
start doing these acts. If something else is left, they complete it by
stopping the procession of Ashura to stand for prayer.


**Ziaratul Hussain (as)**

We have completed our book, but it is our duty to remove one last
extreme misconception regarding Ziarat e Qabr e Imam Hussain (as)
(visiting the grave of Imam Hussain as). So called religious people say
that we must first perform hajj and then ziarat.

Because according to them, hajj is wajib and ziarat is mustahab. This
is also an attempt to decrease the importance of Imam Mazloom (as). We
deny this rumor with our whole existence. We openly say Ziarat e Imam
Hussain (as) is not mustahab. It is absolutely wajib (compulsory).


Hajj is based upon conditions such as if you have the finances then you
can perform, but the Ziarat of Imam Hussain (as) is wajib without any
conditions. Hajj is wajib only once during a person?s lifetime. While
the Ziarat of Imam Hussain (as) is wajib every day. In this regard we
will present two hadiths from Masoomeen (as) which is proof of our
claims. We are writing these hadiths from our book "Kashaful Ahkam".

1. Min La Yahzarh ul Faqeeh Second Edition page no. 337 hadith 3177,
Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) said, "One who believes the imamate of Imam
Hussain (as) is from Allah , then it is wajib upon that person to make
Ziarat of Imam Hussain (as)."

2. Min La Yahzarh ul Faqeeh Second Edition page no 357 hadith 3203,
Imam Jafar Sadiq (as) said, "Hajj is wajib once during one's lifetime
but there are conditions.

Ziarat e Qabr e Imam Hussain (as) is wajib everyday. If someone does
not do this, then he is among those who oppressed Imam Hussain (as). If
it is not possible to visit the grave of Imam Hussain (as) everyday,
then you should go on the roof of your house.

First look to the right. Then to the left. Then look at the sky. Then
he should say salam to his Master Moula Imam Mazloom (as). This is the
same as if you were saying salam while standing near to the grave of
Imam Hussain (as)."

You must know life and death does not matter to Imam (as). The same
rules which applied while making ziarat (visitation) of the Imams (as)
when They were alive also apply while making ziarat of Their graves. It
is wajib to do ghusl or wudhu before making Their ziarat.

The way no one could meet Them during Their lifetime without first
asking permission, before entering Their shrines you must also ask Their
permission. During the days of aza (mourning), do not ask Them to
fulfill any of your worldly needs. Ask Them to increase your love and
marifat of Them.

When you perform prayer, do not read while standing in the front of the
grave or on the right or left side. Perform prayer behind Their grave in
such a way you make Their grave become your Qibla. Their love and
marifat (recognition) is wajib and without them your ziarat will never
be accepted.


