Brief Biographies of the Maraja’ presented in this Book
=======================================================

**Brief Biographies of the Maraja’ presented in this Book**[^1]

Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali Araki
-------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali Araki was born in the early
1890’s, but the exact date is not known due to the lack of appropriate
birth records at the time, in the Iranian city of Arak.

Following his preliminary religious studies, he demonstrated an aptitude
to further his Islamic studies, and commented on the scholarly book,
‘Urwatul Wuthqa some 48 years ago (1952). This is a book upon which all
Mujtahidin comment as soon as they are recognized as an expert in
independent theological studies, according to their views. At the time
of his review of ‘Urwatul Wuthqa, he was in the company of such great
leaders as Ayatullah al-‘Udhma Khunsari, and others.

Although he was learned and a declared Mujtahid, following the demise of
Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Khusani and Ayatullah al-‘Udhma
al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein al-Burujerdi, he did not openly
declare his Marja’iyyah. He was one of Imam Khomeini’s teachers, having
taught the Founder of the Islamic Republic the initial course of the
Hawza entitled Jami’atul Muqaddamat. In other classes, he was a
contemporary of the late Imam.

Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali Araki was a strong
encouragement to the Islamic Republic, and requently guided the
government whenever requested. Upon the demise of Ayatullah Khomeini,
many of his Muqalladin followed Ayatullah Araki. At the demise of the
Grand Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj ash-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Khu’i (May
Allah raise his rank), the Jamiatul Mudarrasin (Council of the
Theological Schools) in Qum declared in a communique, the top most
Marja’ to be either Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh ‘Ali Araki
orAyatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani,
preferring the later, and on December 10, 1993, following the departure
of Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani
fromthis mortal world, the Council declared the grand Ayatullah Araki to
be the Marja’ for the Shi’a world.

Ayatullah Araki, up until his death used to lead students of the Hawza
Faiziyah in the congregational Salat. His teaching was active right up
to his hospitalization. The President of the Council, Ayatullah Ibrahim
Amini, in his Friday sermon on December 10, 1993, said that the Shaykh
was “since the time of the late Shaikh ‘Abdul Karim Ha’iri (founder of
the Qum Theological Center), one of the most brilliant personalities in
the field of theology and religious sciences, and a friend amoung the
Ulama…”

Ayatullah Yusuf Sana’i also of Qum said that the Grand Ayatullah has “a
high expertise in fiqh and its different topics and also is skillful in
manipulating the principle maxims of jurisprudence.” As for his piety,
Ayatullah Jawadi Amuli mentioned in a statement that the Ayatullah
protected his “soul from wordly desires and his obedience to the Sacred
Existence of the Master of the Seen and Unseen…”

The grand Ayatullah died on the 25th of Jumadi al-Akhar, 1994, one year
to the day of the demise of Ayatullah al-‘Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid
Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani, and was buried in Qum on Thursday the 27th
of Jumadi al-Akhar.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Taqi al-Behjat
-------------------------------------------------------------

AyatullAh al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Taqi al-Behjat was born
in 1915 in the city of Fuman, Iran. His father, Karbalai Muhammad Behjat
was a trustworthy and reliable personality of that region. Ayatullah
al-Behjat finished his primary education in one of the schools in Fuman.
Later on, in that same city, he began his religious education until the
year 1929, when he made the journey to Qum.

He completed studies in Arabic grammar and literature during his short
stay in Qum, and then migrated to the holy city of Karbala, Iraq, where
he attended the lectures of some of the great scholars - such as
Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Khu'i.

In 1933, he left Karbala for the holy city of Najaf to complete his
studies. While there, he attended the lectures of one of Ayatullah
Khurasani's students. After participating in the classes of Ayatullah
Dia' al-Iraqi and Ayatullah Mirza Naini’, he began attending the
lectures of Ayatullah al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad husayn al-Gharawi
al-Isfahani (known as al-Kumpani).

Ayatullah al-Behjat also benefited a great deal from the lectures of
Ayatullah al-Udhma hajj as-Sayyid Abu al-hasan al-Isfahani and al-Hajj
ash-Shaykh Muhammad Kadhim ash-Shirazi.

Apart from Fiqh (Jurisprudence) and Usul (Principles of Jurisprudence),
Ayatullah al-Behjat also studied the book al-Isharat of Ibn Sina and
al-Asfar al-Arba’ of Mulla Sadra ash-Shirazi, under the late as-Sayyid
husayn al-Badkubi.

In 1944, Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Taqi al-Behjat
returned to Iran and became a student of Ayatullah al-Udhma
al-Kukhmari’s while also attending the lectures of Ayatullah al-Udhma
al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein al-Burujerdi on Fiqh and Usul.

For the past fifty years, he has been teaching the Kharij level of Fiqh
and Usul in his home to avoid publicity.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani
----------------------------------------------------------------

AyatullAh al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Riza Al-Gulpaygani
departed for his heavenly abode on Thursday night, 9th of December at
the age of 96. He suffered from acute respiratory deficiency and lung
infection for which he was confined at hospital. The Ayatullah who was
the supreme religious authority of the Shi'a world, became terminally
ill immediately after midnight Tuesday and was shed to the Cardiac Care
Unit of the hospital but his condition continued to deteriorate despite
the extra care and attention of his doctors.

Ayatullah al-Gulpaygani went into a coma in the wee hours of Wednesday
morning and eventually left the mortal world minutes before evening
prayers Thursday.

He saw the light of day in the village of Koukeh near the city of
Gulpaygan (135 kms north-east of Isfahan) in the closing years of the
19th century and at the age of 20 went to Arak which was the centre of
the Theological studies. There, he received his education under
Ayatullah al-Udhma ash-Shaykh ‘Abd al-Karim al-Hairi. Later in 1921 he
went to the city of Qum to complete his studies.

In the early 1960s following the death of Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj
as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein al-Burujerdi and during the banishment
Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini from
Iran, he became superintendent of the Qum Theological Seminary.

He took over the administration of the school at a crucial time when
both the theological school and Islamic scholars were in at stake due to
repressive measures directed by Shah. At that time he had about 800
students who attended his classes and received advanced training in
religious studies.

Ayatullah al-Gulpaygani is the author of a number of scholarly works and
treatises as well as commentaries on various other works of
scholastically abstruse character. Among them is an annotation on the
‘al-Urwatul Wuthqa’, 'Tawzih al-Masa’il', ‘Manasik al-Hajj' and many
others.

He rendered valuable services during his superintendence of the
Theological Seminary in Qum, and also helped establish almost 30
theological schools in various towns and cities throughout Iran, as well
as health clinics for students and other types of public utility centers
in many parts of the country and abroad as well.

Ayatullah al-Gulpaygani was a great scholar and a Marja’ and he had many
followers throughout the world. He subscribed to the concept of
Wilayat-e-Faqihi put forwarded by Ayatullah al-Khomeini.

The Leader of the Islamic Revolution, Ayatullah as-Sayyid ‘Ali
al-husaini al-Khamenei’, expressed deep condolence over the sad demise
of the Grand Ayatullah Muhammad Riza al-Gulpaygani.

He was one of the pillars of the Islamic Revolution and The Islamic
Republic, said the leader in a statement.

During the oppressive rule of the former regime and in confronting the
bitter incidents which occurred in the years after the banishment from
Iran of Ayatullah al-Khomeini (1963), there was some occasions when the
voice of this great personality was the only threatening voice against
the former regime, which raised from the Qum theological seminary and
gave enthusiasm to the Islamic movement.

After the victory of the Islamic Revolution, he had an active
contribution in managing the general affairs of the revolution, said the
statement adding that he unequivocally supported the Islamic Republic
system and its exalted leadership. He was respected and honoured by the
late Ayatullah al-Khomeini.

The departure of this divine scholar was a grave and irreparable loss,
the statement added. The statement also said that the grand Ayatullah
was a Marja' Taqlid for 32 years, and a teacher at the Qum theological
seminary for about 72 years while keeping on learning and teaching Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) for about 85 years.

He was the first person to establish modern theological seminary and the
first great institute for Qur’anic studies in Qum. He was the first
person to prepare a table of contents of Fiqh and hadith (Tradition) by
using modern technology and knowledge.

He founded hundreds of schools, mosques and Islamic propagation centres
in Iran and other countries and brought up thousands of disciples.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini al-Hindi
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

On Jamadi al-Thani 20th, 1320 a.h. (24th September 1902) a child was
born in Khumayn, a town in the central province of Iran, to a devout
family educated in theology and devoted to migration and jihad and the
progeny of Her Holiness Fatima al-Zahra (peace be upon her). The child
was named Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini.

The noble father of Imam al-Khomeini was the late Ayatullah as-Sayyid
Mustafa Musawi, a contemporary of the late grand Ayatulah Mirza Shirazi.
After acquiring considerable Islamic knowledge during several years of
stay in Najaf, and obtaining the license to practice Ijtihad, Imam
Khomeinis father returned to Iran and become a religions guide and
support for the people of Khumayn. When Ruhulluh was barely five months
old his father who had risen against the tyranny of the government
agents, in response to his call to search for truth, was martyred while
commuting from Khumayn to Arak.

His childhood and youthful years were spent under the supervision of his
devout mother (Banu Hajar) herself coming from a family of knowledge and
chastity, a grand-daughter of Ayatullah Khunsari (author of
Zubdatul-Tasanif), and his noble aunt (Sahiba Khanum), a brave,
truth-seeking lady.

By the age of 15, the young Khomeini was deprived of the supervision of
these two cherished personalities. From his childhood and early in his
youth, Imam Khomeini learned, by the grace of his superlative
intelligence, a great deal of the conventional sciences and acquired a
considerable amount of preliminary knowledge - these included Arabic
literature, logic, Jurisprudence and principles. For learning these he
had instructors such as Agha Mirza Mahmud Eftekhar al-\`Ulama, Mirza
Riza Najafi Khomeini, Agha Shaikh \`Ali Muhammad Burujerdi, Shaikh
Muhammad Gulpaygani, Agha \`Abbas Araki, but mostly, his own elder
brother Ayatullah Seyyed Murtaza Passandideh.

Shortly after migration of the grand Ayatullah haj Shaikh \`Abd al-Karim
Haeri Yazdi to Qum, in Rajab 1340 a.h, Imam Khomeini, also migrated to
the Qum Theological Assembly and took the complementary lessons with the
scholars of the assembly of Qum. These included lessons from the lengthy
book of Mutawal on rhetoric (Ma\`ani & Bayan) taken with the late Mirza
Muhammad-Ali Adib Tehrani; completion of the Level studies with the late
Ayatullah Seyyed Muhammad Taqi Khonssari but mostly with the late
Ayatullah Seyyed Ali Yathrebi Kashani; (Fiqh) Jurisprudence principles
with the master of the Qum Assembly, Ayatullah al-Hajj Sheikh Abdulkarim
Haeri Yazdi.

The sensitive and searching spirit of Imam Khomeini could not settle
with just Arabic literature and lessons in “Fiqh” Jurisprudence and
Principles. He was interested in other sciences as well.Therefore, along
with learning jurisprudence and Principles “Fiqh” from the “Fuqaha”,
jurisconsults of the time, he took lessons in mathematics, astronomy and
philosophy from the late Haj Seyyed Abulhasan Rafiey Qazvini and
continued taking the same lessons in addition to spiritual sciences and
mysticism from the late Mirza Ali-Akbar Hakami Yazdi. He also took
lessons in prosody, and rhyme, as well as Islamic and western
philosophies with the late Agha Sheikh Muhammad-Reza Masjid-Shahi
Isfahani. He then took lessons in Ethics and “Erfan” gnosticism from the
late Ayatullah Haj Mirza Javade-Maleki-Tabrizi and he further studied
the highest levels of Theoretical and practical “Erfan” (gnosticism) for
a period of 6 years with the late Ayatullah Agha Mirza Muhammad-Ali
Shahabadi.

For many years, Hazrat Imam Khomeini taught “Fiqh”, jurisprudence and
principles, mysticism and Islamic Ethics in Qum Theological schools
including the Faiziyya, the Aazam mosque, the Muhammadiyya Mosque, the
Haj Mulla Sadiq School, the Salmasi Mosque etc. He taught “Fiqh” and the
knowledge of the Ahl-e-Bayt, at the highest level, for 14 years at the
Sheikh Ansari (s) Mosque in Najaf Theological Centre. It was at Najaf
that Imam Khomeini (s), for the first time included, in his lessons on
“Fiqh”, the Theoretical foundations of the Islamic government. His
students declared his lessons and classes among the most credible in the
Theological Assembly of Najaf. Some of his classes at Qum had as many as
1200 students which, included scores of established jurisconsults
(mujtahedeen) who benefited by the Imam's school of “Fiqh” jurisprudence
and principles.

The blessings of Imam Khomeini's teaching included training and
education of hundreds, better yet, considering the length of his
teaching, thousands of learned men and scholars each one of whom is
currently illuminating a theological Assembly. Today's jurisconsults,
“mujtahedeen” and prominent Gnostics have been among Imam Khomeini's
students in Qum or at other centres of knowledge. Outstanding thinkers
such as the great scholar Shaheed Mutahhari and the wronged Shahid
Beheshti felt honoured to have benefited by Imam Khomeini's teachings.
Today the prominent clergy who guide the Islamic Revolution and system
of the Islamic Republic in all civil affairs are all among those
educated by the school of Fiqh and politics of Imam Khomeini.

On October 13, 1965 Imam Khomeini, accompanied by his son Ayatullah haj
Mustafa were sent from Turkey to their second country of exile, Iraq.
Upon arrival in Iraq, Imam Khomeini went on pilgrimage to the holy
Shrines of the Infallible Imams in Kazamain, Samarra and Karbala. A week
later he moved to his residence in Najaf.

Imam Khomeini began his Lecture teachings in jurisprudence, in Aban,
1344 (November, 1965), inspite of all obstacles and oppositions, in the
Sheikh Ansari Mosque in Najaf, and continued these classes until his
migration to Paris, France. Imam Khomeini's firm fundamentals in (Fiqh)
jurisprudence and Principles and his proficency in Islamic sciences was
such that after a short time, inspite of all the impediments, his
teaching classes came to be known as the most outstanding theological
Assemblies of Najaf both qualitatively and quantitatively.

A large number of clergy students of Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, Afghanistan,
India and countries of the Persian Gulf area attended his teaching
lectures daily. Those attached to the Imam from Iranian theological
Assemblies wanted to make collective migration to Najaf, but desisted at
the recommendation of the Imam, that, it was necessary to keep the
theological assemblies in Iran, active. However, a large number of those
deeply attached to Imam Khomeini had already reached Najaf and,
gradually, a centre of revolutionary figures who believed in the path of
the Imam was formed in Najaf, and it was this group that undertook the
responsibility of relaying the Imam's fighting messages, in those years
of strangulation.

On the 12th of Mehr, Imam Khomeini left Najaf for the border of Kuwait.
The government of Kuwait did not let the Imam in, on a hint by the
Iranian Regime. Previously there was talk of Imam's departure for
Lebanon or Syria. However, after consulting his son (Hojjatul Islam Haj
Seyyed Ahmad Khomeini), the Imam decided to migrate to France and on the
14th of Mehr, he entered Paris and two days later he was stationed in
the house of an Iranian, in Noefel Le Chateau (Suburbs of Paris).

During the four-month stay of Imam Khomeini in Paris, Noefel Le Chateau
was the most important news centre in the world. Imam Khomeini's various
interviews and his visits revealed to the world, his views of Islamic
rule, and the future aims of his Movement. Thus a larger number of
people of the world, became aquatinted with the Imam's thought and
uprising, and it was from this stage and station that he guided the most
critical period of the Movement in Iran.During the four-month stay of
Imam Khomeini in Paris, Noefel Le Chateau was the most important news
centre in the world. Imam Khomeini's various interviews and his visits
revealed to the world, his views of Islamic rule, and the future aims of
his Movement. Thus a larger number of people of the world, became
aquatinted with the Imam's thought and uprising, and it was from this
stage and station that he guided the most critical period of the
Movement in Iran.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Fazil al-Lankarani
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Muhammad Fazil al-Lankarani was
born in 1931 in the Holy city of Qum. His father, the late Ayatullah
Fazil Lankarani was a great teacher and scholar in the Islamic Seminary
of Qum. His dear mother, was a pure and noble woman of descent from the
family of the Prophet of Islam, Peace be upon him and his family.

At the age of 13, after the completion of primary school, he began
studying Islamic studies in the seminary of Qum, where due to his great
ability and aptitude, he was able to finish the preliminary stages of
Islamic studies within six years.

At the age of 19, he started attending lessons in Fiqh (Jurisprudence)
and Usul (Principles of Jurisprudence) at the Kharij level (the highest
level of Islamic studies), which were being taught by Ayatullah al-Udhma
al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein Burujerdi, May Allah raise his
status.

Because of his young age and his ability to pick up information very
quickly, his fellow students and his teachers quickly recognized him.
One of his close friends and study partners, during his quest for
knowledge, was none other than the beloved son of the founder of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the late Shaheed Mustafa Khomeini, May he be
showered in Allah’s peace.

Ayatullah Lankarani benefited from Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid
Muhammad Hussein Burujerdi’s lectures in the subjects of Fiqh and Usul
for almost 11 years. He also participated in the classes of the late
Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini for
9 years. Under these two great teachers, he was able to benefit a great
deal, and quickly excelled in his studies.

He also took part in the lectures on philosophy and Tafsir (Explanation)
of the Holy Qur’an under the great scholar, ‘Allamah as-Sayyid Muhammad
Husayn al-Tabataba'i, May Allah raise his rank, in which he gained much
knowledge and enlightenment.

Because of her perseverance and endeavors, he was able to reach to the
great stage of Ijithad at the early age of 25, something that his
eminent teacher, the late Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad
Hussein Burujerdi gave to him in writing.

For many years, he was busy teaching the intermediate level of studies
in the Islamic Seminary of Qum to a great number of students. In
addition to this, for the past 25 years, he has been teaching lessons of
Kharij in the areas of Fiqh and Usul (Kharij is the highest level of
Islamic studies after which, if completed in their entirety, elevate the
person to a Mujtahid).

His lessons are so popular that in any one lesson, over 700 scholars and
personalities of the hawza ‘Ilmiyyah of Qum can be seen taking part! In
addition to this, for the past few years, his lessons on Fiqh have been
broadcast by Iranian Radio, thus, those living within the Islamic
Republic, and even those in foreign countries have benefited from his
vast amount of knowledge.

From the beginning of the political and social struggle and defiance of
Ayatullah Khomeini against the oppression, corruption and tyrannical
government of the Pahlavi dynasty in Iran, Ayatullah Fazil Lankarani was
one of the helpers and supporters of Ayatullah Khomeini. Step by step in
every movement that the defenders of Islam took, Ayatullah Lankarani was
there and played an active role. One of his important moves was to be
involved with the Jami’ah Mudarasin, a group that consists of the
teachers in the hawza ‘Ilmiyyah of Qum in which they were busy spreading
the word of Islam and the Islamic Revolution among the masses.

More than this, it was they who announced the Marja’iyat and Leadership
of Ayatullah Khomeini…Many times during this difficult period, Ayatullah
Fazil Lankarani was jailed, and finally, as if the Shah could no longer
take the ‘Ulama and their standing up for the truth, he was forced to
exile him to an area known as Bandar Lange. After staying there for 4
months, we was moved to the city of Yazd, where he was forced to reside
for a period of 18 months.

After the victory of the Islamic Revolution of Iran, Ayatullah Fazil
Lankarani continued to play an important role along side the leader,
Ayatullah Khomeini, May his spirit be sanctified, and even today, under
the leadership of Ayatullah Khameni’i, he is still fully supportive and
active.

After the Islamic Revolution in Iran, Ayatullah Lankarani was appointed
as a member of The Council of Experts, and for more than 10 years,
served as the administrator of the Islamic Seminary of Qum.

From the earliest of times, himself and his family have been lovers and
followers of the Ahl al-Bait, Peace be upon all of them, and as has been
noted, weekly gatherings to commemorate the martyrdom of Abu ‘Abdillah
al-Husayn, Peace be upon him, and his loyal family and followers,
gatherings to commemorate the martyrdom of the Ma’sumin, Peace be upon
all of them, and programs to celebrate the birth anniversaries of the
Leaders of Islam, Peace be upon all of them, were held by his late
father, and even today, continue to be held.

After the passing away of Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Sayyid Shahab ad-Din
Najafi al-Mar’ashi, he was inundated with requests from the students of
the hawza ‘Ilmiyyah of Qum, as well as from the people of Qum, not to
mention from those in charge to oversee and run the daily programs of
the haram of Fatimah al-Ma’sumah, Peace be upon her, to lead the Salat
al-Jama’at. He humbly accepted this responsibility, and every night,
under the graceful eyes of the sister of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Riza who
is buried in Qum, thousands of scholars, students, visitors to this holy
city and residents of Qum offered their prayers behind this humble man.

After the death of Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Ruhullah
al-Musawi al-Khomeini, May Allah raise his rank, the believers turned to
him for Taqlid. After the untimely demise of Ayatullah al-Udhma
ash-Shaykh Araki, May Allah raise his rank, Ayatullah Fazil Lankarani
was officially introduced, by the hawza ‘Ilmiyyah of Qum in their
statement, as the number one Marja Taqlid of the Muslim Ummah.

Along with the important task of teaching the future scholars of Islam,
and raising up the guardians of the Religion, he also finds time to
write and compile books. To date, he has some 40 books to his credit.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir Makarim ash-Shirazi
---------------------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Nasir Makarim ash-Shirazi was born
in 1929 in Shiraz, Iran. He completed his primary and high school
studies in Shiraz, and at the early age of fourteen, began his Islamic
studies in the Agha Bab Khan School. Despite the fact that there were no
individuals of a scholarly theological background in his family, a great
inclination and abundant love for Islamic knowledge and sciences
directed his eminence towards the theological studies and the selection
of this path.

When he became eighteen, he moved to the city of Qum, and started his
seminary studies. In Qum, he benefited from the lectures of Ayatullah
al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein al-Burujerdi and other
eminent scholars of that time.

In 1959, Ayatullah Nasir Makarim ash-Shirazi traveled to Najaf, Iraq to
continue his Islamic studies. While in Najaf, he attended the lectures
of Ayatullah al-Hakim, Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim
al-Khu'i, and Ayatullah as-Sayyid ‘Abd al-Hadi ash-Shirazi. He received
the authority of absolute Ijtihad from two of the distinguished
Ayatullahs of Najaf, by the time he reached the age of 30!

It was in the year 1960 that he returned to Iran and began teaching Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) and Usul (Principles of Jurisprudence). His lectures are
very popular among the students and scholars, and he has been teaching
these courses continuously now for over 30 years. It should also be
mentioned that over 2000 students and distinguished scholars of the Qum
hawza regularly attend his classes.

Among the other achievements of Ayatullah Nasir Makarim ash-Shirazi are
the establishments of the Imam ‘Ali (‘a), Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (‘a),
and Imam husayn (‘a) Hawzahs. Recently, a new hawza has also been opened
under his supervision dedicated exclusively to the study of the Holy
Qur’an.

He has written over one hundred books, all of which have been published,
and some have been repeatedly reprinted – up to 30 editions! Many have
also been translated and published in Arabic, Urdu, and English to name
a few of the many languages.

His comprehensive work, al-Amthal Fi Tafsir-e-Kitab Allah al-Munzal, is
an encyclopedia on the commentary of the Qur’an, published in 37 volumes
in Arabic, and over 30 volumes in Farsi. He has also opened a new
chapter in the field of commentary of the Qur’an, by writing a
topic-wise commentary, now totalling 11 volumes in Farsi which are also
available in Arabic.

Ayatullah Nasir Makarim ash-Shirazi also played an important role in the
victory of the Islamic Revolution of Iran. During the rule of the tyrant
Shaw, he was exiled three times to remote cities in Iran. He also played
a vital role in the writing of the Islamic Constitution in the first
Council of Experts.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Husaini as-Seestani
----------------------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Husaini
as-Seestani was born in 1928 in the month of Rabi’ al-Awwal in the holy
city of Mashad, Iran, where the sacred shrine of Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa
al-Riza is located. Ayatullah as-Sayyid as-Seestani began his
introductory ‘Arabic studies, including Balagha (Eloquence), in
Khurasan, under a renowned teacher of ‘Arabic, named Muhammad Taqi Adib
Nishaburi.

Ayatullah as-Seestani began his introductory ‘Arabic studies, including
Balagha (Eloquence), in Khurasan under a renowned teacher of ‘Arabic,
named Muhammad Taqi Adib Nishaburi. He also studied Fiqh, Usul, Mantiq,
and Aqaid under the great ‘Ulama and teachers of Khurasan.

It was in this same city, that he took part in Dars-e-Kharij (the
highest level of studies in the hawza). At this time, he also benefited
from the presence of Allamah Muhaqqiq Mirza Mahdi Isfahani (may Allah
sanctify his spirit).

In order to advance further and complete his studies, he traveled to the
city of Qum in 1948, so that he would be able to study under various
‘Ulama of the grand hawza in this city.

Ayatullah Seestani who was present in the lessons of Fiqh and Usul,
which at that time were being taught by Ayatullah Burujerdi, was quickly
recognized as one of the brightest students in the fields of Fiqh, Usul,
and Rijal. He also took part in the classes of Ayatullah al-Udhma hujjat
Kuhkumrai and other scholars so that he could further quench his thirst
for knowledge.

In the year 1951, Ayatullah Seestani once again moved, this time to
Najaf al-Ashraf. For more than 10 years he took part in the lessons of
Ayatullah al-Udhma as-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khu’i (may Allah
be pleased with him).

During this time, he also attended the lessons taught by Ayatullah
al-\`Udhma Mohsin al-hakim (may Allah sanctify his spirit); and he
finished one complete course in Usul al-Fiqh under the auspices of
Ayatullah al-\`Udhma ash-Shaykh Husayn al-Hilli (may Allah be pleased
with him).

In the year 1960, in recognition of his achievements he was awarded the
distinction certifying that he had attained the level of Ijtihad -
deduction of legal judgement in matters of religion, by as-Sayyid
al-Khu’i and again, by ash-Shaykh al-Hilli.

In the same year, he was also awarded certification by the distinguished
traditionalist and scholar ash-Shaykh Agha Buzurg al-Tehrani, testifying
to his skill in the science of ’Ilm al-Rijal (research into the
biographies of the narrators of ahadith). He achieved this grand status
when he was a mere 31 years of age!

In the year 1961, after years of studies and participating in the
lessons of Usul, Fiqh, and Mantiq in the hawzas of Mashad, Qum, and
Najaf, he started to teach his own lessons in Dars-e-Kharij, revolving
around the book, al-Makasib by Shaykh Murtaza Ansari (may Allah be
pleased with him). After teaching Dars-e-Kharij based on the framework
found in al-Makasib for several years, he advanced his lessons onto a
higher level by teaching from the book Urwatul Wuthqa.

Some scholars of the Najaf center for theological studies (hawza
an-Najaf) were quoted as saying that after the death of as-Sayyid
Nasrullah al-Mustanbit, they advised the late as-Sayyid al-Khu’i to
choose someone for the office of the supreme religious authority and the
supervision of the Najaf hawza. as-Sayyid as-Seestani was chosen for his
merits, knowledge, and impeccable character. Accordingly, he started
leading the prayers in Imam al-Khu’i’s masjid, al-Khadra, during the
lifetime of his late teacher, and writing and compiling his annotation
based on as-Sayyid al-Khu’i's Tauzhiul Masa’il.

After the passing away of the Marja’ Taqlid of the Shi’a world and the
Guardian of the hawza ‘Ilmiyyah, Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid
Abu al-Qasim al-Khu‘i (may Allah raise his rank), Ayatullah al-\`Udhma
al-Hajj as-Sayyid ‘Ali al-husayni as-Seestani was among the six people
who were allowed to take part in his funeral and performed the services
on the dead body.

Ayatullah Seestani, for the past 28 years, has been continuing the
important task of teaching Dars-e-Kharij in Fiqh, Usul, and Rijal. The
fruits of his struggle for knowledge and the accomplishments of this
Faqhi have been preserved in writing (now numbering over 40 books) –
many of which have been translated into English, Urdu, French, Spanish,
German, Turkish, Malay and countless other languages of the world.

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Mirza Jawad at-Tabrizi
------------------------------------------------------------

Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj ash-Shaykh Mirza Jawad at-Tabrizi was born in
1926 in the city of Tabriz, Iran. After finishing his secular studies,
and reaching to the age of eighteen, he entered a theological school in
his hometown. Within four years of entering this, he managed to complete
the preliminary and intermediate levels of his Islamic studies.

In the year 1948, he migrated to Qum and finished other lessons at the
intermediate level. In Qum he reached to the Kharij level; thereupon he
attended the lectures of the late Ayatullah al-Hujjat, and Ayatullah
al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Muhammad Hussein Burujerdi.

Asides from studying, he also taught the intermediate to advanced
courses of Islamic studies in Qum.

Ayatullah Mirza Jawad al-Tabrizi then migrated to Najaf al-Ashraf and
was fortunate enough to benefit from eminent scholars such as the late
Ayatullah al-Sayyid Abu al-Hadi ash-Shirazi, and the late Ayatullah
al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Khu'i, where he reached to
the level of Ijtihad.

Ayatullah al-Tabrizi was invited by Ayatullah al-Udhma al-Hajj as-Sayyid
Abu al-Qasim al-Khu'i to join the Assembly of Consultants, which was an
organized group of scholars that responded to the questions of the
people.

Ayatullah al-Tabrizi stayed in the holy city of Najaf for about 23
years, leaving only in the holidays to do propagation in different
countries. He later returned to Iran and began teaching Fiqh
(Jurisprudence) and Usul (Principles of Jurisprudence) in the Islamic
Seminary of Qum, where he currently is until today.

[^1]: We apologize to the dear readers for the brevity of the
biographies of some of the Maraja’ Taqlid mentioned in this book. We had
repeatedly tried to get more information on these great figures from
their offices in Qum, but they were not co-operative with us.


