Rules related To covering
=========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرّحمن الرّحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا بَنِي آدَمَ قَدْ أَنزَلْنَا عَلَيْكُمْ لِبَاساً يُوَارِي
سَوْئَاتِكُمْ وَرِيشاً وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَى ذَلِكَ خَيْرٌ ذَلِكَ مِنْ
آيَاتِ اللّهِ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O children of Adam! We have indeed sent down to you clothing to
cover your shame, and (clothing) for beauty and clothing that guards
(against evil), that is the best. This is of the communications of Allah
that they may be mindful.***

***Al-Qur’an · Surah A’raf · Ayah 26***

Covering for Men
----------------

### A) Clothing Forbidden for Men

79 – Rule: It is haram for men to wear clothing that is made of 100%
pure silk, even if it is a skull-cap or a belt, regardless of whether or
not it can be seen by a man or a woman who is a Mahram or non-Mahram.
KMST

It is haram for men to wear clothing that is made of 100% pure silk, but
as for things such as a skull-cap, belt or socks which in itself can not
be used to cover the private parts, if they are made of 100% pure silk
then apparently it is allowed to read the Salat (with these things on
the person) although it is against Ihtiyat B

Attention: This explanation is in the meaning of Ihtiyat Mustahab and
therefore according to his ruling, according to Ihtiyat Mustahab, at the
time of Salat, men should not have on things like a skull-cap, socks,
etc (made of pure silk)…

It is haram for men to wear clothing that is made of 100% pure silk.
Also, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed for men to wear
things such as a skull-cap, belt, etc… that in itself can not be used to
cover the private parts, if they are made from 100% silk. AGL

80 – Rule: If the entire or a part of the lining of clothing is made
from 100% pure silk, then it is not allowed for a man to wear it.
ABKLMST

If the amount of silk is less than the size of four closed fingers, then
it is not a problem, and any amount more than this is haram for men to
wear. G

81 – Rule: It is haram for men to wear clothing that is made of 100%
pure silk, even if it is the clothing that is not apparent, for example,
underclothing. ABGKLMST

82 – Rule: It is not a problem to wear clothing that has braids or laces
made of silk, or if it has a patch or emblem made of silk on it. AGKLMS

83 – Rule: It is not a problem to have something made of pure silk with
you, such as a handkerchief in the pocket. ABGKLMST

84 – Rule: If a type of clothing is made of a mix of silk and something
other than silk, then in the event that the term 100% silk can not be
applied to that clothing, it is not a problem to wear it. However, if it
is such that it can be referred to as 100% silk, then it is not
permitted to wear it. AGKLMS

85 – Rule: It is not a problem to wear clothing if one is in doubt
whether it is 100% silk or something else. ABGKLMST

86 – Rule: It is not a problem to wear clothing that has been stitched
with thread made of silk. AGKLMS

Apparently, it is allowed. B

87 – Rule: It is haram for men to beautify themselves with gold, or wear
clothing that has been stitched with gold, whether it be something
apparent or hidden, and the Salat prayed (by a man who has gold on) is
void. Therefore, if for example, a man is wearing gold chain around his
neck, then even if it is hidden (under his shirt), it is still haram.
ABGKLMST

88 – Rule: It is not allowed for men to beautify themselves with
anything made of gold, whether it is something apparent or hidden.
ABGKLMST

Therefore: It is not allowed for a man to wear a gold bracelet or a gold
necklace, even if it is under the clothing and can not be seen. Also, it
is not allowed to wear a gold watch or gold cuff links or any other type
of beautification that is made of gold.

89 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, men must not wear glasses made of
gold either. GKLM

It is haram for men to wear glasses made of gold. ST

90 – Rule: White gold does not have the same ruling as yellow gold, and
the wearing of it for men is not a problem, except that which is in
reality yellow gold, but only the colour of it has changed. K

If white gold is a metal other than yellow gold, then it is not a
problem for men to wear it. AGMST

If white gold is referred to as gold and is the same thing as yellow
gold, then it is not allowed for men to wear it. L

91 – Rule: It is not a problem to beautify or decorate one’s self with
something that is gold coated, in the event that in reality it can not
be considered as gold. ABGKLMST

92 – Rule: If something is a mixture of yellow gold and another metal,
and if the yellow gold has become mixed such that in reality it is no
longer considered as yellow gold, then it does not have the ruling as
gold. AM

It is not allowed for mean to wear anything that is a mixture of gold
and other than gold. L

93 – Rule: If a man doubts whether an item is made of gold or not, then
the usage of it for him is not a problem. AGKLM

If it is considered as gold, then it is not allowed. B

94 – Question: What is the ruling for a man if he purchases a gold ring
or a gold watch for his wife, and in order to see if it will fit or to
protect it, puts it on his hand? What is the ruling for this if it is
during Salat or even otherwise?

Answer: It is haram for the man; and his Salat while wearing it, is
void. G

95 – Question: A man buys a gold ring for his wife and in order to check
the size, he puts it on his finger. Does this amount of wearing it have
any relevance or not?

Answer: In this instance, for that amount of time (that he is just
trying it), is not a problem. G

### B) Covering for Men in Front of Maharim, Men, and Others

**B) Covering for Men in Front of Maharim, Men, and Others**[^1]

96 – Rule: Men must cover their private parts from other men and those
women that are his Mahram, however it is not Wajib to cover the rest of
their body from them. ABGKLMST

97 – Question: Is it sufficient for a man to (only) wear swimming trunks
or other types of under clothing which show the shape of the private
parts, but do not show the skin, in front of others?

Answer: If there is no fear of falling into sin, then it is not a
problem. AGKLMST

Answer: If it leads to corruption or falling into sin, then it is not
allowed. B

98 – Rule: It is haram for a man not to cover a part of his body with
the intention of making others fall into sin. AGKT

That amount of the body that must be covered, is the same amount of the
body that is haram to be left open, even if others will not fall into
sin. As for those parts of the body that are not wajib to be covered, if
it (being kept open) will lead one to commit a haram act, then it is
wajib to cover that area as well. B

99 – Rule: It is haram to take off one’s clothes in the presence of
other men or one’s Maharim with the intention of sexually arousing
others. One’s spouse is an exception. AGKT

That amount of the body that must be covered, is the same amount of the
body that is haram to be left open, even if others will not fall into
sin. As for those parts of the body that are not wajib to be covered, if
it (being kept open) will lead one to commit a haram act, then it is
wajib to cover that area as well. B

100 – Rule: Doctors are not an exception to the above rules and
therefore men must keep their private parts covered in front of them as
well, except in the case of necessity. ABGKLMST

Summary: That which is an exception to the covering of men is in the
case of a necessity. Thus, if a man is compelled, he is permitted to
expose his private parts in front of the doctor (for example, some
illnesses in which it is necessary to expose the private parts in order
to be cured). In cases other than this (such as for birth control,
except in the case of necessity), a man must cover his private parts in
front of others, even if it may be his father, brother, or son. He must
also cover his private parts from other Maharim like such as his sister,
mother, aunt, and anyone else.

### C) Covering of Men in the Presence of Non-Mahram Women

101 – Rule: A man must cover his private parts when in the presence of
non-Mahram women, but it is not wajib to cover the rest of his body.
AGKLMS

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, a man must cover his body from non-Mahram
women even if it (not covering the body) does not lead one to a haram
act; but if it does lead one to it, then without a doubt it is wajib to
cover the body in the same way that covering the private parts from the
view of non-Mahram women is wajib. B

102 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Mustahab, men must cover other parts of
the body that are normally covered by men, while in the presence of
non-Mahram women, especially if the man knows that the non-Mahram women
may look at them with the intention of lust. KLM

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, men must cover their body from the view of
non-Mahram women, even if it does not lead one to a haram act, and if it
does, then without doubt it is wajib to cover it. B

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, a man must cover those parts that are
commonly covered by men, in the event that he knows that a non-family
member woman will look at him. G

Therefore: Men must cover the area above their wrist, the chest, the
feet and other parts that men usually cover from non-Mahram women who
are in their presence. As for covering the other parts such as the head,
face, and hands, it is not necessary.

103 – Rule: It is haram to expose any part of the body with the
intention of sexually arousing non-Mahrams. AGK

If it helps or leads one to commit a haram act, then without a doubt it
is wajib to cover the body. B

Therefore: It is haram for a man to expose his arms, chest or any other
part of his body with the intention of having non-Mahram women look at
him. Also, it is haram for him to wear a see-thru shirt with the
intention of having non-Mahram women look at his body, thus he must also
refrain from these acts. If clothing such as a short sleeve shirt is
worn, however not with the intention of arousing others, but it is known
that others may fall into sin, then according to Ihtiyat Mustahab one
should not wear such clothing.

104 – Question: Can a non-Mahram woman give an injection to a man, take
his blood pressure, or take an x-ray of him?

Answer: If it necessitates touching or a forbidden look at the body of
the man, then it is not allowed, except in the case of necessity. AGKLMS

Looking at the body of a non-Mahram man, if it does not lead one to
commit a haram act, then according to Ihtiyat Wajib, is not allowed; and
if it will lead one to commit a haram act, then without doubt, it is
haram to look at his body. In either scenario, it is not allowed to
touch the body of a non-Mahram man except in the case of a necessity. B

105 – Question: In the event that a man knows that a non-Mahram woman
will look at him, can he expose a bit more of his body than that which
is normally covered by men? For example, can he be in the house with his
underclothes on, go out to wash carpets, or his car, etc… roll up his
pants in the event that he know that non-Mahram women will look at him,
or swim in the presence of non-Mahram women?

Answer: If it is with the intention of leading others into something
forbidden, then it is haram; and in situations other than this, it is
still better to refrain from it, especially if the onlookers are young
women. KLM

Answer: If it leads one to a haram act, then it is not permitted; but
even if it does not lead one to a haram act, according to Ihtiyat Wajib
the man must cover his body from the view of non-Mahram. B

Answer: If it is with the intention of leading others into something
forbidden, then it is haram, and if not, then according to Ihtiyat
Wajib, one must still cover that which is normally covered. G

### D) Covering for Men in the presence of Children

Children that are not Mumayyiz

106 – Rule: It is not wajib to cover any part of the body – even the
private parts, if the child is not Mumayyiz, whether the child is a boy
or a girl. BGKLMST

If the Child is Mumayyiz

107 – Rule: Men must cover their private parts from a child who is
Mumayyiz, whether it is a boy or a girl, Mahram or a non-Mahram. AGKLMS

Therefore: Men must cover their private parts in front of their Mumayyiz
children in the showers and other places.

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, a man must cover his body from girls who
have not yet completed 9 years of age, but who understand good and bad,
even if there is no intention of sexual pleasure. B

Covering of Women
-----------------

### A) Covering for Women in the Presence of Non-Mahram Men

108 – Rule: It is wajib for women to cover their entire body from
non-Mahram Men; with the exception of their face and hands, as long as
the following conditions are met:

Their face and hands must not have any kind of beautification (zinat) on
them.

One will not look at their face or hands with the intention of lust. AKM

Women must cover their body and hair from non-Mahram men, even if there
is no harm of falling into sin and even if there is no intention of
deriving pleasure. B

A woman must cover her entire body except her face and hands from
non-Mahram men, with the condition that there is no zinat on these parts
and that her intention is not that she wants non-Mahram men to look at
these parts. However, if non-Mahram men look at her face and hands with
the intention of deriving pleasure, then it is not necessary for the
woman to cover her face and hands. L

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, women must also cover their face and hands
from non-Mahram men. G

Women must cover the hair (on their head) and their body from non-Mahram
men, with the exception of their face and hands; and if they fear that
by not covering these parts they will fall into sin, or if their
intention of not covering these parts is to make men look at them with a
haram look, then in either of these two scenarios, it is not permitted
to keep these two parts uncovered. S

A Woman must cover her entire body, with the exception of her face and
hands from non-Mahram men; and in the event that there is any zinat on
her face or hands, such as a ring or if she has shaped her eyebrows, or
she has applied Surma to her eyes, even if these things are common among
old women, it is not wajib to cover them. In other than these scenarios,
a woman must cover her zinat from non-Mahram men. However, according to
Ihtiyat Mustahab, a woman should cover her face and hands from a
non-Mahram, even if there is no zinat on them. T

109 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, women must cover a bit more of
their face and hands than that which is normally covered. (The face is
said to be that part which is wajib to wash in Wuzhu, and it is stated
that the hands are the part from the wrist to the fingertips.) AKLM

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, the entire face and hands must be covered
from non-Mahram men. G

According to Ihtiyat Mustahab, it is better for a woman to cover her
face from non-Mahram men. T

110 – Question: According to the laws of Islam, is it allowed to expose
the sole, top, malleolus and the heel of the foot, in front of
non-Mahram men?

Answer: It is not allowed. ABGKLMST

Therefore: Women are not permitted to go in front of non-Mahram men
without socks on their feet, or with their feet showing, go to a nearby
store to buy even just one item. Also, if there are non-Mahram men in
the house, then it is not permitted to come in their presence without
having socks on, even if it may be one’s husband’s brother, a sister’s
husband, or any other non-Mahram men.

111 – Rule: It is not permitted for women to reveal or expose the part
under the chin, the neck, the ears, the chest or the forearm up to the
upper arm; and therefore one must ensure that these parts are also
covered from non-Mahram men. ABGKLMST

Note: Women must pay close attention to the following: In the house or
in other places in which there are non-Mahram men present; if one is
wearing something with short sleeves, or if one has long sleeves on and
one is trying to reach to something which is high up; or taking
something from the hands of a non-Mahram man; or offering fruits or
other things to the non-Mahram; or when buying things from the store; or
when carrying something big and heavy – in all these and other instances
in which there is a chance of the sleeves going up and the arm or any
part of the body becoming exposed, women must be extra cautious (to
ensure that those parts which must be covered, remain covered) .

112 – Question: What is the extent of the Islamic hijab for women? For
this purpose, does the wearing of clothing that is long and loose
fitting, with pants and a scarf suffice? Essentially, what are the
basics in the clothing and covering that a woman must observe in front
of others?

Answer: It is wajib that the entire body of a woman, with the exception
of the face and hands up to the wrist, is covered from non-Mahram men.
The clothing that has been mentioned, if it covers that part which is
wajib, then it is not a problem; but it is better to wear a chador[^2].
One must also refrain from that clothing which draws the attention of
non-Mahram men. ABKLMST

Answer: It is wajib that the entire body of a woman is covered from
non-Mahram men, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib, the face and hands must
also be covered. The clothing that has been mentioned, if it covers that
part which is wajib, then it is not a problem; but it is better to wear
a chador. One must also refrain from that clothing which draws the
attention of non-Mahram men. G

113 – Question: Is it allowed to wear a mantou [^3] and pants in which
the shape of the body is visible, in the presence of non-Mahram men?

Answer: From the point of hijab and covering, it is sufficient, but in
the event that showing the shape of the body would lead to lust or
corruption, then it must be covered. AKLMS

Answer: If it does not arouse or excite (others), and there is no
corruption (in wearing it), and in the event that it is not considered
as a zinat, then it is not a problem. L

Answer: In the event that it draws the attention of others (non-Mahram
men), then it is not permitted. G

114 – Rule: Women are not permitted to raise their sleeves (to show
their arms) to non-Mahram men in order to get an injection, have their
blood pressure checked, taking of the pulse, or for any other reason,
except in the case of necessity. ABGKLMST

115 – Question: I am a woman who must have an injection everyday and
there is a clinic near my house in which a man gives the injections.
However, there is another clinic that is further away in which a woman
also gives the injection, but because it is far away, I must travel by
car (to get to it). Am I allowed to go to the man to have the injection?

Answer: It is not allowed, except in the case of necessity. ABGKLMST

116 – Question: Are women allowed to go to a male doctor without
investigating and inquiring if there is a female doctor available or
not?

Answer: It is not allowed. AGKL

Answer: In the event that it is an emergency, it is not a problem

117 – Question: In our city, there is a female doctor and a male one,
but the male doctor is more specialized and experienced. Is it allowed
for women to go to the male doctor?

Answer: In the event that the female doctor can not treat the illness,
then it is not a problem. ABGKLMT

Answer: In the event that the male doctor can treat the patient better,
then it is not a problem. S

### B) Rules Related to Wearing Socks

118 – Question: Is it allowed to wear thick socks in which the shape of
the foot is visible in front of non-Mahram men, or not?

Answer: In the event that there is no corruption related to it, and the
skin of the feet does not show, then it is not a problem. AKLMS

Answer: If it leads to corruption and sin, then it is not permitted. B

Answer: In addition to this, the socks must not be of the type that
would be considered as a zinat. T

119 – Rule: Wearing of thin, see-thru socks in which the skin of the
feet is visible is not considered as covering, and therefore, women must
refrain from wearing these kinds of socks in the presence of non-Mahram
men. ABGKLMST

120 – Question: There are some women who wear pants, and then pull their
socks over top of the pants in such a way that the shape of the bottom
of their legs show – what is the ruling for wearing socks in this
manner?

Answer: It is not a problem. KLMS

Answer: In the event that it leads others to excitement or pleasure,
then it is not allowed. A

Answer: If it leads to sin or corruption, then it is not allowed. B

Answer: In the event that it does not lead to falling into sin and there
is no corruption, it is not a problem. G

121 – Question: What is the ruling for wearing flashy,
repelling-coloured clothing, and clothing that draws the attention of
others, in places where non-Mahram men are present, such as
universities, stores, etc…

Answer: With the assumption that the clothing is arousing, it is haram.
AKS

Answer: Although it is not a problem, however, Muslims must maintain
their dignity even in their (type of) clothing. B

Answer: With the assumption that the clothing is arousing, and leads one
to corruption, it is haram. G

Answer: If the clothing of the woman is clothing that is considered as
zinat, then it is wajib to cover it from the view of non-Mahram men, in
the same way that it is wajib to cover the body from their view. T

### C) Rules Related to the Chador

122 – Question: Is it permitted to wear that type of chador that in the
sunlight shows a bit of the body – in the presence of non-Mahram men?

Answer: In the event that the skin of the body does not show, and there
is no fear of falling into sin, it is not a problem. K

Answer: In all instances, the woman must cover her self in such a way so
as not to attract the attention of others (non-Mahram men). G

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed to wear such a
chador. M

123 – Question: What is the ruling on wearing a chador made of Sherman
(a type of fabric)?

Answer: In the event that according to the general population it not be
considered as drawing the attention (of others), it is not a problem.

Note: Attracting of attention (of others) is of two types: sometimes in
certain places, no women are known to wear this Sherman Chador, and in
this case a woman wearing it, would attract the attention (of others),
and thus, it is not allowed for her to wear it. In the second instance,
there may be a place where women wear the Sherman Chador, however, one
wears it in such a way so as to attract the attention of others, in
which case this too is not permitted.

124 – Rule: It is not allowed to wear those types of chadors in which
the hair or the shape of the hand of the woman shows through or to wear
these types of chador in which their hair shows or the shape of their
hands shows through, especially if there are non-Mahram men (in the
house), and women must refrain from wearing these types of chador.
ABGKLMS

125 – Question: If a woman wears a type of chador in which the shape of
her body can be seen through it, but she is wearing enough clothing
under the chador, for example, she is wearing a scarf on her head,
socks, and long sleeve clothing, then is it Islamically permissible (to
wear such a chador)?

Answer: In the event that the body (skin) can not be seen and by wearing
such a chador there is no fear of corruption, then it is not a problem.
ABGKLMS

Note: Those women who use chador as their hijab, in the following
examples, must be extra careful of their covering:

1. At the time of buying and selling something with non-Mahram men;
while fixing their chador in the presence of non-Mahram men; taking or
giving things to them; working in the presence of non-Mahram men,
whether it be in the house or outside of the house; washing clothes,
dishes or anything else in the presence of non-Mahram men; setting the
table and cleaning up after a meal, etc…

2. In all of the above mentioned examples, and those that are related to
these, it is recommended that women should wear sufficient clothing
underneath their chador, and that they make use of a scarf or maqnah.
Also, they should wear “add-on sleeves” in the event that the clothing
they are wearing under the chador is short sleeved so as to observe the
complete hijab and to gain the pleasure of Allah (SWT).

126 – Question: If a close family member proposes to a girl but she does
not accept his marriage proposal, then later on if these two meet each
other, and in the event the man is still single, how should the girl act
and behave in front of him? Should she observe more than that which
wajib in her hijab or be extra careful while speaking to him or not?

Answer: One must keep away from all those actions that may lead to
corruption and sins. AGK

Therefore: For example, according to the fatawa of the late Ayatullah
Khomeini, if keeping the face and hands open leads the young man to look
at her with the intention of lust, then she must cover her face and
hands and if speaking to him leads him to falling into corruption, then
she must also keep away from this.

### D) Rules Related to Beautification (Zinat)

**D) Rules Related to Beautification (Zinat)**[^4]

127 – Question: What is meant by beautification (zinat)?

Answer: Everything that the general public regards as beautification,
and people refer to it as such. AGKL

128 – Question: If a woman applies surma – not with the intention of it
being for beauty, but instead for the benefits that are in it, then in
this case, must it be concealed from the view of non-Mahram men?

Answer: If the general population regard it as being a means of
beautification then it must be concealed, whether one’s intention for
using it is beautification, or not. AGKL

Answer: It would be considered as zinat. B

Answer: If she applies the surma in such a way that even old women or
elderly women use it, then even if it is for beautification, it is not
necessary to cover it from non-Mahram men. T

129 – Question: Must a woman who has had her eyebrows shaped (hair
plucked from the eyebrows) cover them (in the presence of non-Mahram
men) in order to observe the true Islamic hijab, or is she permitted to
have them exposed?

Answer: She must cover them. AGK

Answer: If it is arousing or stimulating, then she must cover them, and
in other than this, according to Ihtiyat (she must cover it). B

Answer: In the event that according to the general public it would be
considered as a beautification, then it is necessary to cover it. L

Answer: If beautifying the face (either by plucking the eyebrows or
having them shaped) is done in such a way that even elderly women
perform it, then it is not necessary to cover it. T

130 – Rule: Women are allowed to cover only that part of the face or
hands that has some beauty on it, and it is not wajib that the rest of
the face (or hands) be covered. ALMT

Therefore: If a woman only has the bottom part of the eyebrows shaped,
then she can just cover that part of her face with her scarf or chador;
and in the event that the rest of her face does not have any
beautification on it, then it is not a problem if that portion is
exposed (without the zinat).

Answer: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, in all instances the face and hands
must be covered from non-Mahram men, whether they have any
beautification on them or not. G

Note: The following are some examples of beautification on the hands and
that must be covered from non-Mahram men:

Bangle

Bracelet

Ring (even if it is one’s wedding ring)

Long finger nails

Nail polish

Henna

Certain types of watches which are worn as a means of beautification

Certain types of gloves which are worn as a means of beautification

The following are considered as beautification for the face:

Applying surma

Shaping of the eyebrows

Applying artificial eyebrows

Using any kind of makeup

Having a nose-ring (as is the custom is some cultures)

Earrings

Other than these, anything else that the general population (of that
particular area) considers as beautification is also included and these
must all be covered while in the presence of non-Mahram men.

131 – Question: Do plucking the eyebrows for women constitute
beautification (zinat) or not? Also, if a woman has her eyebrows
plucked, must she cover her face from the view of non-Mahram men?

Answer: If the general public considers it as a beautification, then it
wajib to cover it from non-Mahram men. AL

Answer: Yes, it will be considered as zinat and it must be covered from
non-Mahram men. G

Answer: If the beautification of the face is done in such a way that is
common even among old women, then it is not wajib to cover it from
non-Mahram men. T

132 – Rule: In the ruling concerning the covering of the face and hands
while in the presence of non-Mahram men, in the event that one has any
beautification on – there is no difference between the non-Mahram man
being a family member or an outsider. ABGKLMT

Therefore: In gatherings, or when guests come to one’s house who are
family members or otherwise, women must either refrain from applying any
type of beautification on their face and hands, or else cover them in
front of the non-Mahram men.

133 – Question: I am a woman who wears a wedding ring (that is very
simple) and it is not for zinat, but rather for remembrance and loyalty
to my husband. Is it wajib for me to cover this from non-Mahram men?

Answer: To wear any kind of ring is considered as zinat, and therefore
it is wajib to cover it from the sight of non-Mahram men. AGK

Answer: If it is arousing or stimulating, then it must be covered and in
other than this, according to Ihtiyat (it must be covered). B

Answer: It is not wajib to cover those rings that women usually wear on
their hands, from the view of non-Mahram men. T

Answer: In the event that the general public consider it is a zinat, it
is necessary to cover it. L

134 – Question: Is there any difference in the type of beautification?
For example, if one applies a type of beautification that according to
her own custom is considered as zinat, however, for another group of
people, not only is it not considered as a zinat, rather it is taken as
something repulsive or ugly, then must this type of zinat be concealed
from non-Mahram men as well?

Answer: Beautifying one’s self is not related to beauty or ugliness, and
anything that the general public considers as zinat must be covered from
non-Mahram men. ABGKL

Answer: If the beautification on the face or hands is done in such a way
that is common even among old women, such as shaping the eyebrows or
applying surma, then it is not wajib for the woman to cover it from
non-Mahram men. In other than this scenario, it is wajib to cover it
(whether it is considered as beautiful or ugly). U

135 – Question: Is it allowed for men and women to put perfume on or
make themselves smell nice by other means, in the event that the smell
of it reaches non-Mahram?

Answer: There is no problem in applying perfume, but if the usage of it
for the woman leads to corruption, arousal or stimulation of (non-Mahram
men), then it is not allowed. AK

Question: If a woman applies perfume on herself for a non-Mahram man, is
it necessary for her to perform a Ghusl?

Answer: In the event that putting the perfume on is to attract the
attention of non-Mahram men, then it is a problem. G

Answer: In the above scenario, it is Mustahab for her to perform a
Ghusl. L

136 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, women must cover artificial or
synthetic hair, whether it has been joined to one’s own hair or if it is
a wig or hairpiece that has been placed on top of the head. Also it does
not make a difference if this joined hair is that of a man or a woman.
AGKL

Answer: It is wajib for a woman to cover (it) from non-Mahram men. B

Answer: If this action is considered as a beautification, then it is
wajib for her to cover it from non-Mahram men. M

137 – Question: What is the ruling for a woman beautifying herself for
other than her husband, in gatherings where there are only women present
such as in weddings, or dinner invitations only for women?

Answer: In the event that non-Mahram men do not see her, it is not a
problem. ABGKLMST

138 – Question: Is there a problem for women to wear shoes that make
noise, such that when one walks, non-Mahram men can her the sound of
them?

Answer: In the event that corruption can be associated with it, one must
refrain from it. K

139 – Rule: If a woman knows that a non-Mahram man will look at her face
or hands with the intention of lust, then even if she does not have any
zinat on them, she must cover these parts from him. AGKLMS

Answer: In the event that is leads or helps to commit a sin, then it is
wajib to cover (these two parts). B

140 – Rule: It is not allowed to keep the face and hands open with the
intention of making others fall into sin. AGKLS

In the event that it helps to commit a sin, it is not allowed. B

141 – Rule: Old women who do not have the hope of marrying - in addition
to their face and hands, can also keep a bit of their hair, hands up to
the elbows, and the legs up to the knees open, in the front of
non-Mahram men. S

142 – Rule: It is not allowed for a woman to go to a place where she
knows that non-Mahram men will look at her with the intention of lust.
AGK

In itself, going (to such a place) is not a problem, but she must
observe the proper clothing so as to not make others fall into sin. B

### E) Covering of a Woman in the Presence of Other Women

143 – Rule: A woman must cover her private parts from other women
however it is not wajib to cover the rest of the body in front of them.
ABGKLMS

144 – Rule: If a woman knows that other women will look at her body,
face or hands with the intention of lust, then it is wajib for her to
cover these parts from them. AGKLM

Therefore: In bathrooms, swimming pools, fitness or sports clubs, and
beauty parlors, if a woman sees that other women are looking at her with
the intention of lust, the she must immediately cover her body from
them.

145 – Rule: It is haram for a woman to reveal her body with the
intention of wanting other women to fall into sin. AGKLMS

That amount of the body that is wajib to cover is that (same) amount
that is haram to keep uncovered, even if others will not fall into a
haram act; butd those places that are not wajib to cover, if it leads or
helps to commit a sin, then it becomes wajib to cover them. B

146 – Rule: It is wajib for a woman to cover her private parts from
other women, even if they will not look at them with the intention of
lust, except in the case of necessity. ABGKLMS

Therefore: Just as has been mentioned in the previous section on
‘looking’, women are not permitted to show their private parts to a
doctor, unless it reaches to the stage of necessity. Even in the matter
of birth control, it is not allowed to expose one’s private parts in
front of a doctor, and one must refrain from this, except in the case of
a necessity. Also in this ruling, it does not make a difference if the
doctor is a woman either.

Note: Women must be cautious in places such as public showers that their
private parts are covered, and it is also not allowed to wear thin,
see-thru clothing in which one’s private parts are not covered properly.
In addition, to have x-rays taken (of certain areas), or a sonograph of
the womb, or have certain devices inserted into the womb or other
related things, if it necessitates the exposing of one’s private parts
in front of others, then it is not allowed and one must refrain from it
(unless it is in the case of necessity).

### F) Covering of a Woman in the Presence of Children

**(Those who have reached the age of Mumayyiz or not)(Those who have
reached the age of Mumayyiz or not)**

147 – Rule: It is not wajib to cover any part of the body, even so far
as the private parts, from a child (a girl or a Mahram or non-Mahram
boy) who has not yet reached the age of Mumayyiz. ABGKLMST

148 – Rule: A woman must cover her private parts from a girl child who
is Mumayyiz. ABGKLMS

149 – Rule: It is wajib for a woman to cover her private parts from a
boy who is a Mumayyiz child and her Mahram. ABGKLMS

150 – Rule: In the event that the Mumayyiz child is a boy and a
non-Mahram, then not only is it wajib for the women to cover their
private parts from him, but according to Ihtiyat Wajib, she must also
cover her entire body from him, with the exception of the face and
hands. BKGS

According to Ihtiyat Mustahab, a woman should cover her body and hair
from non-Baligh children who understands good and bad – meaning that he
has reached to such a stage that his look would be with lust (meaning
that he is Mumayyiz). However, it is not necessary for her to cover the
face and hands. M

Clothing that is haram for Men and Women
----------------------------------------

### 1. Notorious Clothing

**1. Notorious Clothing**[^5]

151 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed for men or
women to wear notorious clothing. This means whether it be the type of
clothing, type of stitching, its style, or its color or a combination of
any of these. The same rule applies to the way of wearing the clothing
as well. AKLM

Rather, it is haram to wear notorious clothing. BG

In the event that it leads to disgrace or degradation (of a person),
then it is haram to wear it. ST

152 – Question: What is meant by notorious clothing?

Answer 1: That clothing whose material, color, the way it is sewn, or
the way it is worn, is not common for that person to wear. BKL

Answer 2: That clothing that has certain qualities or characteristics
that attract the attention of the general public, causing one to stand
out in a crowd. K

Note: First of al, anything that is considered as clothing or a covering
can be considered under this ruling, therefore it includes clothing such
as shoes, a hat, a shirt, a skirt, a head scarf (for women), a Maqne,
socks, pants, a Mantou, etc… If any of these are such that they could be
classified as notorious clothing, then they are included in this ruling.

Secondly, it does not make a difference if the clothing is considered as
notorious clothing due to the kind or type (of clothing) or the color of
it, for example, those types of clothing whose color is loud or
repulsive, or the style of clothing which is common among the Punks, or
the manner in which it is worn.

Notorious clothing is that clothing which does not suit one’s appearance
nor fits his status. A

Note: These explanations of notorious clothing are the same as those
given by Ayatullah Khomeini in answer one above. The meaning of
notorious clothing, is clothing that is not the usual type that a
certain person wears. Thus, if an older person puts on clothing that is
the style for children, or a person puts on clothing that is not fitting
for his position or status, then that type of clothing would be referred
to as notorious clothing. Therefore, even if wearing a chador in foreign
countries, or wearing clothing (specific) to one area in another area
draws the attention of others, but if these types of clothing signify
the status of that person, then it is not a problem.

That clothing which is made of a certain kind of fabric or its color or
it has been stitched in such a way that it is not common for that person
to wear it and could lead to degradation or make him stand out, is
referred to as notorious clothing. G

The meaning of notorious clothing is that clothing which may lead one to
being proud or by wearing it, that person wants to be known as an
ascetic or one who has renounced all worldly pleasures. Whether it is by
means of the type of fabric, color, or the way it was stitched. However,
if in actuality a person’s intention is to wear simple clothing and he
does not have the intent of showing off, then not only is it permitted,
but rather it is a worthy action. M

Notorious clothing is that clothing which is made of a type of fabric or
color or the way in which it has been stitched is not common for that
person to wear and it is degrading or a disgrace (to the one who wants
to wear it). ST

### 2. Clothing which is Specific to One Gender

153 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is not allowed for women to
wear clothing that is specific to men, and similarly, it is not allowed
for men to wear clothing that is specific to women. KL

For a woman to wear clothing that is specific for a man and vice-versa
is problematic. A

If a man wears clothing that is specific for a woman or a woman wears
clothing that is specific for a man, then in the event that that
clothing would be classified as ‘Notorious’, then it is haram (to wear
such clothing); and in other than this scenario, according to Ihtiyat
Wajib, one must refrain from wearing such clothing. B

It is haram for women to wear clothing that is specifically for men, and
similarly, it is haram for men to wear clothing that is specifically for
women. G

(Makarim): It is not a problem for a man to wear the clothing of a woman
or for a woman to wear the clothing of a man, except in the event that
it necessitates a haram action, in which it becomes not permissible.
However, according to Ihtiyat Mustahab it is better that men and women
do not wear clothing that is specific to the other gender.

If a man wears women’s clothing, or a woman wears men’s clothing, then
in the event that that clothing becomes customary for them (they become
known as one who wears that type of clothing), then according to Ihtiyat
Wajib, it is haram to wear such clothing. S

154 – Rule: The meaning of clothing that is specific only to men is that
clothing which is normally only worn by men; and specific clothing for
women means that which is normally only worn by women. ABGKLMS

155 – Rule: The meaning of specific clothing includes all those things
which are classified as clothing – whether it be something that it is
visible when worn, for example a chador, skirt, scarf, or long socks –
(where are not allowed) for men; or a coat and pants (suit-type), men’s
shoes, etc… - (which are not common) for women. This also includes
clothing which may not be visible – such as men wearing women’s under
clothing or women wearing men’s under clothing. K

156 – Question: Further to what has been stated that according to
Ihtiyat Wajib, men must not wear women’s clothing, and women must not
wear men’s clothing, relating to this rule are some questions below:

Is this covering (of specific clothing) limited to being in public or
even in (one’s) privacy is it problematic?

In the event that it is problematic, then would it also be a problem for
men to wear women’s slippers if it is just inside the house?

Answer:

There is no difference between being in public or private. AK

According to Ihtiyat Wajib, if the clothing is considered as specific
(for one sex), then it is not permitted. AK

In privacy, it’s being haram is an area of question. B

1. In privacy, the condition of it being haram is not known. G

There is no problem. G

157 – Rule: According to Ihtiyat Wajib, it is haram to wear specific
clothing, whether it is in privacy and there is no one else to see the
person, or it is in public. Also, it does not make a difference in it
being haram if the one who sees the person wearing the clothing is a man
or woman, a Mahram or a non-Mahram. AK

In privacy, it’s being haram is an area of question. B

In the event that there is no one to see the person (in privacy), the
condition of it being haram is not known. G

158 – Rule: It is not a problem to wear non-specific clothing, for
example that clothing which the common people would regard as not being
specific to men or women (such as pants, certain types of shirts, etc…).
BGKLMST

Note: Just by a clothing being labeled “for women” or “for men”, does
not make that clothing specific, rather, the usage of the clothing being
only for men or women makes clothing that is specific (to that sex). As
an example, the wearing of slippers in the house that the common people
acknowledge to be worn by both men and women is not a problem, and thus
either one of them can wear those slippers, even if they are referred to
as women’s slippers or men’s slippers. However, if there is a pair of
slippers that the common people acknowledge as only for women (such as
slippers that were asked about in the previous question), then it is not
allowed for men to wear them, even if it is only for a moment (such as
to get something from the kitchen).

159 – Rule: It is not allowed, according to Ihtiyat Wajib, to wear
specific clothing no matter what the reason is – whether it is for
simply trying it on, playing or acting in the theatre, cinema, showing
off or anything else. KL

It is a problematic area for a woman to wear clothing that is specific
to men. A

It is haram for a man to wear clothing that is specifically for women
and similarly for a woman to wear clothing that is specifically for men,
however until the point that this is not regarded as notorious clothing,
this being haram is an area to ponder upon. B

Question: Is it permitted for a woman who is acting in the theatre or in
a play and is playing the role of a man, to wear the clothing of a man
if she is performing in front of women?

Answer: As long as non-Mahram Men will not see her, it is not a problem.
G

160 – Question: Are men allowed to use things of zinat that women
usually wear – such as a ring, watch, bangle, belt, necklace, etc…
keeping in mind that the wearing of clothing specific to women is not
allowed for men?

Answer: One must refrain from wearing anything that goes against one’s
character. A

Answer: It is haram for men and women to beautify themselves with that
which is used as a beautifier for the opposite sex. B

Answer: It is not allowed for men to use any kind of beautification or
clothing that is specific to women. G

Answer: If the man is considered to resemble a woman or the woman is
considered to resemble a man, then it is not permitted. L

161 – Question: What is the ruling for a woman who cuts her hair short
such that she resembles a man, and also what is the ruling for a man to
grow his hair long such that he resembles a woman?

Answer: If it considered that the man resembles the woman or the woman
resembles the man then it is not allowed. L

### 3. Arousing or Stimulating Clothing

162 – Rule: It is haram for a woman or a man to wear any type of
clothing that the common people would consider as arousing or
stimulating, or one that attracts the attention of non-Mahrams. ABGKL

It is problematic to wear clothing that can lead to degradation, loss of
one’s self-respect or corruption. M

163 – Rule: Arousing or stimulating clothing can be due to its color,
style, type of cloth, or any other thing. Thus, it is possible that a
woman’s headscarf, mantou, maqnah or shoes are such that they attract
the attention of non-Mahram Men and are stimulating. In these instances,
it is not permissible to wear them. ABGKLM

Note: The meaning of arousing or stimulating is related to the type of
clothing and not the person wearing it. Thus if according to the common
people a certain type of clothing is considered as arousing, then it is
not allowed to wear it, even if one or a few people would not be aroused
or stimulated by it.

Therefore: Clothing such as certain types of gloves with lace, chador, a
thin scarf with lace, things that hand (around a person’s neck) such as
flowers, and other things of beautification such as gold stitching or
lace stitching on the headscarf, chador or mantou, etc… or placing
buttons on a specific part of the clothing, keeping the buttons of the
clothing open even if underneath there may be clothing, etc… - all of
these kinds of clothing, if they are considered as stimulating or
arousing, or they attract the attention of others, then it is haram and
one must refrain from wearing these (types of clothing).

164 – Question: Are men allowed to beautify their faces with make-up
that women use? Also, are men allowed to pluck the hair under their
eyebrows?

Answer: It is haram for a man and woman to beautify themselves with
those things that are used by the opposite sex. B

Answer: It is problematic. G

Answer: If the man is considered to resemble a woman or a woman is
considered to resemble a man, then it is not allowed. L

### 4. Usurped Clothing

165 – Rule: It is not allowed to wear clothing that has been usurped,
and according to Islamic law, it is haram; and the Salat recited with
this clothing will also be void. ABGKST

It is haram to wear usurped clothing, and according to Ihtiyat Wajib,
Salat recited with this clothing will also be void. LM

166 – Rule: If a type of clothing is made or purchased from money that
was usurped, then it has the same ruling as usurped clothing and thus,
the wearing of them is not allowed. ABGKLMS

167 – Rule: Even if a part of the clothing is usurped, then the wearing
of it is not allowed either, even if it is just a single stitch, a
button, a zipper or the lining of the material. ABGKLMS

168 – Rule: It is not allowed for a person who has Khums pending on
him/her to buy any clothing from that money on which Khums has not yet
been paid, since it will be considered as usurped, and the wearing of it
is not allowed; also the Salat recited in it is void. (Except those who
have received the permission of the Islamic Ruler, or his
representative.) ABGKLMST

### 5. Clothing Specific to the Non-Muslims

169 – Rule: It is haram to wear that clothing which only the non-Muslims
make use of. GKL

In the event that it endorses the non-Muslims or makes them powerful,
then it is not allowed. A

According to Ihtiyat, one must refrain from imitating the non-Muslims. B

Therefore: It is not permitted for a Muslim man or woman to wear
clothing that is commonly worn by Punks, clergymen of the Church,
Rabbis, the Hindus, or other groups of non-Muslims.

170 – Rule: There is no problem in wearing that clothing which is common
to both Muslims and non-Muslims. BGKLMST

171 – Question: What is the view of Islam on the necktie?

Answer 1: The necktie is the practice of the Christian religion, which
has unfortunately become widespread amongst the Muslims. G

Answer 2: The necktie is one of the symbols of the Christians, and it is
incumbent on the Muslims to refrain from using it. G

Answer: The necktie is related to and is one of the symbols of the
Christians, thus, it is better that the Muslims refrain from wearing it,
even though it is no longer prevalent among the Muslims as being a
symbol for the Christians. L

[^1]: In the following rulings, the spouse is an exception.

[^2]: The Chador is the type of ‘hijab’ that is commonly worn by Iranian
women and consists of a large, usually black cloth wrapped around the
body.

[^3]: A long overcoat type covering for women that is commonly worn in
Iran.

[^4]: It should be noted that the meaning of Zinat refers to those
decorations and beautification that a woman applies to herself, and not
that which is natural. (Translator)

[^5]: Please note that the term Libas al-Shuhrah has been translated
here as Notorious Clothing for lack of a better term in English. Please
refer to the list of definitions at the end of this book for a detailed
explanation.


