The Invasion of Mecca
=====================

In the 8th year of HIJRA, war started between the Muslims and the Roman
army, hence the battle of MU'TA. The Muslims were defeated and had to
retreat. When QURAYSH heard of that defeat, their sick mentality
motivated them to violate the peace treaty. They thought the Muslims
were no longer strong, and that it would be easy to defeat them. They
attacked an Arab tribe that was an ally of the Muslims. They killed some
of its members and captured others. Those who managed to escape informed
the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) who was greatly vexed at the violation of the
treaty. He promised to teach the idolaters a lesson in morals.

QURAYSH was worried and tried to make up for its wrong deed. The
QURAYSHIS sent their envoy to the Prophet to apologize, but their
efforts were in vain.

When time was suitable for the Prophet's (P.B.U.H.) plans, he mobilized
his forces and ordered the people to keep their intention secret so that
no news of the invasion would reach QURAYSH.

It was an important mission: to achieve victory and to deprive the
enemy of its weapons. Many would embrace Islam as soon as they were
aware of its sublime teachings. It was necessary to achieve that without
shedding any blood.

On the 10th of the month of Ramadan of that year, the Prophet
(P.B.U.H.) ordered his army to set out towards Mecca. They reached a
place near it and set up their camp. They were ordered to burn fires
near their tents. ABU SUFYAN and some of his companions saw the fires
and were stunned at the many burning spots. He was at a loss as to what
to do when the Prophet's uncle AL-ABBAS came by and saw him. He said to
him, "Are you amazed at these fires? It is Mohammed's Army waiting to
enter Mecca in the morning. No one can stop it".

ABU SUFYAN trembled in fear on hearing those words. He said to
AL-ABBAS, "Take me to the Prophet, please". AL-ABBAS took him to the
Prophet's tent and he had no other choice but to profess his faith in
Allah and to pretend to become a Muslim only out of fear of the Muslims'
army. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) considered ABA SUFYAN'S "conversion" to
Islam as a benefit to avoid the shedding of blood. He allowed him to
announce in Mecca, on behalf of the Prophet, that whoever entered the
sacred Mosque, or his (Prophet's) own house, or ABI SUFYAN'S house and
closed his door, would be safe.

ABU SUFYAN returned to Mecca and told the people about the Muslims'
army which was impossible for anyone to fight. He conveyed to them the
words of the Prophet regarding their safety. The people took refuge in
their homes and closed their doors. They heard the Muslims shout:
"ALLAHU AKBAR!" "Allah is the Greatest!".

They entered the holy city of Mecca with the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) riding
his white mule, surrounded by Muslims from every side. They went round
the KA'BA as in HAJJ rituals. The people of Mecca watched and little by
little left their homes and gathered near the sacred House. They saw the
Prophet (P.B.U.H.) and Imam Ali (as) break the idols and crush them into
pieces. All the images were removed and smashed. The Prophet then stood
near the KA'BA'S gate. He praised Allah and recited some QUR'ANIC
verses, then he addressed the people of Mecca. He said: "What do you
expect me to do to you now?" In a feeble voice, choked with tears, they
said, "As a brother and son of noble brother would do".

They confessed how cruel they were to him and how badly they had
treated him. However, they hoped for his forgiveness and kindness. He
(P.B.U.H.) said, "You treated me badly, accused me of lies and insanity.
You chased me out of my home town and house. You waged wars against me…"
The infidels and the idolaters were overwhelmed by fear and could not
utter a ward. They believed it was the due time for the Prophet to seek
revenge against them, and that they would suffer the same torture the
early Muslims had suffered at their hands. However, the Prophet
(P.B.U.H.) never thought of revenge nor of torture. He alone was looking
up to a promising future for Islam and the Muslims.

He added, "Regarding myself, I shall forget the past and forgive you.
Go now, you are all free". None of the infidels expected to hear the big
news and sense such kindness. They were now assured of their safety.
Most of them embraced Islam immediately. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) stayed
in holy Mecca for a few days to arrange its affairs. He appointed one of
the believers to administer the community. He then left the holy city
with his followers, returning to AL-MEDINA.

**CONFRONTATION BETWEEN THE MUSLIMS AND THE ROMANS**

Following Mecca's invasion, Islam became a major force to reckon with;
oppression came to an end. Islam spread throughout the country, and the
Muslims achieved victory in many battles such as HUNAIN and Yemen. The
worst tyrants of those days were the rulers of Persia and Rome, the
greatest two states with the mightiest armies in the world. The Romans,
only few years before then, had achieved victory over the Persians,
hence they considered themselves more powerful and more mighty.
Suddenly, they had now to face a challenging force: that of Islam.

The arrogant usually fear the revolutionary movements, specially the
ideological ones; hence, the Romans decided to end the newly born Muslim
force. The Muslims got the news of the mighty Roman army of 40,000
fighters heading towards their borders. Some of the Arab tribes of the
distant borders joined forces with them.

The Muslims received such news while they were suffering from a
shortage in food and had not yet harvested their crops. However, the
worshippers of Allah, the true believers, knew that the defense of Islam
had a priority over all other matters. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) ordered
them to prepare themselves to fight the Romans. Few days later, some
30,000 Muslims made their approach towards the war front. Some could not
find the necessary weapons and, hence, could not join the Prophet in
this expedition of TABUK. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) left Ali (as) behind in
the city to protect it against sudden plots of the hypocrites. He
(P.B.U.H.) said to him, "You are to me as HAROUN (Aaron) was to MUSA
(Moses), only no Prophet shall come after me".

Suffering the hardship of the journey, the Muslims' army reached TABUK
to find out that none of the Roman soldiers were there: they were scared
to death and withdrew inside the country in order to avoid being
defeated by the Muslim army. The Muslim spent a few days in TABUK where
the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) signed friendly treaties with some of the
dwellers of that area. Then the Muslim army made its way back to
AL-MEDINA where news of their victory was ahead of them, and people
gathered to welcome them back.

The news of the fleeing Romans spread at large and the Arab tribes felt
no more fear of the arrogant enemies. The Muslim army became a major
force in support of all oppressed people. The suffering cries of AMMAR
son of YASSIR, under torture, the moaning of BILAL the ABYSSINIAN on the
burning sands of the desert outside Mecca, the shedding of HAMZA'S blood
(the Prophet's uncle) and the blood of other hundreds of martyrs did not
go in vain. All became a fruitful tree for humanity. They enjoyed the
rewards of safety and were freed from slavery. Their pure blood injected
new blood in the veins of the Muslim heroes.

**THE FAREWELL PILGRIMAGE AND THE IMPORTANT MESSAGE**

On the 10th year of HIJRA, Allah ordered His Messenger to make his last
pilgrimage and proclaim it to all the Muslims. The Muslims heard of the
intended pilgrimage of the holy Prophet and joined him from all over
their countries. They were more than a hundred thousands who performed
the rituals according to Allah's instructions. When the rituals were
over, the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) was ordered by Allah to convey to them a
very important message. The following QUR'ANIC verse was revealed in
this regard:

{O Prophet! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and
if you do not do it, then you have not delivered His message at all, and
Allah will protect you from the people; surely Allah does not guide the
unbelieving people}. [AL-MAIDAH: 67].

He (P.B.U.H.) ordered the Muslims to gather at a place called 'GHADIR
KUHM". Those who were ahead returned, and those who were behind joined
the gathering. A pulpit of animals' saddles was prepared and a sun-shade
of palm-leaves was fixed on it. the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) got up the pulpit
and addressed the big gathering of tens of thousands of Muslims. He
said: "…. I have been called upon (to leave this world) and will soon
comply. Allah has ordered me to deliver to you this message: I am
leaving among you two precious trustees. One is the Book of Allah, the
holy QUR'AN. The other is my household (AHL AL-BAYT). The two will never
separate…." Then he added, "Am I not your master?" They all answered,
"Yes, you are!" He then took Ali's hand and raised it up for all to see
and said, "To whomsoever I am the master, Ali is his master. O Allah! Be
the friend to Ali's friends and the enemy of Ali's enemies".

All the Muslims heard the message and came to congratulate Ali and to
swear the oath of allegiance to him as a successor to the Prophet
(P.B.U.H.). However, many forgot (or pretended to forget) that
declaration and went astray. They were deviated by satanic
motivations.

**THE CRUCIAL HOURS**

Shortly after returning to AL-MEDINA, the Messenger of Allah fell sick.
His greatest concern during his illness was the affairs of the Muslims.
He continued preaching to the Muslims, telling them what their religious
duties were. Yet some of them were thinking of their own personal gains
and were heedless of the Prophet's advice. The Prophet was saddened by
their indifference to and negligence of his words. A very small number
of faithful followers of Islam, besides his cousin Ali and his daughter
FATIMA, sat crying near his bed while the others were waiting for his
demise in order to achieve their own goal of dominating the Muslims'
affairs and proclaiming their leadership. They were the same men who
only a few weeks ago had congratulated Ali (as) at GHADIR KHUM and swore
allegiance to him as their leader. They managed to convince the
simple-minded Muslims who quickly forgot the Prophet's words and
advice.

They even attacked the house of the Prophet's daughter with the
intention to burn it to the ground and caused her a wound in order to
force her husband Ali (as) to submit to their domination. They imposed a
house arrest on him for many years, thus they paved the way for
MU'AWIYAH and his infidel son YAZID to seize the Muslims' leadership.

During his sickness, sadness and worries wrapped the city of the
messenger of Allah, AL-MEDINA AL-MUNAWARA. The people prayed to Allah
for the recovery of their Prophet (P.B.U.H.), but it was Allah's will
for him to pass away on the 28th of SAFAR (Lunar Calendar), while his
holy head leaned motionless on Ali's chest.

Ali (as) prepared the holy body for funeral and burial the following
day.

Centuries later, we still listen to his words and obey them: "… I am
leaving among you two precious trustees. One is the Book of Allah, the
holy QUR'AN. The other is my household (AHL AL-BAYT). The two will never
separate from one anther…" We pray to Allah to guide us and to help us
observe the Prophet's will and follow in the footsteps of his righteous
companions and be followers of His Messenger and his household, his AHL
AL-BAYT, peace and blessing of Allah be on them. Praise is due to Allah
the Lord of the Worlds.

A SPECIAL NOTE

I- The reader will come across words such as:

a. ABU, ABA and ABI.

b. ABDULLAH , ABDALLAH , ABDILLAH.

The change of the vowel is related to grammar rule regarding subjective
or objective case of noun. II- P.B.U.H and A.S.

The letters stand for words: Peace be upon him and ALAIHI, ALAIHA,
ALAIHUM AL-SALAM: Peace on him, her, them. III- BINT means daughter of …
IBN means son of

**IMAM ALI (A.S.)

** **LINEAGE**

IMAM ALI (A.S), the son of ABI TALIB, was born on the 13th of RAJAB
(Lunar Calendar) 23 years prior to the prophet's immigration to YATHRIB,
inside the holy KA'ABA in holy Mecca. His mother was FATIMA BINT ASAD of
the HASHIMI family. He enjoyed martyrdom on the 21st of the month of
Ramadan in the mosque of KUFA (Iraq) and was buried in holy NAJAF, in
the year 40 of HIJRA.

**THE MOSQUE:

ALLAH'S SACRED HOUSE**

It is the first place set up for the worship of Allah in the holy city
of Mecca. People from many far places make their journeys towards it to
pray to Allah and seek His blessing. Has anyone ever heard of a child
born in this sacred House? {…. This is Allah's grace, He gives it to
whom He pleases, and Allah is Ample- giving} [MAIDA: 54]. Yes, it was
Allah's grace bestowed on one born in His Sacred House.

**THE FAVOURED CHILD**

FATIMA, the daughter of ASAD IBN ABDI MUNAF, was a righteous woman who
believed in Allah. She was the wife of ABI TALIB, the uncle of Prophet
Mohammed (P.B.U.H). She was the only woman who gave birth to her baby at
such a Sacred House of Allah. She gave birth to her son in the holy
mosque set up by Prophet IBRAHIM (AS) many thousands of years ago. The
holy QUR'AN says, {And We enjoined IBRAHIM and ISMAEL, saying: Purify My
House for those who visit (it) and those who abide (in it) for devotion,
and for those who bow down, and for those who prostrate}. [The Cow:
125].

The holy mosque of KA'ABA is the most sacred place in the world. It was
a clear Divine sign of Allah's will for a child to be born in the holy
House. A child was, indeed, born in that place. The parents were very
happy at his birth. They called him Ali. The name signifies highness and
sublime office in conformity with the sacred place where this unique
childbirth took place. At the very first moment of his birth, his mother
FATIMA BINT ASAD realized his unique status. Similarly, her relatives
and family members predicted such a high office. He was a healthy,
quiet, active, and dynamic baby. His mother sometimes used to call him
"HAYDER", (this name is attributed to a lion). He grew up as brave as a
lion, nothing could frighten him. He was polite and loving. He treated
his parents kindly and was ready to help whoever needed some help.
Everyone loved him for his good qualities.

It was the Divine will to expose one of the Muslim heroes. Since his
early childhood, he grew up in the house of the Messenger of Allah
(P.B.U.H). The story of his childhood caused all people to wonder: He
was born in the most sacred house of and was raised by the best of
Allah's creatures: Mohammed son of ABDILLAH.

In those days, the people of Mecca worshipped idols and bowed to the
stone and wooden objects which could do them neither good nor harm. They
used to drink wines and gamble. Since childhood, Ali never turned to
those idols nor bowed to them. He never took to bad deeds since he was
in the company of the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H) who taught him every
good quality. He would listen to him, comprehend his words, and act
accordingly. Ali was not yet 10 years old when Allah the Almighty chose
Mohammed to dewier the Divine mission of Islam. Ali was the first male
to believe in his prophet-hood and to support him in his struggle.

The bounties of Allah bestowed on him since his birth in the Sacred
House, then his stay at the Prophet's house, then his being a pioneer in
believing in the religion of Islam. He was chosen for a special role; to
become one of Allah's signs. {Surely Allah has chosen him in preference
over you, and He has increased him abundantly in knowledge and in
physique, and Allah grants His kingdom to whomsoever He pleases, and
Allah's is Ample-giving, knowing} [The Cow: 247]. Ali (as) was of a
medium height, rather stout, full of energy and activity that was to the
benefit of Islam, and in support of the Messenger of Allah. Some
idolaters used to slander the Prophet (P.B.U.H) who tried to avoid them,
while Ali was always ready to confront them. He was ready to punish
whoever tried to hurt the Prophet.

**AND WARN YOUR NEAREST KIN**

The Prophet (P.B.U.H) was ordered by Allah to warn his relatives and to
invite them to Islam he, therefore, invited them to his house and said
to them, "Allah has sent me to you to convey to you His message. You
should give up the worship of idols. You should worship Allah the One
God, the Lord of the world. Who among you supports me in my mission and
thus be my Minster and successor?" No one answered him except Ali (as)
who was then a teenager. He stood up and said, "I do believe in your
message, and I do support you, O Messenger of Allah!"

It became common knowledge that Ali would be his minister and
successor. The event spread among all people and became another of
Allah's favors bestowed on Ali (as).

{And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah,
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants}. [The Cow: 207]. When the
Messenger of Allah decided to immigrate from Mecca to YATHRIB (AL-MEDINA
AL-MUNAWRAH) at the order of Allah, he (P.B.U.H) informed Ali (as) of
his intention. It was a dangerous night; the armed QURAYSHIS surrounded
the Prophet's house and decided to assassinate him at dawn. Ali slept in
the Prophet's bed and was not afraid of exposing himself to the
dangerous attack. The Prophet (P.B.U.H) managed to leave the house
safely.

The previously quoted QURANIC verse refers to this great sacrifice of
Ali for the sake of Allah. It was again a Divine favor bestowed on him.
{And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command when they were
patient, and they were certain of Our communications}. [AL-SAJDA: 24].
At the order of Allah the Almighty, the Prophet (P.B.U.H) performed the
marriage of his daughter FATIMA to Ali who the most pious of all, next
only to the Messenger of Allah.

Ali was endowed with a sound knowledge and great talents. Fatima was
most pious and obedient to Allah. Both were of unique example that
should be followed. Through marriage, they gave birth to the purified
Imams whose names and qualities were revealed to the Prophet (P.B.U.H).
This is how Allah rewards His righteous servants. Allah the Almighty
gave IBRAHIM the good news of a son and a grandson, although IBRAHIM was
then very old. {Then We helped those who believed against their enemy,
and they became the uppermost}. [AL-SAFF: 14].

Following the Prophet's immigration to YATHRIB (AL-MEDINA
AL-MUNAWARAH), the infidels waged wars against the Muslims, and many
battles took place. Some Muslims were afraid of fighting those battles,
and some would flee the battlefield at the crucial moments. Only Ali was
always ready to help. He created fear in the heart of the enemy. His
bravery and might helped achieve victory for the Muslims in many battles
and helped in the spread of Islam. He managed to defeat the enemies one
after the other. For instance, in the battle of the Trench (or
AL-AHZAB), AMRO IBN WIDD, the most brave of the QURAYSHIS, managed to
cross the Trench that the Muslims had dug round the city to halt the
enemy's advance. He challenged the Muslims and called them to fight him.
No one dared come out to fight him except Ali. It was a crucial moment.
The infidels' greatest goal was to confront and destroy the Muslims. The
enemy surrounded them from all sides. Ali came forward and faced AMR.
With one stroke of his sword, he killed him and achieved a great victory
for the Muslims and a great defeat for the infidels. Similarly, during
the battles of BADR, UHUD, KHAIBAR, and HUNAIN, Ali was always nearby to
achieve victory, destroying the enemy of Islam.

Regarding Ali's role in the battle of the Trench, the Prophet used to
say, "Ali's stroke in that battle was better than the worship of all
mankind".

**THE HYPOCRITES**

The hypocrites in AL-MEDINA were more dangerous than the enemy: they
lived among the Muslims and expressed belief in their tongues. But they
secretly conspired against the Muslims. They even spied for the enemy.
During the battle of TABUK, the Prophet (P.B.U.H) put Ali in charge of
AL-Medina to protect it against the plots of the hypocrites. The
hypocrites, who were vexed by the Prophet's decision, spread the rumor
that the Prophet was displeased with Ali and no longer desired is
presence near him in the battles.

Ali heard the rumor and felt very sad. He followed the Prophet
(P.B.U.H) who was few miles away and expressed his wish to accompany
him. He also informed him of the hypocrite's rumor. The Prophet said to
him, "O Ali! Do not listen to such rumors. Are you not pleased to be to
me s HAROUN was to MUSA when he appointed him in his place? You are to
me as was HAROUN to MUSA". ALI felt at ease when he heard the Prophet's
words, and people perceived the high status of Imam Ali as a
representative of the Messenger of Allah and his successor.

**THE CHRISTIAN DELEGATION**

On the 24 of DHIL-HIJJA (Lunar Calendar), the 10th year of HIJRA, a
Christian delegation of 60 prominent bishops and priests came to
AL-Medina to challenge the Prophet (P.B.U.H) and to put his prophet-hood
to test. They entered the Prophet 's Mosque. Fourteen of them were of
high office, dressed in splendid attire, carrying their crosses. They
tolled their bells and performed their prayers. The Muslims were angry
but the Prophet calmed them and said, "Leave them now, we shall have a
talk with them later".

The Prophet invited them to embrace Islam. He ordered them to give up
the worship of the cross, not to eat pork, and to consider Jesus as a
Prophet, not as a deity. When they asked him who the father of Jesus
was, he recited to them this QURANIC verse: {Surely the likeness of ISA
(Jesus) is with Allah as the likeness of Adam: He created him from dust
then said to him: Be! And he was. This is the truth from your Lord, so
do not be (one) of those who dispute (about it)}. [AL-IMRAN: 59].

But the Christian delegation insisted on calling Jesus a deity, so the
Prophet was ordered by Allah to challenge them, through prayer, top
invoke a curse on the liars. The QURANIC verse 61, chapter AL-IMRAN, was
then revealed. The delegation asked for time to discuss the matter. When
they were alone, their chief said, "If Mohammed comes with the noble
persons of his tribe, then he is not a Prophet, and we can challenge
him. If he comes with his nearest and dearest, then we had better not
challenge him because he is a real Prophet; otherwise, if we challenge
him, nothing will remain from Christianity".

The holy QURAN says, {But whoever disputes with you in this matter
after what has come to you of the knowledge, say, "Come! Let us call our
sons and your sons, our women and your women, and our souls (nearest and
dearest) and your souls (nearest and dearest), then let us humbly pray
and so lay the curse of Allah on the liars}. [AL-IMRAN: 61].

The next morning, while the Christians were waiting, they were stunned
to see the Prophet (P.B.U.H) leading his household. He came carrying
AL-HUSAIN and holding AL-HASAN'S hand (his grandsons). Fatima (daughter,
mother, and wife) followed her father the Prophet, and her husband Ali
followed her, carrying the banner of Islam. Ali was the soul nearest and
dearest to the Prophet (P.B.U.H). The members of the delegation were
afraid of praying, and they were ready to pay the JIZIA (Non-Muslims'
tax) and thus have the right to keep their own beliefs. They promised
not to conspire against the Muslims.

Through that QURANIC verse (AL-IMRAN:61), all Muslims and non-Muslims
became aware of Ali's and his family's sublime office. His two sons
according to the book of Allah (AL-IMARAN: 61) are the sons of the
Prophet (P.B.U.H), and Ali in this very verse is the Prophet's soul.
Such a fact is the greatest favor of Allah bestowed Ali (as) whom Allah
the Almighty designated for a sublime role. {And when We made the House
a pilgrimage for people and a (place of) security, and (said): Appoint
for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing place of IBRAHIM. And
We enjoined to IBRAHIM and ISMAEL saying: Purify My House for those who
go round it and for those who abide in it and for those who bow and
prostrate}. [The Cow: 125].

Islam achieved a complete victory when holy Mecca was invaded in the
8th year of HIJRAH. The holy Prophet ordered Ali to climb on his
shoulder and remove all the idols that were placed on its rooftop. All
the idols were thrown down and crushed into pieces. It was not an easy
task to break down the idols which the Arab tribes worshipped. But Ali
was not afraid of breaking all of them. Just as he had destroyed their
brave men with is sword, he destroyed the idols they used to worship. It
was another favor of Allah bestowed on him to accomplish such a task.

One day the Messenger of Allah said to him, "O Ali! No one knows you
more than I do, and no one knows me more than you do". The Prophet
(P.B.U.H) was quite aware of Ali's sublime status and his important
future role as a truthful successor and protector of Islam and the Book
of Allah. He would do his best to teach the Muslims the holy QURAN and
its interpretation. He would be the head of the believers of the Muslim
community. The infallible Imams would be from his progeny. He (P.B.U.H)
was sure that Islamic science and knowledge would spread through Ali and
his successors. He used to say, "Ali is always with the Truth, and the
Truth is always with Ali. Ali is the best listener who comprehends what
he hears".

The Prophet was sure of Ali's sublime role because Allah the Almighty
had informed him of it, hence he became his best teacher. He kept him
near him to teach him all that he knew. He taught him the QURANIC
sciences and ordered him to keep a record of those sciences in a book.
Ali had that book, a precious treasure kept by his sons and grandsons,
the blessed Imams (peace be upon them all). {O Apostle! Deliver that
which has been revealed to you from your Lord; and if you do not, then
you have not delivered His message (at all), and Allah will protect you
from the people}. [AL-MAIDAH: 67].

It became necessary for the Messenger of Allah, to inform the people of
Ali's sublime office. When the above mentioned verse was revealed to
him, he was on his way back from his last pilgrimage to holy Mecca in
the 10th year of HIJRAH. He was then accompanied by more than 120,000
pilgrims from different Islamic places.

Although he (P.B.U.H) performed his mission during the period of 23
years, this QURANIC verse (AL-MAIDAH: 67) refers in particular to a
certain message; it was: to appoint his successor, and that it equaled
all his efforts in calling people to Islam during all those long years
in holy Mecca and Medina. Hence, he immediately stopped the caravans of
pilgrims at a place a few miles away from Mecca. He then ordered those
who were ahead to come back to the place of gathering which is known as
"GHADIR [SWAMP] KHUM", and those who were behind to join the others.

A pulpit with a sunshade was set up for him. He got up the pulpit and
addressed the attendants. He said, in his long and important sermon, "Am
I not the master of every believer?" They all said, "Yes, your are". He
then took Ali's hand and raised it up for all to see Ali and declared
him as his successor in authority. He said, "To whomsoever I am the
master, Ali is his master. O Lord! Befriend Ali's friends, and be the
enemy of his enemies. O Lord! Help whoever helps him, and defeat whoever
confronts him. O Lord! Keep the truth at his side wherever he turns".

All the believers then came and congratulated Ali (as). The first to do
so was UMAR IBN AL-KHATAB who said to Ali, "Rejoice, O son of ABI TALIB!
You have become my master (guardian) and the master of every believing
man and woman".

It was a major event witnessed by tens of thousands of pilgrims who
performed the HAJJ that year. In fact, Ali (as) was one of Allah's clear
signs, some of Allah's treasure spared for the sake of Islam, and for
the benefit of Muslims. He comes next to the Messenger of Allah. The
infallible Imams are chosen from his and Fatima's offspring.

There are many QURANIC verses that refer to those who are worthy of
Islamic leadership. Some of them refer to the pioneers who embraced
Islam, and surely Ali (as) was the first. Other verses refer to those
who struggle bravely and who do not flee the battle field; those who
love to struggle for the sake of Allah more than they love their wives,
children, and wealth. Everyone knew that Ali was at the head of such
opponents of the enemies of Allah. He was the most pious, the most brave
and the nearest to the Messenger of Allah. They were all sure that he
was qualified for the Muslims' leadership after the Prophet (P.B.U.H).

The Messenger of Allah informed all the Muslims of Ali's sublime
qualities and status, so that nobody would doubt it. the holy QURAN
says: {…. Such is the grace of Allah; He gives it to whomsoever He
please, and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace}. [The Iron: 21]. In fact,
the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H) and Ali (as) are the greatest bounties
bestowed by Allah on His creatures. Had people been aware of such
bounties, they would have enjoyed Allah's full bounties and blessings,
and He would have helped them to enjoy every kind of knowledge and true
civilization. The holy QURAN says,

{Had they kept to the (right) path, we would have certainly given them
to drink of abundant water}. [Jinn: 16]. The Muslims today are in a dire
need for such a sublime example in order to follow his footsteps and act
accordingly. Ali was a pioneer in accepting Islam. Prejudice and
fanatism of the era of ignorance did not tarnish him. He wholeheartedly
loved Islam and struggled day and night for its sake. He suffered from
the infidels' harms and was ready to die in the Prophet's bed in order
to save the Messenger of Allah from the infidels' plot. He participated
in all the Muslim battles and was the most brave. He feared no human
being and was firm in his belief in the Almighty, the One and only Lord
of the World. He used to say, "If the unseen is uncovered to me, my
certain belief (in Allah) will not increase (it is quite perfect)".

Being such a unique figure in faith and bravery, Imam Ali raised his
children AL-HASAN, AL-HUSAIN, and ZAINAB, besides his companions: MALIK
AL-ASHTAR and MAYTHAM AL-TAMMAR, to be embodiments of his school of
thought, the most perfect school whose headmaster was born in the Sacred
House of Allah and who enjoyed martyrdom in the sanctuary of a mosque
while he was performing his prayers at the early dawn.

His school is the school of struggle in words and in deeds for the sake
of the truth and justice, for the sake of Islam, and for the sake of
Allah. It is the school of the winners in this life and in the
hereafter.

Did the murderer ABDUL RAHAMN IBN MALJIM AL-MURADI, the KHARIJITE,
think that he had put an end to Imam Ali's life when he struck him with
his poisonous sword on 19th of Ramadan, 40th year of HIJRA?

Surely not! The great ones live through their ideas and conduct, though
their bodies perish. Imam Ali is still amid us in his teachings and in
his faith. It is our responsibility to follow his example. Surely we are
to be called to account on the Day of Judgment. The holy QUR'AN says,
{And stop them, for they shall be questioned} [SAFFAT: 24].


