Prophet Mohammad's Daughter :fatima Al-zahra (as)
=================================================

**Lineage**

Fatima is the daughter of the Messenger of Allah, Mohammed (P.B.U.H).
her mother is KHADIJAH BINT KHUWAYLID. Fatima was born eight years prior
to the immigration (HIJRA) of the Prophet to YATHRIB (AL-MEDINA), on the
20th of JAMADI AL-THANI (Lunar Calendar) in the holy city of Mecca. She
died in AL-Medina on the 3rd of JAMADI AL-THANI, eleven years after the
HIJRA and was buried there. Fatima (as) is remembers by the believers as
a symbol of purity, chastity, and virtue. The oppressed one remembers
how she suffered oppression and injustices, hence he tolerates his
suffering and hardship.

<p dir="rtl">
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم إنا أعطيناك الكوثر\* فصل لربك وانحر\* إن شانئك
هو الأبتر
</p>

Righteous wives recall her life as a wife of Ali (as) and consider her
as a role model of the righteous wife.

Mothers remember her sublime statue as a mother of the infallible
Imams, thus they follow in her footsteps in raising their children.
Fathers remember how she grew up in the lap of the Messenger of Allah,
the Prophet (P.B.U.H), who prepared her for the highest status of a
believing woman.

**A WOMAN OF VIRTUE**

Prior to telling Fatima's story, her mother, Lady KHADIJAH, should
first be mentioned. Lady KHADIJAH was one of the wealthiest women in
holy Mecca. Many prominent figures desired to marry her for her wealth,
but she rejected all those who proposed to her. She surprised them by
her choice to marry Mohammed the son of ABDILLAH, the truthful young man
who was not at all among the rich, though he belonged to the best family
among the QURAYSHIS.

Men and women of Mecca criticized her for such a choice but she paid no
attention to them and did not change her mind. In fact, she was quite a
wise lady who chose the best life's partner, though most people could
not comprehend that fact. KHADIJAH was a woman of talent and brilliant
intellect. No wonder she raised such a sublime daughter like Fatima
(as).

**THE SECLUSION**

KHADIJAH and Mohammed led for many years a happy and peaceful life till
he was chosen to be a Prophet entrusted with the Divine mission of
Islam. Lady KHADIJAH was the first woman to believe in him, and she
supported him with all her might and means. The arrogant and the
idolaters of Mecca demonstrated their hostility towards Mohammed,
causing him a great deal of hardship. A social and economic ban was
imposed on Mohammed and his followers. The good wife endured the
hardships for the sake of Allah and His religion, Islam. She comforted
her husband and shared his concerns. She all her affairs.

**THE BLESSED BIRTH OF FATIMA**

New signs seemed to bring the good tiding of relief when KHADIJAH was
pregnant with a new baby who stirred in her womb. At the due hour of
childbirth, and when the pain of labor intensified, QURAYSHI midwives
refused to give her a hand and help her deliver her child. Allah's
miracles happen quite often. During the time of her difficulty, suddenly
the room was lit with a bright light. Four bright women appeared near
her. They sat near her and gently spoke to her. They said to her, "Fear
not ! we are guests sent by Allah". She felt at ease, so she relaxed.
Quietly she gave birth to a female baby: Fatima, with the help of the
four ladies who were: SARAH, PROPHET IBRAHIM'S wife, ASIA, the righteous
wife of Pharaoh, MARYAM (Mary), the mother of Prophet Jesus, and KALTHAM
sister of Prophet MUSA (Moses) (peace be on them all). However, there
are some people who wonder at such miracles and are heedless of Allah's
might.

Before Fatima, KHADIJAH had given birth to three other daughters. They
were: RUQAYYAH, UMM KULTHUM, and ZAINAB. ZAINAB was married to her
maternal cousin AL-RABEE' IBN AL-AAS. The other two were married to the
two sons of ABI LAHAB who became a deadly enemy of the Prophet and
ordered his sons UTBAH and UTAYBAH to divorce their wives. UTHMAN
married both of them, one after the death of the other. Neither one of
them gave birth to any children.

The only daughter who lived in the house of the Prophet was Fatima (as)
who was of a uniquely sublime personality. She resembled her father in
features and in high morals.

When the days of hardship were over, following the Prophet's
immigration to YATHRIB, many prominent figures sought Fatima's hand in
marriage but were all rejected. All the suitors hoped to enjoy the
sublime status of being near the Messenger of Allah through marrying
Fatima. But Fatima was Ali's dear cousin. None deserved being her
husband except Ali (as), the Prophet's first supporter and the brave
defender of Islam. It was Allah's will that none should marry her except
Ali (as).

When the Prophet's two sons died while still children, the arrogant of
Mecca degraded the Prophet (P.B.U.H), claiming that he would have no
progeny. Allah refuted their claim. The QUR'ANIC chapter AL-KAWTHAR was
revealed; in it the Almighty says, {Surely, We have given you AL-KAWTHAR
(abundance in offspring), so pray to your Lord and make a sacrifice.
Surely he that hates you is the one cut off}. [AL-KAWTHAR: 1-3].

**THE BLESSED MARRIAGE**

One day the Prophet's companions were at the Prophet's Mosque. They
talked about the Prophet's only daughter, Fatima. ABU BAKR, one of them,
said, "Many prominent figures from the immigrants (AL-MUHAJIREEN) and
the Muslim's of AL-MEDINA (AL-ANSAR) have sought Fatima's hand, but the
Messenger of Allah has not approved the proposal of any. However, Ali
has not proposed to her yet. I think if he proposes, the Messenger of
Allah will accept him". SA'AD IBN MU'ATH, the chief of AL-WAS, a tribe
of the ANSAR, said, "Let us see Ali and encourage him to seek her hand.
Perhaps we may thus do a good deed".

They left the Mosque looking for Ali. They found him in the city's
outskirts watering an orchard for one of the ANSAR landowners. They
greeted him, then ABU BAKR said, "Brother Ali, you are one of the best
people. You enjoy every quality that pleases Allah and His Messenger. It
is time for you to have a wife. Why don't you propose to the Prophet's
daughter, Fatima? The daughter of the Messenger of Allah may be yours.
We have all proposed to her and have been rejected. It seems Allah and
His Messenger want Fatima to marry you".

On hearing those words, Ali felt great longing to get nearer to the
Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H) through marrying Fatima. But alas! He did
not have enough money to give her a dowry. However, he was encouraged by
them. He put his trust in Allah and made his way towards the Prophet's
house. He expressed his great wish to marry Fatima. The Prophet
(P.B.U.H) rejoiced on hearing Ali's proposal and said, "O Ali! Many men
have already proposed to her before you. When I told her of their
proposals, she turned away in disapproval. Now, you wait while I tell
her of yours.

The Prophet entered her room and said to her, "O Fatima! Here is Ali
son of ABI TALIB. You know his blood relation to you and his great
struggle for the sake of Islam. I have prayed to my Lord to send you the
best of His creatures and the one He loves most to be your husband. Ali
has made a proposal to marry you. What do you say?" Fatima did not turn
away; she silently expressed her approval. The Prophet glorified Allah
and conveyed to Ali her approval of his marriage proposal.

**FATIMA'S DOWRY: A SHIELD**

The Prophet (P.B.U.H) came to Ali and happily said to him, "Ali! Do you
have anything for a dowry?!" Ali said, "May my parents be sacrificed for
you! By Allah, you know my own (financial) situation. I have nothing
except my sword, shield, and camel". The Prophet (P.B.U.H) said, "You
cannot do without your sword with which you fight the enemies of Allah.
You need your camel to water your date palms and to transport your daily
food. You ride it in your trips. But I accept the shield as a dowry for
your marriage. Go sell it and come back with its price".

Ali (as) sold the shield for 480 DIRHAMS and came back with the money
which he gave to the Prophet (P.B.U.H) It was the dowry for the most
noble and honorable lady, the best among all creatures past and
present.

The Prophet (P.B.U.H) divided the money into three parts. A third was
for the new home's furniture. Another third was for perfumes and other
necessary thing for the bride, and the last third was kept with UMM
SALAMA (the Prophet's wife) to spend on the wedding day. He then gave
some money to AMMAR IBN YASIR and SALMAN AL-FARISI and to other
companions. He said to them, "Buy for my daughter what is necessary for
a new home". They bought the necessary items which were: A gown for 7
DIRHAMS, a head scarf for four DIRHAMS, a bedcover made in KHAIBAR, a
wooden bed, two mattresses of wool and fiber, four food dishes made in
AL-TAIF, a wool curtain, a mat, a flour hand-mill, two bowls, a
water-skin, a milk pot, a water pot, a copper container, and other such
items.

They brought them to the Prophet (P.B.U.H) who checked them and was
satisfied with the new home's furnishing. He said. "May Allah bless this
household!". Some QURAYSHI men said to the Prophet, "You have married
your daughter to a poor man". He said, "By Allah, I have not! it was
Allah Who has ordered me to marry her to Ali. My Lord had informed me of
this marriage on the night of my ascendancy to heaven".

**THE WEDDING DAY**

A month later, Fatima was still in her father's house as Ali everyday
dept praying with the Prophet at his mosque then going home. He did not
discuss the issue of his marriage again. One day, UMMU AYMAN and her
other women asked Ali if he wanted them to talk to the Prophet regarding
his marriage. Ali rejoiced at their suggestion, so they went to the
Prophet and said, "O Messenger of Allah! Had Fatima's mother been alive,
she would have rejoiced at her daughter's wedding. Now Ali wants his
wife, so let the couple enjoy their life together. We will celebrate the
occasion".

He (P.B.U.H) said, "Why has Ali mentioned this to me yet?" they said,
"He is shy". He said, "Send Ali to me". When Ali come, he sat silently,
feeling shy. The Prophet said to him, "Do you want to wed?" Ali said,
"Yes, I do love to". The Prophet said, "You will have your wife with my
pleasure".

The Prophet (P.B.U.H) asked UMMU SALAMA to prepare Fatima's bedroom,
and other women to embellish the bride. Someone prepared her wedding
dress, her perfumes, her make-up and her hair style. Dinner was
prepared. A sheep was cooked and the Prophet himself helped in preparing
the desserts of dates and butter. Ali went to the mosque and invited all
the attendants. He said to them, "O people! You are all invited to
dinner at the Prophet's house on behalf of Fatima daughter of Mohammed
(P.B.U.H)".

they were more than 300 persons (exceeding the number of the fighters
in the battle of BADR which had taken place few days earlier). They all
had their dinner then left the house. The Prophet asked the HASHIMI
women to accompany Fatima to her husband's house. He asked them to
glorify Allah and chant decent chants. He (P.B.U.H) himself helped
Fatima get on his own white mule and asked SALMAN AL-FARISI to hold the
rein and lead the animal. HAMZA (the Prophet's uncle), JA'FER and AQIL
raising their unsheathed swords up as was the custom then. The Prophet's
wives and other Muslim women walked chanting lyrics and poetry. Everyone
praised the bride in poems as gifts to her.

They reached Ali's house and the men shouted: "ALLAHU AKBAR!" Allah is
the Greatest!" They shook Ali's hand, congratulated him, then left. The
Prophet (P.B.U.H) called Ali and took Fatima's hand and put it in his
(Ali's) hand. He said, "Allah blesses the daughter of the Messenger of
Allah. O Lord! Bless them and overwhelm them with Your bliss! O Lord! I
place them and their progeny under Your protection from the cursed
Satan". The Prophet's companions gave their presents to the bride and
the bridegroom. It was the blessing of Allah as in the QUR'ANIC verse:
{…. That is the grace of Allah, He gives it to whomsoever He pleases,
and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace}. [Iron: 21].

**MARRIAGE LIFE**

Ali and Fatima enjoyed their life of happiness in their simple house.
The Prophet (P.B.U.H) used to visit them now and then on various
occasions. He would talk to them about the virtues of patience and
uprightness. One day he (P.B.U.H) said to Fatima (as), "Allah has chosen
two men from among the people of the world. One is your father and the
other is your husband".

Fatima was a righteous wife, hence she was not annoyed when her husband
was often away, fighting for the sake of Allah. She would always prepare
his weapons and other needed items for him. She would encourage him to
always is for every believing wife! She was quite aware of her husband's
sublime status as well as sacred status in Allah's sight, so she
respected him as a woman respects and obeys her religious leader, her
Imam. Ali was the dearest person to the Messenger of Allah. He was his
brother (in religion), successor, and trustee. Ali respected her, too,
and considered her sublime status, not only for her being his wife, but
also for being the one dearest to the Messenger of Allah. She was part
of him (P.B.U.H), of the same brightness, patience, and modesty, and she
was the head of all women of the world. She was chosen by Allah for such
an honor. The holy QUR'AN says:

{Surely Allah chose Adam and Noah and the descendants of IBRAHIM and
the descendants of 'IMRAN above all nations. Offspring, one from the
other, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing}. [AALI-'IMRAN: 33-34] Poverty
never disturbed her life. She carried out the house work, grinding wheat
and barley, cooking and baking bread. She was a unique model for
believing women.

She was also quite aware of her duty towards the struggle for the sake
of Allah. During the battle of UHUD, when her father was wounded, she
was near him, addressing his wounds and comforting him. During the time
of hardship, she was a woman of deeds, not a woman of tears.

**THE REWARD FOR THE MESSAGE**

In the 3rd year of HIJRAH, Fatima gave birth to her first son. The
Prophet (P.B.U.H) called him AL-HASAN. A year later she gave birth to
her second son, AL-HUSAIN (Junior HASAN).

The Prophet (P.B.U.H) greatly rejoiced at the birth of his two
grandsons. He actually considered them a reward for his struggle and
hardship in inviting people to Islam. He used to embrace the two
children and say, "These HASAN and HUSAIN are my two sons; they are the
two fragrant flowers, the heads of the youth of Paradise".

**THE PURIFIED HOUSEHOLD**

When the QUR'ANIC verse 33 (chapter AL-AHZAB) was revealed, the Prophet
(P.B.U.H) was in the house of his wife UMMU SALAMA. The verse reads:
{Allah Surely desires to keep all uncleanness away from you, O people of
the House, and purify you with a (thorough) purification}. [AL-AHZAB:
33]. He (P.B.U.H) asked his wife to give him the YEMENI covering sheet
(AL-KISA AL-YEMANI). He called Ali, Fatima, AL-HASAN and AL-HUSAIN to
him and covered them, along with himself, with that sheet then said,

"O Lord! These are my household, my nearest and dearest. They are part
of me; whatever hurts them hurts me, whatever saddens them saddens me. I
am on war against whoever is on war against them. I am at peace with
whoever is at peace with them. I am the enemy of their enemy and the
friend of their friend. They are part of me and I am part of them. O
Lord! Bless them with Your bliss, Your mercy, Your forgiveness, and Your
pleasure. Purify them with a thorough purification". In fact, they led a
righteous life free from all sins and errors. Their attributes were and
are Allah's signs to all mankind, though most people are not aware of
this fact.

**FATIMA'S DISPLEASURE**

The Prophet's great regard for Fatima was not due to her being his own
daughter. Blood relation was not the criterion for him to evaluate the
members of his family. Rather, it was on account of her great piety and
awareness of Allah the Almighty. She enjoyed most of the Prophet's
attributes. Allah Almighty confirmed the purified Fatima to be the
mother of the infallible Imams. The Prophet often referred to her
sublime status. As mentioned in SAHIH AL-BUKHARI, he (P.B.U.H) once
said, "Fatima is part of me. Whoever makes her angry, makes me angry
too". He once addressed her saying, "O Fatima! Allah is pleased at your
pleasure and displeased at your displeasure".

**THE FATHER'S DEMISE**

Fatima's happy days came to an end when her father, the Messenger of
Allah, fell sick and soon passed away to be near his Lord. Fatima's
difficult days, the days of suffering, started when everything changed
at her father's demise. A few of the companions appointed ABA BAKR as
the caliph, and most people followed suit and swore the oath of
allegiance to him. Ali (as) felt the Muslims' need for unity and for
their firm stand against their enemies, so he made no demand of his
right and preferred to remain silent.

Muslims have always been in need of unity against their enemies, and
Islam will always be in need of it till the Day of Judgment.

However, Fatima (as) considered it her duty to warn the people of the
grave wrong they were doing. She made her way to her father's mosque
where the Muslims gathered around the new caliph. She publicly made it
clear that Ali (as) had the right to the caliphate more than anyone
else. She warned the Muslims of the great calamity if divisions settled
among them instead of unity. The future would bring great evils if they
kept silent and did not support the truth. She referred to her right to
the FADAK property which belonged to her father and his household and
never to the common people. The Prophet's daughter surely could not and
would not claim ownership of something if it were not hers. How strange
it was to tarnish her with such an accusation! Fatima is one of the five
purified people according to the above quoted QUR'ANIC verse 33 of
Chapter AL-AHZAB! There are other QUR'ANIC verses that laud her sublime
status. However, many people were heedless of that fact.

**FATIMA'S EARLY DEATH**

Due to such hardships, Fatima felt sick and resorted to silence and
seclusion. Women from the MUHAJIREEN and the ANSAR visited her during
her sickness to wish her well. They asked her how she was feeling. She
thanked Allah and praised Him, invoked peace and blessing of Allah on
her father, then said, "By Allah! I now fully resent your world and
detest your men…. Evil, indeed, is that which their souls have sent
forward before them; Allah's wrath is on them, and in the torment shall
they abide…. Why were they hostile to ABI AL-HASAN? By Allah they hated
his unbiased sword for the sake of Allah…. Surely they are the
mischief-makers, though they are unaware of it".

{Is He then Who guides to the truth more worthy to be followed, or is
he who himself does not go aright unless he is guided? What, then, is
the matter with you?! How do you judge?} [YUNIS: 35].

When the women conveyed to their men Fatima's words, their chiefs went
to her to apologize. They said to her, "O Mistress of all women! Had
your husband mentioned the affair to us, we would not have sworn the
oath of allegiance to anyone else". Fatima (as) said, "Go away! You have
no excuse after having been warned, and there is no order following your
shortcomings".

**THE LAST MESSAGE**

Fatima's health deteriorated; she became quite aware of her imminent
death. She said to her husband, "Dear cousin, I am informed of my death.
Within few hours, I will join my father. I would like you to listen to
my will". He said to her, "Make your will, dear daughter of the
Messenger of Allah''! How difficult it is for me to miss you…. By Allah!
My sorrows at the death of the Prophet are now renewed. Say what you
want; you will find me trustworthy of fulfilling your orders; I will
prefer your orders to mine". She said, "…. Bury me at night, and remove
all traces of my grave. Don't allow those who did injustice to me to
attend my funeral. "Dear cousin, if you marry, then assign one day and
night for your wife, and one day and night for my children. Be kind to
them, and do not let them suffer as orphans do. How quickly they had
missed their grandfather, and how soon will they miss their mother!

"Woe unto the people who hate them and who kill them!" She (as) then
had a bath and put on a clean dress, stretched her body on her bed and
closed her eyes forever. She died smiling at the near reunion with her
father.

Her death was real loss to Imam Ali to whom she had been a righteous
wife, a life partner that lets him as she was in the prime of her youth.
Her will was her last message: a clear lesson for those who ponder. She
chose to be buried secretly so that those who did her wrong could not
participate in her funeral or pray near her grave. With such a
procedure, she made a record of her name as being one of the oppressed;
thus, she recorded the injustice from which she suffered for all time to
come.

When the people of AL-Medina heard about her death, they hurried to her
house to perform the funeral prayers and walk behind her coffin. They
were very sad when they heard that she had already been buried. Ali and
very few of his companions performed the funeral prayers for her sacred
body. Thus did the story of the Messenger's only daughter come to its
conclusion. It is the story of Fatima who gave birth to AL-HASAN,
AL-HUSAIN and ZAINAB AL-KUBRA.

It is the story of the wife who strived for her husband's rights. It is
the story of the Prophet's daughter who was a copy of him in virtue and
greatness. Fatima is the mother of all righteous people.

Whoever loves the Messenger of Allah loves Fatima.
Whoever hates him, hates her.
Fatima is purified by Allah the Almighty.
Peace and blessing of Allah be on FATIMA AL-ZAHRA.


