Imam Al-hasan (a.s.)
====================

**LINEAGE**

AL-HASAN is the son of Ali son of ABI TALIB the son of ABDIL MUTTALIB.
His mother is Fatima the daughter of Mohammed the son of ABDILLAH, the
son of ABDIL MUTTALIB (peace be upon them all). He was born on the 15th
of the month of Ramadan, in the 3rd year of HIJRAH (immigration of the
Prophet (P.B.U.H) from holy Mecca to YATHRIB (AL-Medina AL-MUNAWARA),
and enjoyed martyrdom on the 28th of SAFAR (Lunar Calendar) in the 50th
year of HIJRAH, in Al-Medina and was buried in AL-BAQIE (a suburb of
Al-Medina).

**THE ERA OF IGNORANCE VIS-?-VIS ISLAM**

The pre-Islamic era was stamped with ignorance and oppression. The most
oppressive people were also the most arrogant and the most deceiving.
Such people enjoyed a complete control over others and were respected by
others who only wished to avoid their injustice.

The most oppressive family of the era of ignorance was the UMAYYAD
family of ABI SUFYAN. MU'AWIYAH, his brother YAZID, ABU JAHAL, ABU
LAHAB, and their likes controlled the affairs in holy Mecca and
throughout the Arabian Peninsula. As soon as Islam spread its bright
light, the arrogant ones' injustice came to an end. Good morals replaced
bad ones, the humble common people regained their dignity, and human
rights were achieved. The arrogant ones no longer had a say in the
affairs. It was the advent of the new religion of Islam, and the era of
the holy Prophet (P.B.U.H) and the righteous among his companions.

As the party of Allah achieved victory against the idolaters and
infidels, the arrogant ones such as ABU SUFYAN and his likes had no
other way but to articulate acceptance of Islam and the leadership of
Prophet Mohammed (P.B.U.H). This took place in the 8th year of HIJRAH
(more than twenty years after the beginning of the message), following
the invasion of Mecca. However, those arrogant ones were never true in
their belief in Allah and His Messenger, hence they harbored hidden
hostilities towards the Prophet and his household, peace be upon them
all.

**THE INFIDELS AND THE HYPOCRITES**

Following the demise of the Messenger of Allah, ABU SUFYAN and his
infidel party conspired secretly against Islam. Their infidelity was
still in hide, while their great concern was to halt the achievement of
political and financial power by AHLUL BAYT (the Prophet's household).
They strove to keep such power within their own control. Through plots,
they achieved their goal, hence MU'AWIYAH IBN (son of) ABI SUFYAN
proclaimed his domination over the country of AL-SHAM (greater Syria:
Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon plus today's Syria). He accumulated a great
wealth and forced his authority on the Muslim world.

Following the assassination of the third Caliph, OTHMAN IBN 'AFFAN,
people swore allegiance to the Prophet's cousin and son-in-law Ali (as),
father of AL-HASAN and AL-HUSAIN. As soon as Ali (as) became the
Muslims' Caliph, the hypocrites and the deviated openly unveiled their
hostility towards Ali (as) and waged wars against him. Thus, within a
short period of time during his caliphate, he had to fight in the Battle
of the Camel, the Battle of SIFFIN and the Battle of AL-NAHRAWAN.

It was the irony of fate to see the "followers of the camel" siding
with "the followers of ABI SUFYAN" along with the misled KHARIJITES. The
enemies of Islam and those of AHLUL BAYT mobilized their forces and
raised their swords in the face Imam Ali (as). During the course of
those events, three deviated men conspired under the claim of sparing
the Muslims the perils of the deteriorated situation which they thought
was the result of the confrontation of three dangerous men: MU'AWIYAH,
AMRO IBN AL-'AS and Imam Ali (as). They though that they would reform
the Muslim community if they killed all three of them at one and the
same time. The result of their sick mentality was the martyrdom of Imam
Ali (as), the pious and just caliph, while the other two survived.

**IMAM AL-HASAN'S RULE**

At such situations, when MU'AWIYAH'S mercenaries were in control of the
Muslims' affairs, IMAM AL-HASAN'S (as) became the Muslims' Caliph. He
had to face the worst officials the majority of whom belonged to the
UMAYYAD clan. They had been in office since OTHMAN'S rule when they
devoured the Muslims' wealth just as cattle devour Spring's fresh
buds.

Imam AL-HASAN'S Caliphate covered large areas of the Muslim world
including: Persia, KHURASAN, Yemen, HIJAZ, KUFA and BASRA (Iraq).
Although the people of those countries had sworn allegiance to the Imam
(as), the area suffered unrest as a result of MU'AWIYAH'S conspiracy.
They Imam knew that MU'AWIYAH was personally making preparations to
fight him, so he sent his envoys to the governors of the region to get
ready to fight back. He (as) also sent a letter to MU'AWIYAH to warn and
to advise him through reasonable facts relevant to the Imam's right to
the caliphate. He confirmed his concern about the Muslims' unity and the
safety of Islam, demanding an end to fights and quarrels. He wanted him
to be wise enough to accept his advice and to avoid divisions that would
lead the Muslim community to destruction. He informed him of his
decision to fight him if he did not comply.

**THE FINAL JUDGMENT IS WITH ALLAH**

MU'AWIYAH, whose concern was only to achieve power and seize the
caliphate, lent a deaf ear to Imam AL-HASAN'S letter. MU'AWIYAH was
ready to commit every crime in order to be the leader. He sent his spies
and got in touch with the Imam's army leaders. He bribed some leaders
and promised others with high offices if they abandoned their Imam and
joined him. Many accepted the bribes and joined the enemy's camp in
broad daylight. Others conspired even to lay their hand on their
legitimate Imam and hand him over to MU'AWIYAH. Thus, they violated
their vows of allegiance and betrayed their sublime leader. MU'AWIYAH,
the cunning fox, advised them to stay in office till the battle time,
then to leave their Imam alone to face his defeat.

Within few months of secret plots, MU'AWIYAH managed to have most of
the tribes' chiefs on his side. Those tribes' chiefs knew that Imam
AL-HASAN'S rule would be similar to his father's, hence they expected no
gains from him, while MU'AWIYAH was flooding them with gifts, they
preferred this world to the hereafter and sold their religion for this
life's pleasures.

**THE AGGRESSOR ARMY**

The army of MU'AWIYAH made its way towards KUFA, the then capital of
Imam AL-HASAN'S (as). The Imam, in turn, encouraged his army to fight,
but his efforts were in vain. Only a few were ready to obey him. The
majority were in groups of different opinions. This made it difficult
for him to unite them or to fight the enemy. IMAM AL-HASAN entrusted his
cousin UBAYED-ALLAH IBN ABBAS, with the leadership of his army. Everyone
knew him as one of the first QURAYSHIS to swear allegiance to Imam
AL-HASAN. He was very highly respected and obeyed. Moreover, he greatly
hated MU'AWIYAH whose mercenaries killed both of his children.

UBAYD-ALLAH'S army numbered 12,000 as IMAM AL-HASAN led another army
towards Al-Medina (Iraq) and camped there. He planned to defeat the
large army of MU'AWIYAH. MU'AWIYAH was still suffering from his bitter
defeat at the Battle of SIFFIN when Ali's brave men were about toe
defeat MU'AWIYAH who escaped though a trick. MU'AWIYAH, therefore,
decided to apply more tricks to avoid the war. He secretly contacted
UBAYD-ALLAH and offered him a million DIRHAMS if he refrained from
fighting him. MU'AWIYAH was ready to pay him half a million at KUFA and
the other half later only if he joined his camp.

UBAYD-ALLAH was at a loss few days. He knew that very few tribes came
to help IMAM AL-HASAN while many of them joined MU'AWIYAH'S camp. He was
sure of MU'AWIYAH'S victory, so why should he hesitate? The offer was
quite tempting, hence he made his shameful decision to accept it. at
mid-night, along with a few of his men, he made his way to MU'AWIYAH'S
camp. He made his choice and sold the religion of Allah, the Messenger
of Allah, and his Imam, for such a petty price.

The people gathered at dawn to pray at the mosque. They waited for
UBAYD-ALLAH to it in its fight against the enemy. They waited and waited
only in vain! UBAYD-ALLAH did not attend the prayers, and the secret was
made public! They heard someone from the enemy's camp calling: "O
people! Go home! UBAYD-ALLAH and his men are in MU'AWIYAH'S camp! They
have chosen reconciliation! There is no good in brothers fighting each
other!" UBAYD-ALLAH was the second important man after the Imam himself
in leading the army, hence his treason was a major blow. He was a
religious scholar; therefore, many were fooled by his call for peace, so
they deserted the army.

A group of the Imam's supporters realized the trick and tried to bring
the others back, but they failed in their attempt. Only a few decided to
die in defense of the religion and for the sake of the truth. They
informed the Imam of their readiness to help. The cowards and the
deserters even spread the rumor that MU'AWIYAH had achieved victory
against the Imam's army, hence the others found it a good excuse to
return to their homes in KUFA. That was the story repeated with Imam
AL-HASAN (AS): the KHARIJITES had by then found an excuse to give up the
fight and even assassinate their own Imam Ali (as).

Could such people be Muslims or claim to defend Islam while they helped
the enemies of Islam achieve their devilish goals? Throughout history,
hypocrites play the same role. They are not sincere in their faith, so
they turn away rather than face death. The real believers are always
firm in conviction and ready to die for the sake of their religion.

**THE HARD DECISION**

The Imam (as) had to either to fight and sacrifice the very few good
believers with him or yield to a compromising reconciliation and endure
the painful outcome. The Imam followed his father's footsteps when, 25
years ago, he rejected the hatful quarrel and tolerated the situation of
being deprived of his right. The Imam through reconciliation could spare
his righteous companions from a useless death. He accepted
re-conciliation on special honorable conditions.

It was a bitter experience for the IMAM who was ready to fight since he
was never afraid of death. But he was quite sure that his dear family
would sacrifice first to defend him. His companions were ready to die
before him. However, their death would not change the situation. Most
people were misled and knew nothing about the real situation between the
infidel MU'AWIYAH and IMAM AL-HASAN (AS), the Muslims' legitimate
caliph. MU'AWIYAH managed to fool the people and claim to be the
defender of Islam. People believed him because his real infidelity was
hidden. They did not know that his only concern was to achieve power for
his own clan under the cover of Islam. Had IMAM AL-HASAN been killed
that day, no one would have come to know the truth. It would have been
senseless bloodshed. Even such bloodshed of the infallible Imam would
not have awakened the community from its coma.

Due to such a crucial situation, IMAM AL-HASAN (as) agreed to
reconcile. Thus, the confrontation was postponed till the day when the
true face of MU'AWIYAH would be exposed and people would know the truth
and fight for it.

Many of the Imam's followers were vexed at the outcome, and some were
even rude, except IMAM AL-HUSAIN (AS) who approved of his brother's
decision. In fact, many are heedless of the fact that objection to the
Imam's or Prophet's decisions is objection to the QUR'ANIC instructions
which confirm the infallibility of these figures. Hence, their decisions
should always be accepted, in wars and in peace. Rejection of the Imams'
decision means rejection of the Prophet's (P.B.U.H) decision. A
Prophetic tradition says: "AL-HASAN and AL-HUSAIN are leaders of the
believers, whether they are in office or not".

However, it is the people's nature to make hasty conclusions without a
deep insight or sound thinking. On achieving victory, MU'AWIYAH went to
KUFA, the residence of IMAM AL-HASAN (as) and his followers. He got on
the pulpit of its grand mosque and started slandering IMAM ALI'S
companions and degrading the tribes' chiefs. He betrayed them and
violated the covenants he had previously made to them. He called them
names, thus disgracing them in public. Those who betrayed the Imam could
not even enjoy the least gratitude from MU'AWIYAH.

In the wake of those events, IMAM AL-HASAN (AS) and his household made
their way towards Al-Medina where they settled while the UMAYYAD clan
dominated Al-KUFA. On the pulpit of IMAM ALI (AS), ZIYAD IBN ABIHI (a
bastard) and later his son ruled the country. Those who sought excuses
to justify their stance regarding IMAM ALI'S rule and later rejected his
pious son's rule bowed their heads in front of MU'AWIYAH'S bloody
swords. They at last came to know- thought too late- the important
advice of the legitimate Imams. They perceived the great calamity that
befell them. They regretted their own actions but such regret was of no
use.

Those who, during five years of Imam Ali's rule and a few months of
IMAM AL-HASAN'S, disobeyed the infallible Imams for trifle reasons or
excuses, no longer offended MU'AWIYAH'S agents who had a free hand to do
whatever they desire. None of them uttered a word of objection. No
figures such as TALHA and AL-ZUBAYR raised the banner of confrontation.
Not a single KHARIJITE made a show of sedition or disobedience. The
hypocrites had their golden opportunity to play their role.

At the dark era of history, Ali's companions and followers were the
only ones who confronted the tyrannical rule and were blessed with
martyrdom. As for those on his pay list, they crept on their bellies and
praised the unjust rulers. They never forgot to slander Imam Ali (as) in
order to please the tyrants. How wonderful it is to confront the tyrants
of history, yet it is impossible to oppose the One worshipped by all!

**VIOLATION OF THE COVENANT**

When MU'AWIYAH'S end came near, he feared the caliphate might be
entrusted to IMAM AL-HASAN (AS), thus all his efforts of many years
might go in vain, and the Prophet's household might return right back to
the Muslims' caliphate. To MU'AWIYAH, that would be the greatest
calamity, so he decided to poison IMAM AL-HASAN and get rid of him. With
the help of the Imam's wife, he achieved his aim. Through this crime,
MU'AWIYAH accomplished most of his devilish plan. The enemies of Allah
and of His Messenger such as MARWAN IBN AL-HAKAM and his likes rejoiced
and shamelessly threw their arrows at his holy coffin at the Imam's
funeral.

MU'AWIYAH proceeded with his plan. He vested authority on his notorious
son YAZID, the wine-drinker, the doer of evil, and the indecent infidel.
MU'AWIYAH first made the people of AL-SHAM swear the oath of allegiance
to his son, then he went to holy Mecca and to Al-Medina and achieved his
goal without the least resistance; thus, the UMAYYAD clan survived in
power. There was none like TALHA or AL-ZUBAYR to raise the banner of
war. History repeats itself and people hesitate in time of need to
support the truth. This hesitation encourages the tyrants to increase
their oppression and aggression.

So was it when Imam Ali (as) tried to lead the people to the right
path. Likewise, IMAM AL-HASAN (as) did his best to lead them to the
right path. However, it is only Allah's will that helps one go along the
right path. The holy QUR'AN says: {Surely you cannot guide whom you
love, but Allah guides whom He pleases, and He best knows the followers
of the right path}. [AL-QASAS: 56]. The Imam was quite aware of the
Prophet's mission which was: to convey the Message of Allah to the
people and to keep on preaching and advising them, whether they accept
it or not; it makes no difference. Similarly, the Imam's task was to
follow in the footsteps of the Prophet and to safeguard the religion of
Allah: Islam.

IMAM AL-HASAN (AS) tried his best to show the truth to all people and
make them aware of being misled by the false claims of rulers and by
leaders who articulated Islamic beliefs while remaining infidels,
enemies of the religion. The Imam (as) taught his followers to be
patient and to tolerate injustice when it is for the sake of Allah.
Through, he nurtured the seeds of revolution through the heroic role of
his brother IMAM AL-HUSAIN. IMAM AL-HASAN'S achievement was part of IMAM
AL-HUSAIN'S revolution. Thus, the Prophetic tradition regarding both of
them is a clear evidence of their roles. The said tradition says:

"AL-HASAN and AL-HUSAIN are two Imams (leaders) whether they are in
office or not"


**AL-IMAM AL-HUSAIN (A.S.)**

**LINEAGE**

AL-IMAM AL-HUSAIN (AS) is the younger son of IMAM ALI IBN ABI TALIB
(AS). His mother is FATIMA AL-ZAHRA, daughter of Prophet Mohammed, peace
be upon them all. He was born on the 3rd of SHA'BAN (Lunar Calendar) in
the 4th year of HIJRAH, in Al-Medina AL-MUNAWARA. He enjoyed martyrdom
on the 10th of MUHARRAM, in the year 61 of HIJRA in KERBALA (Iraq) and
was buried there.

**THE BLESSED BABY**

On the 3rd of SHA'BAN, the 4th year of HIJRAH, Fatima gave birth to her
second blessed baby.

ASMA, one of Fatima's attendants, wrapped the newly born baby with a
clean white cloth and carried him to his grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah (P.B.U.H), who took him in his arms and kissed him warmly. He
embraced him and uttered in his ears: "There is no god but Allah. Allah
is the Greatest. Prayer is up". He called him HUSAIN, kept him long in
his arms, looked sadly at him, touched his limbs then burst in tears.
Being surprised at the prophet's sudden sadness, ASMA said, "May my
parents be your sacrifice, what has caused your crying?"

Still his eyes full of tears, he said, "I am crying for this - my son".
She could not comprehend what he said, so she asked him, "He has just
been born!" He (P.B.U.H) said, "The aggressive party will kill him. They
are deprived of my intercession". He handed her the baby and said, "Do
not tell Fatima this. She is still in birth labor". While AL-HUSAIN was
growing up, the Prophet (P.B.U.H) often looked after him and was really
concerned. He was already informed by Allah of what his grandson would
suffer. AL-HUSAIN was chosen by Allah to keep the bright torch of Islam
spreading its light against infidelity and hypocrisy. It is one of
Allah's bounties bestowed on His Messenger's offspring, though the
hypocrites do not perceive.

**DEMISE OF THE MESSENGER OF ALLAH**

We are quite aware of the unjust people's reaction to the demise of
Prophet Mohammed (P.B.U.H). they were careless of the Prophet's last
will, though they had often heard every word of it and had known its
significance. At his demise, they forgot every word and betrayed the
Prophet's holy household. They entrusted the Muslims' affairs to the
enemies of Islam, thus preferring blindness to clear insight and
darkness to the bright Divine light. The holy QUR'AN says: {And as to
THAMUD, We showed them the right way, but they preferred blindness to
guidance}. [FUSSILAT: 17].

Had they obeyed Allah's order, they would have enjoyed His bounties and
achieved a great might and knowledge. They disobeyed Him, so they
suffered loss and were unjust to their own selves. Due to their
blindness and utter ignorance and violation of their covenants, Imam
HUSAIN (as) enjoyed martyrdom while MUAWIA and his clan assumed the
caliphate along with an aggressive policy against all the righteous
believers. Many suffered imprisonment, torture, and even death through
poison or other means.

**IMAM HUSAIN (AS) VIS-?-VIS INFIDEL YAZID**

During IMAM AL-HASAN'S life, IMAM HUSAIN respected his brother's peace
treaty (with MUAWIA) and did not confront the ruling clique. However,
MUAWIA not only violated every item of the said treaty, but he also
entrusted the caliphate to his infidel son YAZID to succeed him after
his death. The cursed son ordered the governor of Al-Medina AL-WALID to
summon IMAM HUSAIN and force him to swear the oath of allegiance to
YAZID'S authority. At midnight, the governor summoned the Prophet's
grandson and said to him, "May Allah rewards you! At the death of
MUAWIA, there are no members left of the Prophet's household (AHL AL
BAYT) except you. You are quite aware of your sublime office among the
Muslims. You must be the first to swear allegiance to the new caliph,
YAZID, and be a good example for others. You are then son of the
daughter of the Prophet (P.B.U.H) of all Muslims. You must strive for
their welfare".

IMAM HUSAIN (AS) listened carefully and was deep in thoughts. He knew
that everything had come to its end with YAZID'S evil intentions. He
(as) did not rebel against MUAWIA only to conform to his brothers'
stance. Could he be silent now that MUAWIA was dead and YAZID is the
caliph? Could he keep silent at YAZID'S infidelity, immorality and
deviation, thus to demonstrate acceptance of his evils? IMAM HUSAIN was
sure that all the Muslims were watching his actions vis-à-vis YAZID. If
he ever agreed to YAZID'S leadership, it meant that he accepted all his
(YAZID'S) indecency. He was quite aware of the crucial situation, so he
said to AL-WALID, "I am not of those who vow behind walls (secretly). If
you call the people tomorrow to make their vows, you can call us as
well".

AL-WALID IBN UTBA IBN ABI SUFFIAN was a peaceful man, so he agreed to
the Imam's suggestion and postponed the affair until the next morning.
However, the infidel MARWAN IBN AL-HAKAM, who was present there and
then, said to AL-WALID, "If you let him go now without taking his vow,
you will never have the chance to get it again. Keep him in prison and
kill him if he does not swear the oath of allegiance". IMAM AL-HUSAIN
(AS) shouted at him, "You son of the … are you going to kill me?! By
Allah, you are a mean liar".

IMAM HUSAIN then turned to AL-WALID and said, "O governor! I am the
Prophet's grandson, the core of the religion of Islam, the sacred
landing of angels and the source of Mercy. Allah stated (His creation)
with us and sealed it with us. YAZID is a transgressor, a wine-addict, a
killer of the innocent and an open defer of Allah's instructions. A man
of my qualities does not swear the oath of allegiance to one of his
like. Tomorrow morning, we will meet and see to it".

**TOWARDS HOLY MECCA**

That night, IMAM HUSAIN (as) decided to leave Al-Medina for holy Mecca.
He immediately set out in the company of his family and relatives. They
made the journey amid the risk of being chased by YAZID'A mercenaries.
The people of Al-Medina were indifferent regarding the situation. They
offered no support or protection to the Prophet's grandson. They took
refuge in their homes for fear of YAZID'S oppression. IMAM HUSAIN'S
caravan reached Mecca, the holy city of Allah, which is supposed to be
the most secure place since old ages. Arabs used to respect the land of
Allah, hence refuges were never killed in the holy place. Wars and
quarrels were also avoided in that town. IMAM HUSAIN did not stay long
in the holy town because YAZID'S mercenaries came under the cover of
pilgrimage to kill him and then claim that he killed in a dispute over
personal matters by someone.

IMAM HUSAIN stayed for a while in holy Mecca. He warned the pilgrims of
the dangerous impact on Islam as a result of YAZID coming to power. On
the 8th of DHIL HIJJA, he performed the HAJJ rituals in haste and left
Mecca without any delay. He said to his half-brother Mohammed IBN
AL-HANAFIYYA, "If I stayed, YAZID'S mercenaries would assassinate me and
my blood would be shed in vain.

**KUFA, CENTER OF ACTIVITY**

The hen city of KUFA was a heavily inhabited area whose people enjoyed
Imam Ali's rule for a few years. They were familiar with his justice and
sublime morals. The KUFIANS were religious people, supporters of the
Prophet's household while other towns' people knew nothing of Islam
except through the deviated rulers and court theologians' instructions.
They were indifferent regarding whoever ruled them be it HUSAIN (AS) or
MUAWIA, be it HUSAIN (AS) or the infidel YAZID.

Due to such a situation, and receiving thousands of letters from the
people of KUFA in support of his cause, IMAM HUSAIN (AS) sent his cousin
MUSLIM BIN AQIL to KUFA to mobilize his supporters and prepare them to
fight as they had promised in their letters since MUAWIA'S lifetime. Now
that MUAWIA was dead, the Imam made his march towards AL-KUFA to accept
the people's allegiance and announce his Islamic caliphate. YAZID felt
the danger of mobilizing the people of KUFA by Imam HUSSAIN'S envoy, so
he appointed IBN ZIAD, a cruel man, the son of an indecent woman called
MARJANA, as the governor of KUFA. He was a stone-hearted man of a
cunning talent. He inherited hostility of the Prophet's household form
his father, besides his indecent upbringing. The people of AL-KUFA
planned to kill IBN ZIAD who was invited to the house of one of the city
nobles. It was decided that Muslim IBN AQIL should come out suddenly and
attack him with his sword. Muslim did not agree to that plan. He did not
want his supporters to be the party that started the war.

IBN ZIAD left the house and ordered his mercenaries to chase and arrest
Muslim and all his supporters. Some were arrested and some were killed.
HANI IBN URWA, who hosted Muslim IBN AQIL in his house, was killed and
later Muslim himself was martyred. The city gates were locked and no one
was allowed to leave the town to inform IMAM HUSAIN of the actual
situation in AL-KUFA or of the martyrdom of the Imam's cousin, Muslim
IBN AQIL.

**LEAVING MECCA FOR KUFA**

IMAM HUSAIN was still in Mecca, waiting for news from his envoy in
KUFA. Before getting any news, he performed the HAJJ rituals and decided
to leave the holy city. Prominent figures in Mecca tried to make him
change his mind and stay with them. They said to him, "You are quite
aware of the people of AL-KUFA. They had refrained from supporting your
father and your brother after him. They will as well refrain from
supporting you. They are of no firm faith. They may articulate readiness
to support you, but they will soon raise their swords in your face. Do
not leave the holy city'. IMAM HUSAIN (AS) did not change his mind,
insisting on performing his Divine mission: To die for the sake of Allah
and the Truth. He performed the rituals of HAJJ (pilgrimage) in haste
without staying to the end of the HAJJ season.

Thus, YAZID mercenaries did not have the chance to shed his holy blood
in the holy city. He set out towards Iraq along with his nearest and
dearest family members accompanied by righteous followers. He had no
news from his envoy, as previously mentioned, due to IBN ZIAD'S strict
control over KUFA along with other measures he undertook. He put spies
along the roads to inform him of IMAM HUSAIN'S approach.

**LAND OF THE TRAGIC EVENT: KERBALA**

IMAM HUSAIN'S caravan approached AL-KUFA but IBN ZIAD mercenaries, led
by AL-HUR IBN AL-RIAHI, halted his approach and forced him to camp at a
barren sandy area called KERBALA. When the Imam (as) heard of its name,
he went in deep thought then said, "This is the land of tragic hardship.
This is our landing, and here is the place where our blood will be
shed". He (as) ordered the caravan to set up the tents. On hearing about
IMAM HUSAIN camping near AL-KUFA, IBN ZIAD gathered the KUFIANS in the
grand mosque then addressed the attendants. He praised the "qualities"
of the infidel YAZID and his order to increase their salaries if they
joined YAZID'S army to fight IMAM HUSAIN.

Otherwise, they would suffer punishment and he would deprive them of
all their rights in life. They would put at risk their families, their
properties, and their own selves if they refrained from fighting the
Prophet's grandson. With such threats and temptations, many stupid and
simpleminded citizens joined the aggressive army. They chose the party
of falsehood, the party of Satan, against the party of the Truth, the
party of Allah.

**THE LAST NIGHT: THE 10THE OF MUHARRAM**

During that night, darkness wrapped the whole area. IMAM HUSSAIN (AS)
gathered his followers and relatives, praised Allah the Almighty then
said, "Surely I know not of better and sincere followers than you are to
me. May Allah reward you with His best rewards. I believe tomorrow is
our day to meet those enemies. Now you are all in relief of your
allegiance to me. Night is dark, so take it as a cover and go home. The
enemies want only me. If they get me, they will be satisfied with their
catch".

The holy Imam made it clear to them that whoever stayed with him would
surely be killed. He encouraged them to leave in the darkness to spare
them the feeling of shame as they retreated, if they preferred to
withdraw. But as soon as he had finished his words, the righteous
relatives and followers made their brave decision clear to him. At the
head of the speakers was hi half-brother AL-ABBAS who said, "Why should
we leave you? Is it to survive at your own expense? We pray to Allah
never to let us see such a day". Then others spoke, all preferring death
to life for his sake. The brave followers such as HABIB IBN MUDHAHIR,
Muslim IBN USAJA, ZUHAIR IBN AL-QIN and the others welcomed death in his
defense and said, "Praise is due to Allah Who has honored us in being at
your side, fighting your enemy and dying in your presence".

They were overwhelmed with Divine tranquility and were most truthful,
most sincere. On that dark night, in the camp of the holy Imam, nothing
could be heard but the utterance of glorification of Allah and the
praising His will. All were ready to enjoy martyrdom, eager to meet
death.

IMAM HUSSAIN now and then talked with them and filled their hearts with
true faith. They all longed to meet their Lord, hence they tuned to Him
for forgiveness. They murmured: "Our Lord! Surely we have heard a
preacher calling to faith saying: 'believe in your Lord', so we did
believe. Our Lord! Forgive, therefore, our faults and pardon our wrong
deeds, and make us die with the righteous. Our Lord accept the sacrifice
of Your purified servants (the Prophet's household, the AHL AL BAYT),
and let people hear our call, and turn towards us; You are all-Knowing,
all-Hearing". On the other side of the field, in the enemy's camp, IBN
SA'AD'S troops enjoyed eating and drinking just as cattle enjoy their
food. Songs and music could be heard. They were sure of their victory
against the handful strugglers in IMAM HUSAIN'S camp, hence they
rejoiced at their victory before hand.

**ASHURA**

At sunrise on the day of ASHURA (the 10th of MUHARRAM), the year 61 of
HIJRA, the small army in defense of the Truth faced the big army in
defense of falsehood. UMAR IBN SA'AD, the enemy army's leader, gave his
orders to start the fight and immediately arrows were thrown at IMAM
HUSAIN'S camp. Moreover, the court theologian in AL-MEDINA issued his
religious verdict justifying the big crime against the Prophet's
grandson (peace be upon both). The deviated jurist said, "AL-HUSAIN has
left his land and involved himself in politics, thus causing dispute and
division among the Muslims. He should be killed with the Muslims' sword
to rid Islam of him".

What a horrible statement it was! What a heinous crime it was! To
justify the murdering of the sublime figure along with the most
righteous believers if the pretext of his involvement in politics! It
was the ugliest crime of the self-claimed Muslim theologians.

The bodies of the righteous martyrs were torn under the hooves of the
horses at IBN SA'AD'S orders. Could it be involvement in politics or
malicious hatred towards Allah, the Messenger of Allah and his
household? It was mere hostility towards Allah, His Prophet, His
religion, and His Book. The battle was over, and everyone resorted to
rest in his own home except the Prophet's household: Women and Children
along with the young sick Imam, who were all captives in chains, were
transported from one place to another. While the name of Allah and of
His Messenger echoed on top of minarets in calls for daily prayers, the
sublime figures of the Prophet's household suffered every kind of
oppression and persecution. Could not those so-called Muslims read the
QURANIC verses in favor of the Prophet's household? The holy QURAN
says:

{Say (Oh, Mohammed): I ask you no recompense at all save love for my
relatives…} [AL-SHURA: 23].

SA'AD'S troops were not satisfied with their dirty performance against
the martyrs' holy bodies, so they put the Imam's dearest and nearest
women and children in chains and led them to the city of KUFA which once
was Imam Ali's residence during his caliphate. All the city's
inhabitants knew Imam Ali's noble daughter Lady ZAINAB, daughter of the
sublime Lady Fatima AL-ZAHRA, the Prophet's only daughter. They had
often seen her in her father's house while their women visited her and
attended her meetings and listened to her talks.

Now they saw her at the head of the arrested women and children. The
KUFIAN women and men felt a great shame. Stifled in tears, they cursed
IBN SA'AD and IBN ZIAD. Could that be enough? Could they be forgiven for
turning away from the Imam's call for help? Could their men, who sent
the martyred Imam letters calling him to their country to lead them
along the right path, then withdrew their help, be ever forgiven? Lady
ZAINAB ordered them to stop crying and in a speech exposed their
shameful deeds. Her words were lashes inflicted on their backs. Could
her words awaken the sleeping masses and revive in them the fading
awareness?

History tells us that her words were the most effective, next to the
sublime martyr's blood that brought YAZID'S tyrannical rule to an end.

**THE CAPTIVES IN DAMASCUS**

The captives were brought from AL-KUFA (Iraq) to Damascus (Syria) which
was celebrating YAZID'S so-called victory against his enemy, the
Prophet's grandson.

The mercenaries who carried the martyrs' head on their lances were
ordered to bring Imam HUSAIN'S holy head on a tray to the infidel YAZID
IBN MUAWIA (the curse of Allah is on YAZID and on his father MUAWIA).
History tells us that at the orders of an Israeli prostitute named
SALOMI, the head of Prophet YAHYA son of Prophet ZAKARRIA was brought on
a tray to the infidel ruler of the idolaters.

YAZID rejoiced on seeing the holy head and in false pride of the era of
ignorance expressed his rejoice through lines of poetry, Would that my
seniors of BADR (the battle when the infidels were defeated) were here,
To laugh, rejoice and to say:

Hail, YAZID, cease not killing, proceed! The HASHIMI plaything of
kingship is over, No revelation, nor news from heaven has ever come;
never. In Damascus, IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (IMAM ALI son of IMAM HUSAIN who
was spared the massacre through Divine care) had the chance to speak to
the people who stood on both sides of the roads. He discloses to them
the actual facts and cleared away their wrong illusions. The infidel
YAZID tired to mislead the people through spreading rumors that the
captives were only KHARIJITES, enemies of Islam. Now IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN
refuted YAZID'S claims and told the people that he, his martyred father
and brothers, and his family were Prophet Mohammed's offspring. He said
to the crowed, "…if there is someone who knows me, it is alright, but if
others do not know me, then I will inform them who I am. I am the son of
Mohammed AL-MUSTAFA (the chosen Prophet), I am the son of ALI
AL-MURTADHA (Allah is pleased with him), I am the son of FATIMA
AL-ZAHRA, the head of all women, I am the son of the one wrapped in
blood, slain in KERBALA.

IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN went on making clear to the attendants his actual
status till everyone who heard him started crying and cursing YAZID. The
people of Damascus were stunned at the actual truth. Could those
captives be the Prophet's dearest and nearest? What a heinous crime
YAZID had committed! What a big lie he had spread!

On knowing the truth, a great unrest spread in the city, a revolution
was about to start and shake YAZID'S firm control of AL-SHAM. He
immediately ordered the departure of the captives to Al-Medina, and the
martyrs' heads to be buried. The people were ordered never to utter IMAM
HUSAIN'S name if they wanted to avoid imprisonment and killing.

**THE MONUMENT OF MARTYRDOM**

The first one to pay homage to IMAM HUSAIN'S grave was the righteous
companion of Prophet Mohammed (P.B.U.H), JABIR IBN ABDILLAH AL-ANSARI.
He visited the holy grave few days after the battle of KERBALAL. He shed
hot tears near the grave. His tears scattered throughout the ages and
brought countless lovers to the martyred IMAM (AS). Since then, visitors
have never stopped visiting the holy shrine of IMAM HUSAIN (AS) nor
shedding hot tears on the events that took place that ASHURA. They,
wherever they, are curse the infidel YAZID and his likes of infidel
rulers, enemies of Islam. With the passage of years, the holy shrine has
become the center of freedom lovers who swear to tread the same road of
the sublime martyrs, IMAM AL-HUSAIN and his family and followers.

They swear to keep his revolution alive so that future generations may
keep on struggling against all oppressors and aggressive rulers. For
such an important reason, the UMMAYADS and after them the ABASSAIDS
tried to prevent people from visiting KERBALA and renewing the tragic
event. However, their desperate attempts were in vain. The holy shrine
has become a bright landmark. On that piece of land a house for the
worship of Allah is set up. The bright torch of martyrdom had become an
ever-burning light illuminating the road for those who wish to walk on
the right-path.

IMAM HUSAIN'S martyrdom teaches us many lessons:

" The bloodshed of the defeated small group has achieved victory
against all tyrants.
" The small party achieved victory against the big party though
following principles and high morals.
" Imam HUSAIN (as) is a school of thought from which lovers of freedom
learn how to rebel against the arrogant and the tyrants.
" Imam HUSAIN comes at the head of all strugglers of the world who
strive to achieve justice and dignity and equality for mankind.
It is a unique revolution in the lengthy human history.


