Imam Zain Al-abidin (a.s.)
==========================

**LINEAGE

IMAM ALI son of IMAM HUSAIN son of IMAM ALI IBN ABI TALIB (peace be
upon them all) was born on the 15th of JAMADI AL-AWWAL in the year 36 of
HIJRA in Al-Medina AL-MUNAWARA. His mother's name was SHAHRBANO. He was
blessed with martyrdom on the 25th of MUHARRAM in the year 95 of HIJRA
in Al-Medina and was buried at AL-BAQIE cemetery. The Imam's mother,
SHAHRBANO, was the daughter of a Persian emperor. There is nothing
strange in that. History tells us that Prophet ISMAEL'S mother was an
Egyptian maid in the court of Pharaoh. It is one sign of Allah's might
that nations meet each other just as oceans meet each other and pearls
are produced. Pharaoh's wife was a righteous woman through her belief in
Allah the Almighty while Prophet NUH'S son an infidel through his bad
deeds. The daughter of a noble Persian enjoyed faith in Allah and a
Roman emperor's daughter became the mother of the 12th IMAM MEHDI who is
still in occultation.

However, the hypocrites are not real believers in Allah, hence they
have criteria other than piety and good deeds that bring one nearer to
Allah the Exalted.

**THE ISLAMIC ETHICS**

When Persia was invaded by Muslims, the captives were brought to the
city of the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.) in HIJAZ. Having looked at
them, the caliph ordered their distribution on the victorious army
leaders, as was the custom then. The caliph's order had a different
impact on both sides: the captives and the victorious leaders. The
former were sad while the latter rejoiced. The daughters and
grandchildren of the Persian emperor YAZDAJERD stood humbly watching the
distribution of the captives. They wondered what the future held for
them. They sadly remembered their big hopes which until recently filled
their hearts when they enjoyed a luxurious life of power and might. They
wondered how matters could come to such an end! Could they blame their
army leaders or their own forefathers? Had the big Persian, the ruler,
KHOSROW (PARVIZ), or CHOSROES II who died in 628 of the Christian
calendar, not torn the Messenger of Allah's letter calling him to Islam,
would the result have been different? They had no answers to their
inquiries. They could not comprehend Allah's word:

{Thus We requited them because they disbelieved, and We do not requite
any but the ungrateful}. [SABA: 17]. While the caliph was looking at the
captives, a young man approached him and said, "I heard the Messenger of
Allah (P.B.U.H.) say: 'The noble and honorable ones of their people
should be respected. Their status should be considered'. These captives
are of high status. As Muslims, we are not supposed to leave them in
captivity. For my part, I set my own share free, seeking the pleasure of
Allah and His Messenger". The man was none but IMAM ALI IBN ABI TALIB
(as) whose words were appreciated by all. Immediately the other
believers, AL-ANSAR and AL-MUHAJREEN, followed his footstep and set free
theirs.

Peace and blessing of Allah be upon His Messenger who honored SAFANA
daughter of HATIM AL-TAYEE, the man who was very famous for his
generosity in the pre-Islamic era, though she was not yet Muslim. He set
her free in regard due to her honorable status. In pursuit of the
sublime morals of the holy Prophet, his truthful and trustworthy cousin
ALI (AS) put Islamic ethics to practice.

Ali's action had a good impact on the Persian captives who felt at ease
and no more worried about their future. They became sure of Islamic
justice and tolerance. Undoubtedly, Islamic instructions and teachings
do not discriminate between Arabs and non-Arabs, or between white and
black. All are equal in rights and should enjoy the caliph's protection
and care, since he is supposed to be the best man after the Messenger of
Allah. They felt special love for Ali (as).

**A DIVINE FAVOUR**

Soon after this event, SHAHRBANO daughter of YAZDAJERD was chosen a
wife for IMAM AL-HUSAIN (AS), the younger son of IMAM ALI (AS). She gave
birth to a son who was named ALI AL-ASGHAR (Ali the Junior), known also
as ZAIN AL-ABDIN (the best of the worshippers) due to his great piety
and chastity. He is the fourth Imam from the Prophet's lineage. Some
historians do not know the exact story of SHAHRBANO as it has been
related. IMAM HUSAIN (AS) had another son called ALI AL-AKBAR (Ali the
Senior) who greatly resembled the holy Prophet (P.B.U.H.) and who was
blessed with martyrdom at the battle of KERBALA on the 10th of MUHARRAM
the year 61 of HIJRA.

IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) resembled his grandfather IMAM ALI (AS) in
bravery, patience and piety along with his sound knowledge and brilliant
talent. Narrators say that when he accompanied his father on their way
to KERBALA, he was full of determination and prowess. When the battle
started, everyone had a sword and a shield. ZAIN AL-ABIDIN'S shield was
a bit longer for him and reached his knees, He immediately bent the
extra length then broke it out to have the shield fit. The attendants
were surprised at his strength and praised his strength. Yet he could
not make use of his bravery on the day of the battle. He suffered a
fever that threw him in bed. It was Allah's will that he should be sick
at that apex of the fight, hence be was spared martyrdom at that age in
order to survive and play his role in keeping the Prophet's progeny
safe, despite the tyrants' decision to end all of IMAM HUSAIN'S
offspring.

It was Allah's will that protected him and kept him alive while all
other males were blessed with martyrdom at the battle of KERBALA. They
left a bright record in the Islamic history though their struggle
against oppression while their enemies are cursed throughout history. At
the end of that tragic event, women and children were chained then taken
to KUFA accompanied by IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN.

**FACING THE INFIDEL IBN ZIAD**

At the city of KUFA, the infidel IBN ZIAD made a show of arrogance and
merry-making. His mercenaries surrounded him, so he could insult the
captives as much as he could, using malicious words against them.

No one dared utter a word for fear of his cruelty. When he saw IMAM
ZAIN AL-ABIDIN, he said, "Who are you?" The Imam (as) answered, "I am
Ali son of AL-HUSAIN". The tyrant said, "Has not Allah killed Ali son of
AL-HUSAIN?" The Imam said, "I had a brother called Ali; the people
killed him". IBN ZIAD said, "Surely, Allah had killed him". The Imam
said, "Allah takes the souls at death". IBN ZIAD was vexed because the
Imam refuted his claims. He shouted, "dare you answer me?' He ordered
his mercenaries to kill him, but his Aunt Lady ZAINAB protected him with
her arms and said, "By Allah! I will not let him go. Kill me before you
kill him. Are not you satisfied with the blood you have shed of my men?"
IBN ZIAD could not kill a woman, hence the Imam's life was spared.

**FACING THE TYRANT YAZID**

The captives, members of the prophet's family, were taken to AL-SHAM
(Syria) where people were told that those captives were outlaws who
stirred sedition, and that it was necessary to punish them.

Damascus, at the order of the cursed YAZID, was decorated to celebrate
his so-called victory. The captives entered Damascus and were brought to
YAZID'S court. The nobles and the officials were all in their best
attire sitting on both sides of the tyrant who rejoiced at seeing the
martyrs' severed heads. He recited some poetry to express his happiness
at the martyrdom of the prophet's family. He turned to ZAIN AL-ABIDIN
and said, "Your father had denied my blood relation and ignored my right
to authority, hence Allah had done this to him". The Imam (as) recited
the following QURANIC verse:

{No evil befalls on the earth nor in your own souls but it is in a book
before We bring it into existence; surely that is easy for Allah. So
that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant at
what He has given you, and Allah does not love any arrogant boaster}
[AL-HADID: 22-23].

YAZID ordered one of his mercenaries to ascend the pulpit and degrade
Imam Ali and his two sons, AL-HASAN and AL-HUSAIN (peace be upon them).
The man did so and insulted the righteous Imams. IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN
said to him, "Woe to you, O speaker! You have bought the pleasure of the
creature for the displeasure of the Creator, so get your seat in the
Fire".

Then he turned to the people and said, "O people! If you know me, then
it is all right, if you do not know me, then I will inform you of my
lineage: I am the son of Mohammed AL-MUSTAFA (the one chosen by Allah),
I am the son of ALI AL-MURTADHA (the one favored by Allah), I am the
sonâ€¦." He continued mentioning the sublime status of his grandfathers:
Prophet Mohammed (P.B.U.H.) and Imam Ali (as), of his martyred father
AL-HUSAIN (as). Then he related the tragic event of KERBALA which caused
the attendants to burst in tears. YAZID feared the reaction, so he
ordered someone to call to the prayers in order to disrupt the Imam's
disclosure of the truth. When the caller to the prayers said, "Allah is
the Greatest", the Imam confirmed: "None is greater than Allah". When
the caller said, "I bear witness there is no god but Allah", the Imam
said, "My flesh, my skin, my blood and my hair all bear witness to it".
when the caller said, "I bear witness Mohammed is he Messenger of
Allah", the Imam turned to YAZID and said, "This Mohammed, is he your
grandfather or my grandfather? If you say: He is my grandfather, then
you lie and disbelieve. If you say: He is your grandfather, then why
have you killed his offspring?"

YAZID was at a loss of words. He blamed IBN ZIAD for the heinous crime,
but none believed him. Finally he had to get rid of the captives and
send them back to Al-Medina to avoid more exposure of the truth.

**TOWARDS AL-MEDINA**

The captives were released, and the Imam ordered the caravan to first
make their way to KERBALA to pay homage to the martyrs' graves. They
stopped there and shed hot tears on the sacred spot of martyrdom. Since
then and throughout the years, the area has become a fortress of worship
that relates the heroic roles of its figures who confronted injustice
and oppression. Then the caravan made its way towards the city of the
Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.). All its inhabitants, young and old, women
and men, came out to meet the bereaved members of the Prophet's
family.

They cried bitterly and shed hot tears on hearing the details of the
tragedy. They blamed themselves and expressed regret for their negative
stance. They crowded round the Imam to offer condolence and prayed to
Allah to forgive them. The Imam (as) stood up and addressed them saying,
"Praise is due to Allah the Lord of the worlds, the Compassionate, the
Merciful, the Master of the Day of Judgment, the Creator of all
creatures. O people! Allah, Whom do I praise, has tried us with grave
calamities. Islam has been grossly damaged. Imam HUSAIN (father of Imam
ZAIN AL-ABIDIN) has been killed. His severed holy head has been raised
on lances and paraded to people, carried from town to town. His women
and children have been made captive. It is a tragedy of no like. O
people! We have become homeless chased for no guilt nor sin, for no
damage done to Islam by us. By Allah, had the Prophet approached them to
fight s as he had advised them to treat us well, they would not have
exceeded in hostility. We are from Allah, and to His shall we return. To
Him we complain our hardship; He is Mighty in revenge on the unjust".

His words stirred great sadness in the masses that filled the place
with crying and wailing. They sensed the great damage inflicted on Islam
and were ready to rebel and revenge.

**SEVERAL UPRISINGS**

The tragedy of KERBALA was a big shock that awakened heedless people
and stirred their abated feelings, hence several uprisings erupted
against the infidel rulers. One year only after the battle of KERBALA, a
revolution exploded in the city of the Messenger of Allah. The people
attacked the UMAYYAD agents and followers. They repealed their
allegiance to YAZID and chased his governor out. When YAZID heard of the
revolution, he sent a big army led by MUSLIM IBN UQBA to invade
Al-Medina. Several hundreds of innocent people were killed at a battle
called AL-HARRA. The troops had a free hand to commit all crimes for
three days. They plundered properties, destroyed homes, and raped chaste
women. Finally, the people of Al-Medina gave in to the aggressive army
and swear the oath fed to be YAZID'S slaves. They paid a high price for
their indifference when IMAM HUSAIN called for help.

Another uprising started in HIJAZ. It was led by ABDILLAH IBN
AL-ZUBAIR, the deadly enemy of the Prophet's family. He waited long to
have the opportunity to assume power. The martyrdom of Imam HUSAIN
provided him with such an opportunity. Under the cover of revenge for
Imam HUSAIN'S blood, he declared his revolution. He never thought of
AHLUL BAYT was quite clear.

On seeing revolts start here and there, IBN AL-ZUBAIR was encouraged to
fight YAZID. He formed an army and started a battle near holy Mecca.
Many people were killed and the holy KA'BA was thrown with fire balls by
YAZID'S men. Before the battle was over, YAZID was killed and his men
withdrew, in the wake of hearing the news. IBN AL-ZUBAIR enjoyed
authority for a while until he was killed by AL-HAJJAJ during ABDUL
MALIK IBN MARWAN'S regime.

One of the many revolts that started due to the battle of KERBALA was
one very well-known as "The repentant uprising" (THAWRAT AL-TAWWABIN).
It started in AL-KUFA in the year 65 of HIJRA, and extended to include
AL-BASRA and Al-Median (Iraq), and was labeled: THAWRAT AL-TAWWABIN,
after the name of a groups of KUFIANS who expressed their great
repentance at their holding back in IMAM HUSAIN'S struggle against
infidel YAZID, though they had previously sent him letters to come to
KUFA and enjoy their support. They declared their sincere repentance and
were led by SULAIMAN IBN AL-SURD AL-KHUZAE'. It is said that their
number mounted to 16,000. the repentant left AL-KUFA and headed towards
IMAM HUSAIN'S holy gravesite.

They put on their shrouds and swore never to return to their homes
until they effected revenge against the killers. They tried to make up
for their shortcoming in the battle of KERBALA by killing the Imam's
enemies or being themselves martyred. They raised their voices calling
revenge for Imam HUSAIN'S blood. Their shouts spread everywhere. When
they reached the holy grave, they cried day and night then made their
way towards the Syrian territory. They continued reciting the following
QURANIC verse: {â€¦ therefore turn to your Creator (repentant), so kill
yourselves, that is the best for you with your Creator, so He turned to
you, surely He is the Oft-returning, the Merciful}. [The Cow: 54].

They met IBN ZIAD'S army on the way and were about to defeat him had no
help reached him on time. They continued fighting until they were all
killed. Thus they passed away as models of repentance and penitence;
thus they left behind for the following generation to inherit the
essence of revolution against all oppressors and tyrants of the world.
In the wake of YAZID'S death, uprisings increased against the UMAYYAD
rule. AL-MUKHTAR IBN UBAID AL-THAQAFI'S revolt started also in KUFA in
the year 66 of HIJRA.

AL-MUKHTAR called the KUFIANS to avenge the shedding of the Imam's
blood, and many people responded to his call. He put his hand on the
official treasure and distributed the money on those who joined him. He
controlled the affairs in KUFA and tried to enhance his office through
writing to IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (as) in Medina. He asked for the Imam's
support and offered him allegiance. The Imam did not response because he
was aware of AL-MUKHTAR'S personal interests. On receiving no answer
form the Imam, he wrote to Mohammed son of Imam Ali (as), nicknamed IBN
AL-HANAFIYYA (after his mother's name). AL-MUKHTAR spread the rumor that
IBN AL-HANAFIYYA was the one entrusted with the Divine bliss and was
AL-QAIM (AL-MEHDI) from the Prophet's offspring. He also claimed the
support of IBN AL-HANAFIYYA; hence some people believed his lies and a
new religions sect, AL-KESANIYYA, came into existence.

**THE MIGHTY REVENGE**

Anyway, AL-MUKHTAR chased the killers of IMAM HUSAIN (as) and those who
participated in fight against him, especially their leaders such as IBN
SA'AD, IBN ZIAD, and their likes. He spared none of them and revenged in
similar manner of their own practice against IMAM HUSAIN and his
companions. He was a deadly enemy of the UMAYYADS. Finally, he caught
IBN ZIAD and beheaded him. He sent his head along with the head of IBN
SA'AD, some presents, and a maid to IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS).

On seeing the two heads, the IMAM (AS) threw himself on the ground in
prostration, thanking Allah the Almighty. He said, "Praise is due to
Allah who achieved for me revenge on my enemies. May Allah best reward
AL-MUKHTAR". He (as) accepted the presents and married the maid who gave
birth to his son: ZAID IBN ALI. ZAID grew up a firm struggler for the
sake of Allah's religion. He led a revolt against the UMAYYADS' rule and
was blessed with martyrdom. Thus, he conveyed the message of his
righteous forefathers and struggled until he was killed for the sake of
Allah.

**IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIBIN PERSONAL QUALITIES**

The Imam (as) resembled his two grandfathers: the Prophet (P.B.U.H.)
and Imam Ali (as), in morals and ethics. He was of sound religious
knowledge of QURANIC sciences. He was generous, pious and of sublime
demeanor. It is related that he was one day in the presence of the
UMAYYAD caliph UMAR IBN ABDIL AZIZ. When he left, the caliph asked the
attendants, "Who is the most honorable of all creatures?" some of the
flatterers said, "Your Excellency, you are". The caliph said, "No I am
not. it is he who has just left".

This incident indicated his sublime status and the respect he enjoyed
among the people. Another indication of his sublime morals and
forgiveness is linked to MARWAN IBN AL-HAKAM, the deadly enemy of AHLUL
BAYT, peace be upon them. AL-HAKAM was the one who advised Al-Medina's
governor to kill IMAM HUSAIN when the Imam refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to infidel YAZID. AL-HAKAM was also among those who fought
Imam Ali (as) in the battle of the camel and in SIFFIN. Yet, none could
spare AL-HAKAM'S family from the citizens' wrath and revenge except Imam
ZAIN AL-ABIDIN. That was on the day when the inhabitants of Al-Medina
rebelled against the UMAYYAD domination. The IMAM (AS) provided
AL-HAKAM'S women and children a safe haven with his own family.

Such high morals are confined to those infallible figures chosen by
Allah the Almighty. IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN'S qualities were not different
from his grandfather's. the Messenger of Allah pardoned the infidels and
the hypocrites after the invasion of Mecca. He (P.B.U.H.) set free all
those who were supposed to be punished for their crimes against the
early Muslims and the Prophet himself.

Similarly, Imam Ali (as) pardoned MARWAN IBN AL-HAKAM who participated
in the battle of the camel. He set him free, though he could have
punished him as a criminal of war. He let him go though he was sure that
MARWAN would join MUAWIA'S camp and fight him in SIFFIN, as he actually
did. Surely such is the HASHIMI generosity and forgiveness. His other
outstanding characteristic was his unique generosity. Many needy
families lived on his personal help. He used to carry food to them,
under disguise, so they never knew his real identity until he was
blessed with martyrdom and no longer came to assist them. They said, "We
missed the secret alms at the demise of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN, ZAIN
AL-ABIDIN, peace be on him".

**AL-SAHIFA AL-SAJJADIYYA AND RISALT AL-HUQOOQ**

His profound knowledge was extremely deep. Although he was not allowed
to hold meetings to address attendants in mosque in order to guide them
to the right path, he resorted to other means. He conveyed his message
though DU'A and glorification of Allah. He left on record more than
sixty supplications (DU'A) compiled in AL-SAHIFA AL-SAJJADIYYA, related
later by his two sons, IMAM AL-BAQIR and ZAIN IBN ALI, along with other
trustworthy followers.

Up to the present day, the believers recite those supplications and
glorifications. They are full of Islamic ethics and morals that bring
the believers nearer to Allah the Almighty. He (as) also recorded for
his followers long pages telling them their duties and rights towards
each other in 50 items known as RISALT AL-HUQOOQ. The items include all
kinds of relations and duties towards: brothers, neighbors, friends,
spouses, rulers, and so on. In addition, many sagacious statements are
related to him (as).

There is no wonder at such abundant knowledge, since he (as) is the
fourth of the infallible purified Imams who are inheritors of Prophetic
sciences and Divine knowledge. They are bright torches that lead mankind
to he right path.


**Imam Mohammad Al-Baqir (A.S.)**

**LINEAGE**

IMAM MOHAMMED AL-BAQIR son of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN (peace be upon all
of them) was born on the first of RAJAB (Lunar Calendar) in the year 56
of HIJRA in Al-Medina Al-MUNAWARA. His mother was Fatima daughter of
IMAM AL-HASAN (A.S.). he was blessed with martyrdom on the 7th of
DHIL-HIJJA, in the year 114 of HIJRA, and was buried at AL-BAQIE in
Al-Medina.

**THE BLESSED OFFSPRING**

IMAM AL-HASAN (AS) had a daughter named Fatima, after her grandmother
Lady Fatima, the only daughter of the Prophet (P.B.U.H.). she was pious,
pure and chaste, and she grew up in the house of virtue and Islamic
ethics. She learned Islamic knowledge and QURANIC sciences at the house
of Prophet-hood.

IMAM AL-HASAN (as) wanted his niece Fatima II to marry his son Ali II.
They led a pious life of chastity. She gave birth to a son named
Mohammed, nicknamed AL-BAQIR, with bright talents and vast knowledge.
Prophetic narrations indicate which identified him as having vast
knowledge, even prior to his blessed birth. That was Divine knowledge
revealed to him (P.B.U.H.). AL-BAQIR resembled his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.) to a great extent.

**CHILDHOOD AND THE TRAGIC EVENTS**

When IMAM HUSAIN (AS) made his way towards Iraq and camped at a place
named KERBALA, he was accompanied by his women and sons, including ALI
ZAIN AL-ABIDIN and his wife Fatima and tier son: Mohammed AL-BAQIR who
was only four years old. Thus the little child witnessed the tragic
events of the battle of KERBALA. He witnessed the tragic martyrdom of
his grandfather IMAM HUSAIN (AS) and of other relatives and followers
who fell one after the other in the battlefield and covered the area
with their noble blood. He also underwent captivity along with his
parents and relatives when they were taken to KUFA and later to AL-SHAM
(Greater Syria). He saw the holy head of his grandfather and other
martyrs' heads carried on lances. He saw the people of AL-SHAM celebrate
the occasion and YAZID'S hostility towards AHLUL BAYT (as).

He saw everything and heard every word; thus, he perceived through his
childhood the tragic events, while he started learning Islamic sciences
at the hands of his father IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS).

He suffered from the tyranny of the UMAYYAD rulers as he was
contemporary to YAZID'S regime and those of ABDUL MALIK IBN MARWAN and
his two sons (AL-WALID and HISHAM). He also witnessed the aggressive
policy of one of their most cruel governors: AL-HAJJAJ IBN YUSUF, a wild
beast, who imposed a house arrest on the Imam's noble father while all
other people enjoyed their freedom of speech and could say and write
whatever they wanted. He, AL-HAJJAJ, deprived the holy Imams of their
freedom and warned whoever came in contact with them. Hence, people
could not benefit from his father's religious sciences, nor could they
convey their religious inquiries to him for only one reason: His being
the grandson of Ali son of ABI TALIB and son of IMAM HUSAIN.

However, there were many who were brave enough to get in touch with the
Imam and enjoy his company. One of those brave men was JABIR IBN
ABDILLAH AL-ANSARI, the only surviving companion of the Prophet
(P.B.U.H.) until then. Eh was quite old and conveyed a message from the
Prophet (P.B.U.H.) to IMAM AL-BAQIR 9AS).

JABIR used to sit at the Prophet's mosque and utter the words: BAQIR
AL-ILM (cutting through abundant knowledge). The people of Al-Medina
were amazed on hearing him utter those words often and thought that he
was delirious. He would then swear to them that he was quite sane and
was uttering only what he had heard from the Messenger of Allah
(P.B.U.H.). he (P.B.U.H.) one day said to JABIR, "O JABIR! You will live
until you see a son born from my offspring. His name is my name, his
features are my features. He will enjoy abundant knowledge, he is: BAQIR
AL-ILM". Thus he explained to them his insistence on uttering his
nickname.

One day, when JABIR was walking along the alleys of AL-Medina, he saw a
boy whom he stopped and asked, "What is your name, O young boy?" the boy
said, "My name is Mohammed son of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN". JABIR kissed
his head and said, "May my parents be your sacrifice! Your grandfather
the Messenger of Allah sends you his greeting". The boy in turn sent his
greeting to the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) and hurried home to tell his father
of that incident. On hearing it, IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN ordered his son to
stay at home, for fear of the aggressive rulers who had put the Imam and
his family under their surveillance. He knew that they would harm him if
they knew of his future Imamate.

JABIR used to meet AL-BAQIR and discuss religious matters with him. He
realized that the Prophetic sciences were entrusted to him. One day he
said to him, "O son! You will solve different problems and answer all
inquiries. O son of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN son of Ali son of ABI TALIB!
You are among those who enjoy Divine sciences at an early age". Then he
recited the following QURANIC verse: {O YAHYA! Take hold of the Book
with strength, and We granted him wisdom while still a child}. [MARIAM:
12]. Nearly 100 years after HIJRA passed when IMAM ZIAN AL-ABIDIN died.
He entrusted the Imamate to his son Mohammed AL-BAQIR who was then 40
years old.

**THE ERA OF IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS)**

During IMAM AL-BAQIR'S Imamate, two of ABDUL MALIK'S sons, AL-WALID and
SULAIMAN, ruled successively. Then UMAR IBN ABDIL AZIZ assumed power,
then ABDUL MALIK'S other two sons, YAZID and HISHAM.

Whoever of those rulers visited Al-Medina, he would visit IMAM AL-BAQIR
due to his religious status among the Muslim. They would also invite him
to Damascus. They wanted to keep him away from Al-Medina where they
feared the people might be influenced by him, especially when the
UMAYYAD domination was getting weak throughout the vast Islamic world.
Such a situation gave the Imam a better chance to act, and it lessened
the pressure on him, hence people could visit him and listen to his
lessons and sermons. He used to hold meetings every morning when
different branches of sciences were taught and religious education was
conduced. Sciences during his time made a big progress hence the era was
labeled "golden". A great number of Prophetic narrations are related by
him.

His was also the era of Islamic awareness. Fifty years following the
battle of KERBALA were enough for people to realize that the UMAYYAD who
ruled under the cover of Islam were not at all real Muslims. Those great
men (IMAM HUSAIN (AS) and his followers) who scarified their lives for
the sake of Islamic awareness taught the others clear lessons. Hence the
Muslim believers raised the banner of revolution against injustice,
corruption and deviation. Revolts started in many places. KERBALA'S
bright torch of martyrdom illuminated the road for them.

Many ALAWIS declared revolution but they failed. Even the revolution
led by ZAID IBN ALI, IMAM AL-BAQIR'S brother, did not achieve success
when his followers abandoned him. With a few of his supporters, he
fought bravely but was finally defeated due to the enemy's great number.
He was a pious, God-fearing worshipper, and very brave. IMAM AL-BAQIR
(AS) and his family were greatly saddened by his tragic defeat, thus he
was blessed with martyrdom.

Yet IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) witnessed not only the UMAYYAD tyranny but the
ABBASIDE one as well. Just as the UMAYYAD exploited religion to achieve
their goal, the ABBASIDES raised the banner of devotion to AHLUL BAYT
and struggled under the slogans of revenge for AHLUL BAYT'S martyrs,
while they actually sought to achieve their own goal of authority and
leadership. Hence, ABU Muslim AL-KHURASANI, ABU SALAMA, and ABU AL-ABBAS
AL-SAFFAH became combatant strugglers.

**THE SHORT RULE OF JUSTICE**

When UMAR IBN ABDIL AZIZ became caliph, he tried to make up for the
damage inflicted on the Prophet's household by the preceding rulers. At
the order of cursed MUAWIA, the prayer leaders were ordered to curse the
leader of all believers: Ali (as) from the mosques' pulpits. UMAR IBN
ABDIL AZIZ immediately ordered them to stop the cursing , although he
could not remove the black disgrace from the UMAYAYD history. He also
ordered the return of the FADAK property to AHLUL BAYT after they were
deprived of it for many decades. FADAK was Fatima's own property given
to her by her father as a gift. The right procedure taken by UMAR IBN
ABDIL AZIZ exposed the great injustice done to AHLUL BAYT by the
oppressive rulers. He also ordered the recording of Prophetic
narrations, something which was banned for a hundred years.

IBN ABDIL AZIZ'S rule did not last long (nearly two years). Soon after
him, HISHAM IBN ABDIL MALIK seized power and increased pressure on the
Prophet's family. This motivated JA'FER, the eldest son of IMAM AL-BAQIR
(AS), to stand during the pilgrimage season, when thousands of men and
women gathered in the sacred house, and introduce his father and himself
to the pilgrims. He said, "Praise is due to Allah who entrusted Mohammed
with Prophet-hood and honored us through him. We are the elite of
Allah's creatures and the best of His worshippers. Lucky is he who
follows us; miserable is he who opposes and hates us".

HISHAM'S brother MASLAMA was among the pilgrims and who heard those
words. He saw how the pilgrims were influenced and how they crowded
around JA'FER and his father (peace be on both), confirming their
sublime status. MASLAMA felt a bitter hatred and conveyed to his brother
the whole incident. HISHAM was vexed at the young man who dared speak to
the people and call them to follow him and his father. He wondered: How
dare JA'FER and his father declare their right to the caliphate? How
could they ignore the UMAYYAD domination?

He ordered his governor in Al-Medina to send IMAM AL-BAQIR and his son
to Damascus which was then the seat of the Islamic government. It was a
beautiful big city with huge buildings and grand mosques.

IMAM AL-BAQIR and his son had no option except to set out to Damascus.
When they reached it, they were kept waiting for three days before being
called to HISHAM'S court. In fact, HISHAM intended to humiliate them in
front of his mercenaries and court attendants. On the fourth day, he
invited them to his court which was decorated at its best, surrounded
with beautiful gardens. Guards stood in two rows on both sides. They
were dressed splendidly, showing angry faces. The army leaders,
dignitaries and UMAYYAD prominent figures stood with bows and arrows
aiming at a certain target set up especially fro that purpose.

IMAM AL-BAQIR entered and saluted the attendants without addressing
HISHAM with the title of "leader of the believers". This had a serious
impact on HISHAM and on the attendants who were unable to utter a word.
IMAM AL-SADIQ later related the event. He said, "â€¦. When we entered, my
father in front and I behind him; HISHAM shouted: 'O Mohammed! Take the
bow and the arrow and shoot with the seniors of your folks".

"My father said, 'I am too old to do it; see if you excuse me!' "HISHAM
shouted: 'I swear by Him Who honored us through His religion and His
Prophet (P.B.U.H); you are not excused!'

"The tyrant thought the IMAM would fail in aiming at the target and
thus would be degraded in front of the mob of the country. He pointed to
someone to hand the Imam a bow and an arrow. The Imam took the bow,
fixed the arrow and when it exactly in the heart of the target. He took
a second arrow and threw it cutting the first one in half. He took
another arrow and another oneâ€¦. Until he used nine of them without
missing the target "HISHAM was confused and shouted: 'O father of
JA'FER! You are the best shooter of all Arabs and non-Arabs, yet you
claim you are too old for it!' "HISHAM regretted his hasty praise and
gazed on the ground, leaving the Imam still standing. The Imam became
angry and, as it was his habit, lifted his head up and looked at the
sky. When HISHAM saw anger on the face of the Imam, he stood up, went to
him, took him in his arms and seated him on his right side. Then he said
to him, 'O Mohammed! QURAYSH will still rule the Arabs and non-Arabs as
long as it has men like you! By Allah the Gracious, it is well done! How
did you learn it? when? Who aught you this? Can JA'FER shoot arrows as
well as you can?'

"IMAM AL-BAQIR (as) said, 'We inherit perfection!"

"The tyrant was red with anger. He said, 'What?! Are not we sons of
ABDI MANAF, of the same lineage?" "The IMAM (AS) refuted his claims. He
said, 'We are all the sons of ABDI MANAF, but Allah has entrusted only
us with His perfect knowledge and Divine secrets".

"HISHAM said, 'Has not Allah sent Mohammed from the offspring of ABDI
MANAF to all people, to the White, the Black, and the Yellow?! How can
you inherit what is not yours? Does not Allah say: {Surely We inherit
the earth and all those on it?} how could you inherit this knowledge
while you are no Prophets, and there is no Prophet after Mohammed
(P.B.U.H)?"

"The Imam said, 'We have got it through Allah's words: {Don't move your
tongue with it to make haste of it} [AL-QIYAMA: 16]. What he did not
tell others he told us according to the order of Allah. That is why IMAM
ALI (AS) said, 'the Messenger of Allah taught me a thousand doors
leading to knowledge, each door leading to a thousand other doors'. The
holy Prophet entrusted him only with that knowledge and it has been our
inheritance rather than others of our folks".

"HISHAM was shocked and did not know what to say. He said, 'What is
your need?" "The Imam said, 'I have left my family, wife, and children
behind. They surely mess me". "HISHAM said, 'May Allah spare them
missing you; go back to them and set out today".

**THE IMAM DEBATES A BISHOP**

While IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) was in Damascus, he one day met some
Christians who were on their way to meet one of their learned scholars
during a religious celebration. The Imam accompanied them. The
Christians lived peacefully among the Muslims and practiced their
rituals according to their beliefs. IMAM AL-BAQIR attended that meeting
and sat with the others. The Christian bishop looked at him. Since he
did not know him, he asked him, "Are you one of us or one of the blessed
nation?"

The Imam (as) said, "One of the blessed nation"
The Bishop said, "are you one of its scholars or of its ignorant
ones?"
the Imam said, "I am not of its ignorant ones".

The Bishop said, "You claim you go (after death) to Paradise where you
eat and drink but no defecate".

The Imam said, "Yes". The Bishop said, "Prove it to me". The Imam said,
"The fetus in its mother's womb eats from her food, drinks from her
drink, but does not defecate". The Bishop was stunned at the answer and
said, "You claimed you were not of its scholars".

The Imam said, "I said, 'I am not of its ignorant ones". The debate
continued for a long time until the Bishop was defeated. He became angry
and said to his followers, "By Allah! I will not talk with you or see
you for twelve months".

He thought they had purposely brought the Imam with them to defeat him
in the debate. The above mentioned story spread throughout Damascus and
the people became aware of the Imam's sound knowledge at all levels.
When HISHAM heard of it, he made up his mind to annoy the Imam, so he
sent his mercenaries to the towns along the route of YATHRIB (Al-Medina)
to spread a lie claiming that the son of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN had joined
a Christian monastery and had accepted Christianity. Thus, the people
were ordered not to talk to his caravan nor to host them, nor to sell
them food or drink. The people were even ordered to close their town
gates in their faces.

The Imam's caravan left Damascus for YATHRIB. They reached one of the
towns on their way. They were very tired and thirsty. They dismounted
from their animals near that town to get some food and water then to
continue their journey. They found the town gates locked and the
people's doors closed. People usually act according to their rulers'
whims.

The travelers were short of water, and the doors were closed; so, what
could they do? The Imam (as) stood on a big rock and spoke to them
gently and patiently, but they lent him a deaf ear, insisting on their
stance. He then raised his voice and recited some QURANIC verses warning
them of Allah's wrath just as Prophet SHUAIB had warned his people. He
recited to them the following QURANIC verses:

{And to MADIAN (We sent) their brother SHUAIB. He said: 'O my people,
serve Allah, you have no god other than Him; clear proof indeed has come
to you from your Lord, therefore give full measure and weight and do not
diminish to men their things, and do not make mischief in the land after
its reform; this is better for you if you are believers}. [A'RAF: 85]

Then the Imam addressed the people of the town saying, 'O people of the
unjust town! What remains with Allah is better for you! I am what
remains". As soon as he uttered those words, one of their old men
shouted at his folk, saying, "O people! By Allah, this is SHUAIB'S
invocation. Fear Allah and open your doors for this holy man. If you do
not, you will suffer Allah's wrath. I am a mere adviser to you, so
listen to me". On hearing the wise man's warning, the people were afraid
and realized their big sin of opposing their Prophet's grandson in order
to please the oppressive ruler: HISHAM. They opened the doors and hosted
the caravan and asked the Imam to forgive them. Surely in every person
there is some feeling of pure faith that can be awakened in due time.

**THE IMAM'S ACTIVE LIFE**

The era of IMAM AL-BAQIR was the most crucial in Islamic history and
the most important. During his time, various Islamic sects came into
existence and political parties confronted each other. Strong return to
norms of the era of Ignorance spread among the people. People started
boasting of their forefathers' lineage, hence the tribal prejudice was
stirred and conflicts appeared. The UMAYYADS encouraged such norms. A
life of luxury, indecent practices, and unlawful accumulation of wealth
could be noticed throughout the Islamic world.

The Imam tried his best to put things right and spare the people the
deviated life. He set up centers for preaching and guidance in order to
keep religion free from distortion. He also confronted the deviated
sects through care for AHLUL BAYT'S School of Thought that was set up by
his grandfather ALI IBN ABI TALIB (AS) and his grandsons, the purified
Imams. Great numbers of religious scholars attended his school and
benefited from his religious knowledge and QURANIC sciences.

He spent his life struggling for the sake of Allah. He confronted the
anti-Islamic trends and the oppressive rulers. At the age of 58, a
sinful hand of the UMAYYAD enemy poisoned him. The UMAYYADS feared his
sublime morals, great piety, and graceful status that attracted who shed
their blood for the sake of Islam. Thus he added to the bright pages of
Islamic mission another bright page. He enhanced the community with
elements of awareness and progress that brought about flourishing
civilization.


**
