Imam Ja'fer Al-sadiq (a.s.)
===========================

**LINEAGE**

Nicknamed AL-SADIQ (The Truthful), IMAM JA'FER son of IMAM Mohammed was
born in Al-Medina on the 17th of RABI AL-AWAL in the year 83 of HIJRA.
His mother was Fatima daughter of AL-QASIM son of Mohammed son of ABI
BAKR. He was blessed with martyrdom in Al-Medina on the 25th of SHAWAL
in the year 148 of HIJRA and was buried at AL-BAQIE' cemetery in
AL-MEDINA AL-MUNAWARA.

**EVENTS PRIOR TO HIS IMAMATE**

Twenty three years after the tragic battle of KERBALA, a son was born
in the family of the Prophet (P.B.U.H). he was the son of Mohammed
AL-BAQIR son of ALI IBN AL-HUSAIN, the only survivor in the Prophet's
family following the tragic battle of KERBALA. Hence, AL-SADIQ'S
grandfather is IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS).

JA'FER AL-SADIQ enjoyed the company of his grandfather besides that of
his parents till he was thirteen years old, when the noble grandfather
was blessed with martyrdom after years of a life of piety and good
deeds. JA'FER was raised in a house of piety and righteousness, so he
enjoyed sublime morals and was nicknamed "AL-SADIQ", one who always
tells the truth, thus he came to be known as JA'FER AL-SADIQ.

During those days, ABDUL MALIK IBN MARWAN ruled the Muslim world. His
deputy in Al-Medina was a stonehearted man called AL-HAJJAJ IBN YOUSUF
who subjected the followers of Imam Ali (as) to a severe torture. He
threw most of them, without having committed any guilt, in prison and
treated them with utmost cruelty. He put IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN'S house
under surveillance and warned people of getting in touch with him, while
the enemies of Islam and of the Prophet's family enjoyed freedom.

At the death of ABDIL MALIK, his son AL-WALID assumed power. He was
more oppressive than his father towards the members of AHLUL BAYT, peace
be upon them. This infidel ruler demonstrated his disbelief in public
and even mocked Islamic values and ethics. However, his rule did not
last long. He died and UMAR IBN ABDIL AZIZ succeeded him.

IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) by then was no longer a young man while his father
IMAM AL-BAQIR enjoyed the Imamate of the Muslim believers. During the
rule of ABDIL AZIZ, the Prophet's family members were treated much
better than in previous years. They were spared harassment, and IMAM
AL-BAQIR enjoyed his freedom. He could hold meetings, sit among the
people and teach them Islamic instructions and QURANIC sciences besides
other branches of knowledge. IBN ABDIL AZIZ'S rule also did not last
long. Following his death, HISHAM IBN ABDIL MALIK assumed power. HISHAM
was a cruel and tough man who openly demonstrated his hatred towards the
Prophet's offspring. IMAM AL-BAQIR suffered from his cruelty to some
extent, though less than he suffered during the era of other rulers.

It is related that HISHAM one day summoned IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) and asked
him to tell him of his need which he promised he would meet. The only
request the Imam made was to let him return to Al-Medina so that he
would be able to carry on his lessons in Islamic sciences. HISHAM
agreed, and the Imam returned to the mosque of his grandfather, the
Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H). he carried on his mission, giving
religious lessons to his students who were ever-increasing in number,
whether old or young. Thus, the Prophet's family enjoyed the respect of
all Muslims. IMAM AL-BAQIR possessed sound and deep knowledge which his
students learned and spread in different cities and towns. They spread
the Imam's instructions throughout all towns and villages and conveyed
his religious verdicts which became widely known everywhere.

HISHAM'S mercenaries felt the great danger that the Imam's lessons
endangered the authority of the rulers through exposing facts that were
previously hidden. Yet the mercenaries could do nothing to stop the
Imam's lessons or halt the people's new awareness. The UMAYYAD control
of the affairs of the Muslims was getting weaker and weaker, and people
everywhere confronted the oppressive rulers and rejected their
injustice. Hence, IMAM AL-BAQIR managed to proceed with his lessons
while his students kept increasing in number throughout the Muslim
world.

**AHLUL BAYT UNIVERSITY**

IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) passed away in the year 114 of HIJRA after he had
entrusted his son JA'FER AL-SADIQ (AS) with the Imamate. HISHAM IBN
ABDIL MALIK was more worried because AL-SADIQ (AS) carried on his
father's lessons more actively and vividly, since he was a young man,
only 31 year old, full of energy and strength. AL-SADIQ'S great concern
was the school of thought of AHLUL BAYT which was established by the
leader of the believers, IMAM ALI IBN ABI TALIB (AS), and which survived
through his sons and grandsons, especially IMAM AL-SADIQ'S father, IMAM
AL-BAQIR (as). The university established by Imam AL-BAQIR (AS)
encompassed branches of different sciences. It played a great role in
safeguarding the Islamic teachings from deviation and distortion. It
was, in fact, behind the spread of Islam's genuine teachings.

HISHAM died in the year 125 of HIJRA, and the UMAYYAD government was
deteriorating. Two groups were formed to confront the oppressive regime
and assume authority. One of them was led by IMAM AL-HASAN'S sons. The
other was led by some of the offspring of AL-ABBAS (the Prophet's
uncle). The second group raised the banner of revenge of the martyrs'
blood and professed devotion to the Prophet's family. This happened
while IMAM AL-SADIQ was quite occupied with spreading knowledge and
different sciences through meetings and daily lessons attended by all
those who strove to get the caliphate out of the UMAYYAD dynasty.
Figures such as ABO AL-ABBAS AL-SAFFAH, AL-MANSOUR, and others used to
attend his lessons and make a show of their love and devotion to the
Prophet's offspring.

**IMAM AL-SADIQ FACES THE PARTIES**

At the midst of such events, each group (party) tried to approach IMAM
AL-SADIQ (AS) and solicit his leadership so that it would achieve
success. The group following IMAM AL-HASAN'S grandson could not enjoy
full growth to achieve victory, while the other group was more anxious
for power and managed to enjoy support of the majority of people who
were actually suffering from the injustice of the ruling clique. The
people regarded AL-ABBAS'S party as the real movement that could save
them from injustice. Moreover, BANU AL-ABBAS raised slogans of revenge
for the martyrs of the Prophet's family and of calls to set al prisoners
in the UMAYYAD prisons free. They claimed they would hand over the
leadership (the caliphate) to its owners: the Prophet's offspring.

Two influential figures joined AL-ABBAS'S party. They were; ABU Muslim
AL-KHURASANI and ABU SALAMA AL-KHALLA. Both men were active in
confronting the UMAYYAD domination and in supporting BANI AL-ABBAS'S
party. They had a major impact on the events. But soon they discovered
that BANI AL-ABBASS were not different from BANI UMAYYAD. Their claims
of revenge for the martyrs' blood and devotion to the Prophet's progeny
were all lies behind which their lust for power was hidden.

Hence, ABU Muslim and ABU SALAM wrote a letter to IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) in
which they offered him leadership of the movement against the UMAYYAD
rule. They swore the oath of allegiance to his caliphate. On getting the
letter, the Imam burnt it in front of his attendants. It was his clear
answer in rejecting the offer because he knew that their struggle was
for personal interests more than for the Muslims' welfare. Due to his
refusal, they joined the ABASSI group on condition that they would enjoy
ministry offices. Finally, in the wake of a big battle, MARWAN IBN
AL-HAKAM, the last UMAYYAD caliph, was killed and ABU AL-ABASS AL-SAFFAH
assumed leadership. He was a blood-thirsty person; he was very cruel and
not any different from the preceding rulers. ABU SALAM became his
minister whose end came at the hand of his friend ABI Muslim
AL-KHURASANI.

At first AL-SAFFAH claimed to be a supporter of AHLUL BAYT'S rights and
pretended to seek revenge for the martyrs of the battle of KERBALA,
hence he treated AL-SADIQ (AS) gently just for a short while.


**THE RIGHT TO ONE FIFTH (KHUMS): A MAJOR CONTRIBUTOR TO
INDEPENDENCE**

During those days, the official theologians (court ULEMA-FUQAHA) used
to get their salaries from the state treasury. Hence, they accompanied
the rulers whether in mosques or in the state offices to justify their
practices and to please them. They were the supporters of the oppressive
rulers because they were on their pay list.

The people used to pay to the state one-fifth of their earning as ZAKAT
(religions duty/poor rate) and the non-Muslims used to pay JIZYA
(non-Muslim protection tax) since they lived peacefully in the Muslims'
land and enjoyed their rights under the protection of the Muslims. The
state used such revenues to pay its officials, employees, and court
theologians.

IMAM AL-SADIQ and his companions kept themselves far from such groups
that strove for material gains. The Imam considered the ruler as a
usurper of the caliphate, hence it is always unlawful to deal with
tyrants and usurpers. IMAM AL-SADIQ'S companions, especially those who
were beyond the state's watch, used to pay the one-fifth and other
religious taxes to IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) to spend it according to religious
legislations. Hence, members of the Prophet's progeny throughout history
have been independent of the state's financial support and have had no
links with unjust rulers' apparatus.

The ABASSI ruler AL-SAFFAH realized that he had no power over IMAM
AL-SADIQ (AS). He also realized that the Imam's management of religious
revenues, the one-fifth (KHUMS), the poor-rate (ZAKAT), and the
non-Muslim tax (JIZYA), was quite different from the caliphs' management
and bribed theologians. The ABASSI ruler was often vexed because the
Imam (as) was beyond hid control. Sometimes he would summon him to his
court in AL-ANBAR (near KUFA) to admonish him openly, showing his
hostility towards him (as). Sometimes he would try other means to bring
him under his control or to earn his pleasure. However, he dared not
hurt him, since AL-SAJJAH assumed the caliphate under the cover of
devotion to the Imam and to his blessed forefathers. In the year 136 of
HIJRA, AL-SAFFAH AL-ABASSI died and his brother AL-MANSOUR seized
power.

**AL-SADIQ VIS-?-VIS AL-MANSOUR**

Due to his outward posture, AL-MANSOUR enjoyed a good reputation among
the people who were easily fooled. It was quite natural since AL-MASOUR
confronted the UMAYYAD tyrants for many years. Moreover, he helped the
followers of Imam Ali (as) jailed by the UMAYYADS. He often voiced his
call for revenge for the martyrs of KERBALA. In fact, he achieved power
only through such means.

IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) was quite aware of AL-MANSOUR'S real nature. The
latter often attended the Imam's meetings and discussed various issues,
asking him many questions and getting their answers. Hence, the Imam was
quite aware of the ABASSI tyrant's intentions. At first, AL-MANSOUR
behaved quite well regarding IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS). He would often call him
to his presence and ask his sons to sit near him and learn from him. His
aim was to attract him and thus have him under his control, a tool in
his hand just as the other theologians were. He wanted him to be a cover
behind which he could hide his evil intentions and ambitions.

The Imam (as) was quite aware of AL-MANSOUR'S game, hence he
disappointed him and mocked his devilish dreams he did not respond to
his attempts, thus he did not fall in his traps. On the contrary, the
Imam made his ideas and instructions clear to all his companions. He
referred to AL-MANSOUR and his likes as usurpers of the caliphate, and
that it was unlawful (HARAM) to deal with them. Dealing with unjust
rulers always brings about Allah's wrath.

On the other hand, the Imam warned his followers to be vigilant of the
court's theologians and never to deal with them. He also warned his
followers to avoid open disputes to avoid their mischief. He used to
tell his followers: "Be silent supporters of our cause". When AL-MANSOUR
failed in getting to the Imam's companions, he started bothering them.
He scattered their supporters in order to hinder their attendance of the
Imam's lessons and meetings. Moreover, he often summoned the Imam to
blame him for his stances, to warn him, and even to threaten him because
of such stances.

From all his heart he often wished to kill him with both his hands but
could not do it! Hence, he directed all his hatred towards the Imam's
followers who were often jailed and brutally tortured to confess the
names of other followers. As a result of the oppressive policy, the
followers of Imam AL-SADIQ were arrested, tortured, killed, and secretly
buried in mass graves throughout the city of AL-ANBAR. Yet his greatest
concern lingered: to get rid of IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) himself. But the
Divine care kept the Imam safe despite all devilish plots.

It is related that once AL-MANSOUR made up his mind to end the Imam's
life. He swore by Allah to kill him, hence he summoned him at mid-night.
He said, "May Allah kill me if I do not kill him". When the Imam entered
AL-MANSOUR'S room, he saluted him, but AL-MANSOUR did not return the
salutation. He was exploding in anger and said, "O JA'FER! You incite
people against me. You encourage them to revolt against me". The Imam
calmly said, "I do not! The source of your information is the enemies of
the Prophet's family".

He proved to him the wrong claims and managed to convince him in the
discussion. AL-MANSOUR'S anger vanished and he said, "I think that you
are truthful". He ordered his agents to take the Imam back home and to
treat him with all respect and honor. It is said that the Imam (as) was
summoned eight times by AL-MANSOUR with the letter's intention to kill
him, but on seeing him, he could not achieve his objective and would
order him sent back home with respect and dignity.

The reason behind AL-MANSOUR'S behavior was not a sudden feeling of
mercy. Mercy could not find its way to his heart. He himself, with his
own hands, had cut the body of his minister ABI Muslim AL-KHURASANI into
many pieces at that same place. He shed the blood of several hundred
innocent and pious believers. In fact, fear only stopped him from the
fulfillment of his devilish intention. Whenever he met the Imam, he felt
great fear on seeing his sublime figure and had no way but to show
respect and justify his anger through accusing backbiters and liars. He
would even testify to the Imam's truthfulness.

It is related that AL-MANSOUR used to say, "Whenever I intended to kill
him, the face of the Messenger of Allah appeared in front of me, so I
was scared to death, unable event to move my hand".

**IMAM AL-SADIQ'S SCHOOL OF THOUGHT THROUGHOUT THE MUSLIM WORLD**

IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) carried on his teaching lessons in every circle, and
his students increased in number and spread throughout the Muslim world.
They spread his teachings wherever they went. His students studied
various scientific fields. Each was assigned a special task or activity.
Some of his students sat at mosques to teach people the religious
legislation, verdicts, and what is lawful or unlawful. Some taught the
interpretation of the holy QURAN and answered inquiries related to
various issues. Some confronted the universe and its Almighty Creator.
They learned about the righteous deeds, about monotheism, resurrection,
Imamate, and the leadership of the community.

The followers of the imam spread under the guise of tradesmen to escape
the tyrants' mercenaries.

AL-MANSOUR, in turn, was active in confronting Imam AL-SADIQ'S schools
by applying tough methods whenever he could. He used to let his
mercenaries infiltrate the Imam's lesson circles in order to spread
false narrations and wrong sayings on his behalf. They praised the
rulers of AL-ABASS'S offspring and called the people to obey them.
Moreover, the ABASSI caliph appointed many theologians on his pay list
and ordered them to set up different schools of thought to oppose IMAM
JA'FER AL-SADIQ'S School of Thought (the FA'FERI SCHOOL) and spread
wrong information and false narrations. Thus, AL-MANSOUR helped many
schools of thought to start. It was quite easy for him to do it since he
could quickly find theologians ready to receive their salaries from him
and act according to his own orders which were: to confront the Imam's
school and refute his verdicts.

Yet the Imam's school stemmed from the very school of Prophet Mohammed
(P.B.U.H.) and Imam Ali (as), so the Imam's knowledge proved to be quite
perfect and authentic, and such knowledge could not be refuted or
falsified! Naturally, sun rays cannot be hidden behind a cripple. It is
worth mentioning that IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) himself confronted the deviated
trends and held meetings to conduct debates to refute the false
narrations and the deviated theologians' distorted information. He had
dialogues with the heretics and infidels, and through sound reasoning
and clear proofs, he led his opponents to give in and to admit his sound
opinions.

Thus, his students managed to compile four hundred books recording the
Imam's statements and explanations. They categorized those books then
produced out of them four volumes which contain his sciences in addition
to books on geography, biology, medicine, chemistry… etc. His books are
available even today.

**HIS MARTYRDOM**

AL-MANSOUR was told one day, "Praise is due to Allah, O caliph! You
have gotten rid of all your enemies!" He said, "Not at all. I cannot
feel at rest as long as JA'FER son of Mohammed is alive".

Soon after this devilish hint, the mercenaries killed sixty-five year
old IMAM AL-SADIQ who was blessed with martyrdom by poisoning. When
AL-MANSOUR heard of the Imam's martyrdom, he shed false tears, crocodile
tears, then said, "We are from Allah, and to Him shall we return". He
immediately wrote a letter to his agent in Al-medina Mohammed IBN
SULAYMAN. He said in his letter, "If JA'FER IBN MUHAMMED has entrusted
(the Imamate) to someone in particular in his will, then get that person
and behead him at once".

The tyrant thought that he could thus put an end to the Imamate of AHL
AL-BAYT. However, the infallible Imam was aware of such a risk, so he
entrusted the Imamate to his son MUSA son of JA'FER in front of his
faithful companions. Then he wrote a will in which be entrusted
authority to five persons: AL-MANSOUR himself, SULAYMAN the agent in
Al-Medina, ABDILLAH IBN AL-AFTAH son of JA'FER, MUSA son of JA'FER, and
HAMIDA, his wife. Al-Medina's ruler was at a loss; he did not know what
to do. He wrote a letter to AL-MANSOUR and informed him of the said
will. AL-MANSOUR again failed in his aim since it was impossible to
behead those mentioned in the will.

The Imam (as) was quite clever, blessed with a deep insight that
protected his successor in the office of the Imamate. IMAM AL-SADIQ was
blessed with martyrdom in the year 148 of HIJRA and was buried at
AL-BAQIE cemetery near his father, grandfather, and grandmother Fatima
AL-ZAHRA, and his uncle AL-HASAN, peace and blessing of Allah be upon
them all.

The Imam (as) witnessed big events at a crucial junction of the Islamic
history. His era formed a major turn in the drive of Islamic life,
stamped with his holy name, hence it is known as "the era of IMAM JA'FER
AL-SADIQ". It was an age when different concepts were mixed and
contradictions of opinions spread. The people were in serious need to
differentiate between what is good and what is bad. IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS)
was the best to sort out the odds and separate the truth from falsehood.
Up to our time, his teachings are still the bright torch leading to the
right path.


