Imam Musa Al-kadhim (a.s.)
==========================

**LINEAGE**

IMAM MUSA son of Imam JA'FER AL-SADIQ (AS) was born in AL-ABWA (a
district between Mecca and Medina) on the 7th of SAFAR in the year 128
of HIJRA. His mother, HAMEEDA, was of Berber's (North African) lineage.
He was blessed with martyrdom on 25th of RAJAB in the year 183 of HIJRA
in KADHIMIA (Iraq) and was buried there.

**THE ERA OF THE PRECEDING IMAMS: AL-BAQIR AND AL-SADIQ (A.S)**

During the life of IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS), a current of awareness started
in the Muslim community coinciding with the deteriorated situation of
the UMAYYAD rule which grew weaker year after year. Now and then,
rebellious groups confronted injustice and oppression of the UMAYYAD
rule and reminded the people of the ALAWIS' suffering in their prisons.
They called the people to seek revenge for the martyrs of KERBALA and of
such battles.. As a result, the UMAYYAD rulers came to realize the great
risk facing their authority, hence they had to show less hostility
towards AHLUL BAYT (AS). They stopped killing and torturing their
opponents in public.

During this period, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) was giving his lessons in
Al-Medina and its surrounding villages. His lessons were comprised of:
Islamic beliefs and legislations, and QURANIC interpretation along with
explanation of the Prophetic Tradition. Following the demise of IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS), revolts against the UMAYYAD rule increased in number and
spread everywhere. People turned towards the Prophet's family in their
devotion and support.

IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS) pursued his forefathers' footsteps and demonstrated
a genuine concern for their school of thought. That school became so
large that it was called AHLUL BAYT'S University. Students from all over
the Muslim world joined that School to acquire religious instructions
and legislations besides other sciences. It was quite necessary for
those concerned to attend that School of IMAM AL-SADIQ to get the
authentic narrations which were not recorded for nearly one century at
the order of the preceding caliphs. Recording such narrations started
only ten years prior to IMAM AL-SADIQ'S Imamate. Nearly 4.000 students
attended IMAM AL-SADIQ lessons during the 30 years of this authority.
Among those students were leaders of different movements and parties.
Even opponents and supporters of different groups attended his lessons.
The UMAYYADS could do nothing to confront the attraction to his
lessons.

In the year 132 of HIJRA, the UMAYYAD reign of terror came to an end
and the ABASSI clan seized power through their chief ABI AL-ABBAS
AL-SAFFAH (the blood-shedder), then his brother ABI JA'FER AL-MANSOUR,
his successor. AL-MANSOUR was among the attendants of IMAM AL-SADIQ'S
lessons. He often listened to his sermons and sayings, hence he was
quite aware of his method of spreading the Islamic instructions.

Prior to their rise to power, AL-SAFFAH and his brother, along with
YAQUB IBN DAWOOD, ABU Muslim AL-KHURASANI, and ABU SALAMA AL-KHALLAL,
prominent figures of the time and deadly enemies of the UMAYYADS,
demonstrated great pain at the injustice inflicted on the ALAWIS. They
expressed a great anger at the bloodshed in KERBALA. However, as soon as
they assumed power, little by little they exposed their true face and
showed their wicked intentions and ambitions. They openly expressed
their hostility towards the Prophet's family members and filled their
prisons with them, even put most of them to death. At that time, Imam
AL-SADIQ'S name enjoyed a high reputation throughout the Muslim world.

As previously mentioned, AL-MANSOUR was quite aware of the Imam's
influence, his sublime virtue, and his sound knowledge. He himself
listened to the Imam's lessons and saw how numerous his students were,
hence he decided to stop those lessons by all means.

At first he kept his intention secret but soon made it public and
started chasing the Imam's students and followers. He (AL-MANSOUR) even
appointed a killer as a governor in Al-Medina and ordered him to put the
Imam under severe house arrest and to continue bothering him. The
governor was Mohammed IBN SULAIMAN who could not achieve his goal.

**THE UNIQUE TESTAMENT**

In the year 148 of HIJRA, IMAM AL-SADIQ was blessed with martyrdom: he
was poisoned by AL-MANSOUR'S mercenaries. When AL-MANSOUR heard of the
Imam's demise, he ordered his governor in AL-Medina to search for the
Imam's will and know who his successor in Imamate was, to arrest him,
and to immediately put him to death. The governor searched the house for
it. He found it and read it. The Imam had entrusted authority to five
persons: AL-MANSOUR (the caliph) himself, Mohammed IBN SULAIMNA
(Al-Medina governor), ABDILLAH AL-AFTAH (son of the late Imam), MUSA
(his other son), and to his (the late Imam's) wife, HAMEEDA.

When the governor read the will, he was at a loss as to what to do. He
informed AL-MANSOUR of its contents and waited for his instructions.
AL-MANSOUR, too, was now at a loss and was stunned at the Imam's sharp
intellect and far insight. He knew that the late Imam was aware of his
evil intentions; this is why he resorted to that procedure. He found it
impossible to kill those mentioned in the will.

**MUSA AL-KADHIM'S IMAMATE**

MUSA AL-KADHIM (AS) became the Imam while the common people considered
AL-MANSOUR as the Muslims leader and caliph, successor of the Messenger
of Allah (P.B.U.H). AL-MANSOUR'S agents spread everywhere and imposed a
strict surveillance on the people in order to know the name of the new
Imam who would succeed AL-SADIQ (AS). They arrested everyone whom they
suspected and subjected him to severe torture.

Following the demise of IMAM AL-SADIQ (AS), AL-MANSOUR devised plans to
extinguish the torch of SHI'ISM (the following of AHLUL BAYTS' School of
Thought), hence he created many Islamic sects and used the court
theologians to achieve his goals. He flooded them with wealth and
ordered them to start different Schools of Thought vis-à-vis IMAM
AL-SADIQ'S School. They were provided with official facilities while his
(AL-MANSOUR'S) assistants encouraged people to join those Schools. The
era of AL-MANSOUR'S reign was the most damaging in the Islamic history
and the most bitter. He managed to create more than one hundred
religious sects.

IMAM AL-KADHIM enjoyed his father's care for twenty years and was quite
aware of AL-MANSOUR'S hostile stance towards the Prophet's family.
Hence, his name as a new Imam was kept secret, unknown to the rulers.
Very few of his close following knew him but never mentioned his name to
avoid AL-MANSOUR'S spies. They received his instructions and guidelines
with a great difficulty. It was quite risky to convey his instructions
to his supporters who were at a loss regarding whom to contact for
religious information. One of those followers was HISHAM IBN SALIM whose
following story indicates the difficulty in reaching the Imam.

**THE STORY OF HISHAM IBN SALIM**

HISHAM says, "Following the demise of IMAM JA'FER AL-SADIQ (AS), I and
Mohammed IBN AL-NU'MAN SAHIB AL-TAAQ were in Al-Medina. People crowded
around ABDILLAH AL-AFTAH, son of late IMAM JA'FER. The people considered
him the authority after his father. We went to him and asked him some
questions about alms-giving (ZAKAT). He could not answer us, thus we
knew that he was not of sound religious knowledge while the infallible
Imam should be aware of all matters and could answer all questions. We
left his house not knowing where to go. Not knowing where to go, we
noticed an old man whom we did not know signaling to me to follow him. I
feared he might be one of AL-MANSOUR'S spies looking for information to
see whom the people would contact after JA'FER (AS) in order to put an
end to them. I said to my comrade: 'Stay away! The man is signaling to
me'.

"He kept away and I followed the old man. I kept walking with him,
thinking that I was approaching death on my feet. He brought me to the
door of IMAM MUSA AL-KADHIM and left me alone. A servant was at the
door. He said, 'Come in, may Allah bless you'. There, I saw IMAM MUSA
AL-KADHIM. I said to him, 'Your father has passed away, whom are we to
follow now?' He said, 'Allah will guide you to your intention'. I said,
'May I be your sacrifice, your brother claims he is the Imam after his
father'. He said, 'My brother does not want people to worship Allah'. I
said, 'Who is in authority after your father?' He said, 'By the will of
Allah, you will be guided to him'. I said, 'Are you the Imam?' He said,
'I do not say it'. "I said to myself, 'It is not the proper question'.
Then I said to him: 'Do you have an Imam?' He said, 'No'. I immediately
felt a strange kind of fear and respect for him. I said, 'Shall I ask
you as I used to ask your father?' He said, 'Make a choice and do not
broadcast. If you do it, then it is sure death'.

"I asked him various questions and found him an ocean of knowledge. I
said to him, 'Your followers are at a loss. They do not know you. Shall
I call them?' He said, 'Call the wise ones only and make them swear to
keep it secret, otherwise it is slaying'. This Imam pointed to his neck
as he uttered the word: 'Slaying'.

"When I left I met my comrade who asked me, 'What have you gotten?' I
said, 'Guidance!' and related to him the affair". The Imam's name spread
and most of his father's followers got in touch with him to ask him
about various religious matters despite the strict official watch
imposed on him along with the caliph's order of preventing him from
giving lessons. Very few were somehow able to get in touch with him
under various excuses. They would get the necessary information, write
it down, then deliver it carefully to other people.

His followers used to write his narrations under different names such
as: the righteous man, the scholar, that man… In order to avoid
troubles, they would write the opinions of the contemporary theologians
and insert the Imam's verdict between the lines. Thus, they managed to
escape the caliph's spies and avoid harassment.

**IMAM AL-KADHIM'S COMPANIONS**

At such crucial situations, the Imam's instructions were disseminated
by his faithful followers. There were 300 of those followers who wrote
books and letters related to him and handed down those books to the
following generations. Among the 300 of them, six were accepted as the
most truthful and authentic. They were: YUNIS IBN ABDIL RAHMAN, SAFWAN
IBN YAHYA, Mohammed IBN UMARI, AHMAD IBN Mohammed, ABDILLAH IBN
AL-MUGHIRA and AL-HASAN IBN MAHBOUB.

Those six were considered the nearest to him and the most accepted.
They spent their life confronting the tyrants of the day. They achieved
the task of conveying the authentic narration and QURANIC sciences to
future generations. YUNIS IBN ABDIL RAHMAN was a pious scholar. People
compared him with SALMAN the Persian. He spent his life writing books
and recording narrations. He was of the near followers. Most of the
time, he was chased by the rulers' agents and spies. Mohammed IBN UMARI
was one of the prominent figures of the day and of the Imam's close
companions. He of the day and of the Imam's close companions. He
conveyed most of the Imam's narration sand sayings. When harassment
against him intensified and he was under heavy chasing by AL-RASHID'S
mercenaries, he hid his books under the ground. He was arrested and
tortured but he was firm and never confessed any name of the Imam's
followers. When he was set free, he got his books out just to find them
all ruined, worn-out.

At this time, IMAM AL-KADHIM was blessed with martyrdom and IBN UMARI
re-wrote whatever he could remember of the Imam's narrations and
sayings. His narrations are considered authentic.

This brief glance at the life of these righteous men indicates the
hardship they suffered for the sake of Islam, and the great efforts they
made to keep Islamic instructions safe from the deviation of the
corrupted rulers and anti-Islamic sects.

**SAFWAN IBN MIHRAN'S STORY**

The story of another important supporter of the Imam (as), namely
SAFWAN IBN MIHRAN is worth mentioning here. He is also known as
"AL-JAMMAL" who should not be confused with another previously mentioned
SAFWAN AL-JAMMAL (his full name is: SAFWAN IBN YAHAY AL-JAMMAL). SAFWAN
AL-JAMMAL was a rich man who owned many camels that were used to
transport people during the HAJJ season from Baghdad to Mecca and back.
The ABASSI caliph HAROUN AL-RASHID used to hire those camels for that
purpose.

One day, SAFWAN visited IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS) who said to him, "Oh,
SAFWAN! Everything is nice about you except one thing". SAFWAN was
amazed; he said, "May I be your sacrifice, what is it?!"

The Imam (as) said, "You hire your camels to this man (HAROUN
AL-RASHID)" SAFWAN said, "By Allah, I hire the camels neither for fun
nor for hunting. I hire them for this special route (Baghdad-Mecca), and
I send my men, I do not keep him company".

The Imam said, "Do you get money from them (HAROUN and his men)?"
SAFWAN said, "Yes, I do". The Imam said, "Do you love to see them
survive till you get your camels back?" SAFWAN said, "Yes".

The Imam said, "Whoever loves to see them survive is one of them and
thus abides in hell". Immediately SAFWAN left him. He went and sold his
camels to avoid hiring them to HAROUN AL-RASHID. AL-RASHID was vexed
when he heard about that but did not show it due to SAFWAN'S good
reputation among people. He only blamed him for that.

**IMAM AL-KADHIM AND THE RULERS OF THE TIME**

IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS) was contemporary of the following ABASSI rulers:
AL-MANSOUR, AL-MEHDI, AL-HADI, and HAROUN AL-RASHID. He spent ten years
of his Imamate during AL-MANSOURS' caliphate. Those years were the most
hard of his life and the darkest in Islamic history. AL-MANSOUR used to
arrest the Imam's followers in groups, torture them, kill them, then
bury them secretly in their prisons. Following AL-MANSOUR'S death, the
prisons were opened and the buried bones of the prisoners were
discovered. Only then did the people come to know the great injustice
that took place at those fearful prisons.

At the death of AL-MANSOUR, his stupid son AL-MEHDI AL-ABASSI assumed
power. He was a playboy who publicly expressed his hostility towards the
Prophet's family. However, he was not as oppressive as his father was.
Hence, things improved in general.

AL-MEHDI AL-ABASSI tried once to annoy IMAM AL-KADHIM. He summoned him
to Baghdad and threw him in prison. Soon after a horrible nightmare, he
set him free and sent him respectfully back to Al-Medina. During his
short regime, AL-MEHDI often met him at his palace. One day, a dialogue
related to FADAK (the property which the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) gave to his
daughter Fatima and she was deprived of it after his demise).

AL-MEHDI AL-ABASSI said to IMAM AL-KADHIM that he was ready to give him
back FADAK. The Imam refused to take it unless it was given back within
its full borders. The ABASSI ruler asked him, "What are its borders?"
the Imam said, "If I mention its borders, you will not give it back to
me". The caliph insisted on knowing its borders, so the Imam said, "The
first border is in Eden in the south". AL-MEHDI'S face changed color.
The Imam said, "The second border is SAMARKAND to the east". AL-MEHDI
frowned. The Imam said, "The third border is to the west of Africa".
AL-MEHDI indignantly said, "And what is the fourth?" the Imam said,
"Armenia and the Black Sea". AL-MEHDI said, "You left nothing for us.
Come, have my place (on the throne)"

The Imam said, "I told you that you would not give it back to me if I
mentioned its borders". This dialogue indicates that the Imam (as)
wanted to show the ABASSI ruler that all the Muslim world was usurped by
the ABASSI rulers and by the UMAYYADS before them. It was not the matter
of a small piece of land, but the whole Muslim countries. AL-MEHDI
AL-ABASSI did not rule long. His son AL-HADI, whose personality was
weak, succeeded him in office. His rule also came to an end soon. HAROUN
AL-RASHID became the caliph after him.

**THE STORY OF ALI IBN YAQTIN**

HAROUN AL-RASHID was the most powerful and the strongest ABASSI ruler.
Since the very beginning of his rule he applied pressure on the ALAWIS,
arresting, torturing, and killing many of them. This motivated the Imam
(as) to advise his followers to go underground to avoid AL-RASHID'S
mercenaries. This helped them spread the Islamic teachings throughout
the Muslim world. They even managed to have jobs in the state offices
and even in AL-RASHID'S palace. It helped them give a hand to the
oppressed and needy Muslims.

ALI IBN YAQTIN was one of the influential figures. From the very
beginning, he was an enemy of the UMAYYAD authority and incited people
to rebel against it. Through his activity, he became acquainted with
AL-SAFFAH and AL-MANSOUR, the two ABASSI rulers. Hence, strong
friendship linked him to the two caliphs, and he was entrusted with high
jobs. He was pious, generous, and always ready to help the needy.
AL-MANSOUR appointed him chief of the caliph's court.

YAQTIN had a son called Ali who like his father: one of the best
followers of IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS). He used to meet him secretly. At the
death of his father, the son took his office. During AL-RASHID'S regime,
he became his minister. AL-RASHID knew nothing about ALI IBN YAQTIN'S
devotion to IMAM AL-KADHIM. ALI used to secretly pay the Imam the fifth
of his wealth (KHUMS) along with the poor-rate (ZAKAT). He often thought
of leaving his office, but the Imam advised him to stay in order to help
those believers who needed some help. One day, AL-RASHID offered him a
very splendid garment knitted with gold threads usually worn by kings.
It was called AL-DDARA'A. As soon as he got it he handed it over to the
Imam with the one-fifth of his earnings and the poor-rate. The Imam took
the money but retuned the garment. He wrote him saying, "Keep it, and do
not give it to anyone. You will have an affair related to it one day",

ALI IBN YAQTIN was sad because the Imam returned it. He sprinkled
perfume on it and kept it in a safe case then sealed the case. Some time
later, Ali was angry with his servant who was aware of Ali's devotion to
IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS). The servant immediately went to AL-RASHID and said
to him, "ALI IBN YAQTIN believes in AL-KADHIM'S Imamate and pays him the
one-fifth and the poor-rate. He even gave him the garment you presented
to him".

AL-RASHID was very angry and said, "I will investigate the matter. If
it is true, I will put him to death". He at once sent for him and said,
"What have you done with the garment I offered you?" IBN YAQTIN said, "I
have perfumed in a sealed case". AL-RASHID said, "Bring it now".

IBN YAQTIN ordered one of his servants to bring it to him, telling him
where he could find it. the servant came back with the sealed case which
he put it in front of AL-RASHID who opened it and found the garment in
it. he was no longer angry and said, "Put it back in its place and go
away well-guided. I will not believe whoever speaks behind your back".
He then ordered the servant to be whipped one thousand stroke after
which he died.

ALI IBN YAQTIN then realized why IMAM AL-KADHIM had returned the
garment and advised him to keep it. such and other incidents led
AL-RASHID to realize the important status of IMAM AL-KADHIM. He decided
to get rid of him, so he sought the advice of his minister KAHLID
AL-BARMAKI, the deadly enemy of IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS). AL-BARMAKI knew
well that the Imam's nephew, ALI IBN ISMAEL, envied his uncle. He
advised AL-RASHID to call him, offer him presents, then ask him about
his uncle's activity. The nephew said, "I left my uncle in Al-Medina. He
is the best condition with so much wealth and so many men. It seems that
there are two caliphs: one is in Iraq and one is in HIJAZ".

The caliph understood the nephew's hint, hence he decided to get rid of
Imam. He ordered him arrested and imprisoned in Basra. The governor of
Basra was ISA IBN JA'FER. He treated the Imam quite well when he saw his
great piety and adoration. When AL-RASHID knew of the good treatment, he
ordered the Imam transferred to another prison, so the Imam was jailed
in AL-FADHIL IBN AL-RABI'S prison. He stayed long in that prison.
AL-RABI felt the grace of the Imam, hence he treated him with great
respect. He moved him to a good house where he was given the best food
and was allowed to meet some of his followers. Sometimes, he was allowed
to leave the house and make some rounds in the city of Baghdad, then
return. AL-RASHID was scared to death of the Imam's good reputation and
feared that people might follow him. He ordered his imprisonment in
AL-SINDI IBN SHAHIK'S prison and ordered IBN SHAHIK to treat Imam with
cruelty.

With chains in feet and his hands, IMAM AL-KADHIM (AS) stayed long in
that prison. Then AL-RASHID sent his minister YAHYA AL-BARMAKI to tell
the Imam that AL-RASHID had sworn to set him free if he apologized to
him. AL-RASHID intended to humiliate him and expose his weakness in
front of the people to prove that he himself was the caliph of the
Muslims.

The Imam knew his intention, so he said to AL-BARMAKI, "I and HAROUN
will son separate. He will achieve his objective". The Imam spent 20
years of his life in AL-RASHID'S prisons.

Finally, IBN SHAHIK was ordered to give him poisoned dates. As soon as
he ate them, the Imam was blessed with martyrdom. The court theologians
and doctors claimed that his death was due to some kind of natural
sickness and for no other reason. However, the people had different
opinions. They were quite aware of the reason behind his death. They
knew who was behind it.

Nowadays, the Imam's shrine in KADHIMAIN, Baghdad, Iraq, is a landmark
testifying to the crimes committed by HAROUN AL-RASHID and his likes.
Such crimes cannot be hidden no matter how long they may be kept secret,
nor can they extinguish the torch of Islam. The Almighty says, {They
desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths and Allah will
not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers are
averse}. [AL-TAWBA: 32].


