Imam Ali Al-ridha (a.s.)
========================

**LINEAGE**

ALI is the son of Imam MUSA AL-KADHIM (AS). His mother is UMM AL-BANIN.
He was born on the 11th of DHIL QIDAH in the year 148 of HIJRA in
Al-Medina Al-MUNAWARA. He was blessed with martyrdom on the 29 of SAFAR
of the year 203 of HIJRA in TOOS (Iran) and was buried MASHHAD.

**AL-KADHIM, AL-RIDHA (PEACE BE UPON BOTH) AND HAROUN AL-RASHID**

It is quite easy for us today to speak about HAROUN AL-RASHID and
discuss his life. It was quite difficult to do so during the life of
this ABASSI ruler. To merely mention his name was enough to stir great
fear and leave the people scared to death. He was notorious for his
cruelty, brutality, and oppression. He ruled the vast Islamic world that
stretched from India in the east to Atlantic Ocean in the west. He
considered himself the Muslims' caliph but was quite aware, deep inside,
that the caliphate was never his legitimate right. He knew that such
right was confined to a special person who exceeded all the people of
his time in knowledge, piety, and righteousness. He knew that the
caliphate was Imam MUSA AL-KADHIM'S own right. Hence, he bitterly hated
him and was hostile to his ALAWI family. Finally, he imprisoned him and
for twenty years, moving him from one jail to another, till he was able
to give him poisoned food. He got rid of him and swore to behead whoever
among the ALAWIS claimed the Imamate after MUSA AL-KADHIM (AS). He
intended to uproot the Imamate but Allah Almighty will not consent save
to keep it, though the infidels are averse.

IMAM AL-KADHIM entrusted his son IMAM ALI with the Imamate. As soon as
AL-KADHIM (AS) was blessed with martyrdom, ALI AL-RIDHA announced his
Imamate to all people. He was not afraid of HAROUN or other tyrants. He
made it clear publicly without hesitation. He was sure of Allah's help.
His followers were concerned about his safety. One of them, Mohammed IBN
SINAN, said to him, "O ABA AL-HASAN! You have declared your authority,
succeeding your father, while AL-RASHID'S sword is still wet with his
blood".

The IMAM (AS) said, "I have done it, motivated by the Messenger of
Allah's stance when the Almighty ordered him (P.B.U.H.) to warn his
nearest kin, and proclaim his call in public. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.)
then said, 'Were ABU JAHL to take one hair from my head, then I would
not be a Prophet'. Now I say to you: 'If HAROUN took one hair from my
head, then I would not be an Imam".

The BARMAKIS were the group that continuously incited the rulers
against IMAM AL-RIDHA. They had plotted against his father IMAM
AL-KADHIM through the Imam' nephew ALI IBN ISMAEL who openly envied his
uncle. They started their plots against his son, IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS).
YAHYA AL-BARMAKI said to AL-RASHID one day, "You can see it now. ALI IBN
MUSA ahs succeeded his father and claimed the Imamate. You have sworn to
kill whoever claims Imamate after him".

AL-RASHID said angrily, "Has it not been enough what we have already
done to his father?! Do you want me to kill them all?" Those words of
AL-RASHID indicated the atrocities which he had committed against IMAM
AL-KADHIM (AS). However, that did not halt his attempt to get rid of
AL-RIDHA (as). He often tried but failed because Allah's will protected
the Imam (as) who one day said in reference to AL-RASHID'S attempts, "By
Allah, he cannot do anything to me which I hate. This is clear from
words reached me from my grandfather the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.)".
Allah, the Manager of all affairs, provided IMAM AL-RIDHA with
protection against AL-RASHID'S oppression, just as He protected the
Prophet's offspring: IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN survived the battle of KERBALA
and assumed his role in the Imamate.

HAROUN AL-RASHID died after having entrusted caliphate to his son
AL-AMIN and, after him, to his other son AL-MAMOUN.

AL-AMIN spent his life in fun and frolic. He neglected the affairs of
the large Muslim world. He also betrayed his brother AL-MAMOUN by
depriving him of his right to the caliphate according to AL-RASHID'S
will. He entrusted it to his young son MUSA whom he named as the
successor. This division between the two brothers stirred wars among the
two brothers' followers and supporters. At last, AL-AMIN was killed and
AL-MAMOUN became the caliph. The division in the ABASSI clan led the
authority to cease watching IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS). This gave him time to
carry out his mission quietly and spread the Islamic tenants. The bloody
wars between both brothers motivated the Muslims to ponder and to have
second thoughts. They realized that both brothers were not qualified to
be the Muslims' leaders. Again the people turned to the ALAWIS to assume
their role. Moreover, the ABBASIS themselves were angry with AL-MAMOUN
who killed his own brother.

**IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS) AND AL-MAMOUN**

AL-MAMOUN chose the city of MARO (MERV) to be his capital in order to
express his gratitude to the KHURASANIS who helped him achieve power. A
year after his ascendance to authority, upheavals spread throughout the
country and revolts led by the ALAWIS erupted everywhere in holy Mecca,
Al-Medina, Yemen, Basra and KUFA. AL-MAMOUN found himself surrounded by
dangers from all sides. He realized the critical situation and found
that the best way for him was to make a show of his desire to hand the
caliphate over to IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS), thus he would please the ALAWIS
who led the revolts against his rule and curb the upheavals. He was sure
of the Imam's rejection, but his minister, AL-FADHIL IBN SAHL,
encouraged him to write to the Imam. AL-MAMOUN wrote to the Imam (as)
and summoned him to KHURASAN where he met him in MARO.

The Imam (as) gave various reasons to be spared the visit, but
AL-MAMOUN insisted again and again till the Imam had no choice except to
go. The Imam knew that the tyrant's son was never devoted to the son of
Imam MUSA AL-KADHIM. He had to go because AL-MAMOUN would not leave him
alone.

**A JOURNEY OF RETURN**

IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS) accompanied AL-MAMOUN'S envoys who surrounded him
and showed a great deal of respect for him. Some of Al-Medina's
dignitaries joined the caravan that made its way towards KHURASAN. At
the order of the ruler (AL-MAMOUN), the caravan was to avoid cities such
as QUM where the Imam's followers and devotees were great in number.
However, people heard of his coming and all of them came out to welcome
the grandson of the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.).

They crowded at both sides of the road and glorified Allah the
Almighty. They were all anxious to have a look at his sublime person.
The Imam noticed that AL-MAMOUN'S men tried to separate him from the
people, so, he tried his best to address the people whenever he could.
When the caravan reached NISAPOUR, its people came out to meet him. They
had never dreamed of attaining such a blessing: to enjoy seeing the
grandson of the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.). their dream had come
true, hence, every man and woman left his/her home to welcome him.

It was a big event of love and devotion to the Prophet's household,
peace be upon them all.

The city theologians and nobles were eager to have the chance to listen
to him speak. But the people's excitement and devotion gave them no
chance. They begged the people to be quiet; they obeyed, and the Imam
put his head out of the pavilion which was on the back of his camel.
They saw his bright face and were again excited. He signaled to them to
keep silent. They held their breath and listened to every word he
uttered. The Imam had to tell them everything but he still had to be
careful. He had to be brief. He said, "My father MUSA AL-KADHIM told me
that his father JA'FER AL-SADIQ, his father AL-BAQIR, his father ALI
ZAIN AL-ABIDIN, his father AL-HUSAIN the martyr of KERBALA, his father
ALI IBN ABI TALIB said, 'My beloved one, the joy of my eyes, the
Messenger of Allah, said that the angel JIBRAEL heard Allah the Almighty
say: The utterance of LA ILAHA ILLA Allah! (There is no god but the One
God) is My fortress. Whoever enters My fortress is spared My wrath and
chastisement'".

Thousands of narrators recorded many other prophetic narrations through
infallible Imams (as). Those narrations are the source of great wisdom
and piety.

Leaving NISAPOUR, the caravan approached MARO where AL-MAMOUN was to
welcome the Imam in great celebration. He hosted him in a splendid
palace, surrounding him with respect and honor.

The people felt happy about the Imam's arrival. They thought the
hateful past would never appear again and that warring was over. They
thought that AL-MAMOUN was ready to give the caliphate to its owner who
had come to him. They thought that a good future was ahead of them.
Alas! They were quite wrong. IMAM AL-RIDHA knew that AL-MAMOUN was not
serious in his offer. He just made a show of compromise for a hidden
purpose.

Not only AL-MAMOUN, but also his agents and followers were concerned
about their own social status and high positions with the government.
Hence, the Imam (as) refused AL-MAMOUN'S offer of the caliphate.
Immediately, AL-MAMOUN offered the Imam the office of crown prince, that
is, to succeed him in the caliphate. He did not make the offer out of
love for the Imam (as) but only to legitimize his authority and silence
the opposition. Again the Imam refused the offer but AL-MAMOUN insisted
saying, "You receive my offer in what I hate, though you are safe from
my harm. I swear by Allah, either you accept the office or I put you to
death".

The Imam (as) was quite aware of the situation. When he made his
farewell visit to the shrine of his grandfather, the Messenger of Allah
(P.B.U.H.), he cried saying, "I am leaving your neighborhood to die in a
strange country". He made his journey from Al-Medina to KHURASAN under
duress; he had no choice.

Finally he accepted the office but on certain conditions. He said to
AL-MAMOUN, "I accept it on the condition that I neither appoint anyone
in office nor dismiss anyone. I nullify no tradition and keep away from
all affairs except for consultation".

AL-MAMOUN agreed and the covenant was made in front of all ministers,
the army leaders, the noblemen, and a crowd of the common people.
AL-MAMOUN distributed gifts and poets recited their poetry in praise of
the event. On that occasion, AL-MAMOUN issued the state currency with
the name of AL-RIDHA (as) on one face. The mosques' leaders thus would
start their sermons praising AL-MAMOUN and IMAM AL-RIDHA in their DU'A
(supplication). In KHURASAN, the Imam held meetings attended by
scholars, doctors, theologians and others who were all amazed at his
profound knowledge.

AL-MAMOUN used to attend those meetings which filled him with envy,
though he claimed to encourage scientific research and knowledge. The
Imam (as) often noticed the disappointment of AL-MAMOUN during his
lessons. Hence, he tired to make his talks brief and to end the meetings
as soon as possible. He under the cover of being at his service. He
often appealed to Allah saying, "O Lord! If my relief is through death,
then hasten with it".

**THE CONGREGATION PRAYERS AT EID AL-FITR**

During the first year of the imam's appointment as the crown prince, he
was ordered by AL-MAMOUN to lead the congregational prayers of the
religious ritual on the first day of SHAWAL celebrating the achievement
of fasting during the month of Ramadan. The occasion is EID AL-FITR
which all Muslims enjoy. IMAM AL-RIDHA wrote him saying, "You are aware
of the condition we made when I accepted this office. Now do spare me
this duty of leading the prayers".

AL-MAMOUN insisted saying, "I want the people to feel at ease on seeing
you and know your distinction". The Imam (as) agreed on condition that
he would perform it similarly to the performance of the Messenger of
Allah (P.B.U.H.) and Ali (as). AL-MAMOUN agreed saying, "Do it as you
please". AL-MAMOUN ordered his officials, army leaders, and other people
to go early and wait at the Imam's door to accompany him to the mosque
for the prayers.

On that early morning, people gathered along the roads and on their
homes' rooftops to watch the holy Imam on his way to the prayers
service. The troops, the army leaders, and the noblemen were all in
their best attire, on back of their horses, waiting for the Imam to come
out. The imam (as) had a bath, put on his clothes with a white headgear
made of cotton. He wrapped his head with it and left one end on his
chest and the other between his shoulders. He used some perfume then
said to his companions, "Do as I do".

He came out bare-footed, with his garment's sleeves up and his head
towards the heavens as he shouted: ALLAHU AKBAR! Allah is the Greatest".
People echoed his words. When the officials saw him walk, they alighted
from their horses and walked behind him bare-footed in splendid grace.
The Imam glorified Allah and people glorified Him after him.
Glorifications could be heard everywhere and all people left their homes
and crowded along the road sides. It was an event like no other in the
town's history.

In fact, on seeing him, they remembered the Messenger of Allah
(P.B.U.H.), his grandfather. They were taken by the grace that
overwhelmed him. He walked humbly performing a religious ritual in the
presence of Allah the Almighty. However, AL-MAMOUN wanted him to attend
prayers in a royal procession amid decoration and grandeur and thus be
exploited by the rulers after seeing their power and dreadful status.

Yet, the Imam was not to make such a show of the religious celebration,
a Divine ritual of spiritual sacredness. Submission to Allah only should
be demonstrated and all should glorify Allah and worship Him and only
Him. There was a big difference between AL-MAMOUN'S intention behind the
Imam's prayers and the Imam's performance thereof. AL-MAMOUN had no
other way but to halt the performance of such prayers. He immediately
sent to IMAM AL-RIDHA a message saying, "We have asked you more than
necessary and caused you trouble, O son of the Messenger of Allah! So,
rest and someone else will lead the prayers".

The Imam was relieved of the duty. He went back home. On that occasion,
AL-MAMOUN saw how wholeheartedly the people responded to the Imam, how
they were greatly attracted to him. He felt a bitter envy and remembered
how his father, AL-RASHID, had treated AL-RIDHA'S father, IMAM
AL-KADHIM. He saw how AL-RASHID respected him while AL-MAMOUN at that
time did not know the Imam. He asked his father later about him. He said
to him, "Who is that man whom you have greatly honored? You stood up for
him and seated him nest to you".

AL-RASHID said, "He is the Imam of all Muslims, the Divine sign for
people, His caliph on earth". AL-MAMOUN said, "Are not you with such
qualifications?" AL-RASHID said, "I am the people's caliph by force and
oppression. MUSA IBN JA'FER (IMAM AL-KADHIM[AS]) is the actual leader
through his kinship to the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.). He has the
full right of being in this office more than I am". AL-MAMOUN said, "If
it is his own right, then step aside and let him have it". AL-RASHID
said, "Kingship is barren. By Allah, if you become my rival in its
regard, I will take your life away".

AL-MAMOUN remembered that conversation which still rang in his ears:
"By Allah, if you become my rival…., I will take your life away". He
wondered: How could he allow that man to have the people's support and
great devotion? They yearned to see him, and he was greatly honored. Why
should he give it up to him? Had not he killed his own brother for the
sake of this kingship? He remembered all that and made up his mind to
get rid of that concern and put himself at ease. He would get rid of the
Imam by all means. It did take him long to achieve his goal. IMAM
AL-RIDHA spent less than two years as a crown prince before he was
blessed with martyrdom through poisoned grapes.

AL-MAMOUN was accused of the murder, but he denied it and made a show
of his sadness. The Imam was blessed with martyrdom in the year 203 of
HIJRA in TOOS and was buried in MASHHAD, KHURASAN. He was heard saying,
"Whoever visits me in my residence will be in my company in Paradise".
Peace and blessing of Allah be upon him.


**Imam Mohammad Al-Jawad(A.S.)**

**LINEAGE**

MOHAMMED is son of IMAM ALI AL-RIDHA. He was born in Al-Medina on the
10th of RAJAB of the year 195 of HIJRA. His mother was called KHAIZARAN.
He was blessed with martyrdom on the 6th of THIL-HIJJA of the HIJRI year
220 in KADHIMAIN (Baghdad) and was buried there.

**THE FIRST ENCOUNTER**

On a warm day, when the sun's rays spread gently over the alleys of the
city of Baghdad and wrapped the wide plains surrounding it, the ABBASI
caliph AL-MA'MOUN, accompanied by his entourage, went out hunting. They
were on their horsed treading along with their dogs and eagles heading
towards the plains outside.

Baghdad was then a big city surrounded by vineyards, fruit orchards and
date palms. Gardens full of flowers were all round with green fields.
The caliph's procession passed through the capital's streets at a great
speed, causing terror among the people. In one of the streets, some
children were playing, running here and there. When they saw the ruler's
procession, they ran away in all directions. Former unjust rulers such
as AL-RASHID, AL-MA'MOUN, HISHAM, and AL-HAJJAJ had left a horrible
image of terror and cruelty in the hearts of all people.

All the children ran away except one who stood up paying no attention
to the procession of the ruler AL-MA'MOUN who was surprised. He ordered
someone to bring him the child. He asked him, "Why have not you run away
as the others have?" The child said, "Why should I run away?! I have
done nothing wrong. The street is wide enough for you to pass".

AL-MA'MOUN was surprised at the child's courage, so he asked him who he
was. The child said, "I am Mohammed son of Ali son of MUSA son of JA'FER
son of Mohammed son of Ali son of AL-HUSAIN son of ALI BIN ABI TALIB,
peace be on them".

AL-MA'MOUN said, "How much is your knowledge?"

AL-MA'MOUN asked a child about his knowledge which could not be
acquired except through learning for many years. Why did he ask him?
Surely because AL-MA'MOUN knew that child was the son of IMAM AL-RIDHA.
He was a branch of the blessed tree of AHLUL BAYT (AS) who inherited all
science and Divine knowledge. It was quite natural to ask him.

The child said, "Ask me about heavens' news and I will answer you".

AL-MA'MOUN left him and proceeded towards the far plains, drowned in
deep thoughts of that boy. He could not hunt but very little. He sent
his eagle to catch a prey. The bird flew high and disappeared for an
hour. It came back with a snake in its paws. It threw the snake in front
of AL-MA'MOUN who ordered his servants to keep it in a box. He said to
his companions, "The boy's end is near at my hand today". On his way
back, AL-MA'MOUN met the same children; AL-RIDHA'S son was among them.
AL-MA'MOUN approached him and said, in continuation of his previous
question, "What news of heaven do you know?" The child said, "My father
told me, through his forefathers, through the Prophet (P.B.U.H.),
through the angel JIBRAEL, that Allah says, 'Between the heaven and the
earth there is dust (smoke gases) that causes waves. There are snakes of
green bellies with spotted backs. Kings hunt the snakes with their
eagles to test the scholars'".

AL-MA'MOUN said, "You, your father, your grandfather and your Lord are
truthful (i.e. they tell only the truth)". That was the first encounter
between AL-MA'MOUN and Imam Mohammed AL-JAWAD (AS). Other encounters
followed, and AL-MA'MOUN acquired more and more information about the
Imam's qualifications. He made up his mind to give him his daughter in
marriage.

**THE ABBASI CLAN OBJECTS**

Through marrying his daughter to IMAM AL-JAWAD, AL-MA'MOUN aimed at
pleasing the noble ALAWIS and thus erasing the memory of the sudden
death of IMAM AL-RIDHA and putting it out of their minds. He wanted to
establish friendly relations with them. On the other hand, he wanted to
have the young Imam near him, under his spies' watch, and to be informed
of all his actions and connections. It was AL-MA'MOUN'S same method
which he had applied when dealing with IMAM AL-RIDHA (AS).

When the ABBASIS heard of the affair, they were greatly annoyed, and
they exaggerated their feelings. They feared AL-JAWAD just as they had
feared his father lest he should become crown prince and thus deprive
them of the opportunity to inherit the caliphate.

They came to AL-MA'MOUN and said, "By Allah, we want you to discard the
idea of such a marriage. We fear lest we should be deprived of our
kingship and might. You know our past and present feelings regarding the
progeny of Ali. You remember how the early (three) caliphs treated them.
We were scared when you favored AL-RIDHA with the office of crown prince
until Allah spared us the important part of the affair. By Allah, do not
bring back what had caused us to be greatly concerned. Do not marry your
daughter to AL-RIDHA'S son and find someone else of our household to
marry her to".

AL-MA'MOUN said, "Whatever happened between Ali's progeny and you was
due to your own stance. Had you been fair to them, they would have taken
your side. The early caliphs' stance towards them was unfair. They
betrayed the blood relation. I will not do that. I have chosen Mohammed
son of AL-RIDHA to marry my daughter because he is the best of all in
knowledge, though he is still young. I will demonstrate his knowledge to
you, and everyone of you will see that I am right".

They said, "He is too young; he is not versed in religious sciences. He
does not know what is lawful and what is unlawful. How can you marry
your daughter to him? Give him time to acquire religious sciences and
legislation, then do as you please". AL-MA'MOUN said, "Woe unto you! I
am better aware of his knowledge than you are. He is the best of all in
religious sciences. If you want, test him. If he fails, I will accept
your suggestion".

The said, "We agree, so let us test him. Qualified scholars will ask
him about religious legislation. If he gives the right answers, we will
agree to your suggestion. If he does not, the matter is over".
AL-MA'MOUN agreed, and a day was fixed for that test. They chose the
chief theologian YAHYA IBN AKTHAM to raise the religious inquiries to
him to answer. The inquiries should be quite difficult. They promised
the theologian a good present if he defeated the young IMAM AL-JAWAD.

**MEETING FOR A TEST**

On the special day appointed by AL-MA'MOUN, the Imam (as), the ABBASI
chiefs, the state officials, and other people met. Each sat according to
his status. AL-MA'MOUN sat next to IMAM AL-JAWAD.

It is worth mentioning that such aristocratic meetings held by the
ABBASIS now and then were no more than for fun and entertainment. They
were not held in conformity with Islamic ethics that demand neither
class discrimination nor social differences. The Islamic meetings held
by AHLUL BAYT (AS) were to discuss Islamic sciences and religious
verdicts. They were not held for debates and contentment through words
as well as poetry in praise of the ruler of the time.

IMAM AL-JAWAD (AS) was forced to attend such meetings. He was not
considered a guest or a participant, but he had no way to avoid having
to attend. Anyway, IMAM AL-JAWAD (as) sat near AL-MA'MOUN on a decorated
sofa, just as Prophet YOUSUF used to sit next to the Pharaoh of Egypt as
we are told in the QUR'ANIC which teach us many lessons and expose
factors behind historic events throughout the ages. While Prophet YOUSUF
assisted the Pharaoh in the state affairs, we see later another Prophet:
MUSA (AS) confronting and defeating another Pharaoh. Yet people are
heedless of such historical events and cannot perceive their
implication. The holy QUR'AN says, {Certainly in YOUSUF and his brothers
there are signs for the inquirers}. [YOUSUF: 7].

The attendants sat silently, anxious to see the IMAM, the newcomer to
Baghdad. They had never seen him before and were not aware of his
religious knowledge as he was still under age. They wondered how he
could hold firm in front of the chief theologian. Could the Prophet's
grandson answer the scholar's questions? The chief theologian YAHYA IBN
AKTHAM broke the silence by asking AL-MA'MOUN, "Will the caliph allow me
to ask AL-RIDHA'S son a question?" AL-MA'MOUN said, "you had better ask
him permission". IBN AKTHAM turned to IMAM AL-JAWAD and said, "May I be
your sacrifice, do you allow me to ask you a question?"

The young Imam said, "Ask if you wish".

IBN AKTHAM said, "What is the atonement for the sin of one who hunts
while still in the pilgrimage attire (IHRAM)?"

The young Imam said, "This is not a clear question. It lacks details:
Was the hunting outside the sanctified area or inside it? Was the hunter
aware of his sin or was he ignorant? Did he kill purposely or by
mistake? Was he a bondsman or a free one? Is it his first sin or not?
Was the hunted a bird or something else? Was it a small animal or a big
one? Is he sorry or hot? Does he insist on it? Did he kill it secretly
at night or openly in daylight? Was he performing the major pilgrimage
or the minor one (UMRA)? Without such details, you cannot have a clear
answer". IBN AKTHAM was at a loss for words. For the first time, he
seemed unable to give an answer. He hesitated and uttered unclear words.
The attendants became aware of his poor knowledge.

Till that day, he knew no more than one ruling relevant to hunting
during the sacred months, along with one verdict. Now he was taken by so
much detail for such a brief question.

Not only IBN AL-AKTHAM, but also all the attendants were amazed at the
Imam's knowledge. They realized that he was endowed with profound
knowledge despite his young age. He gave them a lesson in religious
verdicts. They understood that verdicts differ according to those
details. AL-MA'MOUN wanted IMAM AL-JAWAD to ask IBN AKTHAM a question
and he did, but IBN AKTHAM could not know the answer. He said, "By
Allah, I do not know the answer. If you want, let us benefit from your
knowledge in giving the answer". The Imam answered that question.

Following that meeting, AL-MA'MOUN said to his household, "Woe unto
you! Do you not know that the members of that house (the Prophet's
household) alone, out of all creatures, are entrusted with such a Divine
favor? Being young does not mean they are of less knowledge. Do you not
know that the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.) started his message by
calling to Islam the leader of the believers Ali son of ABI TALIB who
then was only ten years old? He accepted him at such an early age while
he accepted no other one of his age. Allah has entrusted them with
profound sciences; they are all offspring, one from the other. What the
first of them enjoyed of Divine favor the last of them will also enjoy".
They said, "You are right, O Caliph of the Muslims!"

**A POLITICAL MARRIAGE**

AL-MA'MOUN rejoiced at his successful plan to earn the approval of his
family of marrying his daughter off to IMAM AL-JAWAD. He turned to IMAM
AL-JAWAD and said, "O relic of the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.)! I know
your high status and qualifications, hence I have chosen you to marry my
daughter UMM AL-FADHIL. Despite someone's disapproval, I do want you to
agree". IMAM AL-JAWAD was aware of AL-MA'MOUN'S intention and aim behind
that marriage. It was only a political marriage to achieve AL-MA'MOUN'S
goals: to please the ALAWIS and to have him near him under close watch.
He felt annoyed, but it was difficult for him to reject that marriage in
Baghdad and in the presence of the high officials of the government.
Such a rejection would be considered a serious insult to the caliph, one
of unknown consequences.

The Imam accepted the marriage on the condition that he would pay a
dowry of no more than 500 DIRHAMS, the same as was that of his
grandmother Fatima AL-ZAHRA.

On that occasion, AL-MA'MOUN ordered a splendid celebration with all
grandeur and luxury. The servants and the entourage were ordered to put
on their best to welcome the guests and to distribute gifts. Food tables
were set with the most delicious types of food for all people to eat.
IMAM AL-JAWAD concealed his annoyance at that marriage relationship
which was a burden imposed on him. He felt AL-MA'MOUN'S domination over
him and wished he could have stayed in Al-Medina. He was aware of the
man who killed his father in cold blood and now had become his
father-in-law. He would surely proceed with his devilish plots to uproot
the Imamate which posed a major risk to his authority and future.

IMAM AL-JAWAD knew all of that, but he had no other choice except to be
patient and to turn to Allah in his affairs.

When the couple grew up and got married, they spent some years in
Baghdad. AL-MA'MOUN tired to make IMAM AL-JAWAD attend the ABBASI
meetings, but he failed. The Imam tried to avoid those meetings, and if
by chance he attended one, he would use it as an opportunity to advise
the attendants and to refute the deviated ideas and the wrong trends of
the era which despite troubles was generally peaceful. The Imam
dedicated his time to reforming the Muslim community.

One year before AL-MA'MOUN'S death, IMAM AL-JAWAD and his wife left
Baghdad for holy Mecca to perform the HAJJ ritual. From Mecca they went
to Al-Medina where they stayed till AL-MA'MOUN'S death. AL-MAU'TASIM,
who assumed power after AL-MA'MOUN, was more oppressive than his
brother. He spent most of his time drinking, hunting and having fun. He,
however, feared IMAM AL-JAWAD'S influence on people and the great
respect and good reputation the Imam enjoyed. He, therefore, summoned
him to Baghdad to place him under strict surveillance, plotting against
him. The Imam (as) left in Al-Medina his son ALI AL-HADI whom he
entrusted with the Imamate after his demise.

He went to Iraq while the caliph AL-MU'TASIM, with the help of the
Imam's nephew JA'FER son of AL-MA'MOUN and YA'QUB IBN DAQOOD, the chief
theologian at the palace, and other agents, plotted to get rid of him.

IBN DAWOOD hated the Imam because he considered him a challenge to his
authority among the people and a threat to AL-MU'TASIM'S leadership.
Often in debates, the Imam defeated IBN DAWOOD through logic and the
truth. Once a thief was brought to AL-MU'TASIM'S court and the
theologians were asked to give their verdicts of punishment. IBN DAWOOD
said that the hand should be cut off to the wrist. Most of the
theologians approved of the verdict. Some said it should be cut off as
far as the elbow. AL-MU'TASIM asked IMAM AL-JAWAD about his opinion. The
Imam said that only the fingers should be cut off and the palm should be
kept to help one perform the prayers and other deeds.

AL-MU'TASIM accepted that verdict and ignored the verdicts of the other
theologians. This caused IBN DAWOOD'S great unrest, since it was the
first time that his verdict was ignored.

IBN DAWOOD looked for an opportunity to instigate AL-MU'TASIM against
the Imam. He reminded him of the ALAWIS' danger to his leadership. He
also reminded him of the preceding ABBASI rulers' treatment of the
Prophet's household and that he should follow in their footsteps.
AL-MU'TASIM made up his mind to put an end to him, so he gave him
poisoned food and cowardly used the Imam's wife UMM AL-FADHIL who was
angry with her husband because he preferred his other wife. The Imam was
blessed with martyrdom on the 6th of THIL-HIJJA, in the year 220 of
HIJRA. He was in the prime of his age. He was buried in KADHIMAIN near
his grandfather IMAM AL-KADHIM, peace be on both of them.

**THE GOOD LEGACY**

His life was an image of his forefathers' life: pure and righteous. He
performed his mission of disseminating Islamic instructions despite all
difficulties and hardships. He had many followers and dozens of
narrators who recorded his narrations. Most of his sayings are adages
and preaching. One day, one of his followers said to him, "O Master! I
wish you were the awaited savior of the Prophet's progeny so you could
achieve justice in the world as it is full of oppression".

He (as) said, "Everyone of us performs his mission and carries out
Allah's orders in guiding mankind towards the right path. "The awaited
savior who will purify the world and spread justice is of hidden birth
and will go into occultation. "This world will be at his service, and
every hardship will be easy for him. His followers are the same in
number as those of the combatants of the battle of BADR: 313 men from
all over the world. Allah Almighty says,

{And We desired to bestow a favor upon those who were weak in the land
and to make them the Imams, and to make them the heirs}. [AL-QASAS: 5].
"When this number of supporters follow him, Allah will manifest him to
the people. Ten thousand of the best believers will help him kill the
enemies of Allah".

Some of his sayings and adages are:

1- Perfect dignity of one is to give up that which is of no use.
2- One's good moral is never to meet someone with what someone hates.


