Imam Ali Al-hadi (a.s.)
=======================

**LINEAGE**

ALI is the son of IMAM Mohammed AL-JAWAD; his mother is called SAMANA.
He was born on the 15th THIL HIJJA in the year 214 A.H. in SARIYA (a
suburb of Al-Medina), and he was blessed with martyrdom on the 3rd of
RAJAB of the HIJRI year 254 in SAMARRA where he was buried.

**SARIYA: THE BLESSED FARM**

The holy QUR'AN states, {And say: Work, so Allah will see your work and
(so will) His Apostle and the believers…}. [AL-TAWBA: 105].

The above cited QUR'ANIC verse was a torch for the guiding Imams (as)
as they strove to guide the community on the right path. They acted
according to the Divine order and taught the people to do likewise in
order to enjoy the pleasure of Allah and of His Messenger. They
confirmed the virtue of cultivating and farming the land and the value
of work linked with the earth's produce. They themselves (as) worked the
land and planted different trees; thus, they were a good example for
other people to benefit from the fertile land. IMAM AL-KADHIM'S farm was
an evidence to this fact.

He started a farm in SARIYA, near Al-Medina AL-MUHAWARA. The successive
Imams after him carried on the task. His grandson IMAM AL-JAWAD loved it
very much and spent most of his time as a worker, a farmer, and an
instructor. He built a house for his second wife SAMANA (daughter of
AMMAR IBN YASIR) where she settled. Through his efforts, the area became
a village where the Imam's followers and supporters could meet him and
listen to his wise guidance. It was on that farm that his son ALI
AL-HADI (as) was born. He enjoyed a peaceful childhood under his
parents' care and among the working farmers. He enjoyed the beauty of
nature and pondered on the greatness of the Creator. However, those
quiet days did not last long, for the ABBASI ruler AL-MU'TASIM summoned
his father to Baghdad. Leaving his wife and his son behind, IMAM
AL-JAWAD headed towards Iraq where he was blessed with martyrdom and was
buried in KADHIMAIN (Baghdad) near his grandfather IMAM AL-KADHIM (peace
be upon all of them); thus did his link with the village and his family
come to an end.

Prior to his journey, he entrusted the Imamate to his son ALI AL-HADI
who was then six years old.

**THE IMAMATE**

The ABBASI caliph AL-MU'TASIM ordered one of his trusted agents to
tutor IMAM AL-HADI in order to brainwash him with regard to AHLUL BAYT'S
trend and to lead him towards the ABBASI line. The tutor tried to teach
him obedience to the ABBASI rulers and to recognize their legitimacy to
the caliphate, but he was confronted by the young Imam's bright talent
and profound knowledge which he had inherited from the Prophet's
progeny. Despite all his efforts to teach the Imam according to the
ABBASI instruction, the tutor was stunned when one day he asked the Imam
to repeat what he had taught him. The Imam said, "Do ask me about the
QUR'ANIC verses so that I may recite them to you by heart". Perhaps that
tutor forgotten the Prophetic narration that says:

"I am leaving among you two precious (weighty) objects. If you hold
firm to both of them, you will not go astray. They are: The Book of
Allah (the holy QUR'AN) and my offspring. The two will never separate
(from each other) till they meet me at the pool (of AL-KAWTHAR)". The
tutor forgot or seemed to have forgotten that the Prophet's offspring
enjoyed the prophetic sciences and perceived the religious instructions
thoroughly as well as the legislation relevant to every day's life.

Despite the strict watch and harassment, the Imam (as) performed the
duties of his Imamate quietly. When he was twenty years old, he was
quite famous among the Muslim masses. Everyone tried to contact him for
religious information or to solve life's problems.

**A BIG OVEN**

The ABBASI caliph AL-MU'TASIM died, and HAROUN son of Mohammed, known
as AL-WATHIQ, succeeded him in office. AL-WATHIQ was a playboy, careless
of his official duties, hence his minister AL-ZIAT had a free hand to
act according to his own whims. He was a cruel man who opened the
prisons' doors widely for the caliph's opponents. He tortured and killed
many detainees. In one prison he built a big oven and supplied it with
torture equipment in order to put an end to the opponents. Even the
caliph's brother AL-MUTAWAKKIL was one of AL-ZIAT'S victims. He suffered
all types of torture at his hands due to the enmity between the two
brothers and their pursuit for authority.

After six years of rule, AL-WATHIQ died and his brother AL-MUTAWAKKIL
assumed the caliphate. The latter started his regime by seeking revenge
against his brother's minister AL-ZIAT. He threw him in the very oven
which he himself had built. Hence, whoever sows evil will harvest
evil.

**HATRED TOWARDS THE DEAD AND THE LIVING**

As soon as AL-MUTAWAKKIL took hold of the affairs, he demonstrated
hostility towards the Prophet's progeny (as). He was greatly hostile
towards them and exceeded the preceding rulers in his hatred. He ordered
the demolition of Imam HUSAIN'S shrine in KERBALA and flooded the area
with water in order to remove all traces of the holy shrine. He killed
many of its visitors, the devotees of the martyred Imam. He knew that
such visits incited people to revolt against unjust and oppressive
rulers.

Despite all hardship and oppression, the sacred shrine was traced out
and is still visited by thousands of devotees from all over the world,
throughout the year. The holy QUR'AN says, {They desire to put out the
light of Allah with their mouths, and Allah will not consent save to
perfect His light, though the infidels are averse thereto}. [AL-TAWBA:
32]. Many poets composed poetry denouncing AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S crimes
against the Prophet's progeny (as). One of those poets says: By Allah,
it was an unjust crime of the UMAYYADS: To murder the Prophet's
grandson,

The son of Fatima. Yet his father's kin (the ABBASIS) had it done:

A similar crime: demolishing his shrine.
It was a pity; not to have a hand in that killing.
Thus, they chased his bones in their dwelling.

The ABBASI injustice was not different from that of the UMAYYADS
regarding the Prophet's offspring who suffered torture and death and
were chased by both dynasties. The ABBASIS surpassed the UMAYYADS in
their hostility towards AHLUL BAYT, hence the Imam's shrines were
demolished while the living Imams suffered hardship at their hands
despite the blood relation and the ABBASI claim of devotion to them.

AL-MUTAWAKKIL was informed of the Imam's popularity among the masses.
This caused him to be greatly concerned. It enraged him to see people
gather around IMAM AL-HADI with such devotion and respect. Yet he could
not find an excuse to put an end to him or even to accuse him of some
guilt. He employed the old means of the previous rulers. He summoned the
Imam to Baghdad on the pretext of liking to see him close to him. He
wrote a letter full of flattery and hypocrisy. It said, "… the caliph
longs to see you. If you visit him and settle with your family near him,
it will be done for your ease and comfort… you are free to leave
whenever you wish. Seek Allah's guidance and come to see the caliph who
offers you the highest office and considers you in better status than
all of his sons and near ones…. Peace and blessings of Allah be upon
you".

AL-MUTAWAKKIL ordered one of his men, YAHYA IBN HARTHAMA, to carry his
letter to the Imam. He also ordered him to search the Imam's house as he
was informed of the Imam gathering weapons and money in order to revolt
against him.

When IBN HARTHAMA entered Al-Medina, the people sensed his evil
intention. They were concerned about the Imam's safety because they were
aware of AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S hostility towards the Prophet's offspring.
However, IBN HARTHAMA put them at ease by saying that he was not ordered
to cause him any harm, only to search his house. He searched the house
and found nothing except a copy of the holy QUR'AN and some books of
religious sciences. The Imam was aware of AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S evil
intentions and was not deceived by his hypocritical letter. He knew how
much AL-MUTAWAKKIL hated Ali (as) and his offspring and whoever was
related to him. He knew that he would not be spared to lead a peaceful
life in his grandfather's town and had no other choice but to make his
way towards Baghdad in the company of AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S men.

**THE WAY TO SAMARRA**

IBN HARTHAMA relates the following: "While we were on our way towards
Baghdad, the sky was clear blue and the sun was shining. IMAM AL-HADI
put on a garment to protect himself from the rain. Within a few minutes,
clouds gathered; it became dark, and heavy rain came down". The Imam
(as) said to IBN HARTHAMA, "I know that you were surprised on seeing me
putting on the rain garment. You thought that I might know what you do
not. It is not like that. I grew up in the open country and I know the
winds that are followed by rain. When I got up in the morning, I smelled
the wind and expected rain, as you have seen".

The Prophet's household are Allah's chosen people from among all
creatures. They are His true worshippers who are blessed by His favors
as signs to all mankind. They are obedient to His orders and devotees of
His religion. Throughout their lives, they openly struggled against
injustice and tyranny. Their sacrifice for Allah's sake is a clear
evidence of their sublime status. Peace and blessing of Allah be upon
them all.

IBN HARTHAMA continues to say the following: "When we reached Baghdad
('DAR AL-SALAM', the abode of peace), the people came out to welcome the
Imam. At the head was the governor of Baghdad, ISHAQ IBN IBRAHIM
AL-TAHIRI. He said to me, 'O YAHYA! This man is the Prophet's grandson.
You know that AL-MUTAWAKKIL hates him! If you incite AL-MUTAWAKKIL to
kill him, then the Messenger of Allah will call you to account for it'.
I said, 'By Allah, I saw nothing wrong in his deeds'. When we reached
SAMARRA, I met WASIF AL-TURKI, a high government official, who said to
me, 'If one hair of this man is fallen, only I will be called upon to
account for it'. I was surprised at how similar their opinions were.
When I met AL-MUTAWAKKIL, he asked me about him. I told him of his good
conduct, piety and God-fearing attitude. I told him that I found no
weapons in his house, only a copy of the holy QUR'AN and books of
knowledge. I also told him how the people of Al-Medina were concerned
about his safety and how I swore to them that no evil was intended for
him".

AL-MUTAWAKKIL honored the Imam and hosted him in a special house.
However, it is related that, on reaching SAMARRA, the Imam (as) was kept
for one night at a humble in for the homeless. Then AL-MUTAWAKKIL met
him the second day and gave him a house to live in.

**HIS STAY IN SAMARRA**

During the Imam's stay in SAMRRA, AL-MUTAWAKKIL made a show of respect
to him. He bestowed on him generously, but also put him under strict
surveillance. Most of his followers contacted him through letters.
AL-MUTAWAKKIL often summoned him to meet him just as he dispatched his
mercenaries to search his house in order to look for weapons and money.
The Imam sometimes would help them search his house. One of
AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S agents named AL-BATTHANI greatly hated the Imam and
incited AL-MUTAWAKKIL against him.

Instigated by AL-BATTHANI, AL-MUTAWAKKIL called his special guard SA'ID
and his men climbed up a ladder to the roof, but it was dark and they
could not find the way down, so the Imam shouted at them saying, "O
SA'ID! Wait till someone brings you a candle!" They gave him a candle,
so they all came down. They saw the Imam in his garment and headgear
standing for the prayers. He said to them, "You have the rooms; go and
search". The searched the house and, as usual, found neither weapons nor
money save some books. They apologized to him for being ordered to
search the house, but he only said to them, "The unjust will surely be
punished".

One night, the imam was called upon to attend the caliph's court
meeting. The caliph was sitting with a cup of wine in his hand. He asked
the Imam to sit near him, then he offered him the cup to drink. The Imam
refused. The caliph did not insist but asked the imam to recite some
poetry for him. He again refused, but the caliph this time insisted, so
the Imam recited few lines of poetry which portrayed a clear image of
the tyrants' life, the life of those who enjoy every luxury and who have
men ready to serve them, then suddenly they leave everything and settle
in graves where they become foodstuff for each earth worms.

The poetic versed say:

The glories of our blood and state
Are shadows, not substantial things.
There is no armor against the fate:

Death lays its icy hands on kings.

Scepter and crown
Must tumble down,
And in the earth be equally made
To the laborer's scythe and spade.
No fortress on the mountain peak
Could save the kings from the jaws of death

Their pomp and power proved too weak,
The cold earth asks them in contempt:
"Wither is thy robe, crown, and throne?!

"Did cruel Death thy beauty exempt?!

"Did it respect thy royal blood and bone?!" The grave replies
With sorrowful sighs:

"Those beautiful forms "Are but food for the worms!" This poem clearly
highlights the fact that no matter how long one lives, or however rich
he may be, he is surely one day to die and leave everything behind. He
takes nothing with him except his deeds, whether good or bad. He will be
called upon to account for them. It was clear that the Imam wanted to
advise the caliph and to halt his sins and indifference regarding his
religious duties and responsibilities. AL-MUTAWAKKIL did not expect to
hear that kind of poetry; he was shocked, and he cried bitterly. He
ordered the servants to clear the table from wine then apologized to the
Imam and bade him farewell.

AL-MUTAWAKKIL intended to humiliate the Imam in front of his
attendants. He offered him wine although he knew that wine is forbidden
in Islam and is a sin as heinous as idol worship. When the Imam refused,
he wanted him to recite poetry in praise of the caliph as poets usually
do. But the Imam was not such a flatterer. He slapped the caliph with
the actual image of the tyrants' life and their dreadful end. This
caused AL-MUTAWAKKIL to cry then give up drinking - though for a while -
and then apologized to the sublime Imam (as).

**THE IMAM'S ACHIEVEMENTS**

IMAM AL-HADI (AS) dedicated all his time to serve the religion of Islam
through spreading its sublime principles and commandments. He would
attend meetings in order to refute the deviated trends of the time and
to explain every religious issue quietly and clearly through reason and
logic. He received letters from all over the Muslim world and accepted
the religious revenues to be spent according to religious instructions
for the welfare of the Muslim community. He bravely confronted the
extremists and the deviated. He exposed their deviation and declared
them on the wrong path. All the Infallible Imams confronted such
deviated trends.

Once he said to someone who exaggerated in praising him, "Too much
praise (flattery) stirs doubt and suspicion. If you favor your brother
in religion, do not flatter him. Do him good in action and in
intention". Following are some of his sayings:

1- He who obeys the Creator won't be bothered by the creatures'
displeasure.
2- He who is aware of the Creator's clear sign is not bothered by
life's hardship.
3- Whoever is true in love and advise to you, you should obey him.
4- Whoever lacks self-respect should be avoided in order to escape his
evil.
5- One who is pleased with himself will have many who will be
displeased with him.
6- To the patient person, calamity is of one impact. To the impatient
one, it is of a double impact.
7- Ignorance and misery are two of the worst manners.
8- Covetousness is bad quality.
9- Mocking is the fools' joke and the ignorant's career.

**JA'FER THE LIAR**

IMAM AL-HADI had four sons and one daughter. The eldest of his sons was
IMAM HASAN AL-ASKARI (AS). All his sons, except JA'FER, were of great
piety and righteousness. JA'FER the liar was notorious for his bad
conduct. He used to lie and spread false news, hence he was called
"JA'FER the liar". He was not different from Prophet Noah's son who was
drowned for his sins. As a result of his lies, people turned away from
him, so he suffered negligence of any other factor. Lineage of good tree
is useless if the branch suffers a defect.

**HIS MARTYRDOM**

As previously mentioned, IMAM AL-HADI lived with his parents in
Al-Medina till he was six years old when his father IMAM AL-JAWAD passed
away. He stayed in Al-Medina till he was 20 years old. That was during
AL-MU'TASIM'S reign. AL-MUTAWAKKIL summoned him to SAMARRA where he
stayed till AL-MUTAWAKKIL was killed at the hands of his own son.

AL-MUNTASIR, AL-MUSTA'IN, and AL-MU'TAZZ ruled successively for seven
years which was a peaceful period for the Imam who did not suffer
harassment like the one he had to endure during AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S reign.
Yet he was deprived of his right to return to Al-Medina, his
grandfather's town, which he greatly longed to see and preferred over
any other place. That meant that he was in exile and under house arrest.
The peace which he enjoyed for a while was not due to the rulers' good
nature but to their weak authority. The caliphs became weak and mere
tools in the hands of their Turkish officers and others. The latter were
the actual rulers, giving orders of all kinds. They could appoint
someone in office and rob the other of his right. They would do that
according to their whims and desires. They would even kill a caliph and
appoint another one. They once toppled AL-MUTA'IN and put AL-MU'TAZZ in
his place.

IMAM AL-HADI was blessed with martyrdom during the caliphate of
AL-MU'TAZZ. It is said that AL-MU'TAZZ poisoned his food and, as usual,
claimed that the Imam had died a natural death. On hearing of his death,
a great number of the HASHIMIS and the ABBASIS gathered at his house.
AL-MU'TAZZ'S men attended his funeral. His son, IMAM HASAN AL-ASKARI,
performed the funeral prayers. He was buried in his own home in SAMARRA
(Iraq) in the year 254 of HIJRA. We love AHLUL BAYT and respect them and
consider them unique examples to be followed. This is due to their great
piety, righteousness and sound faith. Allah Almighty has purified them;
He says so in the following verse of the holy QUR'AN: {Allah only
desires to keep away uncleanness from you, O people of the House, and to
purify you wish a (thorough) purification}. [AL-AHZAB: 33].


**Imam Hasan Al-Askari (A.S.)**

**LINEAGE**

IMAM HASAN AL-ASKARI, son of IMAM ALI AL-HADI, was born in Al-Medina
AL-MUNAWARA on the 8th of RABI' AL-THANI, in the year 232 of HIJRA. His
mother's name was HUDIATHA. He was blessed with martyrdom on the 8th of
RABI' AL-AWAL in the year 260 of HIJRA in SAMRRA (Iraq) and was buried
there.

**THE TWO PRECIOS OBJECTS**

In his farewell pilgrimage, in the 10th year of HIJRA, the Prophet
(P.B.U.H.) addressed the pilgrims, whose number exceeded one hundred
thousand, saying "O people! I have been called upon (to leave this
world), and I am going to respond. I am leaving among you two precious
objects: The Book of Allah (the holy QUR'AN) and my Household, my
offspring. The Almighty has told me that they will never separate (from
each other) till they meet me at the pool (of AL-KAWTHAR). See how you
treat them after my demise".

In those words did the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.) inform the
pilgrims of his near departure from this world to meet his Lord. He
reminded them, prior to his demise, that he was leaving behind him,
among the Muslims, two heavy (in importance) objects: the holy QUR'AN
whose versed link us with Allah the Almighty. If we perceive the verses
and adhere to the QUR'ANIC instructions, we may be saved. It is like a
safety cord extending between heaven and earth. The other important
object he (P.B.U.H.) referred to was his own household who enjoy the
same special Divine status as that of the Book of Allah. The devotees of
the household of the Messenger of Allah, who obey the religious
instructions and adhere to the Book of Allah, are the saved party
according to the Prophetic narration that says, "My UMMA (Muslim
community) will divide into 73 parties of which only one is saved". He
(P.B.U.H.) on one occasion covered his household: ALI, FATIMA, AL-HASAN
and AL-HUSAIN, with a YEMENI cloth (AL-KISA AL-YEMANI) and said: "O
Lord! These are my household! Purify them with a thorough
purification".

The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) appealed to Allah to keep them away from all
uncleanness of sins or disobedience to Allah or any unholy actions.
Thus, Allah revealed verse 33 of chapter AL-AHZAB which says:

{Allah only desires to keep away (all) uncleanness from you, O people
of the House (AHL AL-BAYT), and purity you with a thorough
purification}. It confirmed the sublime status of the holy family.
Again, in his farewell pilgrimage, at a place called GHADIR KHUM, he
(P.B.U.H.) addressed the pilgrims. In a lengthy sermon, He (P.B.U.H.)
referred to Ali's sublime status and recommended him for the highest
office in the community: Leadership. He took Ali's hand and raised it up
for all to see then said, "Of whomsoever I am the master (WALI), this
(Ali) is his master. O Lord! Keep the truth on his side wherever he
turns!"

These prophetic narrations, besides many others, indicate the Divine
status of the Infallible Imams who guide mankind to the right path. The
narrations confirm their lineage as the offspring of Ali and Fatima,
peace be upon them all. Even their names are confirmed in prophetic
narrations. We are informed of their names and attributes. They are
Twelve Imams of whom Ali (as) is the first and the last is his grandson
IMAM AL-MAHDI, the awaited IMAM in occultation.

These narrations tell us clearly who the authoritative in the Muslim
community are. They confirm their virtue and sublime status. They are
infallible, clear of all wrongdoings or sins according to QUR'ANIC
verses and prophetic narrations. We are ordered to obey them and adhere
to their instructions so that we may enjoy a good life here and in the
hereafter. It is worth mentioning that QUR'ANIC verse 67 of chapter
AL-MAIDA was revealed during the farewell pilgrimage. It is relevant to
Imam Ali's leadership and, thus, the Prophet (P.B.U.H.) conveyed the
message in full on that occasion. The verse says:

{O Prophet! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord, and
if you do not, then you have not delivered His message (at all), and
Allah protects you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people}. [AL-MAIDAH: 67].

**LOVE FOR THE PROPHET'S HOUSEHOLD**

The holy QUR'AN says,

{…. Say (O Mohammed!): I demand not of you any recompense for it save
love for my relatives…}. [AL-SHURA: 23]. The holy Prophet did not stay
long after his farewell pilgrimage. For all his struggle for the sake of
mankind's welfare and guidance to the right path, he asked nothing but
that we love his household. For such a mighty task, he (P.B.U.H.) asked
nothing but that we be fair and kind to his offspring! Imagine! But
alas! The Muslim community betrayed its Prophet (P.B.U.H.) and denied
his offspring all their rights, rendering them the most oppressed in the
community. They were all treated with cruelty and ingratitude. All his
recommendations were discarded, all his narrations were forgotten.
Islamic leadership was entrusted to others, not to them. Hence, the
enemies of Islam dominated the Muslim world. Since that early age of
Islam, the community has been suffering deviation, and the sublime
instructions of Islam have been neglected.

Islam would have come to an end had it not been for the important roles
played by the Infallible Imams who sacrificed their lives for the sake
of Islam and for the safety of its injunctions. At the time when IMAM
ALI AL-HADI (AS) had passed away, his son HASAN AL-ASKARI succeeded him
as the Imam

**IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS)**

He was born in Al-Medina AL-MUNAWARA on the 8th of RABI AL-THANI, in
the year 232 of HIJRA. When he was two years old, he accompanied his
father IMAM AL-HADI when he was summoned to Iraq by orders form the
ABBASI ruler AL-MUTAWAKIL. They both settled in SAMARRA in a house
surrounded by the army camps. They were under strict surveillance by the
military (called in Arabic 'ASKAR), hence they were nicknamed
AL'ASKARAIN. At the age of 20, his father passed away. The son, HASAN
AL-'ASKARI, performed the funeral prayers for his father and buried him.
He then declared his Imamate to the people. The ABBASI ruler AL-MU'TAZZ
dared not harm him although he waited for the opportunity to get rid of
him. However, AL-MU'TAZZ died when a number of influential Turks
rebelled against him and killed him in the year 254 of HIJRA.

Prior to his death, AL-MU'TAZZ called his guard SA'ID and ordered him
to arrange the transferring of IMAM AL-'ASKARI form SAMARRA to KUFA and
to get rid of him on the way secretly. When the Imam's followers knew of
the plot, they were very much concerned especially since the said
transfer was being carried out at AL-MU'TAZZ'S orders; that was surely
devilish. However, the Imam left for them a letter putting them at ease.
He told them that by Allah's will, they would be relieved of all
concerns. Three days later, AL-MU'TAZZ was killed by the Turks along
with his agent SA'ID. The ABBASI ruler AL-MUHTADI succeeded him.
AL-MUHTADI tried to rule with justice along the lines of the early
RASHIDI caliphs (the first four caliphs who ruled following the
Prophet's demise).

Despite his good deeds, he never concealed his hostility towards the
Imam (as). He chased his followers, jailing and killing them. He even
prevented the imam's followers from visiting their Imam (as). However,
he did not rule long. He was killed one year later by the same Turks who
put his brother AL-MU'TAMID in his place then killed him soon
thereafter.

AL-MU'TAMID was a moderate ruler who was more concerned about the state
affairs than anything else; hence, he did not care for the Imam who was
relieved of the ABBASI spies and agents. During his rule, the 12th Imam,
the awaited MEHDI, was born on the 15th of SHA'BAN of the HIJRI year
255. his mother MERJIS was of royal Roman descent. Although the ruler's
agents knew of his birth, it was the Divine care that kept him safe
despite their plots.

**IMAM AL-'ASKARI'S ERA**

IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI was the target of the ABBASI injustice and
tyranny. Despite the rulers' pressure on him and their harassment, the
number of his followers increased after they had witnessed miracles at
his hands. They were in two groups: One group greatly loved him and the
other was greatly afraid of him. He could expose their good or evil
intentions. If someone resorted to him for some special need, he (as)
would meet his need before he mentioned it to him. Those who intended to
do him evil were at once known to him. He would tell them of their evil
intention and leave them in great fear. Among such men of evil
intentions was one called ALI IBN UTTAMISH. When his intention was
disclosed, he became a righteous man and sought the Imam's forgiveness.
He witnessed the Imam's great insight.

However, the rulers managed to keep the people away from him through
pressure on his followers. Hence, they resorted to letters as means of
communication in order to obtain his instructions and narrations and
disseminate them. Thus, they could defeat the heretics and the deviated.
Muslims in groups came to QUM and NISAPOUR to get in touch with the
theologians and listen to the Imam's instructions and teachings. They
all longed to see him.

IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI had a bad brother called JA'FER whom the rulers
favored, using him against the Imam and his followers. He spied on his
brother and conveyed information to the agents. The aggressive rulers
were waiting for the birth of the Imam's son, the awaited IMAM AL-MEHDI
(as). The Imam was careful to keep that birth a secret. His brother,
too, intended to keep it a secret in order to achieve his aim and
devilish plans.

**MARTYRDOM**

IMAM AL-'ASKARI'S authority did not last more than six years. The
agents of the ABBASI ruler AL-MU'TAMID poisoned his food, hence he feel
ill. AL-MU'TAMID sent few doctors and prominent figures to tend to him
day and night. He tried to clear himself of the accusation of being
behind poisoning the Imam's food.

The Imam suffered sickness for eight days then passed away in the year
260 of HIJRA. As usual, the doctors issued a statement about his death,
claiming it due to natural causes. They also declared that he had left
no children, hence people offered their condolences to his brother
JA'FER. When the holy body was ready for the funeral ceremony and those
present stood up for prayers, JA'FER was about to start the prayers when
a child took hold of his garment and said, "O uncle! Step back; I am to
lead the prayers for my father's body". JA'FER was stunned; he became
angry but had no choice except to obey. The child led the prayers and
the Imam was buried next to his father in SAMARRA.

Their shrines are now monuments and sacred places where people pay
homage to earn Allah's blessings and to appeal to Him to keep them firm
on the right path of AHL AL-BAYT, peace be upon them. As soon as the
burial was over, the awaited Imam disappeared unnoticed. Everyone knew
that he was the awaited Imam, the 12th Imams, the owner of the time
(SAHIB AL-ZAMAN) who will make his presence known to all the people on a
certain day. We appeal to Allah to help us be among his supporters and
followers.

FOLLOWING ARE SOME OF HIS SAYINGS:

1- "The best one among people is he who is aware of his brothers'
rights, the best in performance of those rights, and the most favored by
Allah".

2- "Whoever is humble to his brothers in religion, he is considered by
Allah among the truthful, the true followers of ALI IBN ABI TALIB".

3- Once he said to his followers, "Fear Allah, speak the truth, carry
the trusts to whoever trusts you, be he righteous or mischievous.
Perform your prayers with long prostrations and be good to your
neighbors. Such is the mission of Allah's Messenger".

4- He (as) also said, "Worship is not plenty of prayers or plenty of
fasting, but in pondering on the Divine Affair".

5- "Woe unto one who is with two faces and two tongues, who praises his
brother - in religion - in his presence and degrades him in his absence
(through backbiting)!"

6- "Anger is the key to every evil".

7- "The malicious person is the one with the least amount of ease of
mind"

8- "The most pious is he who shuns what is unlawful".

9- "Whoever sows good will harvest pleasure. Whoever sows evil will
harvest regret".

10- "The fool's heart is in his mouth. The mouth of the wise person is
in his heart".

11- "Two qualities are of the utmost best: Belief in Allah and doing
good to your brethren in religion".

There are many other wise sayings and good pieces of advice related
about him. He used to explain to the Muslims every good quality and
every good conduct. He was one of the purified members of the Prophet's
household who led the best drive in life, who were clear in their
actions and words. Thus, they became the guiding torches to the right
path.

They were true believers calling to the worship of Allah only, the Only
Truth (AL-HAQQ). They kept Islam safe and clear of distortion or
deviation. We appeal to Allah to guide us to follow in their footsteps
in this life and enjoy His pleasure and rewards in this as well as in
the life to come.


**The Awaited Imam: Mohammad Al-Mehdi (A.S.)**

**LINEAGE**

Mohammed AL-MEHDI is the son of HASAN AL-'ASKARI (as). He was born on
the 15th of SHA'BAN in the year 255 of HIJRA in SAMARRA. His mother, of
Roman lineage, was NARJIS. He went in minor occultation for 69 years. He
is still his major occultation.

**PROPHETIC HERALD**

In the last year of his life, the Messenger of Allah (P.B.U.H.) made
his way to holy Mecca to perform the pilgrimage. He was accompanied by
tens of thousands of Muslims. They learned how to perform the pilgrimage
through his guidance. In Mina, he addressed them, raising many issues.
He advised them to love and to be fair to each other, and to always
unite against the enemies of Islam. He made a reference to his
successors by saying, "Twelve Imams will succeed me; they are all from
QURAYSH".

On another occasion, he (P.B.U.H.) said, "The Imams after me are
twelve. All is the first of them and AL-QAIM BI AL-HAQQ (AL-MEHDI) is
the last". On yet another occasion, he (P.B.U.H.) said, "AL-MEHDI is
from my household… he will effect equality and justice on this earth
when oppression and injustice become the norm of the day".

He (P.B.U.H.) also declared that AL-MEHDI would be from the offspring
of Fatima (his purified daughter) and Ali (as), especially the offspring
of Fatima's son, AL-HUSAIN (as). He put his hand on his grandson
(AL-HUSAIN) and said, "The MEHDI of this UMMA (community - nation) is
from his offspring". Peace and blessing of Allah be on all of them.

The good news spread among the Muslims and was a source of great
concern to them as was clearly conveyed by the Messenger of Allah
Almighty. It clearly and frankly indicated the Truth, naming the
community leaders. It was kept in the believers' hearts and recorded in
their books of Prophetic traditions for future generations. Thus, all
Muslims, whether SUNNIS or SHI'ITES, agree that the awaited Imam is the
savior, the promised leader chosen by Allah Almighty to set up Allah's
religion on earth despite the infidels' plots. The awaited Imam was born
of a Roman mother who was called NARJIS. She was the daughter of one of
the Roman kings. Her mother's lineage is traced back to SHIMOUN (SHEMON)
AL-SAFA, one of the disciples of Jesus (as).

NARJIS was taken prisoner in the wake of a battle between the Muslims
and the Romans which took place in the city of AMURIA. The Muslims
achieved victory, and a great number of prisoners were taken to
Baghdad.

It was the norm of the day to see prisoners of war sold at
slave-markets in order to secure their daily bread and accommodation.
They were usually treated well according to the QURANIC orders and
Prophetic Narrations.

IMAM AL-HADI (AS) sent someone, a slave trader called BISHR, to Baghdad
to buy a young Roman girl and bring her to him in SAMARRA. He bought her
and brought her to the Imam (as) who told her the good news of her
giving birth to a blessed son: "The Awaited MEHDI who will fill the
earth with justice and equality, clearing it of all injustice and
oppression". NARJIS rejoiced at the good news and lived in the Imam's
house peacefully. She was a pious and righteous woman. Her pregnancy was
concealed even from the women near her. It was Allah's will that she
should be the mother of the wonderful son who will leave all at a loss
except the true believers who believe in his grandfather's message and
his forefathers' mission of Imamate. Peace and blessings of Allah be on
all of them.

The holy QUR'AN says,

{And we desire to bestow a favor upon those who were deemed weak in the
land and to make them Imams, and to make them heirs}. [AL-QASAS: 5].

**THE 15TH OF SHA'BAN**

At the night of the 15th of SHA'BAN, in the year 255 of HIJRA, IMAM
AL-ASKARI asked his aunt HAKIMA to tend to his wife and never to leave
her because she was to give birth to the awaited Imam on that blessed
night.

The blessed infant was born enjoying the concern and care of the Divine
will. He was called Mohammed AL-MEHDI in conformity with a prophetic
narration which says: "This world will not come to an end until a man
from my household and of my name achieves authority in my community". In
language, the word "AL-MEHDI" signifies piety, righteousness and
guidance on the Right Path. Thus, AL-MEHDI has become the title of the
12th Imam who will fight the oppressors and the tyrants. He will achieve
justice and equality in the world in place of prevailing oppression and
injustice.

**THE MINOR OCCULTATION AND THE MAJOR ONE**

IMAM HASAN AL-ASKARI was poisoned. He passed away in the year 260 of
HIJRA. The awaited Imam, his son, was then five years old and well-known
only to the very close followers and special supporters of his father
(as). His father was concerted about his safety, so he protected him by
keeping his blessed birth as a secret. Hence, the ABASSIDE agents who
tried hard to get hold of him and to kill him failed in their attempts.
They were, however, informed of his existence by his uncle JA'FER the
Liar. The ABASSIDES declared that IMAM AL-ASKARI died leaving no
children. They were looking everywhere for the 12th Imam. They made such
a lie in order to make use of the bad uncle who received condolences at
the funeral. When he was about to lead the funeral's prayer, and as soon
as he uttered the words: "ALLAHO AKBAR!" (Allah is the Greatest), a
small child of brown skin approached him and said, "Step backward,
Uncle! Let me lead the prayers of my father's funeral".

JA'FER was stunned. He turned pale, but he had no other choice except
to obey. He stepped backward and let his nephew lead the prayers. As
soon as finished, he left without being caught or noticed. JA'FER, the
deviated son of the late Imam (as), suffered a great defeat. IMAM
AL-HADI sued to warn his followers saying, "Keep away from my son
JA'FER. He is to me the same as the son of Noah was to his father. The
holy QUR'AN says:

{And Noah cried out to his Lord: Lord! Surely my son is of my family,
and Your promise is surely true, and You are the most just of the
judges. Said He: O Noah! Surely he is not your family; surely he is (the
doer of) other than good deeds…}. [HUD: 45-46]. As previously mentioned,
IMAM AL-MEHDI did not let himself be seen except by the special and very
close followers of his father. He went into occultation twice. The first
time was the minor occultation which lasted for 69 years. He used to
contact his followers through his special deputies. They received his
instructions and delivered them to his followers all over the world.
They received his answers to their letters of inquiries, collected the
religious taxed, the KHUMS (one-fifth), the ZAKAT, and the SADAQAT
(alms) and carried them to him to be distributed according to Islam's
religious instructions. His deputies during the minor occultation
were:

1- UTHMAN IBN SA'EED
2- Mohammed IBN UTHMAN IBN SA'EED
3- AL-HASAN IBN RAWH
4- ALI IBN Mohammed

They were called: "The Imam's ministers". When the fourth deputy died,
no one succeeded him, and the Imam went into major occultation from that
day till our time. This occultation will continue till Allah Almighty
decides when he should come out to assume his role.

The aim behind the minor occultation was to train the believers and
prepare them for his major occultation. They were trained to accept
someone in place of the Imam himself. The practice started during his
father's time and his grandfather's. Both Imams (as) resorted to that
method as a preliminary step to be applied during AL-MEHDI'S
occultation. People became used to those deputies and accepted their
role as means to get to the Imam in his minor occultation. The first
deputy stayed in office for five years, the second for 40 years, the
third for twenty-one years and the fourth for three years. With the
death of the fourth deputy, the major occultation started.

The reason of the major occultation is the Divine will. IMAM AL-SADIQ
(AS) was asked once about its reason. He said, "This affair cannot be
disclosed except when he himself reappears. It is the same issue
involving MUSA (Moses) and the righteous man, AL-KHIDHIR, who explained
the matter to the Prophet later. It is one of Allah's secrets, an affair
unknown to mankind" We are also to accept Allah's will and act
accordingly.

The second Imam, namely IMAM AL-HASAN (AS), said the following to some
of his followers who blamed him for coming to peaceful terms with MUAWIA
IBN ABI SUFIAN: "Each one of us will suffer submission to the tyrant of
his day except AL-QAIM (the 12th Imam). Allah will conceal his birth and
keep him in occultation, so he does not have to swear allegiance to
anyone at all. He is the 9th of my brother's offspring. Allah will
prolong his age then make him manifest in the image of a young man of 40
years. Allah is Powerful, Almighty".

Of course, Allah can do everything. In the holy QUR'AN, we are told
that Noah preached to his people for almost one thousand years, and that
Prophet Jesus is still alive. History tells us that the righteous man
LUQMAN lived 500 years, QAIS IBN SA EEDA for 700 years, and UMAR IBN ABI
RABI'A for 400 years. One naturally asks, "During this major
occultation, who is to tackle the Muslim's affairs? It is quite
important for the Muslims to have some legal and religious
leadership".

The holy QUR'AN says, {O, you who believe! Obey Allah and the Prophet
and those in authority among you…}. [AL-NISA: 59]. During the
occultation of the 12th Imam, the Muslims should turn to the righteous
theologians regarding matters relevant to the affairs of their every day
life. AL-QAIM was asked by the Muslims about who they should follow
during his major occultation. He said to them: "Whoever among the
theologians is chaste, careful about his religion, safeguarding himself
against following his own desires, obedient to his Lord, the common
people can follow him".

**THE HOUSE'S BASEMENT**

During the early years of his life, IMAM AL-MEHDI lived in his father's
house. He would often hide in the house's basement to escape the spies'
watch. Such basements are found in most homes in Iraq. They are used
during the summer to avoid the great heat of the day. Whenever AL-MEHDI
was pursued or his house was surrounded, he would with the help of
Divine care leave the house safely. He would often attend the religious
meetings of his supporters and his followers in order to solve their
problems. He was known only to the few of their elite and to the
community of the faithful.

At the onset of his major occultation, he left his father's house in
SAMARRA to live among the people without being known. He performs the
pilgrimage and other religious rituals. All this is achieved through the
Divine plan and for the benefit of the Muslim community. It is the
Divine secret that cannot be perceived.

The malicious enemies exploit the believers' visits to the two shrines
of IMAM AL-HADI and IMAM AL-'ASKARI (as) and falsely claim that IMAM
AL-MEHDI had entered the basement and had been there for all these long
years. This is a big lie. AL-MEHDI, through the Divine help, lives among
the people, and Allah will manifest his mission whenever He desires,
permitting him to play his role of removing all injustices suffered by
the oppressed people and achieving justice and equality everywhere and
for everyone. The Prophet (P.B.U.H.) indicated his important role
through the Divine revelation. The holy QUR'AN says,

{Your companion (the Prophet) does not err, nor does he go astray. Nor
does he speak out of (his own personal desire). It is naught but
revelation revealed}. [AL-NAJM: 2-4].

It is the duty of all Muslims to get ready for to support him in due
time. This can be achieved through strict adherence to the faith of his
grandfather, Mohammed (P.B.U.H.), and observance of Islamic
instructions. We should enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil. We
should reject injustice and unjust people. Thus can we be soldiers of
the Truth, Justice and Faith. We appeal to Allah Almighty to bring about
his reappearance soon, and to consider us among his followers and
supporters. Allah is All-Knowing All-Hearing. Praise is due only to
Him.


