Lesson 10:  Mistakes Parents often make
=======================================

Many parents have frustrated and angry relationships with their
children. Even very young children sometimes become a source of
annoyance with their constant demands, whining, and disobedience. Family
life is supposed to be joyous and fulfilling but reality is often very
different in many cases. However, a lot of the heartache and pain of
child rearing is quite unnecessary.

If parents would take a little time and effort to improve their ways,
realize their mistakes, and devise new strategies and plans, the
dividends would be great. A small change in attitude and/or behavior
would make life much happier for both parent and child.

Below are some common mistakes that parents often make.

1. Making children dependent
----------------------------

Some parents believe that to love children means to do their work. They
take excessive pity on the child and feel that as a parent it is their
duty to do things for him. So at six years old a child is still be
dressed by the parents. He is considered too young to tie his own shoes,
or comb his hair. Such constant fussing over the child does not instill
confidence and independence in the child. A ten year old who never
cleans his room, and lets mum or dad do it, will learn to always depend
on others. This may also foster laziness, sloppiness and a lack of
initiative.

A wise parent knows that the best way to help a child is not do things
for him, but to show him how to do them. Learning the skills of carrying
out personal and household chores are an achievement often appreciated
during the early years. A child who is not taught to do them when young,
will be very unwilling to do them when older. Parents should help their
children learn to do their own work, using the physical and mental
powers the Almighty has blessed them with.

2. Quarreling in front of the children
--------------------------------------

It is natural for couples to have occasional arguments, sometimes even
heated and bitter ones. However it is very damaging to carry these out
in front of children. Children do not understand that this is not a
cause of worry, and may begin to imagine the worst.

To them it could be a sign that the parents do not love each other, that
they may even divorce and destroy his world.

This causes depression and loss of security among children. Worse, it
could have damaging effects as the child grows. He could look upon the
conflicting relationship of his parents as a normal relationship for
married couples and this could have a major effect on his own
relationships.

Some parents even try to make the children take sides. If a wife feels
her husband is treating her unfairly, she may talk to the children and
make them see her side. She would like to turn them against the husband,
at least to a certain degree. What she fails to realize is that the
husband is a father to her children. They would like to respect and love
him.

By poisoning them against him she is doing them a great injustice. She
could be damaging a relationship that has the potential to bring the
child great good. This also applies to those who try to turn children
against their grandparents, or other relatives. Because of a conflict
with in-laws, children are told of how unfair and oppressive the family
is.

To deprive the children of love and respect for their extended family is
also a great wrong. Parents should not let their own quarrels keep their
children away from enjoying the special love of grandparents and other
relatives.

The best thing parents can do to a child is present a loving and
harmonious relationship among themselves. It boosts the child both
mentally and emotionally and helps him form loving relationships in his
own life. It is true that arguments cannot always be dismissed. But they
must be done in private, away from the child who cannot understand or
bear fighting among his parents.

3. Expecting too much of children
---------------------------------

Some parents would like their children to behave totally like adults.
They don’t want them to run around, to play, to talk loudly, even to
touch things around the house. What they should understand is that all
these activities are part of growing up. To be a healthy adult, children
need to have passed through various stages, each of which is a building
block in his character.

In Hadith al-Mufazzal, our sixth Imam describes the wisdom behind the
childish behavior which some adults dislike. He says:

*If a child had been born with mature intellect, he would have been
astounded on opening his eyes and seeing such varied assortment,
different kinds of forms and distinctive images of unity and disunity.
For a long time he would not understand where he had come from and where
he has arrived, and whether all that he was seeing was in a state of
dreams or waking.*

*If he had been born with mature intellect he would have felt disgusted
and degraded on finding himself being carried about in the lap, fed with
milk, wrapped in bandages.*

*There would not have been, if they had been born with mature intellect,
that sweetness, nor that consideration for infants in the minds of the
adults which comes from fondling the untutored children. Their
artlessness creates a particular attraction. As such he is born into the
world without an understanding for anything, quite unaware of the world
and what lies therein. He views all these things with his undeveloped
brain and inadequate understanding, and so does not feel perplexed.*

*His intellect and understanding develop by degrees, slowly from time to
time, little by little. This introduces him gradually to the things
around him and accustoms his brain accordingly.*

The child lives in a world quite different from that of the parent.
Parents sometimes view the life of the child from an adult perspective,
and forget that to the child his little world is very important.

Although they must be kept away from harmful and dangerous things, a
child should be allowed to explore things that arouse his curiosity. Let
him meddle with things that he is interested in, if the consequences are
not very destructive. The house should not be a prison for him, with
constant orders to sit down and be quiet.

Allow the child to have a little independence, especially in things that
are not greatly significant. The small mistakes that he may make will
teach him to do different next time. There is a difference between
issues of grave importance that cannot be compromised, and issues in
which some flexibility can be allowed. Life should not be so serious
that every small thing should be treated like a major issue.

Some parents also make the mistake of expecting too many achievements
from their children. A parent should know his child, and his strengths
and weaknesses. If a child is not too bright, it is enough to encourage
him to work hard and achieve according to his potential. To expect that
he must bring perfect marks, and then show disappointment when he
cannot, hurts the child and lowers his self-esteem. This is the same for
all expectations the parents has from the child. It must be
proportionate to the age and ability of the child.

4. Negativity
-------------

Life is miserable for those children who have to deal with parents who
are constantly negative. Such parents do not forget mistakes, harp on
small issues, and are always predicting the worst. “You are not studying
hard, you are bound to fail”, Your room is such a mess, I wonder how
sloppy your house will be when you grow up”, “Stop troubling your
younger sister, you have no love for her at all” are examples of
negative and perhaps destructive comments.

A parent may sometimes say such things in anger, but it is the constant
repetition of negative comments that affect a child greatly. A happy
home is one in which children know that they will be disciplined when
necessary, but do not have to fear a sharp tongue or harsh words.

Some parents also have a very negative attitude on life. They complain
of their work, and the people they work with. They blame the world for
their troubles and are quick to talk negatively about others. All this
is undoubtedly going to have an effect on the child. A child who has
heard a lot about how unfair and difficult life is may form a dim view
of life in this world. His enthusiasm for life decreases. A great deal
of a child’s joy and zest for living stems from what his parents think
and say about life. It is always necessary to avoid being too negative
when talking in front of children.

5. Being two-faced
------------------

Many parents do not realize how observant and absorbing a child is. They
will talk in front of him forgetting that he is present, almost as
though he is a piece of furniture - deaf and dumb. But a child listens
and absorbs, often ponders over and sometimes repeats, what he hears.
Thus when a parent says something about a particular thing or person,
and then says something different to someone else, the child is
introduced to being two-faced.

A parent may rant against someone, and say he dislikes him immensely.
Yet when he meets the same person, he is very nice to him and shows no
sign of his anger. Although to a certain degree this may be necessary,
for we cannot show our disagreements openly, it is not necessary to
indulge in hypocritical behavior. A hypocrite is one who will be very
sweet to the face, but will stab from the back.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a) says: *The worst of the servants (of Allah)
is one who has two faces and two tongues. He praises his
brother-in-faith when he is present, and eats him when he is absent.*

A child should not be exposed to such behavior. He believes that his
parent is always right, and to see such two faced behavior is a
disillusionment and a wrong message.

6. Humiliating a child in front of others
-----------------------------------------

A child has his own personality and, just like an adult, wants that
others should love and respect him. It is thus very difficult for him
when he is scolded and derogated in public. Some parents announce to
others when the children are present, how well behaved one child is and
how naughty the other. Or, if a mistake is made, he is scolded even when
there are other people around. A slight reprimand may not matter too
much, but a serious one should be done in private. Respect the child’s
personality, and you will teach him to respect others.

Parents are human beings and are bound to make mistakes. The aim is not
to refrain from ever making mistakes, but to learn from them and
gradually decrease them. Parents have been making the same mistakes over
the years, and it is time to learn and change. A slight change in
attitude and methods of parenting will create vastly improved
relationships between parents and children. This in turn produces
stronger families, a vital commodity in the struggle to create a
progressive *Ummah*.


