Lesson 2: The Role of the Mother
================================

Every society is made up of blocks of family units. The stronger each
block is, the stronger the structure of the society. Families are thus
the building blocks upon which rests the fate of society. For the
development of good families, the mother plays a vital role. Many women
today have aspirations of progress in their careers, and degrees in
various fields.

However it is indisputable that the most important achievement of a
mother is the raising of sensible, virtuous children who will then move
on to build other strong blocks for society. It has been said that it is
easy to bear children but it is difficult to raise them well. In that
lies the challenge for all mothers.

Islam’s respect for the Mother
------------------------------

A Muslim mother has a valued and dignified role. Her contribution is
acknowledged and appreciated. Her unparalleled gifts to the child have
been aptly described by Imam Zaynul ‘Abidin (a) in *Risalatul Huqooq –*
The Chapter of Rights.

*It is the right of your mother that you should appreciate that she
carried you [in her womb] the way nobody carries anybody, She fed you
the fruits of her heart which nobody feeds anybody. She protected you
[during pregnancy] with her ears, eyes, hands, legs, hair, limbs, [in
short] with her whole being, gladly, cheerfully, and carefully;
suffering patiently all the worries, pains, difficulties, and sorrows.*

*Till the hand of God removed you from her and brought you into this
world. Then she was most happy, feeding you forgetting her own hunger,
clothing you even if she herself had no clothes, giving you milk and
water not caring for her own thirst, keeping you in the shade, even if
she had to suffer from the heat of the sun, giving you every comfort
with her own hardships; lulling you to sleep while keeping herself
awake.*

The foundation of the family is laid with the decision to marry, and the
importance of the mother is evident in Islamic teachings beginning with
marriage, conception and then child rearing. The following points
illustrate how Islam sanctifies the role of the mother

Emphasis on choosing a good wife
--------------------------------

Islam advocates choosing of a wife based on moral characteristics. The
Holy Prophet says: *Marry into a decent family, for genes have effects.*
He is also reported to have encouraged Muslims to marry virtuous women
in order to have virtuous children He has condemned those who look only
for wealth and /or beauty when choosing a spouse.

Respect in this world
---------------------

A mother commands great respect from her family. She is to be obeyed,
and venerated. The Qur’anic verses which talk about the rights of
parents include the mother. However the Holy Prophet (S) has enjoined
goodness to the mother even before the father. A man once came for
advice to him, as to who he should be good to. The Prophet (S) advised
him to do good to his mother again. Three times the man asked, and three
times the Prophet (S) told him to do good to his mother. At the fourth
time, the Prophet (S) told him to do good to his father. This well-known
story clearly illustrates the position of the mother in Islam.

Respect in the Hereafter
------------------------

The famous hadith of the Holy Prophet (S) says: *Jannat lies under the
feet of the mothers*. A woman came to the Holy Prophet (S) and asked why
going for Jihad was not obligatory on women. She was afraid that women
were barred from achieving the great reward for those who fought and
died in the way of the Almighty.

The Prophet (S) explained to her that a woman was a fighter in Allah’s
way from the time she became pregnant up to the time she delivered, and
from the time she began breast-feeding till the time she stopped. If she
died during that period, her position would be that of a martyr. To
raise a virtuous child is one of the greatest good deeds. It continues
to bring reward even after death.

Holy Qur’an on the Mother
-------------------------

Allah says in Sura Luqman:

***And We have enjoined man in respect of his parents - his mother bears
him with faintings upon faintings, and his weaning takes two years -
saying : “Be grateful to Me and to both your parents, to Me is the
eternal coming.*** **(31:14)**

And in Sura Ahqaf He says:

***And We have enjoined on man doing of good to his parents; with
troubles did his mother bear him and with troubles did she bring him
forth; and the bearing and the weaning of him was thirty months.***
**(46:15)**

In both the above verses, although both parents are mentioned, the
mother is singled out as she bears a greater responsibility and
ultimately a greater reward.

Two mothers are mentioned by name in the Qur’an. When Bibi Maryam, the
mother of Nabi Isa (a) suffered the pangs of childbirth, she wished she
was dead. She was all alone and worried about what was about to happen
to her. At that time Allah consoled her and told her not to grieve. She
was provided with fresh dates and water. She was also told to fast for
three days by abstaining from talk, and Allah made the baby talk to
prove that he was a miraculous baby (19:23-26).

The mother is shown concern and consideration for her state. Allah does
not abandon her, or reprove her by telling her that she is privileged to
give birth to a Prophet. Although that was true, motherhood entails
great difficulty, a fact recognized by the Qur’an.

Another mother mentioned by the Qur’an is the mother of Prophet Musa
(a). When she was told to put her baby in the river, she was given an
assurance that the baby would be returned to her. Allah knows the love
of the mother, and knows it is difficult to give away one’s child.

When the baby was picked up by Firawn’s wife, he refused to suck the
milk of any foster mother. Prophet Musa’s sister then suggested that
they try her mother. Mother and baby unite, and Allah’s promise was
fulfilled. (Sura TaHa 37-40, Qasas 7-13)

Qualities of a Mother
---------------------

A good mother has outstanding qualities. No one can replace her in the
life of her children. The following are some of the things which make
her so unique.

### 1. A deep love for her children

A mother’s love is unmatched. Whether young or old, healthy or
handicapped, troublesome or obedient, the child is still beloved to the
mother. This love may be displayed in various forms. Sometimes children
misinterpret scoldings and rebukes to be a sign of lack of love. It is
important to assure the child that he is always loved, even when his
behavior warrants disciplinary measures. Such a child becomes confident
and happy, and will never seek solace elsewhere. The love of the mother
becomes a source of happiness and peace at home. Children feel attached
to the home because of the mother.

### 2. Sacrifice and dedication

A mother gives up a great deal for the sake of the child. She gives up
her time, her sleep, her pleasures etc. to ensure that the child is all
right. As Imam Zaynul ‘Abidin(a) says in his book Risalatul Huquq
(mentioned earlier), nobody comes even close to doing what a mother does
for her child. That is why he says that it is only with help of the
Almighty that one can thank the mother for all her sacrifice and
efforts.

A good mother places the needs of the child, both physical and emotional
needs, first. This is an important point to keep in mind, especially in
these modern times. Women today are deluded by society into making their
own careers and jobs more important than their homes. The home will
always remain a woman’s most valuable work and that may require all
types of sacrifices. It is not really a sacrifice, but is an investment
which will reap great dividends.

### 3. Protection and security

A mother always tries to safeguard the child from danger and
difficulties. However some mothers tend to be over protective. It is
wise for the child to learn to face some problems in life, according to
his age and circumstances. A coddled child will be unable to face the
realities of the world when he grows up, a world which will not be as
considerate of him as his mother.

The role of the Mother
----------------------

### A window of the child to the world

When a baby is born, he is totally unaware of the outside world. The
mother plays an important part in introducing him to the world. The
outlook that the child will form towards life depends a lot on the
mother. His attitude, his views - religious or otherwise- his
perspective on life and its goals, will all be gained from her.
Eventually he will mature and perhaps form his own changed views, but
the initial years and what he learns in them will always have a lasting
impression on his mind.

### Model for the child

Since the mother is the most important person in the life of a child,
she is greatly revered. Her habits and behavior become a model for the
child. Whatever the child observes from her, such as her housekeeping
habits, her manners, her relationships with others, the way she spends
money, and in general her lifestyle, will all undoubtedly affect the
child’s character. A mother is said to be better than a hundred
teachers. Her emotional strengths and weaknesses are an example for the
child, and will be followed for many years to come even though all of it
may not be worthy.

People have been reported to be following their mother’s ways even when
they know the mothers were wrong. It is almost like an unconscious
reaction, and it takes effort to behave differently. Thus mothers have
an important task of setting forth a good example. It may seem
difficult, even impossible.

Many mothers think it too great a burden to be acting near perfect all
the time, even in the familiarity of their own homes. However it is a
good training. What mothers will change in themselves for their children
will become a habit, and will lead to a real change. It is not
perfection that Islam demands from mothers, but a willingness to accept
the responsibility of modeling good acceptable behavior.

Many great people remember their mothers and the role they played in
nurturing their greatness. Sayyid ar-Radhi, the compiler of *Nahjul
Balgha*, mourned the death of his mother greatly. He wrote a poem for
her in which he says:

*O Mother! I cry and shed tears for your separation hoping that perhaps
the burning drops of tears coming out of my sorrowful eyes may melt and
remove the mountain of sadness from my heart.*

*O Mother! You were such a precious jewel and valuable pearl that for
getting you released from the plundering enemy’s hand I would have
sacrificed everything in my possession as your ransom. But Alas! The
death ahs snatched you away from my hand and nothing can be taken back
from its deadly claws.*

*O Mother! If all the mothers of the world would have been righteous
like you, indeed the children of the world would not have required the
presence of their fathers.*

*O Mother! All are witness that you were an honorable and noble lady
because you have handed over decent and noble children to society.*[^1]

Shaykh Mutaza Ansari, a great Shi’a Jurist also wept bitterly at the
death of his mother. One of his scholarly pupils reproached him, saying
it did not befit a learned scholar to agonize so much over the death of
his mother. The Shaykh replied: It seems you are not aware of the high
status enjoyed by a mother. The proper training given by this mother of
mine to me, and the numerous hardships borne by her for my sake elevated
me to this position. The initial training given by her to me paved the
way for my making all this progress and acquiring this high status in
the world of knowledge.

Strengths of a Mother
---------------------

The following qualities need to be acquired by all mothers.

### Awareness of responsibility

Motherhood is a career, and those who take it up must try and excel at
it. It is the duty of every mother to look into better techniques and
strategies of parenting. A wide variety of material is available, both
Islamic and secular. Although Islamic material may not be abundant in
English, many secular books and magazines are published about parenting.
Reading these from time to time helps increase awareness and vision.
When a mother reads about problems that parents face, she is comforted
by the fact that she is not alone. That is very reassuring as often
parents assume they are the only ones having difficulties. Also, reading
about solutions used by other people, or advice given by psychologists
etc. helps broaden the choice of possible tactics in dealing with
children.

### Setting clear goals

A mother has to know what she expects from her children, and then
explain that to them. It is not enough to want good children. The
children must know what exactly is expected from them, and what the
mother wants them to do. Sometimes a mother tells the child to lay the
table properly.

Because it has not been explained to the child what properly means, he
does it the way he thinks it right. The child may consequently be blamed
for being sloppy, lazy etc. for not setting the table right. The
frustration and heartache could have been avoided if the child knew
exactly what was expected from him, rather than a vague order to lay the
table.

The same can be applied to all chores, behavior with others, academic
achievements etc. The mother must have definite goals of what she wants,
and make them clear.

### Encourage children according to their potential

Each child comes with his own distinctive potential. The Holy Prophet
(S) has said: *Human beings are like mines of gold and silver*. Children
have abilities that could lead to great achievements. Some show skill
and interest in a certain area, while others prefer a different one.

Apart from not trying to compare children with one another, a good
mother tries to bring out the best in each child. She makes the child
develop his skills in whatever area he is good at, as well as remedy the
weakness in each child. If one child is very shy, for example, the
mother should not demand that he socialize and interact with others the
way his siblings do.

Some mothers unwittingly put their children through a great deal of
embarrassment and humiliation.

The child must be taught to overcome his shyness. Some books on shyness
may help. Or the mother could give practical suggestions of what the
child could talk about to others. A mother’s gentle guidance can remedy
many a flaw and weakness in the character of the child.

Wise Words
----------

1. Fortunate is the person whose mother is chaste and virtuous.  
 Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a)

2. Each one of you is a guardian (shepherd), and each one of you is
responsible for his charges . . . so the man is a guardian over his
family, and is responsible for them. A woman is a guardian over the
family of her husband and his children, and she is responsible for
them.  
 Holy Prophet (S)

[^1]: Excerpts from Meeting the Pious, Ash-Sharif ar-Radi


