Lesson 4:  A Child’s need for Love
==================================

The need to be loved is exceptionally strong in all human beings. From
childhood to old age, humans want to be loved by those around them. Love
connects people in the strongest of ways. It produces care and concern,
without which no one would take the responsibility of looking after
others. Love makes the difficulties of life bearable, and helps ease the
struggles of life. The love given to a child is more important than any
material goods the family can provide.

Life cannot just run on cold and hard rules. The warmth of love is
necessary to infuse spirit and joy in life. A home without love, however
orderly and organized, has not fulfilled its true purpose. A family is
not just a micro-organization where the needs of members are met. This
could be done by a state run facility. A family’s outstanding
characteristic is that members love one another, and this emotion binds
them together.

Love or the lack of it has a profound effect on the lives of children.
Their mental capabilities, their fluency of speech, their observations
and deductions on life, are all affected by it. That is why Islam
emphasizes the display of love to one’s family. The Holy Prophet (S)
loved his grandsons dearly, and often showed great affection to them in
public.

When Husayn (a) got on his back while he was in *sajdah*, the Holy
Prophet (S) prolonged his *sajdah*. He could not bear to see his
grandsons cry, or get hurt. He encouraged his companions to show
affection to their children.

Effects of Love
---------------

A child who knows he is loved has a great head start on life.

1. He is happier and calmer. A child who is loved is at peace with the
world, and is able to bear disappointments better. Without love, a
child’s world is bleak. Such a child often resorts to misbehavior to get
attention.

2. He is more confident of himself. He knows that he is worthy of being
loved, and that is a great boost to his self-esteem.

3. He can form better relationships with others. A loving relationship
with the parents makes the child a kinder, more loving person. Lack of
love hardens the heart, and he could become less prone to showing love
for others.

4. Has a positive outlook on life. A child who is loved looks at the
world with enthusiasm He will be eager to try and experience new things.
A loveless home produces a negative outlook, in which the natural
curiosity and interest in life is deadened.

5. The child will be more responsive to what parents tell him.
Reproaches and scoldings become bearable when he knows he is loved.
Parental orders are followed with more enthusiasm.

### Letting the child know he is loved

It goes without saying that most parents love their children dearly. It
is a natural instinct placed by the Almighty into the heart of all
parents. This love for children is a sign of the wisdom of Allah, for
without it no parent would have borne all the pains and troubles of
raising a child.

However, many parents think that children know, without being told, that
parents love them. They do not realize that children need to be
reassured constantly. The effects of love must be evident in the speech
and behavior of the parents. Children do not have the wisdom and insight
of adults to realize that even punishments and reproaches are signs of
love. They often perceive the actions of the parents as a proof of the
lack of love. It is thus very important to display love to the child, or
at least inform him about it in subtle ways.

The display of love varies with the age and level of the child. It is
most important at the very young age when children need to be cuddled
and hugged. For a baby, physical display of love is necessary for
positive growth and development. All through the toddler years physical
affection remains the most prominent way of displaying love. As the
child grows, this changes to less direct ways of showing affection.

The occasional physical touch is still necessary, but is not the main
way of showing love. Now the child has various needs and desires. To be
considerate of his desires, talking to him constantly, reading to him,
taking interest in his schoolwork etc. are all part of love. Love shows
its bright face in the form of a smile, a tender tone, a patient ear,
etc. A parent’s full attention tells the child he is loved enough to
warrant it.

The older child has friends who are every important to him. To give
importance to his friends is a good way of displaying love for him.
Generally speaking, when a parent gives positive attention to the child,
apart from the regular chores of bathing, feeding, etc. the child
understands that he is loved.

The love of a mother
--------------------

There is no doubt that the love of a mother is a very special gift from
the Almighty for a child. It differs from the love of a father, or the
love of any other person. The tender hand of a mother and her soothing
voice has calmed many a troubled child.

Mothers are thus the main instruments of transmitting love to the child.
At its best, the love of a mother is completely unselfish, wanting
nothing in return for the tremendous amounts of time and energy spent in
raising the children.

From the time of birth, when a child knows the mother as a source of
food and comfort, and all through childhood, the mother is the main
caregiver for the child. The atmosphere at home depends on the nature of
the mother. A loving, caring mother can do a great deal to make her
family a happy and emotionally healthy family.

Unconditional Love
------------------

Some parents only love their children if they fulfill certain
expectations. Gender sometimes plays a great role. So a boy after a few
daughters elicits great affection and attention. Some families just
prefer boys, even if they have equal numbers of both. Such gender biases
are greatly condemned in Islam. The Holy Prophet (S) had a daughter at a
time when daughters were disliked. He showed great love and respect for
her despite the taunts of the Arabs.

Some parents only show their love for the child if he is attractive,
behaves well, and generally lives up to their expectations. Such a love
is conditional. If the child brings a good report card, he is showered
with praise and affection. A bad report card will not only bring
reproach for the low marks, but will make the child feel completely
rejected.

Parents often forget that it is only a particular act that should be
condemned, not the child in general. A child who obeys is praised for
his obedience, but loved for himself. In the same way, a child who is
disobedient is reproached for his disobedience, but still loved for
himself.

Many parents fail to draw the line and make their love conditional to
the acts of the child. All children have faults, and the parental
reaction to these faults sometimes convinces a child that he is not
loved at all. It is necessary that parents ensure that the child
understands it is only his act that is disliked and not he himself.

A child deserves the unconditional love of the parents.

Excessive Love
--------------

A potential danger for many parents is excessive love for the children.
It is often difficult to control the intensity of emotion one feels for
a child. Thus a child may be showered with a lot of love, often
misdirected. Everything in excess is harmful, and too much love is
detrimental to the child. The fifth Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a) has
said: *The worst of parents are those who transgress the limits in their
love and goodness to their children.*

Excessive love is when a parent pampers the child, refusing to let him
face any trouble or difficulty, tending to his every need, and giving in
to his desires. Its results could include:

**1 -**The child becomes totally reliant on the parents. Even as he
grows, the chances of emotional and mental maturity are slim. He has
less courage and feels offended easily. He becomes more like a soft egg
which needs constant protection.

**2 -** The demands of the child who is excessively loved are unending.
He will constantly want more – more attention, more treats, more toys
etc. When refused or frustrated, he will resort to whining and
complaining.

**3** - He may become very egoistic, and expect the same degree of
attention from others in his life. The child feels that he is the center
of the world for his parents, and thus all things should revolve around
him. He believes he has no faults, or at least none that others can
perceive. This elevated perception of himself often lands him in
trouble, especially when others do not see him in the same way.

**4** - When others will not give him the same attention and pampering
he has known from his parents, he will be unable to bear the
disappointment. Often such people lose confidence in themselves, and
feel they are not worth much as they have not been granted the degree of
attention they believe is their due.

Wise Words
----------

1. Kiss your children often, for every display of affection will raise
your status in Heaven.  
 Holy Prophet (S)

2. Allah has mercy on a parent who loves his child greatly.  
 Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a)


