Lesson 5: Self-Esteem and Children
==================================

Self-esteem is defined as feeling oneself worthy of the respect of
others. All human beings have an innate desire to be respected and
liked. They want others to look up to them. There is great wealth in
self-esteem. It brings confidence in one’s own abilities, and helps in
initiating and achieving one’s goals. Feeling good about oneself brings
peace and happiness to the heart. It boosts the spirit and produces
noble characters and lofty ideas.

Self-esteem is different from vanity. When a person has some good
qualities and/or abilities, to know that and be thankful for it, is
self-esteem. To be proud about it, and to think oneself to be better
than others is vanity. There is a fine line between the two, but a basic
difference is the understanding that all that is good in one-self comes
from Allah. That eliminates all feelings of pride and leaves only
gratitude for it, and the desire to be able to use it in the best way.

From a very young age, children show a desire for respect and attention.
They show off in order to get praise. Sometimes when attention is not
forthcoming, they revert to negative behavior such as fighting and
screaming in order to get attention. There are various views on the
origins of this desire for respect.

Some psychologists believe it stems from a natural desire for success
over others. Others say it comes from a love of self, an egoism inherent
in all human beings. Religious scholars believe that within the human
resides a Divine spirit. Almighty Allah says in the Qur’an:

***So when I have made him complete, and breathed into him of My spirit
fall down into prostration to him (*****15:29).**

This Divine spirit, with its greatness and nobility, propels the human
being towards dignity and respect. He needs to be valued, and would not
naturally put himself in a derogatory or lowly position. The Creator
Himself has respected the human being when He says:

***And indeed We have honored the son of Adam.*** **(17:70)**

Thus the human being has the expectation that others will also respect
him in this world. Whatever be the origin of the desire for respect, all
scholars believe that a healthy self-esteem is a vital ingredient for
the progress and success of the human being. The roots of this important
quality are often built, or destroyed, in childhood.

Advantages of a Healthy Self-Esteem
-----------------------------------

1. The child who knows that he has some good qualities that others
respect is satisfied with himself. This will translate into rational and
calm behavior. There will be no need for tantrums and aggressiveness to
demand attention. A child with self-esteem is a happy child.

2. Such a child values himself, and knows that he has a certain respect
and dignity. Thus there will be lesser chances for him to become
involved in acts which lower the status he envisions for himself. A
child who respects himself will not easily give in to peer pressure to
perform immoral and indecent acts. He would realize that it is beneath
himself to stoop to it.

3. A child with self-esteem will try harder to achieve high goals. He
knows he is capable of good, and can set lofty targets to achieve. He
will have the initiative to start things and get involved in various
activities.

When Self-Esteem is Lacking
---------------------------

1. The child gives in to wrong more easily. He is easily swayed by
others as it is difficult to be firm on one’s own principles when there
is no confidence in oneself. The views and opinions of others will carry
great weight. Such children run a higher risk of succumbing to peer
pressure and joining unseemly groups.

2. A child who has no self-esteem accepts failure as his lot. He will
not try to challenge himself, or have high expectations of himself. He
does not think he has the ability to achieve anything good. This
resignation to failure sets ground for future defeats, and the lack of
struggle to progress in life.

3. He suffers more from negative emotions such as anger, jealousy,
frustration etc. A child who has confidence in himself, can accept
another child’s success as he knows that he too is successful. But when
that consolation is absent, jealousy is a natural reaction. Often there
is anger at oneself, or even at others who may be seen as responsible
for the failures. There is then little room for happy, healthy feelings
necessary to make the child an emotionally stable human being.

How to foster self-esteem in a child
------------------------------------

Having seen the importance of self-esteem in the life of a child, many
people wonder what can be done to ensure that a child has a healthy
sense of self-esteem. There is much that parents can do, or avoid doing,
that will help the child to respect himself. The following points are
not meant to raise the child on a pedestal, and turn him into a proud,
selfish brat.

When doled out in moderation, these tactics will help foster a feeling a
sense of self-worth. All parents should use discretion in their
individually unique circumstances to avoid over indulging and spoiling
the child. These points are given only as guidance.

### Show respect to the child

Many parents do not feel it necessary to respect the child. They expect
respect, but believe that respecting the child will amount to spoiling
him. However respect for the child in the following ways will help the
child feel good about himself, as well as respect the parent more
willingly:

a) Talk to the child in a normal voice or tone. Don’t belittle the child
by talking in a childish voice. Talk to him constantly, not only when
you want to scold him or tell him to do something. Talk about everyday
affairs; school, work, political issues, stories from your past, etc.
etc.

Some parents believe that because children do not understand at the
level of adults, there is not much use in talking to them. But children
who are talked to more often become more understanding and insightful
than those who are not. These children feel a sense of communication
with the parents, and know that their parents deem them worthy of a
conversation. It is a great boost in confidence.

b) When scolding the child, do not totally destroy his feeling of
self-worth. Reprove him for a particular action rather than a general
“you are good for nothing” attitude which, if dealt out constantly, will
lead the child to actually believe it. As quick as parents are to point
out a wrong act, they should remember there are good qualities also
present in the child.

c) Listen to his ideas and opinions. When the child wishes to say what
he thinks of something, encourage him to talk. Don’t ridicule or put him
down. A child will not have the wisdom of an adult but deserves to be
listened to so that he will be forthcoming in his views in future.
Dismissing a child’s opinions as unworthy is a perfect way to suppress
any thoughtfulness or creativity in the child.

d) Sometimes speak positively about him to others. When a child hears
himself being talked about positively, he feels that it is a sincere
appreciation. It need not be long praises, or undeserved praise. But
when the child does something good, mention it to a relative, or a
friend, etc. This will seem more genuine and have more effect than a
word of praise to the child himself. Parents who criticize and complain
about the child to others, in front of the child, often ruin any feeling
of self-worth the child may have. Sometimes parents and relatives act as
if the child cannot hear. They discuss him in his presence, comparing
him to others and mentioning the bad qualities he has. This has a very
negative effect on the child.

### Teach the child to think highly of himself

Encourage him to set goals and have high expectations of himself. In
school and Madrasah and any other activities he may be involved in, help
him to do well and to achieve the utmost possible with his capabilities.
A push of encouragement from the parent, as well as concerned interest,
helps the child try hard in his daily activities.

Teach him that certain things are below his dignity. These could include
complaining too much, asking for things from others, getting into
trouble with authority etc. The child will become habituated to a
certain type of behavior. Anything below that will seem unworthy for
himself.

### Make him familiar with stories of great people

Children love stories, and these are a great medium for imparting
valuable lessons. When the children are young and rely on parents to
read to them, use the opportunity to read inspiring stories of great
people. Many Islamic books for children are available these days, and
Muslim parents should make good use of them. Even when reading secular
stories, search your local libraries for stories that will inspire the
child towards good virtues. Heroes and their heroic actions are often
imprinted in the minds of the child, and this will do more to push him
towards noble behavior than a lecture from the parents. Manipulate the
interest in stories to gain a sense of respect and dignity for noble
behavior.

### Listen to the child’s wishes

Sometimes a child is opposed to what the parent wishes him to do. This
could be as simple as an enforcement of bedtime, wearing of appropriate
clothes, or going for a particular outing, etc. The child may have a
different view as to what should be done. A good parent would listen to
what the child has to say. This does not mean that the parent gives in
to the child, or lets him do as he wishes. It just means that the parent
respects the child’s opinions although not necessarily following it. The
child will eventually do as the parent wishes, but will feel that he was
listened to.

Practical Do’s & Don’ts for fostering self-esteem
-------------------------------------------------

**Do** give your child responsibility at home. Give him basic duties and
chores, according to his age, to do around the house. It is important
that the child feels he is part of the household and is needed for the
daily work that goes into running the home.

**Do** talk to him about major changes or decisions being made for the
family. If a new house is being bought, or a job is being changed, let
the child know about it. Often parents leave the child completely out of
important decisions being made.

**Do** teach him not to accept undue praise or flattery. The child likes
to be praised but should only accept it when deserved.

**Don’t** interfere in everything your child does. The child needs some
space for healthy independence and originality. If he wishes to arrange
his things in a particular way, for example, or plans something for
himself, let him do it so long as it is not wrong in any serious way.
Some parents expect children will do everything exactly as they wish,
and fuss over every small detail in the child’s life. Such a child grows
up to feel he cannot make any decisions for himself.

**Don’t** pamper the child too much when he is sick, or hurt. The child
should be taught to be strong and bear a little pain. If allowed to
whine and cry a great deal, the child may learn to be a complainer and
will be unable to bear difficulties.

**Don’t** ignore the child when you have company. When a family has
guests, Islamic etiquette demands that the host pay great respect to the
guests. This does not mean however, that children should be ignored and
brushed aside. Instead the parent should encourage the child to be part
of the gathering, and involve him with the guests.

Wise Words
----------

1. Allah has decreed everything for a believer, except that he humiliate
himself.  
 Holy Prophet (S)

### A lesson from the Life of the Prophet

One day the Prophet was sitting with his companions when he saw a young
child in the group. Having a great love for children, he called him and
sat him on his lap. The people around him watched as the Prophet (S)
gave his attention to the child. Suddenly the boy, over-awed perhaps,
urinated on the lap of the Prophet(S). Embarrassed, the father sprang
forward. “What have you done, you silly boy” he shouted. His arm shoved
forward to grab the child away from the Prophet(S), his red face showing
his anger. Fear and confusion showed in the face of the child. The
Prophet(S) restrained the man, and gently hugged the child to him.
“Don’t worry,” he told the over-zealous father. “This is not a big
issue. My clothes can be washed. But be careful with how you treat the
child” he continued. “What can restore his self-esteem after you have
dealt with him in public like this?”


