Lesson 6:  Discipline and Control
=================================

It is the right of every child to be disciplined by wise and reasonable
parents. A parent uses control and discipline to guide the child. Human
beings by nature, tend to lean towards evil. Allah says in the Holy
Qur’an:

***Surely the soul is wont to command (towards) evil except, such as my
Lord has mercy on*****. (12:53)**

Without discipline human beings are prone to wrongdoing,. A child is
especially vulnerable to such tendencies for he lacks the wisdom and
maturity of an adult. It is easier and more pleasant to follow the
dictates of the soul. To follow what is right, morally and logically,
requires a firm will. This does not come automatically to a child, but
can be developed through discipline.

A good home has certain rules which children must follow. Children feel
better when they know they are expected to follow certain guidelines in
their daily life. Not only does life become more organized, but they are
also freed from the burden of making decisions for themselves when not
really in a position to do so. Although they may outwardly resent it,
all children need some discipline to feel secure in life.

Discipline and control in Islam is not equal to dictatorship. Good
parents take into consideration the age and understanding of the child,
his circumstances, and other relative factors. Rules are then made
accordingly.

Sometimes the child’s wishes are considered and a compromise is made.
There is certain flexibility rather than rigid adherence to the rules.
However there is no doubt that Islam expects parents to remain in
control, to make sure the children follow certain etiquette in behavior
rather than a chaotic do-as-you-please attitude.

Advantages of Discipline
------------------------

### Safety from physical and moral danger

A child with no discipline will be free to do whatever he wishes. At a
young age this may often result in physical harm. As he grows, a lax
attitude towards his behavior and associations may result in moral
dangers. Discipline and control helps ensure the child does not stray
into unwanted and unseemly territory.

### Avoids wrong influences

A child is often naive, and believes what others tell him, especially
his peers. A child without control may have the wrong friends, get
involved in the wrong activities, and generally begin to have very
different morals and values from the parents.

### A chance to be successful

The child who is disciplined has a much better chance of succeeding than
the child who is not. He can achieve better at school, be more mature
and intelligent, and get accustomed to good habits.

### Feels loved and secured

Lack of discipline at home is often interpreted as lack of attention
from the parents. This could be due to lack of love or lack of time.
Both of these are harmful for the child. Discipline, however hateful, is
a sign of concern and love from the parents. It brings with it a
security and sense of belonging.

### What to control?

Many parents agree that control is necessary, but are not sure of
exactly what should be controlled. How much of a child’s life should the
parents control? The following are some important aspects of a child’s
life that should be regulated by parents.

### Going out

As a child grows, he often requests to go out with friends. A parent
should be in full control as to where the child is going, with whom, and
for how long. Allowing the child to go whenever and wherever he pleases
is sure to invite trouble.

### Friends

The influence of friends is greatly emphasized in Islam. The Holy
Prophet (S) says: *The conduct of everyone will be according to the
beliefs and principles of his friend.* Good friends can make a great
difference to the molding of character. Thus a parent has to be vigilant
of the child’s friends. Always being in the company of one who has loose
morals, or a dirty tongue, or other such vices, will rub off on the
child.

Discourage very close connections such as frequent telephone calls,
sleeping over at each other’s homes etc. Moderation in all fields is
necessary for progress. It is necessary for a child to have friends but
it is also necessary that the parents know whom the child befriends.

### Language

The tongue is reported to be the source of great good and great evil.
Imam Muhammad al-Baqir says: *Indeed this tongue is the key to all good
and all evil, so it befits a believer to guard his tongue the way he
would guard his gold and silver.* Parents should control the type of
language a child uses. Dirty and swear words should be completely
forbidden.

Some children pick up various odd ways of speaking from school. These
words may not necessarily be filthy, but are indicators of an attitude
that must be avoided. Examples, are “who cares?” “get a life” “buzz off”
etc. Such expressions vary from place to place, but in general are
prominent in today’s younger generations. Parents must teach their
children to avoid such expressions for they go against the dignity and
character of a good Muslim.

### Time

No child can be forced to follow a tight schedule set by parents. This
is unrealistic. On the other hand, however, it is irresponsible to allow
children do whatever they wish with their time. It is necessary to
control the amount of time spent on leisure activities. They cannot be
allowed to play and watch television as much as they desire. Children
must be encouraged to do some useful things with their time. Examples
could be taking up a good hobby, learning computer programs, accessing
beneficial web-sites etc. It is up to each parent to decide what is most
suitable for his children.

### Behavior

Although every parent knows he has to instill good manners into his
children, many children still get away with unacceptable forms of
behavior. Rudeness, asking for things from others, shouting at elders,
disrespect in the mosque or at people’s homes etc. are all examples of
behavior that should not be tolerated. When such behavior is seen even
after warnings are given, the child must be punished appropriately. It
should be made clear to the child that there are some limits that he
cannot cross without facing the consequences. Discipline in this way
helps the child control himself.

Some Important Points
---------------------

1. When disciplining a child, the parent should refrain from becoming a
dictator. A rule is not to be followed because “I say so” but because it
is the right thing to do. The basis of all discipline is the safety and
progress of the child. Talk to your children often about why you set
rules and enforce certain laws. Inspire them with stories of great
characters, through books and verbal narration. Do not allow the child
to fear you. Allow him to air his view sometimes even if you do not
agree with him. Hear him out and then explain why you think he needs to
be corrected.

2. Be in control of yourself when disciplining. Sometimes parents go
overboard in their attempts to discipline. The home becomes a military
camp with strict rules being enforced all the time. It is advisable that
parents tamper their discipline with gentleness and love. A harsh
venting of anger is not discipline. Physical force and nagging should be
avoided. Parents should say what is necessary without making it a long
lecture and bringing up old problems. This way the child will take it
more seriously rather than shrugging it off as just another lecture.
Harsh disciplining could also lead to despair in the child. He may
assume that he can never acquire the behavior expected of him. This
happens when expectations are impractical and inappropriate.

3. When a mistake has been made, allow the child to make amends. Let him
apologize and if necessary, carry out the designated punishment. This
could include the loss of a privilege, writing lines, time out, or some
extra chores. A variety of punishments may be used to ensure that the
child does not get away with misbehavior. However, after that has been
done, the parents should not continue to be angry and refuse to talk to
the child in a normal manner. It is better to get over the anger and
become friends again soon. Prolonged anger produces sadness and
sometimes resentment in the child.

4. Teach the child internal control. Parental control is external. It is
good and necessary. But better than that is internal control, when a
child learns to discipline himself. He should be able to stop himself
from inappropriate actions even when the parents are not around. This is
only possible if:

a) He has learnt the value and wisdom of the rule. So, for example, if
he understands that it is against one’s dignity to be rude and call
others names, he may stop himself from doing it. The child must have
conviction that what he should do is really best for his personality.
That will automatically make him do it.

b) The parent has not continuously nagged him about it. Constant nagging
produces resentment and anger. This could then be channeled to a defiant
following of wrong behavior even when the child understands it is wrong.

c) He has seen the respect given to those who behave in the right way.
If the child has been exposed to examples, contemporary or in history,
who have earned respect and popularity because of their good manners and
virtues, he becomes more inclined to follow their path. If he has only
been fed on television stars and the examples that abound in today’s
modern society, he will not aspire to acquire good morals. It is the
duty of parents to create an urge in him to have a respectable
personality.

Wise Words
----------

May Allah have mercy on the one who helps his child towards
righteousness by being good to him, appealing to him, teaching him
knowledge, and training him.  
 Imam Ali (a)

1. Luqman the wise told his son;

My son, if you learn good etiquette when you are young, you will benefit
from it when you are older. Whoever values good etiquette will give
importance to it. And whoever gives it importance will take the trouble
to learn it. And whoever takes the trouble to learn it will struggle in
its search. And whoever struggles in its search will achieve it, and
benefit from it.

My son! Get accustomed to carry out your own duties and works. And be
patient over the difficulties you encounter from others. If you wish to
acquire honor in the world, cut off your hopes from what lies with
others. Surely the Prophets and the Righteous reached their status by
cutting off their hopes.


