Lesson 7: Children and Play
===========================

Most parents view playing as a waste of time. They would like a child to
grow out of the love for playing and get into more serious things like
studies, research, or even household chores. It seems more like a
childish behavior that must be tolerated, and the sooner it is over the
better.

However they forget that play is an important part of growing up, and is
vital for the physical and emotional development of the child. Play is
the first source of learning basic social skills necessary for life.

A child loves to play, and it is a form of punishment for the child to
be deprived of playtime. This desire to play, anywhere and with
anything, is most evident in the early years. It is a sign of emotional
and physical health. A child who does not wish to play should be a
source of concern.

Benefits of Play
----------------

### Physical Benefits

A child’s body develops through physical play. His senses sharpen, his
reactions become refined, and he learns the use of appropriate limbs to
achieve his goals. In the beginning years, play helps a child learn
about the world around him as he touches and feels the objects within
his reach. Bones become stronger, vision is sharpened and the limbs
become stronger. Running and exercising helps the flow of blood and
results in a healthier, happier child.

### Mental Benefits

Play provides answers to the curiosity and restlessness of the child.
The imagination of a child is very strong, and play helps to bring it
out. A child can thus imagine that he is a principal and his friends are
the students, or that he and his friends are part of a family and they
take on the role of adults. Such play makes the child creative as he
puts himself in another’s role.

The child also learns certain forms of behavior through play. He learns
about fairness and justice, about sharing and caring. He learns to
become alert and watchful. He becomes lively and enthusiastic. He learns
to invent solutions when he is in a fix and how to outwit his rivals in
play. All these tactics are of great use later in life.

### Emotional benefits

Children often get angry when they do not achieve their desires. When
they lose a game, they may sulk, or whine, or even attack the rival/s.
In time, and through the help and guidance of others, they will learn to
control themselves. This is especially true if the play is supervised or
at least watched by an adult. Through play the child will learn to
accept defeat, and not feel jealous of another’s victory. It removes the
self-centeredness that is very common in children.

### Social benefits

A child should be encouraged to play with others. Some children are shy
and hesitate to participate in playing with others. Parents should try
and contrive gatherings of friends whom the child knows and will feel
comfortable with. He will thus overcome his shyness. Many social
problems can be overcome by playing co-operatively with others. Parents
today find it difficult to arrange for their children to play with those
whom they know and trust. Stressful lifestyles, distances etc. all do
their part in keeping children apart. However parents should try as much
as possible to ensure that their children get occasional chances to play
with others. Playing at home with siblings or parents also has similar
benefits.

Children benefit differently from playing. For many it is a path to
gaining confidence, recognizing one’s abilities, and learning about
others. Play uplifts the spirit of the child, making him cheerful and
lively. It removes sorrow and anger, and is a good medicine for an
unhappy child.

Types of play
-------------

A young child can play with almost anything. He does not need fancy and
expensive toys. Simple inexpensive forms of play could include playing
with old utensils, scraps of cloth and paper etc. Parents should be
creative and look for things the child could play with, rather than buy
the latest in the stores. A child who keeps on getting new toys will
soon become dissatisfied, and will not be content with anything. Many
children these days are quick to lose interest in a toy. They should be
shown creative ways of playing.

Forms of play differ according to age and ability of children. Younger
children like to play with water, scrap materials, paper and glue, etc.
They like to build and destroy. As they grow older they begin to play in
groups. They like organized games and a chance to show their skills
through play. Children may develop interest in a particular sport or
hobby. Parents should encourage this if possible, and help their child
develop his talent.

Parents and Play
----------------

The Holy Prophet (S) loved to play with his grandsons. He would seat
them on his back, and pretend to be a camel. He told his companions that
he was proud of the two riders on his back. He taught us that to play
with children is not a waste of time. It is an expression of love and
respect.

Parents should try and play with their children sometimes. Some parents
believe it is childish and stooping to a low level. It is a great joy
for children when their parents play with them. As the child grows,
sports and board games could be a chance for the family to play
together. This binds the family closer. But parents should remember that
this play is for the sake of the child, not for themselves. They should
not seek to have everything according to what they think is right. A
little flexibility is recommended. They should also let the child gain
some small victories so that he does not despair whenever he plays with
his parents. Playing with children is a good way of getting to know the
child and his temperaments. It should not however be turned against him
with taunts and scoldings.

Companions in play
------------------

Children are very influenced by the friends they play with. Parents
should be careful that they do not pick up bad habits and behaviors
through their play. If a change in behavior or speech is noticed,
parents should at once ask about whom the child plays with. The child
should be explained that such forms of behavior will not be tolerated.
Some children pick up rude forms of speech, aggressive behavior and even
a disrespectful attitude. It is thus necessary to be careful about the
playmates of the child. If necessary, the child should be prevented from
associating with inappropriate playmates.

Some Important Points
---------------------

1. Too much play is harmful for the child. He must not be allowed to
spend all his time in play. Life must be a balance, and work is also
essential. From childhood, it is necessary to learn that there is a time
for everything. So a child must learn that he cannot run around and
touch everything in someone else’s home. He cannot play when he has
schoolwork or chores to finish. He cannot spend his entire holidays just
playing. He needs to do some useful things at the same time.

2. Children must not be forced to play. Some parents insist that their
children play with the board game they have bought them. Or they demand
that since the children are bored, they must play outside. If children
do not wish to play it is a form of punishment to be forced to do it.
Left by themselves, most children will play occasionally.

3. The environment for play must be child-friendly. If there are too
many rules and restrictions, it limits the freedom and independence of a
child. Some rules are necessary, but sometimes parents become extremely
concerned about things around the house, or about the cleanliness and
organization of their home. There must be a place for children where
they can play freely, even if it means they make a mess. They should be
taught to clean up after themselves, not stopped from ever making a
mess.

4. There should be a variety in playing. Different forms of play such as
sports, board games, puzzles, imaginative acting etc. all help to build
a healthy and strong character. It is wrong to emphasize on only one
form of play and neglect others. A balanced individual has had the
chance of trying out and enjoying various forms of recreations and the
skills they build.

Words of Wisdom
---------------

1. Whoever has a child should be like a child with him.

Holy Prophet (S)


