The First Journey - Madina to Mecca
===================================

fter saying good-bye to the graves of his grand-father and his mother,
Imam Husayn went to Bibi Zainab's house.  Bibi Zainab was Imam's sister
and was married to their cousin Hazrat Abdullah ibn Ja’far ibn Abu
Taalib. After exchanging greetings with Hazrat Abdullah, Imam Husayn
advised his cousin of what had happened and what he had decided. Hazrat
Abdullah tried to persuade Imam not to leave Madina but Imam insisted
that it was the only way to save Islam. He then requested Hazrat
Abdullah to permit Bibi Zainab to accompany him. Hazrat Abdullah looked
at his wife and said, “Bismillah!” Bibi Zainab said farewell to her
husband and her sons Aun and Muhammad. The brother and sister walked to
Imam's house.

When all the men who had accompanied Imam Husayn to the Governor's
palace got back, the ladies came to know about the journey. Hazrat
Abbas, Hazrat Ali Akbar, Hazrat Qasim and all the young men got busy
with the preparations. Bibi Fatimah Soghra watched. She was lying in
bed, too ill even to get up. No one was saying anything about her going.
She decided to wait till her father's return.

Bibi Fatimah Soghra was Imam Husayn's daughter. She was about eight
years old. She lay on bed praying that her father would agree to take
her. How could she possibly live alone? How could she survive without
Asghar? Ever since he was born she spent all her time next to Asghar's
little bed playing with him. Now he had begun to recognize faces and
smiled whenever he saw Soghra. Soon he would be talking and she was
anxious to hear him call out her name. “Ya Allah!”, Soghra murmured, “I
hope I would not be left alone in Madina!”

Just then she heard her father's foot-steps. She quickly wiped away the
tears from her eyes, propped herself into a sitting position and put on
a brave smile to convince her father that she was well enough to travel.

Imam Husayn sat on the bed, put his hand on Soghra'a head and said,
“When you were born, my dear. I named you after my mother Fatimah Zahra.
You look know that your grand mother was also known as Saabira, which
means the patient one. I want you also to be a saabira and agree to stay
in Madina with Ummul Baneen and Umme Salmah. Will you do that?”

What could Soghra say? She nodded her head fighting back her tears. Imam
kissed her and left the room.  
 Whenever the children of the Ahlul Bait were troubled by any thing,
they took their problem to Hazrat Abbas. Soghra thought of her dear
uncle, smiled hopefully, and sent for Abbas. Surely, he would find a way
to solve her problem?  
 Abbas came in. He was accompanied by Hazrat Ali Akbar.

Soghra looked at them and said, “I know how much you two love me. How
can you then leave me and go away? If I die who will bury me?” They
explained her that she was too ill to travel and promised her that they
would come and fetch her as soon as they had settled some where.  
 Bibi Fatimah Soghra said, “I will accept that as I do not wish to
disobey my father. I will be brave and stay here.” She looked lovingly
at her brother and added, “Ali Akbar, promise me one thing though. When
after you get married and return to Madina, and find Soghra gone,
promise that you and your bride will visit my grave and recite Fatiha.”

Akbar and Abbas could not control their tears as they said good bye.  
 At dawn the caravan departed. Supported by Umme Salmah on one side and
Ummul Baneen on the other, Soghra waved good-bye. It was difficult to
part with Asghar and both Imam Husayn and Bibi Rubaab had to hold and
console Soghra as she kissed her little brother good-bye.

The story of Karbala’ is a tale of five journeys of tears. This was the
first journey. From Madina to Mecca. Each journey had its hero and
heroine. The hero of this first journey was Imam Husayn and the heroine
was the memory of Bibi Fatimah Soghra, his beloved daughter whom he had
left behind. Until they turned the corner, Imam kept looking back. He
would bravely smile and wave to his daughter. Hazrat Ali Akbar of course
could not even do that because he was unable to control his tears.  
 As soon as they were out of sight, Imam Husayn stopped his horse and
began to sob! It is always so very difficult and so very sad for a
parent and child to part!

Days passed into months. Soghra would spend her days in the mosque or
visiting Ummul Baneen, Hazrat Abbas's mother.

Ramadhan passed. Eid was a difficult day for Soghra. She kept on
thinking of Asghar, and Akbar and her darling sister Bibi Sakina. Then
came Muharram. For some reason Soghra's restlessness increased. One
night she got up. She felt a little thirsty. She filled a cup with
water. As she brought the cup to her lips, Soghra stared at the water,
and screamed. The cup fell out of her hands. Umme Salmah came
running.”What is it, Soghra?” Soghra was shaking with fear. She ran into
the arms of Umme Salmah.”O grand-mother!” she cried, pointing at the
cup, “As I lifted the cup to my mouth, I saw Ali Asghar's reflection in
the water. I saw him spread out his little arms towards me. And then I
heard him speak. He was saying, 'Al atash, Ya Ukhti Fatimah.” (I am
thirsty, O my sister Fatimaah!!) This was the night of 9th Muharram,
Shab al-Ashura!!

Hazrat Muslim
-------------

Imam Husayn's caravan left Madina on 28th Rajab, 60 A.H. and reached
Mecca on the fourth of Shabaan. Imam had not yet made up his mind on
where to go. For the time being he decided to stay in Mecca at least
until the month of Dhul-Hajj and perform the pilgrimage.

The people of Kufa in Iraq heard of what had happened in Madina. Kufa
was an important Shiah centre. The Shiahs there had long suffered under
Muawiya. They feared even greater sufferings under Yazid. They felt that
slowly Islam would be totally destroyed by the greed for power and glory
of these two men. They were anxious to preserve the teachings of the
Holy Prophet. They needed an Imam who would teach the tafseer of the
Holy quraan and relate to them the true sayings, ahaadees, of the Holy
Prophet. They a held a meeting in the house of Sulayman bin Surad and
decided to write a letter to Imam Husayn inviting him. In this letter
they wrote: “We invite you to come to Kufa as we have no Imam to guide
us. Through you Allah will unite us on the path of truth.”

A messenger took the letter to Mecca and gave it to Imam Husayn. A few
days later the people of Kufa sent an emissary, a special messenger, to
Imam to persuade him to go to Kufa. His name was Qais ibn Musheer
as-Saydawi.

There followed hundreds of other letters and many special emissaries
from the people of Kufa to Imam Husayn. The Governor in Kufa was a man
called Nu'amaan bin Basheer. Although he was a follower of Muawiya and
Yazid, he was not by nature a cruel man. The people of Kufa believed
that Imam would be safe in Kufa.

When Imam Husayn received so many petitions and messages from Kufa he
decided to send Hazrat Muslim as his emissary to Kufa to study the
situation there and report to Imam. Imam would go only if there would be
no danger to the people of Kufa or to Imam or any of his companions or
family.

He wrote a letter to the people of Kufa and gave it to Hazrat Muslim. In
this letter Imam said, “I am sending my cousin and one of the most
trusted ones from my family, Muslim ibn Aqeel, to report to me about
your affairs. If his report agrees with what you have writ\_ten I will
soon be with you. You must be clear of the fact that the Imam is only
one who follows the book of Allah, and serves Allah in all matters and
affairs with justice, honesty and truth.”

Who was Muslim ibn Aqeel? He was the son of Aqeel ibn Abu Taalib. He was
a famous warrior. He married Ruqayya binti Ali, Imam's sister through
another mother. We know of his four children. Abdullah aged about 15
years, Muhammad who was about ten years old, Ibraheem who was eight and
young Ruqayya who was just five or six. All these children had travelled
with their parents and were in Mecca.

As Hazrat Muslim was preparing for the journey, Imam Husayn went to him
and said: “Muslim, the whole world knows that you are one of the bravest
warriors. It is just possible that seeing you in Kufa some people may
think that our intention is to fight Yazid. Take your two sons Muhammad
and Ibraheem with you. When they see you with such young children, they
will know that our intentions are peaceful.”

Hazrat Muslim and his two sons said good-bye to all and left Mecca.
Their journey through the desert in the heat of summer was very
difficult.

They arrived in Kufa towards the end of Dhul Qaad. They were received
extremely well by the people of Kufa. Very soon more than eighteen
thousand people appeared before Hazrat Muslim and pledged their
allegiance to Imam Husayn as their Imam.

Hazrat Muslim reported to Imam Husayn that most of the people in Kufa
were ready to receive him as their Imam and advised that Imam should
proceed to Kufa. Amongst the people of Kufa there were many spies
employed by Yazid to report to him direct. When Yazid heard from them of
the invitations to Imam Husayn and the arrival in Kufa of Hazrat Muslim
he was filled with fury. He sent a message to his Governor in Basrah,
Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, to go to Kufa and take over the position of
Nu'amaan ibn Basheer. Ibn Ziyad was also told to arrest Muslim and kill
him and do all that was necessary to suppress the Shiahs in Kufa.

Ibn Ziyad was a cruel and unjust man. He arrived in Kufa on the evening
of 2nd Dhul Hajj. On the following day he went to the mosque and
addressed the people of Kufa. He first announced his appointment as
Yazid's governor. He then threatened any one who was engaged in any
activity against the government with immediate death, and ordered them
to surrender Hazrat Muslim to him.

Ibn Ziyad sealed Kufa in such a way that no one could go in or out of
the city without the governor's permission.

At this time Hazrat Muslim was staying with Al Mukhtar. At the
invitation of Hani bin Urwah, another leading member of the Shiah
community, he moved to Hani's house. This was done secretly and except
for a few people no one knew where Hazrat Muslim was. Through a spy who
pretended to be a Shiah, Ibn Ziyad found out where Hazrat Muslim was.
Hani was arrested and thrown into prison. Not wishing to endanger the
lives of his friends, Hazrat Muslim and his two sons left Hani's house.
He left the children with Qadhi Shurayb, a judge, and went into the
desert to try and get back to Imam Husayn to warn him not to go to Kufa.
This was the seventh of Dhul Hajj. That whole day and the following day
Hazrat Muslim tried to get out of the city. He found all the exits
sealed and guarded by Ibn Ziyad Soldiers.

On the eighth, late in the evening, tired, hungry and exhausted, Hazrat
Muslim knocked at the door of a house on the outskirts of the city. A
lady opened the door. Hazrat Muslim requested for a little water to
quench his thirst. The lady gave him water. When she learnt who he was,
she invited him in and offered him shelter for the night. This lady was
called Tau'aa. She gave Hazrat Muslim some food and water and took him
to a room where he might spend the night.

Late that night Tau'aa's son came home. When he learnt that the man Ibn
Ziyad was looking for was in his mother's house, he felt that he would
be rewarded by the governor if he got Hazrat Muslim arrested. Unknown to
his mother he slipped out in the darkness of the night and gave the
information to a captain in ibn Ziyad army. Early the next morning, five
hundred soldiers surrounded the house of Tau'aa and demanded Hazrat
Muslim's surrender. Hazrat Muslim came out holding his sword. Three
times he drove the enemy away. Twice Ibn Ziyad had to send in
reinforcements.

While Hazrat Muslim was fighting, some soldiers went up the rooftops and
began throwing stones and lighted torches at him. Others dug a trench in
the path of Hazrat Muslim and covered it with grass. Although badly
wounded and totally exhausted, Hazrat Muslim kept on fighting. Then he
fell into the trench. More than fifty soldiers pounced upon him and
chained him. He was dragged to the court of Ibn Ziyad.

Ibn Ziyad told Hazrat Muslim that he would be killed and asked him if he
had any last wishes. Hazrat Muslim said: “I owe a debt which should be
discharged by selling off my sword and armour. Secondly I want my body
to be given a proper burial. Thirdly I want a message sent to Imam
Husayn advising him not to come to Kufa.” Ibn Ziyad agreed to the first
request but refused to do anything about the second and third requests.
He then ordered Hazrat Muslim to be taken to the roof of the palace to
be executed and his body thrown to the ground.

Hazrat Muslim was calm and composed as he was dragged up the steps. He
was reciting “Allahu Akbar” until the last moment. Then there was an
absolute silence followed by a thud as Hazrat Muslim's body fell to the
ground.

This was on 9th Dhul Hajj. Immediately after Hazrat Muslim was killed
Hani bin Urwah was dragged to the roof top and executed.


