The Second Journey - Mecca to Karbala’
======================================

At the same time as Yazid sent Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad as his governor to
Kufa to kill Hazrat Muslim and establish a reign of terror there, he
sent his agents to Mecca to murder Imam Husayn during the Hajj season in
such a way that no one would suspect him of having got the Imam killed.

As the pilgrimage season grew nearer Hazrat Abdullah ibn Ja’far Tayyar
came to Mecca with his two sons, Aun and Muhammad. Imam had by this time
received the message sent by Hazrat Muslim with Qais ibn Musheer, and
made up his mind to go to Kufa after performing pilgrimage. Hazrat
Abdullah tried to persuade Imam not to go to Kufa as he felt that Yazid
would never let Imam settle there. Imam responded that as the people of
Kufa had invited him to go to them as their Imam it was his duty to go.

When Hazrat Abdullah saw that the Imam was adamant, he gave the hands of
his two sons into the hand of Imam saying, “Accept my sons in your
service. One will serve you as Zainab's representative and the other as
mine.”

Thousands of people from everywhere poured into Mecca for Hajj. Amongst
them were the assassins sent by Yazid. Imam Husayn came to learn about
Yazid's plot. He did not wish the House of Allah to be turned into a
battlefield. Imam decided to leave Mecca without performing pilgrimage.

On the eighth of Dhul-Hajj, the very day on which Hazrat Muslim was
murdered in Kufa, Imam Husayn's caravan left Mecca. Our Imam's heart was
filled with mixed feelings. He was sad at being forced to leave Kaaba
without performing Hajj. At the same time Hazrat Muslim had favourably
reported on the situation in Kufa. So at least there would be a
sanctuary for Imam there.  
 So began the second journey of tears. The hero of this journey was
Hazrat Abbas and the heroine was Bibi Sakina.

Let us look at this caravan as it travels towards Iraq. At the head of
the caravan is Hazrat Abbas carrying the 'alam. Next is Imam Husayn
surrounded by all his companions. In this group we find Qais ibn
Musheer. He is accompanying Imam to his home town. How proud he would
feel entering Kufa with the grand-son of the Holy Prophet! He smiles at
the thought. Then come the camels carrying the mehmils (palanquins or
litters) in which all the ladies are. Behind the mehmils, forming, the a
rear guard, are Hazrat Ali Akbar, Hazrat Qasim, Aun, Muhammad and the
other young men of Banu Hashim.

Hazrat Abbas can be seen riding up and down the caravan to make sure
that every one is comfortable. He often stops by the Mehmil carrying
Bibi Sakina to make sure that she had enough water and food. He inquires
of her how Asghar is. If there is anything anyone wants, Hazrat Abbas
rushes to fetch it. Bibi Sakina is so very proud of her uncle Abbas.
Every one knew that Bibi Sakina was the apple of the eye of Hazrat
Abbas. When any child in the caravan needed anything he or she would
tell Bibi Sakina. Bibi Sakina would speak to Hazrat Abbas and the wish
of that child would be fulfilled immediately. There were about fifty
children in the caravan and the four year old Bibi Sakina was an
important link between them and Hazrat Abbas.

The caravan came to a small oasis called al-Thalabiya. It was decided to
stop there for the night. This was the sixth stop of the journey. Qais
ibn Musheer was no longer with Imam Husayn as he had already left for
Kufa carrying Imam's letter announcing his imminent arrival.

Tents were pitched. Imam led maghrib prayers. As the evening meal was
being prepared, he heard that two travellers from Kufa were in the
settlement. He invited them over. He questioned them about the
conditions in Kufa. The travellers described how the city had been
placed under a total blockade. Imam asked his two guests about Hazrat
Muslim.

The travellers remained quiet, their faces reflecting their sadness.
Imam asked them again. With tears flowing down their beards the
travellers reported of the death of Hazrat Muslim and the brutal way he
had been killed. Imam summoned Hazrat Abbas and asked him to look after
the guests. Slowly he made his way to Bibi Zainab's camp. Putting his
hand on her shoulder, he said, “Dear sister, your mission has begun. Go
and console our sister Ruqayya. She is now a widow! But first send
Muslim's daughter to me.”

Young Ruqayya binti Muslim entered the tent. She was accompanied by Bibi
Sakina. Imam took the orphan girl into his arms. Kissed her on her
cheeks, Then he put his hand on her head and kissed her again. The young
girl looked at Imam Husayn fearfully and said, “Uncle you are treating
me as an orphan should be treated in Islam. Tell me, what has happened.
Is my father well?” Imam could not speak. Tears rolled down his eyes.
Bibi Sakina stepped forward. Yes, Bibi Sakina! The heroine of this
journey! She stepped forward and embraced her cousin and lovingly
offered her condolences!!!

Qais Ibn Musheer
----------------

Qais ibn Musheer was a leading member of the Shiah community in Kufa. He
had been sent by the people of Kufa to persuade Imam Husayn to accept
the invitation to go to Kufa as their Imam.  
 It was upon his arrival in Mecca that Imam began to seriously consider
going to Kufa and sent Hazrat Muslim as his envoy to study the situation
there and report to Imam. He rode to Kufa with Hazrat Muslim and brought
back to the Imam Hazrat Muslim's message of the sincerety of the people
of Kufa.

Qais ibn Musheer decided to stay on with Imam so that he could proudly
ride into Kufa with the grand son of the Holy Prophet. Imam Husayn was,
however, forced to leave Mecca before he could perform Hajj. The caravan
left Mecca on the eighth Dhul Hajj. When they reached the fourth stop of
the journey, a settlement called al-Haajir, Imam Husayn decided to send
a letter to the people of Kufa telling them of his departure from Mecca
and that he would shortly arrive in Kufa. He gave this letter to Qais
and asked him to take it to Kufa. This was before Imam had heard of the
death of Hazrat Muslim.

Qais was proud to be Imam's messenger. Indeed he is known in history as
**Safeeratul Husayn Ibn Ali**, the ambassador of Imam Husayn. He
galloped towards Kufa. When he reached al-Qadassiya, on the outskirts of
Kufa he was astonished to see a large garrison of soldiers guarding the
borders of the city. He suspected some thing was wrong. He hid behind
the bushes. At night he visited some bedouins who were camping around.
From them he learnt of the arrival of Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad as the new
Governor, and of the efforts being made by him to capture Hazrat Muslim.

Qais was in a dilemma. Should he rush back to Imam Husayn to advise him
of the danger or should he try to get into Kufa and help Hazrat Muslim?
He spent the night trying to gather more information from the bedouins.
Qais learnt of how ibn Ziyad had spread terror in the city and how he
had isolated Hazrat Muslim. He also learnt that the blockade was being
strictly enforced and it was virtually impossible to get into Kufa
without being caught. Qais was anxious to learn of how Hazrat Muslim was
but the bedouins did not know much about him. In fact it was on that
very morning that Hazrat Muslim had been killed.

Thinking that he might be some help to Hazrat Muslim, Qais decided to
get into Kufa. He waited until sunset. Carefully, hiding himself from
the soldiers posted to guard the borders, Qais tried to make his way
into Kufa. He was spotted by some soldiers. Qais fought them bravely.
Soon, however, ibn al-Numayr, the commander of al-Qadassiya came to the
scene with a large number of soldiers. Qais was captured and chained. In
the morning he was taken before ibn Ziyad.

Ibn Ziyad promised Qais to spare his life if he would mount the minbar
and curse Imam Husayn. Qais mounted the minbar and in a loud voice said:
“O people of Kufa I am the messenger of Imam Husayn ibn Ali. I declare
before you that Husayn, the grand-son of our Holy Prophet is the best
man alive today.”

Saying this Qais looked at ibn Ziyad defiantly. He then called for the
curse of Allah upon ibn Ziyad and Yazid, and called for Allah's
blessings upon Hazrat Ali and Imam Husayn. Ibn Ziyad was beside himself
with anger. He ordered Qais to be taken to the roof of the palace and
thrown to the ground. As he mounted the steps, there was a smile on the
lips of Qais. As he was being pushed off the roof Qais cried out: “My
salaams to you O my master Husayn ibn Ali!”

Tiflaan al-Muslim
-----------------

Hazrat Muslim had taken with him his two sons Muhammad and Ibraheem.
After Hazrat Muslim was killed, Muhammad and Ibraheem were also arrested
and put into a dungeon. It is said that Muhammad was just eight years
old and Ibraheem was ten years old.

On the 20th of Dhul-Hajj in 60 Hijrah, when the jailer came to give the
children their evening meal, he saw them saying their prayers. The
jailer waited. When the boys had finished their prayers, he asked them
who they were. When the jailer learnt that they were the sons of Muslim
Ibn Aqeel and the grandsons of Hazrat Ali, he let them escape. The
children came out of the prison.

It was a dark night. Their first thought was to go to Imam Husayn and
warn him not to go to Kufa. Everywhere they went, they found the roads
blocked by Ibn Ziyad soldiers. It was impossible to get out of Kufa. Now
it was almost day-break. Where could these two young boys go?

They found themselves by the side of the river Euphrates. They drank
some water from the river and then went up a tree to hide for the day.
Just then a woman came to the river to get water. She saw the two young
boys and asked them who they were. Ibraheem said, “We are two orphans,
could you please leave us alone and not tell any one that you have seen
us?” The woman asked them to accompany her to her mistress who would
help them.

The woman's mistress was a kind lady. After talking to the boys for a
while she realized who they were. She gave them food and said to them,
“You can spend the day here and I will try to help you. Unfortunately my
husband Harith is working for Ibn Ziyad. He is out at the moment. You
can rest in the spare room but make no noise otherwise when he comes
back, he will find out you are here.”

The children said their prayers and went to sleep. In the evening
Muhammad woke up and started crying. Ibraheem asked him why he was
crying. Muhammad said “I saw our father in a dream.

He was calling out for us.” Ibraheem said, “Brother, be patient. I also
saw our father in a dream beckoning us to him.” They both started
weeping. Harith, who had come back heard the children crying. He opened
the door and asked the children who they were. On learning they were the
sons of Muslim Ibn Aqeel, he tied both the boys to a pillar. Harith's
wife tried to stop him, but he beat her up. Harith wanted to collect the
reward which Ibn Ziyad had offered to anyone capturing the children.

The children spent the whole night tied to the pillar. In the morning
Harith dragged them to the river-bank. He took out his sword. Ibraheem
asked him, “Harith, are you going to kill us?” Harith said “Yes!”
Ibraheem said, “In that case give us time to finish our morning
prayers.” The two boys said their prayers. They raised their hands and
cried out “Inna Lillaah wa Inna IIay-hi Rajeeoon! O Allah we are coming
to you. Give our mother courage when she hears of our death and judge
between us and our killers!!” The sword came down! There were splashes
in the water. Two young bodies were seen floating away in the waters of
the river Furaat.

Hazrat Hurr
-----------

Hazrat Hurr bin Yazid at-Tamimi al-Yarbu'i was a career officer in the
Kufa army. When Husayn bin Numayr, the commander at al-Qadisiya, learnt
that Imam Husayn and his entourage were getting very close to Kufa he
dispatched Hurr with a detachment of 1,000 men to intercept Imam.

Hurr believed that Imam was being prevented from entering Kufa because
his presence might jeopardize the stability of the city. As a
professional soldier he did not very much concern himself with what he
considered to be political issues. His duty, he felt, was to execute the
order of his superiors. However, lurking somewhere in that stout
military heart was an Islamic conscience.

Hazrat Hurr and his soldiers met Imam Husayn and his companions at a
place a few miles outside Kufa.

It was midday when the two parties met.

Hurr and his people had been travelling since morning and were very
thirsty. He requested Imam Husayn for water for his army. Imam Husayn
asked Hazrat Abbas, Hazrat Ali Akbar, Hazrat Qasim and the others to
give Hurr and his men water and also to give water to their horses. This
must have been a poignant scene. Water bottles being brought out of the
saddle bags and the youths pouring water for Yazid's army to quench
their thirst.

Zuhr prayers were led by Imam and Hurr and his soldiers joined in. After
the prayers Hurr told Imam Husayn that his orders were to stop Imam
Husayn from going to Kufa unless he agreed to give “Bai'at”-swear
allegiance- to Yazid. Imam Husayn said that he would never give Bai'at
to Yazid. Yazid was an unjust ruler who wanted to destroy Islam. In any
case he was going to Kufa because he had been invited by the people
there.

Imam produced two sacks of letters and petitions from the people of Kufa
begging him to go there. Hurr said that as his orders were not to let
Imam go to Kufa there was nothing that he could do save carry out his
orders.

Imam Husayn could have fought Hurr and his soldiers and forced his way
into Kufa, but he did not wish to start any battle.

He told Hurr that he would take another route and go away from Kufa.
Hurr said that his orders were to follow Imam Husayn. And so, followed
by Hurr and his 1000 soldiers, Imam Husayn and his companion rode in the
direction away from Kufa.

On the 2nd Muharram, they reached Karbala’. Imam Husayn bought land
there and put up his tents. Hurr and his men pitched their camps some
distance away.

The following day, Umar bin Sa'ad came to Karbala’ with 4000 soldiers.
Umar Sa'ad was the commander of the Yazid's Army. He had several
meetings with Imam Husayn and was so impressed by Imam that he began to
join Imam for prayers.

When Ibn Ziyad heard this, he was furious. He sent Shimr with 10,000 men
and wrote a letter to Umar bin Sa'ad, ordering him to get “Bai'at” from
Imam Husayn or kill him. Umar bin Sa'ad immediately changed his attitude
towards Imam Husayn. Following his instructions he imposed restrictions
on Imam Husayn and his followers from getting water from “Furaat”, and
from 7th Muharram, no one from Imam Husayn's camp was allowed near the
river.

On the night of Ashura, Hurr was very restless. He could hear the
children in Imam Husayn's camp cry because of thirst. He began to think
“What have I done? Why did I put the son of Fatimah in this position?
Will Allah ever forgive me?” He could not sleep the whole night. Within
him there was a struggle between his duty as a soldier and his Islamic
conscience. Just before dawn he made up his mind.

Hurr, his son and his slave rode over to Imam Husayn's camp. Hurr threw
himself at Imam Husayn's feet, pleading for his forgiveness. Imam Husayn
took Hurr in his arms and said, “Hurr, I forgive you. I assure you that
my grandfather, the Holy Prophet also forgives you.”

Hurr then asked Imam Husayn for permission to go and fight the enemies
of Islam. Imam Husayn said “Hurr, you are my guest. How can I let you
die for me?” Hurr insisted. Hurr went to the battlefield, and after a
valiant fight, he fell and was killed. His son and the slave were also
killed.

Hurr's example moved nearly thirty other soldiers to defect to Imam
Husayn, where the only reward to be had was certain death, but where
Allah's pleasure lay.

The story of Hurr is the story of a struggle between right and wrong
within the human mind and victory of the Islamic conscience.

When he got to the body of Hurr Imam prayed to Allah: “Oh Allah! I
Commend to you this brave man who has given his life for Islam.”

Hazrat Muslim Bin Awsaja
------------------------

Hazrat Muslim Bin Awsajaa was a 'Sahaabi', a companion, of Hazrat Ali.
He was greatly respected by Hazrat Ali, Imam Hassan and Imam Husayn. He
was a leading citizen of Kufa and was among those who had written
letters to Imam Husayn inviting him to go to Kufa. He was an old man,
nearly eighty years old.

When Ibn Ziyad wanted to find out where Hazrat Muslim Ibn Aqeel was
hiding in Kufa, he sent his spy to Muslim Bin Awsaja. The spy pretended
to be a devout shiah and Hazrat Muslim Bin Awsajaa believed him and took
him to Hazrat Muslim. Hazrat Muslim Bin Awsajaa never forgave himself
for having accepted the story of the spy so easily.

After the murder of Hazrat Muslim Ibn Aqeel, Hazrat Muslim Bin Awsajaa
slipped out of Kufa. He left Kufa by foot and travelled towards Mecca in
the hope of meeting Imam Husayn on the way. Some historians record that
he met and joined Imam at the place called 'Zuballah' on the same day as
Imam Husayn got there. From him Imam learnt details about how Hazrat
Muslim bin Aqeel and Hazrat Hani bin Urwah had been murdered. Imam
Husayn was grief stricken.

Muslim Bin Awsajaa said to Imam Husayn, “Mawla, I beg you to accept me
in your party.” Imam Husayn replied “O Muslim Bin Awsajaa, whenever I
see you, I am reminded of my father. You know that these people will not
let me live. You are an old man. Go back to your family and give your
children and grandchildren the honour of burying you when you die. Your
age excuses you from jihad.” When Muslim bin Awsaja insisted, Imam let
him join his entourage.

On the day of Ashura, early in the morning, Muslim Bin Awsajaa went to
Hazrat Habeeb Ibn Mazahir, removed his turban and asked Habeeb Ibn
Mazahir to tie the cloth of the turban tightly around his waist and
abdomen saying, “Habeeb, I do not want those dogs of Yazid to see me
stooping with old age.” Habeeb Ibn Mazahir said, “But Muslim, you will
not then have a turban on your head.”

Muslim replied, “When they kill me, and when I meet our Holy Prophet I
want these my white hair to be my witness when I complain to our Prophet
against Yazid and his people.”

When Muslim Bin Awsajaa rode out to fight, a soldier from Yazid's army
teased him, “O old man! Go back to your bed and lie there!” Hazrat
Muslim replied, “O dog! My bed is now the sword of Yazid. Let me show
you the spirit of Islam.” Saying so he attacked the soldier and killed
him with one stroke.

Umar bin Sa'ad sent twenty strong warriors to fight Muslim Bin Awsajaa.
Six were killed and 14 ran away. At last, thirsty and exhausted, Muslim
Bin Awsajaa stopped his horse, looked at the sky and appeared to be
saying a prayer. Just then they fell upon him like hounds. Muslim Bin
Awsajaa fell to the ground with countless wounds on his frail body.

Habeeb Ibn Mazahir and Imam Husayn rushed to him. When they reached
Muslim bin Awsajaa, he looked at Imam Husayn and asked, “Mawla, How did
I fight?” Imam Husayn replied “You fought like a true follower of Ali
Murtaza.” Hazrat Muslim took Imam Husayn's hand in his hand, brought it
near his lips, and as he kissed Imam's hand he breathed his last. There
was a smile on his lips and pride on his face.

Habeeb Ibn Mazahir
------------------

Habeeb Ibn Mazahir was about the same age as Imam Husayn. They were
childhood friends. When Hazrat Ali moved the capital to Kufa, Habeeb
also moved to Kufa. He stayed on in Kufa and became a prominent citizen.
He was a devout Shiah. The first letter which Imam Husayn received
inviting him to Kufa was signed by Habeeb Ibn Mazahir. After Hazrat
Muslim and Hazrat Hani Bin Urwah were killed by Ibn Ziyaad, Kufa was
sealed off. No one could get in or out of the city without the
Governor's permission.

Ibn Ziyaad also started spreading the rumour that Imam Husayn had gone
to Madina and that he was living there happily under the protection of
Yazid. Even Imam Husayn's messenger Qais Bin Musheer who tried to take a
letter to the citizens of Kufa was arrested outside Kufa. He was tied
and gagged, and thrown from the roof of the palace to the ground three
times. Ibn Ziyaad succeeded in spreading terror in Kufa and silencing
the people.

Habeeb Ibn Mazahir was heart-broken because he could not join Imam
Husayn. He did not even know where Imam Husayn was. There were all sorts
of rumours but no one knew anything for certain.

Imam Husayn had reached Karbala’. Everyday Bibi Zainab saw soldiers
coming to join the camp of Umar al-Sa'ad, the Commander of Yazid's Army.
On 4th Muharram she came to Imam Husayn and said “Ya Akhee, why are all
these soldiers coming?” Imam replied “My dear sister, they are gathering
to kill me.” Bibi Zainab said, “Brother, you have hardly seventy-two men
with you, while they are in thousands.” Bibi Zainab had tears in her
eyes as she added, “Do you not have anyone ready to come to your help?”
Imam Husayn said “Falsehood can buy you many supporters, truth has few
friends.”

That very day Imam Husayn wrote a letter to Habeeb Ibn Mazahir, his
childhood friend, telling him how Yazid's vultures were gathering to
kill him. The letter was carried by a messenger who entered Kufa in the
dark by climbing over the city walls. The messenger reached Habeeb's
house as Habeeb, his wife and his young son were sitting down for
breakfast. Habeeb read the letter, kissed it and tears began to flow
down his cheeks. His wife asked him what was wrong. Habeeb said “Who
would ever have thought that people would be so thirsty for the blood of
the grandson of the Holy Prophet, whose name they utter in every Adhaan
and in every Salaah?”

Habeeb instructed his servant to take his horse to a farm outside the
city and wait for him there. If anyone should ask, the servant should
say that he was taking the horse for grazing.

At Asr, when most people were in the mosque Habeeb slipped out of Kufa.
He mounted his horse and galloped towards Karbala’. Habeeb Ibn Mazahir
reached Karbala’ late in the evening. Imam Husayn greeted Habeeb with
great affection. When Bibi Zainab heard that Habeeb had come she asked
Janaab al-Fizza to convey her greetings to Habeeb. When Habeeb received
the message he began to sob saying, “How fortunate are the companions of
Imam Husayn that the daughter of Fatimah Zahra should honour them with
greetings.”

On the fateful day of Ashura, between zuhr and asr, Habeeb Ibn Mazahir
rode into the battlefield. He fought bravely. Finally he was
over-powered, He fell to the ground. Imam Husayn rushed to him. Habeeb
looked at Imam and said “O the grand-son of the Holy Prophet, please
forgive this humble servant for not being able to give more than his
unworthy life for you and Islam.” Imam took Habeeb in his arms and
cried, “O my friend! O my friend!” Habeeb died resting his head on
Imam's shoulder.

Wahab Bin Abdullah Qalbi
------------------------

This is the story of a young bride and a young bridegroom who were at
Karbala’. They had been married only two months. The bridegroom was his
mother's only child.

After his marriage the mother decided to go for Hajj and take the son
and his bride. They left Kufa for Mecca in the month of Shawwaal.

On their way back, they found Kufa sealed off. At the border the mother
asked why Kufa had been placed under such a strict blockade. She was
told that a rebel group was camped at Karbala’ and that Kufa was sealed
off to protect the city and its inhabitants from an attack by the
rebels. She asked who the rebels were. She was told the leader was
Husayn Ibn Ali Ibn Abu Taalib.

On hearing the name, the lady almost fainted. This lady was the widow
Abdullah Qalbi and her son, the newly wed bridegroom, was Wahab Bin
Abdullah Qalbi. His father was a companion of Hazrat Ali. In 40 Hijrah
when Abdullah Qalbi's wife was pregnant she became very ill. Abdullah
Qalbi went to Hazrat Ali and said “My wife and I have been childless for
so long. Now that she is expecting a baby she is so ill that I may lose
her. Please Mawla, pray for her.” Hazrat Ali prayed, and Abdullah
Qalbi's wife recovered. Same year Hazrat Ali was martyred. A few months
later Wahab was born. Two years later his father died. The widow had
brought up her son with great love.

Now she heard the son of Ali being accused of wanting to attack Kufa and
kill the people there. She refused to believe it. She said to her son,
“Wahab, I must go and find out what is happening.” Wahab said, “Mother,
I too would like to come.” The three arrived in Karbala’ on the 7th
Muharram.

On learning the true situation Wahab decided to stay on with Imam Husayn
and fight for him. When he told his mother of his decision, she said “I
am the proudest mother in Iraq.”

On the day of Ashura, Wahab fought for Imam Husayn. When he was killed
the mother and the bride were standing at the gate of the camp. Their
faces were radiant with pride. Umar Sa'ad ordered Wahab's head to be cut
off from the body. He threw the head at Wahab's mother. She picked it
up, kissed it and threw it back at Umar Sa'ad saying, “What we have
sacrificed for our Imam and for Islam we do not take back. I am sorry I
have one son only. If I had twenty, they all would have fought Yazid
today.” Then she went into the camp, and took the young bride in her
arms. Just then, the tent's curtain lifted and Bibi Zainab came in. She
embraced them both and offered her condolences saying: “May Allah grant
you patience to bear Wahab's loss!!

John bin Huwai
--------------

Among those who were martyred at Karbala’ were sixteen slaves or freed
slaves. Most of them were from Abyssinia, the present day Ethiopia. Some
of them belonged to Imam Husayn's family and others to the companions of
Imam who remained with him.

On the night before Ashura Imam and the companions freed all their
slaves and urged them to go away and seek their safety, but these
sixteen would not leave. Amongst them was an Abyssinian called John bin
Huwai.

Hazrat Ali had given John to Abu Dharr Ghiffari, Abu Dharr freed him,
but John stayed on with Abu Dharr as a companion. When Abu Dharr was
exiled from Madina John went back to Hazrat Ali who invited him to stay
on as his companion. In the company of Hazrat Ali he learnt the tafseer
of Quraan and the traditions of the Holy Prophet. He also knew the Holy
Quraan by heart. When Hazrat Ali was martyred John stayed with Imam
Hassan and after Imam Hassan he moved in with Imam Husayn. When Imam
Husayn left Madina John insisted on accompanying him.

At Karbala’ John could always be seen at the side of Imam Husayn. He was
an old man, dark with grey curly hair. Because of his profound knowledge
and pleasant manners he was greatly respected by all.

John spent the whole night of Ashura sharpening his sword. On the
following day he helped in repelling the first two attacks from Yazid's
army. At mid-day, after the Zuhr prayers, John came to the Imam, and
stood silently with his arms folded. It was his habit never to speak in
the presence of Imam until spoken to.

Imam Husayn looked at John and said, “John, I know you have come for my
permission to go to the battle-field. You have been a good and trusted
friend. I will not deny you martyrdom for Islam. Go, Allah be with you!”
John smiled happily. He faced the enemy and recited a poem which said “I
am a soul willing to die for Allah and have a sword thirsty of the blood
of the enemies of Allah. Before I die I shall fight the enemies of Allah
with my sword and my tongue, and thus shall I serve the grand-son of the
Holy Prophet.”

John fought courageously, all the time reciting the poem. He received
several mortal blows but his recitation of the poem continued. John fell
from his horse, he still continued to fight with his tongue by reciting
the poem. And then a few horse men moved to where he lay. John, the
Abyssinian, was silenced.

Zuhair Ibn Qain & Saeed Ibn Abdullah
------------------------------------

In the Holy Qur'an, Allah Ta'ala has time and again emphasized the
requirement of every muslim to say his prayers. In Sura al-Ma'oon Allah
says “Woe unto those who do not say their prayers regularly, and pray
only to be seen by others!”

Let us see how Zuhr prayers were said in Karbala’. When the time for
Zuhr prayers came most of the companions of Imam Husayn lay dead. They
had been killed in the three battles which had taken place since
sunrise. Now there were only about fifteen companions left in addition
to the members of the family who numbered about eighteen. These 33 stood
up to say Zuhr prayers and Imam Husayn stood in front of them to lead
the prayers.

Just then the enemy began to shoot arrows. This made it very difficult
for Imam Husayn to lead prayers. Imam told his companions that he would
lead “Namaaz al-Khauf”, which meant that some would join in the prayers
and half way they would read salaam and terminate their prayers, and
then others would come in. This would give everyone a chance to say
prayers in jama'at. behind the Imam. The problem, however, was how to
protect the Imam from the arrows. Two companions stepped forward and
begged Imam to let them stand in front of him and act as a shield. They
insisted upon this and the Imam finally agreed.

These two brave men were Zuhair Ibn Qain and Saeed Ibn Abdullah. They
performed their prayers first and then when Imam began Jama'at prayers
they stood up in front of him. Every time an arrow was shot at Imam they
put forward their own bodies and this way stopped the arrows from
hitting Imam.

Let us imagine the scene. Imam Husayn is leading the prayers, Zuhair and
Saeed are standing in front of him. The natural human instinct is that
when a man sees anything flying towards him, he ducks to avoid it. Here
are two men who not only do not duck but actually put forward their
bodies to intercept the arrows. By the time the prayers had finished, 38
arrows had hit Zuhair Ibn Qain and 52 arrows had hit Saeed Ibn Abdullah.
It was by sheer will to serve their Imam and Islam they kept themselves
alive. When the Imam recited the last salaam “Assalaamu 'Alaikum Wa
Rahmatullahu wa Barakaatuh”, these two great heroes of Karbala’ fell.

When Imam Husayn went up to them and said “My friends, you have given
your lives for something most beloved to Allah, the salaah!” Imam then
raised his hands and prayed, “O Allah! I am proud to commend to You the
souls of my two companions who gave their lives for salaah. Please,
Allah, grant them Your Rahmah.” Every one present called out “Aameen!”,
and it is said that “Aameen” could be heard from the angels in the sky.

Aun and Muhammad
----------------

Aun and Muhammad were the sons of Bibi Zainab. They had not accompanied
Bibi Zainab when she left Madina with Imam Husayn (A.S.) Just before
Imam Husayn started his journey from Mecca, Hazrat Abdullah ibn Ja’far
brought his two sons to Mecca and handing them over to Imam Husayn said,
“Ya Imam, since you have decided to go and will not allow me to come
with you, please take my two sons with you. Aun will represent his
maternal grandfather Hazrat Ali (A.S.) and the other will represent his
paternal grandfather Hazrat Ja’far al-Tayyaar.”

Aun and Muhammad were quite young. It is reported that Aun was about
thirteen and Muhammad was a year or two younger. They had learnt the art
of fencing from their uncle, Hazrat Abbas.

On the night before Ashura Bibi Zainab said to them, “My sons, tomorrow
there will be a battle. I can not ask you to fight because you are
young. But if anything happens to Imam Husayn, while you are still
alive, I will be filled with shame.” Both the boys stood up and said
“Mother, we have the blood of Ali and Ja’far in our veins. Our grand
fathers were warriors whose fame will always be remembered.

Do you think we can possibly shame them? More over we are the pupils of
Uncle Abbas. Mother, unless you forbid us and stop us from fighting, we
shall go to the battlefield and show the enemies of Islam how bravely
the children of Islam can fight. All we want from you is a promise that
you will never weep for us. Or souls will never rest in peace if you
grieve for us after we are gone.”

Tears of joy and pride flowed down Bibi Zainab's eyes as she embraced
her two boys. In the morning during the general attacks from the enemy,
Aun and Muhammad fought side by side with Hazrat Ali Akbar, Hazrat Qasim
and Hazrat Abbas. Every time either of them succeeded in felling an
enemy, he would look proudly at Hazrat Abbas who would smile and nod his
approval. Imam Husayn would not, however, give the two boys permission
to go for single combat.

They were very disappointed. They came to their mother for help. Bibi
Zainab sent someone to request Imam Husayn to come to her tent. When the
Imam came Bibi Zainab said, “Husayn, at the battle of Siffeen Hazrat
Abbas was only eight years old. When he saw someone trying to attack
you, he rushed into the battle field and killed the man. Do you remember
how proud our father Ali was? Today I too want to be proud of my sons. I
want to see them go out there and defend Islam. Will you not allow me
that privilege?” Imam Husayn stood there in silence.

He looked at his sister. He saw the disappointment on her face. He saw
tears forming around her eyes. He put his arms around the two boys and
led them to their horses. He kissed them and then helped them
mount.”Go,” said Imam, “Go, and show the world how those as young as you
can fight the injustice and oppression of Yazid!” Then he turned round
and lifted the curtain of the tent. The boys raised their hands and said
“Fi Amaani-llah, mother!” Bibi Zainab replied, “Bismillah my sons. Allah
be with you!”

The two boys rode out into the battlefield. They fought bravely. At one
point Umar Sa'ad asked, “Who are these two youngsters? They fight like I
have seen Ali ibn Abu Taalib fight.” When he was told who they were he
ordered his soldiers to give up single combats and surround and kill the
boys. Aun and Muhammad were attacked from all sides. Soon they were
over-powered and brutally killed. Imam Husayn and Hazrat Abbas carried
the two young bodies to a tent and laid them on the floor. Imam walked
to Bibi Zainab's tent. He found her in sijdah praying, “Ya Allah, I
thank you for accepting my sacrifice. My heart is filled with pride
because my two sons have given their lives for your religion.”

Burair Hamdani
--------------

After the death of Uthmaan, people prevailed upon Hazrat Ali to accept
Khulafah. Uthmaan died on 24th Muharram in 35 Hijrah and Hazrat Ali
became Khalifah in the same month. The first thing he did after becoming
the Khalifah was to dismiss all the corrupt governors and other
officials. Muawiya, who was the Governor of Syria, did not accept the
dismissal and responded by gathering together a Syrian army of fifty
thousand soldiers to fight Hazrat Ali. Hazrat Ali marched from Kufa with
an army of twenty thousand. The battle took place North of Kufa at a
place called Siffeen on the banks of the river Furaat. At one time
during the battle, Hazrat Ali's army captured Furaat.

Muawiya and his army were cut off from water. When Hazrat Ali heard that
Muawiya soldiers were suffering from thirst, he ordered his army to let
Muawiya army come to the river saying, “Every living being is entitled
to water.” Immediately Hazrat Ali's army made a way for Muawiya and his
soldiers to come to the river and take as much water as they needed, and
also to water their horses and camels.

From Asr until sunset Muawiya soldiers were at the river bank drinking
water, watering their animals and filling their mashks. When Hazrat
Ali's officers complained to him, Hazrat Ali replied, “To deprive any
human or animal of water is a sin Allah will never forgive.”

Yazid was at Siffeen, so was Imam Husayn. When the Muharram of 60 Hijrah
came, Yazid sent a secret order to ibn Ziyad to force Imam Husayn away
from Furaat and then cut off Imam Husayn, his family and his companions
from water. Ibn Ziyad gave orders to Umar Sa'ad to do so. On the third
of Muharram, Umar Ibn Sa'ad asked Imam Husayn to move his camp away from
Furaat. Imam Husayn and his camp were cut off from water, while 25 years
earlier, his father had allowed Yazid's father and the army of 50,000
freedom to go to the river and take as much water as they had wanted.

The children in Imam Husayn's camp were soon crying out “Al-atash! al
atash!” Burair Hamdani was a companion of Imam Husayn. He was present at
Karbala’. On the night before Ashura, he could no longer stand the cries
of “Al-atash, Al-atash.” In the dark of the night he made his way to the
river. He filled his mashk and secured the cap. He too was very thirsty
but did not even think of drinking water when he was at the river bank.
How could he when the grand-son of the Holy Prophet and his children
were thirsty!

On his way back, he was seen by two of the guards posted to make sure
that no water reached Imam Husayn's camp. They tried to stop him. He
attacked and killed them both. He brought the mashk to Imam Husayn's
camp. He called Bibi Fizza and asked her to take the mashk to the
children. They were more than fifty children in Imam Husayn's camp. They
were all very thirsty. When they heard that water had come, they rushed.
They put their cheeks on the mashk to cool themselves. In this rush the
cap flew open and the water spilled.

The children looked with pain and disappointment as the water
disappeared into the desert sand. Burair was desolate. He raised his
hands to the sky and cried, “Oh Allah! I had hoped that this Your humble
servant would tonight earn the du'aas of the children of Imam. Oh how
very unfortunate Burair the son of Hamdani is!” Imam consoled Burair,
“My friend, you have earned the du'aas of Fatimah's son for your brave
effort!”

Hazrat Qasim
------------

Hazrat Qasim was the youngest son of Imam Hassan (A.S.). Hazrat Qasim
was born in 47 A.H. three years before his father was martyred. When
Imam Husayn prepared to leave Madina in the month of Rajab 60 A.H.
Hazrat Qasim mother Umme al-Farwa asked Imam Husayn to take her and
Hazrat Qasim with him. Imam Husayn agreed.

Hazrat Qasim, although only 13 years old, had, like his cousins Aun and
Muhammad, learnt fencing from Hazrat Abbas and Hazrat Ali Akbar. Hazrat
Abbas was very fond of Hazrat Qasim.

On the night before Ashura when Imam Husayn was passing by Umm
al-Farwa's tent he heard Hazrat Qasim say to his mother, “Mother,
tomorrow Uncle Abbas, Ali Akbar and I will defend Imam Husayn. Mother,
if I get killed please do not weep for me.” Umm al-Farwa replied, “My
son although I dearly love you, I shall not weep for you. Nothing will
make me prouder than to see my son give his life for Islam.” When Imam
Husayn heard this conversation he prayed to Allah to bless Hazrat Qasim
and Umm al-Farwa.

On Ashura day after Aun and Muhammad had fallen in the battlefield,
Hazrat Qasim came to Imam Husayn and begged for permission to go and
fight. Twice Imam Husayn refused saying “Qasim you are young and your
mother's only son.” Hazrat Qasim was very disappointed. He went to his
mother. When she saw her son so disappointed she remembered that just
before he died, Imam Hassan had written a letter, given it to Umm
al-Farwa saying, “If ever you find Qasim in difficulty, give him this
letter.” She gave Hazrat Qasim the letter. In the letter it was written,
“My son Qasim, a day will come when my brother Husayn will be facing an
enemy army of tens of thousands. That will be the day when Islam will
need to be saved by sacrifice. You must represent me on that day.”

Hazrat Qasim read the letter. He smiled. He rushed to Imam and gave him
the letter. After reading the letter Imam Husayn said, “O my brother's
son, how can I stop you from doing what your father wanted you to do.
Bismillah, go. Allah be with you.”

Imam Husayn tied Imam Hassan's turban on the head of Hazrat Qasim and
helped him mount his horse. As Hazrat Qasim was riding out, Imam Husayn
said “Inna Lilla-hi Wa Inna Ilai-hi Raji'oon.” Hazrat Qasim said “O my
uncle - Do not be upset. I do not fear death. Death for Islam will be
sweeter for me than honey.” Hazrat Qasim came to the battle field. He
was a very handsome boy. When the enemy saw him, they began to murmur,
“How can we kill someone whose face is shining like moon?”

In a loud and a clear voice Hazrat Qasim introduced himself and cried
out a challenge for single combat. He killed several famous warriors who
came forward.

Every time he felled an enemy Hazrat Qasim would stand on his stirrups,
look behind and wave to Hazrat Abbas, just as a pupil would seek
approval of his teacher on any assignment, Hazrat Abbas would proudly
wave back. When the enemy saw his bravery and realized that they could
not possibly over power him in single combats, they came from behind and
one of them hit Hazrat Qasim on the head with a sword.

Hazrat Qasim tried to go on fighting but alas he was so young and he was
so very thirsty! He fell from his horse crying out, “**ya ammaho, accept
my last salaams**.” Imam Husayn and Hazrat Abbas rode out. The soldiers
tried to stop them, when finally they came to where Hazrat Qasim had
fallen they saw a dreadful sight!! Hazrat Qasim's body had been trampled
by the horses of the soldiers who had tried to stop Imam Husayn and
Hazrat Abbas. Hazrat Abbas was so angry when he saw this that he began
to shake with fury. He took out his sword and wanted to attack the
enemy. Imam Husayn restrained him saying “Abbas, have patience, dear
brother. Do not give them an excuse for saying that we attacked them
first.”

Was Hazrat Qasim body carried to the camp to his mother? This is not
very clear. It is reported, however, that Imam Husayn took off his abaa,
spread it on to the ground, and gathered the pieces from the ground as
one gathers flowers from a garden!

Hazrat Abbas
------------

Hazrat Ali married Fatimah Binti Huzaam Ibn Khalid in 24 Hijrah. Fatimah
gave birth to Hazrat Abbas on the 4th Shabaan, 26th Hijrah. In 27th
Hijrah Ja'far was born and in 29th Hijrah Uthmaan was born. Abdullah was
born in 32nd Hijrah. Because she had four sons Fatima Binti Huzaam was
known as Ummul Baneen.

Ummul Baneen, from the very first day she entered Hazrat Ali's house,
treated the children of Bibi Fatimah with utmost respect. She brought up
her own sons to look upon Imam Hassan, Imam Husayn, Bibi Zainab and Bibi
Kulthoom, not as brothers and sisters but as masters and mistresses.

Imam Husayn was very attached to Hazrat Abbas. When Hazrat Abbas was
born, Hazrat Ali asked Imam Husayn to recite the adhaan and the iqamah
in the ears of the child. When he was on the arms of Imam Husayn, the
infant smiled and raised his arms. There were tears in Imam Husayn's
eyes. Was it because he knew that the child was trying to say: “O Mawla
I have come and will happily give these my arms and my life for you and
Islam?”

In early childhood Hazrat Abbas would follow Imam Husayn like a shadow.
If Imam Husayn looked thirsty, Hazrat Abbas would rush to bring him
water. If Imam Husayn seemed hot, Hazrat Abbas would fan him with the
hem of his cloak. At the battle of Siffeen in the 34th Hijrah, Hazrat
Abbas was only eight years old. Imam Husayn was fighting in the battle
field.

When Hazrat Abbas saw an enemy soldier approaching Imam Husayn from
behind, he took a sword and rushed into the battle field and killed the
enemy, at the same time crying out in a loud voice, “How can any one
dare attack my Mawla while I am alive.” He continued to fight
maintaining his position behind Imam Husayn. Muawiya saw this and asked,
“Who is that boy?” When he was told he was Abbas ibn Ali, he said, “By
God! No one can fight like that at that age except a son of Ali!”

Hazrat Abbas grew up to be a tall and handsome man. He was so tall, that
when he sat on a horse his feet touched the ground. He was so handsome
that he was known as Qamar al-Bani Hashim, the Moon of the family of
Hashim.

Hazrat Abbas was also a valiant warrior. It was said that Muawiya did
not dare invade Madina because of five men who were with Imam Husayn and
could, together with their Imam, conquer a whole army. These were
Muhammad Hanafia, a brother of Imam Husayn, Hazrat Muslim ibn Aqeel,
Abdullah Ibn Ja’far, Hazrat Abbas and Hazrat Ali ibnal Husayn, our
fourth Imam, Zainul 'Abideen.

When Imam Husayn decided to leave Madina in the month of Rajab 60
Hijrah, he did not encourage Muhammad Hanafia and Abdullah Ibn Ja’far to
accompany him. He wanted to make sure that no one at the time or in the
future would suggest that Husayn wanted to fight for the khilafah.

Just before Imam Husayn left Madina, Ummul Baneen summoned all her four
sons and said to them, “My sons you must remember that while I love you,
Imam Husayn is your Master. If Imam or his sisters or his children get
injured or hurt while you are still alive, I will never forgive you.”
There were tears in Hazrat Abbas's eyes as he promised his mother that
he and his brothers would lay down their lives for Imam Husayn and his
children.

The caravan reached Karbala’ on 2nd Muharram. From the day the sad news
of Hazrat Muslim's murder had reached the caravan of Imam Husayn, Hazrat
Abbas and his brothers increased their vigilance to protect Imam and the
others.

Hazrat Abbas was very popular with the children of Imam Husayn
especially Bibi Sakina who was only four years old. Whenever the
children wanted anything they would cry out “Ya Abbas!” or “Ya Ammahu!”,
and Hazrat Abbas would go running. But from the seventh of Muharram
Abbas was unable to respond to their cries for water.

Then came the day of Ashura, after Zuhr prayers one by one the brave
companions of Imam Husayn fell in the battle field. At last only Imam
Husayn, Hazrat Ali Akbar and Hazrat Abbas were left. Imam Zainul
'Abideen lay sick in his tent.

Several times Hazrat Abbas asked Imam Husayn for permission to go and
fight. Each time Imam Husayn would reply “Abbas, you are the captain of
my army, you are my 'alamdaar - the standard bearer.” Hazrat Abbas would
never argue with Imam Husayn. His three brothers were killed in the
battle fought after Zuhr. Imam Husayn could see the anger in Hazrat
Abbas's eyes, especially when Hazrat Qasim's body was trampled upon by
the enemy. Imam Husayn knew that if he let Hazrat Abbas go and fight,
there would be a massacre in the enemy rank. Imam Husayn's object was to
re-awaken Islam and not to score a victory on the battle field.

Just then Bibi Sakina came out holding a dried up mask. She walked up to
Hazrat Abbas and said “**al atash, ya ammahu**! I am thirsty O my uncle
Abbas!” Hazrat Abbas went to Imam Husayn and requested for permission to
go and get water for Bibi Sakina. Imam Husayn gave his permission.
Hazrat Abbas put Bibi Sakina's mashk on the 'alam, mounted his horse and
rode up to Imam Husayn. He said “I have come to say goodbye.”

Imam Husayn said “My brother, come and embrace me.” Hazrat Abbas
dismounted his horse. There were tears in Imam's eyes. As Hazrat Abbas
prepared to mount his horse, Imam Husayn said, “My brother, I want a
gift from you. I want your sword.” Hazrat Abbas, without uttering a
word, gave Imam Husayn his sword and rode into the battlefield, armed
only with a spear and holding the 'alam.

There were 30,000 enemy soldiers in the battlefield. They had all heard
of the valour of Hazrat Abbas. A cry arose, “Abbas is coming!” Yazid's
soldiers started hiding behind one another. A few brave ones dared go
near Hazrat Abbas but were soon put to death by the spear or by a
kick.  
 Hazrat Abbas reached the river Furaat. He filled the mashk with water.
He himself was very thirsty. He took the water in his palms, looked at
it and threw it away saying, “O water of Furaat, my lips can welcome you
only after Bibi Sakina has quenched her thirst!?” He placed the mashk on
his 'alam and started to ride back.

Umar Sa'ad cried out, “Do not let that water reach Husayn's camp,
otherwise we shall all be doomed!”

A soldier climbed a tree and as Hazrat Abbas was riding past the tree he
struck his sword on the right shoulder The spear and the arm fell on to
the ground. Just then someone crept behind Hazrat Abbas and struck him
on the left shoulder. The 'alam fell. Hazrat Abbas gripped the mashk
with his teeth. His one object was to get the water to Bibi Sakina.
Fighting with his feet he urged the horse to get him to Imam's camp as
quickly as possible.

Alas! an arrow was shot. It went flying across the desert and hit the
mashk. The water began to pour out and with the water all the hopes of
Hazrat Abbas poured on to the sands of Karbala’ to be buried forever in
the thirsty desert. Hazrat Abbas now did not want to go back and face
Bibi Sakina. With his feet, he signalled the horse to turn back. The
enemy surrounded him from all sides. Hazrat Abbas fell from the horse!!
As he fell, he cried out “My salaams to you Ya Mawla!”

Imam Husayn seemed to lose all his strength when he heard the voice of
his dear brother Abbas.  
 When Hazrat Abbas left to go to fetch water, Imam stood at the gate of
the camp watching the 'alam. Bibi Sakina was standing next to Imam
Husayn, also with her eyes fixed on the 'alam. When Hazrat Abbas reached
the river bank and bent down to fill the mashk, the 'alam disappeared
from sight.

Bibi Sakina was frightened and looked at her father. Imam said, 'Sakina,
your uncle Hazrat Abbas is at the river bank.' Bibi Sakina smiled and
said, 'Alhamdulillah!' and called out all the children to welcome Hazrat
Abbas. When Hazrat Abbas lost both arms, the 'alam fell onto the ground.
Bibi Sakina could see it no longer! She looked at Imam Husayn, but he
turned his face away. Bibi Sakina began to tremble with fear and her
eyes filled with tears. She raised her hands and prayed, 'Ya Allah! Do
not let them kill my uncle Abbas! I will never ask for water again!' and
ran inside to her mother.

Imam Husayn reached where Hazrat Abbas was lying. It was a tragic sight.
Hazrat Abbas was lying on the ground. Both arms had been severed! There
was an arrow in the right eye and blood blocked the left eye. As soon as
Hazrat Abbas sensed the presence of Imam Husayn he said “Mawla, why did
you take the trouble to come over? Please go back and look after
Sakina.” Imam Husayn said, “My dear brother, all your life you have
served me and my children. Is there anything I can do for you at this
last moment of you life?”

Hazrat Abbas replied, “Aqaa, please, clean the blood from my eye so that
I can see your beloved face before I die!” Imam cleaned the blood.
Hazrat Abbas fixed his gaze on Imam. Then he said, “Mawla please do not
carry my body to the camp. I do not wish Sakina to see me in this
state!” Imam Husayn took Hazrat Abbas in his arms, and kissed his
forehead. Just then our Mawla, our Mushkil Kushaa, Hazrat Abbas ibn Ali
breathed his last. Imam Husayn placed Bibi Sakina's mashk on the 'alam
and carried the 'alam to the camp. He went to Bibi Zainab's tent. Imam
Husayn could not say a word. He gave the 'alam to Bibi Zainab and sat
down on the floor! The brother sister performed aza al-Abbas.

Hazrat Ali Akbar
----------------

Hazrat Ali Akbar was the son of Imam Husayn. He was a handsome young man
of eighteen. His mothers' name was Umm al-Laila. He was also a brave
soldier. He had been taught fencing and archery by Hazrat Abbas. He so
much resembled the Holy Prophet that Imam Husayn was often heard to say:
“whenever I remember the Holy Prophet I look at Akbar”.

Hazrat Ali Akbar had a loud beautiful voice. It was he who always
recited adhaan. On the morning of Ashura day Hazrat Ali Akbar recited
adhaan. Every one knew that it was the last time they would hear Hazrat
Ali Akbar's adhaan. Imam Husayn began to weep when Hazrat Ali Akbar
began his Adhaan. The ladies could also be heard crying in their tents.

After Zuhr prayers Hazrat Ali Akbar stood in front of Imam Husayn. He
said, “Father I request for permission to go and fight the enemies of
Islam.” Imam looked at his son lovingly. He said, “Akbar, you have my
permission. May Allah be with you! But Akbar, you know how much your
mother, sisters and aunts love you. Go and say farewell to them.”Ali
Akbar went into the tent of his mother. Every time he wanted to come out
of the tent the mother, aunts and sisters would pull his cloak and say,
“O Akbar, How can we live without you!” Finally Imam Husayn had to go in
and plead with all to let Hazrat Ali Akbar go.

Imam helped his youthful son to mount the horse. As Akbar began to the
ride towards the battlefield, he heard foot steps behind. He looked back
and saw his father. He said, “Father, we have said good-bye. Why are you
walking behind him.” Husayn replied, “My son, had you been a father you
would surely have understood!!”

Hazrat Ali Akbar fought very bravely. No one dared come close to him in
single combat after he had killed many well known warriors. Umar Sa'ad
ordered his soldiers to finish off the young man saying, “When he dies,
Husayn will not want to live! Ali Akbar is the life of Husayn.” While a
few soldiers attacked Hazrat Ali Akbar another slowly crept up to him
and threw a spear at his chest with such ferocity that it penetrated
Akbar chest and he felt faint. As he was falling from his horse, he
cried out.”O Father, my last salaams to you!” As he hit the ground the
spear broke but the blade remained lodged in Akbar's chest.

When our Imam heard Akbar's salaam he looked at Furaat where Hazrat
Abbas lay and said, 'Abbas! Now that this brother of yours needs you
most, where have you gone?' With all his strength sapped by the anguish
in Akbar's voice, Husayn began to walk towards the battle-field.

Let us pause briefly to remind ourselves of an incident in the seventh
Hijrah. The Jews of Khaibar had revolted against the Holy Prophet. The
Prophet and the Muslims of Madina laid a siege on Khaibar. They
surrounded the fortress in which the Jews had taken shelter. The Muslims
could not get victory unless they entered the fortress. There was a moat
surrounding the fortress. Hazrat Ali had been unable to accompany the
Muslims due to his illness. Three days passed and the Muslims could not
find any solution. Even if they got across the moat they would face the
famous gates of the fortress. These were made of steel, and it is said
that at least twenty men were needed to push open or close each gate.

On the third day, after the morning prayers, the Prophet summoned Ali.
Hazrat Ali immediately responded. He jumped his horse over the moat and
with one hand swung open both the gates of the fortress with such force
that they broke off their hinges. He carried them and put them across
the moat to form a bridge. The Muslims rode into the fortress and
conquered Khaibar.

Now let us go back to Karbala’. When Imam Husayn got to where Akbar lay
he took him in his arms. Akbar had his right hand on the chest. He
placed his left arm over the shoulder of his father. Husayn said “Akbar,
why do you embrace me with one arm only?” Akbar would not reply. Husayn
tried to move Akbar hand. Akbar resisted. Imam gently moved the hand.
Then he saw it! He saw the blade of the spear. Imam Husayn laid Hazrat
Ali Akbar on the ground and sitting on his knees he put both his hands
on the blade of the spear. He then looked at Najaf, and cried out,
“Father, I too have come to my Khaibar!” He pulled out the blade.
Jibraeel cried out “Marhaba! Marhaba!” Akbar took a deep sigh and then
lay still.

Hazrat Ali Asghar
-----------------

Hazrat Ali Asghar was the youngest child of Imam Husayn. He was born
only a few weeks before Imam left Madina. His mother's name was Rubaab
daughter of Imra'u'l Qais who was the chief of the tribe of Kinda.

Rubaab had two children, Bibi Sakina and Ali Asghar. She and her two
children accompanied Imam to Karbala’. The fact that Imam took with him
a newly born baby further demonstrates the his intention was never to
engage in any armed rebellion.

At Karbala’ Asghar was only six months old. From the seventh Muharram
there was no water in Imam's camp. Asghar was in great pain because of
thirst.

On Ashura day, after Hazrat Ali Akbar had been killed, Imam Husayn was
standing outside the camp. He was left all alone and he was preparing to
go into the battlefield. Just then he heard a child cry. It was Ali
Asghar, tormented by the pangs of hunger and thirst.

Imam walked into Bibi Rubaab's tent. He lifted the child from the
cradle.”Rubaab,” he said, “I will take him to Yazid's army. Surely they
can not possibly deny this little infant a few drops of water?” Rubaab
changed Ali Asghar's clothes. She even tied a small turban on his head.
Like any other mother she wanted her son to look at his best in front of
strangers.

Imam Husayn carried the child to the battle field. Walking up to Yazid's
soldiers Imam Husayn said, “This child has done you no harm. He is dying
of thirst. I am begging for a few drops of water for him.”There was no
response. Imam said, “If you are afraid that when you bring Asghar any
water I will drink it, look, I will put him on the ground and you can
come yourself and give him water.”

He put the child on the sands of Karbala’ and moved a couple of steps
back. You can imagine how hot the desert sand was. Asghar lay there not
even wincing. He turned towards the enemy and stared at them. A murmur
arose among the soldiers but no one came forward to give water to the
baby. Imam took Asghar in his arms and in a clear voice said, “Asghar,
my son, show them how thirsty you are!” Asghar turned his head towards
the soldiers. He smiled sweetly, opened his mouth, brought out his dry
tongue and moved it over his lips. The ultimate sword had been
unsheathed!

The soldiers were so moved by this that they could be heard sobbing.
Still, they were very afraid of Yazid and none dared come forward to
give water to Ali Asghar.

Umar Sa'ad was worried. It seemed that Asghar was emerging victorious in
this confrontation against the might of Yazid. He looked at Hurmala, a
famous archer, and said, “Silence Husayn!”

Then a terrible thing happened. Hurmala lifted his bow. He aimed an
arrow at the child. The arrow flew across the hot desert. There was a
hissing sound. Asghar smiled. He lifted his head and arched his neck!!
No civilized mind can even imagine what happened next. The hissing sound
stopped and Asghar lay still on his father's arms.

Imam Husayn looked down at Asghar's neck, he saw the arrow, he saw the
neck, he saw the smile and then he could see no more!!!

Our Imam began to feel faint. For a moment everything went dark. He
could not see! There was a total silence over Karbala’, broken only by
the sound of the gentle waves of Furaat. Even the enemy appeared
stunned.

Slowly Husayn turned round and now looked at the baby in his arms.

The arrow had passed through the tender neck and lodged in Imam Husayn's
chest. There was no way Imam Husayn could dislodge the arrow. His two
arms were supporting the still child. He looked at the sky, and prayed
“Ya Allah, give me courage in this most difficult moment of my life. No
Prophet ever was subjected to a test as severe as this.”

It is said that the Imam was so shaken up by what had happened to the
infant child that all of a sudden his beard went all grey and he looked
an old man. With his teeth he pulled his abaa over Asghar to shield the
body from the scorching sun. Then he took a few deep breaths, and began
to walk towards his camp.

As he got near he saw Rubaab standing at the entrance to her tent. He
saw the anxiety, the hope, the fear and the restlessness in her eyes.
Our Imam seemed to lose all strength. He could not walk forward towards
Bibi Rubaab. He took seven steps back saying “**inna lil-Lahi wa inna
ilay-hi raja’uun**.”

He stopped and thought that he must take the child to his mother. He
again took seven steps forwards saying “**inna lil-Lahi wa inna ilay-hi
raja’uun**.” Once again his eyes met with those of Bibi Rubaab's. Again
our Imam seemed to lose his courage and walked backwards repeating
“**inna lil-Lahi wa inna ilay-hi raja’uun**.” Imam Husayn did this seven
times. Forward and backward. All the time Bibi Rubaab's eyes remained
transfixed on the child. Each time Imam reciting “**inna lil-Lahi wa
inna ilay-hi raja’uun**.”

Finally, somehow, he got the arrow dislodged. He now took the dead
infant to Bibi Rubaab. He said, “Rubaab! This is a test from Allah which
no mother has ever been asked to go through. Come with me” Bibi Rubaab
followed. With their own hands they dug a small grave! The father and
the mother together buried Ali Asghar!!

Imam Husayn
-----------

Our Imam is all alone! He looks around him. There lie Habeeb ibn
Mazahir, Muslim ibn Awsaja, Zuhair ibn Qain and all his friends and
companions. There lie Awn and Muhammad. He looks at Hazrat Qasim's
trampled remains. He looks at Hazrat Ali Akbar, his beloved son, with
that dreadful wound on his chest. He looks towards Furaat. Gently he
whispers, 'Abbas, Abbas, I am alone! So very alone!'

Slowly Imam Husayn moves towards the tent of Imam Zain ul 'Abideen. Zain
ul 'Abideen is lying unconscious on his bed. Lovingly Imam shakes his
son by the shoulder. The sick Imam opens his eyes, 'Father, Father, why
are you alone? Where is my uncle Abbas? Where is Ali Akbar? Where is
Qasim? Where are all your companions?' Imam Husayn says, 'Son, no man,
save you and I, is left alive. All of them have died for Islam.'

Imam Zain ul 'Abideen tries to get up. 'Where are you going, my son?'
asks Imam Husayn. 'To fight Yazid's army!' replies the young man. 'No,
my son, you are too sick for Jihad. I have come to say good-bye. Look
after the ladies and the children. And, my son, when you get to Madina,
give my love to Soghra. Tell her that I always remembered her and that
in these last moments of my life, I wish I could give her a hug before I
get killed. . And also, my son, give salaams to our friends and tell
them to think of me when they drink water!'

Imam Husayn then stands in the centre of the camp and cries out, “O
Zainab, O Kulthoom, O Sakina, O Ruqayya, O Rubaab, O Fizza my greetings
to you! Farewell to you all!” The ladies and children weep and wail as
they say farewell to Imam.

Imam walks towards his horse. There is no one to help him mount. Bibi
Zainab steps forward. She holds the reins as Imam mounts the horse. The
horse moves a few steps and then it stops. Imam Husayn urges the horse
to move, but it stands still looking towards its hind legs. Imam turns
his head. He sees Bibi Sakina clinging to the horse's leg, pleading, 'O
horse, do not take my father away from me. Do not let them make me
yateemah!'

Imam dismounts. He says, 'Sakina, you are the great grand daughter of
the Holy Prophet! I love you so much that if you tell me not to go, I
will not. But then Islam will be destroyed. How will you or I be able to
face the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgement?' Fighting back her tears
the four year old Bibi Sakina can only manage to say, 'Bismillah,
father!' The four year old holds the reins as her father mounts for a
certain death!!

Husayn rides on. He stands on a hill and cries out, “Who is there who
will come to my help?”

Of course our Imam is not expecting any of the enemy soldiers to come to
his help! To whom is he addressing this plea for help? Our Imam is
addressing the plea to all the Muslims, in every age and everywhere,
young and old, men and women, grown ups and children urging us all to
always fight Yazidism and refuse to disobey the commands of Allah. Every
little effort we make to preserve and act according to our Islamic
conscience is a response to our Imam's call with **Labbaik! Labbaik!**

Imam rides towards the enemy. There is a shower of arrows! Imam ignores
the arrows and rides on. He wants to make one last effort to preach true
Islam to the enemies of Islam. He stops and turns towards the enemy and
begins to speak: “O those of you who do not know me, know that I am the
grandson of the Holy Prophet. I am on the path of truth. Yazid
personifies falsehood and corruption. He wants to lead you away from
Islam.

Do not follow him. Do not kill the grandson of Allah's messenger. Allah
will never forgive you! Remember that when you see a ruler who does what
has been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, who indulges in sins, who
oppresses the people he rules, and you do nothing to stop such a ruler,
before Allah you are as guilty as he is. You know my ancestry. My
parents did not raise me to submit myself to an evil tyrant. I am your
Imam. You have surrendered the freedom of your mind to the evil ways of
Yazid.  

If you do not care for Islam, do, at least, care for the freedom of your
spirit!!”  
 Umar Sa'ad cries out, “Do not fall victims to Husayn's oratory! Kill
him!”

From all directions the soldiers advance towards Imam Husayn with their
naked swords! Imam says: “You are determined to fight me Then fight you
I shall! I do not fear death. Death to me is sweeter than dishonour. Now
I shall let you witness the valour of the son of Ali ibn Abu Taalib!”

Imam Husayn takes out his sword and begins to fight. Thirsty, tired,
wounded, grieving, our Imam fights as no one had ever seen any one
fight! Where ever he turns to, the soldiers flee as rabbits do at the
sight of a lion! Umar Sa'ad sends all his best warriors against Imam.
They all perish. No one dares come near our Imam! Imam stands on his
stirrups. Casts his eyes to where Hazrat Abbas lies, and murmurs, “Abbas
did you see the battle of your brother, the thirsty, the broken hearted
brother?”

And then Jibra'eel appears and says, 'O Husayn, Allah is pleased with
your bravery. The moment has now arrived for you to save Islam with your
life!” Husayn looks at the sky! Yes, it is the time of Asr! Husayn
returns the sword into the sheath. Lowers himself on the horse-back.
Whispers to the horse “Take me to where my mother Fatimah is waiting for
me! But, O my faithful horse, go past where my Akbar is lying so that I
may see my beloved son just one more time before I die.”

Seeing that Imam has sheathed his sword the enemy come from all sides.
Some throw stones at him, some hit him with swords. Arrows are shot at
him! Suddenly the horse stops! “My son, my son!” cries out the soul of
Fatimah Zahra. Imam Husayn falls from the horse! But his body does not
touch the ground. It is resting on the blades of the arrows. He performs
his Asr prayers lying on this musallah of arrows! Now he goes in to his
last sijdah and says: “O Allah! All praise is to You and You alone!”

Someone is moving towards where our Imam is in sijdah on the arrows. He
is holding a dagger in his hand. The earth trembles! The sun goes into
eclipse! Jibraeel cries out **“oh Husayn has been killed, Husayn has
been killed!!!!”**

Bibi Sakina falls on to the ground unconscious! Bibi Zainab runs to the
tent of our fourth Imam. 'Oh Son! What has happened?” Imam Zain ul
'Abideen staggers towards the curtain of his tent. Lifts it up, and
pointing his finger at a head mounted on a lance. He cries out in a
trembling voice: “Assalaamu 'alaika, Ya 'aba 'Abdillah!!!”

Shaam al-Gareeba
----------------

It was after 'asr on the day of Ashura. Imam Husayn lay dead. The earth
had trembled! Furaat had broken its banks! From the camp of the family
of the Holy Prophet such lamentation arose as had never been heard
before!

Yazid's army had brutally murdered our Imam, his sons, his brothers, his
nephews, his companions. No one was spared. Amongst the male adults
there remained only our fourth Imam, Imam Zain ul 'Abideen, who lay
unconscious in his tent with his young son Muhammad hovering around him,
weeping.

One would think that even the devil would halt himself in exhaustion
after so much evil. But that was not to be!

Umar Sa'ad received a letter from ibn Ziyad. The governor of Kufa
instructed that they should not be satisfied with the death of Husayn.
His body must be subjected to the ultimate insult of being trampled by
the hooves of horses. And this was done to the grandson of the Holy
Prophet!!

As the sun was setting in the horizon, the soldiers rushed to Imam
Husayn's camp in search of booty. They looted every tent. Every lady,
and every girl was stripped of her veil. Fatimah's daughters were left
bare-headed. Bibi Sakina's ear-rings were pulled off her ears, splitting
her ear lobes. When the little girl pleaded for her veil to be left
untouched, she was slapped.

Surely they would stop now? But they did not. They set fire to all the
tents. Humayd Ibn Muslim describes how he saw a little girl with her
dress on fire, her ears bleeding, running from the scene of carnage. He
says: “I ran after her. I took her by hand. Put out the fire in her
dress. I wiped the blood off her ears. She looked at me and said, “You
seem like a kind person, are you a Muslim?” I told her I was. She
thought a while and then said, “Can you please show me the way to
Najaf?” I asked, “Why do you want to go to Najaf at this hour and in
this state?” She said, “I want to go and complain to my grandfather Ali
ibn Abi Talib about how they killed my father.” Realizing that she was
Husayn's daughter, I took her back to her aunt Zainab.”

As the night descended, Bibi Zainab gathered all the ladies and
children, in to one small space in between the gutted tents. Imam
Zain-ul 'Abideen lay on the ground surrounded by these widows and
orphans. There was no fire, no light. Only the moon cast its dull light.

Umar Sa'ad asked Hurr's widow to take some food and water to the ladies
and the children. As she neared to where they were resting, Bibi Zainab
recognized her. She stood up, went towards Hurr's widow and offered her
condolences for the death of Hurr. This gesture on the part of Bibi
Zainab, who had suffered so much, lost so many, and carrying so much
grief in her heart, is a lesson in Islamic akhlaq which the world should
never be allowed to forget.

Bibi Zainab took the jug of water. She went to Bibi Sakina who had
fallen into a fretful sleep.

Gently she stroked the girl's dishevelled hair. Bibi Sakina opened her
eyes. Bibi Zainab said, “Here is some water, Bibi Sakina. Please drink a
little. You have been thirsty for so long!” On hearing the word 'water'
Bibi Sakina cried out hopefully, “Has my uncle Abbas come back?” When
she was told that Hurr's widow had brought the water, she got up, went
to Hurr's widow, thanked her and then asked Bibi Zainab: “Have you all
drunk water?”

Bibi Zainab shook her head. Bibi Sakina asked, “Why then do you ask me
to drink water?” Bibi Zainab said, “Because, my dear, you are the
youngest.” Bibi Sakina replied, “No! no! Asghar is the youngest!” Bibi
Sakina took the jug of water, ran towards where Asghar lay buried,
crying “Wa Asghara! Wa Asghara!”

This was how the homeless spent their night in Karbala’. This was Shaam
al-Gareeba, the night of the homeless. They had lost everything. Their
men had died. Their children had been killed. In this desolate desert
our fourth Imam, the women and the remaining children are huddled where
only a few hours before had stood their camp. Hazrat Abbas, Hazrat Qasim
and Hazrat Ali Akbar had taken turns to guard the camp. Now Bibi Zainab
and Bibi Kulthoom lay awake to make sure that Imam Zain ul 'Abideen and
the children were not attacked.

Suddenly, Bibi Zainab notices that Bibi Sakina has disappeared. She is
alarmed. She looks around but Husayn's darling daughter is not to be
seen. Bibi Zainab slowly walks to the battle field. She comes to where
Hazrat Abbas lay.”Abbas! Abbas! My dear brother, have you seen Sakina?”
There is silence! She makes her way to where Husayn's headless body lay.
There, hugging her father, she finds Bibi Sakina, deep in sleep!!


