The Third Journey - Karbala’ to Kufa
====================================

Dawn breaks out on the desolate sands of Karbala’. What was the battle
field yesterday, is a stretch of desert covered with the bodies of the
slain. In the corner where there had stood Imam Husayn's camp the
mourning widows and orphans have completed their morning prayers.

Imam Zain ul 'Abideen is in sijdah glorifying Allah. Umar Sa'ad walks
over with a few soldiers and orders the women and the children to be
tied with ropes as captives. There is a renewed wailing. Our fourth Imam
consoles them. He himself is put under heavy chains. Yazid's soldiers
spend the day burying their dead. The bodies of the grandson of the
Prophet of Islam and the other martyrs are left unattended. Imam Zain ul
'Abideen pleads to be allowed to bury but all his pleas go unheeded.

Another night in Karbala’ followed by another dawn! The prisoners remain
tied. Our Imam suffers the discomfort of the chain. His wrists and
ankles are bruised. On the morning of the 12th Muharram the enemy brings
unsaddled camels upon which the women and children are made to mount. A
huge procession is being prepared.

At the head of the procession is Umar Sa'ad followed by the officers.
Then a few foot soldiers carrying lances upon which are mounted the
heads of the martyrs. In their midst is our fourth Imam, chained and
shackled. Then the camels carrying the women and children as prisoners.
Shimr and the rest of the infantry bring up the rear. The journey to
Kufa begins.

Yes, the tale of Karbala’ is a tale of five sad journeys! Now begins the
third journey of tears. We look at the travellers. Some of those who had
set out on that first journey, from Mecca to Madina, can be seen but the
rest can not. No! They also can be seen if we look around! They are
lying slaughtered on the sands of Karbala’.

Who is the hero and who is the heroine of this third journey? We see the
hero, hand-cuffed, chained, exhausted with the long illness and the
great suffering, our Fourth Imam, Zain ul 'Abideen. And the heroine? Yes
we see the lady. She is bare-headed. Her face full of pain and yet
reflecting courage and the strength of her spirit! She knows that for
the sake of Bibi Sakina and the other ladies she can not possibly give
in to her grief and sorrow. Yes, it is Bibi Zainab!

Umar Sa'ad cruelty is not exhausted. He decides to lead the procession
past where the bodies of the martyrs lie. As the camel carrying Bibi
Zainab goes past the body of Imam Husayn she can no longer contain her
pain and anguish, and turning her face to Madina she cries out: “Ya
Muhammad, The angels in heaven send their blessings upon you! Look, here
lies your beloved Husayn, so humiliated and disgraced, covered with
blood and cut into pieces. Here are we your daughters taken captives by
Yazid!”

Imam Zain ul 'Abideen walks over to Bibi Zainab.” Dear Aunt, have
patience. Your sacrifices for Islam have only just begun.”

Ibn Ziyad, the Governor of Kufa, had declared a holiday. The city was
decorated with flags and pennants. People had been told that the rebels
who wanted to attack their city and murder them had been defeated at
Karbala’ and that their women were being brought into the city as
prisoners. Those who believed this, and many did, came out to line the
city streets through which the procession was to pass so that they might
mock and jeer at the prisoners.

Big crowds had gathered everywhere. There was a holiday mood. The
procession slowly entered the city and began to move towards the
Governor's palace. People jeered and shouted at the prisoners. There
were a few, however, who guessed the truth. When they saw Imam Husayn's
head, and saw the misery and grief of the widows and orphans, they began
to shed tears. The majority were ignorant. They believed, or found it
convenient to believe, the lies which Umar Sa'ad had told them.

As the procession neared the palace, the crowds thickened. Most of the
people who gathered around the Governor's palace were those who worked
for Yazid or supported him. The jeering and insults grew louder. The
face of Bibi Zainab was red with anger. She stood up on the camel,
looked at the crowd and in a loud and clear voice said: “Praise be to
Allah and blessings upon my grandfather Muhammad, His beloved Prophet!!
Woe unto you, O people of Kufa! Do you know whom you have killed? Do you
know what pledge you have broken? Do you know whose blood you have shed?
Do you know whose honour you have defiled?”

There was a stunned silence. Then a gentle sound of people crying! There
was a blind old man in the crowd. He had been a companion of Hazrat Ali.
When he heard Bibi Zainab's voice, he cried out, “By Allah, if I had not
known that he had died, I could have sworn that what I just heard was
the voice of my master Ali ibn Abu Taalib.” Imam Zain ul 'Abideen went
up to him and said, “Oh Shaikh! This is not Ali but his daughter Zainab
binti Ali! She is the daughter of Fatimah, the beloved daughter of the
Holy Prophet.”The sound of weeping from the crowd grew louder. But as
Bibi Zainab continued. Immediately there was a hushed silence:

“And well may you weep, O people of Kufa! The crime which you committed
against your Prophet was so great that the skies shook, the earth
trembled, and mountains crumbled down! You have killed your Imam, and by
doing so lost your shelter against hardship, evil and kufr! His blood
stains your souls. Nothing can protect you from the anger of Allah for
having killed the son of the last of His prophets!”

People could no longer control their wailing. Umar Sa'ad was frightened
and quickly led the prisoners into the palace. The prisoners were
brought before ibn Ziyad. Shaikh al-Mufid (A.R.) reports that ibn Ziyad
sat on his throne and in front of him was the head of Imam Husayn. He
frequently poked the face with his cane. An old companion of the Holy
Prophet, Zayd bin Arqam, was in the court and when he witnessed this
indignity being inflicted on the head of Imam he cried out, “Take your
cane away from those lips! By Allah I have seen the lips of the Apostle
of Allah on those lips!”

Ibn Ziyad was livid with rage. He retorted, “O old man! How dare you
interrupt our celebrations of the victory of our Imam, Yazid ibn
Muawiya. Because of your age I spare your life. Leave my court
immediately.”

Ibn Ziyad then pointed at Imam Zain ul 'Abideen and asked: “Who is this
young man?” “He is Ali ibnal Husayn,” replied Umar Sa'ad.” “Why is he
alive?” asked ibn Ziyad. and added, “Kill him straight away!”

Bibi Zainab rushed forward and planted herself in front of Imam Zain ul
'Abideen.”You will have to kill me first!” She said looking at ibn Ziyad
with such defiance, determination and anger that ibn Ziyad got up and
walked away ordering that the prisoners be locked up.


