Translator’s Preface
====================

**In the Name of Allah, the Merciful the Compassionate**

One of the most hotly debated topics among the different schools of
thoughts of Islam is the concept of Taharah (purification) and ‘Ismah
(infallibility) of the Holy Prophets, Messengers, Successors, and divine
guides. Each of these divine roles have its own scope of responsibility,
however, they all share one thing in common and that is, divine
selection as the representative of God to the people.

***In such critical role for mankind, it is inevitable that those who
assume these fateful roles **must** be infallible and purified from
committing any sin, error, mistake, or inappropriate act. After all, the
prophets, messengers, and successors are sent to the people to set the
correct standards for them and serve as exceptional role models and a
perfect template for them to emulate.***

Hence, Allah (SWT) directs this command in the Holy Quran to all
believers,

***"O you who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those
vested with authority (Ulul-Amr) from among you." (4:59).***

This verse indicates the supreme authority given to the prophet and
divine guides because they are sinless (Ma\`sum) and free from all types
of errors and sins. Otherwise, Allah would not have ordered us to obey
them unconditionally.

Without the existence of this safety margin for these selected divine
guides, there is no guarantee that they deliver the message exactly the
way that Allah (SWT) intended, or that our obedience to them would be
aligned with the obedience of Allah (SWT). There is no way that one can
be assured with complete confidence that these prophets and successors
don’t order us to disobey God or that they themselves become misguided
due to personal or worldly interests.

Also from verse 4:59 it is clear that Ulul-Amr have been given exactly
the same authority over Muslims as that of the Messenger, and that the
obedience of Ulul-Amr has the same standing as the obedience of the
Messenger.

***It naturally follows that Ulul-Amr **must** also be sinless (Ma'sum)
and free from any type of error, otherwise, their obedience would not
have been joined with the obedience of the Prophet and without any
condition.***

Sure enough, the famous narration of the Cloak (Hadeeth Al Kisaa’)
confirms the fact that Allah (SWT) willed and desired that His beloved
Prophet (SA) and his AhlulBayt (AS) be purified a thorough purification
as revealed in verse 33 of Surat Al Ahzaab:

***“Surely Allah desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O’
Members of the Household and to make you pure and spotless.” [33:33]***

As we know, whenever the divine Creator wills something, He simply says
to it,

***“Be, and it is!”[36:82]***

In order for us to observe and abide by the command given in this ayah,
we must*first* understand the implications of the above-mentioned
verses, and that is, the imperative and essential purification and
infallibility of the

divine representatives on earth. Without instilling and securing this
belief within our minds, our devotion, obedience, and love towards these
divine guides will be questioned and uncertain.

After all, if we don’t have 100% confidence in the infallibility of
those whom we follow and take as our role models, then how can we be
sure that the path we tread is really the correct one? How can we
propagate the teachings of the Imams from the descendants of the Holy
Prophet (SA) to our children when we haven’t established to ourselves or
to them their immaculate personalities and perfect characters?

***This paper is a humble attempt to proceed in that path of recognition
of the essential attributes of purification and infallibility that
**must** be present in all the divinely appointed representatives.***

May Allah (SWT) guide us to the conviction and certitude of the great
divine status and impeccable positions of the Infallible Imams from the
purified household of the Holy Messenger!


