Research Question no. 1
=======================

Let us begin our research by posing this question:

**What is Taharah? And what is ‘Ismah?**

*Taharah -* *طهارة* , by its linguistic definition, refers to the
process of cleansing and the removal of anything that may pollute that
object (e.g. dirt, spots, odor, germs) with things that are unwanted or
harmful to that person. As for the religious or spiritual connotation of
Taharah, it means the purification and cleansing of the bodies, objects,
soul, and heart from the things which Allah (SWT) ordered that they be
purified from and with the way that He (SWT) ordered and specified.

The process of Taharah (purification) can be carried out by yourself to
yourself, or to others just like people can do it on you. There exists a
strong correlation between the efficiency of purification and the
proficiency of that person who carries that procedure, who is referred
to as the*Mutahir -* مُطهِر***.*** The more knowledgeable, experienced,
and competent that individual is in achieving purification and
cleansing, the more efficient and complete the results of purification
will be. In other words, if the proficiency of the*Mutahir* is
approximately 60%, we can also predict that the efficiency of the
process of Tat-heer will also be approximately 60%.

We have three things three components:*Mutahir -* مُطهِر,*Mutahar -*
*مُطهِر* , and the process of*Tat-heer -* *تطهير* .*Mutahir* is the
person or thing which attempts to purify, while*Mutahar* is the person
or thing that is sought to be cleansed and purified.*Tat-heer* is the
process by which the purification takes place.

For instance, if you send your clothes to be washed at a laundromat,
your clothes are the*Mutahar* , the laundromat is the *Mutahir* , and
the method or procedure that the Laundromat undertakes to wash the
clothes is the process of *Tat-heer* (purification). Logically-speaking,
the cleanliness of your clothes will depend on the proficiency and
competence of the *Mutahir* .

As for the spiritual meaning of Taharah, you can also carry it out on
yourself, or someone else could carry it out on you, and the same logic
applies to the rules of relationships, as mentioned earlier.

Spiritual Tat-heer is of two types:

*****1)** Physical cleansing and purification of materialistic things
which you can see and feel, such as clothes or bodies.***

2) Spiritual cleansing and purification of moral things which you cannot
see or touch, such as your heart, spirit, or mind.

It is logical that the 2nd type of purification be more abstract and
difficult to accomplish since you would be attempting to purify
something that is not seen or felt. This process of Tat-heer is
non-specific and the experience and proficiency of the person who
carries it out could be limited too. That is because the proficiency and
experience of the*Mutahir* depends on the proficiency and experience of
the original teacher.

So, if the original teacher lacks the expertise and experience, the
purifier (*Mutahir* ) will also lack it. And if the proficiency and
knowledge of the

teacher is minimal, it will also be minimal in the student who is
learning from his teacher. This type of Tat-heer that is not felt or
seen could also be carried out by yourself as you may try to purify and
cleanse your heart, spirit, mind, and soul through worship and
remembrance of Allah (SWT) (ex: prayer, supplication, fasting, Samara,
Hajj, good deeds, reading, etc.). Others may also carry out this process
on you, like the sheikhs, U'lama, spiritual teachers, religious
institutions, and seminaries.

As for the meaning of*‘Ismah -* *عصمة* , it simply means protection and
safeguarding.*Ya'sim* refers to the act of protecting, while*‘Asim -*
*عاصِم* is the person or thing that protects.*Ma'soom* is the person or
thing that is sought to be protected by the*‘Asim* , whose occurrence
and efficiency of*‘Ismah* is 100% guaranteed.

Now, if the person seeks protection, but the efficiency or approval for
protection is not guaranteed by the*‘Asim* , he is not anymore
called*Ma'soom -* *معصوم* . Rather, he is called*Mu'tasim -* *مُعتصِم*
since he is not sure if the*‘Asim* will approve or is capable of
protecting him or not.

Furthermore, if the person actively and relentlessly seeks the
protection and exerts lots of effort to attain it, which is also not
guaranteed, he is called*Musta'sim -* *مُستعصم* . Hence, not
every*Mu'tasim* is a*Musta'sim* , and not every*Musta'sim* or
a*Mu'tasim* is*Ma'soom* . That is because the*Ma'soom* is the only one
whose process of protection is successfully completed by the*‘Asim* with
100% efficiency.

If we analyze the use of the word*‘Ismah* (and its derivatives) by Allah
(SWT) in the Qur’an, we will find the following:

1) Ayat Al-Balagh:

<p dir="rtl">
وَاللَّهُ يَعْصِمُكَ مِنَ النَّاسِ
</p>

**“Wallahu ya'semuka min al-naas”**

“***And Allah will protect you from the people.”*** [5:67]

In this verse, Allah (SWT) is the*‘Asim* and since He is the *‘Asim* ,
there is no doubt in the efficiency of His protection which is 100%
guaranteed. The Holy Prophet (SA), in this case, would be considered
*Ma'soom* since the process of purification was approved and completed
by the Almighty Creator.

2)

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ سَآوِي إِلَىٰ جَبَلٍ يَعْصِمُنِي مِنَ الْمَاءِ
</p>

***“ **Qala sa-awy illa jabalen ya'semuni min al-maa'…”*****

“***He said: I will betake myself for refuge to a mountain that shall
protect me from the water.”*** [11:43]

The*‘Asim* in this verse is the mountain, while the son of Prophet Nuh
(AS) is *Mu'tasim* , since the ability of the mountain to protect him is
doubted and in fact proved to be a failure as indicated by the verse,

<p dir="rtl">
وَحَالَ بَيْنَهُمَا الْمَوْجُ فَكَانَ مِنَ الْمُغْرَقِينَ
</p>

*****“...** And a wave intervened between them, so he was from among
those who drowned.**” [11:43].*****

3)

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَقَدْ رَاوَدْتُهُ عَنْ نَفْسِهِ فَاسْتَعْصَمَ
</p>

**“Wa la-qad rawadtuhu ‘an nafsih, fasta'sam…”**

“***And certainly I sought his yielding himself to me, but he
abstained*** ***[12:32].***

In this example, Yusuf (AS) is*Musta'sim* according to Al-‘Azeez's wife,
since she witnessed Yusuf exert strong effort with great concern to
attain the protection of His Lord. Due to her lack of belief in Yusuf's
God *(‘Asim* ), she doubted the ability of the *‘Asim* in protecting
him. So, she referred to him as *Musta'sim* and this in itself is a
testimony from her to his persistence in refusing what she asked, and
his seeking the protection of his God from her.

4)

<p dir="rtl">
وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا
</p>

**“Wa'tasimu be-hablullah jamee'an…”**

***“And hold fast by the covenant of Allah all together…” [3:103]***

Here, Allah (SWT) orders us to ask and seek His protection, which is
represented by the “rope” of Allah. If we obey His order and seek His
protection, we will be considered*Mu'tasimeen* with the rope of Allah,
but not*Ma’sumeen* .

This is not to doubt the ability of Allah (SWT) in protecting. Rather,
it is because we don't know if Allah (SWT) will accept to protect us due
to a deficiency or defect in us. Therefore, not every*Mu'tasim* with the
rope of Allah is considered to be*Ma'soom* , except whom Allah (SWT)
accepts and completes His protection. Otherwise, he is considered to be
a*Mu'tasim* who seeks the compassion and acceptance of Allah (SWT) in
granting him protection.

Let us now try to relate between the meaning of the words Taharahand ‘
Ismah:

So far, we have clarified that Taharah is the process of cleaning and
purifying the thing itself, while ‘Ismah is the protection of that
purified thing from getting sullied or polluted again and from loosing
its state of purification (which was achieved after the process of
Tat-heer).

Thus, ‘Ismah is the process of protecting the*Mutahar* from loosing its
state of purity (that was carried out by the*Mutahir* ). The*Mutahir*
attempts to purify, while the*‘Asim* tries to maintain that state of
purification and keep it constant. If it is not for the*‘Asim* , the
purified thing would not stay pure and clean.

So, if we say that there is an object or thing that is always clean, it
is logical then to believe in the presence of a*‘Asim* who maintains the
state of cleanliness for that object at all times. This object will
therefore be considered to be*Ma'soom* due to the presence of continuous
and ongoing protection that is carried out by the competent and
skillful*‘Asim* .

So, Taharah and ‘Ismah are two processes which complete one another and
cannot be separated from each other,*if* we indeed desire the purified
state of something to continue and be constant. Again, the more
competent

and knowledgeable the*‘Asim* is, the more efficient will the ‘Ismah be,
as in the case of the*Mutahir* and the process of Taharah.

For example, a street cleaner or a custodian is considered to be
a*Mutahir* (since he cleans the street or office), while a policeman or
security guard is referred to as *‘Asim* (one who try to prevent
impurification from taking place and the loss of Taharah, which is
achieved by the *Mutahir* ). Every one carries out his role in order to
accomplish constant and cleanliness and purification. Based on that,
‘Ismah cannot be present without prior existence of Taharah, and the
opposite is not true.


