Research Question no. 2
=======================

Now, we come to the second question in our research and that is:

**When we speak of Taharah and ‘Ismah for the Prophets, Messengers,
Awsiya' (executors of will), and the Imams (AS), we ask
ourselves…Taharah and ‘Ismah from what exactly?**

In other words, what will they be purified from and what will they be
protected from? Thus, the question here is composed of two parts:

**a) What will they be purified and cleansed from?**

**b) What will they be protected from?**

In the end of our 1st research question, we identified the relationship
between Taharah and ‘Ismah, and we reached the conclusion that ‘Ismah is
the protection of something from being polluted again and from loosing
its clean state after its purification. Based on that, we can logically
deduce that ‘Ismah will be from the same thing that Tat-heer
(purification) is from.

For example, if you sanitized something from the germs and microbes, you
will also try to protect it from contamination with germs and so on and
so forth. Therefore, ‘Ismah will be from the same thing that Tat-heer is
from, and it will be subsequent to it. Based on this idea, the answer to
question (a) will be the same as the answer to question (b). So, our
question is really one:

**What will the Prophets, Messengers, and Imams (AS) be purified from?**

In answering this question, the Imamiya scholars and Fuqaha' (jurists)
of the AhlulBayt School of Thought have differed and every group has its
own opinion and support for it. It is to be noted that our U'lama are
all respectable and honorable, and they don't speak except with what
they think to be closest to the truth, and they don't fear except Allah
(SWT).

Therefore, it is not appropriate for us, neither is it our goal to
ridicule their ideas or opinions. Rather, we aim to make an effort by
thinking and using our God-given intellect and this will not at all
decrease their rewards and high rank, even if we disagree in some
opinions and thoughts.

We return to our question which we would like to answer in a logical and
reasonable manner; Taharah for the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya' and
Imams is from what exactly? We should take a closer look at our daily
routine in life in order to apply the human logic that will enable us to
answer this question.

For example, if you want to clean the clothes that you will wear to meet
an important personality or to attend a wedding or an inauguration
ceremony, what exactly will you clean that outfit from? There is no
doubt that you will clean and purify it from dirt, spots, wrinkles,
odor, and its like so that the outfit will be ready and in the best
shape possible.

Another example: If you want to clean a knife or a pair of scissors that
will be used in a surgical operation on a human body, what will you
clean that knife or scissors from? In this case, you will be sanitizing
it from germs, microbes, and viruses. This will be your main concern so
that the wound of the patient does not get contaminated and lead to
death of the patient due to his contaminated wound.

Thus, after the process of sanitization and purification, the knife or
scissors will become qualified to perform its duty, which requires a
great

amount of efficiency and care as possible. We can present lots of
similar examples from our daily lives from which we can draw the
conclusion that there is a definite and direct relationship between the
task that will be carried out by the*Mutahar* and the things that it
will be purified from.

In other words, the process of Tat-heer is essentially for the purpose
of making the*Mutahar* more fit and proficient in carrying out its ask
in the best form possible. This is logical, reasonable, and very clear
as we use it many times in our daily lives. We clean and purify an
object from the things that may hinder its performance, and therefore,
it will be more successful at doing its job.

Let us now apply this same logic to our proposed question, as we will
find that the purification of our Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and
Imams (AS) should be from the things that may prevent or hinder their
performance of their God-given roles. This purification should result in
them being more proficient and capable of successfully fulfilling their
jobs and responsibilities.

So, in order for us to know what they will be purified from, we must
first identify and specify their jobs and responsibilities. We must know
what its consequences and implications are so that we can logically
deduce the answer based on our expectations. Now, what exactly are the
roles and responsibilities of the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and
Imams?

*****First** : Relay and convey the orders and commands of Allah (SWT)
to the people.***

*****Second** : Advise and urge the people to follow and obey the orders
of Allah (SWT) and to carry out the instructions and teachings of the
divine message.***

*****Third** : Obey and carry out the orders of Allah (SWT) with
absolute care in the individual and specific roles that are assigned to
each one of them, in addition to their general responsibilities, without
any addition or subtraction.***

*****Fourth** : Set a good example and become roles models for the
people in obeying the rules of Allah (SWT) and not disobeying Him under
any circumstances (such that the people imitate and follow their
example).***

*****Fifth** : Rule justly between the people according to what Allah
(SWT) revealed and His orders, and thereby set the example to the people
how to judge between others in that same manner.***

*****Sixth** : Specify the guidelines and foundations which the human
society will be built on including its relation with its surroundings
and its interior (exactly as Allah commanded), and to execute it out to
the best of their abilities.***

Seventh: Teach the people the wisdom, the lessons, and the laws of the
religion as Allah (SWT) commanded, with what Allah (SWT) instructed, and
with what they received from Him.

After quickly and briefly displaying the roles and responsibilities of
the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams (AS) on Earth, what do*you*
think are the things that they should be cleansed and purified from in
order for them to perform their jobs in the best way possible?

And if their responsibilities is of highest degree of importance and
vitality…and certainly it is of great and critical importance since it
deals with the fate of a person in his Hereafter and his life of this
world…then there is nothing more important and vital than that!

Therefore, it is incumbent and necessary that their success in their
responsibilities and roles is guaranteed to a percentage that might very
well reach 100%. And for that to happen, they must be cleansed and
purified from anything that might cause their failure or hinder their
success. Furthermore, this purification must reach almost or equal to
100%.

Now, if the responsibilities and work that they will carry out is for
the Great Creator, and is by the order and assignment from Him, it
becomes logically necessary that He becomes the*Mutahir* in a direct
way, due to the critical importance of the responsibilities and because
it is for Him and from Him. And if Allah, the Almighty, the
Knowledgeable, the Capable, and the Creator is Himself the*Mutahir* ,
then there is absolutely no doubt that the purification will be
completed and accomplished with a guarantee of 100%.

This purification will also be constant and continuous so long as the
Prophet is still a Prophet, the Messenger is still a Messenger, the Wasi
is still a Wasi, and the Imam still assumes his role as an Imam. And if
this purification is constant and continuous, it then becomes necessary
(as mentioned in the end of the 1st research question) that there exist
a*‘Asim* who protects, maintains, and guarantees the persistence of that
purification state, which thereby indicates the presence of ‘Ismah
(protection from loosing its Taharah).

So long as the*Mutahir* is Allah (SWT), it becomes logically necessary
that the *‘Asim* too, is Allah (SWT). Thus, He alone with His absolute
ability have purified and protected in order to maintain the state of
Taharah and to guarantee its persistence. The Taharah and ‘Ismah here is
guaranteed 100% without any doubt since the *Mutahir* and *‘Asim* is
Allah (SWT).

**Therefore, the purified individuals have become Ma’sumeen since the
certainty of achieving successful completion of ‘Ismah has been
established!**

We now return to our rephrased question: What are the things that Allah
(SWT) should purify and protect His divinely-appointed guides with 100%
guarantee such that their performance of their roles can be ensured in
the best way possible? Let us use our brains, focus, examine, and make a
sound judgment to answer this question.

If we take a closer look at the seven responsibilities mentioned
earlier, we will find that the common ground or factor between all of
them is: the command of Allah (SWT). Hence, the Tat-heer and ‘Ismah
should be from the thing(s) that may interfere, hinder, or obstruct the
meaning of this word. Naturally, what interferes with a word is always
its opposite and what hinders it is always what's against it.

An order is an action that can be responded to with either obedience*or*
disobedience. If the response to an order is obedience, then the action
and order will be accomplished. And if the response is disobedience,
then the action will be prevented and opposed. Whoever counters or
contradicts the orders of Allah (SWT) is really opposing the order and
thereby disobeying it.

If we realize and understand this point, it will become easy for us to
draw the conclusion that the most important thing that the Prophets,
Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams*MUST* be purified and protected from is:
disobedience of the orders and commands of Allah (SWT).

This is exactly what Allah (SWT) mentioned in the Qur’an Al-Kareem,

<p dir="rtl">
بَلْ عِبَادٌ مُكْرَمُونَ لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ
يَعْمَلُونَ.
</p>

**"Bal ‘ebadun mukramoom. La yasbeqoonaho bil qawl wa hom bi amrihi
ya'maloon."**

“***Nay! They are honored servants. They do not precede Him in speech
and (only) according to His Commandment do they act.” (21:26-27)***

So, Allah's testimony for them regarding their inability to disobey Him,
is equivalent to the meaning of purification and indicates that He is
the*Mutahir* . This also indicates the presence of ‘Ismah, which makes
Him the ‘Asim as well since the tenses used in this verse are continuous
present tense. Furthermore, it is from Allah (SWT) which means eternity.
Hence, Tat-heer and ‘Ismah are essentially from the disobedience of
Allah (SWT) in anything.

If their*1st responsibility* is to pass on and convey the orders and
commands of Allah (SWT), then it becomes logically necessary that they
be purified and protected from lying, unfaithfulness, treason, and
forgetfulness. Forgetfulness here means forgetting the contents of the
Message and its details, notthe normal human forgetfulness that is
indicated in Prophet Musa's statement to Al-Khidr (AS):

<p dir="rtl">
قَالَ لَا تُؤَاخِذْنِي بِمَا نَسِيتُ
</p>

**"Qalla la to-akhedhni bema naseet."**

***“Blame me not for what I forgot.” (18:73)***

This is an example of typical human forgetfulness and is not relevant to
the topic of ‘Ismah.

If their*2nd responsibility* is to incite and urge the people to follow
and obey the orders of Allah (SWT) and His Message, then it becomes
logically necessary that they be purified and protected from negative
and indecent behavior and anything that may contradict good manners,
ethics, etiquette, and decent behavior. Hence, the people develop a
liking towards them and so these divine guides become accepted by them
and so they will be able to encourage and urge the people to obey Allah
(SWT) and carry out His orders.

If their*3rd responsibility* is to obey and carry out Allah's orders in
their individual and specific roles that has been assigned to each of
them, without addition or subtraction, then it becomes logically
essential that they be purified from disobedience to Him in any way or
form, no matter what role they're assigned even if it looks strange,
deviant, or rejected by the people of this world, and no matter how much
they suffer because of it. It also becomes necessary that they be
purified against laziness, boredom, naivety, recklessness, negligence,
cowardliness, stupidity, obliviousness, weakness, fragility, lack of
wisdom, lack of insight, and lack of reflection.

If their*4rth responsibility* is to serve as good examples and role
models for the people in observing the rules of Allah (SWT), then it
becomes

logically essential that they be purified and protected from
foolishness, inferiority, solicitation, having ignoble roots and
shameful ancestry, bad and nefarious origin, severe poverty, physical
defect, ugly appearance, chronic illness (except in obedience to the
orders of Allah just like what happened to Prophet Ayoob [Job] ),
ignorance, and anything that may belittle their reverence or sully their
reputation.

If their*5th responsibility* is to rule justly among the people with
what Allah (SWT) revealed, then it becomes logically necessary that they
be purified and protected from injustice and unfairness, the love of
oneself, arrogance, hastened judgment, deviating from the orders of
Allah (SWT), following their own desires and personal thoughts in making
judgments, using personal opinion (except within the limits that Allah
Himself has allowed), flattery, hypocrisy, ignorance, lack of knowledge,
seeking the opinion of those who are not Ma'soom, bribery, weakness of
the heart, and lack of experience and wisdom.

If their*6th responsibility* is to establish and specify the guidelines
and foundations which the human society will be built on (by the command
of Allah) and to execute it if they're capable of it, then it becomes
logically necessary that they be purified and protected from the lack of
presence of political and military skills that is needed, lack of
eloquence in speech, lack of coordination and organization, lack of
concentration, love of carnal desires and ornaments of this world, lack
of seriousness, lack of honesty, weakness in front of the people, love
of appearing and appearance, conceitedness, self-admiration, arrogance,
lack of smartness and knowledge and experience, lack of intelligence and
cleverness and wisdom, carelessness, recklessness, lack of
confrontation, lack of strength, and from betrayal and evil.

If their*7th responsibility* is to teach the people the wisdom, lessons,
and laws, then it becomes logically necessary that they be purified and
protected from everything that has been previously mentioned, especially
ignorance, foolishness, lack of patience, lack of clemency, lack of
insight, hiding the truth, excessive care for the Dunya, forgetting the
remembrance of Allah (SWT), lack of worship and worshipping, fruitless
and endless talk, lack of linguistic eloquence, exaggeration and
magnification, de-emphasizing and embellishment, ambiguity, vagueness,
complication, and complexity.

However, the most important thing here is the purification and
protection against the disobedience of Allah (SWT) in what He orders
them with. This is the judgment of the mind and the human logic in what
these divine guides should be completely purified and always protected
from by Allah (SWT) who is both the*Mutahir* and *‘Asim* . This will be
the case so long as they are appointed in their roles in order for their
performance of their responsibilities be complete and successful. After
all, the fate of humans in this life and the Hereafter will depend on
their performance and fulfillment of their roles and responsibilities.


