Research Question no. 4
=======================

We continue our research by posing the following question:

**Why is it necessary that the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya' and Imams
be purified and protected?**

The answer to this question is simple and clear if we review the
conclusions from the last three questions. Their Tat-heer and ‘Ismah is
logical and necessary in order for them to perform their roles and jobs
in the most complete and perfect way possible. It is needed due to the
criticalness, vitality, and importance of their responsibilities towards
all mankind.

***After all, how is it possible that a Messenger be appointed to convey
a message which urges people to obey Allah (SWT), while **he** himself
is capable of disobeying Allah (SWT)? If that were the case, all of the
message would fall in great danger and that is not logical at all!***

How will the Messenger present the very important and great message
while he himself is exposed to lying, dishonesty, forgetting parts of
the message, foolishness, lack of wisdom and mind, weakness, physical
defect, and the negative aspects of the creations, etc?

This will cause his message to be surrounded by doubts and suspicions in
its authenticity and validity. It will place a big question mark on the
messenger himself and will give the enemies of the Message an
opportunity to attack Islam and question its divinity.

That is because the mind will ask itself: Was not God-the Creator able
to make His Messengers purified and protected from these negative
aspects before He appointed and assigned them with this grave
responsibility?

This question is logical to ask and may stand as a proof of a forged and
invalid message along with its messenger. For example, is it possible
that a doctor sends a sick and crippled person to deliver a message on
his behalf to one of his patients or customers?

Is it possible that a police department sends a limping, one-eyed
criminal with a tattooed face to claim that he is a police officer who
carries a message to you on behalf of the Chief of Police?

***Is it possible that the service people of a laundromat send your
clothes to you after being washed, with an ugly-looking person who is
wearing filthy clothes? Surely, this can never happen in our normal life
and if it did, you will immediately doubt, suspect, and question the
truthfulness of the message **and** the messenger.***

Each one of us carefully chooses those who may represent him or carry
his message, and if we could pick the best of people, we would certainly
do so. For instance, the workplaces and employers take extra care in
selecting the most qualified candidate who will be representing them in
every aspect.

Take a look at any job application and the questions it contains in
which their purpose is to determine the extent of your “purification” in
order to suit the type of work that you will perform. Then they examine
and review the applications and select the most purified and qualified
candidate to perform the job.

So, why don't we apply the same principle in this case too? Why do you
give yourself the right to choose, select, and purify and protect those
who might represent you or your company….yet, you don't give Allah (SWT)
the

right to choose, purify, and protect His Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya',
and Imams? This is a very grave mistake that is certainly not committed
by one who has wisdom and uses his intellect!

The Taharah and ‘Ismah of the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams
is in itself a logical proof on the authenticity and validity of the
Message that they deliver, just like the physical appearance (uniform,
badge, etc.) and behavior of a representative of the police department
verifies to you the truthfulness and sincerity of his message and
representation.

After clarifying this key point, it is not possible for an ignorant
person to question: Why is it necessary for the Prophets, Messengers,
Awliyaa', and Imams appointed by Allah (SWT) to be purified and
protected from disobeying him? Therefore, it is a logical thing that is
expected to happen and if it actually happened, it is not a surprise to
us!

Furthermore, if the verses of the Holy Qur’an and narrations mention and
verify that, then it is not appropriate nor is it our right to pose
questions such as “How is this?” Except if we abandoned our minds and
surrendered to what the foolish, silly, and ignorant minds say.


