Research Question no. 5
=======================

We now face another frequently-asked question:

**Does the Tat-heer and ‘Ismah of the Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and
Imams conflict with their roles as humans?**

We answer this with another question: If someone from the humans take or
has something that no one else ever took or had except him, does that
make him non-human?

Without a doubt, the Taharah and ‘Ismah of the Prophets and Awliyaa' of
Allah (SWT) is an exceptional gift and bounty from Him that is unique to
them. He did not bestow it to anyone else, not before them nor after
them. So, from this aspect they were distinguished, chosen, and granted
something that no other human was granted. However, does this reality
make them non-human? Let us think logically!

If a person is given lots of money which was not given to anyone else
before him, does that make him nonhuman?

If a person is given power that was not ever given to anyone else before
him, does that make him nonhuman? When Neal Armstrong and his colleagues
were the first to place foot and land on the moon, did that make them
not human beings anymore just because what happened to them did not ever
happen to anyone else? Did anyone ever claim that?

We are human because of our physical nature which is composed of flesh,
blood, cells, nerves, and anatomical structure, and because we are able
to speak, think, eat, drink, feel happy, and feel sad just like the rest
of humanity. This is only what makes us human. As for what Allah (SWT)
may distinguish us with or make us unique and exceptional in compared to
others, even if it makes us extraordinary and singular in it, that does
not take us out of the boundaries of humanity and will not make us
inhuman.

For example, if you installed a program in your personal computer which
protects it from electronic viruses, is it right for a person to claim
that your computer is not a computer anymore just because it became
distinguished from the other computer devices that may not have that
virus protection? We present this question to you so that the extent of
foolishness and absurdity of the person who says that becomes clear to
you.

Should Dolly, the sheep that was recently cloned, not be called a sheep
anymore just because it became unique and exceptional compared to the
rest of the sheep? Should the egg in which the cholesterol was extracted
and removed from not be called an egg anymore, just because what
happened to it never happened to any other egg.

We think that the matter is now clear and there is no need for more
explanation than what has already been given. So, the Tat-heer and
‘Ismah of the Prophets and Imams does not remove the human aspect from
them. As Allah (SWT) says in the Qur’an,

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ سُبْحَانَ رَبِّي هَلْ كُنْتُ إِلَّا بَشَرًا رَسُولًا
</p>

**"Qol subhana rabi hal konto illa basharan rasoola?"**

*****“…** Say: Glorified (and Exalted) be my Lord. Am I anything but a
man, sent as a Messenger…” 17:93].***

And did any of the Muslims ever ask: Is Prophet ‘Isa ibn Maryam (AS)
considered to be non-human just because he is unique in being born
without a father? This is the naïve and confused logic that Christians
use to prove the divinity of ‘Isa and that he is the son of God. May
Allah (SWT) curse them and curse those who think and believe like them!


