Research Question no. 6
=======================

The next question that poses itself to us is:

**Does the Taharah and ‘Ismah of the Prophets and Imams make them divine
individuals whom we cannot relate to, compared to the rest of the
people? And does it prevent them from communicating with and meeting the
rest of the human beings?**

There are many types and ways of dealing and relating between the
people, and it is not only one type, as it may be indicated from the
question. For example, your way of relating with your parents will
differ from the way you relate with your siblings. And the way that you
may relate to your school and its Principal, will be different from the
way that you relate to your friend or colleague. And the way that you
conduct yourself with the President of your country will surely differ
from the way that you do so with the boss in your work, or your servant.

Furthermore, the way that you relate to the Sheikh of your Masjid or
your religious and spiritual mentor will certainly be different from
your relation with your neighbor or son! Thus, for every position, there
is a way of dealing that is specific to it, and for every person, there
is a certain type of relationship which will differ with the type of
person you're dealing with.

The Prophets, Messengers, Awsiya', and Imams (AS) are special
individuals who perform divine roles and jobs that are assigned to them
by God. Hence, their respect is derived from the respect of Allah (SWT)
and their position is derived from the position of Allah (SWT),
regardless of whether they are purified and protected, or not. It is not
at all expected that your relationship and way of dealing with them will
ever be the same as that of your friend, teacher, neighbor, or
colleague.

That is because the way that you deal with them will have a special
sacredness that is derived from Allah (SWT) whom they represent. For
example, do you treat and relate to the messenger of your friend to you
in the same way that you do with the messenger of the President of your
country to you, or the messenger of the police to you? Of course not!

That is because your way of dealing with the messengers of both the
President and police, without a doubt will be affected by whom they
represent. You will certainly deal with the messenger of the President
with more respect and veneration, while you will deal with the messenger
of the police with more fear, safeguarding, and carefulness. This is
what people usually do; they change and adjust their way of dealing with
others and their type of communication, depending on the person in front
of them and whom he/she represents.

Hence, from the very start you will not relate and deal with the
Prophets and Imams (AS) the same way that you do with the rest of the
people because the relationship here is *very* different, and whom they
represent *is* the Great Lord and the King of Kings.

It is rather desired that you keep your relationship with them in a
unique and specific form with specific boundaries that differs from the
rest of your relationships and communications. It is unacceptable and
illogical for you to expect that your relationship with them will be
similar to your relationship

with your brother or friend. As a matter of fact, this difference in
relationship is in itself desired and recommended.

After all, did not Allah (SWT) say in the Qur’an in Surah Al-Hujuraat:

<p dir="rtl">
وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ
</p>

**"Wa la tajharoo lahu bil qawl ka jahr ba’dekom liba'd",**

*****“…** Do not speak aloud to him in talk, as you speak aloud to one
another..”[49:2],***

This basically means that you should not deal with Rasulullah (SA) in
the same way that you deal with others. Allah (SWT) willed that there
exist a certain distance of respect and reverence between them and us.
However, this “distance” will not prevent or hinder the Prophets from
carrying out their jobs, for if Allah (SWT) knew that it would, He
wouldn't have ordered us to keep that distance.

This “distance” will also not hinder the revelation of the divine
message and their instructions and guidance for us. Neither will it
prevent them from teaching us, judging over us, and judging on us. It
will never impede them from performing their roles which is what is
required and desired. It is not their position to be our buddy or
entertainer. Does not every king or leader of a country, or manger of
workplace, leave a certain distance between him/her and the people or
employees?

And does that obstruct them from carrying out their responsibilities and
roles? Is it the case that the President of the United States will not
be able to perform his job and carry out his responsibilities except if
he opened the door of the White House for me so that I can go to him
whenever I want, talk to him about whatever I want, to waste his time
however I want, and to contact him via phone whenever I want? If he does
and allows that, will that make him a good President?

And if he doesn't, will he be considered incapable of performing his
duties simply because I am not able to relate and deal with him, and
just because I cannot contact and communicate with him the same way that
I do with my neighbor, friend, or son? Of course not!!

The nature of your relationship and communication with the Prophets and
Imams (AS) *should* differ from others, not because they're purified or
not, nor because they're protected or not. Rather, since they represent
Allah (SWT), with all His divine sacredness, highness, and greatness.

You yourself will respect and give great regard and veneration to the
Sheikh of your Masjid or any ‘Alim (scholar), and you will communicate
with them in a way that you don't with others. Why?!

It is because they represent and signify the religion and Allah (SWT) in
your eyes. Then imagine how you should relate and communicate with the
holy Prophets, Messengers, and Imams!!

It is to be noted that the presence of their Taharah and ‘Ismah has
nothing at all to do with this matter. For example, you give great
respect and regard to the police messenger of the Chief of Police to you
due to what he represents and whom he represents to you.

It does not really matter to you whether this policeman has a good
record or whether he is efficient in his work or whether he is close to
the Chief of

Police or not, or whether his clothes are tidy or not. Regardless, you
will leave a distance between you and him because of what he represents
and not for any other reason.

As for the argument that you will be able to maintain and keep a
relationship with the companions of the Prophet (SA) while you will not
be able to keep that same relationship with the Imams of Ahlul-Bayt (AS)
and that is due to their Taharah and ‘Ismah, this is absolutely true and
is even desired and recommended! Again, the reason here is not because
of their purification and protection.

Rather, it is because of their roles and what they represent. The
companions of Rasulullah (SA) are not appointed by Allah (SWT) nor are
they Awsiya' and Imams, nor do they have divine roles to execute.
Therefore, they are not Mutahareen and Ma’sumeen. Thus, there is a big
difference between your relationship and communication with them,
compared to that of the Imams and Awsiya' who are appointed by Allah
(SWT).

It is imperative to keep in mind that there may exist reverence and high
regard in my heart for the companions of Prophet Musa (AS). However, my
reverence and high regard for Yosha' ibn Noon, the Wasi of Musa (AS),
will be much greater, not because of his Taharah and ‘Ismah, but rather
because of his role and position and what he represents.

Therefore, my relationship and way of dealing with the companions of
Musa (AS) will be easier than my relationship with Yosha' ibn Noon, and
there is absolutely nothing wrong or shameful in that. It is rather
intended that there exist a certain distance between you and the Imam of
your time and the rest of the Imams, more than that which you keep
between you and others.

For example, if your son came to you and told you, “I am able to relate
and communicate with my friends at school, but I am not able to relate
and deal with the Principal of the school with the same easiness and
same way because I feel that there exist a distance between me and the
Principal that is greater than the one between me and my friend.”

How will you answer your son? The explanation that you will give to your
son which will remove his wonder and puzzlement will indeed be the same
one as what we will tell you in order to erase your confusion, doubts,
and wonder.

Hence, the Taharah and ‘Ismah has nothing to do with this matter.
Imagine for a second that you had the honor of meeting Imam Husain (AS)
this moment, will the way that you greet, relate, and deal with him make
any difference to you, as to whether he is Ma'soom or not?

We leave this question for the reader to answer and make up his mind
regarding this matter. Also, it is to be noted that the Christians
worship and sanctify Prophet ‘Isa (AS) and they claim that he is God
Himself which therefore makes him Ma'soom in their eyes. Rather, he is
more than that since according to them, he is God.

However, did that type of thinking prevent them from making and
maintaining a relationship with ‘Isa (AS), relating with him and
integrating him in all aspects of their lives, whether big or small?
This is just a

question…so, why then do we then claim that the concept of Taharah and
‘Ismah will hinder with relating, communicating, and dealing?


