Prologue
========

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمُ ٱتَّبِعُوا مَآ أَنزَلَ ٱللَّهُ قَالُواْ بَلْ
نَتَّبِعُ مَآ أَلْفَيْنَا عَلَيْهِ آبَآءَنَآ أَوَلَوْ كَانَ آبَاؤُهُمْ
لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ شَيْئاً وَلاَ يَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When it is said to them: ‘Follow what Allah hath revealed,’ they say:
‘Nay! We shall follow the ways of our fathers.’ What! Even though their
fathers were void of wisdom and guidance? (Holy Qur’an, 2:170)***

In our present era, it is most disturbing for many Muslims and
non-Muslims alike to witness the escalating rise in sectarian violence
between the Shi’a and Sunni followers of Islam, particularly in places
such as Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. Some people, including Muslims,
ask why the Shi’a and Sunni are violently murdering each other; is there
something in the history of the Muslims that continues to spark such
hatred and violence today; why does one sect accuse the other of heresy;
and why is one sect of the Muslims considered as “mainstream,” while the
other wing is branded unconventional and literally pacified?

Unquestionably, seeded in the history of Islam is the answer - in
particular, the political course that was taken following the death of
the Holy Prophet and the way in which the early history of Islam was
written. They say that history is bound to repeat itself and this is
much more apparent today because the remnants and unconsciousness of
Muslims in regards to their own history is affecting Muslims today.

The account of the Muslims is *not* the classical historical case of not
knowing their past, but rather, it is of not knowing the *truth* of its
past. Thus, a closer examination into the past political and historical
accounts of Islam is needed.

As a Muslim scholar, I get numerous questions from Muslims, both of the
Shi’a and Sunni following (but mainly from Sunni parishioners), as to
the differences between the Shi’a and Sunni communities. The answer does
not lie in a simple stated sentence or two, but rather, it requires an
honest, detailed account and interpretive explanation of the past.

Hence, a truthful and comprehensive contemporary account must be told in
order for sincere seekers to understand what happened to the Muslims,
and why, in particular, some refer to themselves as being Shi’a.

Over fourteen hundred years have passed since Prophet Muhammad bonded
rival tribes, united neighbors, and partnered others to form one
community - the Muslim ummah. However, from the moment that Prophet
Muhammad publicly declared his prophethood and message until now, the
internal relationship of the Muslim ummah has yet to synthesize fully
because of the Shi’a-Sunni division.

This is not to say that there is an internal rift within Islam, far from
that! Muslims are united in the same God, they recite the same Holy
Qur’an, face the same *qiblah* (direction of prayer), fast the same
month (of Ramadhan), and perform the pilgrimage to the same House
(Ka’abah).

Nonetheless, there is a domestic struggle and this strain is embedded in
the historical and political account of Islam; in particular, the
caliphates[^1] of Abu Bakr,[^2] ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab,[^3] and ‘Uthman
Ibn al-Affan.[^4]

For many Muslims, the first three caliphs are highly revered and the
unquestioning belief in the righteousness of them as the “rightly
guided” caliphs lies at the heart of many Muslims’ faith. Nonetheless,
the stark realization that these caliphs made severe misjudgments may
surprise some, perhaps even bewilder or shatter their belief. Uncovering
the truthful facts of the first three caliphs may seem disrespectful for
some; however, this is actually a respectful attempt to restore Islam to
its pristine, original form brought by Prophet Muhammad.

As difficult as it may be, we (Muslims) must be able to objectively
examine the history of these three caliphs, re-examine and filter out
our hadith sources, and then make sound judgment based on facts.

Since the “split” of the Muslims (Shi’a and Sunni) can be summoned to
have intensified during the administration of the first three caliphs,
and much of today’s estrangement of the Muslims can be traced back to
their government, consequently, this book will outline the character,
actions, qualifications, and consequences of these three individuals.

The reports are based solely on the historical accounts of Sunni
sources, such as the respected texts: *Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih
al-Muslim*, and other renowned Sunni scholars. Thus, no claim can be
argued that the author is vindictively judging the three caliphs from
outside sources. Furthermore, the readings will also cover the view of
the Shi’a and shed some light as to why the Shi’a have been marginalized
throughout the Muslim history.

As a scholar of Islam and a member of the Muslim ummah, this writing is
not intended to be derogatory, or as an attempt to maliciously blame
some, or as a means to jostle the past of the Muslims; nor is it an
opportunity by the author to insult or expose the weaknesses of some
companions.

Rather this work is an attempt to shed light and present an unbiased
account of their actions and the subsequent results on the ummah, such
as their plans to dominate the Muslim leadership, the need to develop
the science of Hadith (Prophetic traditions), discordant ideological
interpretations, and the emergence of the schools of thought.

Furthermore, this work is not meant to stir sectarian conflict or to
cause a deeper fissure amongst the schools either. I am well aware and
sensitive to the fact that this is a delicate issue and I take to
practice every means possible to express my sentiments and academic
knowledge respectfully and rationally.

Throughout the years of humbly serving my faith, I have maintained an
open venue to foster intrafaith engagements and reconciliation. The time
has come for Muslim scholars to set aside their differences and rise to
the occasion and challenges by addressing their internal division in an
honest, academic, and composed fashion.

All provocations and polemics must desist on both fronts and a deep
knowledge of being acquainted first-hand about each other’s history,
ideology, and stance are critical ingredients for any plausible
discussions or solutions to arise.

For many years, it has been rumored that the Shi’a do not favor the
companions of the Prophet; however, the reality is that the Shi’a have
always revered, respected, and acknowledged many of the companions. Over
100,000 companions lived during the time of the Prophet - most were
sincere, but not all of them and even the Holy Qur’an attest to this
(al-Qur’an, c. 63[^5] & c. 9:101[^6]).

We recognize and pay tribute to those who sincerely serviced,
sacrificed, and gave their lives for the sake of Islam and the
Prophet.[^7] The Shi’a are highly recognized for paying their respect to
many companions of the Prophet who were martyred to advance Islam. We
make yearly pilgrimages to their places of burial - their mausoleums and
even to the battlegrounds where they lost their lives. Despite the love
we have for the faithful martyrs of Islam, still we are continuously
branded as those who dislike the companions.

The Shi’a have primarily been the most misunderstood of the Muslim
schools of thought. It has been the case throughout Muslim history and
until now that the Shi’a ideology and its followers are persecuted and
ridiculed. In recent times, it is been more accelerated politically
after the invasion of Iraq in 2003. The Muslim world then witnessed an
increasing attack against Shi’a Islam and its followers. A tsunami
effect of ignorance and prejudice batters the Shi’a.

Unsubstantially described as “interpreting their own form of Islam,” the
Shi’a have been hammered with radical accusations as being “renegades”
and “rebellious” by those who believe that the Shi’a doctrine is some
form of a “cult” or that it is at “odds” with mainstream Muslims.

Some known and well-respected Sunni scholars, from the past until the
present, have from time to time labeled the Shi’a followers as
“innovators,” some even going as far as calling them “heretics.” Such
labeled biases spread doubt and fear amongst the ummah, and even worse,
mistrust.

What is more is that intellectual and moderate Muslim leaders have
largely ignored the incredulous accusations and labeling. The silence by
those religious leaders has engendered more ignorance and division
amongst the Shi’a-Sunni schools and their followers.

The fallacy about Shi’a Islam needs to end and this is where my duty and
obligation lies, for Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“To make it known and clear to mankind and not to hide it.”
(3:187)***

I stand to defend any dehumanizing portrayal of the Shi’a by
adversaries, and it is my duty to expunge the rumors that have
beleaguered us (Shi’a) for many centuries.

An honest and unabashed work is far overdue on this subject. I have no
secret agenda, nor the need to practice the license of *taqiyyah*,[^8]
and I stand free of any association to proselytize the Shi’a school of
thought.

These are far from my objective; rather, my aim is to put forward the
historical truth objectively about what some of the companions did
systematically during the life of the Prophet and following his death,
and to allow the reader to make his or her own sound conclusion.

Every Muslim, in fact, every human being bears the moral responsibility
of seeking out the truth. For those who are sincerely searching for the
truth, they must put aside any personal opinion and approach this work
without pretense or prejudice views.

Although the history of Islam has hitherto led a tenuous path, the
damage is not irreparable, for Allah says in the Noble Qur’an:

***“Allah does not change the condition of the people until they change
what is within them.” (c. 13:11)***

The Muslims have freedom of choice and the Muslims still have the
opportunity to liberate themselves and go forward as an ummah, united in
submission to Allah.

I welcome any contributing comments provided they are based and
structured academically and rationally, mutually accepted amongst the
various Muslim scholars, and free of personal rhetoric.

Sayed Moustafa al-Qazwini  
 January 2009  
 Muharram 1430  
 Orange County, California  
 USA

[^1]: Caliph (caliphs) is the person intended to be the successor
(leader) to Prophet Muhammad.

[^2]: (Abu Bakr) Abdullah Ibn Abi Quhafah, his mother is Salma bint
Shakher. He is the father of Aishah the wife of the Prophet. He was born
fifty-one years before the Hijrah; died on the 22nd Jumadi al-Awwal, 13
ah and assumed the caliphate after the Prophet’s death for a period of
two years and four months.

[^3]: ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab was born forty years before the Hijrah. He
accepted Islam six years after the advent of Islam and was appointed by
Abu Bakr to be the second successor to the Prophet and reined for ten
years. He was assassinated in 23 ah in Madinah. He appointed Mu’awiyah
Ibn Abu Sufyan as the governor of Damascus.

[^4]: ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan was chosen by ‘Umar to be in the group of six
candidates for succession. His tribe, Bani Umayyah, swept and dominated
important political and military leadership. He assumed the caliphate in
23 ah and during his reign, the “fitna kubra” (great mischief) occurred.
He was killed in his home by revolutionist in 35 ah in Madinah.

[^5]: Holy Qur’an, 63:1, “When the hypocrites come to you they say, ‘We
bear witness that you are indeed the apostle of God.’ God knows that you
are indeed His Apostle, and God bears witness that the hypocrites are
indeed liars.”

[^6]: Holy Qur’an, 9:101, “Round about you [Muhammad and his community]
and among you in Madinah are hypocrites and they are obstinate in
hypocrisy. You do not know them, We know them, twice shall We punish
them and in addition shall be sent to a grievous penalty.”

[^7]: Holy Qur’an, 9:100, “And as to the foremost from among the
Muhajireen (Immigrants) and Ansar (Helpers) and those who followed them
in goodness, Allah is well pleased with them and they are well pleased
with Him...”

[^8]: Taqiyyah is a form of concealment of one’s belief in order to
protect one’s life, property, family, etc.


