Chapter 7: Prohibition of Transcribing the Hadith
=================================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَالزُّبُرِ وَأَنزَلْنَا إِلَيْكَ الذِّكْرَ
لِتُبَيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ مَا نُزِّلَ إِلَيْهِمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ
يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(We sent them) with Clear Signs and Scriptures; and We have sent down
unto thee (also) the Message; that you may explain clearly to men what
is sent for them, and that they may reflect. (Holy Qur’an, 16:44)***

Without a doubt, the art of writing separates the truth from falsehood,
maintains agreements, and reminds people of what has passed and many
other important things. Even during the pre-Islamic era, writing was a
rare but honored skill. According to Ibn Sa’d, “The accomplished among
them in the time before Islam were those who wrote Arabic, mastered
swimming, and mounted archery.”[^1] Various schools in Mecca, Madinah
and Taif taught the difficult art of the Arabic script.

When Islam came, its teachings prioritized writing and the advancement
of knowledge and imagery of books and writing permeate the verses of the
Qur’an. One of the first verses which Allah revealed was, ***“[He] Who
taught by the use of the pen,”***[^2] thus making the pen as an
instrument used for a binding oath, such as in *Surah al-Qalam*, ***“By
the pen and by what they write.”***[^3] Therefore, despite the
difficulties of writing at that time, gradually the *jahiliyyah*
(pre-Islamic) society slowly became literate.

After establishing the mosque in Madinah, one of the priorities of the
Prophet had was to appoint a teacher, Abdullah Ibn Sa’d al-Aas to teach
reading and writing. This skill was so important that the Prophet even
allowed some of the captives taken during the Battle of Badr to earn
their freedom in exchange for teaching ten Muslims how to read and
write.[^4] Between forty-three and forty-five scribes recorded the
revelations of the Qur’an at the Prophet’s request, and in addition, he
would constantly urge the people to “write (*uktubu*)”[^5] and “document
(*qayyidu*),”[^6] and would advise, “Help yourself to memorize by
writing.”[^7]

Most significant, the Prophet commanded that his hadith (sayings and
actions) be written down. He instructed the Muslims, “Write everything
that comes out of my mouth, for by the One whose Hands my soul is in,
nothing comes from it except the truth.”[^8] Abu Bakr narrates from the
Holy Prophet that, “Whoever writes down a piece of knowledge from me or
a hadith will receive *ajr* (reward) as long as it (the writing)
exists.”[^9]

A companion, Abdullah Ibn al-Aas used to put everything the Prophet said
in writing to such an extent that some companions of the Prophet ordered
him to stop doing so because they felt that the Prophet was just a human
being whose utterance should not be recorded. He consulted with the
Prophet and the Prophet replied, “Yes, write down everything that I
say.”[^10] Similarly, on the authority of Rafi Ibn Khadij we read that:

The Prophet of Allah passed by us one day and we were talking. He said,
“What are you talking about?” We replied, “What we heard from you.” He
said, “So talk about it, but whoever deliberately attributes false
statements to me reserves his place in the hell-fire,” and then the
people stopped talking.

The Prophet asked why they were not talking anymore, and they replied
that they had stopped talking because of his serious words. He said, “I
did not say not to talk. I said, ‘speak, but speak the truth.’ I only
ask you not to attribute false statements to me.” They said to him, “O
Prophet of God, we hear things from you, should we write them down?” He
said, “Yes, by all means, write them down. By thy Lord, everything that
comes out of my mouth is the truth.”[^11]

In addition, the Prophet emphasized the transmission of his teachings
through other means. He repeated twice saying, “Therefore, the witness
must inform the absent,”[^12] regarding those who were not present to
hear his words. He also encouraged the Muslims to memorize his sayings
in order to transmit them and as a way to verify their authenticity. In
this regard, the Prophet would say, “Whoever memorizes and conveys forty
hadith from my tradition, I will admit him into my intercession on the
Day of Judgment,”[^13] and “Whoever from my ummah memorizes forty
hadith, Allah will raise him on the Day of Judgment as a scholar.”[^14]

Despite all this significance and attention given to recording the
hadith of the Prophet, during the reign of the first three caliphs, the
Muslims were absolutely forbidden from recording any hadith.[^15] In the
words of Lady Aishah:

My father collected the hadith of the Messenger of Allah and they
numbered five hundred. He spent the night turning back and forth. He
saddened me and I said to him, “Are you turning around because of pain,
or because of bad news which you have received?” In the morning, he said
to me, “Bring me the hadith of the Prophet which I have left with you.”
I brought him all the hadith. At this point, he asked for fire and
burned all the hadith in the fire. I said to him, “Why do you burn these
hadith?” He said, “I fear that I will die while I have these hadith. I
took them from the man I trusted, but maybe some hadith are not his or
maybe the sayings are not authentic.”[^16]

The excuse proffered in the above quote is that the hadith might not
have been authentic. However, Abu Bakr could hardly have had reason to
doubt traditions that he heard with his own ears and from other
companions whom he himself says he trusted.

This position becomes even more difficult to accept when coupled with
the idea subsequently introduced by scholars, such as Ibn Hajar that
Allah did not allow the companions to lie or make mistakes!

In later times, in order to support Abu Bakr’s action, a false saying
was cited on the authority of Abu Sa’id al-Khudri stating, “Whoever took
from me other than the Qur’an and wrote it down, let him erase it.”[^17]
Aside from the fact that this hadith contradicts previous hadith in
which the Prophet ordered the Muslims to write down his traditions and
the spirit of the Holy Qur’an which encourages writing, if this hadith
was authentic then Abu Bakr would certainly have been aware of it and
would never have narrated any hadith.

To placate the people, Abu Bakr said, “Between us and you is the book of
Allah, so follow the lawful in it and refrain from the prohibited.”
Across the board, both Shi’a and Sunni scholars believe that the Qur’an
alone does not suffice for a comprehensive explanation of Islam and it
is in need of the Prophet’s explanation as a supplement.

Even more, the verses of the Qur’an fall into many categories, such as
*mujmal* (having equal possibilities) and *mubayan* (clearly
recognized); *muhkam* (fundamental or basic) and *mutashabih* (vague);
*aam* (general) and *khass* (specific); and *naasikh* (abrogating) and
*mansukh* (abrogated). It is for this reason that Allah did not leave
the Muslims without a guide to the proper interpretation thereof. Allah
says in the Holy Qur’an,

***“Whoever obeys the Prophet has obeyed Allah,”***[^18]

and

***“Your Companion (Muhammad) errs not, nor is he led astray, nor does
he speaks of his own inclination.”***[^19]

Similarly, the Prophet said, “By Allah, I have commanded and admonished
and prohibited things, and just like the Qur’an, you have to follow what
I say,”[^20] and “Verily, I have been given the Qur’an and something
equivalent to it [the hadith].”[^21] One of his final injunctions to the
Muslims was, “I am leaving among you the Book of Allah and my family
(*itrati*);” *“itrati,*” also refers to the hadith of the Prophet and
his family.

In a hadith narrated in the Sunni books, the Messenger of Allah
prophesized:

It is imminent that a man will narrate from me while leaning on his
couch and then he will say, ‘Between us and between you is the Book of
Allah. When we find something permissible in it, we will follow it, and
when we find something impermissible in it, we will refrain from
it.’[^22]

‘Umar continued the hadith precedent of Abu Bakr during his caliphate.
However, at one point, he consulted the companions of the Prophet about
recording hadith and they encouraged him to do so. After considering the
matter for a month, ‘Umar then declared:

My intention was to record hadith but then I realized that some people
(nations) before you kept writing down the sayings of their prophets,
and kept reading them; as a result, they forgot the book of Allah (their
scriptures). I fear that the same will happen if I order you to document
the sayings of the Prophet, or if I do it myself. I do not want to make
the Book of Allah a victim here because of the hadith; nothing has
precedence over the Book of Allah. [^23]

He then wrote to the Ansar, “Whoever has anything should erase it.”[^24]
Even afterwards ‘Umar decreed, “These (the hadith of the Prophet) are
just like the Jewish scripts (*mushnat*), and they must be burnt.”[^25]
He then gathered all of the hadith written on leather, tablets, and
pieces of wood and ordered them to be burnt.[^26]

However, it is important to note that the People of the Book (Jews and
Christians) did not neglect their scriptures (Holy Revelations) in favor
of the sayings of their prophets [hadith]. Their problem was not that
they were overly fastidious in transcribing the sayings of their
prophets. Instead, they neglected almost all of the traditions of their
prophets, as well as the commands of their Divinely sent books (i.e. the
Tawrah). They also refused to follow the successors that their prophets
named, such as Asif Ibn Barkhiyah, the successor of Prophet Sulayman,
and Yushaa, the successor of Prophet Musa.

As agreed by both schools of thought, the Messenger of Allah forewarned
that the Muslims would follow the pattern of previous generations when
he said, “You will follow the footsteps and tradition of the nations
before you step by step.”[^27] Since the first three caliphs enforced
the policy of not recording the sayings, fabricators such as Ka’ab
al-Ahbar[^28] and Tamim Ibn Aus al-Dari[^29] flourished and spread
thousands of false hadith, forever affecting Islam.

Furthermore, fearing that they would spread the sayings of the Prophet
outside Madinah, the second caliph summoned many of the prominent
companions, such as Abdullah Ibn Hudaafah, Ibn Masud,[^30] Abu
Dardah,[^31] Abu Dharr al-Ghifari,[^32] and Uqbaah Ibn Aamir to Madinah
and rebuked them saying, “What is it that you have done! You spread the
hadith of the Prophet in other places. You have to stay here (in
Madinah) and you will not depart or separate from me as long as I live.”
Thus, they were confined to Madinah until ‘Umar was assassinated.[^33]

Al-Shibi says that the Muhajireen from the Quraysh despised ‘Umar for
confining them to Madinah, so that they would not spread the hadith
elsewhere. The situation reached to a point that some of the men would
ask permission to accompany the *ghazw* (military dispatch) and ‘Umar
would tell them, “No, you had your share with the Prophet, and you had
enough reward for that, so today it is better for you that you do not
see the world and for the world not to see you either.”[^34]

In contrast, others who were not known for their honesty in conveying
the hadith of the Prophet, such as al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah, Hanbal Ibn Abu
Sufyan, and Abdullah Ibn Abi Sarh were permitted to travel wherever they
wanted, even to the conquered lands of Iraq and Persia. However, those
who were known for their integrity in transmitting the hadith of the
Prophet were forced to remain behind.

Unlike Abu Bakr who expressed fear that the hadith he possessed were not
authentic, ‘Umar argued that the hadith should be destroyed because the
people might follow them instead of the Qur’an or that they might
confuse them with the Qur’an. However, the true hadith hardly led people
away from the Qur’an. In fact, the hadith contain an explanation of the
Qur’an itself and the more people know about the hadith, the more one
would heed to the Qur’an. Allah assigned the Prophet to ***“make clear
to humankind what has been sent down to them,”***[^35] hence the hadith
are extremely vital to understanding the Qur’an.

Similarly, the fear that people might mix up the Qur’an and the hadith
is also difficult to understand, since even the average modern reader
can readily distinguish between the text of the Qur’an and that of a
hadith. The style of the Qur’an is inimitable among human beings and the
Qur’an itself says that it is a miracle, and challenges human beings to
produce one verse like it - a challenge that the Prophet never issued
for his hadith. Such a fear, were it genuine, would imply a severe lack
of confidence in the reasoning abilities of the *sahabahs* (companions)
who had the additional advantage of hearing the Prophet himself speak.

Muslim analysts believe that the real reason why there was a calculated
ploy to prevent the hadith from being recorded was that there were
innumerable hadith about the virtues of the household of the Prophet and
their right to the leadership after the Holy Prophet’s death. Had these
sayings circulated in written form amongst the predominant *sahih* books
then they would have undermined the political legitimacy of the first
three caliphs.

As a result, the sad reality developed that, although, the hadith are
second only to the Qur’an in Islamic legislation, many authentic sayings
of Prophet Muhammad were lost, while many others were forged.

The situation degenerated to the level where Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan
ordered Kab al-Ahbar to sit in the mosque and invent hadith to read to
the people, and no one could disprove what he said because no written
sources existed among those masses. It was not until the time of the
Umayyah caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz (99 ah) that Muslims were allowed,
for a short but unsuccessful period, to record the hadith.[^36]

Anyone who tried to compile the hadith of the Prophet faced severe
punishment and this state of affair lasted for more than a century -
spanning from the periods of the first four[^37] caliphs thru to the
Bani Umayyah dynasty and until the time of Abu Ja’far al-Mansur of the
Abbasid dynasty. Ironically, Mu’awiyah told the people, “Narrate less
from the Prophet, and if you want to mention a hadith from him, say what
used to be said about him during the time of ‘Umar.”[^38]

In reality, the policy of not writing hadith took form right before the
death of the Prophet when ‘Umar prevented the Prophet from writing his
will while the Messenger was on his deathbed, as recorded in prominent
Sunni sources, ‘Umar proclaimed that, “The Book of Allah is enough for
us.”[^39]

[^1]: Ibn Sa’d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 3:2 91

[^2]: Holy Qur’an, 96:4

[^3]: Holy Qur’an, 68:1

[^4]: Ibn Sa’d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 2:22

[^5]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, 4:146, hadith 2805

[^6]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, 1:106

[^7]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, 4:145, hadith 2804

[^8]: Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn, I 5:106; Musnad Ahmad, 2:162; Jami
Bayan al-Ilm, 1:71

[^9]: Kanz al-Ummal, 5:237, hadith 4845

[^10]: Rashid Ridha, Tafseer al-Manar, 10:766

[^11]: Ibn Uday, Taqaid al-Ilm, 73; Al-Kamil, 1:36

[^12]: Sahih al-Muslim, 5:108; Sunan Ibn Majah, 1:85; Al-Tirmidhi,
2:152; Mustadrak al-Hakim, 3:174, and others

[^13]: Kanz al-Ummal, 10:158, hadith 28817

[^14]: Kanz al-Ummal, 10:158, hadith 28818, and others

[^15]: Despite being forbidden from doing so, the followers of Ahlul
Bayt continued to record the hadith.

[^16]: Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, 1:5; Hujiyat al-Sunnah, p. 394

[^17]: Al-Nawawi; Sharh Sahih al-Muslim, 17-18; Musnad Ahmad 3:12

[^18]: Holy Qur’an, 4:80

[^19]: Holy Qur’an, 53:2-4

[^20]: Ibn Hazm, Al-Ahkam, 1:159

[^21]: Musnad Ahmad, 4:131

[^22]: Musnad Ahmad, 4:132; Sunan Ibn Majah, 1:6, hadith 12; Sunan Abu
Dawood, 4:200, hadith 4604; Sunan al-Bayhaqi, 9:331

[^23]: Kanzl Ummal, 10, hadith 29474

[^24]: Taqid al-Ilm, 49; Hujjiyat al-Sunnah, 3:95

[^25]: Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat al-Kubra, 1:140

[^26]: Kanz al-Ummal, 5:239

[^27]: Al-Mu’jam al-Kabeer, 7:281; Tafseer al-Qurtubi, 7:273

[^28]: His full name is Ka’ab Ibn Mate’ah al-Himyari, a prominent Jewish
rabbi from Yemen. He accepted Islam during the reign of ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab and migrated from Yemen to Syria. Mu’awiyah favored him and
made him one of his important right hand aids and advisors. He is one of
the main sources of the Israelite folklore that infected the Islamic
tradition and was known for his lies. He died during the reign of
‘Uthman in 32 ah.

[^29]: Tamim Ibn Aus al-Dari was a prominent Christian monk in
Palestine. He embraced Islam in 9 ah. He was the first person to
introduce story telling in the mosque during the reign of ‘Umar
al-Khattab and it was only during Imam ‘Ali’s reign that he put an end
to it. He infiltrated Islamic tradition with unsubstantiated Israelite
stories and died in the year 40 ah.

[^30]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, 1:110; Tarikh Abu Zarah, 270

[^31]: Ibid

[^32]: Ibid

[^33]: Kanz al-Ummal, 10, hadith 29479

[^34]: Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, 3:180-181

[^35]: Holy Qur’an, 16:44

[^36]: The writing of the hadith was short-lived because the reign of
‘Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz lasted for only two years.

[^37]: Although Imam ‘Ali removed the ban on writing the hadith;
nonetheless, it was not enough time to take full effect because his
reign lasted for only four years and nine months.

[^38]: Kanz al-Ummal, 10:291; Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah,
1:360; Tarikh Abi Zaah, p. 270

[^39]: Sahih al-Bukhari; Bab Marad al-Nabi; Ketab al-Marda wa al-Tib,
7:9


