Chapter 8: Legacy of the Quraysh on the Hadith
==============================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ جَاء الْحَقُّ وَزَهَقَ الْبَاطِلُ إِنَّ الْبَاطِلَ كَانَ
زَهُوقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Truth has arrived, and falsehood has perished; verily falsehood by
its nature perishes. (Holy Qur’an, 17:81)***

The critical influence of the Quraysh group was not confined to the
temporary prohibition of the compilation of hadith. This group and the
Bani Umayyah came and went, however the results of their propaganda
tactics survive until today in the invented practices that have found
their way into the books of hadith.

Under the employment of the Bani Umayyah, individuals such as Abu
Huraira al-Dusi and al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah composed stories ridiculing
the household of the Prophet and exaggerating other companions. They
even attributed some false hadith to Imam ‘Ali. As a result, the sources
of Islamic *shariah* (legal law) and legislation became tainted which
lead to many people within the ummah becoming misinformed.

Some Muslims believe that if one rejects any hadith narrated in the six
books of hadith called the *Sahih as-Sittah* (the six authentic books of
hadith), then they are actually rejecting their faith. Few people
realize that belief in the validity of these six *sahih* hadith books is
not a prerequisite for faith and that another option does exist.

Where did all of these fabricated hadith come from? A major source is
the man whom ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab accused of stealing the wealth of the
Muslims and called him “the enemy of Allah and the enemy of the Book of
Allah”[^1] and that man was Abu Huraira, who is known to have narrated
over 5,700 hadith. In fact, in regards to him, ‘Umar said, “Most likely
because of the abundance of the hadith you have delivered, you are lying
about the Prophet.”[^2]

Abu Huraira used to tell stories in which the Prophet would say absurd
things and when the Muslims stared at him dumbfounded, he would affirm,
“I believe in this hadith, and so do Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.” By his own
statement, he was implying that no one else had faith to believe in his
narrations![^3]

Abu Huraira was not the only person who composed his own hadith and
attributed the sayings to Prophet Muhammad. Another prominent
storyteller was ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas.[^4] For example, ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas
narrates that when Lady Aishah was asked who was the closest person to
the heart of the Prophet, she said, “My father.” When asked who else,
she said, “‘Umar,” and then after him, she named other people.[^5]
However, Lady Aishah had always maintained that amongst men, the closest
person to the Prophet was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and that amongst the women
it was his daughter, Lady Fatima al-Zahra.[^6]

Sunni scholars who carefully examine the *sahih* books would
automatically question the authenticity of some of the problematic
hadith. Of course, had the Bani Umayyah not begun the practice of
forging their own hadith, then the entire science of hadith
classification may never have developed. Nevertheless, since they did,
the science of hadith classification was developed.

One of the primary principles, which both Sunni and Shi’a scholars use
in the science of hadith, is that if one narrator in a chain of
narrators is unreliable then all of his hadiths are meaningless.[^7] In
this case, why did the fables of Abu Huraira, and those that insulted
the Prophet, remain in the *sahih* books? By their own inclusion of a
few shortsighted narrators, these false and fabricated hadiths affected
Muslim thought forever.

Hadith of the “Ten People Guaranteed Paradise”
----------------------------------------------

One of the most infamous hadith a fabrication is referred to as, “Ten
People Guaranteed Paradise (*al-Asharah Mubashsharah bil-Jannah*).”

According to this hadith the “ten people guaranteed Paradise” are: (1)
Abu Bakr Ibn Abi Qahafah (2) ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab (3) ‘Uthman Ibn
al-Affan (4) Talha Ibn Ubaydillah (5) Zubayr Ibn al-Awam (6) Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Auf (7) Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqas (8) Abdullah Ibn Masoud (9)
Abu Obaydah Ibn al-Jarrah and (10) ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. Collectively
granting them all paradise puts us in a great dilemma because many of
these individuals are known for their questionable character.

To begin with, only al-Tirmidhi includes this hadith, whereas
al-Bukhari, al-Muslim, and al-Dhahabi all reject it.[^8] It behooves us
to ask why the other prominent hadith recorders did not mention this
hadith, since being guaranteed Paradise assures that their course of
life was traveled correctly. Then who narrated this “hadith?” Near the
top of the chain of narrators lies Sa’ed Ibn Zayd, the son-in-law of the
second caliph - a man who refused to pay allegiance to Imam ‘Ali during
his caliphate.

Another point to consider is that those guaranteed Paradise should
include those who sacrificed their lives and properties in the path of
Allah, so why were not the hundreds of martyrs and companions included
in this hadith? For example, the “Leader of the Martyrs (*Sayyid
al-Shuhada*),” Hamzah, the uncle of the Holy Prophet is not included in
this hadith, nor are any of the Ansar whom the Holy Prophet constantly
praised.

Above that, to guarantee Paradise to Talha, Zubayr, Abd al-Rahman Ibn
Auf, and ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan would bring about a problem for several
reasons. First, Talha, Zubayr, and Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf used to call
‘Uthman a “*fasiq*” (indecent), and they eventually revolted against him
during his caliphate. In addition, Talha and Zubayr pressed for a civil
war by supporting and joining Lady Aishah in the Battle of the Camel, in
which both of them were killed in the battle. Secondly, ‘Uthman and Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Auf (whom ‘Umar nicknamed “the Pharaoh of this
nation”[^9]), after a falling out, did not speak to one another until
death.

Furthermore, after ‘Uthman’s assassination, the Muslims were so angry
with ‘Uthman that they did not allow for his body to be buried in
al-Baqi cemetery; hence, his remains were buried in the Jewish cemetery
of Kokab.[^10] He remained buried there until Mu’awiyah came to power
and included him in the common cemetery of al-Baqi, in Madinah. To add,
Sa’d Ibn Abi al-Waqqas refused to pay allegiance to Imam ‘Ali even when
the rest of the ummah accepted him as their fourth caliph. Nevertheless,
many Muslim leaders still cite this fabricated hadith, and many Muslims
embrace it unquestioningly.

‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab
--------------------

Many of the fabricated hadith were introduced to provide religious
legitimacy for the government of the caliphs. In fact, that could be
seen as the primary motive for inventing hadith. For this reason, many
posthumous narrations are recorded in praise of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab;
some of which are attributed to the Prophet having said them, others to
Imam ‘Ali, and some are attributed to various companions.

However, almost all of these hadith are flawed as either they contradict
the Qur’an, the *sunnah* or other established facts, or one or more of
their narrators are known to be unreliable, according to the standards
of recognizing the hadith in the Sunni tradition.

Virtually all of the fabricated sayings in praise of ‘Umar appeared
during the time of Bani Umayyah, particularly during the rule of
Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, for obvious reasons, since the Bani Umayyah
was attempting to consolidate their rule. In contrast, most of the
reliable hadith about ‘Umar that appeared during his lifetime and have
been included in the Sunni books are not overly favorable for him.

‘Umar is recorded to have said about himself, “All people are more
knowledgeable than ‘Umar, even the housewives.”[^11] He asks, “Doesn’t
it surprise you that your leader erred and a lady in his audience
corrected him?”[^12] He also spoke about himself saying, “All the people
are more knowledgeable than you, ‘Umar.”[^13] In regards to the claims
of ‘Ali supposedly praising ‘Umar’s knowledge, Sunni and Shi’a agree
that ‘Umar said, “If it were not for ‘Ali, ‘Umar would have
perished.”[^14]

From the viewpoint of other companions, “‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab took
twelve years to learn *Surah al-Baqarah*, and when he learned it, he
sacrificed a cow.”[^15] One of the transcribers of the Qur’an, Ubay Ibn
Ka’ab said to ‘Umar, “The reason for your lack of knowledge about the
Qur’an is that the Qur’an was keeping me busy (with it), while you were
busy in the marketplace.”[^16] Al-Bayhaqi says, “Since the house of
‘Umar was far from the Mosque of the Prophet in the area of al-Awali, he
used to go to the Mosque of the Prophet once every two days.”[^17]

Conversely, many unreliable hadith grossly exaggerate ‘Umar’s position
and knowledge. One says, “If all of the knowledge of humanity was put on
one side of a scale, and the knowledge of ‘Umar was put on the other,
then the knowledge of ‘Umar would outweigh the knowledge belonging to
all of humanity.”[^18]

If this hadith was true, then what would be the need for the Prophet if
‘Umar had all of this knowledge? Another “hadith” says, “One day an
earthquake hit Madinah, and ‘Umar hit the ground with his stick and
said, ‘Be calm, by the permission of Allah,’ and the earthquake ceased
because ‘Umar told it to.”[^19] Moreover, another “hadith” claims that
the Prophet said, “If I had never been sent to you as a prophet, ‘Umar
would have been sent by Allah as a prophet.”[^20] One hadith goes as far
as to state, “In the nations before us, there were some people whom the
angels would talk to, and if there is one person in our ummah that one
is ‘Umar.”[^21]

Although ‘Umar looked to ‘Ali for guidance during his caliphate, still
‘Ali is purported to have said, “We used to say there is an angel
speaking through the tongue of ‘Umar.”[^22] While hadith pointing to the
realistic good qualities of the second caliph would not be out of the
ordinary; nonetheless, these traditions go beyond the bounds of
credibility and suggest that ‘Umar himself was higher than the Prophet
was, and this is definitely an unacceptable belief.

Not all hadith regarding the second caliph came out of nowhere. Some
hadith were specifically introduced to either counterbalance or share a
similar tone in praising Ahlul Bayt or the immediate household of the
Prophet. For example, Sunni and Shi’a both agree that the Prophet said
about his daughter, “Fatima is part of me. Whoever angers her angers me,
and whoever angers me angers Allah.”[^23] Therefore, the appearance of a
similar hadith about ‘Umar is not surprising - it reads, “Avoid angering
‘Umar, for if he becomes angry, Allah will become angry.”[^24] Regarding
one of the narrators of this hadith, Abu Luqman Ibn Asakir says, “He
narrates false narrations and attributes them to people who are honest
and trustworthy.”[^25]

Fortunately, many authentic hadith passed the test of time;
nevertheless, numerous unfounded hadith remain. Moreover, such hadith
continue to cause friction among the schools of thought. As an example,
one fabrication that al-Dhahabi dismisses, in fact, he says, “This is a
clear fabrication,” is the hadith that reports:

The first thing that Allah will embrace on the Day of Judgment is ‘Umar
Ibn al-Khattab, and the first thing that Allah will shake hands with is
‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, and the first who Allah will take his hand and go
with him to Paradise is ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab.[^26]

Another instance of a clearly erroneous hadith in the established books
comes to us by Ibn al-Atheer who relates from Muhammad Ibn Khaleel, who
al-Atheer himself said that he, Khaleel fabricates hadith[^27] states:

The Prophet climbed Mount Uhud with Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman. The
mountain was shaking, so the Prophet kicked the mountain and said, “Stop
it Uhud, climbing you are only a prophet, a *siddiq* (truthful person),
and two *shaheeds* (martyrs).”[^28]

In *Sahih al-Muslim*, Ibn Abbas says:

When ‘Umar died and was lying on his bed, people were coming and praying
for him. I felt a man holding my shoulders from my back. I saw that the
man was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. He (‘Ali) began seeking forgiveness for
‘Umar and said, “I wish I could meet Allah with the same deeds that
‘Umar is meeting him with.” Then he continued to say, “I hope that Allah
will gather you (‘Umar) with your two companions (the Prophet and Abu
Bakr) because I always heard the Prophet say, “I came with Abu Bakr and
‘Umar; I left with Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.”[^29]

Since ‘Ali grew up side by side with the Prophet and spent virtually
every moment with him, it is unlikely that the Prophet named others as
being closer to him, especially since ‘Umar himself narrated that the
Prophet said, “‘Ali is the guardian (*mawla*) of every male and female
believer.”[^30]

Attempting to prove that ‘Umar was more insightful than the Prophet was
someone related the following story:

One day, ‘Umar saw the Prophet ordering the Muslims to destroy the palm
trees of Khaybar, so ‘Umar asked the Prophet to stop doing that. The
Prophet listened to ‘Umar and asked the people not to cut down the palm
trees of Khaybar.[^31]

Unfortunately, this particular narration has been used to lower the
status of the Prophet, whereas in fact, it is extremely unlikely that
Allah would send His final Messenger, perfect him in every way, and then
leave him in need of basic guidance.

In another peculiar myth:

When Egypt was conquered during the time of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, the
people of Egypt came to the first governor, ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas. They told
him, “We have a tradition regarding the Nile River. On the eleventh of
this month, we find a virgin woman and after seeking her parents’
permission and satisfying them, we put the best clothing and ornaments
on her, and then we throw her into the Nile. If we do not do this, then
the river will not run.” ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas said, “No, this is against
Islam, for this is injustice,” and he banned them from this act.

Since they did not throw a virgin woman into the Nile that year, it did
not run and they had a drought so severe that they had to move
(locations) due to a lack of water. When ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas saw this, he
wrote to ‘Umar and asked him what to do. ‘Umar wrote a letter to the
river and asked his governor to throw the letter into the river.

He wrote in the letter that he told the river, “If you are running by
your own permission, then it is better that you do not run, but if you
are running by the permission of Allah, then I ask that Allah make you
run.” They threw the letter into the river, and suddenly the river began
running.[^32]

While many fabrications focus on ‘Umar, numerous others exist
exaggerating the status of Abu Bakr and ‘Uthman and sadly belittling the
Holy Prophet. For example, in *Sahih al-Muslim*:

The Prophet’s thighs and legs were uncovered. Abu Bakr came, but the
Prophet did not cover himself. ‘Umar came, but he also did not cover
himself. But when ‘Uthman came, the Prophet sat and covered himself.
When Lady Aishah asked him why he did that, the Prophet said, “Should I
not be modest in front of a man that the angels are shy in front
of?”[^33]

This narration is not in concordance with the high moral character of
the Prophet. Seeing as the Prophet described Islam as a religion of
modesty; it is difficult to imagine that he himself would be violating
his own description of the path that he taught.

Similarly, in *Sahih al-Muslim* it says:

One day, Lady Aishah was sitting next to the Prophet. Abu Bakr sought
permission to enter while the Prophet was lying on his bed and Lady
Aishah was sitting there. He came and the Prophet attended to Abu Bakr,
and then Abu Bakr left. Then ‘Umar came and the Prophet attended to him.
Then ‘Uthman came. When ‘Uthman came, the Prophet told Lady Aishah,
“Cover yourself.” So she covered herself and the Prophet attended to
‘Uthman.

Then the Prophet turned to Lady Aishah and asked her, “Why were you not
afraid when ‘Umar and Abu Bakr came like you were when ‘Uthman came?”
She said, “Due to the fact that ‘Uthman is a man with shame (*rajulun
hayy*), and if I had remained (uncovered), then he would not have come
and asked for what he needed, and I did not want to deprive him of
obtaining what he required.” [^34]

Another story narrates that Allah sent the Angel Gabriel to ask Abu
Bakr, “Are you happy with Allah? You are poor, do you accept this
poverty?” Abu Bakr replied, “Should I be angry with Allah? No, I am
happy with my God’s decision. I am happy with my God’s decision. I am
happy with my God’s decision.” Al-Suyuti says regarding this hadith, “It
is strange and the chain of narrators is weak.”[^35]

In another hadith it says, “Allah ordered the angels to penetrate the
skies just like Abu Bakr is penetrating the earth.” Regarding this
claim, Ibn Kathir says, “This hadith is wrong and evil (*munkaran
jiddan*).”

Al-Bukhari and Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal relate that Lady Aishah said, “The
Prophet was affected by magic by someone from Bani Zareeq named Lubayd
Ibn al-Asal; and because of this spell, the Prophet would imagine that
he had done something, but in fact he had not done it.”[^36]

Despite the poor performance of certain companions during the military
excursions, fabrications about their bravery became abundant. When asked
who was the bravest of the companions, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib is said to
have replied, “Abu Bakr - because on the day of Badr, we set up a tent
for the Prophet, and we asked someone to stand next to him, so the
*mushrikeen* (non-believers) would not attack him, none came forward
except Abu Bakr. He raised his sword and stood there, thus he is the
bravest person.”

However, the Sunni historian, al-Tabari alludes to the unwillingness of
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar to fight, in addition to their frequent fleeing away
from battles, such as in the Battle of Uhud and Hunain. Thus, the
narrations that speak about their bravery are unjustifiable.[^37]

Since Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and Lady Aishah were the center of focus
of such narrations, thus it may point to an element of untruth in them,
since innumerable devoted companions, more than 100,000, aided the
Prophet. Other books, such as *Kitab al-Maghazi* by al-Waqidi
illustrates the same bias, mentioning ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab in 166 pages,
and Abu Bakr in 143 pages, while he mentions only a few times other
great companions such as Ammar Ibn Yasir, Musab Ibn Umair, Abdullah Ibn
Masud, Khuzaymah Ibn Thabit, and Zayd Ibn al-Khattab (the brother of
‘Umar).

Fabrications Involving the Qur’an
---------------------------------

Some of the Umayyah clan went so far as to claim that some of the
Qur’anic verses descended because of ‘Umar’s wishes, actions, and
suggestions. For instance, al-Suyuti says:

When ‘Umar gave his opinion about something, the Qur’an would come with
a verse supporting his opinion. Whenever there was a disagreement
between the people and ‘Umar, the Qur’an came and supported what ‘Umar
said... Allah supported ‘Umar and confirmed his views in 21 places in
the Qur’an.[^38]

Such narrations claim that because ‘Umar had instructed the Prophet not
to seek forgiveness for the hypocrites that Allah revealed the following
verse,

***“Whether you seek forgiveness for them or not, Allah will never
forgive them.” (9:80)***

They also say that ‘Umar suggested to the Muslims to prepare themselves
for the Battle of Badr, and the Qur’an came in support of ‘Umar’s idea.
However, these reports ironically neglect the fact that ‘Umar is
recorded to have been against the military engagement for the Battle of
Badr.

In addition, it is alleged that Allah revealed, “And whoever is the
enemy of Allah and His angels and His Messengers and Gabriel and
Michael, Lo! Allah is an enemy to those who reject faith,” (c. 2:98)
because ‘Umar was defending the Angel Gabriel against a Jewish man who
called the angel their enemy. Moreover, they maintain that the verse
requiring people to seek permission before entering a person’s chamber
also came at the request of ‘Umar.[^39] These are all blatant tales
trying to raise the status of ‘Umar.

Imam al-Nawawi attributes many verses to ‘Umar and says, “The Qur’an
descended in conformance with ‘Umar in many places, such as the
prisoners of Badr, the verse of *hijab*, the station of Ibrahim, and the
prohibition of wine.”[^40] However, the latter statement is extremely
doubtful, since historians agree that ‘Umar gradually ceased
drinking.[^41] In fact, the final verse prohibiting alcohol was revealed
after ‘Umar became drunk and injured the head of Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf.

Hadith of the Twelve Successors
-------------------------------

In addition to the fabrication of hadith, the ruling powers also took
the trouble to change well-known traditions. One in particular
reinforces their legitimacy and is a well-known hadith transmitted
amongst both the Sunni and the Shi’a schools of thought.

Al-Bukhari, al-Muslim, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, al-Tirmidhi, Abu Dawud,
al-Tabarani, and Ibn Hajar all narrate the famous hadith which says,
“The successors after me will be twelve, and all of them will be from
Bani Hashim,”[^42] except that in the *sahih* books, “Bani Hashim” has
been changed to read “Quraysh.”

How did the change in the hadith happen? According to al-Muslim, the
narrator Jabir Ibn S’Amrah reports:

I went with my father to see the Prophet and I heard him say that after
him there would be twelve successors. Then he said something that I
could not hear very well. I turned to my father and asked him, “What did
the Prophet say?” My father said, “The Prophet said, ‘All of them will
be from Quraysh.’” [^43]

Al-Bukhari relates the story somewhat differently, using the word
“*amir*” (commander) instead of “*khalifah*”:

I heard the Prophet say that there will be twelve *amirs*, but then said
something I could not hear. I asked the person sitting next to me what
the Prophet said and he replied, “All of them are from Quraysh.”[^44]

Abu Dawud says:

When the Prophet said, “There will be twelve successors after me,” all
the people began to do *takbir* (uttering “*Allahu akbar*”) and raised
their voices while the Prophet was speaking. Therefore, I could not hear
the Prophet because all of the people were saying *takbir*. So I asked
my father, “What did the Prophet say after that?” He said, “All of them
will be from Quraysh.”[^45]

Ahmad Ibn Hanbal simply relates that Jabir Ibn S’Amrah says, “I heard
the Prophet saying, ‘This nation will have twelve successors,’[^46] and
‘all of them will be from Quraysh.’”[^47] Al-Tabarani includes the same
hadith, only using the word “*qayyim*” (guardian) instead of
“*khalifah*.”[^48]

However, Ibn Hajar points to the root of the matter and explains that
Jabir Ibn S’Amrah was sitting and could not hear the Prophet clearly. He
turned to the two people next to him; one of them was his father and the
other was ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab.

As the Prophet was speaking, the people were listening quietly.
Suddenly, when he approached the subject of who was to succeed him,
clamor broke out (described in the other reports as *takbir*). Few could
hear the Prophet clearly. However, according to Ibn Hajar, a person was
ready to relate what the Prophet had said, and that was ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab - who as a key member of the Quraysh group had a strong
interest in ensuring that the caliphate was not limited to the members
of Bani Hashim.[^49]

In addition, Sunni scholars have had difficulty interpreting this
hadith, since their number of successors to the Prophet never reached
twelve. Shi’a scholars on the other hand, maintain that this hadith
relates to the twelve Imams whom they say the Prophet designated to
succeed him, one after another, beginning with Imam ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
and ending with Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi.

Where Did the Hadith Fictions Come From?
----------------------------------------

The fabrication of hadith flourished due to the initial ban on the
transcription of the hadith that lasted for one century. Had Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar allowed the Muslims to write down the hadith, the Bani Umayyah
would never have been able to attribute such lies to the Holy Prophet
and his companions. Instead, the Bani Umayyah had free reign to
encourage fabricators in their favor,[^50] and in the words of Abu Jafar
al-Iskafi:

Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan encouraged and paid some of the *sahabah* and
the *tabieen* (the second generation of the *sahabah*) to fabricate evil
hadith against ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib in order to slander, defame, vilify,
and denounce him. He (Mu’awiyah) allocated an amount of money for them
and they started inventing and creating these hadiths for him, which
truly satisfied him. Among the fabricators were Abu Huraira, ‘Amr Ibn
al-Aas, al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah, and Urwah Ibn Zubayr. [^51]

A prominent Sunni historian adds:

Mu’awiyah ordered all of his governors not to accept any testimony from
the Shi’a of ‘Ali (followers of ‘Ali and the Ahlul Bayt). However, those
who were the Shi’a of ‘Uthman (the followers of ‘Uthman and Bani
Umayyah), were brought close, honored, paid, and their stories were
documented until the virtues of ‘Uthman were plenty and widespread. Then
Mu’awiyah realized that there were too many hadith in favor of ‘Uthman,
so he said, “Go and from now on, say hadith in favor of the rest of the
*sahabah* and the rest of the *khalifah* (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar), and
whenever you find a hadith narrated by the Prophet in favor of ‘Ali,
invent an identical one in favor of the *sahabah*. Remove from the
public registry (*diwan*, list of salaries) whoever loves ‘Ali and his
family, and do not pay him his salary and destroy his house.” [^52]

As is apparent, the Bani Umayyah were ready and willing to contradict
the Qur’an, known hadith, and even exaggerate the qualities and stature
of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman for the sake of political gain.
Regrettably, they undermined the credibility of the hadith by
fabricating a new Islam and turning its history inside out.

[^1]: Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 8:116

[^2]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:360

[^3]: Sahih al-Muslim, 4:1857, hadith 2388

[^4]: ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas was one of the most cunning figures in Arab
history. He is known for ridiculing and deriding the Prophet. The Holy
Qur’an says about him, “For he who hates you, he will be cut off from
prosterity (children).”(c. 108:3) He was cursed by the Prophet when he
was seen singing and drinking alcohol. Mu’awiyah appointed him to be the
governor of Egypt and it was he who fought against Imam ‘Ali in the
Battle of Siffeen in 37 ah. He died in Egypt in 43 ah.

[^5]: Sahih al-Muslim, 4:1856, hadith 2384

[^6]: Sunan al-Tirmidi, 5:362

[^7]: Al-Imam al-Nawawi, Al-Taqrib

[^8]: Al-Dhahabi, Mizan al-Itedaal

[^9]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 24

[^10]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Al-Estiaab

[^11]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:61 and 1:182

[^12]: Ibid., 3:96

[^13]: Tafseer al-Fakhr al-Raizi, 3:175; Tafseer al-Kashshaf, 3:573;
Al-Jami li-Akham al-Qur’an, 14:277; Al-Durr al-Manthur, 5:229

[^14]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Al-Estiaab, 3:1103

[^15]: Ibn Asakir, Al-Mukhtasar Tarikh Ibn Asakir, 18:323

[^16]: Al-Bayhaqi, Tafseer al-Qurtubi, 7:69; 14:126

[^17]: Ibid., 7:37

[^18]: Al-Estiaab, 2:430; Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, 3:86

[^19]: Tafseer al-Fakher al-Razi, 21:88

[^20]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, 5:281, hadith 3769; Al-Mustadrak ‘ala
Sahihayn, 3:85

[^21]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 5:15; Sahih al-Muslim, 4:1864/28; Mustadrak
‘ala Sahihayn, 3:86

[^22]: Abu Nuaym, Hiliyat al-Awliya, 1:24

[^23]: Al-Mustadrak ala Sahihayn, 3:167, hadith 473; Usd al-Ghabah,
7:224; Al-Isabah, 4:378; Al-Tahdheeb, 12:469; Majma al-Zawaid, 9:203

[^24]: Tarik Baghdad, 3:49; Ibn Hajr, Lisan al-Mizan, 5:225

[^25]: Ibn al-Atheer, Mukhtasar Tarikh Ibn Asakir, 18:282

[^26]: Al-Dhahabi, Al-Mizan, 2:12

[^27]: Ibn al-Atheer, Usd al-Ghabah, 4:173

[^28]: Ibn Hajar, Lisan al-Mizan, 5:180

[^29]: Sahih al-Muslim, 4:1858, hadith 2389

[^30]: Tafseer al-Tha’laby, 4:92; Al-Thahabi Tarikh al-Islam, 3:633

[^31]: Al-Sir al-Kabir, 1:55

[^32]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p. 127

[^33]: Sahih al-Muslim, 4:1866, hadith 2401

[^34]: Bab Fadahil ‘Uthman, 7:117, Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 4:353;
Al-Adbe al-Mufrad, Sahih al-Buhkari, p.131

[^35]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p.39

[^36]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 7:28; Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 6:57

[^37]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:240

[^38]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p.122-123

[^39]: Ibid., p.124

[^40]: Al-Imam al-Nawawi, Al-Tahdheeb

[^41]: Al-Abshihi, Al-Mustadraf, 2:260; Ibn Shabbah, Tarikh al-Madinah
al-Muhawarah, 3:863

[^42]: Al-khulafa min badi ithna ashar wa kulluhum min Quraysh (Bani
Hashim)

[^43]: Sahih al-Muslim, 3:1452, hadith 5

[^44]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 9:101

[^45]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 4:106, hadith 4280

[^46]: Musnad Ahmad, 5:106

[^47]: Ibid., 5:86

[^48]: Al-Tabarani, Mujam al-Kabeer, 2:196, hadith 1794

[^49]: Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari fi Sharh al-Bukhari

[^50]: Mahmoud Abu Rayah, Adwa ala al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyah, p.325

[^51]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:358

[^52]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Al-Istiab, 1:65; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isabah, 1:154;
Ibn Atheer, Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, 3:162; Tarikh al-Tabari, 6:77


