Chapter 9: Arduous Truth
========================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 ثُمَّ إِلَى رَبِّهِمْ مَرْجِعُهُمْ فَيُنَبِّئُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the end will they return to their Lord, and We shall then tell
them the truth of all that they did. (Holy Qur’an, 6:108)***

Often Shias are asked by their Sunni counterparts, “Why do you hate the
companions (*sahabahs*)?” The question resembles that which is asked by
some of the Americans to the Muslims post 9-11, “Why do you (Muslims)
hate us (Americans)?”

The truth is that the Shi’a do not hate the companions (*sahabahs*) of
the Prophet; however, there are some of them who did not merit becoming
the leaders of the ummah - and for rightful reasons. I ask the reader to
bear with me as I present forth the research in this chapter, which will
bring a better understanding as to why the Shi’a are not too fond of
certain companions.

One of the primary beliefs in Sunni Islam is the sacredness of the
sayings and deeds of the Holy Prophet’s companions (the *sahabah*). Even
today, merely inferring that a particular companion said or did
something is enough to engender complete and total respect for that
companion, and his words and deeds, and unquestioning compliance with
what he or she said or did. For this reason, it is extremely important
to investigate what exactly makes a person a *sahabah* of the Prophet.
After all, thousands of people if not more, were in the presence of the
Holy Prophet, and yet some of them were hypocrites and enemies of the
Prophet according to the Qur’an;[^1] therefore, how can they be relied
upon?

Defining Sahabah
----------------

*Al-Qaamus al-Muhit* is the work of a prominent Sunni scholar and
linguist; he defines *sahabah* as “*al-muasharah wa al-mulazimah*,”
which means living together or associating together inseparably. Raghib
al-Isfahani says, “This term applies only to the one who is constantly
and continuously in companionship (with another person).”[^2] Therefore,
according to these definitions, a companion of the Prophet would be
someone who associated very closely with him, regardless of whether he
was a Muslim or a non-Muslim, righteous or unrighteous, and whether he
believed or disbelieved in him.

However, Islamic jurists (*usuliyun*) unanimously agree that for someone
to bear the title of “companion,” he or she must have been Muslim and
must have accompanied the Prophet for a long period (*tallat
mujalasatuhu*), while listening attentively to him and learning from
him, not just merely visiting him or learning from or about his
knowledge.[^3]

The *Muhaddithun* (school of Narrators) defines “companion” as being
“every Muslim who saw the Prophet.”[^4] Some scholars define it as, “any
Muslim who lived during the time of the Prophet even if he did not see
the Prophet.”[^5] Still other narrators further expanded the definition
of “companion” to encompass every Muslim who met the Prophet and
believed in him, and then apostatized and then reverted to Islam.[^6]

How the Sahabahs Define “Companionship”
---------------------------------------

In the earlier years of Islam, the Muslim ummah itself divided
themselves into three categories in regards to how they viewed the
*sahabah*:

### (1) Al-Firqa al-Kamiliyah and the Ghulat

Al-Firqa al-Kamiliyah[^7] and the Ghulat[^8] were a minority sect of
Muslims that attributed *kufr* (apostasy) to all of the companions. This
view is of course, completely rejected by all modern scholars of Islam,
in both the Sunni and Shi’a traditions.

### (2) Adalat al-Sahabah, Integrity of the Companions

This group attributed absolute *adalah* (integrity) to all of the
companions; this is the commonly held view within the Sunni tradition.
For example, *Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi* says, “The justness of the
*sahabah* is proven and firmly established (*thabitatun malumah*).”[^9]
Ibn Hazm says, “Undoubtedly, all of the companions are among the people
of Paradise.”[^10]

Nevertheless, many prominent jurists and scholars in the Sunni tradition
reject this idea of the absolute righteousness of all of the companions,
and they include: al-Sa’d al-Tafatahzani, al-Marizi, and
al-Shawqani,[^11] as well as scholars from a later generation, such as
Sheikh Muhammad Abduh, Sheikh Mahmud Abu Riyah, and others.[^12] They
argued that the companions were not infallible, and thus there were the
righteous and the unrighteous individuals amongst their ranks.

### (3) The Qur’an, the Prophet, and the Ahlul Bayt

The Qur’an does not guarantee automatic righteousness to all of the
Prophet’s companions, nor does it grant all of them entrance into
Paradise. Many of the righteous companions are praised and honored in
the Qur’an, while others have been criticized - even cursed. The Qur’an
says,

***“Round about you [Muhammad and his community] and among you in
Madinah are hypocrites and they are obstinate in hypocrisy. You do not
know them, We know them, twice shall We punish them and in addition they
shall be sent to a grievous penalty.” (9:101)***

The Qur’an also says,

***“And Muhammad is not but an apostle, (other) apostles have already
passed away prior to him; therefore, if he dies or is slain, will you
turn upon your heels? And he who turns upon his heels will by no means
do harm to God in the least, and soon will God reward the grateful
ones.” (3:144)***

These and others verses, such as those found in *Surah al-Tawbah*
(*Repentance*) and *Surah al-Munafiqun* (*The Hypocrites*) indicate that
a group of hypocrites existed among the companions of the Prophet. Thus,
according to the Qur’an, a group of companions was composed of the
righteous and the unrighteous, the believers and the hypocrites, and
although companionship was a great honor, it did not ensure immunity
from error and this view has been adopted by the Shi’a scholars as well.

In many of the hadith, the companions themselves rejected each other or
refuted what other companions said. As for the leaders of the Islamic
schools of thought, Imam Abu Hanifah is known to have said that all of
the companions were pure except for a few, and he mentioned some of
their names.[^13]

Imam Malik Ibn Anas was asked what to do when two narrators relate
contradictory hadith from the Prophet and whether both should be
accepted or not? He replied that, no, the truth is only one; and when he
was asked about the disagreement of the companions (*ikhtilaaf
al-sahabah*), he said that one side is right and the other is wrong, and
that the matter had to be investigated.[^14] Imam al-Shaf’i states that
he does not accept the testimony of four known companions: Mu’awiyah Ibn
Abu Sufyan, ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas, al-Mugheerah, and Ziyad.[^15]

Hadith of “the Stars”
---------------------

In the Sunni tradition, a famous hadith, known as the *Hadith* *of the
Stars* reports that the Prophet said, “My companions are like the stars:
whichever you follow, you will be guided.”[^16] Although this hadith is
pivotal to the Sunni belief since it gives absolute certainty that all
of the companions were entitled to lead others toward Paradise;
nonetheless, Imam Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal states that this hadith is
unauthentic.[^17] Abu Ibrahim al-Muzni, a student of al-Shaf’i, and his
companions also doubted the authenticity of this hadith.[^18] Abu Bakr
al-Bazzaz criticized this hadith and expounded upon its flaws.[^19]

Other narrators (*huffaz*) also mention its weakness and the
unreliability of its chain of narrators. They include: Abul Hasan
al-Darqutni, al-Bayhaqi, Ibn Hazm, Ibn Abd al-Birr, Ibn Asakir, Ibn
al-Jawzi, Ibn Dahiyah, Abu Hayan al-Andalusi, Shams al-Din al-Dhahabi,
and surprisingly, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyah.[^20] In addition, Ibn Hajar
al-Asqalani has stated that although famous, this hadith had an
unreliable and weak chain of narrators (*isnad*).

Given these doubts, this hadith - one of the most important pillars of
the concept of absolute righteousness of the companions - falls apart
and is nothing more than a fabrication.

Flaws found in the Companions in the Established Hadith
-------------------------------------------------------

The Prophet has been quoted as saying, “I am the first who will reach
the fountain of *Hawdh al-Kawthar* (located in Paradise). Some people
will try to reach me, but they will not be able to. I will say, ‘O my
Lord, they are my companions!’ Allah will answer, ‘You do not know what
they have invented after you.’”[^21]

This hadith reflects that some of the companions did indeed err. Anyone
who considers them all to be just would be disregarding this hadith. If
all of the companions were considered to be just, then one must question
as to why some of the companions who murdered ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan will
go to Heaven? To say because they were companions would not justify
entrance into Heaven.

Even more, anyone who considers them all to be just must also ponder why
some of them revolted against ‘Ali - the rightful ruler who had proven
his loyalty to Allah, the Prophet, and Islam, and had partaken in the
civil battles of Jamal, Siffeen, and Nahrawan, in which thousands of
Muslims lost their lives, so will these companions who fought against
him also be rewarded with Paradise?

Participation of the Companions in the Battles
----------------------------------------------

Despite popular misconception, neither Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, nor ‘Uthman
participated actively in the main excursions of Islam. Not until the
time of Mu’awiyah did the fabrications about their roles in these
battles begin to surface in an effort by the Bani Umayyah to attribute
the virtues of the Ahlul Bayt to others.

According to Ibn Arafah, “Most of the hadith which have been fabricated
and developed in favor of the *sahabah,* their virtues, bravery, and
heroism were fabricated during the time of the Bani Umayyah in order to
seek nearness to them, and to defy and humiliate the Bani Hashim.”[^22]

### Battle of Uhud

On the day of the Battle of Uhud, the Holy Prophet raised his sword and
called, “Who can give this sword its right?” ‘Umar said, “I can,” but
the Prophet turned away from him, for he knew that ‘Umar would not do
that. Zubayr Ibn Awam said, “I can,” but the Prophet refused him as
well. Then Abu Dujanah stood and asked, “What is the right of that
sword?” The Prophet replied, “You fight with it until it breaks.” Abu
Dujanah swore, “I am the one who will give it its right,” so the Prophet
gave his sword to Abu Dujanah.[^23]

The Battle of Uhud commenced and in this regard, al-Tabari says:

‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib began slaying the leaders of the battalions of the
mushrikeen (people who associate others with God) in Uhud who were
carrying the banners. Whenever a leader of another battalion would
approach the Prophet, he (the Prophet) would look at ‘Ali and say,
“Start your strike on him,” so he would strike them and disperse them.
Group after group came and ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib did the same, until
Gabriel came to the Prophet and said, “O Messenger of Allah, this is
real solidarity.” The Prophet said, “Yes, because he is part of me, and
I am part of him.” Gabriel replied, “And I am from both of you, O
Messenger of Allah.”[^24]

What happened next in the Battle of Uhud has been recorded for eternity
in the Holy Qur’an. Allah says, “Behold, you were climbing up the high
ground, without even casting a side glance at anyone, and the Messenger
in your rear was calling you back.” (c. 3:153) This verse indicates the
opposition that the Holy Prophet had faced in maintaining his forces.

Examining the verse deeper and its *tafseer* (explanation), it
explicitly identifies Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and the other companions - all of
whom fled the scene except for a few who stood with the Holy Prophet –
and this included one woman, Naseebah Umme Amarah Ibn Ka’ab (who fought
until she was wounded on her shoulder), a few from the Ansar tribe, and
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and Abu Dujanah from the Quraysh.[^25] As Muhammad
Hasanain Haykil says, “The main concern of every Muslim on that day was
to rescue himself and salvage himself, except for those who had been
protected and blessed by Allah, such as ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.”[^26]

The Qur’an continues, “It was *Shaytan* (Satan) who caused them to fail
because of some evil that they had done.” (c. 3:153) Most likely, the
“evil they had done” was their disobedience to the Holy Prophet, for
although the Holy Prophet ordered them to remain in their positions,
they ran after the war booty, thus the *mushrikeen* defeated them.

During his caliphate, ‘Umar recalled that incident when his daughter and
a woman came to him, asking for clothing. ‘Umar gave some clothing to
the woman but not to his daughter and when asked why he did that, he
replied, “The father of that lady stood on the day of Uhud and did not
run away, but the father of this one (pointing to his own daughter) ran
away on the day of Uhud and did not stand firm.”[^27] Abu Bakr too later
recounted his flight on that day.[^28]

Although most of the companions returned a few hours after the Battle of
Uhud, ‘Uthman disappeared for three days.[^29] When he returned, the
Holy Prophet admonished him by saying, “It took you so long to return!
Why three days?”[^30]

### Battle of Badr

A similar situation arose during the Battle of Badr. On the eve of the
battle, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar staunchly refused to fight. They said to the
Holy Prophet, “This is Quraysh. The Quraysh are so powerful. The Quraysh
never believed when they disbelieved. The Quraysh have never been
defeated because they are so powerful, so do not fight them.”

Displeased, the Prophet turned away from them, until Sa’d Ibn Ma’adh
promised the Prophet, “Go and we will fight with you to the last
breath.” At that the Prophet became pleased again, and on the morning of
the 17th in the month of Ramadhan (2 ah), the Muslims engaged against
the *mushrikeen* in the Battle of Badr.[^31] Seventy *mushrikeen* met
their end in the battle, half of them exclusively by the sword of ‘Ali,
and the other half with the help of ‘Ali’s sword.[^32]

Similarly, ‘Uthman was not present during the Battle of Badr, just as he
was not present at the important signing of Bay’at al-Ridhwan; what’s
more, he fled from the battles of Uhud and Hunayn.

During the Battle of Khandaq, he refused to fight ‘Amr Ibn Abd al-Wudd
al-Aamir. Even after the death of the Prophet, he declined to
participate in the battles against those who rejected the caliphate of
Abu Bakr. During the time of ‘Umar, he also refused to participate in
any form of military service and was known for avoiding battles; his
former ally, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf sarcastically chided him with this
comment, “I was not the one who was absent from Badr, and I was not the
one who ran away on the day of Uhud.”[^33]

### Battle of Khaybar

The Battle of Khaybar took place during the seventh year of the
migration, about 160 km north of Madinah. Due to the terrain, and the
mighty fortress that the Jews barricaded themselves in, the first
attempt to break through was led by Abu Bakr, who returned defeated. The
second attempt, led by ‘Umar, was also unsuccessful. Muslim historians
have noted, “They returned not only defeated but exchanging blames of
cowardice on each other.”[^34]

After the first two failed attempts, the Holy Prophet pledged,
“Tomorrow, I will give this banner, the leadership of this battle, to a
man who is loved by Allah and His Apostle, and he himself loves Allah
and His Apostle. Allah will open the way by his hands. He will go
forward and not be defeated or retreat.” When the Prophet spoke these
words, ‘Ali was ill.

Some of the companions brought him to the Prophet. As ‘Ali leaned on the
Holy Prophet, the Prophet prayed for him, placed the banner in his hands
and said, “O Allah, may the heat and the cold not affect him anymore.”
‘Ali later stated, “After the prayer of the Prophet, I did not feel any
heat or cold.”[^35] From there, ‘Ali went and defeated Marhab, the
Jewish leader of the enemies in the castle, including Marhab’s two
brothers, Harith and Yasir.[^36]

### Battle of Hunayn

The Prophet had brought 10,000 soldiers with him to recapture Mecca, and
only a few days after their conquest of Mecca in the eighth year of the
Hijrah, the Battle of Hunayn broke out. Two thousand more people in
Mecca accepted Islam and joined the defense force. Therefore, the
Prophet’s army of 12,000 met their enemy in the valley of Hunayn between
Mecca and the city of Taif.

Like the Battle of Uhud, the Battle of Hunayn is mentioned in the Holy
Qur’an,

**“Assuredly, Allah did help you in many battlefields, and on the day of
Hunayn; behold, your great numbers elated you, but they availed you
nothing; the land did constrain you, and you turned back fleeing.” (c.
9:25-26)**

According to the *Tafseer* of this verse, seeing their large numbers,
Abu Bakr exclaimed, “No one will defeat us while we have such a large
number.”[^37] However, their numbers were meaningless since faith,
bravery, sincerity, and willingness was lacking.

Although many companions pledged that they would not flee,[^38] despite
their vow, some still did leave including Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, Ibn
al-Jarah, al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah, Abu Musa al-Ashari, Ma’adh Ibn
Jabal, Usayd Ibn Hubayr, Khalid Ibn al-Waleed, and Sa’d Ibn Abi
al-Waqqas.[^39] During the battle, Abu Sufyan, who had just become
Muslim two weeks before, said about the Muslims, “I wish their defeat
would not stop, and they would keep running away and fleeing until they
reach the sea.”[^40] At the battle, only four stood with the Holy
Prophet: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, al-Abbas - the uncle of the Prophet, Abu
Sufyan Ibn al-Harith (from the Bani Hashim), and Abdullah Ibn
Masud.[^41] The rest of the companions fled the scene.

Conquests of the First Three Caliphs
------------------------------------

Along with his army, the Messenger of Allah always fought on the
frontlines of the battle; but such was not the case for Abu Bakr, ‘Umar,
and ‘Uthman - they never battled alongside their soldiers during their
years as caliphs. Instead, they sat in Madinah and dispatched forces.

When Abu Bakr assumed the caliphate, rather than fight himself, he sent
Usama Ibn Zayd to fight the Romans. When Usama inquired as to why ‘Umar
was remaining in Madinah, Abu Bakr said that he needed him there. When
Usama then asked Abu Bakr why he himself was staying behind in Madinah,
Abu Bakr told him, “Just lead the army and go.”[^42]

When the Bani Umayyah came to power, they fabricated stories saying that
‘Ali advised ‘Umar and Abu Bakr not to lead their armies, since they
were the leaders of the people. Such stories are obviously false, since
during his own caliphate, ‘Ali himself led his troops and thus he would
not have advised others to do contrary to this.

Despite the unwillingness of the first three caliphs to participate in
military activity, the Muslim conquest during their caliphate was
tremendous. The Islamic influence spread far and during the reign of
‘Umar, the Persian and Roman Empires were both defeated. However, the
motive of the first three caliphs to send the Muslims into battle was
less for military necessity than it was to prevent political unrest at
home. This ploy is most visible in the advice that Abdullah Ibn Aamir
gave to ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan when he instructed him to keep the Muslims
preoccupied in battle so that ‘Uthman would have less difficulties with
the masses.

A Brief Introduction to the Prophet’s Companions
------------------------------------------------

### Abu Bakr (Ibn Abi Quhafah)

The Holy Prophet gave Abu Bakr the surname of Abdullah.[^43] Before
that, he was known as Abd al-Ka’abah (the worshipper of the Ka’abah) and
al-Ateeq (the freed one). Although Lady Aishah had been quoted as
stating that the Prophet called Abu Bakr, Ateeq Allah min al-Nar (the
person whom Allah has vindicated from the Fire);[^44] however, sources
indicate that Abu Bakr’s father had called him Ateeq long before Islam
because of the delicacy of his skin.[^45] His mother’s name is reported
as being Salma bint Sakher.

Abu Bakr was the fifteenth man to embrace Islam,[^46] not the first, as
some may believe and in his early days, he made a living selling
clothing, as did ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf, and Talha
Ibn Ubaydillah.

### ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab Ibn Nafeel Ibn Uday Ibn Ka’ab

‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab[^47] was born thirteen years after the Year of the
Elephant, thus he was thirteen years younger than the Prophet was,
eleven years younger than Abu Bakr, and seven years younger than ‘Uthman
Ibn al-Affan. While still young, his mother was adopted by Hisham Ibn
al-Mugheerah, so she was known as Hantamah Ibn Hisham Ibn
al-Mugheerah.[^48] He made a living as a merchant dealer and died at the
age of eighty-six in the year 23 ah.

At the age of forty-six, he became a Muslim and was the seventy-fifth
person to accept Islam. He did so right before the migration from Mecca
to Madinah; thus, he did not participate in the first Hijrah to
Ethiopia.[^49]

Before joining the Muslims, ‘Umar exhibited an enormous dissatisfaction
towards Islam and the Muslims so much so that he beat his brother-in-law
and hit his sister when he discovered that they had become Muslims.[^50]
Perhaps for this reason, ‘Umar had been chosen by the rest of the
Quraysh to kill the Prophet.[^51]

It is mentioned that one day, ‘Umar took his sword and went to the house
of Ibn Abi al-Arqam, where the Holy Prophet was with his uncle, Hamzah
and some companions. He knocked loudly and burst into the house angrily.
The Prophet restrained him and shook him so hard that he fell to the
ground. The Prophet then said, “Isn’t it time that you stop your
persecution and terrorization of the Muslims?” At which ‘Umar replied,
“I bear witness that there is no God but Allah, One with no partner, and
I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and messenger.”[^52]

Throughout his life, ‘Umar was known for his violent nature and
outbursts. He usually frowned at people and often used his hand to
strike the Muslims, and during his caliphate, he was often seen using
his stick (*durrah*), to strike people. He quickly angered and judged
others with the same rapidity.

He was known to be particularly harsh with women, whether they were his
daughters, his wives, his sisters, or strangers. He once wrote, “I
buried my daughter alive, and while I was burying her, she was putting
her hands on my beard to clean the dust from it.”[^53] Al-Ashath Ibn
Qays recalls that when he was hosting ‘Umar at his home, in the middle
of the night, ‘Umar kept beating his wife until al-Ashath stopped
him.[^54] ‘Umar told another one of his wives, “You are nothing but a
toy that men play with, and then you are abandoned.”[^55] His harshness
caused women to decline his marriage proposals; one of those who refused
him was Umme Kulthum, the daughter of Abu Bakr.[^56]

‘Umar did not confine his abuse to only the women of his household. When
Lady Aishah was mourning the death of her father Abu Bakr, he threatened
to hit her if she did not stop and then retorted to beating her sister,
Umme Farwah with his stick instead. Hence, they both stopped
crying.[^57]

On another occasion, when he heard the cry of a woman, he took it upon
himself to enter her home and hit her with his stick, until the covering
of her hair fell off.[^58] When Zaynab, the Prophet’s daughter died,
‘Umar hit the women who were crying over her, until the Messenger of
Allah seized his hand and told him to stop.[^59] Needless to say, even
Fatima al-Zahra, the daughter of the Holy Prophet did not escape his
wrath. Tragically, ‘Umar attacked her at her own home and forced her to
miscarry her baby son Muhsin, the third grandson of the Holy Prophet.

Numerous traditions relate that the Muslim community greatly feared
‘Umar’s violent tendencies. However in one tradition, although
unbecoming, it shows the extent of that fear. In an example of the
virtues of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, al-Bukhari relates a peculiar story:

Some women were sitting with the Prophet and enthusiastically asking him
questions that caused their voices to be raised above the voice of the
Prophet. ‘Umar sought permission to enter, and as soon as the women
heard him, they became afraid and put on their hijab (head covering).
After the Prophet gave him permission, he entered, at which point the
Prophet laughed. ‘Umar asked the Prophet, “Why do you laugh, O Messenger
of Allah?” The Prophet replied, “I am surprised at these women who were
sitting next to me not wearing the hijab, but the moment they heard your
voice, they rushed to wear the hijab.” ‘Umar rebuked them, “You are the
enemies of Allah; why do you not fear the Prophet and you fear me?” They
told him, “Due to the fact that you are harsh and violent.”[^60]

Al-Bukhari considers this narration to be an example of the virtues of
‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab - perhaps it may be that this tradition reflects
the fear of ‘Umar amongst the women; but it also implies that the
Prophet was frolicking amongst unveiled Muslim women, and such an
implication undermines the moral virtues and character of the Prophet.

In another incident, ‘Umar summoned a woman whose chastity he doubted so
that he could inquire whether her pregnancy was legitimate. Terrified,
the woman miscarried. When ‘Umar asked his aides whether he had to pay
the *diyah* (blood money), they told him that he did not have to because
he was only instructing her. However, ‘Ali instructed him, “They misled
you, they ill-advised you and you have to pay the *diyah* of the baby to
its mother.”

Men too were on the receiving end of ‘Umar’s *durrah* (stick). People
used to say, “The stick of ‘Umar is sharper than the sword of al-Hajjaj
(al-Hajjaj was a well-known tyrant who had killed thousands of his
opponents).”[^61] Ibn Sa’dah al-Hadhalah narrates, “I saw ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab in the market beating the merchants with his stick.

When they gathered around the food in the market, he wanted to disturb
them, so he used his stick.”[^62] When he was not using his stick, he
often used his hands or his feet, and sometimes he would bite people. In
one instance, he bit the hand of Ubaydallah Ibn ‘Umar, the son of a man
who was known as Abu Isa, and warned him, “Do not call yourself Abu Isa,
since Isa [Prophet Jesus] did not have a father.”[^63]

Again in the market, he beat people for purchasing red meat, which was
considered a delicacy, two days in a row.[^64] In addition, he beat
Timem al-Darimi for performing the *sunnah* (recommended) prayers after
the afternoon prayers.[^65] He even beat the man who later became a
popular transmitter of hadith, Abu Huraira. Many other incidents of
‘Umar’s brutality have been reported by the companions, such as
Bilal[^66] and Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf.[^67] Even ‘Umar himself knew he
was too harsh and once prayed, “O my Lord, I am tough, so make me
soft.”[^68]

Unlike his predecessor Abu Bakr, ‘Umar was known for his toughness, even
sometimes, he was merciless.[^69] ‘Umar’s toughness caused many of the
companions in Madinah to react against him. Openly, the Muslims could
not retaliate against him, thus the people would aim their stones at him
during the stoning of the symbolic *Shaytan* at the Hajj and cause him
to bleed.[^70]

In addition to using aggression, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab also imprisoned
many people during his caliphate. Al-Dhahabi relates that ‘Umar detained
three prominent companions: Abdullah Ibn Masud, Abu Dardah, and Abu
Masud al-Ansari.[^71] According to Abu Bakr Ibn al-Arabi, they were only
released after ‘Umar died.[^72] ‘Umar imprisoned these three because he
feared they would spread certain hadith from the Prophet that threatened
his rule.

‘Umar saw little value in the blood relationships between people and the
Holy Prophet. When Safiyah, the aunt of the Prophet, whom the Prophet
respected considerably lost her son, the Prophet consoled her by saying
that Allah would build a house in Paradise for anyone who lost a child
and was patient through the ordeal.

After hearing this, Safiyah was comforted and the Prophet left her.
Afterwards, ‘Umar came and said to her, “Safiyah, I heard your cries,
and your relationship to the Prophet will not help you on the Day of
Judgment.” At that, she started crying again. The Prophet heard her cry
again and said, “O my aunt, you are still crying and you heard what I
said to you?” She replied, “No, O Messenger of Allah, what made me cry
again was when ‘Umar said to me that my relationship to the Prophet
would not help me on the Day of Judgment.” Angered, the Prophet told
Bilal to call for the prayer (*adhan*), and when the people assembled,
he climbed the pulpit, praised Allah and asked, “What is wrong with the
people that they claim that my relationship does not benefit them and is
useless on the Day of Judgment? My relationship is binding in this world
and in the Hereafter.”[^73]

‘Umar is also recorded to have had a propensity towards music and wine
(*nabeeth*[^74]).[^75] He habitually listened to and requested music to
be played and he is said to have stayed awake until dawn to listen to
singing (*ghina*).[^76]

Since wine was initially discouraged rather than prohibited, some
Muslims continued to drink between the Qur’anic revelations of c. 2:219
and c. 4:42 and ‘Umar was one of those who drank between the
revelations. Once while drunk, he fractured the head of Abd al-Rahman
Ibn Auf and then sat poetically lamenting the *mushrikeen* who had been
killed in the Battle of Badr. At that moment, Allah revealed the third
verse that completely prohibited the drinking of alcohol (wine).[^77]
Having realized Allah’s commandment that there was no more
permissibility for drinking, ‘Umar cried out, “We stopped (*intahayna*),
we stopped (*intahayna*).”[^78]

However, during his caliphate, ‘Umar is recorded to have continued to
ask for wine - once when he was traveling to Shaam (Syria);[^79] and
once when he was traveling to Mecca, he met a man named Abdullah Ibn
Ayash al-Maszumi and sipped his wine before passing it on to the man on
his right.[^80] Other stories have also been recorded; however, the last
known incident of him drinking alcohol was after doing his prayers just
before he was killed.[^81] However, some tend to explain these stories
by saying that the wine that ‘Umar drank after the time of *jahilliyah*
was non-alcoholic.

#### Qur’an as a “Book”

By the time ‘Umar became the caliph, Muslims already had the Qur’an in
its complete and present-day form. Many verses of the Qur’an also attest
to its preserved status before the life of the Prophet ended.[^82]

The Prophet handpicked the scribes who would copy word for word each
*ayah* (considered as a letter or a word in the Qur’an) under his direct
supervision. The known scribes were: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Abdullah Ibn
Masud, Abu Dardah, Zayd Ibn Thabit, Ma’adh Ibn Jabal, and Salim Mawla
Abi Hudayfah. During the lifetime of the Prophet, many of the
companions - forty-one of whom are recorded by Ibn Nadeem[^83] - had
written the entire Qur’an with their own hands; therefore, each copy was
known as “the copy of Abdullah Ibn Masud,” “the copy of Ibn Abbas,” and
so on.

In later times, some attempted to credit Abu Bakr and ‘Umar for first
compiling the Qur’an, but those who did so neglected the earlier
historical references. In reality, ‘Umar not only lacked interest in the
Qur’an, but he also cast serious doubt on its completeness and
authenticity. Oftentimes, he would inform the people from the *minbar*
(pulpit) that some verses of the Qur’an were removed.

Even more, ‘Umar believed that certain verses were lost with the death
of the Prophet.[^84] In accordance with al-Bukhari, ‘Umar is related to
have said, “Allah sent Muhammad with the truth, and He sent a book to
him, and we used to read verses in that book, and we don’t find them
anymore.” The “missing” verse that ‘Umar is referring to - in which only
he thought - was about stoning of an adulterer.[^85]

At times, during the dawn prayers, ‘Umar would recite verses that no one
else heard; he called them “*al-hafd* *wal-khul*.”[^86] As for the
entirety of the Qur’an, ‘Umar mentioned that it was composed of a
whopping 1,027,000 letters, while the Qur’an consists of just over
300,000 letters.[^87]

‘Umar would argue, for instance, with one of the original transcribers
of the Qur’an, Hudayfah. ‘Umar asked him how many verses were in *Surah
al-Ahzab*, and Hudayfah answered that there were 72 or 73. ‘Umar
countered that the number of verses in that *surah* was similar to the
number of verses in *Surah al-Baqarah*, which has 286 verses, implying
that over 200 verses of the original *surah* had been lost.[^88] He also
said that *Surah al-Tawbah* (*Repentance*) was only one-fourth of the
original, and that it was first called “Surah al-Adhab (The Punishment)”
before the people changed its name to *Surah al-Tawbah*.[^89]

*Tafseer*, the interpretation of the verses of the Holy Qur’an was also
not one of ‘Umar’s strong points. He would often discourage, even react
violently when people asked him questions about the meaning of the
Qur’an, which he could not answer.[^90] When a man came to ‘Umar and
inquired about what c. 4:128 meant, ‘Umar hit him rather than admitting
that he did not know the answer. Similarly, when someone asked ‘Umar
what “fodder” meant in the verse,

***“We split the earth in fragments and produce therein grain...and
fruits and fodder”***[^91]

‘Umar reproached him saying, “You have the book of your Lord with you.
Practice what you know from it, and leave what you do not know.”[^92]
According to Ibn Abil Hadid, ‘Umar was not concerned with the
interpretation (*tafseer*) of the Qur’an and used to say, “Just recite
the Qur’an and do not interpret it (*tufassiruhu*),”[^93] since he
himself did not know much about it.

Occasionally, ‘Umar would hear verses of the Qur’an but not recognize
them as such.[^94] One day, ‘Umar angrily interrupted a man who was
reading verse 11 from *Surah al-Tawbah* because he did not recognize the
verse and assumed that the man was inventing it. Defending himself, the
man asserted, “Yes, I heard it from Ubay Ibn Ka’ab,” one of the
transcribers of the Qur’an. Then, ‘Umar went to Ubay Ibn Ka’ab and asked
him three times about the verse. Each time he replied, “Yes, I received
it from Prophet Muhammad.” After that, ‘Umar left raising his hands and
shouting “*Allahu akbar* (God is Great),” “*Allahu akbar*,” confessing
that the verse was authentic but that he had never heard it before.[^95]

Elsewhere, when ‘Umar saw verse nine of *Surah al-Jumuah* (c. 62)
written on a tablet he questioned, “Who dictated this verse to you?”
Someone replied that Ubay Ibn Ka’ab had narrated the verse. ‘Umar said,
“The Prophet has died and we did not read this verse the way it is
written here.” He then continued that the verse should have read “*fa
umdhu ilaa dhikr Allah*,” instead of “*fasaw ilaa dhikr Allah*” (with
both versions having the same meaning of “march” or “go”).[^96]

‘Umar himself knew that his knowledge of the Qur’an was lacking because
once when he heard a man read verse 107 of *Surah al-Maidah*, he told
him, “You are a liar.” The man rebuked, “You are a liar.” Another man
interjected, “Are you denying that the Commander of the Faithful is
saying the truth?” The man replied, “No, I respect the Commander of the
Faithful, but he is unaware of the Qur’an.” ‘Umar admitted, “He is
telling the truth (*sadaq*).”[^97]

One of the scribers of the Qur’an, Ubay Ibn Ka’ab commented, “I was busy
with the Qur’an during the time of the Prophet, but you (‘Umar) were
busy walking in the markets and in the streets.”[^98]

An assailant stabbed ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab on Wednesday, four days before
the end of Dhul Hijjah in 23 ah.[^99] As his condition worsened he
realized that his life was about to end, thus he began addressing the
subject of his impending death with apprehension and anxiety. Abdullah
Ibn Amar Ibn Rabiah relates:

I saw ‘Umar when he was on his deathbed, holding in his hand a piece of
straw. He raised it and said, “I wish I was this straw. I wish I was
nothing. I wish my mother had not delivered me.” [^100]

Soon after, he said:

I wish I was a male sheep in my family. They would feed me and fatten
me, and once I became fat, someone who likes my family would visit, so
they would slaughter me. They would grill part of me and dry the second
half. After that, they would eat me and turn me into adharah (human
waste - feces). I wish I was not a human being. [^101]

He expressed a similar sentiment again:

I wish I was a tree on the side of a road, and a camel would pass by and
eat me, and start to chew me and swallow me, and then get rid of me as
its droppings. I wish I was not a human being. [^102]

These statements raise many questions. Perhaps ‘Umar was regretting how
he had treated the Prophet, or how he had accused the Prophet of
hallucinating,[^103] or how he had delayed the burial of the Prophet
until Abu Bakr had returned to participate in the power-sharing
talks.[^104] Perhaps he regretted tugging on the clothes of the Prophet
while he was reading *Salat al-Janazah* (Prayer of the Deceased);[^105]
or raising his voice above the voice of the Prophet despite the command
of the Qur’an to the contrary (c. 49:2). Maybe at the time of his death,
the incident of the attack on the house of Fatima al-Zahra came to his
mind.

Just before he died, ‘Umar was resting his head in the lap of his son
Abdullah. He asked his son to put his cheek on the ground. His son did
not listen, so ‘Umar repeated his words harshly. As soon as his cheek
touched the earth, ‘Umar said, “Woe to ‘Umar and to the mother of ‘Umar,
if Allah does not forgive ‘Umar.” After the fatal attack on him on
Wednesday, ‘Umar was buried the following Sunday, the first day of
Muharram, in 24 ah. His *khalifah* lasted for ten years, five months,
and twenty-one days.

### ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan

As mentioned elsewhere, the primary reason why ‘Uthman was killed was
for mismanaging the affairs of the Muslim nation, and it was Lady Aishah
who was the forerunner to censure him regarding this.

While both the Prophet and Abu Bakr had distributed the revenue from the
treasury equally amongst the Muslims, ‘Umar, on the other hand, begun to
shift the distribution in favor of his allies. Thus ‘Umar had assigned
Lady Aishah, the daughter of Abu Bakr; Hafsa, his own daughter; and Umme
Habiba, the daughter of Abu Sufyan with 12,000 *dinars* a month, while
providing the rest of the wives of the Prophet with only 5,000 *dinars*
per month.

When ‘Uthman came to power, he wanted to reinstate the equal stipend
among the Prophet’s widows but Lady Aishah protested,[^106] and thus the
campaign to turn against ‘Uthman first began by her. According to
al-Tabari,[^107] she is recorded to have said, “Kill this Nathal[^108]
(the nickname she gave to ‘Uthman), for he has disbelieved.”[^109]

Besides his practice of nepotism and favoritism, ‘Uthman on many levels
suspended the practices of the Qur’an and the Holy Prophet. Blatantly
disregarding the two most fundamental aspects of Islam had undoubtedly
caused a furor amongst the Muslim population, as a result of his
actions, ‘Uthman was murdered and his corpse was prohibited from being
buried inside the Muslim cemetery of al-Baqi,[^110] and to add to this,
the prayer of the deceased was prohibited from being performed on
him.[^111]

Further information about these individuals can be found in the history
of al-Tabari.[^112]

Innovations of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab
-----------------------------------

According to historical records, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab prided himself on
his “improvements” to the teachings of the Qur’an and the Prophet.
Although Abu Bakr and ‘Uthman both adjusted religious law for special
cases,[^113] ‘Umar relied almost entirely on his own opinion and
encouraged others to do the same.

When he appointed Shurayh al-Qadi as the religious judge of Madinah, he
instructed him, “If you are searching for a verdict, then look in the
Book of God. If you do not find one, then look in the tradition of the
Prophet. But if you do not find it in the tradition of the Prophet, then
make up a verdict yourself.” [^114]

Similarly, he wrote to Abu Musa al-Ashari, “If you do not find an answer
in the Book or the tradition, then make an analogy and develop an answer
yourself.”[^115] For these reasons, al-Tabari says that people preferred
not to take their disputes to ‘Umar, because he was known for judging by
his personal beliefs, rather than the Islamic criteria.[^116]

### Changes During ‘Umar’s Reign

Some of the practices that ‘Umar is best known for changing are the
*adhan* (call to prayer), *tarawih*[^117] prayer, prayers for the
deceased, and the laws of divorce which we will explain in detail:

#### Adhan (Call to Prayer)

Initially, “*as-salatu khayrun min an-nawm* (prayer is better than
sleep)” was not part of the *adhan*. It came about one morning when
‘Umar’s servant came to wake him for prayer by calling to him,
“*as-salatu khayrun min an-nawm*.” Approving of that phrase, ‘Umar
instructed the *muadhdhin* (a person who performs the call to prayer) to
include it in the *adhan* from then on.[^118]

#### History of the Adhan

A majority of the Sunni commentators maintain that the Prophet learned
the *adhan* from a companion named Abdullah Ibn Zayd. Narrators such as
al-Tirmidhi, Abu Dawud, and Ibn Majah say that the Prophet asked his
companions how he should inform people about the time for prayer. Some
said he should use a banner, others said a horn, and others said a bell,
like the Christians. According to these narrators, it is reported that
on that night, Abdullah Ibn Zayd had the following strange dream:

Abdullah Ibn Zayd saw a man carrying a bell in his hand. He asked if he
could buy the bell, and the man asked him what he wanted it for.
Abdullah Ibn Zayd said, “I want to use it to call the people to prayer.”
The man replied, “I can teach you something better than ringing the
bell,” and then he taught Abdullah Ibn Zayd the *adhan*.

According to these commentators, in the morning Abdullah Ibn Zayd told
the Prophet his dream. The Prophet replied, “This is a true dream that
you have seen. Come with me to Bilal - teach him what you have seen in
the dream and let Bilal learn the *adhan*.” The story concludes that
when ‘Umar heard the *adhan*, he told the Prophet, “I swear, I saw the
same dream,” and the Prophet said, “praise be to Allah.”

Clearly, this story cannot be true for surely Allah, the Merciful, the
Compassionate to humankind, would not provide detailed revelation and
then omit an important practice such as the *adhan*.

Nonetheless, there exists another explanation, which is accepted by
Shi’a scholars:[^119]

Gabriel came to the Prophet while the Prophet was resting on ‘Ali.
Gabriel read the *adhan* to them. To maintain this, the Prophet turned
to ‘Ali and said, “Did you hear the *adhan*?” ‘Ali said, “Yes.” The
Prophet said, “Did you memorize it?” ‘Ali said, “Yes.” The Prophet said,
“Then call Bilal; let us teach him the *adhan*.” So they called Bilal
and taught him the *adhan*.[^120]

An important point to note is that because the instructions came from
angel Gabriel, the *adhan* must be considered as being part of the
revelation, and not a whimsical dream seen by one of the companions.

#### Prayer without Taharah (Ritual Purity)

Al-Bukhari narrates that one day a man came to ‘Umar and said, “I am in
a state of *janabah* (ritual impurity) and I cannot find water.” ‘Umar
told him, “Do not pray.” Ammar Ibn Yasir, who was sitting there
retorted:

Do you not remember that you and I were in a battalion going to the
battles, and both of us woke up and found ourselves in a state of ritual
impurity, and we did not find water? So you did not pray, but I did the
*tayammum* (ritual purification by means of dust) in the dust. We
mentioned this to the Prophet, and the Prophet said that you should have
put your hands in the dust and performed the *tayammum*. [^121]

Primarily, the Qur’an prescribes the *tayammum* for situations when
water cannot be found. (c. 4:43) Therefore, most of the Sunni schools of
thought follow the Qur’an in this regard. Only the Hanafi school follows
‘Umar’s opinion and indicates that *tayammum* is permissible only while
traveling or ill, but in all other cases, a person who cannot find water
for *taharah* should not pray.

#### Tarawih Prayers

Al-Bukhari narrates from Abdullah Ibn Abd al-Qari:

I went with ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab during his period of caliphate one
night in the Month of Ramadhan to the mosque. We saw the people praying
scattered, not together. ‘Umar said, “It is best if these people can
pray together, and there is only one who leads the prayers.” So he
gathered them and appointed Ubay Ibn Ka’ab to lead the prayers. Another
night, I went with ‘Umar to the mosque and saw that the people were
praying together, organized, and ‘Umar said, “What an excellent
innovation (niam al-bidah hadhihi).”[^122]

#### Prayers for the Deceased

Although narrators like Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal, al-Muslim, and al-Nisa’i
all relate that the Prophet read prayers over the deceased with five
*takbiraat* (uttering “*Allahu akbar*”);[^123] however, ‘Umar reduced
the number of *takbiraat* in prayers over the deceased from five to
four.[^124]

#### Three Divorces in One Session

According to the Holy Qur’an (c. 2:229), a married couple may divorce
each other three times before they are no longer allowed to remarry each
other.[^125] Thus, divorce must be declared and its rulings applied on
three separate periods; the pronouncement of the three divorces cannot
be declared in one declaration. The Holy Prophet explained:

A man came to the Prophet and told him, “I divorced my wife.” The
Prophet asked, “How did you divorce her?” He said, “Three times in one
session.” The Prophet said, “That divorce is considered only one
divorce. It cannot be considered three divorces, so you may take your
wife back.”[^126]

However, historians say that divorce became more prevalent during the
time of the second caliph; thus to make divorce easier, ‘Umar allowed
men to read all three pronouncements of divorce at one time.[^127]

### Other Actions performed by ‘Umar

‘Umar also did following:

• Prevented the death announcement of the Prophet

• Objected to the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah

• Refused to join the dispatch of Usama as the Prophet commanded him to
do so just before his death

• Prevented the Prophet from narrating his will

• He was the first person to give allegiance to Abu Bakr at Saqifah

• Offered two options to ‘Ali and Fatima al-Zahra - pay allegiance to
Abu Bakr or face the consequences

• Appointed Mu’awiyah as governor of Syria

• Appointed Abu Huraira as governor of Bahrain and then accused him of
theft and lying about the statements of the Prophet

• Allocated different salaries to different groups of people,
introducing discrimination into the financial system

• Permitted wiping over one’s socks in *wudhu* instead of removing them
and performing it on the bare feet;

• Prevented people from mourning over the dead[^128]

• Forced people who had taken the names of prophets (as their first
names) to change their names[^129]

• Required all men to offer the same amount of *mahr* (marriage gift) to
all women

‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan
--------------------

According to Muslim historians, the third caliph ‘Uthman Ibn al-Affan
was assassinated because of his financial mismanagement and religious
digression. The prominent historian Ibn Sa’d says that ‘Uthman Ibn
al-Affan governed for twelve years.

For the first six years, he was very popular, but in the second six
years, he brought his family members and clan to political power and
flooded them with money, whereby he angered the people because those
whom he appointed as administrators and governors over all the Islamic
lands were corrupt.[^130] Al-Tabari and Ibn al-Atheer go further and
agree that financial mismanagement was not the only reason why ‘Uthman
was killed; nonetheless, they say that they do not want to mention the
other reasons because they do not want to stir the tension in the
public.[^131] Other sources are more vocal about what actually happened
during that time.

Before assuming the caliphate, ‘Uthman had agreed to follow the policies
of his predecessors. However, after becoming the caliph, he reverted to
the *jahiliyyah* practice of favoring his own relatives. Aware of
‘Uthman’s tendencies in that direction, ‘Umar had previously warned him
to refrain from nepotism because the people would reject it and the
Quraysh would lose power,[^132] however ‘Uthman did not heed his advice.

Unlike Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, ‘Uthman filled the official positions with
his own tribesmen, such as Abu Sufyan, Marwan Ibn al-Hakam, Mu’awiyah
Ibn Abu Sufyan, al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah, Abdullah Ibn Abi Sarh, and Sa’ed
Ibn al-Aas. In doing so, he angered many people, even those on the side
of Quraysh, such as Lady Aishah.

Particularly upset were those who lost power due to ‘Uthman’s nepotism,
such as ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas, who lost Egypt; al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah, who
lost Kufa; and Abu Musa al-Ashari, who lost Basra. Adding insult to
injury, ‘Uthman then appointed incompetent and corrupt individuals from
among the Bani Umayyah to fill those positions. As a result, some of
those townships revolted and in Kufa for example, the people ousted
‘Uthman’s choice and reinstated Abu Musa al-Ashari.[^133]

The administrative mismanagement began with al-Hakam Ibn al-Aas and his
son Marwan. The Holy Prophet had exiled both of them from Madinah
because they had been agitating the populace. During the caliphates of
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, both leaders refused permission for them to return.

However, when ‘Uthman came to power, not only did he bring back al-Hakam
Ibn al-Aas and Marwan, but he gave al-Hakam Ibn al-Aas 100,000
*dirhams*, and he gave his own daughter, Umme Aban in marriage to
Marwan. As his son-in-law, Marwan became a close minister to ‘Uthman and
in turn, ‘Uthman presented him with many gifts, such as allocating him
all of the income of Africa. He even gave Marwan’s brother Harith Ibn
al-Hakam 300,000 *dirhams*.

‘Uthman favored his own relatives for government positions despite their
incompetence, and in doing so, he alienated the rest of the Muslims,
especially the Muhajireen and the Ansar. Rumor spread in the city of
Kufa that ‘Uthman wanted to honor his stepbrother at the expense of the
ummah of Muhammad.[^134]

In truth, ‘Uthman replaced Sa’d Ibn Abi al-Waqqas, the well-liked
governor of Kufa, with his step-brother al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah and thereby
earned the wrath of the people, who asked whether it was just to replace
Sa’d Ibn Abi al-Waqqas, whom they felt was moderate, kind, and forgiving
with his own step-brother, who was in their words, “stupid, irreligious,
and corrupt (*ahmaq, majin, wa* *fajir*).”[^135]

He also allocated the entire income of Africa, from Tripoli to Tangiers,
to another stepbrother, Ibn Abi Sarh and made him supreme governor of
Egypt instead of governor of the countryside. In addition, he expanded
the authority of Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, which had been limited to
Damascus during the time of ‘Umar, to include all of Shaam, which
encompassed Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine, and other areas at that
time. He treated others from the Bani Umayyah in a similar fashion.

These actions brought him into conflict with the people, not because
they disliked the Bani Umayyah, but because those whom he appointed were
dishonest and corrupt. However, when historians analyze the reasons
behind ‘Uthman’s assassination, they say that it was not only because he
departed from the egalitarian spirit of the Qur’an and allowed his
clansmen to take from the people at a time of economic crisis and
poverty, but that *bidah* (religious innovation) was a factor as well.
Closer investigation of that period reveals that ‘Uthman did in fact
attempt to make changes to the religion.

‘Uthman’s nepotism led to his assassination and the awaited succession
of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to the caliphate. After ‘Ali was murdered, power
again shifted to the Quraysh group under the rule of Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu
Sufyan. Learning from ‘Uthman’s errors, Mu’awiyah balanced political
with tribal alliances and followed ‘Umar’s practice of appointing allies
from outside his own tribe to official positions. Hence, ‘Amr Ibn
al-Aas, al-Mugheerah Ibn al-Shu’bah, Abu Huraira, al-Numan Ibn Basheer,
and Abd al-Rahman Ibn Khalid all found places in the new caliphate under
Mu’awiyah, and even Lady Aishah was pacified.

### Al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah

One of the first examples of ‘Uthman’s mismanagement revolved around his
stepbrother, al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah, whom ‘Uthman made the governor of
Kufa - much to the dismay of the people. Al-Waleed was habituated to
drinking wine. One day when he was drunk, he came to the mosque to lead
the prayers.

After finishing two *rakats* (units of prayer), he turned to the people
and asked, “Do you need more prayers?” One of the companions reproached
him, “May the Lord never increase you in goodness, and neither the one
who sent you as a governor over us (‘Uthman),” and then he threw a
handful of pebbles in the face of al-Waleed. Others in the mosque
followed suit, and al-Waleed drunkenly staggered back to the palace as
the people stoned him.[^136]

A group of Kufans went to Madinah to raise their grievances about
al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah, but ‘Uthman did not believe them and mocked them,
so they went to the house of Lady Aishah. Aishah was furious at ‘Uthman
and told him, “You abandoned the tradition of the Prophet.”[^137] News
of this incident spread and a crowd gathered in the Masjid of Madinah.

Those who took Lady Aishah’s side and those who took ‘Uthman’s side
fought and threw stones at each other. This day marked the first public
fighting between Muslims in the city of Madinah since the death of the
Prophet and this incident forced ‘Uthman to replace his stepbrother with
Sa’ed Ibn al-Aas as governor of Kufa in order to resolve the matter.

Known for his *fusuq* (impiety), Sa’ed Ibn al-Aas was no better than his
predecessor and he treated Iraq as the personal property of the Quraysh,
and in particular, the Bani Umayyah. One of those who opposed his
governorship was Malik al-Ashtar al-Nakhai, but when he brought the
issue up in public, more conflict ensued.[^138] Others also objected to
the practice of Sa’ed Ibn al-Aas that the public treasury (*bayt
al-mal*) was wide open to the Bani Umayyah. ‘Ali, Zubayr, Talha, Sa’d
Ibn Abdullah, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf, and others came to ‘Uthman to voice
their objections to him, but ‘Uthman rebuked them by saying, “This is my
family and Allah has enjoined upon me to be kind to them.”[^139]

### ‘Uthman’s Innovations

#### Third Call to Prayer (Adhan)

When the Messenger of Allah used to go to the mosque for the Friday
prayers, the person in charge of giving the call to prayer would first
call the *adhan* and then the *iqamah*, and this practice continued
during the caliphates of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar and for half of the
caliphate of ‘Uthman. However, in the seventh year of his caliphate,
‘Uthman ordered that a third call to prayer be given. This shocked the
Muslims[^140] because they considered the addition of a third *adhan* to
be a *bidah* (religious innovation).[^141]

Al-Yaqubi comments in his history that ‘Uthman had the audacity to climb
the pulpit of the Prophet and sit in the same place that the Prophet
used to sit in, even though Abu Bakr and ‘Umar respected it by never
sitting on the pulpit of the Prophet. [^142]

#### Complete Prayers in Mina

During the Hajj (the Pilgrimage), the prayers in Mina used to be
performed in the shortened version (*qasr*) by a person who was
traveling. However, one year, ‘Uthman recited the prayers in their full
form rather than in their shortened form.

Many of the companions protested and one of them, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf
came to ‘Uthman and asked, “Didn’t you pray with the Prophet in this
spot with two *rakats* (units of prayer)?” ‘Uthman said he had. Abd
al-Rahman Ibn Auf then asked, “Didn’t you pray with Abu Bakr in this
spot with two *rakats*?” ‘Uthman said he had. Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf
further asked, “Didn’t you pray with ‘Umar in this spot with two
*rakats*?” ‘Uthman said that he had. Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf continued,
“Didn’t you, yourself lead the prayers during your caliphate in this
spot with two *rakats*?”

‘Uthman said that he had. Abd al-Rahman then resorted to ask why ‘Uthman
had read the prayers with four *rakats* this time, to which ‘Uthman
replied, “I have married a woman from Mecca, and the people of Yemen
came to me and said, ‘Uthman is a resident of Mecca, but he still prays
*qasr* even though he should pray the complete prayers; because of this,
I wanted to do four *rakats*.” Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf then pointed out to
him that the Holy Prophet himself was a resident of Mecca and he still
led the prayers with two *rakats*, and that ‘Uthman should follow the
tradition of the Prophet. ‘Uthman replied, “This is the opinion that I
have followed.”[^143]

In another case, when ‘Uthman was in Mina, he became ill and asked ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib to lead the prayers. ‘Ali replied, “If you like, I will
lead the prayers, but I will pray exactly the way that Prophet Muhammad
did (the shortened prayers).” ‘Uthman objected and told him that he had
to pray with four *rakats*, and the matter was left at that.

#### Khutbah before the Eid Prayer

Throughout the time of the Prophet and the caliphates of Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, as well as today, the *khutbah* (sermon) on the day of Eid is
said after the Eid Prayer. However, ‘Uthman noticed that people tended
to miss the prayers, so he developed the habit of giving the sermon
first, and then after that leading the prayer.[^144]

#### Land of Fadak and Marwan Ibn al-Hakam

Aside from encouraging Marwan Ibn al-Hakam to return from exile and
making him his son-in-law, ‘Uthman also granted him the land of Fadak.

Originally, the Prophet gave Fadak to his daughter Fatima al-Zahra
because when the *ayah* of the Qur’an was revealed, “And give to your
kin their right,” (c. 17:26) the Angel Gabriel told the Prophet that he
had to give Fadak to Fatima. However when Abu Bakr assumed the
caliphate, he held that it was *fay* (income for all of the Muslim
community), so he took Fadak away from her and made it a public
endowment, while the Ahlul Bayt maintained that it was a private gift.
Irrespective of which viewpoint one takes, ‘Uthman still had no right to
grant the land to a specific individual, since neither public
endowments, nor private property of someone else can be given to a
private party.

In addition to Fadak, as mentioned earlier, ‘Uthman also gave Marwan all
of the income from Africa. Such treatment raised discontent among the
Muslims of Madinah because Marwan was not an admired or moral figure.

#### Reactions of Some Prominent Companions

On the account of ‘Uthman’s actions, many Muslims were not happy with
him. The negative reaction of prominent Muslims is well documented, and
a careful review of this, may perhaps give some insight as to why
‘Uthman was eventually assassinated.

Talha Ibn Abdullah said to ‘Uthman, “You brought new innovations into
the religion that people were unaware of before and did not know about
in religion.”[^145]

Al-Zubayr Ibn al-Awam one day said about ‘Uthman, “Kill him, he has
changed your religion.” The people reminded him that his own son stood
at the door of ‘Uthman and protected him. Al-Zubayr replied, “I would
not dislike that ‘Uthman be killed even if they start by killing my
son.”[^146]

Abdullah Ibn Masud used to say about ‘Uthman, “The best of truth is the
Book of Allah, and the best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad, and
the most evil things are the ones which have been innovated, and every
new thing that has been brought up is *bidah*, and every *bidah* is
deviation, and every deviant is in the Fire.”[^147]

Ammar Ibn Yasir, at the Battle of Siffeen, said that when the people
were asked why they killed ‘Uthman, they answered, “We killed him
because of his *ihdath* (new innovations).”[^148]

Sa’d Ibn Abi al-Waqqas was asked about the motivations behind ‘Uthman’s
assassination and he said, “He changed - and he has been changed. He did
good things and he did bad things. If we do good, then we have done
good, and if we do bad then we ask forgiveness from Allah.”[^149]

Malik al-Ashtar describes ‘Uthman in his letter to him as “the one who
throws the injunctions of the Qur’an behind his back (*al-nabidh li hukm
al-Qur’an*),” and “the one who has turned away from the tradition of the
Prophet (*al-haid an sunnat al-Nabi*).”[^150]

Lady Aishah, the wife of the Prophet said to ‘Uthman, “How quickly you
have deserted the tradition of your Prophet. His hair and his sandals
have not yet decomposed” [the *sunnah* fell apart quicker than the
remnants of the Holy Prophet]. She also said to him, “You have abandoned
the tradition (*sunnah*) of the Messenger of Allah.”[^151]

Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr, the son of the first caliph Abu Bakr, said to
‘Uthman, “What religion do you follow?” ‘Uthman replied, “I follow the
religion of Islam,” after which Muhammad told him, “You have changed the
injunctions of the Book of Allah,” and left angrily.[^152]

Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, a close companion of the Prophet, said to ‘Uthman,
“By God, I have seen affairs and events that I cannot even recognize”
[that they are neither in the Book of Allah, nor in the traditions of
the Prophet]. He also said, “I can see truth which has been extinguished
and falsehood (*batil*) which is being resurrected and an honest person
whom people are doing wrong to and are saying that he is a liar.”[^153]

Such comments indicate that many prominent companions were displeased
with ‘Uthman’s policies and his implementation of the Qur’an and the
*sunnah*. The accusations they levied upon him, *bidah* and *ihdath* -
both meaning innovation - are very serious in Islam. After he was
killed, his body was left for three days - unwashed and unburied.[^154]

Finally, Marwan Ibn al-Hakam and three of his disciples recited the
funeral prayers over him, but the people of Madinah, who had refused to
participate in the funeral prayer stoned them. They did not allow his
body to be buried in the same cemetery (as the Muslims), thus he was
buried outside the boundaries of the al-Baqi cemetery. Later on, when
Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan took power, he extended al-Baqi to include the
grave of ‘Uthman.

### An Analysis of ‘Uthman’s Motivations

For the first six years of his caliphate, ‘Uthman followed the
precedents of the first two caliphs. At some point however, he realized
that the people did not view him as his own entity; but rather as a
follower of the *Shaykhayn* (Abu Bakr and ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab) and he
felt that he was not receiving the respect that his position entitled
him to.

The people had permitted ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab to alter the religion
based on circumstances, such as when ‘Umar expanded the grounds of
Masjid al-Haram (the Ka’abah), or increased the government subsidies
(*aba*). However, they did not give ‘Uthman the same level of tolerance
and flexibility, even though ‘Uthman, like ‘Umar, was tied by blood to
the Holy Prophet.

Even when he tried to expand the sacred mosque (in Madinah) as ‘Umar had
done, the people said, “He expands the mosque of the Prophet, but he
changes his tradition.” According to al-Tabari, when ‘Uthman demolished
the homes around the sacred mosque for its expansion, he attempted to
compensate their owners, but they refused to accept the money. ‘Uthman
said to them, “Do you know what made you strong in front of me and made
you accuse me? It was my forbearance. ‘Umar did exactly the same thing
to you, but you did not protest.”[^155]

He said to others, “You accuse me of things that happened during the
time of ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, but you did not accuse him. You agreed
with him, and he forced you to follow him and his tradition; whereas I
gave you freedom and freedom of expression, and I barred my hands and my
tongue from you, and that is what gave you the courage to attack
me.”[^156]

Overall, ‘Uthman lacked the strength to resist the desire for fame and
recognition and new ideas in his name.

[^1]: “Round about you [Muhammad and his community] and among you in
Madinah are hypocrites and they are obstinate in hypocrisy. You do not
know them, We know them, twice shall We punish them and in addition they
shall be sent to a grievous penalty.” (9:101)

[^2]: Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Qur’an, the section on Sahab

[^3]: Miqbaas al-Hidayah; Al-Darajat al-Rafia, 10

[^4]: Mukhtasar, 2:67

[^5]: Miqbaas al-Hidayah

[^6]: Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, 1:10

[^7]: The Kamilites – one of the schools of thought in Islamic theology.

[^8]: Those who attributed divinity to certain individuals.

[^9]: Ibn Hajar, al-Isabah, 1:17

[^10]: Ibn Hajar, al-Isabah, 1:19; Ibn Abd al-Birr, al-Estiaab, 1:8; Ibn
al-Atheer, Usd al-Ghabah, 1:3

[^11]: Al-Sa’d al-Tafatahzani, Sharh al-Maqasir, 5:310; al-Marizi,
al-Isabah, 1:19; al-Shawqani, Irshad al-Fuhul

[^12]: Sheikh Muhammad Abduh, Adwa ala al-Sunnah Muhammadi; Sheikh
Mahmud Abu Riyah, Abu Huraira, 1:01

[^13]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah

[^14]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Jami Bayan al-Ilm

[^15]: Abul Fida, al-Mukhtasar fi Akhbar al-Bashar

[^16]: “Ashabi kal-nujum...”

[^17]: Al-Taysir fi Sharh al-Tahrer, 3:243, Al-Muntakhab, Ibn Qudamah

[^18]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Jami Bayan al-Ilm, 2:89

[^19]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Jami Bayan al-Ilm, 2:90; Ilam al-Muwaqain,
2:223; Al-Bahr al-Muhit, 5:528

[^20]: Ilam al-Muwaqain, 2:223

[^21]: Sahih al-Bukhari; Sahih al-Muslim, Bab al-Hawdh, 7:65; Musnad
Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal, 5:333

[^22]: Ahmad Amin, Fajr al-Islam, p.213

[^23]: Al-Bayhaqi, Dalail al-Nubuwah, 3:218; Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Marif,
p.159

[^24]: Al-Tabari, 2:197; Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, 2:154

[^25]: Sahih al-Muslim 5:78; Dalail al-Nubuwah; Al-Bayhaqi, 3:234;
Al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, p. 191

[^26]: Muhammad Hasanain al-Haykil, Hayatu Muhammad, p. 244

[^27]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 15:22

[^28]: al-Haykil, Hayat Muhammad, p.245

[^29]: Mafatih al-Ghayb, 9:53; Tafseer al-Fakhr al-Razi, 3:198; Al-Serah
al-Halabiyah, 2:227

[^30]: Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, 2:158; Ibn Katheer,
Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 4:32; Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:203

[^31]: Ibn Katheer, Al-Serah al-Nabawiyah, 2:391-395; Dalail al-Nubuwah,
3:106; Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 3:321

[^32]: Maghazi al-Waqidi, 1:152; Dalail al-Nubuwah, 3:124

[^33]: Ibn Shabah, Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawarah, 3:1033

[^34]: Al-Haythami, Majma al-Zawaid, 9:124; Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:465,
hadith 1155; Muhammad Hasanain Hayqil, Hayat Muhammad, p.312

[^35]: Al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, 2:412

[^36]: Al-Sirah al-Halabiyah, 3:39; Maghazi al-Waqidi, 2:654; Sirat Ibn
Hisham, 3:349; Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:200

[^37]: Al-Zamakhshari, Tafseer al-Kashshaf, 2:259; Tarikh Abul Fida,
1:208; Al-Serah al-Halabiyyah, 3:110

[^38]: Sunan al-Nisai, 3:871, hadith 3877

[^39]: Maghazi al-Waqidi, 2:904

[^40]: Maghazi al-Waqidi, 2:904

[^41]: Tarikh al-Khamis, p.102; Al-Serah al-Halabiyah, 3:109

[^42]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:462

[^43]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Marif, 167

[^44]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:615

[^45]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’ad, 3:187

[^46]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:316

[^47]: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawarah, 2:654

[^48]: Ibn al-Atheer, Usd al-Ghabah, 4:145

[^49]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 5:17

[^50]: Al-Aqad, Abqariyat ‘Umar, p. 33

[^51]: Ibn Ishaq, Al-Serah al-Nabawiyah, 160; Ibn Asakir, Mukhtasar
Tarikh Damashq, 18:271

[^52]: Ibn Asakir, Mukhtasar Tarikh Damashq, 18:269

[^53]: Al-Aqad, Abqariyat ‘Umar, p. 33

[^54]: Sunan Ibn Majah, 1:693, Musnad Ahmad, 1:20

[^55]: Ibn al-Jawzi, Tarikh ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, p.114; al-Shaykhan,
p.189

[^56]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wal-Muluk, 5:17; Ibn Atheer, al-Kamil
fil-Tarikh, 3:54

[^57]: Ibn Hajir, al-Isabah, 3:606; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat Ibn Sa´d, 3:208

[^58]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 3:111

[^59]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 1:237; Mustadrak al-Hakim, 3:191

[^60]: Bab al-Tabasum, 4:63

[^61]: Tarikh al-Madinah Al-Munawarah, 2:686

[^62]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, 5:60

[^63]: Umdat al-Qari, 7:143

[^64]: Al-Haythami, Majma al-Zawaid, 5:35

[^65]: Al-Haythami, Majma al-Zawaid; Sahih al-Muslim, 1:310; Musnad
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 4:102

[^66]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, p.130

[^67]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:55

[^68]: Tarikh al-Khamis, 2:241

[^69]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, 5:60; Umdat al-Qari, 7:143; Sahih al-Muslim,
1:310; Musnad Ahmad, 4:102; Ibn al-Jawzi, Sirat ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab,
p.174; Kanz al-Umal, 4:334

[^70]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, 5:64

[^71]: Al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, 1:2; Adwa ala Sunan
Muhammadiyah, p.45

[^72]: Abu Bakr Ibn al-Arabi, Al-Awasim min al-Qawasim, p.75-76

[^73]: Al-Haythami, Majm al-Zawaid, 8:216

[^74]: Nabeeth is a form of wine.

[^75]: Al-Aqad, Abqariyat ‘Umar, 61:265

[^76]: Sunan al-Kubra al-Bayhaqi, 5:69; Al-Muhalla, 9:62; Al Tabaqaat
al-Kubraa, 4:163 Holy Qur’an, 5:91; Ibn Sa’d, Al Tabaqaat al-Kubraa,
4:163

[^77]: Holy Qur’an, 5:91

[^78]: “Intahayna, intahayna;” Al-Mustadraf, 2:499-500; Jami al-Bayan,
2:211

[^79]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, 3:230

[^80]: Muwatta Imam al-Malik, 2:894

[^81]: Sahih al-Bukhari; Tabaqat Ibn Sa´d, 3:257; Istiab of Ibn Abd
al-Birr, 3:1154

[^82]: Holy Qur’an, 80:13-15, 76:77-79, 25:5, & 98:2

[^83]: Ibn Nadeem, Al-Fihrist, p. 41

[^84]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 5:179

[^85]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 10:43; Abu Ubaydah, Al-Itqan, 2:42; Al-Suyuti,
Al-Dur al-Manthur, 1:106

[^86]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Dur al-Manthur, 3:296; Al-Mutaqi al-Hindi, Kanz
al-Ummal, 8:74-75 & 78

[^87]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Dur al-Manthur, 6:222; Al-Haythami, Majma
al-Zawaid, 7:163; Kanz al-Umal, 1:517

[^88]: Musnad Ahmad, 5:132; Mustadrak al-Hakim, 2:415; Sunan al-Bayhaqi,
8:211

[^89]: Mustadrak al-Hakim, 2:330; Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 1:105

[^90]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummal, 1:229; Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr
al-Manthur, 6:321

[^91]: Holy Qur’an, 80:31

[^92]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 6:317; Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz
al-Ummal, 2:328

[^93]: Ibn Abil Hadid, 3:2 &120

[^94]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummal, 2:568

[^95]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummal, 2:605

[^96]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 3:201

[^97]: Ibn Shabbah, Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, 2:709

[^98]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummal

[^99]: Ibn al-Atheer, Usd al-Ghabah

[^100]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, 129

[^101]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa, 142; Muntakhab Kanz al-Ummal,
4:361, 6:365

[^102]: Muntakhab Kanz al-Ummal, 4:361

[^103]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 1.120; Kitab al-Ilm; Sahih al-Muslim, 11:89

[^104]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:442; Sirat Ibn Hisham, 4:305

[^105]: Sahih al-Bukhari; Kitab al-Libas; Kanz al-Umaal, hadith 4403

[^106]: Tarikh al-Yaqubi, 2:132

[^107]: Al-Tabari, 5:72

[^108]: Nathal was a Jewish man with a long beard who resided in Madinah
at the time.

[^109]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 3:477; Ibn A’atham, Al-Futuh, 1:64

[^110]: When Mu’awiyah came into power, he extended the boundaries of
al-Baqi cemetery to include the burial site of ‘Uthman.

[^111]: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawarah, 3:1052

[^112]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:452

[^113]: For example, Abu Bakr was unwilling to prosecute Khalid Ibn
al-Waleed, who killed Malik Ibn Nuwayrah, and who on the same night, had
committed adultery with the wife of the victim. Abu Bakr said, “He made
ijtihad (deducing Muslim law), but of course he made an error,” and left
the matter at that.

[^114]: Muhammad al-Khudari, Tarikh al-Tashri al-Islami, p.83

[^115]: Ibid

[^116]: Al-Tabari, 2:617

[^117]: In the Sunni tradition, tarawih is done as a congregational
prayer during the nights of the Month of Ramadhan, while the Shi’a
perform it individually.

[^118]: Jalal al-Deen al-Suyuti, footnoted in Tanweer al-Hawalik,
referencing Muwatta Malik; Sunan al-Tirmidhi, 1:64

[^119]: Wasail al-Shiah, 4:612

[^120]: Prophet Muhammad said, “‘Ali, you can see all that I can see,
and you can hear all that I can hear; except that you are not a prophet
but a vicegerent and you are virtually on the path of virtue.” Nahjul
Balaghah, sermon 192

[^121]: Sunan al-Nisa’i, 1:169; Sunan Ibn Majah, 1:188; Al-Bayhaqi,
Al-Sunan al-Kubaa, 1:209; Tafseer Ibn Katheer, 4:505; Ibn Qudaamah,
Al-Mughni, 1:234; Ibn Rushd, Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 1:63

[^122]: Sahih al-Bukaari, 3:58; Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawarah, 2:713;
Al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, 1:309; Tarikh al-Yaqubi, 2:114

[^123]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 4:370; Sahih al-Muslim, Baab al-Salat
ala al-Qabr; Kitab al-Janazah

[^124]: Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafah, p. 137

[^125]: Al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, 1:378

[^126]: Sirat Ibn Ishaq, 2:191

[^127]: Sahih al-Muslim, Chapter of Talaq al-Thalath, 1:575; Musnad
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 1:314; Al-Bayhaqi, 7:336

[^128]: Umdat al-Qari, 4:87; Sahih al-Bukhari, 2:102; Sahih al-Muslim,
2:238

[^129]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, 5:51; Umdat al-Qari, 7:143

[^130]: Ibn Sa’d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 3:64

[^131]: Tarikh al-Tabari 4:365; Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh,
3:167

[^132]: Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, 3:67

[^133]: Ibn Sa’d, al-Tabaqat, 5:33

[^134]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:32

[^135]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:30; Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah,
3:17

[^136]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:32

[^137]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:34

[^138]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:40; Tarikh al-Tabari, 4:322; Kamil
fil-Tarikh, 3:137

[^139]: Al-Baladri, Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:25; Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balaghah, 3:35

[^140]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:39; al-Muntazam, 5:7

[^141]: Ibn Abi Shaybah, al-Musanaf, 2:48; Al-Zuhai; and others

[^142]: Al-Yaqubi, 2:162

[^143]: Tarikh al-Tabari 4:268; Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:39

[^144]: Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, 2:261

[^145]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:29

[^146]: Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 9:36

[^147]: Hayliyat al-Awliya, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:38; 3:42; Ansab
al-Ashraf, 5:36

[^148]: Kitab Siffeen, 3:19

[^149]: Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1:48

[^150]: Al-Futuh, 1:40; Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:46

[^151]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:48; Al-Futuh, 1:64; Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah,
3:49

[^152]: Al-Tabaqat, 3:73; Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 7:193; Al-Kamil,
3:178; Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1:44

[^153]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:53; Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 3:55

[^154]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 5:83; al-Muntazam, 5:58

[^155]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 4:251

[^156]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 4:339


