Chapter 10: The Ummah Fractures
===============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَقَطَّعُوا أَمْرَهُم بَيْنَهُمْ زُبُرًا كُلُّ حِزْبٍ بِمَا
لَدَيْهِمْ فَرِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But people have cut off their affair (of unity), between them into
sects: each party rejoices in that which is with itself. (Holy Qur’an,
23:53)***

The tumult of the Quraysh group could not leave the Muslim ummah
unscathed. Although the popular viewpoint today is that Islam has
maintained two sects—Sunni and Shi’a, but the fact of the matter is that
virtually hundreds of Muslim religious sects came and went in the past.

Nonetheless, the fracture, which has grown into the two main paths
(Sunni and Shi’a) cannot be neglected. Many bystanders view the Shi’a
aspect of Islam as a deviation from the norm and a split from the
“original Islam” because the Shi’a are a minority. However, the Shi’a
maintain that their path is actually the original and unaltered version
of Islam as taught by the Prophet, and verified and secured by his
family (Ahlul Bayt).

When did Shiaism Come About?
----------------------------

Historians vary as to when the term “Shi’a” came into being. Some Sunni
sources say that “Shi’a Islam” emerged at the time of the death of the
Prophet, while others say that it took form afterwards. Some Sunni
historians also differ as to the influence of Shi’a Islam, with some
citing a fringe band following a legendary figure named Abdullah Ibn
Saba. However, the Shi’a say otherwise and affirm that the concept of
“Shi’a” was entitled as the “Shi’a of ‘Ali” by the Prophet during his
lifetime, and that it was a real force in Islamic history that took form
and was shaped by the Qur’an and the *sunnah*.

Interpreters of the Qur’an assert that when the following verse was
revealed to the Prophet, “Verily, those who believe and do good deeds:
they are the best of creation,” the Prophet then turned and pointed to
‘Ali and said, “This man and his Shi’a (followers) are the best of
creation.”[^1]

As the Muslim community expanded, the Prophet continued to refer to some
of the Muslims as the “Shi’a of ‘Ali.” Al-Suyuti, a Sunni scholar
narrates on the authority of Jabir Ibn Abdullah al-Ansari:

We were sitting with the Prophet when ‘Ali came. The Prophet said, “By
the One who has my soul in His hands, verily this man (he pointed to
‘Ali) and his friends (*Shi’a*) will be the successful ones on the Day
of Judgment.”[^2] & [^3]

This hadith is related in several similar versions in the books of
hadith compiled by Sunni scholars. In addition, some Sunni scholars have
recorded that during the time of the Prophet, some of the companions
were distinguished from others as being the “Shi’a of ‘Ali.” They
included Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, Ammar Ibn Yasir, al-Miqdaad Ibn al-Aswad,
and Salman al-Farsi. Therefore, saying that the term Shi’a emerged after
the death of the Prophet is incorrect, since the first person to
introduce the concept of “Shi’a” was the Prophet himself during his own
lifetime.

One of the key differences between the Shi’a and non-Shi’a
interpretations of Islam is the right to succession after the death of
the Prophet, thus the misconception that Shiaism emerged after the death
of the Prophet is understandable. Early Sunni historians, such as Ibn
Khaldun and al-Yaqubi, as well as contemporary academics, such as
Egyptian scholars Dr. Hasan Ibrahim and Dr. Ahmad Amin, have expressed
the following viewpoints on the successorship of the Prophet.

Ibn Khaldun and al-Yaqubi contend that the Shi’a began as a group of
companions who were the friends of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, and hence
supported the claim that the chosen family members of the Prophet, known
as Ahlul Bayt have the right of leadership.[^4] Al-Yaqubi also specifies
a group of companions who refused to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr as
being: Salman al-Farsi, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, al-Miqdaad Ibn al-Aswad,
and al-Abbas Ibn Abdul Muttalib.[^5] Dr. Hasan Ibrahim[^6] and Dr. Ahmad
Amin[^7] focus on the same concept, with Dr. Amin contending that ‘Ali
was seen as having the right to leadership on account of his nearness to
the Prophet and his own personal merits.

However, Dr. Amin then advances the idea that although Shiaism began
with the straightforward disagreement of the first three appointed
caliphs, elements from Judaism, Christianity, and the Magians (the
religion of the ancient Persians) caused it to deviate. He argues that
since the Persians were forced to convert, they left the biggest
footprints of their heritage on Shi’a Islam. However, this argument is
not warranted.

To begin with, the majority of the new converts including the Persians
followed the Sunni interpretation of Islam. Another important point is
that it was not until the fifteenth century AD that Persia became a
Shi’a nation. It is known that all of the Twelve Imams of the Shi’a are
full-blooded Arabs from Quraysh (as the hadith from the Prophet said
they would be), and the Shi’a, like the rest of the Muslims, are a
mixture of Arab and non-Arab people.

Muslims who come from non-Arab cultures enrich Islam as a whole in their
own unique ways; thus, that influence is not limited to Shiaism, and
many of the great scholars and narrators of the Sunni tradition, such as
al-Bukhari come from non-Arab countries. Hence, the argument that
Shiaism developed because of the influence of non-Islamic ideas, is in
essence nothing more than a faulty attempt to marginalize the role of
Shiaism in the Islamic history.

Some Sunni sources speculate Shi’a Islam emerged in the time between the
death of the Prophet and the martyrdom of Imam Husayn in Karbala. Sunni
historian Ibn Hazm suggested that Shiaism could have come about during
the time of ‘Uthman, while another Sunni historian, al-Nawbakhti and
others say that Shiaism took form during the caliphate of ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib, specifically during the Battle of the Camel in Basra.[^8] Still,
a few others maintain that while the spiritual side of Shiaism developed
after the death of the Prophet, the political dimension of Shiaism was
born after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn.

In contrast, the majority of the Shi’a scholars hold that Shiaism first
appeared in Mecca during the early stage of the prophethood of the last
Messenger when Allah revealed the verse, “And warn your relatives of
nearest kin.”[^9] After this verse was revealed, the Holy Prophet
invited forty members of his tribe (Bani Hashim) for a meal with him in
the house of his uncle Abu Talib and then he informed them about his
prophethood and asked who would support him. None responded except for
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

The Holy Prophet repeated the question three times, but still none
responded except ‘Ali. At that time, the Holy Prophet put his hand on
the shoulder of ‘Ali and declared, “This is my brother, my legatee, and
my successor (*khalifah*) over you, so listen to him and obey him.” The
invited relatives laughed and teased the father of ‘Ali because the
Prophet had ordered him to obey his son.[^10] Therefore, according to
the Shi’a, all Muslims were ordered to follow ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib after
the Holy Prophet; therefore, the subtle divide between those who did so
willingly, and those who did not, marked the first definition of Shi’a.

Why the Focus on Ahlul Bayt?
----------------------------

### Qur’anic Verse on those who Possess Knowledge

Many Muslims often cite the Qur’anic verse - repeated twice - that
instructs, “Ask those who possess knowledge if you do not know.”[^11]
Since both Sunni and Shi’a commentators explain that “those who possess
knowledge” refers to the Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husayn,[^12]
hence the Shi’a stance has always maintained that all religious
questions and interpretations of the Qur’an must be referred to them.

### The Verse of Purity (Ayat al-Tatheerah)

***“Allah only wishes to remove all uncleanliness away from you, Ahlul
Bayt, and to purify you completely.” (c. 33:33)***

In his *tafseer* (exegesis), the reputable Sunni, al-Fakhr al-Razi uses
this *ayah* (verse) to prove that those five individuals (the Prophet,
‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and Husayn) have been purified and immune from any
form of sin, both major and minor.

This *ayah* (c. 33:33) descended in the house of Umme Salamah, one of
the wives of the Prophet, which later was referred to as the “Event of
the Cloak (*Hadith al-Kisa*).” When the *ayah* was revealed, the
Prophet, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Fatima, Hasan, and Husayn were gathered
beneath a cloak, and the Angel Gabriel directed and included this *ayah*
to all of them. Umme Salamah was present and asked the Prophet whether
she could join them too, but he softly refused her saying, “*Anti ala
khayr* (You are from the people of good).”

Therefore, the wives of the Prophet were not included as part of the
“Ahlul Bayt” in this *ayah*, as some assume. To prove further, another
wife of the Prophet, Lady Aishah narrated herself that the only people
concerned in this verse were Prophet Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan, and
Husayn.

Although, the beginning verses of 33:33 (*ayah*) address the wives of
the Prophet, the ending verses (*ayah*) clearly do not, since they refer
to “Ahlul Bayt” in the mixed (masculine and feminine) gender, rather
than in the strict feminine gender, which is used when referring
exclusively to the wives of the Prophet (as it was in the beginning).
Since the Qur’an is written in Arabic, the language is extraordinarily
rich in its linguistic composition and it uses the precise words,
structure, and style to express itself clearly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَلَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ
الْأُولَى وَأَقِمْنَ الصَّلاَةَ وَآتِينَ الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِعْنَ اللهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ
الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And stay quietly in your houses, and make not a dazzling display,
like that of the former times of Ignorance; and establish regular
prayer, and give regular charity; and obey Allah and His*** ***Messenger
[in Arabic this portion is written in the strictly feminine form]. And
Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, O members of the
Family, and to make you pure and immaculate [this portion is***
***written in the masculine form, implying its direction to a mixed
gender].***[^13]

Nonetheless, some still argue that “Ahlul Bayt” also included others;
but, according to Shi’a scholars (who are unanimous on this issue) and
at least twenty-four prominent Sunni historical references state that
this *ayah* refers exclusively to Prophet Muhammad, ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan,
and Husayn. The Sunni historians include:

• *Sahih al-Muslim*, Fadhail Ahlul Bayt 2:368

• *Al-Khasais* of al-Imam al-Nisa’i, 49

• Sahih al-Tirmidhi, 5:30

• Musnad Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal, 1:330

• *Al-Sawaiq al-Muhraqah*, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, 85

• *Al-Estiaab,* Ibn Abd al-Birr, 3:37

• Tafseer al-Qurtubi, 14:182

• *Ahkam al-Qur’an*, Ibn Arabi, 2:166

• Mustadrak al-Hakim, 3:123

• Asbaab al-Nuzul al-Wahidi, 203

• Muntakhib Kanz al-Umal, 5:96

• Al-Bukhari, Al-Tarikh al-Kabeer, 1:69

• Tafseer al-Fakh al-Razi, 2:700

• Al-Seerah al-Halabiyah, 3:212

• *Usd al-Ghabah*, Ibn al-Atheer, 2:12

• Tafseer al-Tabari, 22:6

• Tarikh Ibn Asakir, 1:185

• *Tafseer al-Kashshaf*, al-Zamakhshari, 1:193

• Manaqib al-Khawarizmi, 23

• Al-Seerah al-Dahlaniyyah, 3:329

• Tafseer Ibn Katheer, 3:483

• *Al-Aqd al-Fareed*, Ibn Abd Rabah, 4:311

• *Masabih al-Sunnah*, al-Baghawi, 2:278

• *Al-Durr al-Manthur*, al-Suyuti, 5:198

The Verse of Malediction (Ayat al-Mubahilah)
--------------------------------------------

The verse known as the “*Mubahilah*” (malediction) proposes,

***“Say (O Prophet) come, let us summon our sons and your sons and our
women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, and then let us
invoke the curse of God upon the liars.” (3:61)***

The revelation is directed towards the Christians of Najran who disputed
the claim of the Holy Prophet’s prophethood and the nature of Jesus
(whether he was divine or a prophet).

After the revelation of this verse, a meeting was arranged between the
Muslims and the Christians under the conditions of the *ayah* in which
both sides would solemnly swear to invoke the curse of Allah upon the
side that was wrong.

The Christians brought along their hierarchy of priests to the
malediction, however when they arrived, they found that the Prophet had
brought only himself, his son-in-law and cousin, ‘Ali; his daughter,
Fatima; and his two grandsons, Hasan and Husayn. No one else, not even
his wives were present even though the *ayah* had said “our women and
your women.”

Although confident of his prophethood, the Prophet took with him the
dearest of all people to him - his family - because he wanted the
Christians to witness the seriousness of the malediction by which he was
even ready to put his own family at risk when it came to defending Islam
and his message.

Seeing that the Prophet was willing to endanger those closest to him and
put them face to face with the wrath of God, the Christians became
fearful. The leader of the Christians, Zamakhshari, said, “O Christians!
I am beholding such faces that if God wishes, for their sake, He would
move mountains for them. Do not accept their challenge for malediction,
for if you do, you will all perish and no Christian will remain on the
face of the earth until the Day of Resurrection.”[^14]

The mutual malediction was aborted and the Christians retreated to
Najran, but later returned to embrace Islam.

Status of the Ahlul Bayt
------------------------

The author of *Sahih al-Bukhari* narrates that a group of Muslims came
to the Prophet and asked him, “O Messenger of Allah, Allah has ordered
us to send our prayers upon you, so how should we send our prayers upon
you?” (Referring to the verse 33:56 in the Holy Qur’an where Allah says,
***“Indeed Allah and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who have faith!
Invoke blessings on him and invoke Peace upon him in a worthy
manner.”)***

The Prophet replied, “Say, ‘O Allah, bless Muhammad and the family of
Muhammad, just as you blessed Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim, and
grant favor to Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, just as you granted
favor to Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim; truly, You the most
Praiseworthy and Noble One in the worlds.’”[^15]

Sanctity of the Ahlul Bayt
--------------------------

In the battlefield of the Battle of Uhud, on the day when the Messenger
of Allah was hit on his forehead and was injured, he raised his head in
supplication and said, “The wrath of Allah increased upon the Jews when
they attributed Uzayr to Him and said that Uzayr was the son of Allah;
and His wrath increased upon the Christians when they attributed
divinity to Jesus and said that the Messiah was the son of God; and His
wrath increased upon those people who made my blood flow and those who
annoy my family members.”[^16]

Ahlul Bayt - According to the Prophet
-------------------------------------

The Messenger of Allah said, “The parable of my household among you is
the parable of the ark of Nuh (Noah); whoever embarked upon that ship
was saved, and whoever did not was drowned (*Mathalu ahl al bayti fikum
ka-mathali safeenati Nuh*).”[^17]

The Messenger of Allah said, “We are members of a family that no one can
ever be compared to (*Nahnu ahl baytin laa yuqassu binaa ahad*).”[^18]

Rafidah (The Rejecters)
-----------------------

In recent years, the term *rafidah* (rejecters) has been increasingly
used to refer to the Shi’a on account of their refusal to recognize the
first three caliphs as legitimate. This term “*rafidah*” dates back to
the Umayyah time and was used as a derogatory term to insult the
Shi’a.[^19]

Imam al-Shafi’i composed a famous line of poetry regarding this subject
in which he said, “If *rafidah* be the love of the family of Muhammad,
then let the *jinn* (spirits) and mankind bear witness that I am a
*rafidah*.”[^20]

How “Shi’a Islam” Originated
----------------------------

“Shi’a Islam” originated based on love for the family of the Prophet,
not the hatred of some around him. Although some Shi’a individuals may
have said some unbecoming remarks about the first two caliphs, their
comments cannot be taken to represent the views of all Shi’a.

In fact, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib forbade his followers from verbally abusing
those who fought him[^21] and this principle is in line with the Book of
Allah which commands, “Abuse yet not those whom they invoke besides God,
lest they abuse God in transgression without knowledge; thus have We
made fair-seeming to every people their deeds.”[^22]

Nonetheless, despite the exhortations of the Ahlul Bayt, defamation and
prosecution against the Shi’a occurred by those who opposed them.
Perhaps it was a natural reaction to the conditions set by the Umayyah
rule. For instance, Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan bribed and forced all the
leaders of the Friday Prayer (*Salat al-Jumah*) to curse Imam ‘Ali,
Hasan, Husayn, and Fatima al-Zahra - for over forty years. However, when
‘Umar Ibn Abd al-Aziz came to power, he attempted to stop this practice,
but it had become so firmly entrenched that his efforts were futile.

Moreover, asides from having to endure the continuous unjust slandering
of the closest family members of the Prophet who are revered by Shi’a
and non-Shi’a Muslims alike, the followers of Ahlul Bayt were severely
tortured during the Umayyah and Abbasid time for their loyalty.

Abdullah Ibn Saba: Myth or Reality?
-----------------------------------

Over the centuries, a preposterous idea developed that the Shi’a
doctrine originated from a Jewish man who hated Islam and infiltrated
the Muslims to destroy them. His name is said to have been Abdullah Ibn
Saba. However, some contemporary Sunni scholars, Shi’a scholars, Western
authors, and a logical study of the background of this invented figure
all concur that Abdullah Ibn Saba never even existed.

None of the important primary Sunni sources such as al-Baladri and Ibn
Sa’d even mention Ibn Saba; only al-Tabari mentions him, but the
accounts of Ibn Saba are given on the authority of two extremely
unreliable men: Sayf Ibn ‘Umar al-Tamimi and al-Sari Ibn Yahya. Sunni
narrators, such as Ibn Hayyan, Ibn Uday, and Ibn Muin all confer that
Sayf Ibn ‘Umar al-Tamimi forged or mistook hadith.

Similarly, in the following books: *al-Tahdheeb,* *Mizan al-Itidal,* and
*Tadhkirat al-Mawdhuat* they mention two men referred to as al-Sari
(al-Sari Ibn Ismail al-Hamdani al-Kufi and al-Sari Ibn Asim al-Hamdani)
who lived during the time of al-Tabari (who is most likely the al-Sari
mentioned earlier by al-Tabari), who were renowned for fabricating
hadiths.[^23]

However, a different al-Sari, whose hadiths were reliable lived much
before them - he died in 167 ah, therefore al-Tabari, who was born in
224 ah could never have met him. Since all of the subsequent sources
that discuss Ibn Saba refer back to the history of al-Tabari and the
information given by al-Tabari was at best questionable, hence more than
likely, the existence of Ibn Saba was concocted by the two dishonest men
(Sayf Ibn ‘Umar al-Tamimi and al-Sari Ibn Yahya).[^24]

Nonetheless, whether true or fictional, the information that al-Tabari
provides regarding Ibn Saba is worth examining.

According to al-Tabari, Ibn Saba was a Jewish man who came from Sana in
Yemen. His mother’s name was Sawda, and he is said to have become a
Muslim during the caliphate of ‘Uthman. He traveled throughout the
Muslim countries from Hijaz, Basra, Shaam, and Egypt, all the while
propagating the notion that just like Prophet Isa will have a second
coming, so too will Prophet Muhammad, citing c. 28:85 as a roundabout
sort of evidence,

***“Indeed He who has revealed to you the Qur’an will surely restore you
to the place of return. Say, ‘My Lord knows best him who brings guidance
and him who is in manifest error.’”***

However, some modern historians, such as Muhammad Fareed Wajdi in his
encyclopedia *Dairat al-Marif*, not only added more fiction to
al-Tabari’s accounts, but also told a slightly different version. Wajdi
maintained that Ibn Saba was a close follower of Imam ‘Ali and admired
him so much that he attributed divinity to him.

According to this fable, when Imam ‘Ali heard Ibn Saba’s claim he wanted
to take his life, but at the advice of Abdullah Ibn Abbas he sent Ibn
Saba to al-Madain instead. This reaction is incidentally in complete
disagreement with what is known about the behavioral pattern of Imam
‘Ali, who is recorded to have spared an enemy out of fear that he might
be killing him out of anger rather than out of justice.

Al-Wajdi continues that while in al-Madain, Ibn Saba is said to have
spread the first notion that ‘Ali was a prophet and later that he was a
deity.[^25] Other contemporary authors, such as Ahmad Atayllah, declare
that Ibn Saba wanted to weaken and destroy the caliphate of ‘Uthman,
thus he intentionally mixed some Jewish ideas with Islam to form the
doctrines about the return of the Prophet (*raja*) and the knowledge of
Imam ‘Ali about the unseen (*ilm al-ghayb*, which by definition is that
which is known by no one).[^26]

By attributing these ideas to Ibn Saba, real or imaginary, these authors
not only succeeded in discrediting the Shi’a and presenting the Shi’a
ideology as nothing more than imported teachings from another religion
(instead of a legitimate and integral part of the history of Islam), but
they also shifted the blame for the assassination of ‘Uthman to some
unorthodox sectarian incident, rather than on the administrative
policies of ‘Uthman, which bred so much resentment that he was killed -
not by followers of “Ibn Saba,” but by the companions of the Prophet.

The idea that someone with Ibn Saba’s heretical mentality convinced the
Muslims, many of whom were companions and who had seen the Prophet
firsthand, is ludicrous. Even more unrealistic is the idea that someone
so powerful who was able to bring down the third caliphate, could have
existed unmentioned at such a heavily scrutinized time, even well after
he had passed away.

It is also unconceivable to believe that ‘Uthman, who severely punished
some of the companions of the Prophet, such as Ammar Ibn Yasir and Ibn
Masud, over issues unrelated to Islamic doctrine, would overlook such a
person, since he could have been a potential threat to topple his power
structure.

Furthermore, even the scant narratives regarding Ibn Saba conflict with
one another because some people said that he appeared during the time of
‘Uthman, while others said that he appeared during the lifetime of Imam
‘Ali, and still others said that he came on the scene after the death of
‘Ali. Even more, some said that he just revered Imam ‘Ali, while others
said that his main goal was to turn popular opinion against ‘Uthman.

For these reasons, the Shi’a scholars, who have studied this subject in
depth; as well as many orientalists, such as Bernard Lewis, Wellhausen,
Friedlander, and others all agree that Ibn Saba was nothing but a legend
fabricated by those who came later on in history.

The myth of Ibn Saba did not develop out of a vacuum. At the time when
stories about him first spread, the status quo was threatened by the
fact that the beliefs of Shi’a Islam, which are based firmly on the
Qur’an, the *sunnah* of the Prophet, and the appointment of successors
by the Prophet.

Inventing Ibn Saba and attributing the ideas of Shi’a Islam to him in a
much-skewed fashion made the Shi’a appear more as a fringe group rather
than as part of the Islamic core. As the Egyptian scholar Taha Husayn
says in his book *Al-Fitnah al-Kubra*, “The opponents of the Shi’a
exaggerated the issue of Ibn Saba in order to defame ‘Ali and his
followers. Ibn Saba was an imaginary figure (*shakhsiyah wahmiyah*), and
the only source that mentioned him was Sayf Ibn ‘Umar, and he was a man
well known to be a liar.”[^27]

More about Ibn Saba can be found in the book of Taha Husayn or in the
thesis of Sayyid Murtadha al-Askari.[^28]

Four Schools of Thought
-----------------------

Another misconception is that Islam, outside of the Shi’a school of
thought, crystallized directly into four schools of thought, whereas in
reality, the process was more complicated than this. However, through a
combination of factors, not the least of which was government supported,
these schools coalesced and took on separate identities during the time
of the Abbasid Empire (75 ah - 1258).

### Hanafi School (Al-Madhab al-Hanafi)

The Hanafi school, founded by Imam Abu Hanifah al-Nu’man Ibn Thabit
(80 - 148 ah), was the first to acquire widespread popularity.

The first scholar to pay allegiance to this school of thought was Abul
Abbas al-Saffah who was the leader of the revolution against the Umayyah
dynasty and the founder of the Abbasid Empire. Other scholars and
jurists (*fuqaha*) also joined him in the hope that a just government
would rise and implement the *sunnah* of the Prophet and save the Muslim
ummah from the tyranny of the Umayyah dynasty.

However, Abu Hanifah soon realized that the Abbasid were not sincere in
their call to establish the Islamic *sharia* (law) and Islamic
government, and so he distanced himself from the government and refused
to accept the formidable position of leadership in the judiciary system
(*al-qada*) during the time of al-Mansur al-Abbasi.

Al-Mansur tried to bring Abu Hanifah to his side, but he refused and was
then imprisoned, and according to some accounts even tortured. Some
historians have also reported that the Abbasid eventually poisoned Abu
Hanifah.

Nonetheless, the Abbasid government succeeded in attracting two of the
most prominent students who had studied directly under Abu Hanifah: Abu
Yusuf al-Qadi and Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani. Abu Yusuf joined
the Abbasid government during the reign of al-Mahdi al-Abbasi in the
year 158 ah. He continued working for them during the rules of al-Hadi
and al-Rashid and wrote several works on jurisprudence, one of the most
noteworthy being *Kitab al-Kharaj*, which he wrote at the request of the
caliph Harun al-Rashid.

He enjoyed an intimate relationship with the ruling powers, and through
this, they supplemented the salary they paid him with gifts and lavish
invitations, enabling him to lead an extravagant life for that time.

The other student, Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani, assumed leadership
of the judiciary system (*al-qada*) during the time of Harun al-Rashid.
He wrote many thesis in jurisprudence (*fiqh*), including *Jami
al-Sagheer*, which he narrated from Abu Yusuf al-Qadi, Abu Hanifah, and
Jami al-Kabeer.[^29]

Undoubtedly, the government played a central role in promoting the
Hanafi school of thought because of Abu Yusuf al-Qadi and Muhammad Ibn
al-Hasan al-Shaybani, and particularly since the position of judiciary
leadership that the latter took, was central in promoting the
jurisprudence (*fiqh*) of a particular school of thought. Regarding this
issue, Ibn Hazm says:

Two schools of thought were promoted and spread in the beginning of
their emergence by leadership (*riyasah*) and the government
(*sultanah*). The first was the Hanafi school of thought; since Abu
Yusuf al-Qadi was declared the leader of the high court, he employed
people only from his school of thought. The second school of thought
that was supported by the government was the Maliki school of
thought.[^30]

Along the same line, al-Dahlawi says:

Any school of thought whose leaders are famous and who assumed the
positions of judiciary leadership (*qada*) and authority (*ifta* or the
*fatwa*) will spread among the lands and expand day after day.
Conversely, the people will not know any school of thought whose leaders
did not assume the position of judiciary leadership and authority, and
they will die out in the future.[^31]

From this, it is clear that the expansion of a school of thought at that
time, hinged on the government. The government in turn, supported the
schools of thought because of their willingness to compromise Islamic
principles in favor of the government, and so a reciprocal relationship
developed between the government and the propagators of the schools of
thought who used the judiciary positions (the position of *qadi*) that
they were appointed to, to spread their ideologies to the masses.

Maliki School of Thought (Al-Madhab al-Maliki)
----------------------------------------------

Once Al-Mansur al-Abbasi failed to sway Abu Hanifah to his side, he
turned his attention towards Imam Malik Ibn Anas (93 - 179 ah) and
proposed that the body of Islamic knowledge unify under one definitive
book and set of guidelines, rather than be split among several schools
of thought, as was the case at that time. He encouraged Imam Malik to
write *al-Muwatta* (the book that Imam Malik is well-known for). History
says:

Al-Mansur spoke to al-Malik around 150 ah and encouraged him to write
*Fiqh al-Muwatta*. He told him, “Put down this knowledge in writing, and
try to avoid the eccentricity (*shawad*) of Ibn Abdullah al-Masud, the
leniency (*rukhsah*) of Ibn Abbas, and the harshness (*shadaid*) of Ibn
‘Umar. Be moderate in this *fiqh* and write whatever the majority of the
*imams* and *sahabah* agree upon, and we promise you that we will bring
all the people to follow your school of thought, and your *fiqh* and
your knowledge, and we will spread and promote your book in the
provinces and states, and we will ask the people not to oppose it, and
they will not give judgments other than those in accordance with your
books.”[^32]

Imam Malik spent approximately 11 years writing *al-Muwatta*, and his
book eventually became the definitive legal text of the Abbasid state.
The Abbasid rulers in turn, exhibited the utmost respect towards Imam
Malik to the extent that Harun al-Rashid would stand whenever he saw
Imam Malik, and then sit on the floor in front of him to listen to what
he had to say. Through his open support of al-Mansur, Imam Malik
alienated his teacher Rabiat al-Rai who refused to compromise his
principles for the government and then parted company with Imam Malik.

Imam Malik continued to support the Abbasid government beyond the reign
of al-Mansur into the time of al-Mahdi al-Abbasi. Just like al-Mansur,
al-Mahdi al-Abbasi succeeded not in winning over the support of the
Hanafi school of thought, but to entice two of Abu Hanifah’s most famous
students (as mentioned above).

At the same time, as they fostered the growth of the Maliki movement,
the Abbasid also attempted to suppress the school of Ahlul Bayt. Not
only were the ideas of Ahlul Bayt school threatening, but its leaders
were also popular, such as Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq. The sixth Imam of the
Shi’a school of thought, who had nearly 4,000 students attending his
classes.

Like the other Imams from Ahlul Bayt, Imam al-Sadiq was put under house
arrest and later imprisoned. Only after methods of intimidation and
coercion to halt the spread of his teachings failed, did the Abbasid
attempt to counter his ideas by creating another intellectual entity to
compete with him, in this case, the promotion of the Hanafi and Maliki
schools of thought.

As it is said, people tend to follow the religion of their leaders;[^33]
therefore, the ideological path that the Abbasid government was laying
out was rudimentary for the people to follow. Still, like the rest of
the imams of Ahlul Bayt, Imam al-Sadiq gave up his life at the hands of
the ruling power for his unwavering resistance to compromise the
principles of Islam.

### Shafi’i School of Thought (Al-Madhab al-Shafi’i)

From the time of his childhood, Imam Muhammad Ibn Idris al-Shafi’i
(150 - 206 ah) immersed himself in the ideas of Imam Malik. He was
inspired deeply by him and nearly memorized *al-Muwatta*. Eventually he
procured a letter of recommendation from the governor of Mecca to the
governor of Madinah enabling him to meet with Imam Malik, whose status
was very high in Madinah during the Abbasid time. There he became a
student of Imam Malik until the death of Imam Malik about nine years
later.

At that time, Imam Shafi’i fell into poverty and was obliged to return
to Mecca.[^34] There, some individuals concerned about his condition,
appealed to the governor of Yemen to find him an official position, and
thus Imam al-Shafi’i was made the governor of the state of Najran in
Yemen.

However, during the rule of Harun al-Rashid, Imam al-Shafi’i was accused
of leaning towards the Alawiyin[^35] and the school of Ahlul Bayt, and
so he was brought to Baghdad, handcuffed. While he was being held as a
prisoner, one of his friends, Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani (who was
also one of the primary advocates of the Hanafi school of thought for
the Abbasid) interceded on his behalf and testified that al-Shafi’i was
not on the side of Ahlul Bayt and was completely supportive of the
Abbasid government.

This testimony resulted in the release of al-Shafi’i, and as a result,
he became very close to al-Shaybani and studied under him, learning the
opinions (*araa*) of Abu Hanifah in *ra’i* (opinion) and *qiyas*
(analogy), both of which Abu Hanifah was well known for. However, the
two differed regarding Ahlul Bayt - al-Shafi’i was in fact sympathetic
towards their cause, while al-Shaybani was not.[^36]

Out of these two influences: the Maliki school (which can also be
referred to as the school of *athar* (text)) and the Hanafi school, was
born the Shafi’i school of thought. In 199 ah, Imam al-Shafi’i moved to
Egypt along with Ibn Abdullah al-Abbas, the governor of Egypt. There,
his school slowly began to spread. Unfortunately, because he differed on
some points with Imam Malik, Imam al-Shafi’i incurred the anger of many
of the adherents of the Maliki school in Egypt, and they eventually
rioted and killed him.

It is worth noting that al-Bukhari and al-Muslim did not narrate any
hadith from al-Shafi’i - not because he was inferior in knowledge, but
because he had inclinations towards the school of Ahlul Bayt. He said
that ‘Ali Ibn ‘Ali Talib had the right to leadership at the time over
Mu’awiyah and his companions,[^37] who were the group that began the
assault on Islam.

He displayed love for Ahlul Bayt and the family of the Prophet and
proclaimed, “If anyone who loves the Ahlul Bayt is a *rafidi* (a
rejecter of the three caliphates) then let the whole world witness that
I am the first *rafidi*.” Such statements not only led to his arrest as
mentioned before, but also resulted in silencing his books of hadith.

### Hanbali School of Thought (Al-Madhab al-Hanbali)

Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (165 - 240 ah) was born in Baghdad. At the age of
fifteen, he embarked on journeys to different countries to meet with
various scholars. While in Baghdad, he studied under Imam al-Shafi’i,
who inspired him considerably, and Abu Yusuf al-Qadi. At the time, there
were two competing schools: *madrasah al-athar* (the school focusing on
texts) and *madrasah al-ra'i wal-qiyas* (the school based on opinion and
analogy), and Ibn Hanbal favored the former.

Although like other scholars, he too relocated to Hijaz, however he was
not as well known as the leaders of the other schools of thought because
most considered him to be a *muhaddith* (narrator of hadith) instead of
a genuine *faqih* (jurist).

Ibn Hanbal was a strong advocate of the Abbasid government and when
al-Mutawakil came to power in 232 ah, he tortured the Alawiyin and
fiercely opposed the school of Ahlul Bayt, but he paid Ibn Hanbal a
handsome salary of 4,000 *dirhams,* and invited him to Samarra to obtain
blessings from his presence.[^38]

Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal wrote his famous work *Musnad Ahmad Ibn Hanbal*
under the reign of al-Mutawakil and passed away while al-Mutawakil was
still in power. His case was similar to that of Imam al-Malik, whose
ideas were also propagated by the Abbasid caliphate, and the Abbasid
promoted both of their schools of thought.

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, 98:7

[^2]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 6:376

[^3]: Inna hadha wa shiatuhu la-hum al-faizun yawm al-qiyamah.

[^4]: Tarikh Ibn Khaldun, 3:364

[^5]: Tarikh al-Yaqubi, 2:104

[^6]: Dr. Hasan Ibrahim, Tarikh al-Islam, 1:371

[^7]: Dr. Ahmad Amin, Fajr al-Islam, 266

[^8]: Firaq al-Shiah, p.16; Ibn al-Nadeem, Al-Fihrist, p.175

[^9]: Holy Qur’an, 26:214

[^10]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, 4:62; Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:117; Musnad Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, 1:159; Tarikh Abul Fida, 1:116; Nadhm Durar al-Simtayn, p.82;
Kifayat al-Talib, p.205; Tarikh Madinat Dimishq, 1:87, hadith 139 & 143;
Al-Hasakani, Shawahid al-Tanzil, 1:420; Muhammad Ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
Jami al-Bayan, 19:131; Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur, 5:97;
Tafseer Ibn Kathir, 3:350; Al-Baghdadi, Tafseer al-Khazin, 3:371;
Al-Alusi al-Baghdadi, Ruh al-Maani, 19:122; Al-Tantawi, Tafseer
al-Jawahir, 13:103; Al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn,
3:135. Other historical sources, such as Sirat al-Halabi, say that the
Holy Prophet added, “And he will be my minister (wazir) and inheritor
(warith).”

[^11]: Holy Qur’an, 16:43 & 21:7

[^12]: Tafseer al-Tabari, 14:109; Al-Alusi, Tafseer Ruh al-Maani,
14:134; Tafseer al-Qurtubi, 11:272; Tafseer Ibn al-Katheer, 2:570;
Al-Hakim, Tafseer Shawahid al-Tanzel, 1:334; Tafseer al-Thalabi

[^13]: Holy Qur’an, 33:33

[^14]: Tafseer al-Kashshaf

[^15]: Allahumma salli ala Muhammadin wa aale Muhammad kama sallayta ala
Ibrahim wa aale Ibrahim, wa barik ala Muhammadin wa aale Muhammad kama
barakta ala Ibrahim wa aale Ibrahim fil-aalameena innaka hamidun majeed.

[^16]: Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-Umal, 10:435, hadith 30050

[^17]: Kanz al-Umal 6:216; Mustadrak al-Sahihayn, 2:343; Al-Tabarani,
Al-Mujam al-Kabeer, 12:27; Ibn Hajar, Al-Sawaiq al-Muhriqah, 1:86

[^18]: Kunuz al-Haqaiq, 153; Al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, 2:208

[^19]: Al-Zubaydi, Taj al-Arus, 5:35; Al-Jawhari, 3:1078

[^20]: In kana rafdhan hubbu aale Muhammadin. Fal yashhad al-thaqalan
anni rafidahi.

[^21]: Nahjul Balaghah

[^22]: Holy Qur’an, 6:108

[^23]: Lisan al-Mizan, 3:12; al-Ghadir, 8:143

[^24]: Al-Ghadir, 9:218

[^25]: Wajdi, Muhammad Fareed; Dairat al-Marif al-Qarn al-Aishren, 5:17

[^26]: Atayllah, Ahmad; Al-Qamus al-Islami, 3:222

[^27]: Taha Husayn, Al-Fitnah al-Kubra, the chapter on Ibn Saba.

[^28]: His work on Abdullah Ibn Saba is available in English under the
title of Abdullah Ibn Saba and Other Myths and has been printed in two
volumes.

[^29]: Al-Zarakli, Al-Alam, 6:80

[^30]: Wafayat al-Ayan, 6:144

[^31]: Al-Dahlawi, Hujjat Allah al-Balighah, 1:151

[^32]: Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 2:150

[^33]: Al-Nas ala Deen Mulukihim

[^34]: Mujam al-Udaba, 17:287

[^35]: The descendants of the Holy Prophet through Imam ‘Ali.

[^36]: Tarikh Baghdad, 2:178

[^37]: ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib huwa al-Imam al-Haq.

[^38]: Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 10:350


