Conclusion
==========

A fundamental principle of the Muslims is that Islam has been perfected
by God,

***“This day I have perfected your religion for you, completed My favor
upon you, and have chosen for you Islam as your religion.” (5:3)***

Muslims also consider Prophet Muhammad as the best example to emulate,

***“Verily, in the Apostle of God you have a good example [to follow]
for everyone who looks forward [with hope and awe] to God and the Last
Day, and remembers God unceasingly.” (33:21)***

Having believed in these two proclamations, those who held the highest
office of authority in Islam - the caliphate (from after the Prophet’s
death until the collapse of the caliphate rule in 1923) - should have
been more attentive to preserve and protect the integrity of Islam and
follow the ways of Prophet Muhammadwithout any modifications,
alterations, innovations, or introduction of new practices. However,
this was not the case, as mentioned throughout this book.

Some people continue to argue that “the Shi’a are the innovators of
Islam,” and that it is actually the Shi’a who have introduced new ideas
and concepts into Islam, when in fact, through careful research and
examination of Islamic history and jurisprudence this accusation becomes
baseless.

Even as recently as in 2008, a well-known Egyptian cleric (considered as
a “moderate” figure) reiterated the same propaganda, which caused a wave
of rebuttals from Shi’a scholars. In part, this book is a reply to such
accusations and labeling as well.

Although, the thought of writing this book came about some ten years
ago, the writing took an intermission of six of those years; and what
urged its publication now are the false accusations being hurled against
the followers of Ahlul Bayt, which extensively arise from global pulpits
and through multi-media sources. My conscience did not permit me to
remain on the sideline and be silent about this matter any longer.

The truth of the matter is, and as this book details, the innovations
and alterations were never started or practiced by the followers of
Ahlul Bayt; rather, the Shi’a have always maintained, without waiver or
variation that they follow the path of the Prophet.

In part, in our times we are witnessing the effect of the past on the
present. Today’s violent acts of terrorism and the radical ideological
interpretation being perpetrated by some “Muslims” against Muslims and
non-Muslims are conjoined to the times of the early Muslim governance
and their successive caliphate regimes.

The Muslim leaders of the past, like those of the Umayyah and Abbasid
dynasties, mentally and culturally cultivated the seeds of anarchic
dogma, hatred, and violence, which is present among the most extremist
Muslim parties of today. Establishments like the Taliban and the
teachings of the Wahhabis are deeply rooted in the same radical
mentality and hegemonic control like the ones of the past.

Our time has witnessed people like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the sinister
aid of al-Qaida who introduced suicide bombers to the streets of Iraq
and caused thousands of lives to be lost. We can also see this
totalitarian and violent force on the streets of Kabul, Mumbai, Jakarta,
and Islamabad, and on the dreadful day of 9-11-2001.

It is the anticipation of the author of this book, for the reader to
know the reality. As a scholar and researcher it is incumbent to ascend
personal interest and contracted thoughts, and to speak the rightful
truth without apprehension. I am held to the highest degree by the
covenant taken from the early scholars by which Allah holds them to the
following,

***“Those who conceal the clear (Signs) We have sent down, and the
Guidance, after We have made it clear for the people in the Book, on
them shall be Allah’s curse, and the curse of those entitled to curse.”
(2:159)***

Along with,

***“And remember Allah took a covenant from the People of the Book, to
make it known and clear to mankind, and not to hide it; but they threw
it away behind their backs, and purchased with it some miserable gain!
And vile was the bargain that they made!” ( 3:187)***

What has been documented and cited in this work are facts, written by
the most revered authentic (*sahih*) books and respected Sunni scholars.
Thus, no one can argue that the author was relying on outside sources;
and in addition, not one source has been taken out of context or
exaggerated.

Some may argue that there is no need to frequent the past of the
Muslims. As difficult as it may be, the past of the Muslims should not
be impervious. Muslims must know their history in order to understand
the current predicament they find themselves in. There are reasons why
the state of the ummah is the way it is today. The record shows that in
our history there were certain Muslims who affected the course of Islam
and Muslims forever - politically, theologically, and historically.

The Quraysh group had systematically planned, influenced, and executed
the orders of the caliph and wished to design it as a revolving
political hegemony. Even on the deathbed of the Prophet, they prevented
the Prophet from writing his will - a will that would have forever
guarded the ummah from misguidance - and then they sealed it at Saqifah.
In the words of the second caliph himself, they prevented the Prophet
from writing his will because they did not want both prophethood and
successorship vested in Bani Hashim, namely ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. In
short, the pre-Islamic Arab rivalry first impregnated the division of
the ummah.

Shi’a and Sunni have two opposing views when it comes to the appointment
of the caliph. According to the Ahlul Bayt, Allah ordains the highest
accolade (leadership office) of the ummah. On the other end, the Sunni
believe that it is one of consulate (*shura*). Although, the early
history of political Islam records that “*shura*” was never fairly
executed, nor was the method of it consistent as seen in the
appointments of the first three caliphs and the caliphs of the Umayyad
and Abbasid dynasties.

To leave the ummah without continued Divine guidance would be to expose
the religion to unwarranted innovations, modifications, and personal
conjecture.

The history of the Islamic caliphate earmarks acts of nepotism,
corruption, and incompetency, primarily witnessed during the reins of
‘Uthman, Bani Umayyah, and Bani Abbas. We find unqualified and
incompetent leaders who changed and modified Islam, and practiced
nepotism and favoritism.

One day, a group of companions was with the Prophet and they said, “O
Allah’s Apostle! We know how to greet you, but how should we invoke
Allah for you?” The Prophet said, “Say: ‘O Allah! Send your blessings
(greeting, which is God’s mercy upon the Prophet - *salawat*) on
Muhammad and his family, the same way as You sent Your blessings
(greetings & mercy) on Ibrahim’s family; You are indeed worthy of all
praise, full of glory.’”[^1]

On another occasion, the Prophet said to his companions, “Do not salute
me in short!” The companions asked, “What is saluting you in short?” The
Prophet replied, “Saying that blessing (mercy) of Allah be upon
Muhammad.” They asked, “What should we say?” The Prophet answered, “Say:
‘Blessing (mercy) of Allah be upon Muhammad and his Ahlul Bayt!’”[^2]
Despite being purified by Allah (c. 33:33) and recognized by the
Prophet, a misfortunate mistreatment of the household of the Prophet by
some of the companions has been recorded in history.

The attempt to burn the house of Fatima and ‘Ali, denying them economic
power by confiscating their property, and a forty-year campaign to smear
and discredit them are just some of the ill workings made by those who
stood to secure their power post and sway public opinion against the
household of the Prophet.

Most notably, one of the most consequential effects on the ummah was
depriving them of the unabridged sayings (Hadith) of the Prophet. The
Prophet emphatically urged his companions to write his sayings, but
unfortunately, those who held power prevented this writing, and even
barred those from traveling so as to not inform others about the
Prophet’s sayings.

Eventually, unsubstantiated hadith surfaced - even ludicrous ones - such
as the hadith that exhorts the religious knowledge of the second caliph
as being superior to that of the Prophet, or the Prophet frolicking with
unveiled women! As a result, Muslim scholars had to develop the Science
of Hadith, in which each hadith went under intense scrutiny to ascertain
its authenticity.

Although the followers of Ahlul Bayt continued to record the hadith and
passed them along to their followers, nonetheless they were the minority
as opposed to the majority who held public attitude. The trepidation of
transmitting the hadith was a form of maintaining dominance of the
caliphate, because had the hadith about the Ahlul Bayt (especially the
Prophet’s appointment of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib as his successor and the
importance of adhering to his family on numerous occasions) circulated,
then the ummah would have known the truth. The consequence is that the
people would have instigated a collapse of the illegitimate institute of
the caliphate and those appointed.

Understanding that the historical and political aspects covered
throughout this book may be delicate for some; nonetheless, never is it
meant to be as a means to jostle sectarian division - this is far from
my intention. I have maintained judicious care in the manner of
presenting this work, but it is my belief that in order for Islam and
Muslims to go forward in harmony and solidarity, we have to have the
courage to recognize the truth of our past and rationally discuss the
matter in a dignified and scholarly fashion.

When an injustice is done in the past against others, then it becomes
incumbent upon the people of the present to acknowledge it and make
amends. This needs to happen so that the Muslims can truly practice what
Allah has intended for them - a religion of brotherhood, peace, and
justice.

Until the end of time, even the most sincere Muslims will disagree upon
what they truly believe is the most correct path. However, while
accepting that there will be disagreement, it is important to represent
each school of thought accurately - as it represents itself, and as
reliable and mutually agreed-upon historical sources represents it,
rather than continue to propagate confusion.

I do not believe that the divisions amongst the Muslims are an
irreparable part of our history. If Muslims and non-Muslims can sit side
by side, have intellectual and scholarly discussions, engage in a deeper
understanding about each other’s faith, and then publish their findings,
then what prevents responsible and respected Shi’a and Sunni Muslim
scholars from doing the same? The time has come to hold such dialogue.

I continue to uphold and encourage an open and rational discussion
policy with my colleagues. The invitation to hold such roundtable
discussions remains open and is welcomed.

[^1]: Ibn Hajar, Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah, c.11, section 1, p.225

[^2]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 6.320


