Chapter 3: The Saqifah Union
============================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مُحَمَّدٌ إِلاَّ رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِن قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ
أَفَإِنْ مَّاتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ إِنْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلَى أَعْقَابِكُمْ وَمَنْ
يَنْقَلِبْ عَلَى عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ اللهَ َشَيْئًا وَسَيَجْزِي
اللهُ الشَّاكِرِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Muhammad is no more than an apostle: many were the apostle that
passed away before him. If he died or was slain, will you then turn back
on your heels? If any did turn back on his heels, not the least harm
will he do to Allah. But Allah (on the other hand) will swiftly reward
those who (serve Him) with gratitude. (Holy Qur’an, 3:144)***

Having faced hostile aggression, economic boycott and expulsion, an
invitation was extended to the Prophet and his followers to uproot
themselves from their homeland and migrate to the desert oasis of
Yathrib (which was later renamed Madinah). The invitation came from the
Ansar (Helpers) who were the inhabitants of Madinah.[^1] In the year 622
CE, the Prophet and the Muhajireen[^2] arrived in Madinah and along with
the Ansar, they established the first official Muslim state.

Chronicles of Saqifah
---------------------

On the 28th of Safar, 632 CE (11 ah), four days after the “Calamity of
Thursday” occurred, Prophet Muhammad, the Seal of the Messengers passed
away. The believing men, women, and children wandered in shock as if one
of their own family members had died. At the same time, a select few
were anxious to gain power. They knew that they could not simply declare
themselves as the new guardians of the ummah because the Prophet had
already explicitly declared ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib as his successor. Had
they done so, even though the Muslims were still in a state of grief,
they would have rejected them and their authority. Thus, they took a
much more subtle approach.

As the Prophet’s body lay in wait, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib and the immediate
family of the Bani Hashim were busy preparing the Prophet’s body for
burial. With the family of the Prophet being preoccupied, several
members of the Ansar tribe arranged for a private meeting far away from
the Prophet’s mosque at a place called Saqifah Bani Sa’idah. They had
grown concerned about the leadership (*khalifah*) of the ummah and
wanted to ensure a smooth transition of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib’s office
post.

Despite having welcomed the Muhajireen into their town, the Ansar had
all along been fearful and cautious of their domination in Madinah; even
more, they were fearful of the power their relatives maintained in
Mecca. Concerned that the Muhajireen might make the initial move to
secure leadership of the ummah, the Ansar took a pre-emptive measure to
discuss and uphold their support of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. This was their
initial plan; however, the meeting took a turn. Some members of the
Ansar sensed that the leadership was going to slip away from ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib, hence they began to discuss the seizing of leadership for
themselves.

Large in numbers and a formidable tribe to contend with, some of them
felt that the Ansar had rights for leadership since they were the ones
who had fully participated in the battles of Badr, Uhud, Khaybar, and
Hunayn, as well as the two “Bayahs of Ridhwan.”[^3] In addition, the
Holy Prophet had stated the following about the Ansar, “Only a believer
loves the Ansar, and only a hypocrite dislikes them.”[^4] Moreover, they
were quite familiar with the old rivalry of the Quraysh tribe.

Envy and blood feud, although dormant, was deeply felt amongst the
Quraysh tribe. In particular, their jealousy was directed against ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib for numerous reasons - including the fact that he stood as
a stark reminder about the lives of the members of the Quraysh that he
took away in defending Islam in the various battles.

In one battle alone, ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib took the lives of seventy elite
members of the Quraysh. This was ingrained too deep into the memory of
those Quraysh families to ignore and no matter how much they embraced
Islam, the loss of their family members was far greater for some or too
fresh in their memories to forget. The Ansar were quite familiar with
this, but on the other hand, they did not have to contend with such
animosity and rivalry - they had no loss of relatives that could be
traced back to ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib’s valor and they had no township
quarrels with the Quraysh tribe.

The shaded area of Saqifah belonged to Bani Sa’idah Ibn Ka’ab Ibn
al-Khazraj from the tribe of Khazraj (from the Ansar of Madinah). The
meeting location was not accidental, for it was there that the Khazraj,
led by Sa’d Ibn Ibadah used to gather underneath the shaded canopy to
legislate and resolve town matters.

That day, both tribes of the Ansar - the Khazraj and Aws were present at
the meeting. At the beginning of the meeting, the following were in
attendance: Sa’d Ibn Ibadah, Ibn al-Aas, Anas Ibn Malik, al-Mugheerah
Ibn Shu’bah, Khalid Ibn al-Waleed, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf, Basheer Ibn
Sa’d, Ma’adh Ibn Jabal, and Usayd Ibn Hudayr.[^5] Other individuals from
the Muhajireen who found out about the meeting came later, such as Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, and Abu Ubaydah Ibn al-Jarrah.

At the meeting, the Ansar initially recruited Sa’d Ibn Ibadah for the
leadership of the Muslim community, however on that day he was extremely
ill to the point that he could barely speak or move.[^6] He was the only
man other than ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib that the Quraysh group feared during
the time of the Holy Prophet. Sa’d Ibn Ibadah was also popular amongst
the Muslims - both the Muhajireen and the Ansar, due to the fact that
during the battles he used to carry the flag of Islam until combat
started, at which point he would pass it over to ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.[^7]

However, not everyone at the meeting agreed to his nomination. Some of
those present began to bicker, hence the old rivalry between the two
tribes surfaced. When they realized that a mutual consensus would not be
reached, they resounded to the following statement, “We will never pay
allegiance (to anyone) except to ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.”[^8]

As the tension grew at the meeting, two members from the Aws tribe,
Awaim Ibn Sa’ad and Maen Ibn Obed left the meeting unnoticed. Fearing
that the leadership of the Muslim community would fall into the hands of
their former rivals, the Khazraj, they sought to inform ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab about what was taking place.[^9]

After the two men informed ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab about the private
meeting, ‘Umar grew anxiously impatient. As it so happened, ‘Umar had
intended for Abu Bakr to be present when the death of the Holy Prophet
would occur, but Abu Bakr was away in an outlying area of Madinah called
al-Samh.

Hence, as the news of the Prophet’s death began to spread quickly and
the shock and sadness amongst the Muslims grew, ‘Umar needed to react in
order to buy some time to join the meeting - and there were two reasons
for this. First, ‘Umar needed Abu Bakr to return so that both of them
could attend the private meeting at Saqifah; and the other reason was to
act as if the Prophet was not dead in order to delay the official
appointment of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.

Thus, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab came out of the Prophet’s mosque and into the
streets shouting and negating the news that the Prophet had died and
even threatened to dismember anyone who said otherwise! ‘Umar cried out,
“Verily, the Messenger of Allah - by Allah - has not died, and will
never die.”[^10] Although the Holy Prophet’s body lay in wait, ‘Umar
continued to say that his soul had gone to Heaven like the soul of
Prophet Isa[^11] and promised a resurrection by saying, “The Prophet
will come back.”[^12]

Upon Abu Bakr’s return, ‘Umar informed him about the undisclosed meeting
at Saqifah and both of them headed out, along with Abu Ubaydah Ibn
al-Jarrah, to the meeting.

The Saqifah meeting played out like a well-rehearsed theatrical
production. Having been given some details about the meeting, ‘Umar and
Abu Bakr entered and found the Ansar locked in a bitter dispute. Sensing
that the leadership was about to fall into the hands of Sa’d Ibn Ibadah
from the Tribe of Khazraj, Abu Bakr immediately began to play on the
emotions of the Tribe of Aws to provoke them so that they would not pay
allegiance to their opponent, however his ultimate intention was to put
forward his own proposal.

After sympathizing with the Aws, Abu Bakr then turned the tables and
said that they (the Quraysh) were better suited for leadership than any
other group. Abu Bakr said, “We, the Muhajireen were the first to accept
Islam; we possess the most notable pedigree; our abode is the most
central; we have the best leaders; and we are nearest of kin to the
Prophet of Allah.” Abu Bakr then appeased both tribes by saying that
they too were worthy for some form of leadership of the ummah but that
ultimate authority must reside with the Muhajireen. Abu Bakr continued
his argument by quoting the words of the Prophet, “My successors are
twelve…,” but instead of saying, “…and all of them are from Bani
Hashim,”[^13] he changed it and said, “…and all of them are from
Quraysh.”[^14] To which ‘Umar seconded his statement.

However, a member of the Ansar, al-Habbab Ibn al-Mandhar, saw through
Abu Bakr’s facade. He realized the ploy being undertaken and quickly
discredited their claim to leadership. Al-Habbab claimed that since the
Ansar were the ones who approached the Prophet and supported him
throughout his entire mission, that they had the first right for
leadership.

After his statement, the tone of the meeting rapidly intensified as
fiery words were exchanged between him and ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, which
eventually led to ‘Umar physically assaulting him and breaking his nose.

Abu Bakr immediately pacified the firestorm and proposed two candidates
from the Quraysh for the position of caliph, Abu Ubaydah Ibn al-Jarrah
and ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab. Abu Bakr declared, “I advise you to choose one
of those two men, so pay allegiance to whomsoever you like.”

By offering the caliphate to others, Abu Bakr absolved himself of any
accusations that he might be seeking the caliphate for himself. However,
Abu Ubaydah Ibn al-Jarrah immediately declined the offer, and ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab promptly interrupted Abu Bakr by taking up the Arab custom of
respecting the elderly and stated, “God forbid that we do that, while
you are alive amongst us,” to Abu Bakr.

Then ‘Umar, as if on cue, abruptly held out his hand towards Abu Bakr
and said, “Stretch out your hand, and I will pay allegiance to you.”
Some of the Ansar agreed, namely: Ma’adh Ibn Jabal, Usayd Ibn Hudayr,
Basheer Ibn Sa’d, and Zayd Ibn Thabit. They stood up and declared (on
the grounds that the Prophet was from the Muhajireen, hence his
successor should also be from the Muhajireen), “As we supported the
Prophet, we will support his successor.”[^15]

Upon seeing the members of the Ansar offer allegiance to Abu Bakr, ‘Umar
related, “My heart was strengthened and others followed them.”[^16]
Hence, that ended the nomination process by confirming Abu Bakr as the
*khalifah* of the ummah.[^17] Abu Bakr accepted gracefully saying, “May
Allah reward you with goodness, O people of the Ansar.”[^18] Afterwards,
in his own words, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab stated, “The Quraysh examined
[the situation] and chose a leader for themselves, and they were
successful in their choice.”[^19]

However, it can be seen that the caliphate was predetermined and
confined to three people: Abu Bakr, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, and Abu
Ubaydah Ibn al-Jarrah - hence, their conversation was not spontaneous.

As mentioned earlier, the members of the Quraysh, in particular: Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, Abu Ubaydah Ibn al-Jarrah, al-Mugheerah Ibn
Shu’bah, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf, Khalid Ibn al-Waleed, Muhammad Ibn
Muslim, Ma’adh Ibn Jabal, Basheer Ibn Sa’d, and Usayd Ibn Hudayr had
already agreed to this sequence of events long before the Saqifah
meeting occurred, just like they had agreed that Abu Bakr would take
control on behalf of the Tribe of Taym first.

Most of the others present followed ‘Umar in giving their allegiance to
Abu Bakr,[^20] but the core of the Ansar who supported ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib refused, maintaining, “We will not pay allegiance to anyone except
‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib.”[^21] The only leader of the Ansar who remained
steadfast and refused to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr was Sa’d Ibn Ibadah,
who was ill and unable to move.

He told ‘Umar, “By Allah, if I was able to stand, you would have heard
from me a roaring which would have filled the streets and alleyways of
Madinah and would have been painful to you and your companions.”[^22] He
then turned to Abu Bakr and said, “I will never pay allegiance to you!
Even if ‘Ali pays allegiance, I still will not do so.” In return,
despite his illness, ‘Umar assaulted him just as he had accosted
al-Habbab Ibn al-Mandhar.[^23]

Later on ‘Umar recounted, “We attacked Sa’d Ibn Ibadah, and he was then
trampled and the people said, ‘Sa’d has been killed.’” Therefore, ‘Umar
said, “May Allah kill Sa’d.” Perceiving him as a threat, ‘Umar accused
Sa’d Ibn Ibadah of hypocrisy and wanting the leadership for himself and
hence wanted to kill him, but Abu Bakr restrained him.[^24]

If Sa’d Ibn Ibadah had really sought leadership, he could have obtained
it easily since the Saqifah (shaded area) was his home territory and he
was favored among the Muslims. Most likely, he would have obtained the
caliphate much easier than Abu Bakr, but like ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib later
said, Sa’d Ibn Ibadah was upset when he saw the people giving allegiance
to Abu Bakr, not because he wanted the leadership for himself, but
because he wanted the leadership to go to ‘Ali, as the Prophet had
dictated. Thereafter, Sa’d Ibn Ibadah rode to Huran in Syria, where
after the death of Abu Bakr, ‘Umar determined his fate by sending
Muhammad Ibn Muslim to kill him.[^25] & [^26]

The events of Saqifah did not end on that day. ‘Umar’s primary concern
was not to channel the political leadership towards Abu Bakr, but rather
to keep it away from ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib. ‘Umar sought to prevent ‘Ali
and the Bani Hashim from reaching the *khalifah* by any means possible.
Thus after he became *khalifah*, ‘Umar ensured that ‘Uthman would
succeed him, despite knowing that he would bring his tribesmen from the
Bani Umayyah to power.

‘Umar later said to ‘Uthman, “‘Uthman, what keeps me from appointing you
is your bigotry (*asabiyah*), and the preference that you give to your
family and clan over other Muslims.”[^27] Still, ‘Umar handed the rein
of *khalifah* to ‘Uthman, who as ‘Umar had predicted, ruled by nepotism
and favoritism until a defiant faction of the Muslims murdered him.

Overall, as Ibn Abil Hadid says,[^28] “It was ‘Umar who stood strongly
behind Abu Bakr and paved the way for him to assume the leadership. If
he had not backed him, it would have been impossible for Abu Bakr to
reach where he reached [the *khalifah*].” Nonetheless, the fate of the
ummah was sealed on that day, a day which ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab himself
later called, “One of the errors of pre-Islamic times (*Faltah*[^29]
*min falataat al-jahiliyyah*).”[^30] Even more he said, “Whoever goes
back to it [the same method used to select Abu Bakr as the *khalifah*],
then kill him.”[^31] ‘Umar also admitted his mistake by saying, “God
protected the Muslims from the dangers and risks of this immense error
[meaning having elected Abu Bakr].”[^32]

Nonetheless, the effects of Saqifah are felt even today. Had the Saqifah
not happened and had the Muslims followed the Prophet’s command, then
most likely, there would be no Sunni or Shi’a Muslim. The Muslims would
have been united under the banner of obedience to Allah and the
leadership that Allah Himself ordained. Instead, once others obtained
power, they held it firmly and did not allow anyone else outside their
circle to share in it. As a result, they held absolute control over the
ummah until the fall of the Bani Umayyah.

It can be argued that the issue of political leadership is solely a
political issue and something to be left, buried in the past.
Nevertheless, the influence of the ruling group extended beyond politics
because for nearly 100 years they banned the transcription of the
Prophet’s sayings for fear that the narrations referring to the right
and merits of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to the caliphate spread among the
masses.

As a result of not recording the hadith until centuries later, scholars
had to argue over which statements of the Holy Prophet were authentic
and which were fabrications and this led to the need to develop the
Science of Hadith. Perhaps the most damaging of all was that the ummah
was deprived from a valuable source of Divinely inspired guidance.

Given the severe calamity that the shift in leadership brought, one
might ask: Why did ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib not fight for his right to lead
the ummah? The answer is best given in his own words:

O Allah! I beseech Thee to take revenge on the Quraysh and those who are
assisting them, for they have cut asunder my kinship and overturned my
cup and have collaborated to contest a right to which I was entitled
more than anyone else. They said to me, ‘If you get your right, that
will be just, but if you are denied the right that too will be just.

Endure it with sadness or kill yourself in grief.’ I looked around but
found no one to shield me, protect me, or help me except the members of
my family. I refrained from flinging them into death and therefore
closed my eyes despite the dust; kept swallowing saliva despite the
suffocation of grief; and endured pangs of anger although it was
bitterer than colocynth and more grievous than the bite of knives.[^33]

Although ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib knew that the ummah would suffer without his
leadership, he also knew that it would destroy itself if he attempted to
take the leadership by force; and thus he abstained from the caliphate
until the murder of ‘Uthman. Even then, he was still hesitant, but at
that moment in time, Islam was on the brink of annihilation and there
was no one else to save it except for him. However, the extent of the
damage done by the group, unfortunately, had already severely crippled
the Muslim ummah.

[^1]: The Ansar (the Helpers) consisted of two tribes, the Aws and the
Khazraj who lived in the oasis desert of Yathrib which is about 250
miles northeast of Mecca. These two tribes had been at bitter and deadly
odds with each other for many years and with the Prophet’s assistance,
they put aside their differences and invited the Prophet and his
followers to Yathrib, which was later renamed Madinah.

[^2]: Those who migrated with the Prophet from Mecca to Madinah are
known as the Muhajireen - a term that means someone who is fleeing. The
Muhajireen were the indigenous inhabitants of Mecca, mainly from the
tribe of Quraysh.

[^3]: The Pledge of Ridhwan: In Dhul-Qa’dah, 6 ah, the Prophet decided
to perform the umrah (the lesser pilgrimage) to the Ka’abah which had
been until then denied to the Muslims due to the hostility of the
Meccans. Fourteen hundred Muhajireen and Ansar showed readiness to go
with him. Lest there be any misgivings in any quarter about his
intentions, he directed the Muslims not to carry any arms other than
swords, and he himself put on the robes of ihram and took camels to
sacrifice. The Muslims camped at Hudaibiyah, ten miles from Mecca. An
envoy was sent to the Meccans to obtain their permission for visiting
the Ka’abah but it was rejected. Instead, the Meccans collected a force
to prevent the Muslims from entering Mecca. The Quraysh sent Budayl of
the tribe of Khuza’ah, to tell the Prophet that he was not allowed to
visit the Ka’abah. The Prophet said that he had not gone there to fight
but to perform the pilgrimage. The Quraysh deputed ‘Urwah ibn Mas’ud
al-Thaqafi to have a talk with the Prophet, but nothing came out of it.
The Prophet then sent Karash ibn Umayyah to the Quraysh, but the
messenger was mistreated, and it was only with difficulty that he
escaped without being killed. The vanguard of the Quraysh attacked the
Muslims, but it was captured. The Prophet demonstrated great clemency
and set the captives free. Ultimately, ‘Uthman (who belonged to the same
clan in which Abu Sufyan belonged) was sent to persuade the Quraysh to
allow the Muslims to visit the Ka’abah. News came that the Quraysh had
killed ‘Uthman. The Muslims took a pledge on the hands of the Prophet,
known as “Bay’at al-Ridhwan” to stand by him to the last. Referring to
this pledge, the Qur’an says: Indeed God was well pleased with the
believers when they swore allegiance to thee under the tree, and He knew
what was in their hearts, so He sent down tranquility on them and
rewarded them with a near victory. (48:18)

[^4]: Sahih al-Muslim, 1:33, hadith 75

[^5]: Tarikh al-Ya’qubi, 2:123; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isabah, 1:325

[^6]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:455

[^7]: Usud al-Ghabah, 4:20; Ansab al-Ashraf, 2:106

[^8]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 3:198; Ibn al-Atheer, 5:157

[^9]: Al-Uqdul Farid, 3:63

[^10]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:442; Sirat Ibn Hisham, 4:305

[^11]: Al-Shahrestani, Al-Milal wal-Nihal, Vol. 115; Sunan al-Darimi,
Vol. 1

[^12]: Ibn Katheer, Al-Kamil fil Tarikh, 2:323; Sirat Ibn Hisham, 4:305

[^13]: Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi al-Muwaddah, c. 77

[^14]: Abu Nuaym, Haliyat al-Awliyaa, 1:86

[^15]: Sirat Ibn Hisham, 4:494

[^16]: Al-Kamil fil al-Tarikh, 2:231

[^17]: Musnad Ahmad, 1:239, 405, & 442; Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawarah,
3:1006

[^18]: Musnad Ahmad, 5:185

[^19]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 5:13; Ibn al-Atheer, Al-Kamil fil al-Tarikh,
3:63 & 3:288

[^20]: Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, Vol. 9

[^21]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:446 & 3:198; Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:111; Musnad
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, 1:55

[^22]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:459

[^23]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:457-463

[^24]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:459

[^25]: Ansab al-Ashraf, 1:589; Abd al-Fattah Abd al-Maqsud, Al-Saqifah
wal-Khalifah, 13; Al-Aqd al-Farid, 4:247

[^26]: For further reference regarding the death of Sa’d Ibn Ibadah see,
Al-Khulafa al-Rashidun by the Egyptian author Taha Husain, p.33. He says
in his book that politics killed Sa’d Ibn Ibadah, meaning that they
wanted to keep him away from power because they deemed his as a threat
to the regime, and he was a man who insisted that the khalifah and the
succession goes to the rightful people, the people appointed by Allah.

[^27]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 3:292

[^28]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 1:174

[^29]: In this context, the term “faltah” can be defined with any of the
following: an unexpected event, a sudden occurrence, a slip or lapse,
and something that only happens once and would never happen again.

[^30]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:459

[^31]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 2:29

[^32]: Ibid

[^33]: Nahjul Balaghah, Sermon 217


