Chapter 5: Backlash
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ ٱللهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُـمُ ٱلرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ ٱلْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيــراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah only wishes to remove all abomination from you, O members of
the Family, and to make you pure and immaculate. (Holy Qur’an, 33:33)***

Attempt to Burn the House of Fatima al-Zahra
--------------------------------------------

The day after the Saqifah, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab, along with a group of
individuals came to the house of the daughter of the Holy Prophet. In
the house, there was ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Fatima, and their two sons,
Hasan and Husayn, who were still in a state of deep sorrow over the
death of the Prophet.

Fatima opened the door and asked ‘Umar, “Did you come here to burn our
house?” ‘Umar retorted, “Yes, unless you enter into what the nation
entered in [meaning allegiance to Abu Bakr].”[^1] ‘Umar then slammed
open the door against Fatima at which point she found herself being
squeezed between the door and the wall of her house, causing one of her
ribs to break. At that time, she was pregnant with the third grandson of
the Holy Prophet; however, the force that ‘Umar applied on the door
caused her to have a miscarriage, and the baby who had been named Muhsin
by the Prophet, was stillborn only a few days after the death of his
grandfather.

Many historians have narrated this event with some of them providing
details that others omit. Ibn Abd Rabah al-Andalusi says:[^2]

Those who refrained from giving the bayah (allegiance) to Abu Bakr were
‘Ali, Abbas (the uncle of the Prophet), Zubayr Ibn al-Awam (cousin of
the Prophet) and Sa’d Ibn Ibadah. As for ‘Ali and Abbas, they sat in the
house of Fatima until Abu Bakr sent ‘Umar to take them out of the house
of Fatima, and he (Abu Bakr) said to him (‘Umar), “If they refuse, then
fight them.” Thus, he (‘Umar) came with a torch of fire to engulf the
house on them and upon arriving, he encountered Fatima. She said, “O Ibn
al-Khattab, did you come to burn our house?” He said, “Yes, unless you
enter into what the ummah entered into.”

Al-Tabari also relates the story; however, he says that Talha, Zubayr,
and some men from the Muhajireen were also in the house. He goes on to
say that ‘Umar told them, “By Allah, I will burn the house unless you
come out for the *bayah* (allegiance).” Raising his sword, Zubayr came
out of the house, but he fell to the ground and was attacked. In the
ensuing chaos, his sword was taken away.[^3]

Ibn Abil Hadid says:

When Fatima saw what ‘Umar did, she cried and wailed, and many women
from Bani Hashim gathered with her. They came to her and she said, “O
Abu Bakr, how fast you launched your strike on the family of the Prophet
after the death of the Prophet. By Allah, I will never speak to you
until I meet Allah!”[^4]

The historian, al-Baladri reports:

Abu Bakr sent for ‘Ali, asking him to pay allegiance. He didn’t pay
allegiance and thus ‘Umar came with a torch to the house of ‘Ali and
Fatima. He came face to face with Fatima and she said to him, “Are you
really going to burn the door of the house?” ‘Umar answered, “Yes
indeed.”[^5]

Other Sunni authors go on to state that had Fatima al-Zahra not opened
the door, ‘Umar would have proceeded to burn down the entire house. They
say that ‘Umar was shouting from outside the house saying, “Burn the
house with the people inside it!”[^6] The companions who were around
‘Umar saw him gathering wood and warned him, “‘Umar, you know that
Fatima lives in this house.” ‘Umar answered, “Still, even if she lives
here I am going to burn the house!”[^7]

Some other narrations have unsubstantially claimed that an opposition
group had gathered at the house of Fatima ready to act against Abu Bakr.
However, the truth is that some of the previously mentioned prominent
Sunni historians do not mention this at all – scholars such as
al-Shahristani, al-Baladri, al-Safti, al-Jawhari, Ibn Abd Rabbah
al-Andalusi, and Urwat Ibn Zubayr. Thus, this claim was just an excuse
put forth later on in order to justify the actions of ‘Umar and his
group.

These prominent Sunni scholars also name the individuals who
participated with ‘Umar in the attack on Fatima al-Zahra’s home and they
include the following: Ubayd Ibn Hubayr, Thabit Ibn Qays, Muhammad Ibn
Muslim, Khalid Ibn al-Waleed, al-Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah, Abu Ubaydah Ibn
al-Jarrah, Sa’d Mawla Abi Udaybah, Ma’adh Ibn Jabal, Qunfud, ‘Uthman,
Abd al-Rahman Ibn Auf, Ziyad Ibn Ubayd, Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, and
‘Amr Ibn al-Aas.

Many years later at a meeting between Imam Hasan (the first grandson of
the Prophet and son of Fatima and ‘Ali) and Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan in
the presence of Mugheerah Ibn Shu’bah, the Imam said to Mugheerah, “You
are the one who hit Fatima,[^8] the daughter of the Prophet until you
made her bleed and she miscarried her baby. You wanted to humiliate the
Prophet, and you opposed his teachings and violated the respect of the
Prophet. You know that the Prophet said to Fatima al-Zahra, ‘You are the
leader of the women of Paradise.’ By Allah, your fate will be the
Fire.”[^9]

Other Sunni historians who narrate this meeting are Ibn Qutaybah,[^10]
Ibn Abil Hadid,[^11] and al-Mahqari.[^12] However, as for Fatima’s
unborn son (who was killed during the attack), Ibn Qutaybah says that
Muhsin Ibn ‘Ali perished when he was a baby, but he does not mention
how.[^13]

Setting aside the events that occurred at the door of Fatima’s home, did
‘Umar have the right to enter her home? According to the Holy Qur’an, no
one may enter another person’s house without permission, as Allah
orders:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياأَيُّهَا ٱلَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ لاَ تَدْخُلُواْ بُيُوتاً غَيْرَ
بُيُوتِكُمْ حَتَّى تَسْتَأْنِسُواْ وَتُسَلِّمُواْ عَلىٰ أَهْلِهَا
ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَّكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَذَكَّرُونَ. فَإِن لَّمْ تَجِدُوا
فِيهَآ أَحَداً فَلاَ تَدْخُلُوهَا حَتَّى يُؤْذَنَ لَكُمُ وَإِن قِيلَ
لَكُمْ ٱرْجِعُواْ فَٱرْجِعُواْ هُوَ أَزْكى لَكُمْ وَٱللهُ بِمَا
تَعْمَلُونَ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Enter not the houses other than your [own] houses
until you have sought familiarity and saluted their inhabitants; this is
best for you; haply you may remember. But if you do not find anyone in
there, then enter them not until permission is given to you; and if it
is said unto you ‘Go you back’ then go back, for it is purer for you;
and God knows what all of you do. (24:27-28)***

Even the Messenger of Allah did not enter the house of his daughter and
grandchildren without first asking permission!

It is indeed disheartening that such an event occurred despite Allah’s
commandment that the ummah is to treat the family of the Prophet with
adoration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لاَّ أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْراً إِلاَّ ٱلْمَوَدَّةَ فِى
ٱلْقُرْبَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: ‘I demand not of you any recompense for it (the toils of the
apostleship) save the love of (my) relatives.’ (42:23)***

Regret for the Actions Taken Against Fatima
-------------------------------------------

As time passed, Abu Bakr felt the pangs of remorse about the incident at
Fatima al-Zahra’s home and said, “Every man sleeps next to his wife,
embracing her, enjoying his family, and you left me with my misery. I
don’t need your *bayah*, I don’t need it, take it away from me.” Near
the end of his life he also mentioned, “I was sad for three things that
I did, and I wish I hadn’t done them. One of them is that I exposed the
house of Fatima.”[^14]

Perhaps Abu Bakr’s guilt came from the fact that he had ordered ‘Umar to
subdue whoever was in the house if they did not surrender, even though
he knew that those in the house included Fatima al-Zahra - the beloved
daughter of the Holy Prophet and his grandsons, Hasan and Husayn. The
guilt drove Abu Bakr to seek reconciliation, so he asked ‘Umar to
accompany him to reconcile with Fatima al-Zahra and said to ‘Umar,
“Since we have angered Fatima, let us go and make her happy.”[^15]

Initially, they sought permission from her to enter her house, but she
refused, so they asked ‘Ali and he allowed them in. Both Abu Bakr and
‘Umar Ibn Khattab sat in front of Fatima al-Zahra, but she turned her
head towards the wall.

Abu Bakr said to her, “O beloved daughter of the Prophet, you are dearer
to me than my daughter Aishah, and I wish that on the day your father
died, I would have died instead and that I would not have remained
(alive) after him. You are angry because we did not grant you your
inheritance since we heard your father say, ‘We don’t leave any
inheritance; whatever we leave is charity.’”

With her head still turned against them, Fatima al-Zahra replied, “If I
remind you of a saying of my father, would you acknowledge it, and if
you acknowledge it, would you practice and implement it?” Both of them
said they would and thus she said, “I ask you by Allah, did you not hear
the Prophet of Allah saying, ‘The pleasure of Fatima is my pleasure, and
her wrath and anger is my anger, and whoever loves my daughter Fatima
loves me, and whoever pleases her pleases me, and whoever angers her
angers me?’”[^16] They said, “Yes, we heard this from the Messenger of
Allah.” She continued, “Then I testify before Allah and His angels that
you have angered me, and when I meet the Prophet, I will raise my
grievances with you to him.”

According to al-Tabari,[^17] al-Bukhari,[^18] and al-Muslim,[^19] Fatima
al-Zahra refused to speak with Abu Bakr until she died. Even at her
funeral, her wishes were for them not to be present, thus ‘Ali buried
her at night according to her wishes and did not allow Abu Bakr and
‘Umar to participate in her burial.

The exact date when Fatima al-Zahra died is uncertain. According to Abul
Faraj al-Isfahani,[^20] she lived a maximum of six months after the
death of her father, while others mention a minimum period of forty
days. What the author upholds is that of the narration of Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir, in which he stated she died three months after the departure
of the Messenger of Allah.

Usurping the Land of Fadak
--------------------------

Muslim commentators report that when the verse, “And give your kin their
rightful due” was revealed,[^21] the Holy Prophet asked the Angel
Gabriel what he was being directed to do, and Gabriel replied that Allah
was commanding him to give Fadak, a piece of land north of Madinah, to
his daughter Fatima al-Zahra and the Holy Prophet avidly complied.

However, after the death of the Prophet, Abu Bakr confiscated the land
from Fatima on the pretext that the Holy Prophet had said, “We the
prophets, do not leave any inheritance. Whatever we leave behind is
charity.” This is a statement that not only contradicts the wishes of
the Prophet, but also a precedent of the Qur’an that states,

***“And Sulayman inherited from Dawud.”***[^22]

Nevertheless, when Abu Bakr and ‘Umar later came to power, they both
gave preference to Lady Aishah. History narrates that on several
occasions, the exception to their rule that “prophets do not leave
inheritance” was enacted.

For instance, both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar allowed Lady Aishah to inherit the
house of the Holy Prophet, although she did not have the absolute right
to inherit the home exclusively, considering that she was merely one out
of the nine wives of the Prophet, while the other wives were renounced
of their share of the home inheritance. The property was hers and she
exercised her control of it by permitting the burial of her father, Abu
Bakr in the room of the Holy Prophet, next to the Prophet, while
refusing the grandson of the Holy Prophet, Hasan to be buried next to
his grandfather.

When ‘Uthman came to power, Lady Aishah and Hafsah (two wives of the
Prophet) asked him to grant them more of the inheritance of the Prophet,
however ‘Uthman rebuked Lady Aishah by saying, “Didn’t you come here
with another man named Malik Ibn Aus al-Nadhari and say that the Prophet
said, ‘We don’t leave inheritance?’ Didn’t you prevent Fatima al-Zahra
from taking her share of the inheritance of the Prophet, and now you
have come to ask for your share?”

Enraged, Lady Aishah went to the Mosque of the Holy Prophet, raised the
Prophet’s shirt and cried that ‘Uthman had disagreed with “the owner of
this shirt.” In turn, ‘Uthman cited verse 66:10 of the Qur’an drawing a
parallel about the disobedient wives of the prophets Nuh and Lut to her.

Ironically, ‘Uthman did not return the land of Fadak to the children of
Fatima al-Zahra nor allow Lady Aishah to have it, nor did he give it as
charity, as the hadith that he was claiming to act under said. Instead,
‘Uthman gave it as a gift to one of his family members named Marwan Ibn
al-Hakam, whom the Holy Prophet had cursed and exiled from Madinah for
his sedition and rampage against Islam.[^23]

Story of Fadak
--------------

In the once populated Jewish territory of Khaybar, which is north of
Madinah in a town known as Fadak, lay the start of one of the most
contentious issues in the history of Islam - the right of inheritance of
the Prophet’s daughter, Fatima al-Zahra.

Both schools of thought (The School of the Ahlul Bayt - also known as
the Shi’a; and The School of the Companions - also known as the Sunni)
have their own version on how the episode regarding Fadak unfolded.

The position of the School of the Companions is that the family of the
Prophet had no right to inherit Fadak because the Prophet himself
narrated that he does not leave behind any bequests; while the School of
the Ahlul Bayt claim otherwise and add that Fadak was not only Fatima
al-Zahra’s right to inherit, but also that her father bestowed it to her
during his lifetime by the decree of Allah. In addition, scholars who
follow the Ahlul Bayt contest that by stripping Fatima of her resources
also meant the weakening of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib of the means to defend
his rightful entitlement to the leadership of the community.

Both schools of thought relate that Fadak was a well-developed and
productive farmland owned by the Jews of the Bani Nadir tribe (the Jews
of Madinah) near Khaybar. The Jews who lived in Khaybar posed a
persistent threat to the newly established Islamic community. Several
attempts were made by them to destabilize and destroy the Islamic
community, and thus the Prophet sent his army, led by ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Talib, to conquer their castle in the seventh year of the Hijrah. What
remained after the acquisition was the Jewish village of Fadak.

After witnessing the defeat of Khaybar, the Jews of Fadak met with an
envoy of the Prophet. Preferring survival, these Jews struck a
settlement with the Prophet, and in this deal, they relinquished half of
the settlement of Fadak. In addition, they also agreed to deliver half
of their part of Fadak’s yearly production to the Prophet, and in
return, the Jewish villagers could live peacefully under the protection
of the Islamic state.

Therefore, after conquering Khaybar and taking possession of half of the
land of Fadak and its yearly revenues without embattlement, the
attention then turned towards the issue of its ownership. In accordance
with Islam, land or wealth acquired through military intervention
becomes the property of the Muslim community; but in all other
circumstances, land or wealth acquired without the use of military might
becomes the sole property of the Prophet, as indicated in the Qur’an
where Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَفَاءَ اللهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ
عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلاَ رِكَابٍ وَلَكِنَّ اللهَ يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ
عَلَى مَن يَشَآءُ وَ اللهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What God has bestowed on His Apostle and taken away from them - for
this you made no expedition with either cavalry or camels: but God gives
power to His apostles over any He pleases: and God has power over all
things. (59:6)***

Allah further adds in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَفَاءَ اللهُ عَلَى رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَى فَالِلَّهِ
وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***What God has bestowed on His Apostle and taken away from the people
of the townships belongs to God, to His Apostle and to kindred and
orphans… (59:7)***

Thus, the followers of the Ahlul Bayt have long claimed that Fadak
belonged to the Prophet and their belief is based on the Qur’anic verses
mentioned above (c. 59:6-7), in addition to the recorded traditions.

According to the School of the Companions, they too believe that Fadak
was the property of the Prophet since it was acquired without the use of
force.[^24] For example, it is narrated in the Sunni books of tradition
that ‘Umar is reported to have said, “The property of Bani Nadir was
among that which Allah bestowed on His Messenger; against them neither
horses nor camels were pricked, but they belonged specifically to the
Messenger of Allah.”[^25]

Therefore, the matter of Allah granting ownership of Fadak to the
Prophet is not disputed in either school of thought. The disagreement
amongst the schools began in regards to what the Prophet did with Fadak
during his lifetime, and thus, they narrate the story of Fadak
differently.

Shi’a scholars believe that during his lifetime, the Prophet bestowed
Fadak upon his daughter Fatima al-Zahra. These scholars cite a letter
written by ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib to the governor of Basra, ‘Uthman Ibn
Hunaif in which he stated, “Yes, Fadak was the only land under the
heavens which was in our possession; but the inclinations of certain men
lusted for it and the souls of others relinquished it.”

On the other hand, those who deny that the Prophet presented Fadak to
Fatima al-Zahra reason that the notion that the Prophet would grant one
of his children such an abundant gift and would neglect the others is
unimaginable.

They reason that this would mean that the Prophet would have acted
contrary to the Islamic concept of parental fairness, since he had more
children other than Fatima. In order to defend this theory, they cite
the following tradition, “The companion Basheer Ibn Sa’d came to the
Prophet telling him that he had given one of his sons a garden as a gift
and requested the Prophet to be a witness thereto. The Prophet asked
whether he had given a similar gift to all of his children. When he
replied that he had not done so, then the Prophet told him, ‘Go away,
for I will not be a witness to injustice.’”[^26]

The Ahlul Bayt rebut that the Prophet acted fairly when he presented
Fadak to Fatima al-Zahra for several reasons. Firstly, Fatima was no
ordinary child from the Prophet’s children; and he showed her a lofty
position through his exceptional treatment towards her. For example, he
would stand up to greet her, offer his seat to her, and only permit the
door to her home to be adjacent to his home and the mosque.

The Prophet used to say the following about her, “Fatima is the mother
of her father (*Umme Abeeha*).”[^27] Secondly, she was the only daughter
regarded and revered in the Qur’an and *sunnah* as the leader of all the
women. Thirdly, she was the only child of the Prophet whom Allah had
purified.[^28] Fourthly, through her came the Prophet’s eleven
descendents and successors. Lastly and most importantly, it was the
decree of Allah to gift Fatima al-Zahra the land of Fadak.

The Ahlul Bayt scholars also draw upon Sunni references to solidify
their belief that Fadak was indeed a gift to Fatima al-Zahra. For
instance, when chapter 17, verse 26 was revealed in the Qur’an,[^29]
Sunni commentators say that it pertained to the Prophet bestowing Fadak
upon his daughter Fatima al-Zahra. Sunni traditionalists narrated that
the Prophet asked the Angel Gabriel in reference to,

***“And render to the kindred their rights” (17:26)***

the following, “Who are the kinsmen and what is their due?” The Angel
Gabriel replied, “Give Fadak to Fatima for it is her due, and whatever
is due to Allah and the Prophet out of Fadak also belongs to her, so
entrust it to her also.”[^30]

As mentioned earlier, according to both schools of thought, Fadak
belonged to the Prophet who then presented it to Fatima al-Zahra.[^31]
According to the Sunni version of events, after the departure of the
Prophet and the succession of Abu Bakr, he (Abu Bakr) was obligated by
the Prophet’s tradition to seize his (the Prophet’s) assets as public
property. The Shi’a version argues that confiscation of Fadak and other
properties were unwarranted based on the Qur’an and that Abu Bakr’s
tradition was unfounded.

According to the teachings of the Ahlul Bayt, Fadak had been in Fatima
al-Zahra’s possession for four years prior to the death of the Prophet.
They also make a strong point that Abu Bakr had known all along that the
Prophet gifted Fadak to Fatima al-Zahra because he had been present
during the conquest of Khaybar and had known what the Prophet did with
Fadak afterwards.

According to both schools of thought, upon becoming caliph, Abu Bakr
ousted Fatima’s hired residents from the land of Fadak and confiscated
the land along with other properties that she owned in Madinah. Fatima
immediately went to Abu Bakr to protest the seizures and he dismissed
her claim by citing the following tradition of the Prophet, “We, the
folk of prophets do not leave bequests; what we leave is for alms.”[^32]

Fatima al-Zahra employed various means to prove her entitlement to the
land. First, she came seeking Fadak as an entitlement of a gift by her
father; however, Abu Bakr refused her claim on the account of him
hearing from the Prophet that prophets do not leave inheritance.

She rebutted his argument by stating that the land was a gift, thus not
considered a bequest. After Abu Bakr’s continued refusal to relinquish
her property, Fatima then requested her right to inheritance according
to the Qur’an for which Abu Bakr asked her to bring forth witnesses.

Some Sunni scholars question as to why Fatima al-Zahra claimed Fadak as
her inheritance if it was a gift. The response is that Fatima al-Zahra
was compelled to claim her right as an inheritance according to the
Qur’an because Abu Bakr would not recognize it as a gift. Besides, if
both schools of thought have recorded narrations that Fadak was gifted
to Fatima al-Zahra during the life of the Prophet then Abu Bakr’s
narration does not apply to this case. He had no grounds to claim it as
the Prophet’s property because it no longer belonged to the Prophet.

According to other reports, Fatima al-Zahra claimed Fadak as being a
gift from the Prophet, which Abu Bakr requested witnesses in which
Fatima al-Zahra brought forward witnesses.[^33] In some accounts, the
witnesses were ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib, Umme Ayman (the wife of the Prophet),
and Rabah, a freed slave of the Prophet.[^34] In other accounts, the
witnesses were ‘Ali and Umme Ayman.[^35] While in others, the witnesses
were ‘Ali, Hasan, and Husayn; and in some traditions, Umme Ayman[^36] is
also included, however Abu Bakr rejected all of these people. In some of
the reports, Abu Bakr refused Fatima al-Zahra’s witnesses on account of
them being her immediate family members. In other reports, he denied her
witnesses on account that they fell short of the criteria needed to be
witnesses.

In regards to the witnesses, Shi’a scholars disapprove of Abu Bakr
requesting Fatima al-Zahra to bring forth witnesses on account of the
following arguments: Fatima’s testimony alone should have sufficed, and
there was no need for any witnesses on the account of Allah having
purified her, which was also extended to ‘Ali, Hasan, and Husayn.[^37]

In contrast, on a different occasion, Abu Bakr had accepted the
testimony of one person, such as Jabir Ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, so why
did he then deny Fatima al-Zahra’s testimony? The event is recorded in
history as follows:

When the Prophet died, Abu Bakr received some property from al-Ala
al-Hadrami. Abu Bakr said to the people, “Whoever has a money claim on
the Prophet or was promised something by him should come to us (so that
we may pay him his right).” Jabir added, I said (to Abu Bakr), “Allah’s
Apostle promised me that he would give me this much, and this much, and
this much (spreading his hands three times).” Jabir added, “Abu Bakr
counted for me and handed me five hundred gold pieces, and then five
hundred, and then five hundred (more).”[^38]

Many more exceptions to the ‘verse of evidence,’ (c. 2:282) as recorded
in the traditions narrated by the School of the Companions can be seen,
such as in the example of Khazima Ibn Thabit. This individual gave
evidence in support of the Prophet in a case concerning the sale of a
horse, in which an Arab man had made a claim against the Prophet and his
(*Khazima’s*) single testimony was considered sufficient, and through
this the Prophet gave him the title of “*Dhush Shahadatain*” (the person
whose single testimony is equivalent to two people) because he was
regarded as being equal to two just witnesses.”[^39] Thus, again why is
it that Abu Bakr could not make an exception for Fatima al-Zahra?

A critical examination into Abu Bakr’s narration shows us the reason.
Abu Bakr said, “I heard the Messenger saying, ‘We do not leave
inheritance. What we leave behind is charity.’”[^40] The Shi’a scholars
deny such a tradition because it goes against the Qur’anic injunction
regarding inheritance[^41] and the verses that mention about past
prophets inheriting.[^42] Nonetheless, Abu Bakr upheld the above quoted
alleged tradition in the face of Fatima al-Zahra’s claim and the clear
verses of the Qur’an.

According to Sunni tradition, the hadith Abu Bakr quoted is considered
as genuine, since it can be found in what they describe as *sahih*
(authentic) books, such as *Sahih al-Bukhari* and *Sahih al-Muslim*,
thus making the tradition irrefutable. In addition to their own sources,
they also refer to traditions from Shi’a books on the subject. For
example, from one of the major four books of the Shi’a, *al-Kafi* by
Shaykh al-Kulayni, Imam Jafar as-Sadiq has been quoted as saying that
the Prophet said, “…And the *ulama* (Islamic scholars) are the heirs of
the *anbiya* (prophets); and the *anbiya* did not leave *dinars* and
*dirhams* (money) as inheritance; but they do leave knowledge.
Therefore, whosoever takes knowledge has taken a great portion.”[^43]

In addition, in order to justify that Abu Bakr acted rightfully in
denying Fadak to Fatima al-Zahra, Sunni scholars also cite the following
tradition mentioned in the Shi’a books, “Women do not inherit anything
of the land or fixed property.”[^44] They also cite the following
hadith, “They (women) will get the value of the bricks, the building,
the wood and the bamboo. As for the land and the fixed property, they
will get no inheritance from that.”[^45]

However, the Shi’a scholars do not remain silent when hadith are cited
from their books in order to justify actions taken against Fatima
al-Zahra. The scholars explain that the tradition regarding the
“*anbiya* (prophets) not leaving inheritance” is not in reference to the
traditional inheritance of heirs; but rather, it is in the context of
inheriting the spirit and knowledge of Islam.

Moreover, Shi’a scholars point not only towards the Qur’anic verses that
mention prophets inheriting, such as Prophet Sulayman inheriting from
Prophet Dawud,[^46] but also, that Prophet Muhammad himself inherited
from his father. Abdullah Ibn Abdul Muttalib (the Prophet’s father) left
to Aminah (the Prophet’s mother) a legacy of five colored camels and a
small flock of sheep which was inherited by the Prophet.[^47]

In regards to the tradition that women are not permitted to inherit land
or property, Shi’a scholars say that the tradition only applies to the
inheritance of a wife from her husband. Thus, it is not applicable to
Abu Bakr’s action in denying Fatima her right to inherit from her
father. Plus they argue that had Abu Bakr’s tradition been accurate then
Fatima al-Zahra and ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib would have known about it for
several reasons.

First, they were closest to the Prophet and such a tradition would have
affected them both. In addition, ‘Ali would have certainly been aware of
the hadith since he was the “gateway” of Islamic knowledge. The Prophet
used to refer to ‘Ali as, “I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its
gate.” Secondly, they would have never come forward with such a claim if
the tradition was accurate.

For the most part, Shi’a theologians and historians present undisputable
arguments and we see that in all accounts, Fadak was rightfully the
property of Fatima al-Zahra as it had been gifted to her; and if we
presume that it was not gifted to her, then still, if analyzed
objectively, one would conclude that she had a right to claim it as an
inheritance.

By virtue of Fatima al-Zahra’s stature, her testimony, coupled with the
Qur’an, take precedence over Abu Bakr’s tradition and position. Thus, to
justify Abu Bakr’s action falls short before Fatima al-Zahra’s grandeur.
Although various reasons are cited by others to justify Abu Bakr’s
claim, but the main intent behind the confiscation of Fadak is closely
tied to the usurpation of the Islamic leadership after the Prophet, and
thus the underlying reason for the confiscation of Fadak was to deny
‘Ali and Fatima al-Zahra any economic power which would have enabled
them to forge a greater stand against Abu Bakr’s leadership.

Stand Against Imam ‘Ali
-----------------------

Since power remained firm in the hands of the Quraysh group, and they
limited their ranks to those who had refused to pay allegiance to ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib, ‘Ali bore the brunt of this group’s enmity.

The only individuals who could move up in the ranks were those who had
refused to pay allegiance to ‘Ali - people such as al-Mugheerah Ibn
Shu’bah, ‘Amr Ibn al-Aas, Abu Musa al-Ashari, Sa’d Ibn Abil Waqqas,
Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, Abu Huraira, Utbah Ibn Abu Sufyan, Sa’ed Ibn
al-Aas, and al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah.

For forty years, the leadership who bore deep animosity towards ‘Ali,
forced mercenary speakers to ascend the pulpit and curse him in addition
to the daughter of the Holy Prophet and their children, Hasan and
Husayn.[^48] If anyone ventured outside of this jurisdiction and tried
to mention the virtues of ‘Ali, they were warned that that was a crime
punishable by death.

This forced scholars, such as Hasan al-Basri to refer to the fourth
caliph, ‘Ali, as “Abu Zaynab (the father of Zaynab).” Their
vindictiveness continued despite the agreed upon saying of Prophet
Muhammad, narrated by both Sunni and Shi’a that, “O ‘Ali, no one likes
you except a believer, and no one hates you except a hypocrite.”[^49]

‘Ali was of such a high status in the sight of the Holy Prophet that
when *Surah al-Bara’at* (*The Disavowal*, also known as *al-Tawbah*
(*The* *Repentance*)) was revealed, the Prophet sent Abu Bakr as the
*amir* (caravan leader) of the Hajj to recite it (and thus to offer the
Quraysh a stern warning).

However while on the way to Mecca, Abu Bakr was intercepted by ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Talib through the Divine decree given by Allah to Prophet Muhammad.
The Angel Gabriel instructed the Prophet with Allah’s order, “No one
delivers on your behalf except yourself or a man from you.” Afterwards
the Prophet commented, “‘Ali is from me, and I am from him, and no one
delivers (the revelation) except me or ‘Ali.”[^50]

In reality, the intense opposition towards ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib proves
that without a doubt, the Quraysh group did recognize that ‘Ali was
bound to succeed the Prophet. What other reason could they possibly have
had for ritualizing invocations against him? If nothing else, he was a
companion with the highest recorded caliber of service to Islam and the
Prophet.

He was the father of the Prophet’s grandchildren and he was never known
to have committed any wrong act. Although he maintained that the
caliphate should have gone to him, he did not raise arms, and he only
assumed the caliphate after the institution itself had crumbled. Had he
been only a mere contender, the ruling powers would have exiled him -
even annihilated him, just as they did to companions such as Abu Dharr
al-Ghifari.

Instead, the Quraysh group was more concerned with assassinating the
character of ‘Ali, and in hindsight, their propaganda campaign points
all the more clearly to the reality that they were trying to cover up
the Prophet’s command that ‘Ali was to be his successor.

In the end, this intense hatred turned into violent bloodshed when the
wife of the Prophet, Lady Aishah, despite having been warned by the
Prophet not to transgress against ‘Ali,[^51] mobilized 30,000 fighters
and marched from Madinah to Basra in a confrontation known as the Battle
of Camel (Battle of Jamal). Lady Aishah instigated the first battle in
Islam in which Muslims raised swords against one another, and as a
result, she caused the death of 20,000 Muslims from her side and another
500 from the defense of ‘Ali’s army.

Following her lead, Mu’awiyah also took arms against ‘Ali during his
caliphate resulting in the Battle of Siffeen, in which 70,000 Muslims
lost their lives. Indeed, she did not take heed to what the Prophet had
said to ‘Ali, “May God fight the one who fights you and may God be
hostile to the one who is hostile towards you.”[^52]

[^1]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 3:198; Tarikh Abul Fida, 1:156

[^2]: Ibn Abd Rabbah al-Andalusi, Al-Aqd al-Farid, 4:259

[^3]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 2:198

[^4]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 2.:119

[^5]: Al-Baladri, Ansab al-Ashraf, 1:586

[^6]: Shahrestani, Al-Milal wal-Nihal, 1:56; Salah al-Din al-Susti;
Al-Shafi’i, Manaqib al-Ibadah, 3:407

[^7]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1:12; ‘Umar Ridha (Kahhalah),
Alam Al-Nisa, 4:14; Abd al-Fattah Abd al-Maqsud; Al-Saqifah
wal-Khalifah, 14

[^8]: When ‘Umar attacked Fatima in her home, others physically accosted
her as well.

[^9]: Al-Tabrasi, Al-Ihtijaj, 1:414

[^10]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1:12-13

[^11]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 14:192

[^12]: Al-Mahqari, Waqt Siffeen, 1:63

[^13]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Ma’arif, 1:93

[^14]: Lisan al Mizan, 8:189; Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imamah wa Siyasah, 1:18;
Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 6:51; Tarikh al-Ya´qubi, 2:137

[^15]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1:14

[^16]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 5:36

[^17]: Tarikh al-Tabari, 3:202

[^18]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:96

[^19]: Sahih al-Muslim, hadith 1259

[^20]: Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-Talibi´in, 19

[^21]: Holy Qur’an, 17:26, 30:38

[^22]: Holy Qur’an, 27:16

[^23]: Ibn Qutaybah, Al-Marif, 195; Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balaghah

[^24]: Al-Tabari, The Last Years of the Prophet (English translation),
4:196; Futuhal Buldan, p.42; Tarikh al-Khamees, 2:64; Ibn Atheer, Tarikh
al-Kamil, 2:85; Ibn Hisham, Seerah, 3:48; Ibn Khuldun, Al-Tarikh, 2,
part 2

[^25]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:46, 7:82, & 9:121-22; Sahih al-Muslim, 5:151;
Abu Dawood, Sunan, 3:139-41; Nasa’i, Sunan, 7:132; Ahmad al-Hanbal,
al-Musnad, p.25, 48, 60, & 208; Al-Kubra (Al-Bayhaqi), Sunan, 6:296-99

[^26]: Sahih al-Muslim, Kitab al-Hibat, no. 14

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, 43:19

[^28]: Holy Qur’an, 33:33

[^29]: Holy Qur’an, 17:26, “And render to the kindred their due rights…”

[^30]: Narration can be found through al-Bazzaz, Abu Yala, Ibn Abi
Hatim, Ibn Marduwayh, and others from Abu Said al-Khudri and through Ibn
Marduwayh from Abdullah Ibn al-Abbas; al-Mustadrak, 4:63; History of
Tabari, 3:3460; al-Istiab, 4:1793; Usud al-Ghabah, 5:567; al-Tabaqat,
8:192; al-Isabah, 4:432

[^31]: ‘Ali Ibn Burhanuddin al-Halabi al-Shafi, comp.,
Siratu’l-Halabiyya, p.39

[^32]: Karmani’s commentary, Sahih al-Bukhari, 15:4

[^33]: Siratul Halabiyya, p.39

[^34]: Al-Baladhuri, More Facts on Fadak, comments from Futuhul Buldan,
p.48

[^35]: Ibid

[^36]: Al-Yaqubi, al-Tarikh, 3:195-96

[^37]: Holy Qur’an, 33:33

[^38]: Sahih al-Muslim, 7:75-76; Ahmad al-Hanbal, al-Musnad, 3:307-308

[^39]: Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:24 & 6:146; Abu Dawud, Sunan, 3:308

[^40]: Sahih al-Muslim, Kitab al-Jihad Was\`-Siyar, no. 49

[^41]: Holy Qur’an, 4:7 & 4:33

[^42]: Holy Qur’an, 27:16 & 19:5-6

[^43]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, 1:42

[^44]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, 7:127

[^45]: Bihar al-Anwar, 104:351

[^46]: Holy Qur’an, 27:16

[^47]: Tabaqat Ibn Sa’d, part 1:39; Moulana Shibli al-Noumani, Siratan
Nabi, 1:122

[^48]: Al-Kamil fil-Tarikh, 5:42

[^49]: Sahih al-Tirmidhi, 2:301; Sahih al-Nisai, 2:271; Sahih Ibn Majah,
p. 12; Abu Nuaym, Hiliyat al-Awiya, 4:185

[^50]: Musnad Ahmad Ibn al-Hanbal, 4:164; Kanz al-Ummal, 6:153

[^51]: Musnad Ahmad, 6:52; Al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, 1163; Tarikh
al-Tabari, 4:469

[^52]: Usud al-Ghabah, 2:154; Al-Isabah, 1:501


