Chapter 6: Transition of the Group
==================================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَثلُ كَلِمَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ كَشَجَرَةٍ خَبِيثَةٍ اجْتُثَّتْ مِن فَوْقِ
الأَرْضِ مَا لَهَا مِن قَرَارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree: It is torn
up by the root from the surface of the earth: it has no stability. (Holy
Qur’an, 14:26)***

The Cursed Tree
---------------

Since the advent of the revelation of the Qur’an, the Bani Umayyah
spearheaded a calculated fight against Islam. Having received full
knowledge of their evil traits through revelation, the Holy Prophet
repeatedly cursed them,[^1] specifically Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb.[^2] Even
Allah, referring to them metaphorically in the Qur’an cursed them when
He said, “And the cursed tree in the Qur’an...” (c. 17:60) Both Sunni
and Shi’a commentators agree that this “cursed tree” is none other than
the Bani Umayyah.[^3]

Generation after generation, they perpetuated their hatred towards the
religion of Islam and their attempts to overcome it. Initially, in Mecca
and Madinah, Abu Sufyan and his son Mu’awiyah severely tormented the
Muslims. The attacks by Abu Sufyan led the reputable Sunni historian,
Ibn Abd al-Birr to declare that, “Abu Sufyan was a shelter for all the
hypocrites who were against the Muslims after he embraced Islam and what
is correct (to say) is that he did not embrace Islam, but rather he
unwillingly surrendered to the Muslims.”[^4]

His animosity prevailed some fourteen years after his “conversion” when
he kicked the grave of the martyred uncle of the Prophet, Hamzah, and
mocked him saying, “O *Aba Imarah*, the issue [Islamic leadership] which
you fought against us with the sword is now in the hands of our children
who are playing with it.”[^5]

Mu’awiyah, on the other hand, took a less vocal stance during his
caliphate and simply killed those prominent companions of the Prophet
who disagreed with his totalitarian policies. Among the souls whom he
escorted out of the life of this world were the grandson of the Prophet,
Imam Hasan, Hijr Ibn Uday, Malik al-Ashtar, Muhammad Ibn Abu Bakr, Ammar
Ibn Yasir, Abd al-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakr, and Sa’d Ibn Abu al-Waqqas.[^6]

Mu’awiyah continued his mayhem by killing many of the Ansar and
memorizers of the Holy Qur’an. Mu’awiyah’s son Yazid continued the trend
years later by murdering the other grandson of the Prophet, Imam Husayn
in the tragic massacre at Karbala in the year 61 ah, in which he then
took the women and children of the Prophet’s household captive and
dishonored them by parading them through Iraq and Syria. Yazid broadened
his reign of terror and havoc by allowing his soldiers to rape the women
and pillage the city of Madinah in the year 62 ah and topped his rule of
tyranny with setting out to destroy the Ka’abah in the year 63 ah.

Anyone who indulges in such vile practices should not only have been
banned from leading the Islamic government, but should have also been
ostracized from the nation. Yet, despite the inclinations of the Bani
Umayyah and the curse of Allah upon them, both the first and the second
caliphs involved them in their power structure and exposed the ummah to
their treachery.

They made ‘Uthman a senior aide (vizier) and made use of others, such as
Mu’awiyah, Utbah, Yazid, Sa’eed Ibn al-Aas, al-Waleed Ibn Uqbah, and
Uttab Ibn Usayd, while other worthy men went unrepresented.

Ironically, at one time, the first caliph confided to al-Mugheerah Ibn
Shu’bah his fear that the Bani Umayyah posed a serious threat to Islam
and said, “By Allah, Bani Umayyah will cause Islam to become
one-eyed.”[^7] Yet ironically, ‘Umar privileged people from the Bani
Umayyah over others in his government.

When Mu’awiyah was only 18 years old, ‘Umar appointed him governor of
Syria, although ‘Umar himself had refused to join the dispatch of Usama
Ibn Zayd upon the order of the Holy Prophet on the pretext that Usama
was only 18; and he also objected to the caliphate of ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib
because ‘Ali was too young - 33 years old.[^8] In response to the
criticism that Mu’awiyah was too young to govern, ‘Umar retorted, “Are
you criticizing me for appointing him? I heard the Prophet say about
Mu’awiyah, ‘God, make a guide (*hadi*), a guided one (*mahdi*), and
guide the people by him.’”[^9]

‘Umar even knighted some well-known enemies of the Prophet and Islam
with honored titles. Abu Sufyan was given the title of “*Sayyid Quraysh*
(Leader of the Quraysh),” while he called Mu’awiyah, “*Kisra al-Arab*” -
“*kisra*” being the word for a noble Persian king, and he called Hind,
the mother of Mu’awiyah, “*Karemat Quraysh* (the Honorable Lady of
Quraysh).” In reality, reports on Hind say otherwise about her honor as
the report according to Ibn al-Katheer shows:

In the Battle of Uhud, Hind, the mother of Mu’awiyah who was the wife of
Abu Sufyan was butchering the martyrs of the Muslims - including Hamzah
the uncle of the Prophet - and amputating their limbs.[^10]

Is it possible that someone who had committed such horrendous acts be
entitled as an “honorable woman?” Little evidence exists to indicate
that Hind was sincere when she later embraced Islam. The Bani Umayyah
remained as the Qur’an had described them - “the Cursed Tree.”

How easily did the Quraysh group forget the admonitions of the Holy
Qur’an and the Noble Prophet, and yet they were to become the ruling
dynasty of the Muslim world. Instead of the hadith of the Prophet
warning the people against Bani Umayyah - or even the words of ‘Umar Ibn
al-Khattab warning himself against them - an exorbitant amount of false
hadith began to appear claiming the high status of the Bani Umayyah in
the sight of Allah. Indeed, the “evil word” of the “cursed tree” had
begun to spread its roots.

[^1]: Al-Hakim al-Hasakani, Al-Mustadrak, 4:480

[^2]: Al-Isabah, 2:38; Usd al-Ghabah, 3:76

[^3]: Al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur; Al-Bayhaqi, Al-Dalail

[^4]: Ibn Abd al-Birr, Al-Istiab, 2:690

[^5]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balaghah

[^6]: Ibn al-Atheer 3:440; Al-Istiab, p. 839; Ibn Hajar, Al-Isabah,
3:384

[^7]: Ibn Sa’d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 7:78

[^8]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balaghah, 3:115

[^9]: Ibn Katheer, Sunan al-Tirmidhi; Al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, 8:120

[^10]: Ibn Katheer, 4:42


