Introduction
============

***“Our Lord! Grant us comfort in our spouses and descedents, and make
us imams of the Godwary.”***[^1]

There is a natural desire in all human beings in wanting to have a
worthy child, as all people wish to have healthy and righteous children.
They are the light of the eyes and mirth of the soul of their parents.
Indeed, even deplorable persons like their children to be good and
commendable.

However, the motivation of those who have derived their teachings from
the Glorious Qur’an is more intense in fulfilling this natural wish. Not
only do they want their children to be good and worthy, but they also
want their children within their family to become leaders and examples
for all good people. Such people supplicate to Allah the Merciful
through this verse in the holy Qur’an:

***“Our Lord! Grant us comfort in our spouses and descedents, and make
us imams of the Godwary.” (Qur’an, 25:74)***

The important question is how can this lofty wish be obtained and how
can the grounds for the acceptance of this supplication for children be
met.

In answer, bringing up a worthy child is based on three main principles.
They are:

1. A righteous family

2. Observing the rights of the child

3. The child having knowledge of his/her responsibilities

This book ‘*Children in the Qur’an and Sunnah*’ is dedicated in
presenting the guidance and recommendations of the holy Qur’an and the
great leaders of Islam regarding these principles, and it is divided
into three sections.

The first section contains four chapters which are on the
responsibilities of the Islamic society in relation to the establishment
of a laudable family, the role of heredity in the happiness of a child,
the role of nutrition of the father and mother in the health and
happiness of the child, and the role of the formation of the foetus in
the mother’s womb for the future life of the child as explained by the
leaders of Islam.

Section two introduces the rights of a child from an Islamic viewpoint,
and this section is divided into six chapters.

The first chapter is about the rights of an infant. These rights
include: 1) Honouring the birth of the child; 2) The ritual bath of
birth; 3) Reciting the *Adhan* in the right ear of the child and the
*Iqamah* in the left ear; 4) Giving the newborn a taste of the water of
FurÁt and the soil of Karbala; 5) Choosing a good name for the child; 6)
Shaving the child’s head and donating the weight of its hair in gold or
silver, 7) The slaughtering of an animal; 8) Circumcision.

The second chapter is about the rights of a suckling infant. This
chapter deals with the child’s nutrition from its mother’s milk or the
milk of an appropriate wet-nurse, and the necessity of respecting a
child’s feelings.

The third chapter explains the child’s upbringing, being his most
important right, then the importance of the child’s education and the
responsibilities of the Islamic government and the families in this
regard is explained, along with the most important aspect of this
discussion, which is the method of upbringing a child.

Chapter four deals with the ethics of the upbringing of children, such
as: being kind to them, respecting and greeting them, being just between
them, fulfilling promises made to them and making them happy.

The fifth chapter turns the upbringer’s attention to the role of the
child’s outer appearance, his sense of beauty, his desire to play and
how these things lead to the enhancement of his growth.

The sixth chapter emphasizes on supplicating for children and refraining
from cursing them and the role it has in their upbringing along with the
parent’s program of raising them. This is why it is referred to as one
of the rights of a child. The supplication of Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) for
his children that is mentioned at the end of this chapter is a worthy
guide for Muslim families.

The third section explains the duties of a child. It is incumbent upon a
qualified trainer that along with fulfilling the duties mentioned in
sections one and two, he/she must provide the grounds for children to
adopt a sense of responsibility.

This section which is divided into four chapters speaks about the
personal duties of a child, and his duties in relation to his parents,
his teachers, those older than him and his friends.

The targeted readers of this book ‘*Children in the Qur’an and the
Sunnah*’ are families, upbringers, trainers and researchers of children
education, and so children themselves are not the direct addressees in
this compilation.

Another important point is that diligent attempts were made to combine
in this work the most important teachings of the Qur’an and Islamic
traditions in the field of upbringing and education of children.
Important commentaries and necessary explanations have been added in
particular places.

Without doubt, commentating on each of these guidelines would need the
compiling of independent books in different fields of children’s
upbringing. Therefore, this collection can be a valuable cultural source
for those interested in the field of children’s education.

In conclusion, I would like to sincerely thank all my respected
colleagues at the ‘Íadith Sciences and Studies Institute’ for assisting
me in the compiling and research of this valuable compilation, in
particular, the esteemed scholar Mr. Abbas Pasandideh and his
cooperation in compiling the book.

I would also like to gratefully thank the eminent scholar Hujjatul-Islam
Sheikh Muhammad Sharif Mahdavi for supervising the project along with
comparing and reviewing the text and Mr. Zaid Alsalami for editing this
work and assisting him in this task.

I beseech Allah the Beneficent with His Mercy to bestow upon them all a
reward.

“*Our Lord! Accept it from us! Indeed You are the All-hearing, the
All-knowing.*”

**Muhammad Muhammadi Rayshahri**
**20 Jamadi al-Thani, 1430 A.H.**
**[The Birth Anniversary of Fatimah al-Zahra (s.a.)]**
**14 June, 2009**

[^1]: . Qur’an, 25:74.


