Chapter 2: The Rights of a Suckling Infant
==========================================

During the period of breastfeeding, an infant has two fundamental
rights:

1- Suitable Nutrition
---------------------

According to the recommendations of the great leaders of Islam, the best
food for a baby is the mother’s milk. For a suckling child, nothing can
be substituted for the mother’s milk. Therefore, one of the rights of a
baby is to be breastfed by its mother, if possible.

The Holy Qur’an clearly says that the mothers who are willing to
accomplish this duty perfectly must breastfeed their infants for two
complete years. According to what is narrated from Imam al-Ridha (a.s),
the right of children is that they are breastfed for the minimum of
twenty one months, and anything less than that is doing injustice to
them.

If the baby cannot suckle the mother’s milk due to any reason, the
father must choose a worthy wet-nurse to feed the baby. She must have
spiritual and physical exquisiteness, because the milk itself has an
effect on the upbringing of the child’s body and soul, and hence
narrations have warned against choosing wet-nurses who are deviated in
their belief, deeds, and morals, or are suffering from a disease.

2- Respecting the Feelings
--------------------------

Another important aspect to be mentioned in the conduct of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) in observing the rights of suckling babies is respecting their
feelings. According to a tradition, the messenger of God one day unlike
usual, ended his prayers so fast that Muslims thought a new revelation
was coming down to him. When they asked him about its reason, they
surprisingly heard him say: “Did you not hear the cry of the baby?”

It was realized that the reason for shortening of the prayers was the
cry of a restless infant who was beside the people and the Prophet
(s.a.w.) shortened the prayers so that they could pacify the baby.

It frequently happened that people brought a baby to the Prophet
(s.a.w.) in order that he would recite an invocation for him. The
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) took the baby in his bosom and, when he was
busy reciting invocation, the infant polluted the Prophet’s clothes.
People wanted to separate the baby from him so that his clothes might
not be more polluted, but he (s.a.w.) did not let them do so.

By these kinds of wise treatments, besides appeasing the child’s family,
the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) would not allow the feelings of the child
to be hurt, as he knew that ignoring the child’s sentiments would have
some unpleasant sequels in his future life.

2.1: Being Breastfed from the Mother’s Milk, if Possible
--------------------------------------------------------

### A) The virtue of breastfeeding the infant

**184.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “When a woman becomes pregnant,
her station will be like a person who fasts during the day and vigilant
by night, and she is like a struggler who strives with her soul and
wealth in the path of Allah. When she delivers her child, she has such a
reward that you do not know what it is because of its magnitude. When
she breastfeeds, for every suckle made, she will receive the reward of
emancipating one of the children of Isma’il; and when the time of
weaning comes an angel will say: “Continue your act [of breastfeeding],
for you have been forgiven.”[^1]

**185.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “If it were not for hurting
their husbands, no pregnant, wet-nursing and compassionate woman who
perform prayers, would enter Hellfire.”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَضلُ إرضاعِ الوَلَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 184. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا حَمَلَتِ المَرأَةُ كانَت
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِمَنزِلَةِ الصّائِمِ القائِم، المُجاهِدِ بِنَفسِهِ و مالِهِ في
سَبِيلِ اللهِ، فَإِذا وَضَعَت كانَ لَها مِنَ الأَجرِ ما لا تَدري ما
هُوَ لِعِظَمِهِ، فَإذا أرضَعَت كانَ لَها بِكُلِّ مَصَّةٍ كَعِدلِ عِتقِ
مُحَرَّرٍ مِن وُلدِ إسماعيلَ، فَإِذا فَرَغَت مِن رَضاعِهِ ضَرَبَ
مَلَكٌ عَلى جَنبِها، و قالَ: استَأنِفِي العَمَلَ؛ فَقَد غُفِرَ لَكِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 185. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: حامِلاتٌ والِداتٌ مُرضِعاتٌ رَحيماتٌ، لو
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا ما يَأتينَ إلى بُعولَتِهِنَّ ما دَخَلَت مُصَلِّيَةٌ مِنهُنَّ
النّارَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

### B) The Blessing of the Mother’s Milk

**186.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “There is no milk better for an
infant than its mother’s milk.”[^3]

**187.** **Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “There is no milk that the infant
feeds on more blessing than its mother’s milk.”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرَكَةُ لَبَنِ الأُمِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 186. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لَيسَ لِلصَّبِيّ لَبَنٌ خَيرٌ مِن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَنِ امِّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 187. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: ما مِن لَبَنٍ يُرضَعُ بِهِ الصَّبِيّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعظَمُ بَرَكَةً عَلَيهِ مِن لَبَنِ امِّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

### C) The Duration of Nursing

***“And the mothers shall suckle their children for two whole years for
the one who desires to complete the period of suckling …”***[^5]

***“… and We did enjoin upon man concerning his parents, did his mother
bear him with fainting upon fainting and his weaning takes two years
…”***[^6]

**188.** **Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Nursing is to twenty one
months, and anything less than that is injustice to the infant.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُدَّةُ الإِرضاعِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وَ الْوالِداتُ يُرْضِعْنَ أَوْلادَهُنَّ حَوْلَيْنِ كامِلَيْنِ لِمَنْ
أَرادَ أَنْ يُتِمَّ الرَّضاعَةَ).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وَ وَصَّيْنَا الْإِنْسانَ بِوالِدَيْهِ حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ وَهْناً
عَلى‏ وَهْنٍ وَ فِصالُهُ فِي عامَيْنِ أَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي وَ لِوالِدَيْكَ
إِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ ...).
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 188. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: الرَّضاعُ واحِدٌ و عِشرونَ شَهراً،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَما نَقَصَ فَهُوَ جَورٌ عَلَى الصَّبِيِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.2: Choosing a Righteous Wet-nurse to Breastfeed
-------------------------------------------------

**189.** **Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Choose [a wet-nurse] for
breastfeeding [the infant] the same way that you choose someone for
marriage, for milk changes one’s nature.”[^8]

**190.** **Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Be aware of the one who breastfeeds
your children, for a child will grow up based on that [milk].”[^9]

**191.** **Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:** “Look for the milk of attractive
wet-nurses for your child, and avoid the milk of the unattractive ones,
for milk transmits [the characteristics of the wet-nurse to the
child].”[^10]

**192.** **Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:** “Choose clean and affectionate
wet-nurses, for milk transmits [the characteristics of the wet-nurse to
the child].”[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
استِرضاعُ المُرْضِعَةِ الصّالِحَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 189. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: تَخَيَّروا لِلرَّضاعِ كَما تَتَخَيَّرونَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلنِّكاحِ؛ فَإِنَّ الرَّضاعَ يُغَيِّرُ الطِّباعَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 190. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: انظُروا مَن تُرضِعُ أَولادَكُم؛ فَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الوَلَدَ يَشِبُّ عَلَيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 191. الإمام الباقر عليه السلام: استَرضِع لِوَلَدِكَ بِلَبَنِ الحِسانِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإيَّاكَ وَ القِباحَ؛ فَإِنَّ اللَّبَنَ قَد يُعدي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 192. عنه عليه السلام: عَلَيكُم بِالوِضاءِ مِن الظُّؤورَةِ ؛ فإنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّبَنَ يُعدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.3: Those Who Should not Be Asked for Suckling
-----------------------------------------------

**193.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Avoid letting your children
suckle from debauch or insane women, for milk transmits [the
characteristics of the wet-nurse to the child].”[^12]

**194.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Do not ask a foolish,
blear-eyed or sick woman to breastfeed [your child], for milk transmits
[the characteristics of the wet-nurse to the child].”[^13]

**195.** **The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Do not ask a foolish woman to
breastfeed [your child], for milk transmits [the characteristics of the
wet-nurse to the child] and the child will become resemblant to the
milk, meaning in foolishness and idiocy.”[^14]

**196.** *al-Kafi*: From ‘Ubaydullah al-Halabi who said: “I asked Abu
‘Abdullah [al-Sadiq] (a.s.): “Can I get a woman who is born from an
adulterine person to breastfeed.” He answered: “No. Ask neither her nor
her daughter to breastfeed.”[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لا يَنبَغِي اسْتِرْضاعُهُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 193. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: تَوَقَّوا عَلى أولادِكُم لَبَنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَغِيِ‏ مِنَ النِّساءِ والمَجنونَةِ؛ فَإِنَّ اللَّبَنَ يُعدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 194. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تَستَرضِعُوا الحَمقاءَ ولَا العَمشاءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
؛ فَإِنَّ اللَّبَنَ يُعدِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 195. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تَستَرضِعُوا الحَمقاءَ؛ فَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّبَنَ يُعدي، وإنَّ الغُلامَ يَنزَعُ‏ إلَى اللَّبَنِ؛ يَعني إلَى
الظِّئرِ فِي الرُّعونَةِ وَالحُمق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 196. الكافي عن عبيد الله الحلبي: قُلتُ لِأبي عَبدِ اللهِ عليه السلام:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
امرَأَةٌ وُلِدَت مِنَ الزِّنا، أتَّخِذُها ظِئرا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: لا تَستَرضِعها، ولَا ابنَتَها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.4: Feeding the Child Beneficial Foods
---------------------------------------

**197.** **Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Give pomegranate to your children,
for it will make their teeth grow more rapidly.”[^16]

**198.** **Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Give pomegranate to your
children, for it will make them become mature faster.”[^17]

**199.** *al-Mahasin*, narrating from Khidr who said: “I was at the
presence of Abu ‘Abdullah [al-Sadiq] (a.s.) when one of his followers
came to him and said: “Our children are [usually] born light weighted
and weak.” The Imam said: “Why do you not give them *Sawiq*,[^18] for it
hardens the bone and makes the flesh grow.”[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إطْعامُ الْأغذِيَةِ النّافِعَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 197. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: أَطعِموا صِبيانَكُم الرُّمّانَ؛ فَإنَّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أسرَعُ لِألسِنَتِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 198. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام‏ أَطعِموا صِبيانَكُم الرُّمّانَ؛
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإنَّهُ أسرَعُ لِشَبابِهِم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 199. المحاسن عن خضر: كُنتُ عِندَ أبي عَبدِ اللهِ عليه السلام، فَأتاهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجُلٌ مِن أصحابِنا فَقالَ لَهُ: يولَدُ لَنَا المَولودُ فَيَكونُ مِنهُ
القِلَّةُ وَالضَّعفُ، فَقالَ: ما يَمنَعُكَ مِنَ السَّويقِ‏ فَإِنَّهُ
يَشُدُّ العَظمَ، ويُنبِتُ اللَّحمَ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.5: Respecting the Infant’s Feelings
-------------------------------------

**200.** **Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)
while performing the noon and afternoon prayer finished the [last] two
units quickly. When he finished, people asked him: “O Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.)! Has something new about prayer been sent down?” He said: “Why
are you asking?” They answered: “You performed the last two units
quickly.” He said: “Did you not hear the cry of a child?!”[^20]

**201.** *Makarim al-Akhlaq*: People used to bring children to the
Prophet (s.a.w.) for him to pray for them to be blessed and to give them
a name. He (s.a.w.) used to hold them in his arms out of honour to their
families. Sometimes it happened that the child would pass urine [on his
(s.a.w.) clothes] and those who saw this would call out, but he (s.a.w.)
would say: “Do not interrupt the child.” So, they would leave the child
to finish. Then he (s.a.w.) would continue to finish his prayer for the
child or naming him, bringing happiness to their family in such a way
that they never felt that he (s.a.w.) was displeased by the child’s
urinating. Then, when they left, he would wash his clothes.”[^21]

**202.** *Musnad Ibn Hanbal,* narrating from ‘A’ishah who said:
“Children were often brought to the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and he
would pray for them. One time, an infant who was brought to him urinated
and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) said: “Pour some water on it.”[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احْتِرامُ شُعورِ الرَّضيعِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 200. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: صَلَّى رَسولُ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الظُّهرَ وَالعَصرَ فَخَفَّفَ الصَّلاةَ فِي الرَّكعَتَينِ، فَلَمَّا
انصَرَفَ قالَ لَهُ النّاسُ: يا رسولَ اللهِ أحَدَثَ فِي الصَّلاةِ
شَي‏ءٌ؟ قالَ: وما ذاكَ؟ قالوا: خَفَّفتَ فِي الرَّكعَتَينِ
الأَخيرَتَينِ! فَقالَ لَهُم: أمَا سَمِعتُم صُراخَ الصَّبِيِ؟!.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 201. مكارم الأخلاق: كانَ صلى الله عليه وآله يُؤتى‏ بِالصَّبِيّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّغيرِ لِيَدعُوَ لَهُ بِالبَرَكَةِ أو يُسَمِّيَهُ، فَيَأخُذُهُ
فَيَضَعُهُ في حِجرِهِ؛ تَكرِمَةً لِأَهلِهِ، فَرُبَّما بالَ الصَّبِيّ
عَلَيهِ، فَيَصيحُ بَعضُ مَن رَآهُ حينَ بالَ، فَيقولُ صلى الله عليه
وآله: لا تُزرِموا بالصَّبِيّ، فَيَدَعُهُ حَتَّى يَقضِيَ بَولَهُ، ثُمَّ
يُفرِغُ لَهُ مِن دُعائِهِ أو تَسمِيَتِهِ، ويَبلُغُ سُرورُ أهلِهِ فيهِ،
ولا يَرَونَ أَنَّهُ يَتَأذَّى بِبَولِ صَبِيِّهِم، فَإِذا انصَرَفوا
غَسَلَ ثَوبَهُ بَعدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 202. مسند ابن حنبل عن عائشة: كانَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُؤتى‏ بِالصِّبيانِ فَيَدعُو لَهُم، وإنَّهُ أُتِيَ بِصَبِيّ فَبالَ
عَلَيهِ، فَقالَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله: صُبُّوا عَلَيهِ
الماءَ صَبّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: . al-Amali, by al-Saduq, p. 496, h. 678, narrating from Abu Khalid
al-Ka’bi from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 106, h.
1.

[^2]: . al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 514, h. 2, narrating from Abu Basir from
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 22, p. 146, h. 138. al-Mu’jam
al-Kabir, vol. 8, p. 253, h. 7989, narrating from Abu UmÁmah. Kanz
al-Ummal, vol. 16, p. 407, h. 45133.

[^3]: . ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 34, h. 69. Sahifah
al-Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), p. 101, h. 42. Both narrating from Ahmad ibn
‘Amir ibn Sulayman al-Ta’i from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) from his
forefathers (a.s.).

[^4]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 40, h. 1. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 108,
h. 365. Both narrating from Talhah ibn Zaid from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).
Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 475, h. 4663.

[^5]: . Qur’an, 2:233.

[^6]: . Qur’an, 31:14.

[^7]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 40, h. 3. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 106,
h. 357. Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 474, h. 4661. All
narrating from Sama’ah.

[^8]: . Qurb al-Isnad, p. 93, h. 312, narrating from al-Husayn ibn
‘Alwan from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) from his father (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 103 p. 323, h. 10.

[^9]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 44, h. 10, narrating from Ghiyath ibn
Ibrahim from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).

[^10]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 44, h. 12, narrating from Muhammad ibn
Marwan. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 110, h. 376, narrating from
al-Haytham ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan.

[^11]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 44, h. 13. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p.
110, h. 377. Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 478, h. 4677.
All narrating from Zurarah.

[^12]: . al-Khisal, p. 615, h. 10, narrating from Abu Basir and Muhammad
ibn Muslim from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.). Tuhaf
al-’Uqul, p. 105. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 479, h. 1655. Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 323, h. 9.

[^13]: . ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (a.s.), vol. 2, p. 34, h. 67. Sahifah
al-Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), p. 100, h. 41. Both narrating from Ahmad ibn
‘Amir al-Ta’i from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.).

[^14]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 43, h. 8. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 110,
h. 375. Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 478, h. 4679. All
narrating from Muhammad ibn Qays.

[^15]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 42, h. 1. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 108,
h. 367. Da’a’im al-Islam, vol. 2, p. 242, h. 911, narrating from the
Prophet (s.a.w.).

[^16]: . al-Amali, by al-Tusi, p. 362, h. 753, narrating from ‘Ali ibn
‘Ali al-Di’bali from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.)
from al-Nazal ibn Sirah. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 371, h. 1227.

[^17]: . al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 360, h. 2254, narrating from ‘Abd
al-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 164, h. 47.

[^18]: . Pulverized wheat or barly mixed with sugar and flavoured with
cardamoms.

[^19]: . al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 287, h. 1938. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1,
p. 418, h. 1415. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 276, h. 7.

[^20]: . Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 3, p. 274, h. 796. al-Kafi, vol. 6, p.
48, h. 4. Both narrating from ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan.

[^21]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 65, h. 68. Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
16, p. 240.

[^22]: . Musnad Ibn Hanbal, vol. 9, p. 299, h. 24247. Musnad Ishaq ibn
Rahwayh, vol. 2, p. 116, h. 587.


