Chapter 6: Supplication
=======================

6.1: Encouraging Supplication for Children
------------------------------------------

***“And those who say: ‘O’ our Lord! Grant us from our wives and our
offspring the joy of our eyes, and make us for the pious ones (their)
Imams.”***[^1]

***“My Lord! Make me a performer of the prayer, and of my offspring
(too); Our Lord! And accept my petition.”***[^2]

***“My Lord! Grant me that I may give thank Your favour which You have
bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good which pleases
You and do good to me in respect of my offspring; surely I turn to You,
and surely I am of those who submit.”***[^3]

**396. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The father’s prayer for the child
is useful like water is for plants.”[^4]

**397. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The father’s prayer for his child
is like the prayer of a Prophet for his nation.”[^5]

**398. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “May the mercy of Allah be upon he
who helps his child in being righteous, which is to forgive his faults
and supplicate to Allah for him.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَثُّ عَلَى الدُّعاءِ لِلأولادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(وَ الَّذِينَ يَقُولُونَ رَبَّنا هَبْ لَنا مِنْ أَزْواجِنا وَ
ذُرِّيَّاتِنا قُرَّةَ أَعْيُنٍ وَ اجْعَلْنا لِلْمُتَّقِينَ إِماماً).
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(رَبِّ اجْعَلْنِي مُقِيمَ الصَّلاةِ وَ مِنْ ذُرِّيَّتِي رَبَّنا وَ
تَقَبَّلْ دُعاءِ) .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَ عَلى‏ والِدَيَّ وَ أَنْ أَعْمَلَ صالِحاً تَرْضاهُ وَ أَصْلِحْ لِي
فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَ إِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ)
.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 396. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: دُعاءُ الوالِدِ لِلوَلَدِ كَالماءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلزَّرعِ بِصَلاحِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 397. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: دُعاءُ الوالِدِ لِوَلَدِهِ مِثلُ دُعاءِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّبِيِّ لِأُمَّتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 398. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: رَحِمَ اللهُ مَن أعانَ وَلَدَهُ عَلى
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِرِّهِ؛ وهُوَ أن يَعفُوَ عَن سَيِّئَتِهِ، ويَدعُوَ لَهُ فيما بَينَهُ
وبَينَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6.2: Reproaching of Supplicating Against the Children
-----------------------------------------------------

**399. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Do not supplicate against
yourselves, do not supplicate against your children and do not
supplicate against your properties.”[^7]

**400. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Do not supplicate against your
children, lest it is accepted by Allah.”[^8]

**401. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Any man who supplicates against his
child will be stricken by Allah with poverty.”[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّهيُ عَنِ الدُّعاءِ عَلَى الأَولادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 399. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تَدعوا عَلى أنفُسِكُم، ولا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَدعوا عَلى أولادِكُم، ولا تَدعُوا عَلى أموالِكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 400. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تَدعوا عَلى أولادِكُم أن تُوافِقَ مِنَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهِ إجابَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 401. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: أيُّما رَجُلٍ دَعا عَلى وَلَدِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أورَثَهُ اللهُ الفَقرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

6.3: The Supplication of Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) for his Children
---------------------------------------------------------------

**402. Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) said,** in his supplication for his
children: “O Allah, grant me by keeping my children alive, making them
righteous for me and allowing me to be happy with them!

O Allah! Extend their ages for me, prolong their lives for me, raise the
small ones, strengthen the weak ones, and safeguard their bodies for me
and their faith and moral traits. Make them well in their souls, their
limbs and everything that concerns me of their affairs, and pour out for
me and through my hands their provisions!

Make them pious, fearing, insightful, hearing and obedient to You, and
loving and advising to Your friends, and strictly resistant and
detesting to all Your enemies! Amen!

O Allah! Strengthen my arm through them, straighten my bending back,
multiply my number, adorn my presence, keep alive my remembrance,
suffice me when I am away, help me in my needs, and make them loving
towards me, affectionate, approaching, upright and obedient, and never
disobedient, disrespectful, opposing, or offending!

Help me in their upbringing, their education, and my devotion to them.
Give me male children among them from Yourself, make that something good
for me, and make them a help for me in what I ask from You!

Give me and my progeny refuge from the accursed Satan, for You have
created us, commanded us, and prohibited us, and made us desire the
reward of what You have commanded, and fear its punishment! You assigned
to us an enemy who schemes against us, gave him an authority over us in
a way that You did not give us authority over him, allowed him to dwell
in our breasts and let him run in our blood vessels; he is not heedless,
though we are heedless, he does not forget, though we forget; he makes
us feel secure from Your punishment and fills us with fear toward other
than You. If we are about to commit an indecency, he gives us courage to
do so, and if we are about to perform a righteous work, he holds us back
from it. He opposes us through passions, and sets up for us doubts. If
he promises us, he lies, and if he raises our hopes, he fails to fulfil
them. If You do not turn his trickery away from us, he will misguide us,
and if You do not protect us from his corruption, he will cause us to
slip.

O Allah! So defeat his authority over us through Your authority, such
that You hold him back from us through the frequency of our supplication
to You and we leave his trickery and rise up among those preserved by
You from sin!

O Allah! grant me my every request, accomplish for me my needs, withhold
not from me Your response when You have made Yourself accountable for it
to me, veil not my supplication from Yourself, when You have commanded
me to make it, and be kind to me through everything that will set me
right in this

world and the next, in everything that I remember or forget, display or
conceal, make public or keep secret!

In all of this, place me through my asking You among those who set
things right, those who are answered favourably when they request from
You and from whom is not withheld when they put their trust in You,
those accustomed to seek refuge in You , those who profit through
commerce with You, those granted sanctuary through Your might, those
given lawful provision abdundantly from Your boundless bounty through
Your munificence and generosity, those who reach exaltation after
abasement through You, those granted sanctuary from wrong through Your
justice, those released from affliction through Your mercy, those
delivered from need after poverty through Your riches, those preserved
from sins, slips, and offences through reverential fear toward You,
those successful in goodness, right conduct, and propriety through
obeying You, those walled off from sins through Your power, the
abandoners from every act of disobedience toward You, the dwellers in
Your neighbourhood!

O Allah! Give me all of that through Your bestowal of success and Your
mercy, grant us refuge from the chastisement of the burning, and give to
all the Muslims, male and female, and all the faithful, male and female,
the like of what I have asked for myself and my children, in the
immediate of this word and the deferred of the next! Verily You are the
Near, the Responder, the All- hearing, the All- knowing, the Pardoner,
the Forgiving, the Clement, the Merciful! And give to us in this world
good, and in the next world good, and protect us from the chastisement
of the Fire! [^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دُعاءُ الإمامِ زَينِ العابِدينَ لِوُلدِهِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .402الإمام زين العابدين عليه السلام مِن دعائِهِ لِوُلدِهِ‏ اللّهُمَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومُنَّ عَلَيَ بِبَقاءِ وُلدِي، وبِإصلاحِهِم لي، وبِإمتاعي بِهِم، إلهي
امدُد لي في أعمارِهِم، وزِد لي في آجالِهِم، ورَبِّ لي صَغيرَهُم،
وقَوِّ لي ضَعيفَهُم، وأصِحَّ لي أبدانَهُم وأديانَهُم وأخلاقَهُم،
وعافِهِم في أنفُسِهِم وفي جَوارِحِهِم وفي كُلِّ ما عُنيتُ بِهِ مِن
أمرِهِم، وأدرِر لي وعَلى يَدَيَّ أرزَاقَهُم، وَاجعَلهُم أبراراً
أتقياءَ بُصَراءَ سامِعينَ مُطيعينَ لَكَ، ولِأَولِيائِكَ مُحِبِّينَ
مُناصِحينَ، ولِجَميعِ أعدائِكَ مُعانِدينَ ومُبغِضينَ، آمينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ اشدُد بِهِم عَضُدِي، وأقِم بِهِم أوَدي‏ ، وكَثِّر بِهِم
عَدَدِي، وزَيِّن بِهِم مَحضَري، وأحيِ بِهِم ذِكري، وَاكفِنِي بِهِم في
غَيبَتي، وأعِنّي بِهِم عَلى حاجَتي، وَاجعَلهُم لي‏ مُحِبِّينَ،
وعَلَيَّ حَدِبينَ‏ مُقبِلينَ مُستَقيمينَ لِي، مُطيعينَ غَيرَ عاصينَ
ولا عاقّينَ، ولا مُخالِفينَ ولا خاطِئينَ، وأعِنّي عَلى تَربِيَتِهِم
وتَأديبِهِم وبِرِّهِم، وهَب لي مِن لَدُنكَ مَعَهُم أولادا ذُكورا،
وَاجعَل ذلِكَ خَيرا لي، وَاجعَلهُم لي عَونا عَلى ما سَألتُكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأعِذني وذُرِّيَتي مِنَ الشَّيطانِ الرَّجيم، فَإِنَّكَ خَلَقتَنا
وأمَرتَنا ونَهَيتَنا، ورَغَّبتَنا في ثَوابِ ما أمَرتَنا، ورَهَّبتَنا
عِقابَهُ، وجَعَلتَ لَنا عَدُوّا يَكيدُنا، سَلَّطتَهُ مِنّا عَلى ما لَم
تُسَلِّطنا عَلَيهِ مِنهُ، أسكَنتَهُ صُدورَنا، وأجرَيتَهُ مَجارِيَ
دِمائِنا، لا يَغفُلُ إن غَفَلنا، ولا يَنسى إن نَسينا، يُؤمِنُنا
عِقابَكَ ويُخَوِّفُنا بِغَيرِكَ، إن هَمَمنا بِفاحِشَةٍ شَجَّعَنا
عَلَيها، وإن هَمَمنا بِعَمَلٍ صالِحٍ ثَبَّطَنا عَنهُ، يَتَعَرَّضُ لَنا
بِالشَّهَواتِ، ويَنصِبُ لَنا بِالشُّبُهاتِ، إن وَعَدَنا كَذَبَنا، وإن
مَنّانا أخلَفَنا، وإلّا تَصرِف عَنّا كَيدَهُ يُضِلَّنا، وإلّا تَقِنا
خَبالَهُ يَستَزِلَّنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ فَاقهَر سُلطانَهُ عَنّا بِسُلطانِكَ، حَتّى تَحبِسَهُ عَنّا
بِكَثرَةِ الدُّعاءِ لَكَ فَنُصبِحَ مِن كَيدِهِ فِي المَعصومينَ بِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ أعطِني كُلَّ سُؤلي، وَاقضِ لي حَوائِجي، ولا تَمنَعنِي
الإِجابَةَ وقَد ضَمِنتَها لي، ولا تَحجُب دُعائي عَنكَ وقَد أمَرتَني
بِهِ، وَامنُن عَلَيَ بِكُلِّ ما يُصلِحُني في دُنيايَ وآخِرَتي، ما
ذَكَرتُ مِنهُ وما نَسيتُ، أو أظهَرتُ أو أخفَيتُ، أو أعلَنتُ أو
أسرَرتُ، وَاجعَلني في جَميعِ ذلِكَ مِنَ المُصلِحينَ بِسُؤالي إيّاكَ،
المُنجِحينَ بِالطَّلَبِ إلَيكَ، غَيرِ المَمنوعينَ بِالتَّوَكُّلِ
عَلَيكَ، المُعَوَّدينَ بِالتّعوُّذِ بِكَ، الرّابِحينَ فِي التِّجارَةِ
عَلَيكَ، المُجارينَ بِعِزِّكَ، المُوسَّعِ عَلَيهِم الرِّزقُ الحَلالُ
مِن فَضلِكَ الواسِعِ بِجودِكَ وكَرَمِكَ، المُعَزِّينَ مِنَ الذُّلِّ
بِكَ، وَالمُجارينَ مِنَ الظُّلمِ بِعَدلِكَ، وَالمُعافَينَ مِنَ
البَلاءِ بِرَحمَتِكَ، وَالمُغنَينَ مِنَ الفَقرِ بِغِناكَ،
وَالمَعصومينَ مِنَ الذُّنوبِ وَالزَّلَلِ وَالخَطاءِ بِتَقواكَ،
وَالمُوَفَّقينَ لِلخَيرِ وَالرُّشدِ وَالصَّوابِ بِطاعَتِكَ، وَالمُحالِ
بَينَهُم وبَينَ الذُّنوبِ بِقُدرَتِكَ، التّارِكينَ لِكُلِّ
مَعصِيَتِكَ، السّاكِنينَ في جِوارِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ أعطِنا جَميعَ ذلِكَ بِتَوفيقِكَ ورَحمَتِكَ، وأعِذنا مِن
عَذابِ السَّعيرِ، وأعطِ جَميعَ المُسلِمينَ وَالمُسلِماتِ وَالمُؤمِنينَ
وَالمُؤمِناتِ مِثلَ الّذي سَألتُكَ لِنَفسي ولِوُلدي في عاجِلِ الدُّنيا
وآجِلِ الآخِرَةِ، إنَّكَ قَريبٌ مُجيبٌ سَميعٌ عَليمٌ، عَفُوٌّ غَفورٌ
رَؤوفٌ رَحِيمٌ، وآتِنا فِي الدُّنيا حَسَنَةً، وفِي الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً
وقِنا عَذابَ النَّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

A Father’s Prayer for His Child
-------------------------------

There is a prayer narrated in *Makarim al-Akhlaq* by Shaikh al-Tabarsi
entitled: ‘A Father’s prayer for his child’ that has been recommended to
be recited by some of the great contemporary authorities in favour of
improving the state of on’es children, and it is also encouraged for the
mother to recite this prayer as well.

This prayer consists of four units (*rak’ah*). In the first unit, after
reciting *Surah al-Hamd*, the following verse should be recited ten
times:

***“Our Lord make us submissive to You and show us our ways of worship,
and turn to us (mercifully); for surely You are the Oft-Returning, the
Most Merciful.”***[^11]

In the second unit, after reciting *Surah al-Hamd*, the following verse
should be recited ten times:

***“My Lord! Make me a performer of the prayer, and of my offspring,
(too): Our Lord! And accept my petition;” “Our Lord! Forgive me and my
parents, and the believers on the Day when the reckoning shall come to
pass.”***[^12]

In the third unit, after reciting *Surah al-Hamd*, the following verse
should be recited ten times:

***“…Our Lord! Grant us from our wives and our offspring the joy of our
eyes, and make us for the pious ones (their) Imams.”***[^13]

In the fourth unit, after reciting *Surah al-Hamd*, the following verse
should be recited ten times:

***“My Lord! Grant me that I may give thanks for Your favour which You
have bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good which
pleases You and do good to me in respect of my offspring; surely I turn
to You, and surely I am of those who submit.”***[^14]

After completely finishing this prayer, the following verse should again
be recited ten times: “*…Our Lord! Grant us from our wives and our
offspring the joy of our eyes, and make us for the pious ones (their)
Imams.*”

[^1]: . Qur’an, 25:74.

[^2]: . Qur’an, 14:40.

[^3]: . Qur’an, 46:15.

[^4]: . al-Firdaws, vol. 2, p. 213, h. 3038, narrating from Ibn ‘Umar.

[^5]: . Tarikh Asbahan, vol. 1, p. 226, h. 344. al-Firdaws, vol. 2, p.
212, h. 3037. Both narrating from ‘Anas.

[^6]: . Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 98, h. 70, narrating from ‘Uddah
al-Da’i.

[^7]: . Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 2304, h. 3009. Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 2,
p. 88, h. 1532. Both narrating from Jabir ibn’Abdullah.

[^8]: . Tarikh Asbahan, vol. 2, p. 296, h. 1784, narrating from
‘Abdullah ibn Dinar ibn ‘Umar.

[^9]: . ‘Uddah al-Da’i, p. 80. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 99, h. 77.

[^10]: . al-Sahifah Sajjadiyah, p. 105, Prayer 25.

[^11]: . Qur’an, 2:128.

[^12]: . Qur’an, 14:40-41.

[^13]: . Qur’an, 25:74.

[^14]: . Qur’an, 46:15.


