Chapter 4: The Child’s Duties Towards Elders and Friends
========================================================

4.1: Initiating with Greeting
-----------------------------

**461. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The younger person should greet the
elder, the one passing by should greet the one who is sitting, and a
small group should greet the large group.”[^1]

**462. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The nearest person to Allah and His
Messenger is he who initiates with greeting.”[^2]

**463. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The most obedient of you to Allah
is he who initiates greeting his friend.”[^3]

**464. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Greeting has seventy rewards, sixty
nine of which are for he who initiates the greeting and one is for the
responder.”[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
البَدءُ بِالسَّلامِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .461رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يُسَلِّمُ الصَّغيرُ عَلَى الكَبيرِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والمَارُّ عَلَى القاعِدِ، وَالقَليلُ عَلَى الكَثيرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .462عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: أولَى النّاسِ بِاللهِ وبِرَسولِهِ مَن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَدَأ بِالسَّلامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .463عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: أطوَعُكُم للهِ الذي يَبدَأُ صاحِبَهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بالسَّلامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 464. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: لِلسّلامِ سَبعونَ حَسَنَةً؛ تِسعٌ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسِتُّونَ للمُبتَدِئ وواحِدَةٌ للرّادِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.2:Observing Rights
--------------------

**465. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said,** in his advice to Muhammad ibn
al-Hanafiyah: “O my child! Do not encroach upon the right of your
brother because of what is between you and him, because he whose rights
you breach is not your brother.”[^5]

**466. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “How bad is it for a man, whom his
brother recognizes his rights but he does not recognize the rights of
his brother.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِعايَةُ الحُقوقِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .465الإمام عليّ عليه السلام- في وَصِيَّتِهِ لِابنِهِ مُحَمَّدِ بنِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَنَفِيَّةِ- يا بُنَيَّ ... لا تُضَيِّعَنَّ حَقَّ أخيكَ اتِّكالًا
عَلَى ما بَينَكَ وبَينَهُ؛ فَإِنَّهُ لَيسَ لَكَ بِأَخٍ مَن أضَعتَ
حَقَّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 466. عنه عليه السلام: ما أقبَحَ بِالرَّجُلِ أن يَعرِفَ أخوهُ حَقَّهُ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا يَعرِفَ حَقَّ أخيهِ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

### An explanation about a child greeting elders

Based on the traditions mentioned on the manner of raising children, one
of the upbringing methods of the Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.) was greeting
children. He has explicitly said that by this behaviour he wanted this
custom to continue in the society. He (s.a.w.) said: “There are five
things which I do not abandon till I die and (one of them) is greeting
children so that it can remain a custom after me.”[^7]

However, it can be gathered from the traditions narrated in this chapter
that all Muslims should precede each other in greeting, especially it
being the duty of the young greeting the elder.

Little contemplation will clarify that these narrations are not in
conflict, but they are complementary to each other and it is best to
practice all of them.

This means that the duty of every person in the Islamic society is to
precede in the greeting, but etiquette requires that the younger greet
the older, but if for any reason the younger person delays or hesitates
to greet the elder one, the elder has an upbringing duty to greet the
younger one and thereby making him understand his shortcomings and
faults. This action, especially in respect to children, has a better
upbringing effect, and this is why the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.) used to
greet the children in order to attract the attention of his followers to
the upbringing effects of honouring the personality of the child and
respecting his feelings.

4.3: Taking the Elders as Examples
----------------------------------

**467. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “The young among you should take example
of your elders, and the elders should be affectionate to the young ones.
You should not be like the crude men of the Age of Ignorance who neither
had the understanding of religion nor did they contemplate about Allah.
It is like the egg of a viper that is found in the nest of an ostrich
whose breaking is a sin and the little one that comes out of it is
harmful.”[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّأَسّي بِالأكابِرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 467. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: لِيَتَأَسَّ صَغيرُكُم بِكَبيرِكُم،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَليَرأَف كَبيرُكُم بِصَغيرِكُم، ولا تَكونوا كَجُفاةِ الجاهِلِيَّةِ؛
لا فِي الدّينِ يَتَفَقَّهونَ، ولا عَنِ اللهِ يَعقِلُونَ، كَقَيضِ بَيضٍ
في أداحٍ؛ يَكونُ كَسرُها وِزرا، وَيَخرُجُ حِضانُها شَرّا .
  </p>
</blockquote>

**4.4:** **Fulfilling Needs**

**468. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The believers are brethren. They
fulfil the needs of each other, and by fulfilling each other’s needs,
Allah will fulfil their needs on Judgment Day.”[^9]

**469. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Allah will grant all the needs of
he who seeks to fulfil the need of his brother.”[^10]

**470.** *al-Kafi*, narrating from Safwan al-JammÁl who said: “I was
sitting with Abu ‘Abdullah [al-Sadiq] (a.s.) when a man from Mecca named
Maymun entered and complained about paying the rent of his animals. The
Imam said to me: “Stand up and help your brother.”

So I stood up with him and Allah solved his problem of his rent, then I
returned to my place [in the gathering]. Then Abu ‘Abdullah [al-Sadiq]
(a.s.) said: “What did you do with the need of your brother?”

I said: “Allah solved it for him, may my parents be your ransom.”

He (a.s.) said: “Indeed helping your Muslim brother is more beloved for
me than seven [recommended] circumambulations around the Ka’bah for the
first time.”[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَضاءُ الحاجَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .468رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: المُؤمِنونَ إخوَةٌ، يَقضي بَعضُهُم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَوائِجَ بَعضٍ، فَبِقَضاءِ بَعضِهِم حَوائِجَ بَعضٍ يَقضِي اللهُ
حَوائِجَهُم يَومَ القِيامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .469عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: مَن كانَ في حاجَةِ أخيهِ فَإِنَّ اللهَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاجَتِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 470. الكافي عن صفوان الجمّال: كُنتُ جالِساً مَعَ أبي عَبدِ اللهِ عليه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السلام إذا دَخَلَ عَلَيهِ رَجُلٌ مِن أهلِ مَكَّةَ يُقالُ لَهُ
«مَيمونٌ»، فَشَكا إلَيهِ تَعَذُّرَ الكِراءِ عَلَيهِ، فَقالَ لي: قُم
فَأَعِن أخاكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُمتُ مَعَهُ، فَيَسَّرُ اللهُ كِراهُ، فَرَجَعتُ إلى مَجلِسي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ أبو عَبدِ اللهِ عليه السلام: ما صَنَعتَ في حاجَةِ أخيكَ؟
فَقُلتُ: قَضاهَا اللهُ بِأَبي أنتَ وامّي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ: أما إِنَّكَ أن تُعينَ أخاكَ المُسلِمَ أحَبُّ إلَيَّ مِن طَوافِ
اسبوعٍ بالبَيتِ مُبتَدِئاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.5: Honouring
--------------

**471. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “He who honours his brother has
honoured Allah, and what do you think will be done to one who has
honoured Allah?”[^12]

**472. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Honour he who loves you and turn
away from your enemy and you will attain complete virtue.”[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإِكرا مُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .471رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: مَن أكرَمَ أخاهُ فَإِنَّما يُكرِمُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهَ، فَما ظَنُّكُم بِمَن يُكرِمُ اللهَ بِأَن يُفعَلَ بِهِ؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 472. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: أكرِم مَن وَدَّكَ، وَاصفَح عَن عَدُوِّكَ؛
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَتِمَّ لَكَ الفَضلُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.6: Assisting
--------------

**473. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “He who is capable of assisting and
does so, Allah will assist him in this world and in the Hereafter.”[^14]

**474. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Allah will continue to assist the
servant as long as the servant assists his brother.”[^15]

**475. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “When friendship grows, helping and
cooperation will become incumbent.”[^16]

**476. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “A believer who fails his brother
while he is capable of assisting him will be forsaken by Allah in this
world and in the Hereafter.”[^17]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النُّصرَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .473رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: مَن نَصَرَ أخاهُ المُسلِمَ وهُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَستَطيعُ ذلِكَ، نَصَرَهُ اللهُ فِي الدُّنيا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .474عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: اللهُ في عَونِ العَبدِ ما كانَ العَبدُ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَونِ أخيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 475. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: إذا نَبَتَ الوُدُّ، وَجَبَ التَّرافُدُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالتَّعاضُدُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 476. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: ما مِن مُؤمِنٍ يَخذُلُ أخاهُ وهُوَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقدِرُ عَلى نُصرَتِهِ، إلّا خَذَلَهُ اللهُ فِي الدُّنيا وَالآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.7: Sharing
------------

**477. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Spend your wealth on paying the rights
and share it with your friend, for generosity to a person who does not
ask is more fitting.”[^18]

**478. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Nothing protects brotherhood as much as
equal sharing.”[^19]

**479. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Sharing with friends is of nobility of
a family.”[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المُواساةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .477الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: ابذِل مالَكَ فِي الحُقوقِ، وواسِ بِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّديقَ؛ فَإِنَّ السَّخاءَ بِالحُرِّ أخلَقُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .478عنه عليه السلام: ما حُفِظَتِ الاخُوَّةُ بِمِثلِ المُواساةِ.

> 479. عنه عليه السلام: إنَّ مُواساةَ الرِّفاقِ مِن كَرَمِ الأَعراقِ.

4.8:Maintaining Friendship
--------------------------

**480. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Protect friendship, even though you do
not find a protector.”[^21]

**481. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Allah, may His name be Exalted, will
protect he who protects his friend.”[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حِفظُ الوُدِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .480الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: كُن لِلوُدِّ حافِظا وإن لَم تَجِد
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحافِظا .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 481. عنه عليه السلام: إنَّ اللهَ جَلَّ ذِكرُهُ لَيَحفَظُ مَن يَحفَظُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَديقَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.9: Good Interaction
---------------------

**482. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Meet your brother with a happy
face.”[^23]

**483. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Whoever says to his brother in
faith ‘You are welcome’, Allah the Exalted will write ‘welcome’ for him
until Judgment Day.”[^24]

**484. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Whenever you meet your brethren, shake
hands and show them your happiness, this way you leave each other while
your sins have certainly been forgiven.”[^25]

**485. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Cheerfulness is a trap for
friendship.”[^26]

**486. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Indeed Allah hates he who frowns in the
faces of his brothers.”[^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُسنُ المُواجَهَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .482رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: القَ أخاكَ بِوَجهٍ مُنبَسِطٍ.

> .483الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: مَن قالَ لِأَخيهِ المُؤمِنِ:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«مَرحَباً»، كَتَبَ اللهُ تَعالى لَهُ مَرحَباً إلى يَومِ القِيامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .484الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: إذا لَقيتُم إخوانَكُم فَتَصافَحوا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأظهِروا لَهُمُ البَشاشَةَ وَالبِشرَ؛ تَتَفَرَّقوا وما عَلَيكُم مِنَ
الأوزارِ قَد ذَهَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .485عنه عليه السلام: البَشاشَةُ فَخُّ المَوَدَّةِ.

> 486. عنه عليه السلام: إنَّ اللهَ‏عزّ وجل يُبغِضُ المُعَبِّسَ في وُجوهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إخوانِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.10: Good Remembrance
----------------------

**487. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “A believer is the brother of a
believer. He protects him in his absence and guards his properties for
him; and a believer is the mirror of the believer”.[^28]

**488. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “A believer is the mirror of his
believing brother. When he is absent he wishes good for him, and when he
is present he keeps away from him what he dislikes and he makes a place
for him in a gathering.”[^29]

**489. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Speak about your brother in his
absence in the best form, better than what you like to be mentioned
about when you are absent from him.”[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حُسنُ الذِّكرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 487. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: المُؤمِنُ أخُو المُؤمِنِ؛ حَيثُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَغيبُ يَحفَظُهُ مِن وَرائِهِ، ويَكُفُّ عَنهُ ضَيعَتَهُ، وَالمُؤمِنُ
مِرآةُ المُؤمِنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .488عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: المُؤمِنُ مِرآةٌ لِأخيهِ المُؤمِنِ؛
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنصَحُهُ إذا غابَ عَنهُ، ويُميطُ عَنهُ ما يَكرَهُ إذا شَهِدَ،
ويُوَسِّعُ لَهُ فِي المَجلِسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 489. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: اذكُروا أخاكُم إذا غابَ عَنكُم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَحسَنِ ما تُحِبّونَ أن تُذكَروا بِهِ إذا غِبتُم عَنهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.11: Advice and Goodwill
-------------------------

**490. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Every one of you should give advice
[want good] to their brother the same way that he is for himself.”[^31]

**491. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “A believer is the brother of the
believer and does not stop advising him at any time.”[^32]

**492. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Grant your good will to your friend,
your help to your acquaintances, and your good manners to all
people.”[^33]

**493. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Benevolence will produce love.”[^34]

**494. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “It is the nature of a believer to want
good for others.”[^35]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النَّصيحَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .490رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لِيَنصَحِ الرَّجُلُ مِنكُم أخاهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَنَصيحَتِهِ لِنَفسِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .491عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: المُؤمِنُ أخُو المُؤمِنِ؛ لا يَدَعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَصيحَتَهُ عَلى كُلِّ حالٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .492الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: ابذِل لِصَديقِكَ نُصحَكَ، ولِمَعارِفِكَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَعونَتَكَ، ولِكافَّةِ النّاسِ بِشرَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .493عنه عليه السلام: النُّصحُ يُثمِرُ المَحَبَّةَ.

> .494عنه عليه السلام: المُؤمِنُ غَريزَتُهُ النُّصحُ.

4.12: Presenting the Defect as a Gift
-------------------------------------

**495. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Your best of brothers is he who
shows you your defects.”[^36]

**496. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “A believer is the mirror of the
believer, for he observes him and then fulfils his need and beautifies
his character.”[^37]

**497. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “The fruit of brotherhood is protecting
one in his absence and gifting him his defect.”[^38]

**498. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “He who makes your defect manifest for
you is your friend.”[^39]

**499. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “The most beloved of my friends is
he who gifts me my defects.”[^40]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهداءُ العَيبِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .495رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خَيرُ إخوانِكُم مَن أهدى إلَيكُم
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عُيوبَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .496الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: المُؤمِنُ مِرآةُ المُؤمِنِ؛ لِأَنَّهُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَتَأَمَّلُهُ فَيَسُدُّ فاقَتَهُ، ويُجمِلُ حالَتَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .497عنه عليه السلام: ثَمَرَةُ الاخُوَّةِ حِفظُ الغَيبِ، وإهداءُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العَيبِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .498عنه عليه السلام: مَن أبانَ لَكَ عَيبَكَ فَهُوَ وَدودُكَ.

> 499. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: أحَبُّ إخواني إلَيَّ مَن أهدى إلَيَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عُيوبي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.13: Ignoring Faults
---------------------

**500. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Be moderate with people, honour
scholars and ignore the faults of your brethren; for the Master of the
first and the last (s.a.w.) has disciplined you with his saying:
“Forgive he who has done injustice to you, keep ties with he who has cut
his ties with you, and give to he who has deprived you.”[^41]

**501. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Tolerate the fault of your friend for
the time your enemy attacks.”[^42]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّفحُ عَنِ الزَّلّاتِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .500الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: عَلَيكَ بِمُداراةِ النّاسِ، وإكرامِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العُلَماءِ، وَالصَّفحِ عَن زَلّاتِ الإِخوانِ؛ فَقَد أدَّبَكَ سَيِّدُ
الأَوَّلينَ وَالآخِرينَ بِقَولِهِ صلى الله عليه وآله: اعفُ عَمَّن
ظَلَمَكَ، وصِل مَن قَطَعَكَ، وأعطِ مَن حَرَمَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .501عنه عليه السلام: احتَمِل زَلَّةَ وَلِيِّكَ لِوَقتِ وَثبَةِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَدُوِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.14: Avoidance of Scorning
---------------------------

**502. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Do not scorn the faults of he who
has come to you with his friendship, and do not hold against him his
wrongs that he is ashamed of, for this is not of the morals of the
Messenger of Allah or of the morals of his friends.”[^43]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجَنُّبُ الطَّعنِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 502. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: لا تَطعَنوا في عُيوبِ مَن أقبَلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَيكُم بِمَوَدَّتِهِ، ولا توقِفوهُ عَلى سَيِّئَةٍ يَخضَعُ لَها؛
فَإِنَّها لَيسَت مِن أخلاقِ رَسولِ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله ومِن
أخلاقِ أولِيائِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

4.15: Avoiding Hurting Others
-----------------------------

**503. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The lowest of people is he who
humiliates people.”[^44]

**504. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Whoever hurts a believer has hurt
me, and whoever hurts me surely has hurt Allah, and whoever hurts Allah
is cursed in the Torah, the Gospel, the Psalm and the Qur’an.”[^45]

**505. The Prophet (s.a.w.)** **said,** concerning the rights of a
neighbour: “When you buy fruit, gift some to him, and if you do not want
to do so, carry it [into the house] secretly and do not let your child
come outside with it, lest the feelings of his children become
hurt.”[^46]

**506. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “By Allah, the righteous are
victorious. Do you know who they are? They are those who do not even
hurt a small ant.”[^47]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَجَنُّبُ الإيذاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .503رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أذَلُّ النّاسِ مَن أهانَ النّاسَ.

> .504عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: مَن آذى مُؤمِناً فَقَد آذاني، ومَن آذاني
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَد آذَى اللهَ عزّ وجلَ، ومَن آذَى اللهَ فَهُوَ مَلعونٌ فِي
التَّوراةِ وَالإنجيلِ وَالزَّبورِ وَالفُرقانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .505عنه صلى الله عليه وآله- في بَيانِ حُقوقِ الجارِ- إِذَا اشتَريتَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاكِهَةً فَاهدِ لَهُ، فَإِن لَم تَفعَل فَأَدخِلها سِرّاً، ولا يَخرُج
بِها وَلَدُكَ لِيَغيظَ بِها وَلَدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> .506الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: وَاللهِ الأبرارُ، أتَدري مَن هُم؟ هُمُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذينَ لا يُؤذونَ الذَّرَّ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: . Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 2301 h. 5877, narrating from Abu
Hurayrah. al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 646, h. 1, narrating from Jarrah
al-Mada’ini from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).

[^2]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 644, h. 3, narrating from al-Sakuni from
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 12, h. 50.

[^3]: . Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 9, p. 116, h. 25253, narrating from
al-Tabarani from Abu al-Darda’.

[^4]: . Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 346, h. 1106. Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 248,
narrating from Imam al-Husayn (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 11, h.
46.

[^5]: . Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 4, p. 392, h. 5834. Nahj
al-Balaghah, letter 31.

[^6]: . Musadiqah al-Ikhwan, p. 144, h. 5, narrating from Marazim.

[^7]: . Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 10, h. 38.

[^8]: . Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 166. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 34, p. 113,
h. 950.

[^9]: . al-Amali, by al-Mufid, p. 150, h. 8, narrating from al-Husayn
ibn Zaid. Musadiqah al-Ikhwan, p. 160, h. 5. Both narrating from Imam
al-Sadiq (a.s.) from his father (a.s.).

[^10]: . Sunan Abu Dawud, vol. 4, p. 273, h. 4893. Musnad Ibn Hanbal,
vol. 2, p. 400, h. 5650. Both narrating from ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar.
al-Amali, by al-Tusi, p. 97, h.147, narrating from Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Madani from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.), with ‘his believing Muslim brother’
instead of ‘his brother’.

[^11]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 198, h. 9. Musadiqah al-Ikhwan, p. 176, h.
10.

[^12]: . Thawab al-A’mal, p. 339, narrating from Abu Hurayrah and
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas. ‘Uddah al-Da’i, p. 176, narrating from Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.).

[^13]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 2368.

[^14]: . Hilyah al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 25. Shu’ab al-Iman, vol. 6, p.
112, h. 7639. Both narrating from ‘Imran ibn Hasin.

[^15]: . Sahih Muslim, vol. 4, p. 2074, h. 38. Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol.
5, p. 195, h. 2945. Both narrating from Abu Hurayrah. al-Kafi, vol. 2,
p. 200, h. 5, narrating from Dharih al-Muharibi from Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s.), with ‘the believer’ instead of ‘the servant’ in both places.

[^16]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 4132.

[^17]: . Thawab al-A’mal, p. 177, h. 1. al-Amali, by al-Saduq, p. 574,
h. 785. al-Mahasin, vol. 1, p. 183, h. 296. All narrating from Ibrahim
ibn ‘Umar al-Yamani.

[^18]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 2384. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 85,
h. 2044.

[^19]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 9578. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 477,
h. 8758.

[^20]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 3405. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 143,
h. 3193.

[^21]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 7157. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 391,
h. 6626.

[^22]: . al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 162, h. 166, narrating from ‘Ubaid ibn
Zurarah.

[^23]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 103, h. 3, narrating from Abu Basir from
Abu Ja’far [al-Sadiq] (a.s.). Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 42. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 74, p. 171, h. 38.

[^24]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 206, h. 2, narrating from Jamil ibn Darraj.
Thawab al-A’mal, p.176, h. 1, narrating from Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar.

[^25]: . al-Khisal, p. 633, h. 10, narrating from Abu Basir and Muhammad
ibn Muslim from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.). Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 20, h. 3.

[^26]: . Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 202. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 38, h. 13.

[^27]: . al-Firdaws, vol. 1, p. 153, h. 555. Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 3, p.
441, h. 7350.

[^28]: . Shu’ab al-Iman, vol. 6, p. 113, h. 7644. Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 1,
p. 152, h. 756, narrating from al-Khara’iti in Makarim al-Akhlaq. Both
narrating from al-Muttalib ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Hantab

[^29]: . al-Nawadir, by al-Rawandi, p. 99, h. 56. al-Ja’fariyat, p. 197,
narrating from Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) form his forefathers (a.s.). Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 233, h.29.

[^30]: . al-Amali, by al-Tusi, p. 225, h. 391, narrating from
‘Ubaidullah ibn ‘Abdullah. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 196, h. 17.

[^31]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 208, h. 4. al-Amali, by al-Tusi, p. 231, h.
410. Both narrating from Jabir from Imam al-Baqir (a.s.). Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 358, h. 7.

[^32]: . al-Jami’ al-Saghir, vol. 2, p. 662, h. 9156. Kanz al-Ummal,
vol. 1, p. 142, h. 687. Both narrating from Ibn al-Najjar from Jabir.

[^33]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 2466.

[^34]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 614. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 32,
h. 558.

[^35]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 1305. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 47,
h. 1191.

[^36]: . Tanbih al-Khawatir, vol. 2, p. 123.

[^37]: . Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 173. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 414, h. 38.

[^38]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 4633. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 208,
h. 4167.

[^39]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 8210. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 444,
h. 7786.

[^40]: . al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 639, h. 5. Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 366.

[^41]: . Tadhkirah al-Khawas, p. 136. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 71, h.
34.

[^42]: . al-Irshad, vol. 1, p. 299. Kanz al-Fawa’id, vol. 1, p. 93.
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 419, h. 40.

[^43]: . al-Kafi, vol. 8, p. 150, h. 132. Tanbih al-Khawatir, vol. 2, p.
146. Both narrating from Mas’adah ibn Sadaqah.

[^44]: . Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 4, p. 396, h. 5840,
narrating from Yunus ibn Zabyan. Ma’ani al-Akhbar, p. 195, h. 1,
narrating from Abu Hamzah al-Thumali. Both narrating from Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.). Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, p. 142, h.
2.

[^45]: . Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 149, h. 358. Rawdah al-Wa’izin, p. 321.
Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 67, p. 72, h. 40.

[^46]: . al-Targhib wa al-Tarhib, vol. 3, p. 357, h. 20. Musakkin
al-Fu’ad, p. 105. Both narrating from ‘Amr ibn Shu’aib from his father
from his grandfather. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 82, p. 94, h. 46.

[^47]: . Tafsir al-Qummi, vol. 2, p. 146, narrating from Hafs ibn
Ghiyath. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 27, h. 5 and vol. 78, p. 193, h. 7.


