Introduction
============

The family is the first main pillar for the raising of a good child. The
foundation of the personality of a child is formed in the family
environment, and for this reason the child’s rights upon the family are
divided into two parts: the rights before the birth of the child and the
rights after birth.

Based on this principle, the responsibility of parents towards the child
from the viewpoint of Islam begins prior to birth. So, even before the
birth, the child has rights upon the parents, and if not observed, the
effects of a child’s upbringing and education will decrease.

The recommendations given by the leaders of Islam in this regard are
explained in the first section of this book through four chapters.

1- Organising a Meritorious Family
----------------------------------

In the first chapter while explaining the value of wanting to have
children and the importance of forming a family, emphasis has been put
on the fact that the sex of a child is not important, whether being a
male or a female. The important thing is the health and merit of a
child, and since newborn girls had mostly been treated unkindly, the
predecessors of Islam strongly recommended treating them with extra
affection and grace.

The Holy Qur’an has clearly said that in the Hereafter the believing
children will join their family in Paradise, and thereby families who
raise meritorious children are admired and encouraged.

On the contrary, the Islamic traditions have seriously warned against
the danger of unworthy children, introducing them as the worst
afflictions of a family.

### Population Control from the Viewpoint of Islam

Pondering on the above-mentioned, it becomes clear that the purpose of
the traditions that encourage Muslims to have more children is to
arrange a program for producing as many healthy and righteous children
as possible in order to create an exemplary society. In this case, not
only does Islam oppose the control of the growth of population, but it
supports the increase of the population of a Godly society. However, in
the conditions brought about by economical difficulties and cultural
corruption where families do not have the ability to raise qualified
children, the increase of children is not desirable and there is a need
for family planning to control the population.

Therefore, according to the instructions of the leaders of Islam, the
Islamic government and the Muslim families are obliged to organise their
programs aimed to increase the population based on their economic and
cultural abilities. If it is not possible to upbring righteous people
and have an increase in population at the same time, it is preferred to
prevent polulation growth and give priority to the upbringing of
righteous children.

2- The Role of Heredity
-----------------------

The second chapter explains the positive and negative roles of heredity
in the development of the personality of the child as mentioned by the
leaders of Islam. Accordingly, not only does the child inherit the
outside features of its parents, but it also inherits their
psychological and innate characteristics (such as bravery, generosity,
and good temper).

A noteworthy point is that according to Islamic traditions, the mothers
play a greater role than the fathers in this regard. Therefore, those
who seek to raise healthy, strong, handsome and righteous children must
be more mindful in choosing their wives.

3- The Role of the Parents’ Food
--------------------------------

Chapter three explains the role the parents’ food intake has in the
future of the child. The most important advice the leaders of Islam have
in this regard is warning against the destructive role of consuming
unlawful food. The foetus that originates from the consumption of
unlawful food will lead to the deviation and aberration of the child.
The families who desire happiness for their children must avoid eating
prohibited food. Such precautions regarding food must be specifically
observed by mothers during their pregnancy, and mothers should not even
participate in any feast whose food is doubtful.

Moreover, the consumption of certain kinds of food and fruits is
recommended for fathers and mothers prior to the formation of the
foetus, throughout the period of pregnancy and after giving birth.

4- The role of the Method of Copulation
---------------------------------------

According to Islam, lawful and unlawful sexual relations have a
fundamental role in the positive and negative characteristics of a
child. From the viewpoint of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.), the first
Divine bounty given to a person is the legitimacy and purity of birth.
Many of the social vices are the results of the transgression of
unlawful birth. This does not mean that illegitimately born children can
never choose the correct path of life, even though without doubt
choosing the correct path is difficult for them.

The fourth chapter of this section mentions the positive effects of
legitimacy of birth in the formation of the personality of the child and
the warnings against illegitimate births. In addition to this, for the
felicity of the future of the children, it is recommended that parents
be mindful of this at the time of sexual intercourse. At the end of the
chapter, some traditions will be mentioned about the role of the states
and particular times of sexual intercourse and its effects in the future
of the child.[^1]

[^1]: . It must be noted that the authenticity of such narrations is
weak; however the weakness of the chain of narrators does not indicate
that they have not been issued by the Infallibles (a.s.). Therefore,
since these traditions have been quoted in authentic sources, they have
been mentioned at the end of this chapter for the awareness of families.


