Chapter 2: Heredity
===================

2.1: Blood is Contagious
------------------------

**51. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Look into what the origin of the
womb is that you are going to put your child in, as indeed blood[^1] is
contagious.”[^2]

**52. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “People are [like] minerals; and
blood is contagious and having bad manners is like a bad origin.”[^3]

**53. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Marry from a righteous family
because indeed blood is contagious.”[^4]

**54. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Choose [the womb] for your sperm,
for indeed women bear children that are similar to their brothers and
sisters.”[^5]

**55. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Beware of marrying a fool, for her
companionship is disaster and her children are a loss.”[^6]

**56. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “There are three things incumbent on
the father for the child: to choose a good mother for him, to give him a
good name, and to do his best in training him.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العِرْقُ دَسَّاسٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 51. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله‏ انظُر في أيّ نِصابٍ‏ تَضَعُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَدَكَ؛ فَإِنَّ العِرقَ دَسَّاسٌ‏ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 52. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: النّاسُ مَعادِنُ، وَ العِرقُ دَسّاسٌ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأدَبُ السّوءِ كَعِرقِ السّوءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 53. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: تَزَوَّجُوا في الحِجرِ الصّالِحِ؛ فَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العِرقَ دَسّاسٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 54. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: تَخَيَّروا لِنُطَفِكُم؛ فَإِنَّ النِّساءَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَلِدنَ أشباهَ إخوانِهِنَّ وأخَواتِهِنَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 55. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: إيّاكُم و تَزويجَ الحَمقاءِ؛ فَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صُحبَتَها بَلاءٌ، و وُلدَها ضَياعٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 56. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: تَجِبُ لِلوَلَدِ عَلى‏ والِدِهِ ثَلاثُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خِصالٍ: اختِيارُهُ لِوالِدَتِهِ، و تَحسينُ اسمِهِ، وَ المُبالَغَةُ في
تَأديبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.2: The Role of Heredity in the Creation of a Child
----------------------------------------------------

**57. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “A man from the *Ansar* came to the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) and said: “O Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)!
This is my uncle’s daughter, and I am so and so, son of so and so –until
he mentioned up to ten of his forefathers-, and she is so and so,
daughter of so and so –also mentioning up to ten of her forefathers-,
and there is no black person in my ancestors nor in her ancestors, but
she has given birth to a black child!”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) cast down his head for a long while, and
then he raised his head and said: “Verily, you have ninety nine
blood-veins [genes] and she also has ninety nine blood-veins. When you
copulate with her, the blood-veins will move and every blood-vein asks
Allah Almighty for the child should be similar to it. Stand up, as it is
indeed your child and it did not come other than from either a
blood-vein from you or from her.” He [Imam ‘Ali] (a.s.) said: “The man
stood up and took the hand of his wife and his happiness with his wife
and child increased.”[^8]

**58. Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:** “One of the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) came to him and said: “This is my uncle’s
daughter and my wife. I know nothing but good about her. She has given
birth to a child from me and is extremely black with large nostrils,
fuzzy hair and a flat nose. I know similar to him neither among my
uncles nor my ancestors.

He (s.a.w.) asked the man’s wife: “What do you have to say?” She
answered: “No, by He who has appointed you as a prophet in truth, I have
never been with anyone else since he has taken me.”

The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) cast down his head for a long while then
he looked up at the sky, and then he turned to the man and said: “O man!
There is no one that does not have between him and Adam ninety nine
blood-veins [genes], and all of them effect in the descendents. When the
sperm arrives into the womb, the blood-veins start to move, and they ask
Allah that the child be similar to them. Therefore, this is one of the
roots that neither your ancestors nor the ancestors of your ancestors
have conceived. Take your child.’

The woman said: “O Messenger of Allah! You have solved my problem!”[^9]

**59. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Verily Allah has created four
containers for the womb. Whatever [sperm] comes into the first container
is for the father, whatever comes into the second is for the mother,
whatever comes into the third is for paternal uncles, and whatever comes
into the fourth is for the maternal uncles.”[^10]

**60. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “When Allah the Exalted, the High,
wishes to create someone, He gathers all the features between that
person and up to [the time of] Adam, then He creates him on the feature
of one of them. Therefore, no one should say about their child: “This
child is neither similar to me or to any of my ancestors.”[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ الوِرَاثَةِ في خَلقِ المَولودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 57. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: أقبَلَ رَجُلٌ مِنَ الأنصارِ إلى‏ رَسولِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله صلى الله عليه وآله فَقالَ: يا رَسولَ اللهِ، هذِهِ بِنتُ عَمِّي، و
أَنَا فُلانُ ابنُ فُلانٍ، حَتّى‏ عَدَّ عَشَرَةَ آباءٍ، و هِيَ فُلانَةُ
بِنتُ فُلانٍ حَتّى‏ عَدَّ عَشَرَةَ آباءٍ، لَيسَ في حَسَبي ولا حَسَبِها
حَبَشِيٌّ، و إنَّها وَضَعَت هذَا الحَبَشِيَّ!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأطرَقَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله طَويلًا، ثُمَّ رَفَعَ رَأسَهُ
فَقالَ: إنَّ لَكَ تِسعَةً وَ تِسعينَ عِرقاً، و لَها تِسعَةً وَ تِسعينَ
عِرقاً، فَإِذَا اشتَمَلتَ اضطَرَبَتِ العُروقُ، و سَألَ اللهَ عزوجل
كُلُّ عِرقٍ مِنها أن يُذهِبَ الشَّبَهَ إلَيهِ، قُم فَإِنَّهُ وَلَدُكَ،
و لَم يَأتِكَ إلّا مِن عِرقٍ مِنكَ أو عِرقٍ مِنها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: فَقامَ الرَّجُلُ و أخَذَ بِيَدِ امرَأَتِهِ، و ازدادَ بِها و
بِوَلَدِها عُجباً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 58. الإمام الباقر عليه السلام: أتى‏ رَجُلٌ مِنَ الأنصارِ رَسولَ اللهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صلى الله عليه وآله، فَقالَ: هذهِ ابنَةُ عَمِّي وامرَأتي لا أعلَمُ إلّا
خَيراً، وَ قَد أتَتني بِوَلَدٍ شَديدِ السَّوادِ، مُنتَشِرِ
المِنخِرَينِ، جَعدٍ، قَطَطٍ، أفطَسِ‏ الأنفِ، لا أعرِفُ شِبهَهُ في
أخوالي ولا في أجدادي!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال: فَنَكَسَ رَسولُ اللهِ بِرَأسِهِ مَلِيّاً، ثُمَّ رَفَعَ بَصَرَهُ
إلَى السَّماءِ، ثُمَّ أقبَلَ عَلَى الرَّجُلِ فَقالَ: يا هذا، إنَّهُ
لَيسَ مِن أحَدٍ إلّا بَينَهُ و بَينَ آدمَ تِسعَةٌ و تِسعونَ عِرقاً،
كُلُّها تَضرِبُ فِي النَّسَبِ، فَإِذا وَقَعَتِ النُّطفَةُ فِي
الرَّحِمِ اضطَربَت تِلكَ العُروقُ؛ تَسأَلُ اللهَ الشُّبهَةَ لَها،
فَهذا مِن تِلكَ العُروقِ الَّتي لَم يُدرِكها أجدادُكَ و لا أجدادُ
أجدادِكَ، خُذ إلَيكَ ابنَكَ. فَقالَتِ المَرأَةُ: فَرَّجتَ عَنّي يا
رَسُولَ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 59. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: إنَّ اللهَ عزوجل خَلَقَ لِلرَّحِمِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أربَعَةَ أوعِيَةٍ، فَما كانَ فِي الأوَّلِ فَلِلأبِ، وما كانَ فِي
الثّاني فَلِلُامِّ، و ما كانَ فِي الثّالِثِ فَلِلعُمومَةِ، وَ ما كانَ
فِي الرّابِعِ فَلِلخُؤُولَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 60. عنه عليه السلام: إنَّ اللهَ تبارَكَ وتعالى‏ إذا أرادَ أن يَخلُقَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلقاً جَمَعَ كُلَّ صورَةٍ بَينَهُ و بَينَ آدَمَ، ثُمَّ خَلَقَهُ عَلى‏
صُورَةِ إحداهُنَّ، فَلا يَقولَنَّ أحَدٌ لِوَلَدِهِ: هذا لا يُشبِهُني
ولا يُشبِهُ شَيئاً مِن آبائي. فَقالَ لِامرَأَتِهِ: ما تَقولينَ؟ قالَت:
لا وَ الّذي بَعَثَكَ بِالحَقِّ نَبِيّاً، ما أقعَدتُ مَقعَدَهُ مِنّي
مُنذُ مَلَكَني أحَداً غَيرَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.3: The Role of Heredity in the Behaviour of a Child
-----------------------------------------------------

**61. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Good morals is an indication of the
nobility of the blood-veins.”[^12]

**62. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “When the origin of a person is noble,
his behaviour is noble in both his absence or in his presence.”[^13]

**63. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Seek your needs from noble people who
have good principles, as your needs will be better fulfilled by them and
doing so is more pleasant for you.”[^14]

**64. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “Seek your needs from people who are
noble and have principles. It is with them that the need is fulfilled
promptly and without obligation.”[^15]

**65.** *Muruj al-Dhahab*, in mentioning Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah in
the crisis of the Battle of the Camel when he stood there facing the
spears and arrows: “Then Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) came towards him and hit him
with the sheath of his sword and said: “A blood from your mother has
affected you [your fear is from your mother’s side].”[^16]

**66. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.)** **said,** in Ziyarah al-Arba’in[^17]: “May
my father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O son of the Messenger of
Allah! I bear witness that you were a light in the noble loins and pure
wombs. Never did the impurities of the Age of Ignorance pollute you, and
never did it cover you with its contaminations.”[^18]

**67. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “The Prophet of Allah delivered a
sermon in which he said: “O people! Beware of a nice plant growing in
waste.” He was asked: “O Messenger of Allah! What is a nice plant
growing in waste?” He answered: “A beautiful woman brought up in a bad
family.”[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ الوِرَاثَةِ في خُلُقِ المَوْلودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 61. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: حُسنُ الأخلاقِ بُرهانُ كَرَمِ الأَعراقِ.

> 62. عنه عليه السلام: إذا كَرُمَ أصلُ الرَّجُلِ كَرُمَ مَغيبُهُ و
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَحضَرُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 63. عنه عليه السلام: عَلَيكُم في طَلَبِ الحَوائِجِ بِشِرافِ النُّفوسِ،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَوي الاصولِ الطَّيِّبَةِ؛ فَإِنَّها عِندَهُم أقضَى‏، و هِيَ لَدَيكُم
أَزْكى‏.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 64. عنه عليه السلام: عَلَيكُم في قَضاءِ حَوائِجِكُم بِكِرامِ الأنفُسِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و الاصولِ، تُنجَح لَكُم عِندَهُم مِن غَيرِ مِطالٍ و لا مَنٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 65. مروج الذهب- في ذِكرِ مُحَمَّدِ بنِ الحَنَفِيَّةِ في أزمَةِ حَربِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الجَمَلِ لَمّا وَقَفَ حينَ واجَهَتهُ الرِّماحُ والنُّشّابُ-: فَأَتاهُ
عَلِيٌ عليه السلام: فَضَرَبَهُ بِقائِمِ سَيفِهِ وقالَ: أَدرَكَكَ عِرقٌ
مِن امِّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 66. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام- في زِيارَةِ الأَربَعينَ‏ بِأَبي أنتَ و
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
امِّي يَا ابنَ رَسولِ اللهِ، أشهَدُ أنَّكَ كُنتَ نُوراً فِي الأصلابِ
الشّامِخَةِ وَ الأرحامِ الطّاهِرَةِ، لَم تُنَجِّسكَ الجاهِلِيَّةُ
بِأنجاسِها، و لَم تُلبِسكَ المُدلَهِمَّاتِ‏ مِن ثِيابِها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 67. عنه عليه السلام: قامَ رَسولُ الله صلى الله عليه وآله خَطيباً
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ: أيُّهَا النّاسُ، إيّاكُم و خَضراءَ الدِّمَنِ. قيلَ: يا رَسولَ
اللهِ، و ما خَضراءُ الدِّمَنِ؟ قالَ: المَرأَةُ الحَسناءُ في مَنبَتِ
السَّوءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

2.4: The Role of Marrying Relatives
-----------------------------------

**68. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Marry those foreign to your family
[non- relatives] so that you do not give birth to weak children.”[^20]

**69. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Do not marry close relatives, as the
child will come out weak.”[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دوْرُ زَواجِ الأقارِبِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 68. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: اغتَرِبوا؛ لا تُضووا .

> 69. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تَنكِحُوا القَرابَةَ القَريبَةَ؛
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ الوَلَدَ يُخلَقُ ضاوِياً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: . The Arabic word ‘irq literally means a blood-vein, but in these
traditions it refers to the genetical influence. In the modern context
it could be known as genes. [Ed.].

[^2]: . Musnad al-Shihab, vol. 1, p. 371, h. 638. Kanz al-Ummal, vol.
15, p. 855, h. 43400, narrating from al-Dailami. Both narrating from Ibn
‘Umar.

[^3]: . Shu’ab al-Iman, vol. 7, p. 455, h. 10974. al-Firdaws, vol. 4, p.
299, h. 6878. Both narrating from Ibn ‘Abbas. Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 3, p.
442, h. 7360.

[^4]: . al-Firdaws, vol. 2, p. 51, 2291 & Kanz al-Ummal, vol. 16, p.
296, h. 44559. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 432, h. 1474, narrating
from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).

[^5]: . Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 52, p. 362, h. 11068, narrating from
‘A’ishah. Kashf al-Khafa’, vol. 2, p. 339, h. 2917.

[^6]: . al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 353, h. 1. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 406,
h. 31. Both narrating from al-Sakuni from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).

[^7]: . Tuhaf al-’Uqul, p. 322. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 236, h. 67.

[^8]: . Ja’fariyat, p. 90. al-Nawadir, p. 178, h. 297. Both narrating
from Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) from his forefathers (a.s.).

[^9]: . al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 561, h. 23.’Awali al-La’ali, vol. 3, p. 418,
h. 21.

[^10]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 17, h. 2. ‘Awali al-La’ali, vol. 3, p. 419,
h. 22. Both narrating from Muhammad ibn Hamran.

[^11]: . Kitab Man la Yahdarhu al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 484, h. 4709. ‘Ilal
al-Shara’i’, p. 103, h. 1.

[^12]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 4855. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 228,
h. 4397.

[^13]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 4163. ‘Uyun al-Hikam wa al-Mawa’iz, p. 131,
h. 2958, with ‘family’ instead of ‘origin’.

[^14]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 6162.

[^15]: . Ghurar al-Hikam, h. 6158.

[^16]: . Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 375. Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol.
1, p. 243.

[^17]: . The visitation recited on the fortieth day after the martyrdom
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) (20th of Safar). [Ed.].

[^18]: . Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 6, p. 114, h. 201, narrating from Safwan
ibn Mahran al-Jammal.

[^19]: . al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 332, h. 4. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p.
403, h. 160. Both narrating from al-Sakuni. Kitab Man la Yahdarhu
al-Faqih, vol. 3, p. 391, h. 4377. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 232, h.
10, narrating from Ma’ani al-Akhbar from Muhammad ibn Abu Talhah.

[^20]: . al-Mujazat al-Nabawiyah, p. 92, h. 59.

[^21]: . al-Mahajjah al-Bayda, vol. 3, p. 94.


