Chapter 3: The Food of the Parents
==================================

3.1: The Role of Unlawful Food in a Newborn
-------------------------------------------

**70. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “O son of Mas’ud! Do not consume what
is unlawful, do not wear what is unlawful, do not take an unlawful
relationship, and do not disobey Allah, as indeed Allah the Exalted says
to Iblis: “*Instigate whomever of them you can with your voice; and
rally against them your cavalry and your infantry, and share with them
in wealth and children and make promises to them! But Satan promises
them nothing but delusion.*”[^1] [^2]

**71.** *Tafsir al-’Ayyashi*, narrating from Muhammad ibn Muslim who
said: “I asked Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) about Satan’s share in His saying:
“*and share with them in wealth and children.*”[^3] He (a.s.) said:
“Anything that comes from unlawful wealth is the share of Satan.” He
(a.s.) then said: “And he [Satan] stays with the man until he has
intercourse, and the child will be from the sperm of Satan and the sperm
of the man if his wealth is from the unlawful.”[^4]

**72.** *Tafsir al-’Ayyashi*, narrating from Muhammad from Imam al-Baqir
(a.s.) or Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) who said: ‘The share of Satan is what is
produced from unlawful wealth, and the child is born from the
partnership of Satan.

He [Satan] will accompany the man until he has intercourse, and so his
semen will be mixed with the man’s semen if the wealth consumed was
unlawful. He said: “Both [their semen] will be mixed together.” And he
said: “The child might be created from the semen of one, or it might be
created from both.”[^5]

**73. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “[The effects of] Unlawful income
will be seen in one’s offspring.”[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ طَعامِ الحَرامِ فِي المَوْلودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 70. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: يَا ابنَ مَسعودٍ: لا تَأكُلِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحَرامَ، و لا تَلبَسِ الحَرامَ، و لا تَأخُذ مِنَ الحَرامِ، و لا تَعصِ
اللهَ؛ لِأَنَّ اللهَ تَعالى‏ يَقولُ لِإِبليسَ: (وَ اسْتَفْزِزْ مَنِ
اسْتَطَعْتَ مِنْهُمْ بِصَوْتِكَ وَ أَجْلِبْ عَلَيْهِمْ بِخَيْلِكَ وَ
رَجِلِكَ وَ شارِكْهُمْ فِي الْأَمْوالِ وَ الْأَوْلادِ وَ عِدْهُمْ وَ
ما يَعِدُهُمُ الشَّيْطانُ إِلَّا غُرُوراً .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 71. تفسير العيّاشي عن محمّد بن مسلم عن الإمام الباقر عليه السلام، قال:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأَلتُهُ عَن شِركِ الشَّيطانِ؛ قَولِهِ: (وَ شارِكْهُمْ فِي
الْأَمْوالِ وَ الْأَوْلادِ)، قالَ: ما كانَ مِن مالٍ حَرامٍ فَهُوَ
شَريكُ الشَّيطانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: و يَكونُ مَعَ الرَّجُلِ حَتّى‏ يُجامِعَ، فَيَكونَ مِن نُطفَتِهِ
وَنُطفَةِ الرَّجُل إذا كانَ حَراماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 72. تفسير العيّاشي عن محمّد عن أحدهما عليهما السلام: شِركُ الشَّيطانِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما كانَ مِن مالٍ حَرامٍ فَهُوَ مِن شِركَةِ الشَّيطان، و يَكونُ مَعَ
الرَّجُلِ حِينَ يُجامِعُ، فَيَكونُ نُطفَتُهُ مَعَ نُطفَتِهِ‏ إذا كانَ
حَراماً، قالَ: كِلتَيهِما جَميعاً مُختَلِطَينِ، و قالَ: رُبَّما خُلِقَ
مِن واحِدَةٍ، و رُبَّما خُلِقَ مِنهُما جَميعاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 73. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: كَسبُ الحَرام يَبينُ فِي الذُّريَّةِ.

3.2: The Role of the Father’s Food in his Child
-----------------------------------------------

**74. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Whoever eats a quince before
breakfast, his semen will be clean and his child will be good.”[^7]

**75.** *Tibb al-A’immah*, narrating from Bukair ibn Muhammad who said:
“I was in the presence of Abu ‘Abdullah al-Sadiq (a.s.) when someone
said: “O son of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.)! [Sometimes] A child is
born but he is rather foolish and weak.”

He (a.s.) said: “What has prevented you from eating *Sawiq*?[^8] Both
you and your wife should eat it, for it causes flesh to grow, the bone
to strengthen and only the strong will be born from you.”[^9]

**76. Imam al-Kazim (a.s.) said:** “He who eats egg, onion and [olive]
oil will increase his sexual potency. He who eats meat mixed with eggs
will result in his child’s bones being strong.”[^10]

**77.** *al-Kafi*, narrating from ‘Amr ibn Ibrahim from
al-Khurasani[^11] who said: “Eating a sweet pomegranate increases a
man’s semen and makes the child beautiful.”[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ غِذاءِ الوالِدِ فِي الوَلَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 74. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: مَن أكَلَ سَفَرجَلَةً عَلَى الرِّيقِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طابَ ماؤُهُ، و حَسُنَ وَلَدُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 75. طبّ الأئمّة عن بكير بن محمّد: كُنتُ عِندَ أبي عَبدِ اللهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصّادِقِ عليه السلام فَقالَ لَهُ رَجُلٌ: يَا ابنَ رَسولِ اللهِ،
يولَدُ الوَلَدُ فَيَكونُ فِيهِ البَلَهُ و الضَّعفُ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقالَ: ما يَمنَعُكَ مِنَ السَّويقِ؟ اشرَبهُ وَمُر أهلَكَ بِهِ؛
فَإِنَّهُ يُنبِتُ اللَّحمَ، ويَشُدُّ العَظمَ، ولا يولَدُ لَكُم إلّا
القَوِيُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 76. الإمام الكاظم عليه السلام: مَن أكَلَ البَيضَ و البَصَلَ وَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الزَّيتَ زادَ في جُماعِهِ، ومَن أكَلَ اللّحمَ بِالبَيضِ كَبُرَ عَظمُ
وَلَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 77. الكافي عن عمرو بن إبراهيم عن الخراساني: أكلُ الرُّمّانِ الحُلوِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَزيدُ في ماءِ الرَّجُلِ و يُحَسِّنُ الوَلَدَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3.3: The Role of a Pregnant Woman’s Food on the Foetus
------------------------------------------------------

**78. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Feed dates to a woman who is in her
month of delivery, for her child will become patient and clean.”[^13]

**79. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Feed frankincense to your pregnant
women, for when a child is fed with frankincense while in its mother’s
womb, its heart will be strengthened and its intellect will increase. If
it is a male, he will become brave, and if it is female, her posteriors
will grow large and it will be liked by her husband.”[^14]

**80.** **Imam al-Ridha** **(a.s.) said:** “Give wet frankincense to
your pregnant women, for if she caries a male in her womb, he will be
born with a strong heart, be knowledgeable and brave; and if it is a
female, she will beautiful, have good morals, her posteriors will be
large and her husband will be pleased with her.”[^15]

**81. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Give frankincense to your pregnant
women, for it will increase in the child’s intellect.”[^16]

**82. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “There is no pregnant woman who eats
melon with cheese without her child not being born with a beautiful face
and good morals.”[^17]

**83. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “Give quince to your pregnant women,
for it will make your children have good morals.”[^18]

**84. The Prophet (s.a.w.) said:** “The smell of prophets is the scent
of quince, the smell of Houris is the pleasant scent of the *‘As* tree,
the smell of angels is the scent of a rose, and the smell of my daughter
Fatimah al-Zahra (a.s.) is the scent of quince, the *‘As* tree and a
rose. Allah did not send a prophet or a successor that did not have the
smell of quince, so eat it and feed it to your pregnant women, for it
makes your children beautiful.”[^19]

**85.** *Makarim al-Akhlaq*, narrating from the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.) who said: “Eat quince and give it to each other as a gift, for
it brightens the eyesight and grows friendship in the heart, and feed it
to your pregnant women, for it makes your children beautiful.”

In another tradition: “It [quince] will make your children have good
morals.”[^20]

**86. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said,** while looking at a handsome boy: “The
father of this boy must have eaten quince.”[^21]

**87. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Eat endive, for it increases a man’s
semen and makes a child handsome. Its nature is hot, it is a laxative
and it increases the masculinity of a child.”[^22]

**88.** *al-Kafi*, narrating from Sharhabil ibn Muslim who said: “He
(a.s.) said concerning a pregnant woman: “She should eat quince, for it
will give a nicer scent to her child and a better colour.”[^23]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ غِذاءِ الحامِلِ فِي الجَنينِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 78. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أطعِمُوا المَرأةَ فِي شَهرِها الَّذي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَلِدُ فيهِ التَّمرَ؛ فَإنَّ وَلَدَها يَكونُ حَليماً نَقِيّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 79. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: أطعِموا حَبالاكُمُ اللُّبانَ؛ فَإِنَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصَّبِيَّ إذا غُذِّيَ في بَطنِ امِّهِ بِاللُّبانِ‏ اشتَدَّ قَلبُهُ،
وَ زِيدَ في عَقلِهِ، فَإِن يَكُ ذَكَراً كانَ شُجاعَاً ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 80. الإمام الرضا عليه السلام: أطعِمُوا حَبالاكُم ذَكَرَ اللُّبان،
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن يَكُ في بَطنِها غُلامٌ خَرَجَ ذَكِيَّ القَلبِ، عَالِماً،
شُجاعاً، و إن تَكُ جارِيَةً حَسُنَ خَلقُها و خُلُقُها و ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 81. رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: أطعِموا نِساءَكُم الحَوامِلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللُّبانَ؛ فَإنَّهُ يَزيدُ في عَقلِ الصَّبِيّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 82. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: ما مِن امرَأَةٍ حامِلَةٍ أكَلَت البِطِّيخَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالجُبنِ إلّا يَكونُ مَولودُها حَسَنَ الوَجهِ و الخُلُقِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 83. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: أَطعِموا حَبالاكُمُ السَّفَرجَلَ؛ فَإِنَّه
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُحَسِّنُ أخلاقَ أولادِكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 84. عنه صلى الله عليه وآله: رائِحَةُ الأَنبِياءِ عليهم السلام رائِحَةُ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
السَّفَرجَلِ، و رائِحَةُ الحورِ العينِ رائِحَةُ الآسِ‏ ، و رائِحَةُ
المَلائِكَةِ رائِحَةُ الوَردِ، و رائِحَةُ ابنَتي فاطِمَةَ الزَّهراءِ
عليها السلام رائِحَةُ السَّفَرجَلِ وَ الآسِ وَ الوَردِ، و لا بَعَثَ
اللهُ نَبِيّاً و لا وَصِيّاً إلّا وُجِدَ مِنهُ رائِحَةُ السَّفَرجَلِ؛
فَكُلوها، وَأَطعِمُوا حَبالاكُم؛ يَحسُنَ أولادُكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 85. مكارم الأخلاق عن رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: كُلُوا السَّفرجَلَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و تَهادَوهُ بَينَكُم؛ فَإِنَّهُ يَجلُو البَصَرَ، و يُنبِتُ المَوَدَّةَ
فِي القَلبِ، وأطعِموهُ حَبالاكُم؛ فَإِنَّهُ يُحَسِّنُ أولادَكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي رواية: يُحَسِّنُ أخلاقَ أولادِكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 86. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام- لَمّا نَظَرَ إلى غُلامٍ جَميلٍ‏ يَنبَغي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن يَكونَ أبو هذَا الغُلامِ أكَلَ السَّفَرجَلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 87. عنه عليه السلام: عَلَيكَ بالهِندَباءِ؛ فَإِنَّهُ يَزيدُ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الماءِ، وَ يُحَسِّنُ الوَلَدَ، و هُوَ حارٌّ لَيِّنٌ، يَزيدُ فِي
الوَلَدِ الذُّكورَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 88. الكافي عن شرحبيل بن مسلم: أنَّهُ‏ قالَ فِي المَرأَةِ الحامِلِ:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَأكُلُ السَّفَرجَلَ؛ فَإِنَّ الوَلَدَ يَكونُ أطيَبَ ريحا وَ أَصفَى‏
لَوناً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

3.4: The Role of a Mother’s Food on the Newborn
-----------------------------------------------

**89. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “The Prophet of Allah said: “The first
thing a parturient should eat is ripe dates, for Allah the Exalted told
Mary: “*Shake the trunk of the* *palm tree, freshly picked dates will
drop upon you*.”[^24]

Some asked: “O Messenger of Allah! If it is not the season of fresh ripe
dates, what must she do?”

He said: “Then seven dates from the dates of Medina; if that is not
found, then seven dates from your own cities, for Allah (s.w.t.) says:
“By My honour, My glory, My greatness and the highness of My position,
if a parturient was to eat ripe dates on the day she delivers her child,
boy or girl, will be forbearing.”[^25]

**90. Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:** “The best of your dates is the
Barni.[^26] Feed it to women while they are in their post-natal period
so your children will become wise.”[^27]

**91. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:** “Feed Barni to your women during
their post-natal period and your children will turn out
forbearing.”[^28]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دَوْرُ غِذاءِ النُّفَساءِ في المَوْلودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 89. الإمام عليّ عليه السلام: قالَ رَسولُ اللهِ صلى الله عليه وآله:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَكُن أوَّلُ ما تَأكُلُ النُّفَسَاءُ الرُّطَبَ؛ فَإنَّ اللهَ تَعالى‏
قالَ لِمَريَمَ: (وَ هُزِّي إِلَيْكِ بِجِذْعِ النَّخْلَةِ تُساقِطْ
عَلَيْكِ رُطَباً جَنِيًّا(
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قيلَ: يا رَسولَ اللهِ، فإن لَم يَكُن أوانُ الرُّطَبِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالَ: سَبعُ تَمراتٍ مِن تَمرِ المَدينَةِ، فإن لَم يَكُن فَسَبعُ
تَمراتٍ مِن تَمرِ أمصارِكُم؛ فَإِنَّ اللهَ يَقولُ: و عِزَّتي و جَلالِي
و عَظَمَتي وَ ارتِفاعِ مَكاني لا تَأكُلُ نُفَساءُ يَومَ تَلِدُ
الرُّطَبَ فَيَكونُ غُلاما إلّا كانَ حَليما، و إن كانت جارِيَةً كانَت
حَليمَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 90. عنه عليه السلام: خَيرُ تُمورِكُم البَرنيّ، فأطعِموا النّسَاءَ في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِفاسِهِنَّ يَخرُج أولادُكُم حُكَمَاءَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 91. الإمام الصادق عليه السلام: أطعِمُوا البَرنِيَّ نِساءَكُم في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نِفاسِهِنَّ تَحلُمُ أولادُكُم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: . Qur’an, 17:64.

[^2]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 2, p. 354, h. 2660, narrating from
‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 105, h. 1.

[^3]: . Qur’an, 17:64.

[^4]: . Tafsir al-’Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 299, h. 102. Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
104, p. 136, h. 5.

[^5]: . Tafsir al-’Ayyashi, vol. 2, p. 300, h. 108. Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
103, p. 294, h. 48.

[^6]: . al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 124, h. 4, narrating from ‘Ubayd ibn
Zurarah.

[^7]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 357, h. 3. al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 365, h.
2273.

[^8]: . A dish made from wheat-flour and roasted barley.

[^9]: . Tibb al-A’immah, by Ibn Basaam, p. 88. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104,
p. 79, h. 4.

[^10]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 425, h. 1451. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 104, p. 84, h. 41.

[^11]: . Apparently referring to Imam al-Ridha (a.s.), however the
narrator of this tradition is ‘Amr ibn Ibrahim who is a companion of
Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.), so it is far from possible that he has narrated
this from Imam al-Ridha (a.s.). [This footnote is mentioned in the
source of the tradition].

[^12]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 355, h. 17. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p.
163, h. 46 .

[^13]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 365, h. 1202. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 66, p. 141, h. 58.

[^14]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 23, h. 6, narrating from Abu Ziyad from
Imam al-Hasan.

[^15]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 23, h. 7. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 440,
h. 1758. Both narrating from Muhammad ibn Sinan. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol.
1, p. 424, h. 1443.

[^16]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 423, h. 1439. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 66, p. 444, h. 8. al-Firdaws, vol. 1, p. 101, h. 331, narrating
from Ibn ‘Umar.

[^17]: . Tibb al-Nabi, p. 28. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 62, p. 299.

[^18]: . al-Da’wat, p. 151, h. 405. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 372,
h. 1230. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 177, h. 37.

[^19]: . Jami’ al-Ahadith, p. 82. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 66, p. 177, h.
39, narrating from al-Imamah wa al-Tabsirah.

[^20]: . Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 372, h. 1230. Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 66, p. 176, h. 37.

[^21]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 22, h. 2. al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 365, h.
2274. Both narrating from Muhammad ibn Muslim. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol.
1, p. 373, h. 1241.

[^22]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 363, h. 6. al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 313, h.
2047. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 385, h. 1295.

[^23]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 22, h. 1. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 439,
h. 1755.

[^24]: . Qur’an, 19:25.

[^25]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 22, h. 4. Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 440,
h. 1757, with ‘wise’ instead of ‘forbearing’. al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p.
346, h. 2194.

[^26]: . A high quality sweet red-yellowish date.

[^27]: . Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 7, p. 440, h. 20. al-Kafi, vol. 6, p.
22, h. 3, with ‘virtuous and forbearing’ instead of ‘wise’. Both
narrating from Zurarah from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.).

[^28]: . al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 22, h. 5. al-Mahasin, vol. 2, p. 345, h.
2190. Both narrating from Salih ibn ‘Aqabah. Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1,
p. 366, h. 1206, with will become beautiful’ instead of ‘will turn out
forbearing’.


