Section 4 : the Beginnings of Shi’i Ijtihad
===========================================

**The Beginnings of Shi’i Ijtihad**

After the demise of the Prophet (S) in the year 11/632, the need for
ijtihad was felt acutely by the Sunnis, for they thought that the
continuity of Divine guidance in the form of authoritative texts
(nass)had ceased with his (S) demise and the only means of deter­mining
the Divine laws that remained was to search for them in the Book of God
and the statements and acts of the Prophet (S). The Shi'ah, on the other
hand, believed in the continuity of religious authority and nass after
the Prophet (S), and they considered the Infallible Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (A) as embodying the Prophet's authority. Their state­ments
(qawl), acts (fi’l) and approvals (taqr'ir)were considered by them
authoritative like those of the Holy Prophet (S), and hence as part of
the Sunnah. Accordingly, the Shi'ah did not feel the need for ijtihad
contemporaneously with the Sunnis; it was only after the Greater
Occultation (al ghaybat al-kubra)of the Twelfth Imam (A) that the Shi’ah
came to feel the need to practise ijtihad on an extensive scale.

Moreover, the Ahl al-Sunnah came to face various constrictions in the
way of deducing laws of Shari'ah for contingent issues on account of
distancing themselves from the Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (A) after the
Prophet's demise. This was because, on the one hand, about two­ thirds
of Quranic verses were seen to deal with doctrines, social princi­ples,
higher ethical values, historical events relating to past messengers and
their peoples, and accounts of their struggle against the oppressors and
taghuts of their times; on the other hand, though the remaining
one-third of them relate to legal matters (such as: salat, sawm, khums,
zakatt, Hajj, jihad, al-'amr bi al-maruf wa al-nahy \`an al-munkar,
tawalli, tabari; legal contracts and economic deals, such as matters
relating to marriage, divorce, will and inheritance, sale, lease and
mortgage; penal matters, such as those relating to hudud, diyat and
qisas; matters relating to government, judiciary, judgement, testimony,
qualifications for judgeship; matters relating to the rights of parents,
debts, etc.) they deal mostly with general principles, leaving the
details and particulars to the Sunnah in accordance with the verse:

Take whatever the Apostle brings you, and abstain from whatever he
forbids you from.(59:7)

**The Quran as the Source of Law**

It may be argued that the Quran and some traditions expressly state
that the Quran contains everything and that there can be no short­age
while we possess the Quran. Accordingly, it may be said, there is no
reason why the Ahl al-Sunnah should have faced any difficulty in
deducing ahkam after the Prophet's demise.

In reply to this, we should say that it is undoubtedly true that: (not
a thing, fresh or withered, but it is in a Book Manifest), but the
belief that everything has been mentioned in the Quran and that nothing
has been omitted by it, in accordance with the verse: (We have not
omitted anything in the Book) does not imply that everyone, regardless
of his qualifications, is capable of obtaining the pearls lying in the
depths of its shoreless oceans. The belief that the Quran contains all
the ahkam and is capable of answering every question that can be raised
by man does not conflict with the view that an extraordinary level of
knowledge, effort and learning is essential for obtaining all the ahkdm
of the Shari'ah from the Quran' and for finding the answer to any
question. Thus we find that some traditions that expressly declare that
there is everything in the Quran also add that it is not possible to
understand part of Quranic meanings without reference to someone who is
infallible (Masum). Usul al-Kafi (vol. I, p. 62)records the following
statement of Amir al-Mu'minin (A) in this regard:.

There is the Quran: ask it to speak, but it will never speak to you
(because its profound speech is audible only to the Ma\`sum and it is he
who can make it speak unreservedly), yet I will inform you about it;
verily, in it is the knowl­edge of the past and the future up to the Day
of Resurrection. In it is the judgment touching whatever passes between
you and the explanations of your differences. If you ask me about it, I
will inform you.

**Difficulty of Utilizing the Sunnah**

Some, while admitting that it has been a difficult task for Islamic
scholars to deduce the ahkam from the Quran - i.e. to make the Quran
weak, in Imam 'Ali's words, the task lying basically beyond the Power:
of ordinary persons - may argue that the Ahl al-Sunnah did have access
to the Prophet's traditions on legal issues and that such traditions
were sufficient to meet their needs. In reply to this conjecture it must
be said that unfortunately these traditions were very few in comparison
to the number of contingent issues that arose, and therefore they were
not sufficient to answer all the questions that arose.

It was exactly for this reason that terrible gaps appeared in the Sunni
fiqh of this period, and the inadequacy of the existing sources and
foundations led to the invention of instruments for drawing legal
conjectures (such as ijtihad bi al-ra'y and other instruments as qiyas,
istihsan, masalih mursalah, istislah, madhhab al-sahabi, sadd al-dhara'i
; fath al-dhara’i ; shari\`at al-salaf, 'urf, istidlal, etc.)

**The Need for Ijtihad amongst the Shi’ah**

As said above, the Shi'ah did not face any constriction in respect of
legal source for finding answers to emergent issues after the Prophet's
era. They did not face any vacuum in Islamic law after the prophet's
demise because of their belief that \`Ali (A) and his descendants had
been invested by the Prophet (S) with Imamate, the authority to expound
the Prophet's Sunnah and to perpetuate it, which to them was an
inexhaustible treasure that had been left by the Prophet (S) for the
Ummah. As a result of this belief the Shi'ah referred to the living Imam
for the solution of new problems and obtained the solution in the form
of an exposition of a verse of the Quran or through a tradition of the
Prophet (S). They never felt any need to turn to ijtihad bi al-ra’y or
to resort to conjectural methods.

The only time the Shi'ah met with any difficulty in this regard with
the beginning of the Minor Occultation of the Twelfth Imam (A), a period
of 69 years from 260/874 to 328/940. During this period the Shi'ah could
obtain replies to their queries through the deputies (nuwwab) of the
hidden Imam (A) who served as intermediaries. These deputies, one after
another, were four: Abu \`Amr \`Uthman ibn Sa\`id, Abu Ja'far Muhammad
ibn \`Uthman (d. 304 or 5/916 or 7), Abu al-Qasim Husayn ibn Ruh
al-Nawbakhti (d. 326/938), and Abu al-Hasan \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Samari
(d. 329/941).

With the end of the Minor Occultation and the beginning of the Major
Occultation in the year 329/941, in the absence of access to the Imam
(A) or his deputies, the Shi'ah were confronted with greater difficulty
in regard to obtain­ing ahkam for new issues, which increased with the
passage of time and the growing distance from the era of nass, together
with the growing variety of the emergent issues and problems created by
new conditions of life. Moreover, with the passage of time, increasing
number of doubts took the place of the previous certainty about the
meaning and import of the texts which served as the bases of legal
deductions. It was at this time that the Shi'ah began to search for ways
to solve this problem by deducing the ahkam for new issues from the
available legal sources.

This new path was that of "ijtihad " whose pioneer was the treat
mujtahid and creative jurisprudent al-Hasan ibn Abi \`Aqil al Umani.
After him, we can name al-Shaykh al-Tusi, the great scholar and highly
original mujtahid who employed the foundations built by Ibn Abi \`Aqil
for extensive deduction of ahkam of the Shari'ah. In this way the
difficulties living in the way of Shi’i jurisprudence were removed and
it overcame its hurdles.

**The Difference between Shi'i and Sunni Ijtihad**

\`Ijtihad' is a familiar term both in Shi\`i and Sunni fiqh, but its
meaning and characteristics are different in the contexts of the two.
Whereas ijtihad in the Shi'i sense means deduction of ahkam from the
sources and through the principles of the Shari'ah, the same term in
Sunni fiqh means deduction of ahkam through such means as ray, qiyas,
istihsan, masalih mursalah, etc. Therefore, it has been said that Shi'i
ijtihad does not involve legislation (tashr'i') of new laws as Divine
commands regarding emergent issues and events; it confines itself to
applying the unchanging general principles to emergent, changing
particulars (tafri\`).The Shi'ah do not look upon ijtihad as an
independ­ent source of ahkam but as the meant of their identification
through a study of the sources of the Shari'ah. The Ahl al-Sunnah, on
the contrary, consider ijtihad as an independent source of
legislation.

**Ijtihad during the Era of the Imams (A)**

Though, it would appear that the Shi'ah had no need of ijtihad during
the era of accessibility to the Infallible Imams (A), the fact is that
some Shi'i jurists did confront the need to perform ijtihad
occasion­ally under some special circumstances, and the path of deducing
second­ary ahkam from the basic sources was open to them. The evidence
of it is as follows:

1. There are traditions in which mention is made of certain common
elements pertaining to the general principles of legal deduction. In
these traditions, the Imams -- particularly- al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) – are
reported to have been questioned about such principles (usul) and roles
(qawa'id), and they gave replies to suck questions. These traditions by
themselves indicate that issues related to ijtihad were relevant for the
Shi'ah during that period. \`The Imams (A) propounded such usul as that
of Bara’ah, Ihtiyat, Istishab, and Takhyir, and such aqaid as that of
taharah, yad, ibadah, hilliyah, sihhah, tajawuz, faragh, la darar, la
haraj, etc. These usul and qawaid provide effective assistance- to the
faqih in his effort to deduce the hukm of the Shari'ah about any
contingent issue.

Historical accounts reveal that whenever the companions of the Imams
(A) came across the texts of their ahadith - which differed from one
another in respect to 'amm and khass, mutlaq and muqayyad, mujmal and
mubin, zahir and azhar, zahir and nass - they would try, to reconcile
them according to the rules of objective reconciliation (jam mawdu’i) so
far as it was possible (such as between \`amm and khass, mutlaq and
muqayyad, mujmal and mubin). But if objective reconciliation was not
possible (such as between zahir and azhar, zahir and nass) they would
reconcile the tradition in accordance with the rule of jam\` hukmi and
remove their apparent conflict. When none of these two methods of
reconciliation worked (such as when there were totally divergent
narrations regarding a certain issue), the narrators would ask the Imams
(A) to suggest some criterion for distinguishing between reliable and
unreliable traditions. In this relation numerous traditions have been
reported from the Imams (A) which are termed in \`ilm al 'usul as akhbar
\`ilajiyyah (remedial traditions). In Usul al-Kafi(vol. I), \`Awali
al-la'ali, and other works, there are chapters related to this topic and
here we shall cite one tradition as an example.

In \`Awali al-la'ali (vol. IV, p. 133) a tradition is recorded from
Zurarah ibn A'yan:

Zurarah says: "I said to Abu Ja'far, 'May I be your ransom, if two
conflict­ing traditions are narrated from you which one of them are we
to accept?' The Imam (A) said, \`Take the one which is well-known among
your compan­ions (i.e. the Shi’is) and leave the one which is
unfamiliar: I said, \`What should we do if both of the traditions are
equally well-known?' The Imam (A) replied, \`Take the one which seems
more balanced (a’dal)and more reliable (awthaq)to you.' I said, \`What
if both of them are equally balanced, accept­able and reliable?' The
Imam (A) said, \`See which of them is in accordance with the standpoint
of the \`Ammah (i.e. non-Shi\`i Muslims); leave it, and take the
opposite of what the \`Amman hold, for the truth lies in that which
contradicts them.' I said, \`Sometimes we come across two traditions
both of which are in agreement with the \`Amman or both of them
contradict with their standpoint; what are we to do in such cases?' The
Imam-(A) replied, \`Select the tradition which is nearer to caution and
leave the other one.' I said, \`What is our duty if both the traditions
are in accordance with caution or if both of them are opposed to it?'
The Imam (A) replied, \`In such a case, take anyone of the two and leave
the other."'

The traditions which deal with the resolution of conflict between
traditions are great many and there is no need to cite them here. The
aim of quoting the above tradition was to show that the principles of
jurisprudence were often discussed during the era of the Imams (A) and
that these principles were generally employed for the practice of
ijtihad. On this basis, the practice of ijtihad was not limited to the
period of inaccessibility to the Imams (A).

2. The presence of books dealing with some issues of \`ilm al-'usul
among the writings of the contemporaries of the Imams (A) is indicative
of the fact that the practice of ijtihad was current and the principles
of jurisprudence were relevant during the era of accessibility. We shall
discuss this matter in detail while studying the various periods in the
history of ijtihad; here we shall cite few instances of it for the sake
of example:

(a) Hisham ibn al-Hakam, a pupil of al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A), compiled a
treatise on word usage (alfad ).

(b) Yunus ibn \`Abd al-Rahman, a pupil of al-'Imam al-Rida (A) , wrote
a short treatise on usul al-fiqh.

(c) Al-Fadl ibn Shadhan al-'Azdi al-Nishaburi, a pupil of al-'Imam
al-Hadi (A), was the author of a number of fatawa issued on the basis of
jurisprudential principles. For instance, he gave a fatwa upholding the
validity of prayers offered in an usurped place, in accordance with his
belief in the permissibility of the concurrence of amr and nahy.
Appar­ently he was the first to believe in the permissibility of the
concurrence of amr and nahy in matters of primary significance.

3. During the era of accessibility to the Imams (A), the Shi\`is who
lived in distant lands, such as Khurasan and Ray, could not easily
con­tact the Imam (A) and question him about the problems they came
across. Although historical accounts show that the Shi\`is sent their
queries to the Imams (A) through travellers and pilgrims, who brought
them the Imam's answers on returning, it should be noted that this
method was not followed in respect to all the problems encountered.
Secondly, the replies in such cases arrived after the passage of
consider­able time during which we cannot say that they remained without
any obligation to fulfill.

Thirdly, the travellers and the messengers sent were not always
successful in getting access to the Imams (A), because most of the time
the Imams (A) were either under surveillance or in the prisons of
tyrannical caliphs, so that the Shi\`is could not contact their Imam.
For instance, al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) was under such strict and oppressive
surveillance of the \`Abbasid caliph al-Mansur that no one could easily
approach the Imam (A). The Shi'-is had to resort to various kinds of
tactics to approach the Imam's house in the garb of peddlers or
tradesmen to ask questions while observing intense caution.

After al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A), the next Imam, Musa ibn Ja'far (A), spent
long years in the prisons of Basrah and Baghdad until his mar­tyrdom.
During such periods, eminent Shi'i fuqaha', such as Zurarah, Muhammad
ibn Muslim, al-Fadl ibn Shadhan, Safwan ibn Yahya and others fulfilled
the legal needs of the Shi\`is through their own ijtihad.

4. There are traditions which indicate that the Imams' companions and
pupils were required to apply the general juristic principles to
par­ticular instances. The following tradition of Safinat al-Bihar(vol.
I, p.22) is an example:

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) said: "Our duty is to teach you the principles
and your duty is to ramify."

Ayan al-Shi\`ah records the following tradition of al-'Imam al-Rida
(A):

From the book of Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Nasr
al­-Bizanti from al-Rida (A): "Our duty is to teach the principles and
yours to ramify.”

5. Another evidence of the existence of ijtihad during the era of
accessibility to the Imam are the fatwas issued by the legists among the
Imams' contemporaries, and the Imams' approval of their verdicts. The
following tradition narrated by Mu'adh ibn Muslim is recorded in Wasa'il
al-Shi'ah (vol. 18, 11th of the chapters on sifat al-qadi, hadith 37):

Mu'idh ibn Muslim said: "Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) said to me, \`I
have -been told that you sit in the mosque and give fatwa to the
people'. I said, \`Yes, I am doing it.' Then I said, \`Before I leave
you I have to ask you a question: (My practice is that) When I sit in
the mosque (giving fatwas) a man comes and asks me a certain question.
If I know that he is one of your opponents and does not act according to
your views, I narrate to him a fatwa which is accept­able in his legal
school. If I know that he is one of your followers, I give a fatwa in
accordance with the Shi’i school. But if I cannot find out to which
group he belongs I explain to him various fatwas putting in your views
amongst them.' The Imam (A) replied, \`Carry on in the same fashion, for
such is also my method."'

6. Some traditions show that the Imams (A) ordered the outstanding
among their companions to give fatwas to the people. In Usd al­-ghabah
(vol. 4, p.197) it is reported that Imam \`Ali (A), while appoint­ing
his cousin Qutham ibn al-'Abbas as governor of Makkah, said to him:

Give fatwa to the initiated and teach the ignorant.

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said to Aban ibn Taghlib
(Jami' al-ruwat, vol. I, p.9):

Sit in the Mosque of Madinah and give fatwas to the people, for I love
the like of you to be seen amongst my Shi'ah.

7. Some traditions indicate that the Imams (A) referred some of their
followers to some of their outstanding pupils in matters relating to
hadith and fatwa.

'Abd al-'Aziz ibn Muhtadi said: "I asked Aba al-Hasan al-Rida (A), 'I
am unable to meet you every time, so from whom should I take my
religious instruction?” 'Take if from Yunus ibn 'Abd al-Rahman,' said
the Imam (A)." (Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol. 18,eleventh of the chapters on
sifatal-qadi, hadith 34)

Shu'ayb says: "I said to al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A), \`Often we have to ask
about something; whom should we ask? 'The Imam said, \`Ask al-'Asadi
(Abu Basir)."' (Ibid.)

'Ali ibn Musayyab al-Hamadani says, "I said to al-Rida (A), 'I have to
come a long distance and I cannot reach you every time (when I have to
ask you something). From whom should I take the teachings of my faith?'
The Iman (A) said, \`From Zakariyya ibn Adam; he is my trustee in regard
to religious and secular matters."' 'Ali ibn Musayyab adds, "On
returning I went to Zakariyya ibn Adam and asked him whatever I needed
to ask." (Usul al-Kafi, vol: 1, p.67 )

Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) said: "The two (Shi'i disputants) should look for
one who narrates our traditions and has in view our halal and haram and
who as well understands our ahkam. Then (having found such a person)
they should accept him as a judge."(Ibid.)

Al-'Imam al-'Askari (A) said:..."As to the faqih who preserves the
integrity of his self, defends his faith, opposes his lust and obeys the
command of his Master (mawla), then it is for the laymen ('awamm)to
imitate him."(al-Tabarsi, al- Ihtijaj) 8. The traditions quoted above
expressly indicate the permissibility of giving fatwa in accordance with
the principles of Shi'i jurisprudence. There are other traditions which,
though they do not expressly state such a sanction, are relevant in that
we can infer such a permissibility from them.

Al-'Imam al-Baqir (A) said: "Anyone who gives fatwa without knowledge
or guidance is cursed by the angels of Divine wrath and mercy. The sins
of those who act upon his fatwas also lie upon him." (Wasa'il al-Shi'ah,
vol. 18, fourth of the chapters of sifat al-qadi, a sahih tradition
narrated on the authority of Abu 'Ubaydah)

Al 'Imam al-Sadiq (A) said: "Anyone who acts upon qiyas destroys
himself and others who act upon his verdict. Whoever gives fatwa without
knowledge and without knowing nasikh and mansukh or muhkam and
mutashabih, brings perdition upon himself and others." (Usul al-Kafi,
vol. 1, bab al-nahy 'an al-qawl bi ghayr al-‘ilm, hadith 9)

The Prophet (S) said: "Whoever gives fatwa without knowledge or
learning, his abode shall be hellfire." (Tuhaf al-'uqul, the riwayah of
al-Hasan ibn 'Ali ibn Shu'bah)

9. In regard to the books of certain Shi'i groups (such as Banu Faddall
and individuals (such as al-Shalamghani), the Imams (A) are reported to
have said: \`Take their narrations and leave their conclusions.' It can
be inferred from this tradition that ijtihad was practised by the Shi'is
of that era. Banu Faddal and al-­Shalamghani had diverted from the right
path, and, therefore, the Imams (A) forbade the Shi\`is from acting upon
their verdicts, judgements and opinions.


