Difference of Viewpoints, a Bounty
==================================

There is no doubt that disagreement in the sense of quarrel and
hostility is an undesirable thing which has been prohibited by the
sacred Shari\`ah. But disagreement in the sense of difference of opinion
is, in many cases, good and valuable, because the conflict of ideas
leads to greater research and deeper investigation. Some have
interpreted the following statement of the Prophet (S) in this sense:

The difference of my Ummah is a mercy. [^1]

In any case, ijtihad and undertaking of investigation for
identifica­tion of Divine laws is considered a desirable thing by the
Lawgiver. The tradition:

The mujtahid who succeeds (in identifying the true law) gets two
rewards and the one who errs gets one, aims to encourage ijtihad as it
leads to the development of thought and taps the resources of the
intellect. This admirable practice has been in vogue in Shi\`i academies
for ages, and throughout the seven epochs of the history of ijtihad,
muj­tahidun welcomed the expression of diverse viewpoints regarding
various issues. This is the reason why Shi'i fiqh has achieved its
remarkable development in various fields and preserved the capacity to
answer the problems and satisfy the diverse wants of man in every age.
Farid al­Wajdi, writing in Da'irat al-ma\`arif, III, 197, under j-h-d,
says:

The Islamic Shari'ah contains sufficient amount of primary principles
suitable for legal deduction and which can meet the emergent wants and
solve the problems of life. Therefore, in every age there should be
mujtahids capable of making legal deductions. From the beginning of the
Islamic era to the third/ninth century there did exit mujtahids who
deduced the hukm for every event and eventuality through ijtihad from
the primary principles of the Shari'ah. They were not afraid of
divergence of viewpoints, which to them was not only something ordinary
and natural but a mercy of God, because diversity is one of the laws of
nature and there is no community without divergence in some matters of
religion, with the followers on every side defending their own
viewpoint. But when the Muslims became rigid with regard to the
understanding of the secrets and subtleties of their law, inade­quacy
and neglect became their lot. As a result they did not permit
them­selves to think about new realities. They would say that it was on
account of the closure of the gates of ijtihad. But the fact is that
according to the express texts of the Book and the Sunnah, the gates of
ijtihad are open for all until the Judgement's Day.

In brief, social stagnation and intellectual decadence cast their
shadow on Islamic communities when the road of ijtihad and thought was
blocked and Muslims did not permit themselves to reflect. about new
realities and problems. As a consequence, their legal studies remained
at the same point that they had reached twelve centuries ago.

**Traditional Fiqh or Progressive Fiqh?**

Nowadays some persons want to draw a distinction between \`tradi­tional
fiqh' and \`progressive fiqh'. However, if we set aside the specific
views and objectives of some groups and see things as they really are,
we will see that there can be no distinction between \`traditional fiqh'
and \`progressive fiqh' in Shi'i context.

This is so because traditional fiqh, when dealt. with on the basis of
ijtihad with all its conditions and criteria, has the capacity to solve
all emergent problems and to march in step with all the manifestations
of progress. However, if by 'progressive fiqh' be meant recognition of
the right to violate Shar'i norms and requirements of ijtihad and the
non­specialist's right to interfere in this discipline, and the exercise
of ijtihad through the use of qiyas, istihsan and masalih mursalah, it
can­not be called Islamic firth. for say nothing of its being
\`progressive'. This is so because 'fiqh' means the commands revealed by
God to His Apostle, not laws determined by human thought and
speculation. So also if traditional fiqh is taken to mean rigid
adherence to the literal meanings of the texts (zawahir al-nusus) and
the fatwas of predecessors and indifference to contemporary realities,
such a static ‘ijtihad cannot answer the diverse problems of life in
every age and keep pace with changing times.

**Ijtihad, Legislation and Tajdid**

Ijtihad from the Shi-i view point is not a kind of legislation or
something based solely on human thought, subjective judgement or
provincial social, economic, cultural or political perceptions. Ijtihad
is also not a kind of taqlid in the sense of a passive acceptance of
ahkam, in whose determination the mujtahid has no role. Ijtihad in Shi’i
view means intellectual effort based on the recognition of certain
canonical sources and juristic principles and aimed at understanding and
dis­covering the laws of God. Although a dynamic force in fiqh, ijtihad
does not diminish the sanctity and stability of the legal content of the
Shari'ah. Rather, throughout the seven epochs of its development ijtihad
has always guarded the principal content of the ahkam while at the same
time extending its scope and application to the most. distant horizons
of human life on the basis of its general laws and principles. Ijtihad,
it may be said, is making intelligent use of God's general grace whereby
He has placed the laws of the Shari'ah in the bounteous domain of the
intellect.

The first Shi\`i faqih to open the gates of ijtihad as a comprehensive
scientific discipline was Abu Muhammad al-Hasan ibn 'Ali al-'Umiini,
known as Ibn Abi \`Aqil. He wrote a book on this subject entitled
al­-ustamsik bi habl Al al-Rasul which is mentioned by al-Najashi as
being one of the most famous and well-known Shi\`i works. In this book
Ibn Abi \`Aqil examined all the various aspects of the principles of
ahkam and the rules of ijtihad as well as the common elements related to
the process of legal deduction. Although he wrote many books, in almost
all the fields of Islamic sciences, his fame rests mostly on his studies
of ijtihad. He wrote his above-mentioned book during the era of the
Minor Occultation of the Twelfth Imam (A). He is considered the pioneer
in the field because no one before him had written such a work that
treated Shi'i fiqh in such a comprehensive manner with an approach based
on ijtihad.

We do not know of any legist to have undertaken such a task before Ibn
Abi \`Aqil. Before him Shi\`i fiqh did not have the ability of enter­ing
the phase of tafri\` (i.e. the application of usul for deriving answers
to new furu\` or secondary issues) on account of the absence of an
elaborate and scientific method, without which ijtihad as a technique
was not possible. This great legist filled this vacuum through his
indefatigable efforts.

After Ibn Abi \`Aqil, the next person to set forth fiqh in a scientific
perspective based on ijtihad was Abu 'Ali Muhmmad ibn Ahmad al. Katib
al-'Iskafi (d.381=991), known as Ibn Junayd. In his endeavour to
establish legal studies on the principles and rules of ijtihad, he wrote
a number of books on the subject. Two of them are: Tahdhib al-Shi\`ah li
ahkam al-Shari\`ah and al-Mukhtasar al-Ahmadi li al-fiqh al-Muhammadi.
Abu Ja'far ibn Ma'd al-Musawi, who claims to have seen Ibn Junayd's
work, says that he had not seen a better-written book among Shi'i works.
He adds that al-Mukhtasasr al-'Ahmadi was popular as a textbook during
the days of the late 'Allamah.

**A Clarification**

Here it is essential to clarify two points. It appears from the
statements of some scholars that Ibn Abi \`Aqil was the first to open
the gate of practical ijtihadand to lay the foundations of tafri\`. This
is not correct, because he was the founder of ijtihad as theory and not
as practice. Secondly, some scholars are of the opinion that Ibn Junayd
was the pioneer of the theory and practice of ijtihad and Ibn Abi \`Aqil
continued his work. This is opposite of what we believe to be the case,
because Ibn Abi \`Aqil was a contemporary of al-Kulayni (d.328 or 329/
940 or 941) and lived during the era of the Minor Occultation. Although
we don't know the exact date of Ibn Abi \`Aqil's death, some indications
lead us to believe that-he died before or about the same time as
al-Kul­ayni. Ibn Junayd al-'Isksfi died in the year 381/991, about 52
(lunar) years after Ibn Abi \`Aqil's death.

**The Practice of Ijtihad**

The first legist to open the gate of practical ijtihad was the great
legist and the unique scholar of his era Shaykh al-Ta'ifah Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan al-Tusi (385-460/995-1068), who applied the general principles
of jurisprudence to new and emergent furu’. We don't know of any Shi’i
mujtahid before him to have practically applied ijtihad in his manner to
answer the multiplying needs of the Shi\`i world of the time. With his
work he extended the scope of Islamic fiqh in a remark­able manner, for
he fully utilized the theoretical foundations which had been laid by his
predecessors in the field, such as Ibn Abi \`Aqil and Ibn Junayd.
Al-Tusi commenced this project in his precious work al-Mabsut. In the
preface to this work, while explaining his motives for writing it, he
says. "Our opponents believe that the Imamiyyah do not have the capacity
to refer the furu\` to usul, and they confine themselves to the texts
(nusus)related by their traditionists". Such a view stimulated the
Shaykh al-Ta'ifah to rise to prove the Shi'i prowess in the field of
ijtihad and to fill the existing vacuum. Juristic thought and the theory
of ijtihad made great advancement during his era, breathing a new life
into the body of fiqh. Al-Mabsut emancipated the studies of fiqh from
their restricted confines - wherein their sole reliance was on the
direct, literal interpretation of traditions - and brought them into a
wide and open field. Al-Tusi's al-Mabsut represents the point of
departure in the expansion of Shi'i fiqh and usul which was made
possible by the pre­liminary work done by Ibn Abi \`Aqil and Ibn
Junayd.

**The Development of the Theory of Ijtihad**

Shi’i ijtihad at the outset of the Minor Occultation did not come
across the kind of difficulty faced during later eras with regard to the
deduction of ahkam regarding new issues and problems. This was because,
firstly, the Muslims of that time did not face the problems which
emerged later. Secondly, due to the proximity with the era of nass, the
availability of the Four Hundred Usul (which contained the records of
the statements of al-'Imam al-Baqir (A), al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) and the
other Imams made, made by their pupils), and the under­standing of the
actual context in which those statements were made, the need for ijtihad
was not felt as acutely as during the later times.

Ijtihad and legal deduction was a simpler affair, free of the later
tech­nical complexities, because the legists of that period did not face
any great difficulty with regard to the identification of trustworthy
tradi­tions, the literal and legal meanings and significance of words
used in traditions, and the specific features relating to them. However,
the pas­sage of time and the emergence of new issues with the
advancement of civilization, on the one hand, and the obliteration of
signs and indica­tions which were instrumental in understanding the
import and purpose of traditions as well as the complications arising
from changes in general and legal usage of words, on the other - all
these together made the task of deduction more difficult for the later
mujtahids and jurists. To these must be added the difficulty arising
from the forgeries and fabrications made by interested persons, which
had affected the trust­worthiness of many traditions.

Due to these causes, the practice of ijtihad for the deduction and
discovery of the real ahkam was not so simple a matter as before, and it
was necessary to study various sciences for the purposes of (1)
deter­mining the meanings of words, (2) understanding of the literal
meanings of the Book and the Sunnah, (3) determining the reliability of
narrators by studying their biographies for evaluating the asnad of
traditions as sahih, da’if, muwaththaq, mursal etc., and (4) determining
the tradi­tional and rational criteria for giving precedence to a
tradition and the rules for reconciling conflicting traditions (on the
basis of \`amm and khass, mutlaq and muqayyad, mujmal and mubin, zahir
and azhar, zahir and nass).

The causes behind the conflict between traditions of legal
signifi­cance were the following:

1. The loss of certain indications accompanying the texts of hadith,
caused at times due to the dismemberment (taqti\`)of traditions and
asnad, and at times due to the negligence of narrators.

2. The narration of traditions in reworded form by the narrator, in
words different from that of the Imam.

3. The making of statements contrary to the real Shi\`i position on
account of taqiyyah, which the Shi\`is were forced to practise as a
safety measure to protect the Shari'ah and their lives, property and
honour.

4. The graded approach of the Imams in the exposition and
com­munication of the ahkam to the people, for the sake of the
considera­tion of specific conditions of a certain inquirer or certain
special cir­cumstances.

5. The treacherous interference of some anti-Islamic elements and
mercenaries, against whose fabrications the Imams (A) warned their
Shi'ah.

Accordingly, anyone who engages in the deduction of Divine ahkam from
the traditions should have the capacity to reconcile various kinds of
contradictions arising from the above-mentioned causes.

**Notes:**

[^1]. This interpretation of the tradition is correct if \`ikhtilaf' is
taken to mean \`difference of opinion'. However, in some traditions a
different meaning is given to the word.

One of these traditions is the following from al-Shaykh al-Saduq's
Ma'ani al-'akhbar, Qumm, 1361 H.Sh., p.157:

...\`Abd al -Mu'min al-'Ansari says: "I said to Abu 'Abd Allah: \`The
people narrate the Prophet (S) to have said: "The ikhtilaf of my ummah
is mercy". (Is that true?)' He replied: \`What they say is true.' I
said, If their difference is mercy, then their consensus should be a
scourge?!' He said, \`it is not as you or they understand it. Indeed,
what the Prophet (S) meant is the import of this utterance of God
Almighty: "...But why should not a party of every section of them go
forth, to become learned in the Din, and to warn their people when they
return to them, that haply they may beware?"(9:122) (In this verse) God
has commanded them to go forth (yanfiru) towards the Messenger of Allah
(S) and to frequent (yukhtalifu)him so that they may learn and then
return to their people to teach them. Indeed he (S) meant their
departure from their places, not their divergence in the Din of Allah,
For, verily, the Din is one."


