`ijtihad' in the Utterances of the Prophet (s)
==============================================

The word ijtihad also occurs in the statements of the Prophet (S) in
the same literal sense. Some examples may be cited here:

Pronounce benedictions over me and be diligent in prayer. [^17]
As to the prostration, be diligent (or insistent) in prayer, for that
makes it worthy of acceptance. [^18]
The \`alim (scholar) is superior to the mujtahid by a hundred degrees.
[^19]
In this tradition mujtahid is used in the sense of \`abid (devotee),
one who is diligent in \`ibadah (worship).

\`Ijtihad' In the Utterances of Some Sahabah

‘A'ishah is reported to have said:

During the last decade of his life the Apostle of God worked harder
than in any period. [^20] Talhah ibn \`Ubayd Allah is reported to a
stated:

(There were) two men in the days of the Prophet (S), one of whom
surpassed the other in his ijtihad (diligence in worship). The
\`diligent one' participated in war and was martyred. [^21] Abu Said
al-Khudri is reported as having said:

Whenever the Apostle of God took an oath (to do something), he would
take pains to fulfil the oath. [^22] The following is reported about
\`Abd Allah ibn Ubayy in relation to the campaign of Banu al-Mustalaq:

He insisted on his oath that he had not done that. [^23]

Umm Harithah is reported to have stated in a question she asked the
Prophet (S): I shall bear with patience if my son is in Paradise, but if
that isn't the case, I shall mourn for him to the limit of my strength.
[^24] ‘Ijtihad in the Utterances of the Imams (A)

In the utterances of the Imams (A) of the Prophet's Ahl al-Bayt, too,
the word ijtihad is used in its literal sense. Following are three
examples: In Nahj al-balaghah, Imam 'Ali (A) states:

It is for you to make effort and to strive, to, prepare yourselves and
to supply yourselves with in this stage of provision (i.e. this world).
[^25] Al-'Imam al-Baqir (A) is reported to have said to a group of
Shi\`is:

By God, I love your fragrance and (the purity of) your souls. So
strengthen them by means of piety and endeavour (ijtihad). You should
know that you will not approach our wilayah except by deeds and through
endeavour. [^26] Al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) is reported to have said to Said
ibn Hilal al-Thaqafi:

I advise you to fear God, to be pious, and to be diligent (in
fulfilling your duties). [^27]

**Ijtihad as a Technical Term**

There is no consensus of opinion among scholars belonging to dif­ferent
Islamic schools regarding the literal meaning of the term ijtihad. A
section of Sunni \`ulama' believes that ijtihad means making effort and
endeavour in order to achieve presumption (zann) regarding a hukm (law)
of the Shari'ah. The same definition is also found in the writings of
some Shi'i \`ulama'. But this interpretation was first proposed by a
group of Sunni \`ulama'. In any case, it would be appropriate to cite
some of the views held by Shi'i and the Sunni \`ulama' in this regard:

(a) The great \`Allamah Sayf al-Din al-'Amidi al-Shafi\`i (d.631/1234)
says: Ijtihad means putting in of effort and endeavour in order to reach
presumption (zann) regarding one of the ahkam of the Shari'ah in such a
manner that one feels that he can do nothing more. [^28] (b) Al-\`Allamah
Ibn Hajib Abu \`Amr \`Uthman ibn \`Umar ibn Abi Baler al-Kurdi al-Maliki
(c. 570 - 646/1174 - 1248) writes in his Mukhtasar al-‘usul: Ijtihad
means making effort to arrive at presump­tion or conjecture regarding a
hukm of the Shari'ah.

(c) Qadi \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn \`Abd al-Ghaffar al-Shafi\`i
al-Adudi (d. 756/1355) , in his book Sharh Mukhtasar usul Ibn Hajib,
writes: Ijtihad is employing one's effort and capacity in the way of
arriving at a presumption regarding some hukm of the Shari'ah. (d) Abu
Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazali al-Shafi\`i (460-505/1068­1111) quotes the
writer of Fawatih al-rahamut to the effect that: Ijtihad is the effort
made on the part of the faqih to derive a presumed hukm of the
Shari\`ah. [^29] (e) Muhammad Ma\`ruf al-Dawalibi writes: Ijtihad means
the exer­cise of ray which is not acceptable to all the \`ulama', for if
it is accept­ed by all it would be called ijma\` (consensus), not
ijtihad. Therefore, ijtihad is on a lower standing than ijma’. [^30]

(f) The great mujtahid al-\`Allamah al-Hilli (648-726/1250-1325), in
his work al Nihayah on usul al-fiqh, writes: Ijtihad means employ­ment
of effort for arriving at presumption with regard to a hukm of the Shari
ah, in a way that is not blameworthy on account of negligence or
omission.

(g) Al-\`Allamah al Turayhi says: Ijtihad is to employ one's effort and
endeavour in pursuit of some difficult task and for arriving at
pre­sumption with regard to a hukm of the Shari\`ah. [^31] (h) The Usuli
mujtahid al-\`Amili al-Jiba\`i says: Ijtihad is the effort and endeavour
of a faqih in order to arrive at presumption in regard to a hukm of the
Shari\`ah. [^32]

(i) Al-Shaykh al-Baha i in his Zubdah quotes al-Hajibi to the ef­fect
that: By ijtihad is meant the exhaustive efforts of a faqih for
ar­riving at presumption in regard to a hukm of the Shari’ah.
Al-\`Allamah al-Hilli agrees with this definition in his book Tahdhib
al-‘usul.

(j) Al \`Allamah Taj al-Din al-Subuki, in his book Jam\` al jawami\`,
writes: Ijtihad as a technical term means the utmost efforts made by a
faqih for arriving at presumption in regard to a hukm (of the
Shari'ah).

**Critique of the Above Definitions**

The above-mentioned definitions of ijtihad do not appear to be correct;
for if these are meant for determining the logical and technical limits
of ijtihad, these definitions fail to do so. However, if only an
ex­planation and clarification of the term ijtihad is meant, they are
not objectionable. Beyond that purpose, they have no scientific value.
Here we shall briefly point out the defects in the said definitions.
According to the science of logic, a definition should be inclusive of
all the members of the set and exclude all alien elements; the said
definitions are not such. For , if by \`presumption' (zann) they mean
something based on the Shari'ah or reason, they are not inclusive of all
their concerned instances. Because, an argument (dalil) related to a
hukm and derived from the Shari'ah or reason belongs to one of the
following three kinds:

1. The argument creates presumption.
2. The argument creates certainty.
3. The argument creates neither presumption nor certainty.

The said definitions deal with the first kind alone, and leave out the
two remaining kinds; whereas a definition of ijtihad should include
these two as well.

The exclusion of the second kind in the definitions cited - that is
that the argument should create certainty - is due to the fact that
cer­tainty is different from presumption and the word \`presumption'
does not include it. As to the exclusion of the third - in which an
argument does not produce either presumption or certainty - the reason
is that the argument may not create presumption. For instance, if the
validity (hujjiyyah) of al-shuhrat al-fatwa’iyyah or khabar al-wahid or
al-'ijma\` al-manqul is presupposed in such a way that despite not
causing presumption they should still be regarded as hujjah, then,
according to this hypothesis, the derivation of ahkam of the Shari'ah by
means of al­-shuhrat al-fatwa’iyyah, khabar al-wahid and
al-ijma'al-manqul would not be ijtihad - since we have supposed that
they do not create presumption - and in the light of the said
definitions ijtihad means attain­ment of presumption.

If, in the above-mentioned definitions, should \`presumption' be taken
to include both trustworthy and untrustworthy presumptions - as it
obviously does - the definition will include untrustworthy presump­tion
also, while the attainment of presumption regarding a hukm of the
Shari’ah by means of untrustworthy presumptions is not considered as
ijtihad; because, it is certain that unreliable presumption cannot be a
source of legislation. Accordingly, the definitions cited fail to
exclude alien elements.

In addition they suffer from another fault - especially those
defi­nitions which mention the faqih - as they fail to avoid a vicious
circle. In the definitions cited, the definition of \`ijtihad' rests
upon the definition of \`faqih' and vice versa, for \`faqih', in the
technical sense, cannot be imagined without the technical qualification
defined as \`ijtihad', and all scholars and thinkers unanimously agree
on the invalid­ity of the vicious circle.

Regarding this vicious circle, al-Muhaqqiq al-Qummi writes: The faqih
is a scholar who knows the Divine ahkam through the means of reliable
(mu'tabar) proofs (adillah) and sources (manabi\`). This ability does
not materialize without ijtihad, and without it no faqih can exist.
Accordingly, the definition of \`faqih' rests upon defining ijtihad, and
vice versa.

Regarding the solution of the problem of the vicious circle, cer­tain
Usulis have said: "According to these definitions, faqih is a person who
is acquainted with and is well-versed in fiqh; as opposed to one who has
no knowledge of fiqh whatsoever. It does not mean someone who has the
knowledge of all the ahkam. It is clear that in this sense the meaning
of \`faqih' does not rest on that of ijtihad; this avoids the vici­ous
circle, because whereas the definition of ijtihad is dependent upon that
of \`faqih', the definition of \`faqih' is not dependent upon that of
ijtihad ."

But al-Muhaqqiq. al-Qummi objects to this statement and says: Firstly,
such a sense imputed to \`faqih' is figurative', as it literally means
one who knows all the ahkam, not one who knows only a few of them or
some of those things that are related to the ahkam. Secondly, the effort
made by one who is a \`faqih' in this sense does not give rise to the
quality of ijtihad; for, one who knows the outlines of the issues of
ijtihad and has read a few books on argumentative fiqh but lacks the
faculty that enables him to revert the furu to the usul, would not be
considered a faqih.

Then, in an effort to remove the vicious circle, al-Muhaqqiq al­ Qummi
says: The \`faqih' is a person possessing such capacity as would lead to
the knowledge of far\`i ahkam of the Shari'ah. Thus, the defini­tion of
ijtihad is made dependent on that of the faqih, whereas the vice versa
is not essential. For, the knowledge of the ahkam of the Shari'ah exists
in a faqih as a (potential) capability, and in ijtihad it exists as an
actuality.

This view of the Muhaqqiq is objectionable, since faqih as a term is
applied to one who actually knows the far'i ahkam of the Shari'ah
through a command of its sources, not one who possesses merely the
faculty and capacity of doing so; as mere capacity and faculty do not
qualify one for this appallation, though the appallation of \`mujtahid'
may fit him. Therefore, the vicious circle still remains; as it is quite
clear that the definition of \`faqih' in the above sense is dependent
upon that of \`ijtihad', and vice versa.

Moreover, the apparent meaning of this definition is unacceptable not
only in the Shi’i view of ijtihad but is also incomplete and
objection­able according to the Sunni viewpoint; because legal grounds
(adillah Shar’iyyah) are not confined to presumption and conjecture
alone according to Sunnis and include other things besides.

In any case, the definitions cited are too restrictive in some
re­spects, and in some others they do not exclude what is alien to
ijtihad. Such definitions are not sound according to the science of
logic, and it may be concluded that they are unacceptable to both the
Muslim sects. Many a time such incorrect definitions of ijtihad have
been responsible for giving rise to negative views about ijtihad, and
made persons like Mirza Muhammad Amin al-'Astarabadi, the founder of the
Akhbari school, to negate ijtihad outrightly. As a consequence of it
ijtihad had been declared as one of the innovations (bid\`at) and
impermissible activities (this will be discussed in detail while dealing
with the Akhbari revolt against ijtihad).

In fact, if ijtihad means exactly what it has been described to be in
the definitions, its rejection is justified: for, to claim something as
a hukm of the Shari'ah on the basis of presumptive and unreliable
grounds (dala'il) and to act according to them is not permissible in
Islamic law. Verses of the Quran expressly forbid reliance on
presumption and con­jecture. God Almighty has stated in the Quran:

O ye who believe, shun much suspicion (al-zann) .... (49:12)

In another place He says:

Most of them follow naught but conjecture. Assuredly conjecture can by
no means take the place of the truth ....(10:36) For positing a hukm of
the Shari'ah only certainty, or such argument or methods as have been
validated by the Shari'ah, may be relied upon. Such trustworthy grounds
as khabar al-wahid and the Practical Principles (al-'usul
al-\`amaliyyah) of the Shari'ah (Bara'ah, Ihtiyat, etc), though they do
not lead to certainty as to the real hukm (al-hukm al-waqi’i) - for they
may be suspect regarding their chain of transmission, or meaning, or
authenticity of source - but the certainty of their validity and
reliability justifies reliance upon them and action in accordance with
them and provides security from Divine chastisement.

Anyhow, the Usulis do not conceive ijtihad in the above sense. By
ijtihad' they mean the knowledge of the ahkam of the Shari'ah from
sources and grounds whose validity has been affirmed by the Shari'ah,
and it is by using such sources, principles and dicta that the mujtahid
is able to meet the needs of contingent issues and events of life.

Accordingly, the result of ijtihad in the context of deduction of ahkam
of the Shari'ah is to refer new furu\` to the fundamental usul (which
are the general precepts of the Book and the Sunnah) and to apply the
usul to their corresponding instances. It is by means of ijtihad that
sufficient evidence or hujjah regarding a hukm of the Shari'ah is
secured for answers to emergent and contingent issues. Ijtihad is not
meant for providing presumption or conjecture. It is this sound meaning
of ijtihad that the Usulis have accepted, and who­soever has faith in
Islam and believes in its eternal and immortal character is bound to
accept it in accordance with the precepts of the Shari'ah and the
dictates of reason. Because, it is not possible to posit the ahkam of
the Shari\`ah for issues for which there is no specific express test
without sufficient evidence and valid grounds, and this is a conception
which Muhammad Amin al-'Astarabadi also accepts.

It is by means of such ijtihad that valid grounds and basic and general
ahkam are employed for deriving a hukm of the Shari'ah on a contingent
issue. Such ijtihad is approved by the Akhbaris too, though they do not
call it ijtihad'.

Thus, the incorrect conception of ijtihad - i.e., the attainment of
presumption on a hukm of the Shari'ah - which incited the Akhbari
opposition, is one which the Usuli also do not accept and one which they
have never approved of. The \`presumption' which al-\`Allamah al-­Hilli,
the author of Ma\`alim al-'asul, and some other Shi\`i scholars mention
in their definitions of ijtihad, is not presumption in its general
sense, but one which is trustworthy and supported by some specific
dalil..

Therefore, it does not include such presumption as is not supported by
a dalil; for such presumption has been forbidden by verses of the Quran
and ahadith. Hence, it cannot be said that the \`presumption' mentioned
in the definitions includes this (untrustworthy) kind of presumption.
Accordingly, the ijtihad approved by the Usulis means procurement of
sufficient evidence (hujjah) regarding a hukm of the Shari'ah - a
conception which the Akhbaris also do not reject.

On this basis, it can be said that the dispute between the Usulis and
the Akhbaris is merely a verbal one, not one which is essential or
substantial, for both of them approve of securing sufficient evidence
for a hukm shar’i, with the difference that the Usulis call it ijtihad
whereas the Akhbaris do not name it so.

In reality, the only objection that theAkhbaris raise regarding ijtihad
relates to the definition of ijtihad and not to the Usulis or the
mujtahidun as such; for the Akhbaris themselves never act on
presump­tion unless it is validated by a reliable Shar'i proof (dalil).
Thus, if the word \`presumption' (zann) is replaced with the term hujjah
(evidence) in the said definition and it is said: "Ijtihad means
employment of one's powers to secure sufficient evidence (hujjah) in
regard to a hukm of the Shari'ah", there is no doubt that this
controversy can be completely avoided and a synthesis of the views of
the Akhbaris and the Usulis can be achieved.


