Second Definition of Ijtihad
============================

Another group of scholars defines ijtihad as effort on the part of a
faqih for deriving the ahkam of the Shari'ah. Here we shall cite the
views of some of them. (a) The great scholar Abu Hamid Muhammad
al-Ghazali al-Shafi\`i says: "Ijtihad is the effort (on the part of the
mujtahid) and employ­ment of one's utmost powers to extract a command
(hukm). This term is not used unless when it involves hardship and
strain. Hence it is said ‘He exerted himself to carry the millstone’.
But it will not be said that: ,’He exerted himself to carry a grain of
mustard seed.’ But in common usage this word is specifically used for
the effort made by the mujtahid in the way of acquiring the knowledge of
the ahkam of the Shari’ah." [^33] Al-Ghazali further remarks: “Ijtihad in
its complete sense is to make utmost effort in achieving a goal so that
it is not possible for one to do anything more." [^34]

(b) Muhammad Khidri Bek writes: Ijtihad is the effort made by a faqih
for acquiring the knowledge of the ahkam of the Shari’ah. [^35] He adds:
Ijtihad in its complete sense is the utmost effort that a faqih
undertakes for extracting a hukm (of the Shari'ah) in such a manner that
he feels that he has exhausted his capacity. [^36]

**Critique of the Second Type of Definitions**

The above-mentioned definitions also are incomplete and defective in
spite of their being closer to a technical definition and freedom from
the defects of the former ones. They are still imperfect because the
word \`waza'if' (lit. duties) needs to be added; because, besides having
to deduce the ahkam of the Shari\`ah, a mujtahid is supposed to procure
the Practical (al usul al-'amaliyyah) and the Rational Rules (al-'ahkam
al-\`aqliyyah) - such as Bara'ah, takhyir and Ihtiyat. Thus the field of
operation of the mujtahid includes the ahkam of the Shari’ah as well as
the Practical and the Rational Rules, whereas the above-mentioned
definitions focus merely on the former alone. In this sense, it is not a
comprehensive definition.

**Third Definition of Ijtihad**

A third group of scholars of usul defines ijtihad as: Deduction of the
ahkam of the Shari'ah from the usul, the adillah, and their sources in
the sacred Shari’ah. It would be appropriate to quote some of these
related views. (a) Ahmad Mustafa al-Zarqa', the author of the valuable
work al­ Madkhal al-faqhi al-'amm, says: Ijtihad means deduction of the
ahkam of the Shari’ah from their elaborate adillah found in the
Shari'ah. [^37]

(b) Al-\`Allamah Abu \`Abd Allah Shah Wali al-Faruqi al-Dihlawi
al-Hanafi, in his book Kitab al-'insaf fi sabab al- Ikhtilaf, writes:
Ijtihad means employment of effort and endeavour for the comprehension
of the far\`i ahkam of the Shari'ah from their elaborate adillah, which
comprise the Book, the Sunnah, ijma\` and qiyas.

(c) Muhammad Amin has also defined ijtihad in his book Taysir al-tahrir
in similar terms.

(d) Dr. Subhi al-Mahmasani says: Ijtihad means exertion and effort for
discovering the ahkam and laws of the Shari'ah from their legal
sources.

**Critique of the Third Type of Definitions**

These definitions are also not free from the defects of the earlier
ones, because, like the previous definitions, they need the word waza'if
in order to include the Practical and the Rational Rules with the ahkam
of the Shari'ah. Another objection against the definition given by
al-­Dihlawi is that he has considered qiyas one of the sources of the
ahkam, a viewpoint which is rejected by the Shi'ah (this will be dealt
in detail while discussing the sources of ijtihad).

**Fourth Definition of Ijtihad**

The great thinker and scholar of the Islamic world Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan ibn \`Abd al-Samad, popularly known as al-Shaykh al-Bahai, in
his book Zubdat al-'usul, writes: Ijtihad is a capacity (malakah) by
means of which one obtains the power of deducing the ahkam of the
Shari'ah. Some other scholars have also defined ijtihad in different
words that are close in meaning to this definition. Here we shall quote
two of them as specimen.

(a) Ijtihad is the manifestation of the capacity for discovering the
hujaj (pl. of hujjah) and adillah for deriving the ahkam of the Shari'ah
and the Practical Obligations (al-waza'if al-\`amaliyyah), whether
posited by the Shari'ah or affirmed by reason.

(b) Ijtihad is a capacity by means of which a faqih becomes able to
relate the minor premises with the major premises and thereby obtains a
hukm of the Shari'ah or an answer to a Practical Obligation.

**Critique of the Fourth Type of Definitions**

These definitions, also, are controvertible like the previous ones,
because firstly, they do not convey the real meaning of ijtihad, for
ijtihad per se is not a capacity; for had ijtihad been a capacity, its
addi­tion would have served an explanatory purpose, and such is not the
case here. Secondly, the titles that have been mentioned in traditions,
like 'faqih, arif, () nazir, () rawi, ()as in the widely accepted
tradition narrated by \`Umar ibn Hanzalah, and other such titles which
are mentioned in other riwayahs - are not applicable to one who merely
possesses the capacity, but apply only to those in whom the capacity has
reached the stage of actualization. Capacity (malakah) is a potential
ability; it may or may not reach the point of actualization. It is for
this very reason that the phrasehas to follow the words above
definitions.

Thirdly, the jurisprudential authorities (maraji taqlid) have set forth
three courses by way of al-wajib al-takhyiri in their handbooks of
rulings (rasa’il 'amaliyyah) and works of fiqh for the mukallaf (adult
person liable to perform religious duties); they are: ijtihad, taqlid
(imitation) and ihtiyat (caution).

If ijtihad be a capacity, it is not correct to put it by the side of
taqlid and ihtiyat; for taqlid and ihtiyat are concerned with actual
practice, while capacity is an inner psychic state. Accordingly, there
is no doubt that in the above statement about a mukallaf's duty ijtihad
is the de facto knowledge of the ahkam of the Shari'ah and the Practical
Rules derived from the sources of the Shari'ah.

**Further Clarification**

It is evident that the actual ahkam issued by the Sacred Lawgiver (like
obligatory duties and impermissible acts, etc.) are known to apply to
all the mukallafun. This essential knowledge with the possibility of
chastisement is before every mukallaf. And since every sane person
essentially knows that God Almighty has prescribed certain duties for
him, his rational faculty enjoins him to comply with the dictates of
reason in comprehending his duties, and to obtain the certainty of their
fulfilment; and - as is said in \`ilm al-'usul - the certainty of
execution brings the certainty of fulfilment.

Anyone who is in quest of the certainty of fulfilment (of his duties)
and wants to tread the path which can assure him that he has performed
all the Shari’i duties assigned by the Supreme Lawgiver, will have to
perform one of these three things:

1. He should himself perform ijtihad and comprehend his duties,
according to the criteria, from the sources of the Shari'ah.
2. He should follow the rulings of an all-round (jami\` al-shara'it)
mujtahid.
3. He should choose the path of ihtiyat (i.e., among other things,
refrain from every act that is not known for certain to be
permissible).

In any case, it is essential to take one of the paths; for if one does
not act or abstain from performing a certain act in accordance with one
of these courses, he faces the possibility of Divine chastisement. The
rational faculty of every mukallaf individual considers it essential to
avoid every possible harm and punishment; and to avoid such a danger is
not possible except by following either the path of ijtihad, or taqlid
or ihtiyat. Thus, we see that ijtihad, as one of the choices, is de
facto com­prehension of one's duties from the sources of the Shari'ah
that results in avoiding possible chastisement; mere possession of the
capacity to comprehend one's duties cannot be regarded as ijtihad;
rather, it means: the identification of the ahkam, their deduction, and
acting according to them.

Accordingly, a rnujtahid' who possesses the capacity of ijtihad alone,
but does not employ the usul and principles for deriving the ahkam is
not different from a non-mujtahid; for, in the same way as a
non­-mujtahid faces the possibility of chastisement in performing of
acts and abstaining from them, a mujtahid who does not use his capacity
of ‘ijtihdd is equally exposed to such a danger.

Thus, anyone possessing the capacity of ijtihad should be either a
mujtahid who has derived the ahkam of the Shari’ah from its sources, or
he should be a muqallid or muhtat; otherwise, he shall not be secure
from chastisement. Anyone who is endowed with the capacity of ‘ijtihad
but has not reached the practical stage of deriving the ahkam of the
Shari'ah may be called a \`mujtahid'; but as far as practice is
concerned he is not different from a non-mujtahid. In any case, ijtihad
should be defined in a manner that is free from such flaws.

**A Misconception**

Some people believe that the capacity of ijtihad is similar to some
other traits (like generosity, justice, valour, etc.), which is acquired
after practice and exercise in deriving the ahkam of the Shari'ah, in
the same way as other qualities reach the stage of actualization after
repeti­tion and practice.

They reason that, as in the case of some qualities and traits which are
not separable from action (generosity is not separable from acts of
generosity, justice is not separable from acts of justice, valour is not
separable from deeds of valour) ijtihad also is not separable from
deduction of the ahkam of the Shari'ah. Accordingly, whosoever
pos­sesses the capacity of ijtihad has inevitably derived the ahkam of
the Shari'ah from its sources, and this necessarily makes him secure
from chastisement. Hence the above definition is correct.

This argument is not valid, for the capacity of ijtihad is not similar
to other qualities. Other qualities cannot be actualized without many
attempts and persistent repetition, but the capacity of ijtihad can be
acquired without deducing any hukm. For instance, the quality of valour
is acquired by repeatedly exposing oneself to danger and through
performance of acts involving danger, because their continuation
grad­ually drives out fear from the heart, to the extent that one can
take part in big battles without any fear and nervousness in his heart.
Similar is the case with generosity and self-denial: repeated
performance of the act of generosity leads man to such a point when he
can bear to be thirsty and hungry in order to feed others.

Therefore, the realization of these qualities needs repeated
per­formance, whereas the capacity of ijtihad does not need any such
prac­tice. On the contrary, unless one possesses the capacity of ijtihad
and the ability to derive the ahkam, he cannot perform ijtihad and
derive ahkam of the Shari'ah. Hence it is the exercise of deriving which
is dependent upon the capacity, not the capacity on repeated derivation.
It is possible for a person to possess the capacity of deriving the
ahkam without having derived even a single hukm; as the capacity of
ijtihad depends upon learning certain sciences like Arabic grammar and
syntax, vocabulary, tafsir, rijal and \`ilm: al-'usul, etc., whose
knowledge enables one to derive the ahkam of the Shari'ah. Therefore,
the act of derivation from the viewpoint of realization is posterior to
the capacity - contrary to other qualities whose realization follows
performance.

It is true that extensive derivation and repeated employment of the
capacity of ijtihad. can enhance this faculty, but this has nothing to
do with its actual realization and existence.

In short, ijtihad in the sense of faculty does not guarantee security
from Divine chastisement, or repel its potential danger from the
mukallaf. It cannot be placed in the category of taqlid and ihtiyat
either, for that which is equivalent to taqlid and ihtiyat is the
knowledge of the ahkam from the Shar'i sources. Hence ijtihad should be
defined in a way which is not open to such objections.

Some other scholars have defined ijtihad in yet another way. \`Abd
al-Wahid al-Khallaf says: Ijtihad means employment of effort and
en­deavour for understanding the ahkam of the Shari'ah for issues for
which there is no specific express text (in the Book and the Sunnah), by
exercising ray and subjective judgement, as well as by using other
methods for deriving the laws of the Shari'ah. [^38]

**Critique of the Fifth Definition**

This definition is also objectionable like other definitions, but, as
we shall see in the discussion about ijtihad bi al-ray and subjective
judgement, in Islamic fiqh valid ijtihad means employment of effort for
deriving the ahkam of the Shari'ah for emergent and contingent issues
from the Shar\`i sources (the Book, the Sunnah, ijma\` and \`aql), not
the exercise of one's subjective opinion and judgement. We shall
elaborate on this matter later on and there we shall see that no
individual - even the Prophet (S) - may legislate laws by exercising
personal judgement; for legislation is exclusively a Divine
prerogative.

In Islamic law there is a hukm for every issue, either as a particular
or a general law. As for the issues for which no express text exists, a
mujtahid can derive laws by applying to them the general laws of the
Book or the Sunnah. Therefore, in emergent issues a mujtahid is required
to discover an express Shar'i text, and whenever he is unable to
dis­cover such a proof or express text, he has to secure an \`apparent'
hukm (al-hukm al-zahiri) for the mukallaf from such Practical Rules as
Bara'ah, Takhyir, Istishab, etc.

According to Abu Bakr al-Razi, the term ijtihad has been applied to the
following three meanings: (1) Qiyas, when the cause (\`illah) does not
lead to the hukm, for it may not possibly contain the hukm (on account
of its being an incomplete and not a complete cause). As a result, the
cause does not lead to certainty about the desired hukm, which has to be
based on ijtihad and derivation through ray. (2) Any­thing that gives
rise to presumption without the existence of a cause, like ijtihad
regarding time, direction of Qiblah, price of a commodity, etc. (3)
Argument based on usul for positing a hukm of the Shari\`ah. [^39]

This statement is also objectionable; for, of the three points that
which can relate to the technical sense of ijtihad, the first one -
i.e., derivation of ahkam by means of qiyas - is invalid from the Shi'i
point of view. The second meaning also is not right, as giving
judg­ments about ordinary external details is not the duty of the
mujtahid. In the third point, ijtihad is used in a general, non-specific
sense, as it includes qiyas and other things also.

The great jurist Akhund al-Kurasani has defined ijtihad as employ­ment
of one's powers for acquisition of hujjah regarding the ahkam of the
Shari\`ah. [^40]

Another scholar has defined ijtihad as effort and endeavour made in
deriving the far’i ahkam of the Shari'ah, or securing legal validity
through (the study of) its elaborate adillah. If the criterion of the
validity of an act is considered acquisition of hujjah, the above given
definition is safe from the objections raised against the earlier
definitions, as hujjah is inclusive of: certainty; the adillah that lead
to certainty (such as reliable usul and dicta); and presumption, in
accordance with the Sunni outlook. Similarly the term hujjah covers
presumption during the period of closure of doors of certainty, in
accordance with the belief of those who believe in such a closure.

Accordingly, employment of effort for securing legal validity in regard
to the ahkam of the Shari'ah is no doubt regarded as ijtihad, whether
the hujjah leads to certainty or is based on a dalil; and it does not
make any difference whether it gives rise to presumption or not.
Accordingly, the earlier objections cannot be raised against this
defini­tion.


