The Qur'an On Muhkamat and Mutashabihat
=======================================

The first verse of the Surat Hud states:

"A Book whose verses are set muhkam .... "

This can be taken to mean that all the Qur'anic verses are muh­kamat.
However, the twenty-third verse of the Surat al-Zumar states:

God has sent down the fairest discourse as a Book,
consimilar.(mutashabihan) in its opt-repeated.

This can be interpreted to mean that the entire verses of the Qur'an
represent mutashabihat. The seventh verse of the Surat Al \`Imran
states: It is He Who sent down upon thee the Book, wherein are muhkam
verses that are the umm al-Kitab, and others are mutashabih. (3: 7) From
this verse, it can be inferred that the Qur'anic verses are of two
kinds; some are "muhkamat" and some others "mutashabihat. "

One's first unstudied impression concerning the above verses is that
they may seem contradictory. However, on a close examination it will
become clear that there is no such contradiction whatsoever. For the
first verse, which implies that all the Qur'anic verses are muhkamat,
signifies that the Divine verses are firm and muhkam in regard to their
words and phrases, their arrangement, as well as their meaning and
simi­lar other aspects. They do not contain any kind of weakness or
infir­mity whatsoever.

The meaning of the second verse quoted above is that all the verses of
the Qur'an are similar (mutashabih) in their harmony, consistency,
sublimity, clarity, eloquent delivery and miraculous nature. There is
neither any disharmony nor any inconsistency in them.

The third verse implies that some of the Qur'anic verses are
self-­contained, in that their sense does not depend for their full
compre­hension on that of the other verses, and these are clear and
muhkam. The other verses which are not such are labelled mutashabihat.
This explanation ought to suffice for dispelling any impression of a
contradiction.

**A-Shayhh al-Tusi's Remark:**

The great Islamic scholar al-Shaykh al-Tusi says something
illumi­nating in this regard. He states:

Among these verses, there is no inconsistency or contradiction. The
first verse denotes that the Qur'an is not vulnerable to any
inconsistency or contradiction in its verses. Accordingly, the verses
are considered muhkamat. The second verse conveys the similarity of some
verses with some of others. How­ ever, the third verse conveys that the
meaning of some verses is comprehensi­ble, and that of some other verses
is not so. The meaning of these three verses is nothing except that
which has been mentioned. Hence there remains no basis for sensing a
contradiction.

Examples of Muhkamat and Mutashabihat:

Here it would be proper to give some examples of muhkamat and
mutashabihat in order to illustrate their character. Here are some
ex­amples of the muhkamat:

God is the creator of every thing..., (39: 62)
Verily, God is powerful over everything. (2:20)
He has not begotten, nor He has been begotten. (112:3)
... Nothing is like Him .... (42:11)

The meaning of the above verses is quite distinct and clear. They can
be understood without any reflection. The following is an example of a
mutashabih verse:

Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three quru' .... (2:228)

In the above example, the word quru' has two different meanings in
Arabic. One meaning is menstruation (haya) and the other is purity from
menses (tuhr). Because of this a kind of doubt has come about for
jurisprudents "in understanding it. Some of them interpret it as
\`purity', while others take it to mean \`menstruation.' In the
following verse:

...Or he makes remission in whose hand is the knot of marriage ....
(2:237)

it is not clear whether the one who makes remission is the guardian or
the husband, for it can mean either of them. In another example:

O believers, when you stand up to pray, wash your faces, and your hands
up to (ila) the elbows .... (5:6)

it is not clear whether the word ?? is used in the sense of inclusion
or in the sense of \`extreme limit' and whether the extremity is to be
included, from the viewpoint of the rule of ablution, in the part of the
hand to be washed or not. Furthermore, in the verse:

...And if you can find no water, then have recourse to wholesome
dust..., (4:43)

the meaning and significance of the word said is not clear. It can be
understood to mean either the \`ground surface' or \`soil.' Also, in the
case of the verse:

...And wipe your faces and your \`hands'..., (4:43)

it is unclear as to whether or not the word aydi (hands) indicates only
the back of the palm, or includes the wrist and the forearm, or includes
the forearm and the elbow, or the forearm together with the elbow and
the upper arm.

In another verse: (or if you have touched women [ 4:43 ]) the meaning
and significance of the word lams (touch) is unclear as well. Does it
mean touching by the hand or sexual inter­course?

There are many other examples, including some cited below:

...Then He sat upon the Throne ....(7:54)
...Yet the Face of thy Lord abides ....(55:27)
...And I breathed in him (Adam) of My Spirit ... (15:29)
...God's hand is above their hands ...(48:10)
...And We shall set up the just balances for the Resurrection
Day...(21:47)
And thy Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank. (89:22)
...And they devised, and God devised .... (3:54)

There is some ambiguity or the other in all the above verses. Their
proper understanding requires a comprehensive and expert knowledge of
the Islamic sources and Qur'anic concepts, necessitating in particular
reference to the Ahl al-Dhikr, the Household of Revelation, about whom
the Glorious Qur'an says ... Question the People of the Remembrance, if
you do not know. (21:7)

**The Hidden Meanings of Qur'anic Verses**

Just as the Qur'an contains mutashabihat and mujmalat, it also contains
hidden meanings. That is, besides the literal meanings of the words and
their apparent, ordinary sense, other meanings and concepts underlie the
same that are beyond the grasp of many. Just as the mutashabihat and
mujmalat cannot be understood without reference to the Ma'sumun (A), the
grasp of what lies beyond the apparent meaning of Qur'anic words, too,
cannot be attained without reference to the Household of the
Revelation.

Marhum \`Allamah Majlisi, in his most precious book Bihar al­'anwar
(vol.92, p.78)has reported a hadith:

Verily, the Qur'an came down on seven letters. Every one of its verses
has an exoteric and esoteric aspect, and every one of its letters has a
hadd (lit. limit) and matla' (lit. beginning). In Hilyat al- awliya',
Abu Nu'aym has quoted the above hadith in the following manner:

Verily, the Qur'an has come down on seven letters. Every one of its
letters has an exoteric and esoteric aspect, and every verse is with
'Ali (A).

Al-'Imam al-Sajjid (A) says:

...The Book of God is constituted of four things: \`ibarah (diction,
text), isharah (indication), lata'if (subtleties) and haqa'iq
(realities). The \`ibarah isfor the common people, isharah is for the
elect, lata'if are for the awliya' and haqa'iq for the prophets. (Bihar
al-'anwar, vo1.92, p.20)

Al-'Imam al-Baqir (A) says:

The Qur'an has a batn (inward or esoteric aspect) and that batn (in
turn) has a batn. And it has 'a zahr (outward or exoteric aspect) and
the zahr has a zahr ... and there is nothing farther from the intellect
of men than tafsir of the Qur'an. The beginning of an ayah may concern
something and its end some other thing, and it is continuous speech that
is susceptible to different interpretations. (Bihar, vo1.92, p.95)

Zayd al-Shahham reports: Qatadah ibn Da'amah came to Abu Ja'far (A).
The Imam (A) asked him, "Are you the faqih of the people of Basrah?"
"That is what they say," replied Qatadah. Abu Ja'far (A) said, "I heard
that you ex­pound the Qur'an" ....(the tradition goes on until where the
Imam says to Qatadah). "Woe to you, O Qatadah! Only those to whom the
Qur'an has been addressed understand it." (Furu\` al-Kafi, vol.8,
p.312)

Anyhow, it is definite that one cannot understand a part of Qur'anic
meanings and Islamic teachings without reference to the Awsiya' of the
Prophet (S). No doubt, those who feel it to be unneces­sary are bound to
fall into error in regard to the mutashabihat of the Qur'an, to the
extent that instead of referring the mutashabihat to the muhkamat they
may construe the muhkamat in their minds as mutasha­bihat. This has led
to deviations in the doctrinal sphere, leading to belief in
anthropomorphism (tashbih), determinism (jabr), and absence of the
necessity of Divine Justice, not to speak of the adverse effects on
deduction of the laws of the Shari'ah and its practical rules and the
resolution of social problems.

The Qur'an and Khabar al-Wahid:

One of the controversial issues relating to inference of ahkam from the
Qur'an is that of the legitimacy of limiting the jurisdiction (takhsis)
of the Qur'an's general statements (\`amm) by khabar al-wahid (a non
­mutawdtir tradition). Difference of opinion exists in this regard among
Islamic scholars. Some consider such a takhsis permissible and others
regard it as impermissible. Of those who favour it, some have put
for­ward the argument that if the hujjiyyah (authority) of khabar
al-wahid can be substantiated by definite proofs, its use for the
takhsis of the Qur'an's general statements is permissible. It must be
added that a majority of Shiite \`ulama' believe in the permissibility
of such takhsis. Some, like \`Isa ibn Aban, believe that if a certain
general statement of the Book has been limited by a valid proof (dalil
qati) other than a khabar al-wahid, the tatter's use for the same
purpose becomes permissible. Some others, like al-Karkhi, have permitted
it in the particular case where the Book's \`amm has been restricted by
a separate proof (dalil munfasil).

Finally, some, like Qadi Abu Bakr, have refrained from expressing any
opinion at all in this connection.

However, those who believe in the impermissibility of such takhsis
(even when the khabar al-wahid is sahih and reliable), who belong to Ahl
al-Sunnah, have advanced arguments in support of their view. These
arguments are briefly stated and evaluated below.

**Arguments Against the Permissibility of the Takhsis**

1. Some have said that the Qur'an enjoys definite authenticity, i.e. it
is qat’i al-sudur, whereas the authenticity of khabar al-wahid is not
free from doubt because of probability of error on the narrator's part.
That is, it is zanni al-sudur. And it is not reasonable, therefore, that
a mukallaf person should forego something of definite authenticity for
something whose authenticity is only probable. In answer we might say
that the Qur'an is doubtlessly of certain authenticity; yet it is
uncertain (zanni) from the viewpoint of its indi­cating the real intent
of the Lawgiver, because one cannot be certain of having completely
understood the Lawgiver's intent from his under­standing of the literal
meaning of a verse or its general import and be certain that the general
import is not subject to any qualification or restriction.

Furthermore, we should take into consideration the occurrence in the
Qur'an of: (1) muhkam and mutashabih, (2) mutlaq and muqayyad, (3)
nasikh and mansukh, and (4) mujmal and mubayyin, etc. On the other hand,
although khabar al-wahid is zanni al-sudur, those who up­hold the
hujjiyyah of khabar al-wahid do not consider every such tradi­tion as
authentic and reliable. They have laid down certain require­ments which
a khabar al-wahid should fulfil in order to be considered reliable.

Accordingly, in the event a khabar al-wahid that has already been
proved to be reliable and valid conflicts with a general rule (\`amm)
deducible from the Book's literal meanings, there are two alternatives
in front of us:

(i) Setting aside and ignoring the khabar al-wahid, despite its
fulfil­ling the criteria of validity, and acting in accordance with the
general rule understandable from the Qur'an's literal meanings. (ii)
Adopting the valid khabar al-wahid as well as acting upon the verse by
limiting the Book's general rule by applying the reliable khabar
al-wahid. In this case we have neither gone against the khabar al-wahid
nor set aside the Qur'anic verse.

The scholars have selected the second alternative because they believe
that the khabar al-wahid is indicatory of the absence of a general
intent. In other words, since on the one hand the Qur'an is zanni
al-dalalah from the viewpoint of one's subjective understanding and
inference, and on the other hand the khabar al-wahid is ,zanni al-sudur,
it is inevi­table that we should give precedence to one of these two. In
the event the khabar al-wahid satisfies the criteria of validity, the
same fact would justify giving priority to it over the presumed general
import of the Qur'anic verse, and this will not give rise to any
difficulty. How­ever, when we act in a contrary fashion and give
precedence to the Book's \`amm over the khabar al-wahid, the question
will arise as to on what basis precedence is being given to something
which is zanni al­dalalah over something which is zanni al-sanad but of
proved reliabil­ity. This is a question to which a satisfactory answer
cannot be given.

2. Some have pointed out that there are traditions relating to the
resolution of conflict between traditions (\`ilaj al-ta\`arud bayn al-
akhbar). According to these traditions if the content of one of two
contradictory narrations happens to agree with the Qur'an, then that
narration should be accepted and the other one should be discarded.

The aforementioned traditions doubtlessly apply to any conflict between
a khabar al-wahid and the Book's general statement as well. Those
traditions make it all the more clear and definite that the khabar
should be discarded and the Qur'an's general statement should be acted
upon, for a tradition can never be construed as strong evidence to the
extent of opposing the Book. In reply we may say that without denying
the above-mentioned traditions and their applicability in the
appropriate context, it is neces­sary first to identify the area of
their applicability. It is to be seen whether or not they are relevant
to the topic of our discussion.

In fact, the above traditions are not relevant to the subject of our
present discussion. This is because contradiction between the Book and a
hadith can possibly exist only when the two are mutually exclusive,
blocking any possibility of a reconciliation, so that acting upon or
believing in both would constitute a contradiction. In other words, in
some cases there may be a conflict between a tradition and the essential
import of the Qur'anic text. In other in­ stances there may be an
incompatibility between a tradition and the general import of the
Qur'anic text. In the latter case, a reconciliation is possible, and the
tradition can be regarded as one that elucidates the Qur'anic text. This
will not constitute a case of contradiction between the tradition and
the Qur'anic verse.

3. Some have argued that those who favour the permissibility of the
takhsis of a Qur'anic \`amm through a khabar al-wahid are permitting a
special kind of naskh (abrogation), for naskh is also a kind of takhsis.
If the possibility of naskh on the basis of khabar al-wahid is not
acceptable, then the protagonists of takhsis ought to disallow the
takhsis of the Qur'an by khabar al-wahid.

In reply, we may point out that, firstly, naskh means the restric­tion
of the jurisdiction of a law in regard to time, whereas takhsis is its
limitation in regard to individual cases.

Secondly, the impermissibility of naskh through khabar al-wahid is
based on ijma \` (consensus). There is no such consensus regarding the
impermissibility of takhs'is through khabar al-wahid. Thirdly, naskh is
not something that can be proven or substantiated by a khabar al-wahid,
for the Qur'anic verses expound the principles and foundations of the
Divine ahkam and, as such, they ought to enjoy especial stability and
security. From this point of view, should any naskh occur therein, the
importance of the matter requires that the naskh be widely reflected and
reported by several narrators through mutawatir traditions.


