Qur'anic Exegesis Through Khabar Al-wahid
=========================================

Having made a cursory appraisal of the topic of takhsis through khabar
al-wahid, that of interpreting the Qur'an through khabar al­wahid too
may be discussed here. Some believe that such tafsir is not permissible.
They reason that the authority and reliability of khabar al ­wahid is
confined to the deduction of the practical laws of the Shari'ah. But
whenever a khabar al-wahid concerns doctrinal issues or pertains to the
historical events and anecdotes (qisas) mentioned in the Qur'an, or
concerns matter of social or moral significance, the grounds justifying
reliance on khabar al-wahid are not valid in such cases.

Since many Qur'anic verses pertain to issues other than those
con­cerning the ahkam, many traditions relating to tafsir pertain to
such issues. Accordingly, it can be concluded that, on the whole,
Qur'anic exegesis through khabar al-wahid is not lawful, except in the
case of Ayat al-'ahkam, which constitute nearly one-sixth of all the
verses.

In contrast, many of those who accept the hujjiyyah of khabar al-­wahid
also accept its general applicability for the purpose of interpret­ing
the Qur'an as well. In this regard, they do not make a distinction
between ayat al- ahkam and other verses. According to their reasoning,
the practice of rational people (sirat al-\`uqala) can be the best
testimony for the support of this viewpoint. This is because in the same
way as rational people accept definite proofs and mutawatir reports,
they also accept reliable proofs creating probability (dalil zanni). Of
course, if a khabar al-wahid is not reliable, it cannot be used for
interpreting the Qur'an. This is because, firstly, following a dalil
zanni of an unreliable kind is not permissible. Secondly, to ascribe
something to God with­out any justification is tantamount to ascribing a
falsehood to Him, which is reckoned as an unforgivable sin. Thirdly,
there are many ahadith which forbid tafsir based on subjective opinion
(ray), and those who indulge in it have been threatened with
chastisement.

In view of the foregoing, Qur'anic tafsir is lawful only when it is
carried out with reference to traditions which are mutawatir, or in
accordance with a definite proof or a khabar al-wahid of established
reliability. Qur'anic exegesis through unreliable traditions amounts to
interpreting it in accordance with one's subjective judgement and
ascrib­ing a falsehood to God, and this is prohibited. The point around
which all these judgements revolve is the essential need for
safeguarding the Qur'an as the source of all religious knowledge and
teachings. Just as the Qur'an has sanctity and credibility, its
exposition and explanation too should bear a seal of reliability.

**Role of Exegesis in Legal Deduction**

No doubt, the difference of viewpoint regarding Qur'anic tafsir has a
significant effect upon the process of a jurisprudent's deduction of
ahkam from the Qur'an. Hence a mujtahid cannot afford to be unfamiliar,
in the course of his work, with tafsir and its historical development
(to the extent that it has a bearing on legal deduction). Researchers in
the field of Qur'anic studies have identified three separate areas for
the sake of classifying and systematizing these studies:

1. \`Ilm al-tajwid, dealing with phonetics and the pronunciation of
consonants and vowels. 2.\`Ilm al-qira'ah; dealing with words, their
syllabication and com­position and the techniques of recitation. 3.
\`Ilm al-tafsir, dealing with the meanings of words, the historical
circumstances of the revelation of verses (asbab al-nuzul), etc.
Discus­sions regarding nasikh and mansukh, and muhkam and mutashabih
also re­late to \`ilm al-tafsir. Researchers in Qur'anic sciences have
compiled various books and treatises in this field. However, for reasons
of space, we shall refrain from mentioning them here.

The Mode of Revelation:

The temporal aspect of the Qur'an's revelation, too, has received
attention among the topics of discussion pertaining to Qur'anic studies.
However, it is difficult to visualize any effect of the aforesaid topic
on the process of legal inference from the Qur'an.

Some are of the opinion that the Qur'an was revealed all at once and
completely, although the Holy Prophet recited the same in parts in
different contexts. Some others believe that the Qur'an was gradually
revealed over a period of time, and its revelation, being in the
temporal order of its communication, was also gradual. Some of the
verses, like those of the Surat al-Qadr, apparently confirm the first
view, and some others, like verse 106 of Surat al-'Isra; are compatible
with the theory of gradual revelation. Be that as it may, this question
does not significantly affect ijtihad and the understanding of the
Qur'an, for it is an established fact that the Prophet (S) conveyed the
Qur'anic verses at different times and on various occasions and re­cited
them to the Muslims at Makkah and Madinah over a period of time. The
time, place and circumstances of revelation, however, do help in the
process of understanding the Qur'in. But the question as to whether or
not the verses were revealed at one time and completely or gradually and
in parts does not make any difference. Accordingly, we refrain from
further discussion in this regard.

**Makki and Madani Verses:**

The division of the Qur'anic vers6s into Makki and Madani is also a
topic of discussion in the Qur'anic studies. It does considerably affect
the understanding of the Qur'an and the Lawgiver's intent, and
conse­quently the deduction of ahkam. Experts and researchers have
consid­ered twenty of the Qur'anic surahs as Madani. Opinions differ in
respect of twelve surahs and the remaining surahs have been reckoned as
Makki.

Some investigators have sought for the distinctive characteristics of
Makki and Madani surahs. A close study of these qualities will in­dicate
the historical order of the exposition of different ethical, spiritual,
doctrinal and ritual issues. Al-\`Allamah al-Suyuti has specified some
special features of Makki surahs, as follows:

1. The Makki surahs contain verses that mention sajdah
(prostra­tion).
2. The name 'Makkah' occurs in some of them.
3. The phrase \`O people,' is used therein to address the Muslims in
general.
4. The stories of the prophets and of past peoples, as well as the
episode of Iblis (with the exception of Surat al-Baqarah), are narrated
therein.
5. The surahs begin with what are called al-huruf al-muqatta\`ah such
as etc.

The presence of these characteristics indicates that a surah is Makkan.
There are, of course, other characteristics of Makkan surahs that have
been pointed out, such as the shortness of the surahs and verses,
powerful phrases and expressions, reference to doctrinal issues, the
recurring oaths, arguments addressed to the idolaters and so on. But
these characteristics are not generally applicable, though they may be
of assistance to the researcher in pursuit of a more definite
view­point.

**The Different Readings:**

Another subject relevant to the study of the Qur'an and legal deduction
is the difference of readings. There are three matters that need to be
studied in this regard. (a) The reasons for the emergence of the various
readings.

(b) The identification of reliable and more common readings, both from
Sunni and Imami viewpoints.

(c) The effect of the difference of readings on the understanding of
the verses and the Lawgiver's intent and, as a result, on the deduction
of ahkam.

**a. The Reason Behind Variant Readings:**

At the outset when the Qur'an was collected and compiled, the scribes
and copyists wrote the text without using any diacritical points or
marks. They relied on their familiarity with the text for correct
reading. However, with the passage of time the readers of the Qur'an
faced difficulties in this respect and they came to read and understand
the verses in ways that differed slightly from one another. The
emergence of this difference compelled some experts on the recitation of
the Qur'an to take steps to specify the correct manner of reading. Seven
of such experts came to acquire fame. They were:

1. Ibn \`Amir: Abu \`Imran \`Abd Allah ibn \`Amir al-Dimashqi
(8-118/6269-736) was the expert of qira'ah among the people of Syria. It
is commonly said of him that he had learnt it under al Mughirah ibn Abi
Shihab. 2. Ibn Kathir al-Makki: \`Abd Allah ibn Kathir ibn \`Abd Allah
ibn Zadan ibn Firuzan ibn Hurmuz (45-120/664-737). According to a
tradition, he had learnt qira'ah from \`Abd Allah ibn Sa'ib al-Makhzumi.
But that which is widely known is that he learnt it from Mujahid. 3.
\`Asim al-Kufi: Abu Baler \`Aim ibn Abi al-Najud al-'Asadi (d. 127 or
128/745 or 746), according to various narrations that have come down
from him, had learnt qira'ah from Abu \`Abd al-Rahman al­Salami, who had
learnt it from 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (A).

4. Abu \`Amr al-Basri: Zabban ibn \`Ala' ibn \`Amman al-Mazini
(68r-154/687-770) was from Basrah and was an Iranian according to one
tradition. He had learnt qira'ah in Makkah, Madinah, Kufah and Basrah.
He was the most eminent qari of his period.

5. Hamzah al-Kufi: Abu \`Ammar Hamzah ibn Habib ibn \`Umarah ibn
Isma'il (80-156/699-772) belonged to the tribe of Tamim and was a Kufan.
According to the author of al Kifayat al-kubra wa al-taysir, he had
learnt qira'ah from Muhammad ibn \`Abd al-Rahman and Talhah ibn
Mu'arrif. According to the book al Mustanir, he had learnt it from al­
'Imam al-Sadiq (A). According to other traditions he had learnt it from
al-Mughirah ibn Muqsim, al-Mansur, Layth ibn Abi Sulaym, Sulayman ibn
al-'A'mash, and Humran ibn A'yan.

6. Nafil al-Madani: Nafi' ibn \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi Nu'aym (d.
169/785), an Iranian from Isfahan, had learnt qira'ah from the tabi'i
scholars of Madinah. 7. Al-Kisa’i: Abu al-Hasan \`Ali ibn Hamzah ibn
\`Abd Allah ibn Behman ibn Firuz (d. 189/804), according to Ibn
al-Jazari, had acquired the leadership of the qurra' of Kufah after
Hamzah. He had heard qira'ah from al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A), al-\`Azrami,
and Sulayman ibn Arqam, and learnt it from Hamzah, Muhammad ibn \`Abd
al-Rahman and \`Isa ibn \`Umar.

**Later, other names that were added to these were the following:**

1. Khalaf ibn Hisham: Abu Muhammad Khalaf ibn Hisham ibn Taghlib
al-Bazzaz (150-229/767-843). He was from Baghdad and is said to have a
very powerful memory. Having memorized the Qur'an at the age of 10, he
began his study of qira'ah at 13.

2. Yaqub ibn Ishaq: Abu Muhammad Ya'qub ibn Ishaq (d. 205/ 820)
belonged to Basrah. He said that he had learnt the entire qira'ah in a
year and a half.

3. Qa’qa: Abu Ja'far Yazid ibn Qa'qa\` al-Makhzumi of Madinah was the
leading qari' of Madinah. He had learnt it from \`Abd Allah ibn \`Ayyash
and \`Abd Allah ibn \`Abbas.

This was a brief account of the ten qurra ; to whom four more names
were subsequently added: al-Hasan al-Basri, Ibn Mahid, Yahya ibn Mubarak
al-Yazdi and Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Shanbudhi. These came to be known as
"the fourteen qurra'. "For further details about them one may refer to
these books: Tabaqat al-qura ; Tahdhib al­-Tahdhib, Lisan al-mizan, and
,Tibat al-nashr fi al-qira’at al-\`ashr. A group of the Prophet's
Companions possessed special expertise and fame in the qira'ah of the
Qur'an. Having learnt it from the Prophet (S) they endeavoured to teach
it to others. Among the Tabi'un those who had learnt it from the Sahabah
and are well-known are:

\`Ubayd ibn \`Umayr, \`Ala' ibn Abi Riyah, Tawus, Mujahid, Ibn Abi
Malkiyyah in Makkah. Said ibn Musayyib, \`Urwah, Salim, \`Umar ibn \`Abd
al-\`Aziz, Sulayman ibn Yasar, \`Ata' ibn Yasar, Mu'adh ibn al-Harith,
\`Abd al­RahmAn ibn Hurmuz, Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, Muslim ibn Jundab and
Zayd ibn Adam in Madinah. \`Alqamah, al-'Aswad, Masruq, \`Ubaydah, \`Amr
ibn Shurahbil, al­Harith ibn Qays, Rabi\` ibn Khashim, \`Amr ibn Maymun,
Abu \`Abd al­Aahman al-Salami, and Zirr ibn Hubaysh in Kufah. Abu
\`Aliyah, Abu Raja', Abu al-'Aswad al-Du'ali, Nasr ibn \`,&4im, and
Yahya ibn Ya\`mar in Basrah.

Al-Mughirah ibn Abi Shihab al-Makhzumi and Khalifah ibn Sa'd in
Syria.

b. The Reliable Readings:

Now it should be seen to what extent the above-mentioned read­ings are
to be relied upon. Some scholars have divided the qira’atinto three
kinds: mutawatir, ahad and shadhdh. According to this division, the
qira’at of the seven qurra' have been considered mutawatir, the qird'at
of the other three as ahad, and those of the next four as shadhdh. Some,
like Jalal al-Din al-Balqini, have accepted this classification, while
al-Suyuti considers the tawatur of the seven qurra' as doubtful for the
following reasons.

1. Because they have been transmitted through akhbar ahad.

2. Because some of the seven qurra' were not reliable (muwath­thaq) as
narrators.

3. Because these qira’at depend on subjective judgement (ray) and
personal ijtihad of the qurra'. Had these been received through tawatur
from the Messenger of Allah (S), there would have been no need of a
proof to establish their authenticity.

4. Because some scholars have rejected some instances in the read­ings
of the seven qurra'.

According to al-Zarakshi in al-Burhan fi \`ulum al-Qur’an (i, 318),
those who believe in these seven qira’at being mutawatir do so on the
following bases:

a. They claim ijma\` on the affirmation of their tawatur.

b. They furnish evidence in favour of their authenticity on the basis
of the care exercised by the Sahabah and Tabi\`un in the memori­zation
and recitation of the Qur'an.

c. They argue that not to regard these qira’at as mutawatir
neces­sarily leads to regarding the Qur'an also as non-mutawatir.

That which is significant in this relation is that believers in the
tawatur of the seven qira’at put a special kind of reliance upon them,
to the extent of considering them as permissible bases for deduction of
ahkam. Those who deny that such a tawatur existed do not consider such a
reliance as legitimate. \`Abd al-Rahman al-Suyuti in his work al-Itqan
fi \`ulum al-Qur'an (i, 13.) states that Ibn al-Jazari has divided the
qira’at into six categories.

1. The readings which are mutawatir, having been narrated by so many
different narrators that any possibility of a conspiracy to establish
something false as true is not imaginable.

2. The mashhur readings whose narrators are \`adil although their
number does not reach the extent of tawatur.

3. The readings whose narrators are \`adil but are either different
from the writing of the \`Uthmani codices or are not in harmony with the
rules of Arabic grammar. This kind of reading should not be used in
reciting the Qur'an, in prayers or something else.

4. The shadhdh readings, whose chains of narrators are not sahih. An
example of it is the reading of Ibn Samigh\` of verse 92 of Surat Yunus,
in which is read with a ha' instead of jim and is read'with fathah on
the lam of . The reading of Hafs is

5. The reading which is maj\`ul or mawdu\` (fabricated) is one which is
ascribed to its author and has no other basis. An instance of it are the
reading mentioned by Abu al-Fadl Muhammad ibn Ja'far al­ Khuza'i (d.
408/1017) in his book al Muntaha that he has attributed to Abu
Hanifah.

One of such readings is that of the verse (35:28) with raf\` on 'Allah'
and nasb on al-\`ulama'. 6. Like the mudraj hadith, this is a reading in
which an expository word or phrase is added to the accepted reading of
the text. An instance of this kind is the qira'ah of Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas
of 4:12 as with the addition , Another instance of it is the qira’ah of
verse 2:198 as with the addition of the phrase For more details in this
regard one may refer to these books: al-Taysir dal-qira'at al-sab\` by
al-Dani, al-Shatibiyyah by Abu Muham­mad al-Qasim al-Shatibi, and Tibat
al-nashr fi al-qira'at al-\`ashr by Ibn al-Jazari.

c. The Effect of the Readings on Legal Deduction:

The difference of readings can influence one's understanding of the
doctrinal and ideological issues from the Our'an as well as effect the
deduction of practical ahkam. For instance, in the verse if the word
\`Allah' be read as marfu\` (as ) and al-' \`ulama' as mansub (), the
meaning becomes something which is not in harmony with Islamic doctrine
and ideology (for then if it means, "God is apprehensive of His
knowledgeable servants"). Rather, it would then be in accordance with
the belief of some non-Islamic modes of thought according to which the
prohibited tree in Paradise was the tree of knowledge and that God
expelled Adam from Paradise because of his inclination for knowledge.
But if the verse is read with nasb on "Allah " and raf ' on al-\`Ulama'
the meaning derived is the opposite of the above one and in harmony with
the other Qur'anic verses that constantly call man to knowledge,
understanding, contemplation and intellection, and consider the basis of
man's obedience and servitude to God to be his intellect and
consciousness.

Although such differences of reading are few, the knowledge of them and
complete familiarity with them is essential for someone who wants to
acquire expert understanding of the Qur'an, both the verses relating to
ahkam and other verses besides them. For instance, in verse 222 of Surat
al-Baqarah, God Almighty says:

…..Go apart from women during the monthly course, and do not approach
them till they are clean. (2: 222)

There is a difference of reading regarding the word , some read it as
and others as . If read as it means that it is permissible to have
intercourse with a woman after her mensus have ceased but before she has
taken a ritual bath. If read as means that intercourse with her is not
permissible before she takes the bath. means' (until) they become clean'
and means \`(until) they clean', i.e. through a ritual bath. A group of
jurists belonging to different schools of Islamic law, including some
eminent Shi'i jurists, Abu Hanifah and his followers, have given their
faatwa according to the first reading. Another group, including Malik,
al-Shafi'i and Ahmad ibn Hanbal as well as some Shi\`i jurists have
given fatwa in accordance with the second reading.

By the way, a third viewpoint is found among the Sunnis according to
which \`taharah' in the verse is taken to mean washing clean of the
bloody locale, not bath. Among them are \`Abd al-Rahman al-'Awza'i, the
founder of the Awza'i school of law and Ibn Hazm, the second ranking
leader of the Zahiri school.

The reason for the divergence of views between the jurists is due to
the fact that the word tuhr is used in all the three meanings in the
Arabic tongue.

The Comprehensive Character of the Qur'an:

After this brief outline of legal studies relating to the Qur'an, it is
necessary to point out that the terms \`fiqh ; \`faqahah'and \`faqih' in
the parlance current in Islamic society convey a significance related
exclu­sively to matters of worship and ritual. As a result of it the
task of jtihad has practically been confined to about 500 verses, or
nearly one­sixth, of the Qur'an. Accordingly, the rest of the Qur'anic
verses have not been studied sufficiently from the viewpoint of
ijtihad.

But it is a fact that the fiqh, faqahah and tafaqquh which are
men­tioned in the Qur'an and many traditions as an activity possessing
sub­lime value are not what these terms have come to mean in our current
vocabulary. Rather, the meaning that they signify today may be
considered only a part of the real meaning of \`fiqh' and \`faqahah'
because the spirit of Islam is asocial and an all-embracing one. The
move­ment of the prophets has been a comprehensive and an all-embracing
movement which, for the purpose of developing spirituality, devotion and
observance of divine laws, has placed the reform of human society, the
purification and education of human beings, their moral develop­ment and
the implementation of social justice at the head of its pro­gramme.

Fiqh or tafaqquh includes the recognition and understanding of all the
values that the Messenger of Allah (S) has brought in his capacity as
the messenger and communicator of the revelation. Evidently, that which
the Prophet (S) has brought meets all the real needs of man and those of
his spiritual and material life. The Qur'an, obviously, occupies the
foremost arid the most fundamental position in the message. Accordingly,
attention to a part of its contents and neglect of its other parts
amounts to deviation from the straight path, which is condemned by the
Qur'an, which declares:

Those who say, \`We believe in part, and disbelieve in part,' desiring
to take between this and that a way - those in truth are the
unbelievers. (4:150-151).

And also says:

And (O Prophet) beware of them lest they tempt thee away from any of
what God has sent down to thee. (5:49). To limit fiqh to the ayat
al-'ahkam, and that too to a section of them related to prayer, fasting,
hajj and such matters of ritual as wudu', tayammum and so on, is
equivalent to the exercise of a selective, dis­criminatory approach in
relation to the Divine 8yat and ahkam - some­thing which has taken place
unwittingly and unconsciously. The same thing has been responsible for
the decline of the Muslim society after the first centuries of rising
glory. This is because the Qur'an and Sunnah that guarantee the
flourishing life of human society are the whole of the Qur'an and the
Sunnah in their uncompromised totality. If this totality is ignored or
neglected, that guarantee too shall cease to operate.

If we observe that the magnificent Prophet of Islam (S) was able to
mould a primitive and unlettered people within half a century into a
civilized, progressive and exemplary society with a system of political
and social life, law, morality and doctrine superior to all the other
systems that existed in the world of those days, that was because he
presented a perfect and multifaceted totality to the Muslims. This
totality in all its dimensions was understood, absorbed and put into
practice by genuine Muslims.

And if we observe that the same Islam lost its effectiveness in the
social arena after the passage of some centuries, that was because those
who were entrusted with the duty to safeguard its intellectual and
ideological frontiers had come to forget its totality and
comprehensive­ness, thus depriving Islam of its real power and
efficiency. The biggest factor in this crisis was the existence of the
unwholesome dominance of the tyrannical and despotic regimes that had
captured the leadership of Islamic society in the name of the Prophet's
khilBfah and produced rulers who in the impious state of ignorance and
intoxication stood up in the mihrab to lead Muslims in congregational
prayers. These rulers promoted. mercenary scholars and pseudo-fuqaha'
devoid of taqwa who served their interest and sent into exile the
committed, aware and authentic fuqaha' who strove to awaken the people
or often subjected them to martyrdom.

Elsewhere, while discussing the ninefold eras of the development of
fiqh that followed the period of legislation, the sevenfold eras in the
history of ijtihad, and the sixfold eras in respect of the exposition of
fiqh, we have shown the real faces of these pseudo-fuqaha' and
pseudo­mujtahids, pointing out their nefarious views in every period,
and revealed the havoc that has been wrought on the body of fiqh and
faqahah by these mercenaries in the garb of fuqaha' in their pursuit of
worldly gain. The harm done by them to fiqh was so serious that they
made fiqh, with its spring of ijtihad and all its effusive vigour and
dynamism, loose its relevance and withdraw into isolation in front of
the expansion of human knowledge and civilization, to the extent that
the people of the world came to believe that Islamic law has no solution
to the multifaceted problems of life.

Although in the early eras there did exist great fuqaha' and pious and
aware mujtahidun, but none of them had the free hand - which the wali-e
faqih does at the present - to take punitive measures against such
elements. But that which is certain is that they have been and shall
remain the object of history's censure. This is because they have made
the shining face of progressive Islamic fiqh to appear dark and clouded
and have distorted its features.

In any case, if we really intend to revive authentic fiqh and true
faqahah and if we have concern for the genuine life of Islam and the
Islamic Ummah and revival of the past glory and sublimity of the word of
tawhid, we should direct our understanding to the totality of the human
and the comprehensiveness of Islam in all its dimensions: devotional,
economic, political, legal and cultural in the spheres of social and
individual life. Only then can we use this invaluable source which is a
great Divine trust and the al-thaql al-'akbar, for the benefit of
humanity in the contemporary era.


