Section 3 : Factors Responsible For Emergence of the Practice of Ra'y
=====================================================================

**Factors Responsible for Emergence of the Practice of Ra'y**

At the most sensitive juncture in the history of Islam when the
Muhammadan Shari ah was in the course of expansion, the process of wahy
(revelation) was terminated and with it the epoch of tashri\`
(legislation). The losing of the era of tashri’ and the demise of the
Prophet (S) coincided with the emergence of diverse changes in the world
of Islam. These changes were the result of the spread of Islam in new
territories and alien soils, followed by new situations and problems
each one of which required an answer.

The passage of time did not offer any solution to the problems; rather
it added to their intricacy and their number as well. For, with time,
sometimes even the problems that had received exposition during the
period of tashri\` were lost in the mazes of ambiguity arising from
different narrations and riwayat (traditions), thus giving rise to new
obstacles in the way of determining the laws (ahkam). At this point,
while the Islamic Ummah had no access to wahyand had lost the biggest
source towards which they looked for the solution of their problems,
much greater problems cropped up, and this vacuum was felt more acutely
than ever before. Two different outlooks emerged in order to confront
this difficult situation in the newly-born Islamic society:

(a) The point of view that the authority for determining the Divine
ahkam and expounding the Quranic meanings belonged to the House of the
Prophet (S) after him, and that they alone, in accordance with the
Prophet's express decree, should be referred to for solution of the
problems and determination of the ahkam of the Almighty. Those who
believed in this outlook did not face any insoluble problem in the wake
of the cessation of wahy, as they knew well that their duty was to refer
to the Ma\`sumun (A). [^1]

(b) The view that there was no specified person after the Prophet to
interpret and determine the Divine commandments. Its proponents
maintained that the Book and the Sunnah of the Prophet (S) were the only
sources from which the ahkam regarding the new legal issues could be
derived.

Those who subscribed to this view-later to be known as "Ahl al­ Sunnah"
turned to solve their problems by referring to the Quran and the Sunnah;
but they soon realized that it is not at all an easy task to extract all
the ahkam of the Shari'ah from express Quranic texts(nusus) and the
Sunnah of the Prophet, and that they are not adequate to answer many of
the new issues.

This led the Ahl al-Sunnah into finding other ways and sources of
ijtihad and to put their trust in the practice of ray and personal
judge­ment and to rely on such sources for basing legal conjectures as
qiyas (analogy), istihsan, masalih mursalah, istislah, sadd
al-dhara'i\`, fath al­dhara'i; madhhab al-sahabi, shari\`at al-salaf,
\`urf, istidlal and so on as hujjah (possessing legal validity).

This was a sketchy description of what we shall discuss in detail
below.

**The Factors Which Generated New, Contingent Issues**

The emergence of new issues after the termination of the period of
tashri\` depended upon various factors:

1. Natural and ordinary factors related to the day-to-day life of the
Muslims.
2. Exceptional or extraordinary factors, like wars.

3. Islamic conquests and victories extended Islamic influence in Asia,
Africa and some European regions, and, in this way, diverse cultural
traditions stepped into the vast domain of Islam. On account of this,
new requirements and needs were felt in the same proportion, and Islamic
fiqh was bound to answer all of them, in addition to presenting
appropriate ahkam which could suit different environmental and social
conditions.

All these factors put strains on ijtihad and made deduction of the laws
of Shari ah more difficult for the Sunni community. This caused the Ahl
al-Ray-those who believed in the practice of ray- the Iraqi school of
jurisprudence, whose founder was Abu Hanifah al-Nu'man ibn Thabit
(80-150/699-767), and a large group of Sunni fuqaha' to reach the
conclusion that the express texts (nusus) of the Quran and the Sunnah of
the Prophet (S) alone, being limited, cannot provide an answer to the
new issues and problems, while the issues of daily life are countless
and ever-increasing. Accordingly, they were forced to rely on an ijtihad
based on ray and other such conjectural instruments that were devised
before him. This topic will be discussed in the article "Sayr-e
ta'rikhi-ye qiyas dar manabi-ye ijtihad" (the Historical development of
Qiyas as a Source of Ijtihad).

In the same period, the Shi'ah, who formed a section of the Islamic
society, also encountered the new problems that faced the society. They
also considered it essential to find solutions to the new problems. But
due to their particular point of view, they never came across the
above-mentioned strains when facing diverse situations, because, during
the days of accessibility to an Imam (A) they went to him for solving
their problems, and during the days when they could not find an access
to him or during his occultation they could solve the problems of daily
life by means of the usul and by using them in deriving the ahkam of the
Shari'ah. They never felt the need for having recourse to ijtihad by ray
and depending upon conjectural legal sources.

According to Ahl al-Sunnah, in instances where the nass of the Quran
and the Sunnah was not available, the mujtahid can legislate laws by
exerting his own personal judgement and ray and set them forth as divine
laws. But according to the Shi'i point of view, in Islamic law a
mujtahid has no right to legislate laws regarding new situations and
issues, as there is no need for a mujtahid to resort to tashri\` in
presence of the general juristic principles which already exist.

**Different Points of View Among Ahl al-Sunnah**

It is essential to mention this point here that the practice of ray was
not accepted by the Sunni community without any resistance, and the
different Sunni sects were not uniform in this regard. The Ahl al-Hadith
(the Hijaz school of fiqh), whose founder was Malik ibn Anas al-'Asbahi
(93-179/711-795), were a section of the Sunni community who forbade
every kind of ijtihad that crossed the limits of the Quran and the
Sunnah. Others who held this outlook were the Hanbalis, the followers of
Ahmad ibn Hanbal al-Shaybani (164-241/780-855), and the Zahiris, the
followers of Da'ud ibn 'Ali al-'Isfahani, knownas Abu Sulayman Zahiri
(200 or 202-270/815 or 817-883). In the beginning, however, Malik did
not subscribe to this outlook and approved the practice of ray.

Ijtihad, as accepted by the Shi'ah, involves the application of certain
essential and fundamental principles (usul) to secondary issues
(furu\`). This results in expansion of fiqh and the laws of Shari'ah in
the sense of development and emergence of new instances and diversity of
legal applications, and not through legislation of new laws.

But ijtihadin the Sunni sense implies tashri\` or legislation of laws,
which forms the part of the mujtahid's activity. In other words, in
Sunni fiqh, ahkamor the laws of Shari'ah also expand along with the
expansion and multiplication of the issues. The variety and number of
the issues and applications and their external and objective diversity
requires variety and diversity of the relevant ahkam. Many a time, the
general laws that cover those applications are not to be found in the
Book and the Sunnah, as if those ahkamhave no relationship with the
wahy. Like laws and regulations formulated by non-Muslim nations of the
world for their societies, they are also the product of the mind and
intellect of human individuals. On account of this, it is not legitimate
to acknowledge them as Divine commands and the laws of Islam. We shall
discuss this matter in detail later in this article-in the critique of
the Riwayahof Mu'adh. However, before that, we shall examine the
arguments advanced by believers in the practice of ray and its
support­ers.

**Arguments in Defence of Ra'y and Their Refutation**

The arguments extended by Sunni fuqaha' in favour of ijtihadby means of
ray can be divided into two main parts:

(1) the arguments derived from the Quran, and
(2) the arguments pro­duced from the tradition and Sunnah.

1. The Arguments Based on the Quran

In order to prove the validity of the practice of ra’y, the fuqaha' of
the Ahl al-Sunnah advance certain arguments from Quranic verses. Some of
them are the following.

1. Verily, We revealed unto thee the Book with the truth, that thou
mayest judge between mankind by that which God showeth thee (araka, from
the same root as ray) .... (4:105)

2. Thus We explain the signs for people who think. (10:24)

3. ....Thus We explain the signs for people who ratiocinate. (30:28)

Basing any argument upon these verses for proving the validity of the
practice under discussion does not appear to be proper. As the first
verse is particularly addressed to the Holy Prophet (S), it does not
include anyone else. Moreover, the phrase (by that which God showeth
thee) indicates that the Prophet (S) adjudicated among the people of his
Ummah according to that which was revealed to him by God in the Holy
Quran and not according to his own person­al judgement and ray. In fact
this verse conveys something contrary to the aims of the believers in
the practice of ray, as it acknowledges the presence of definite laws
revealed to the Prophet (S) as the only criteri­on and standard. This
issue has no relevance whatsoever to the validity of the practice of ray
in ijtihad. As to the second and the third verses, they also are not
concerned with the subject of the practice of ray. They specify the
significance and value of thinking and reflecting about the Divine
verses and the signs of God in creation, for such thought and reflection
leads man to the knowledge of God, strengthens faith, and guides him to
the cognition of the most fundamental of religious doctrines, which is
the knowledge of God.

**2. Arguments Based on the Tradition**

(A) It is reported in the Musnad of Ahmad ibn Hanbal al-Shaybani
(vo1.5,p.230) that the Prophet (S) while sending Mu’adh as a judge to
Yaman asked him: "On what shall you base your judgements?" Mu'adh
replied: "On the Book of God". The Prophet (S) asked: "But what if you
don't find it there?" Mu’adh said: "(Then I will act) according to the
Sunnah of the Apostle of Allah". The Prophet (S) again asked: "What if
you don't find it there[ too]?" Mu’adh said: (I will exert my own ray).
The Prophet (S) said: "Thanks to God who gave success to, His
Messenger". This tradition sounds to be explicit in confirming the view
that the Prophet (S) gave approval to ijtihad by means of exerting
personal judgement and ray.

(b) \`Umar in his letter to Abu Musa al-'Ash'ari, wrote:

Concentrate your understanding on that which goes on in your mind (i.e.
something which is not to be found in the Book and the Sunnah of the
Prophet) and draw an analogy between similar matters. Ibn Qayyim
al-Jawzi has expounded this Riwayahin his book A'lam al-muqi\`tn (vo1:1,
pp. 373-385).

(c) In the Sahih of al-Bukhari (Bab ajr al-hakim, vol. 4, p. 178) it
has been reported from \`Amr ibn al-\`As that the Prophet said that
whenever a judge gives a verdict according to his ijtihad, he will be
given two rewards if his judgement is right, and if it is not, he will
be given one reward.

Muhammad ibn Muslim also has recorded this Riwayahin his Sahih (Kitab
al-Aqdiyah, hadith No.150). Ibn Majah has recorded it in his Sunan (Bab
al-hakim, hadith No.2314) and Ahmad ibn Hanbal al­Shaybani in his Musnad
(vol.2,p.187).

(d) Dr. Mahmasani, in his book on the philosophy of legislation in
Islam, quotes a tradition in which the Prophet (S) is reported to have
said to Ibn Mas'ud:

Judge according to the Book and the Sunnah if you find (the judgement)
in the two, but if you don't find it there exert your own ray.


