Introduction
============

The *Hajj* in Islam, being incumbent upon a *mustati*, is not obligatory
for more than once in the entire lifetime (of an individual).

The obligation of *Hajj* is immediate for a *mustati*; i.e. the *Hajj*
should be performed in the first year of *istitaah* and any delay in it
is not permissible. In case of delay, the obligation still remains and
it should be performed in the following years.

If after *istitaah*, *Hajj* requires preliminaries like travel
provisions, these should be arranged for, so that the *Hajj* could he
performed in the very first year (of *istitaah*) In case of dereliction
of the individual such that he could not go on *Hajj* in that year, the
*Hajj* obligation remains and should be fulfilled later on under any
conditions, even if the status of *istitaah* is lost.

Conditions For The Obligation Of Hajj In Islam
----------------------------------------------

Several conditions make the *Hajj* obligatory, and without all of them
the *Hajj* would not he obligatory.

### A And B: Maturity And Sanity

*Hajj* is not incumbent on the children and the insane.

If a child is made *muhrim* for *Hajj* and becomes religiously mature in
the process of the pilgrimage, the *Hajj* would be acceptable as the
required *Hajj* of Islam.

One who thought that he was religiously immature and went on *istihbabi*
*Hajj* and then realised that he was religiously mature, cannot consider
his *Hajj* as the required *Hajj* of Islam, unless he had made the
*niyyah* to perform the *Hajj*, which the Divine Legislator (Allah the
Almighty) has decreed for him.

Atonement for hunting rests with the guardian. Other types of atonements
obviously do not rest with either the guardian or the child.

In *Hajj*, the childâ€™s guardian should procure sheep for sacrifice.

### C. Having Financial Istitaah, Physical Health And Ability, And Free Access And Sufficient Time

Financial *istitaah* means having provisions for the *Hajj* journey and
the means of conveyance for it. If the likes of these are not possessed,
something such as money or another commodity should be available for
possible use to obtain the required provisions. It is a condition that
the individual should financially afford his return trip. Other issues
related to *istitaah* will be subsequently explained.

For *Hajj* to become obligatory, the individual should be able to afford
expenses of departure and return. In addition, he should have whatever
is imperative for a living and sustenance such as a residence, household
appliances, automobile and the like, in accordance with his social
standing and honour. In case he lacks these things, he should possess
money or anything else with which he could provide them.

One who needs to get married and for whom abstaining from marriage would
result in disease or the commitment of sin and forbidden acts, and who
needs money for marriage, would become *mustati* when the marriage
expenses are met in addition to the *Hajj* expenditures.

If one has money owed to him and possesses the rest of the conditions
for *istitaah*, he should receive the amount owed to him if the due time
of payment has arrived provided he could obtain it without difficulty.
Then he should go on *Hajj*.

If one who does not afford *Hajj* obtains a loan to cover its expenses,
he will not become *mustati*, and the *Hajj* he performs will not be
considered the required *Hajj* of Islam.

One, who can afford *Hajj* expenses but has debt as well, should go on
*Hajj* if he has time for repayment and he is confident that when
repayment time comes he can afford to repay his debt. The same rule
applies to a case when repayment time approaches yet the creditor agrees
to defer repayment and the debtor is confident that he can repay it at
the determined time.

Apart from these two cases, *Hajj will* not be regarded as obligatory.

If the high expenses of the *Hajj* do not make the prospective pilgrim
unable to afford the pilgrimage, this will not remove the obligation of
*Hajj*, unless such expenses cause distress and difficulty for him.

For those who have extra equipment which they do not require at the
moment, and which if sold would cover the *Hajj* expenses, *Hajj* is
obligatory, provided that they meet all other conditions for the
pilgrimage.

If one doubts whether his property is sufficient enough to make him
*mustati* for *Hajj*, it is obviously necessary for him to study the
matter. There is no difference regarding the necessity of study and
investigation in this matter between the one who does not know the
amount of actual estimate of his property and the one who does not know
*Hajj* expenditures.

One who knows that under the normal conditions and the expenses of
*Hajj* he would not have *istitaah* but who believes that possibly
through study and investigation he could find ways to go on *Hajj* under
his present conditions, does not need to embark on such investigation.
But for one who does not know whether or not he has *istitaah* for
*Hajj* it is obviously obligatory to take proper stock of his present
financial conditions.

One who is employed to render services to the pilgrims and who could
meantime perform all *Hajj* rites and could earn his living upon return
would be considered as having *istitaah* for *Hajj*. *Hajj* is
obligatory for him and he would meet the requirements of the *Hajj* in
Islam, even though it is obligatory for him to be hired.

Among conditions for *istitaah*, the individual should be able to meet
expenses of his family (members of the household which are dependent on
him) until his return from *Hajj*.

In *istitaah* arising through competence, i.e. upon return from *Hajj*
the person has to engage in trade, agriculture, and industrial activity
or have property such as orchards and shops in order not to face
distress and difficulty in making his living, if he were able to engage
in a business befitting his place and position, it would suffice. If
upon return, he could make his living with allowance, it would also
suffice.

As a result, *Hajj* is obligatory for students of theological seminaries
who, upon return from *Hajj*, would require allowances of the
theological seminaries and who could make a living with such allowances.

Conditions for the obligation of *Hajj* *is* physical ability, as well
as openness of the route and availability of time. Therefore, *Hajj*
*is* not obligatory for a sick person who lacks the physical strength to
go on *Hajj* or who faces great distress and difficulty in doing so. The
same applies to a person to whom the route for *Hajj* *is* closed or who
faces time shortage such that he could not go *on* *Hajj* in due time.

If, while having *istitaah*, a person abstains from going on *Hajj*, he
will be committing a sin and is duty-bound to go on *Hajj* in any way
possible.

The *mustati* should personally perform *Hajj*. Deputation of *Hajj*
would not suffice for him, unless for one who cannot perform *Hajj* due
to old age and sickness.

One who is personally *mustati* cannot become a representative to
perform another person's
*Hajj*. If such a *Hajj* on deputation is performed, it will be null and
void.

If one who is required to go on *Hajj* pilgrimage passes away before
fulfilling this obligation, his *Hajj* should be performed with what he
has left behind, and a *Hajj Miqati* will suffice in such a case.

Miscellaneous Issues Of Istitaah
--------------------------------

A woman, who lacked financial means during her husband's lifetime,
acquires the financial means for *Hajj* after his death through his
inheritance, but since she has an illness that prevents her from going
on *Hajj* she will not be called a *mustati* and *Hajj* is not
obligatory for her. Likewise, if, after becoming a widow, she does not
have a job, farming or industrial occupation with which to earn a living
upon return from *Hajj*, she will not become *mustati*, even if what she
has received as inheritance is enough for her to go on *Hajj* and
return.

A woman whose marriage portion is equal to or more than the *Hajj*
expenses is a *mustati* for *Hajj*, provided she can obtain her marriage
portion without causing trouble and difficulty (for her husband).

A woman whose marriage portion is sufficient for *Hajj* and is owed the
same by her husband, since he cannot afford to pay it does not have the
right to demand the marriage portion and is not *mustati*.

If a person has a very expensive house and can go on *Hajj* with the
difference earned through selling it and buying a cheaper one, should
not sell the house if it is not higher than his status and position. In
this case he is not a *mustati*. If the house is more than his social
standing, he is a *mustati*, provided all other conditions are met.

Those who can meet the expenses of the *Hajj* journey through business
or other means and who upon return can meet a part of their expenses
through earnings such as preaching and the remaining part from
allowances through legal sources (theological schools) are *mustati*,
even if they need the allowance to meet their expenses upon return from
*Hajj*.

If one sells a piece of land or something else to buy a house, he will
not become *mustati* in case he needs the money to buy a house, even if
the money is sufficient to cover the *Hajj* expenses.

When the due time for *Hajj* arrives, the *mustati* cannot dispense with
his status of *istitaah*, and before this time, based on *ihtiyat wajib*
he should not dispense with the status *istitaah*.

If a person who was hired to go on *Hajj* on behalf of another person
who was not a *mustati* at the time of concluding the contract but who
before the *Hajj* became a *mustati* through means other than the sum of
the contract, should cancel the contract and perform his own obligation
of the *Hajj* in Islam.

Caravan attendants who arrive in Jeddah would become *mustati* if, while
serving the *Hajj* pilgrims, they are able to perform all *Hajj* rites
and rituals and meet all other conditions of *istitaah*, for instance,
having actual or potential means of earning a living and being competent
for a job or industrial and other ability with which they could earn a
proper living upon return. These persons should perform the *Hajj* in
Islam that fulfils their obligation of *Hajj*. If the caravan attendants
do not meet the required conditions, theyâ€™re not *mustati* and their
*Hajj* will be *istihbabi*, but they should perform the obligatory
*Hajj*, if they later become *mustati*.

It is incumbent on the physicians and other people who come to *miqat*
on duty and who meet all conditions of *istitaah* in *miqat* to perform
the Islamic obligation of *Hajj*, even though it is necessary for them
to carry out their duties as well.

One who has financial capability and meets other conditions of
*istitaah* should go on *Hajj*. Performing other good deeds such as
visiting the holy sites or building mosques will not substitute the
obligation of going on *Hajj*.

If, during the obligatory *Hajj*, the *mustati* were to make the
intention of *istihbab* due to negligence or on the assumption of not
having attained *istitaah*, or even consciously and willfully with the
aim of practice for performing the obligatory *Hajj* better the
following year, there is a degree of doubt for the fulfilment of *Hajj*
unless the intention for the *Hajj* was according to what has been
decreed by the Divine Legislator. On this basis, as a matter of
*ihtiyat*, he should go on *Hajj* the next year.

If the *mustati* passes away after putting on the *ihram* and entering
the Sacred Mosque, the
*Hajj* obligation will be removed from him.

If the deceased person was *mustati* in his lifetime and deliberately
delayed the *Hajj* pilgrimage, *Hajj* remains due on him and a *Hajj*
*Miqati* should be performed for him from what he has left.

For one who meets all the conditions of a *mustati* for *Hajj* but has
not performed it, the obligation of *Hajj* remains, even if due to old
age or an incurable disease it is not possible for that person to go on
*Hajj* in the latter case the person should send a representative to
perform *Hajj* on his behalf.

A wife does not require the permission of her husband to go on
obligatory *Hajj*, and she should perform her obligatory *Hajj* even if
her husband does not approve of her travelling for *Hajj*.

Family, in case of financial *istitaah* for which *nafaqah* is a
requisite, refers to a person's formal family, though it may not be
religiously qualified for his maintenance allowance.

**Question 1:** Suppose a person becomes ill in Madinah (say if he
undergoes an apoplexy) and is hospitalised for two weeks by the doctors.
If after convalescence, it is difficult to take him to Makkah to perform
the *Hajj* rites, what is his duty?

**Answer:** If it is the first year of *istitaah* and the person lacks
the strength, even for an emergency case, to carry out the *Hajj* rites,
the status of *istitaah* will become null and void, and the *Hajj* will
not be obligatory. If, however, it is not the first year of *istitaah*
and the *Hajj* is already incumbent on him and the person is despaired
of regaining health, then a substitute should carry out the rites of
*Umrah* and *Tamattu*.

**Question 2:** At present, those who want to perform the *Hajj*
pilgrimage should register their names in advance and make the necessary
arrangements. If the turn of a person takes several years to come, and
before the coming of the turn that person finds other means of going on
*Hajj* and borrows money and goes to Makkah, will such a pilgrimage be
considered the obligatory *Hajj* of Islam?

**Answer:** If *Hajj* has not already become incumbent and the person
cannot presently go on *Hajj* without borrowing money, *Hajj* is not
obligatory for him, and such a pilgrimage cannot be considered the
obligatory *Hajj* of Islam.

**Question 3:** I went on *Hajj* by borrowing money and receiving a
month's salary in advance. Since the person who lent the money fully
approved of my going on *Hajj* and did not need his money, would my
*Hajj* be regarded obligatory or not?

**Answer:** If your financial *istitaah* met the required conditions,
your *Hajj* will be correct and deemed obligatory, provided that you can
easily repay your debt later on. But if you obtained financial
*istitaah* by borrowing money, you have not become *mustati*, and your
*Hajj* will not be considered the obligatory *Hajj* of Islam.

**Question 4:** Based on lots drawn by the *Hajj* and Pilgrimage
Organisation, Allah (SwT) willing, I will be able to go on *Hajj* in the
coming years based on the following conditions:

(a) The entire expenses of the *Hajj* performed by my spouse and me have
been met by *khums* money.

(b) I am a schoolteacher and lead an ordinary life with continence.

(c) I do not have a house or an automobile of my own. I am a tenant in
every city where I work.

(d) I have ordinary housing appliances. In view of these conditions and
doubts raised by others about *Hajj* being obligatory for my spouse, and
me would our *Hajj* meet conditions necessary for obligation?

**Answer:** As per the conditions cited, if your spouse has enough money
to go on *Hajj* and return, she would be *mustati*. You would have
*istitaah* only when you have household appliances for yourself and your
family in accordance with your social position, and when upon return you
could make a living for yourself and your family through what you earn.

**Question 5:** If a person was *mustati* but neglected to go on *Hajj*
until he lost his turn, now that names are no longer being registered,
would it be permissible for him to perform *Hajj* by way of connections
and recommendations inside or outside Iran and through expending huge
amounts? This is because otherwise, his duty of fulfilling the
obligation would be delayed for years and he tears that, Allah (SwT)
forbid, he would be considered as one who has forsaken *Hajj*.

**Answer:** He should go on *Hajj* in any way possible if it does not
violate the regulations of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and in a way
that he would not face distress and difficulty.

**Question 6:** Supposing *Hajj* has not already become incumbent on a
person but while registering names for the *Hajj*, he became *mustati*.
Later on, he, however, faced financial problems and needed the money he
had deposited with the bank (for registering his name). Could he
withdraw the money or not? Would it make any difference if his turn
comes in the first year or in the next years?

**Answer:** Based on this supposition, he is not *mustati* and can
withdraw his money. It would make no difference.

**Question 7:** A person, who had to perform the obligatory *Hajj*
departed for *Hajj* from Pakistan, fell ill in Madinah but continued his
journey to Makkah in that condition, and passed away in a hospital in
Makkah before performing the *Hajj*. At the time of his death, his
entire property consisted of some money and a piece of land in Pakistan.
Given the fact that his money is not enough for *Hajj* on his behalf,
should his heirs sell the piece of land and hire someone to fulfill his
*Hajj*, or would the obligation of *Hajj* no longer be due upon his
death?

**Answer:** If he arrived in Makkah with the *ihram* for *Umrah*
*Tamattu* and passed away before performing *Umrah* or after completing
its rites, whatever he performed will be accepted and the obligation of
*Hajj* would be removed from him. But if he entered Makkah without
*ihram* for *Umrah* and passed away there, and in case *Hajj* had
remained incumbent on him, a substitute on his behalf should be hired
out of what he has left behind. A *Hajj* *Miqati* would suffice in such
a case. But if *Hajj* had not remained incumbent on him, he would not be
considered a *mustati*, and there is no need to hire a person to perform
*Hajj* on his behalf.

**Question 8:** If a person becomes *mustati* in *miqat* and performs
the obligatory *Hajj* of Islam, would it suffice or not? Would *kifayah*
be a precondition or not?

**Answer:** If he becomes *mustati*, it is sufficient, but he should
have *kifayah*.

**Question 9:** In cases where an organisation or body sends a person on
*Hajj* without asking him to do anything in return, would it be regarded
as *Hajj* *Badhli* and should it be necessarily accepted?

**Answer:** Provided that it is legitimate, it would be *Hajj* *Badhli*
if there were no commitment to do anything in return for it.

**Question 10:** A person has four sons, all of whom are married, and
can meet his annual expenses and has no debts, but he and his sons make
their living jointly from the same source of income. Now, since the
*Hajj* expenses of only two people can be met, is *Hajj* obligatory in
this case? If so, is it only incumbent on the father or on the sons as
well? If *Hajj* is incumbent on the sons, which one has the priority to
perform it?

**Answer:** One who has enough property to meet his *Hajj* expenses, go
to Makkah, and upon return afford a living, which befits him, is
*mustati* and should perform the *Hajj*.

**Question 11:** Having financial *istitaah* and being 72 years old, I
have been prevented from going on *Hajj* pilgrimage by the Health
ministry in accordance with domestic laws, as I am addicted to opium.
What is to be done from the viewpoint of *Sharia*?

**Answer:** If you were previously *mustati* but did not go on *Hajj*
pilgrimage, you shoulder the duty of going on *Hajj*. If previously you
did not have *istitaah*, you are not *mustati* under the present
conditions, unless you can abandon opium addiction, obtain the required
permit, and go to Makkah.

**Question 12:** If a person has capital or equipment and can sell part
of it to lead a comfortable life and go on *Hajj* with the difference,
would he be *mustati*?

**Answer:** If all the other conditions are met, he will be deemed
*mustati*.

**Question 13:** A person has an orchard that has not brought him any
income for several years but which, if sold, would cover his *Hajj*
expenses. He is sure that by the time the orchard bears fruit, he would
be old and retired and would be dependent on it for his living. Would
such a person be *mustati*?

**Answer:** If he has no source of income other than the orchard, he
will not be considered *mustati*.

**Question 14:** In the case of debt, how much money should a person
possess to have *istitaah*? In case he has the needed money but suffers
from cardiac ailment and has been notified by the physicians at the
*Hajj* and Pilgrimage Organisation that his pilgrimage might be
dangerous, should he substitute someone else?

**Answer:** If before attaining *istitaah* he fell ill and consequently
lacked the strength to go to Makkah, he will not become *mustati* and
there is no need to substitute someone else for *Hajj*. In addition,
financial *istitaah* would develop only when he has enough money for a
round trip and can easily repay his debt.

Niyabah In Hajj
---------------

Conditions of the *naib*:

a. Maturity

b. Sanity

c. Faith

d. Confidence in performing the rites

e. Knowledge of *Hajj* rites and rituals

f. Exemption from the obligatory *Hajj* that particular year

g. Having no excuses to abstain from certain *Hajj* rites

Conditions of one for whom a *naib* is hired:

For the obligatory *Hajj*, the person for whom a *naib* is hired should
be a deceased one, and in case he is alive. *Hajj* should be incumbent
on him, while he cannot personally go on *Hajj* due to an incurable
disease or old age. In the *Hajj* *Istihbabi*, this is not a condition,
and the person who hires a *naib* does not have to be mature and sane.
There is no need for the *naib* and one who hires him to have
familiarity. One who has not so far gone on *Hajj* and is *mustati* can
become a *naib* for another person.

Hiring a person who has little time for *Hajj at-Tamattu* and who is
compelled to perform the *Hajj al-Ifrad* is not correct for a person on
whom *Hajj at-Tamattu* is incumbent. But if the *naib* was hired with
ample time and then the time ran out, he should engage in *udul*. This
would suffice for *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*. The *naib* should be paid in
return.

One on Whom *Hajj* had become obligatory but had not gone on *Hajj*
pilgrimage in the first year of *istitaah* due to ailment or inability
to walk because of old age or of imminent distress and difficulty by
going on *Hajj* should hire a *naib* in case there is no hope of his
recovery. Based on *ihtiyat* *wajib*, he should immediately hire a
*naib*. If *Hajj* does not become incumbent on him, he will definitely
face no obligation in this regard.

When the *naib* performs the *Hajj*, the one who hired him does not need
to personally go on *Hajj* later even if the excuse he had no longer
exists. But if this excuse is removed before the completion of *Hajj*,
the pilgrimage on behalf will not suffice.

One on whom *Hajj* is incumbent, whether through having *istitaah* or
being duty-bound, should not engage in *niyabah* for another person.

If the hired person dies after *ihram* and entrance into the *Haram*,
(Sacred Mosque of the Kabah) this would suffice for the *Hajj* of the
one whom he represented. But if he dies after *ihram* and before
entrance into the *Haram*, it would not suffice based on *ihtiyat*
*wajib*. In this case there is no difference whether the *Hajj* was
supererogatory, by hire (on behalf), the *Hajj* in Islam or the
obligatory *Hajj*, the same decree that applies to one who goes on
*Hajj* in person would apply here.

If a *naib* is hired to carry out the religious duty of one who hires
him - as is the case for hiring the *naib* for *Hajj* - and if he dies
after *ihram* and entrance into the *Haram*, he deserves the entire wage
(of *naib*).

One who has gone to Makkah as a *naib* without having personally
performed the obligatory *Hajj* should follow the *ihtiyat* *mustahabb*
and, after *niyabah*, perform *Umrah* *Mufradah* for himself. This
*ihtiyat* is not binding. Nevertheless, it is highly recommended.

One who cannot perform some *Hajj* rites due to valid reasons cannot be
hired as a *naib* for *Hajj*. If such a person who has excuses not to
perform some rites, gratuitously and voluntarily goes on *Hajj* on
behalf of another person, this would not suffice.

Secondary Issues Related To Niyabah
-----------------------------------

The caravan attendants who are compelled to leave Mashar at midnight to
perform the required tasks in Mina or who have to accompany the weak
pilgrims to Mina, would be among those having excuses for not being able
to have *ikhtiyari wuquf* in Mashar. Therefore, their *niyabah* will be
invalid. But, if they have been hired as a *naib* before employment (as
a caravan attendant), they have to perform the *Hajj* and observe
*ikhtiyari wuquf*.

For a living person who can hire a *naib*, it would suffice to employ
the *naib* at the *miqat*.

One who performed the *Hajj* for the first time, say as a caravan
attendant, could go on *Hajj* as a *naib* for his deceased father or
mother, unless he was not *mustati* in the first year and has become
*mustati* in the next year.

*Ihram* would be incorrect for one who, as a *naib*, becomes a *muhrim*
at the Masjid ash-Shajarah and goes to Makkah where he realises he was
personally *mustati*. He should return and become a *muhrim* for his own
*Umrah Tamattu* and perform his own religious duties.

The condition of faith and belief of the *naib*, being a prerequisite
for *niyabah* in *Hajj*, also applies to other rites in which *niyabah*
is permissible, such as *ramy* and *tawaf*.

It is incumbent on the *naib* to perform the rites in accordance with
the decrees of his own *Marja* *Taqlid*.

A *naib* who, at the time of accepting *niyabah*, was fully capable of
representing another person at the *Hajj* but who has an excuse at the
time of becoming a *muhrim* or even before, could continue his *niyabah*
if his excuse does not make him violate some *Hajj* rites. But if his
excuse makes him violate some *Hajj* rites, the contract for his
*niyabah* could be declared null and void. Based on the *ahwat*, the
*naib* and one who has hired him should make a compromise on the
former's wages, and the duty of the *Umrah* and *Hajj* would be vested
with the latter.

Gratuitous or wage earning *niyabah* is not acceptable from those hired
to render services and unable to have *ikhtiyari wuquf* in Mashar, as
well as all other people who have excuses and who have performed such
incomplete forms of *Hajj*. Their *niyabah* would not be acceptable as
the *Hajj* of the persons who have hired them, and they do not deserve
wages.

One who cannot perform the *ikhtiyari* rites of the *Hajj* is exempt and
cannot become a *naib*.

The *niyabah* of a person who lacks the ability to correct his *qiraah*
is null and void. If he has the ability, the *niyabah* of such a person
is valid, provided he corrects his *qiraah*.

**Question 1:** Suppose a person who registers his name, receipt of
payment, and specifies in his will that after his demise his son should
go on *Hajj* and perform it on behalf of him, passes away. Upon the
father's death, the son obtains financial *istitaah* but he can only go
on *Hajj* using his father's receipt of payment. Now by using this
receipt and arriving at *miqat* should he perform the *Hajj* on behalf
of his father? Or would he obtain *istitaah* and have to perform *Hajj*
for himself.

**Answer:** The son can go on *Hajj* using the receipt based on his
father's will in case the will for what is additional to the *Hajj*
*Miqati* does not exceed one third and the heirs have allowed it. He
should perform the *Hajj* on behalf of his father.

**Question 2:** In the past two cases, if the son shoulders the duty of
performing *Hajj* on behalf of his father but performs his own *Hajj*,
would it be considered his obligatory *Hajj* of Islam or not?

**Answer:** No.

**Question 3:** A person's father who was *mustati* passes away. The son
takes his father's receipt and goes on *Hajj* with the intention of
representing his father. He reaches *miqat* where he himself is
*mustati*. What should he do? I should explain that there is no will.
Nor has he been asked to engage in *niyabah*. For instance, he was the
sole heir and *Hajj* would not be possible for him unless in this way.

**Answer:** In this case, he should perform his own *Hajj* and hire a
*naib* for his father.

**Question 4:** Being responsible for the *Hajj* caravan, I had to take
care of the sick and disabled people in my group and, therefore,
performed *idhtirari* *wuquf*. Please explain my religious duty.

**Answer:** If you accompanied disabled and sick persons who had excuses
not to engage in *ikhtiyari wuquf*, here is no problem for you. But if
served as a *naib* for someone else, your *niyabah* would not be
acceptable.

**Question 5:** A person served as *naib* for a deceased person without
having any excuses not to perform some *Hajj* rites at the time of being
hired as *naib*. But several years after performing the *Hajj*, he
realised that in the Mashar al-Haram he had engaged in *idhtirari*
*wuquf* with women and sick persons for whom he was guide and went to
Mina. He was unaware of the fact that the *naib* should engage in
*inkhtiyari* *wuquf*. What duty does he shoulder?

**Answer:** This should not have been done on a *Hajj* in which he was
hired as *naib* and he does not deserve any wages. In terms of the
wages, he should refer to the person who hired him. Or in case his
contract for *niyabah* has not expired, he should once again go on
*Hajj* as a *naib* and correctly perform the rites.

**Question 6:** My late father had stated that his eldest son should go
to Makkah on his behalf. I am the eldest son and have become *mustati*
with the inheritance. So far, I have not been able to convert my share
of the inheritance into cash. Under such conditions, can I perform the
*Hajj* on my father's behalf or not?

**Answer:** Supposing that you have financial *istitaah* through
converting your share of the inheritance into cash, you should primarily
perform your own-obligatory *Hajj* and later on perform it on behalf of
your father or hire a *naib* for him.

**Question 7:** A lady for whom the *Hajj* was obligatory said in her
last will that the executor of her will should go on *Hajj* on her
behalf using money from what she left behind. Now the executor of her
will has physical, financial, and other types of *istitaah*, but has not
registered name for *Hajj* based on an excuse and lacks *istitaah* for
travelling. Could the executor of the will engage in *Hajj* *Niyabi*?

**Answer:** If the executor of the will did not previously have
*istitaah*, if the route is not open to him now, and if he is not
*mustati*, he can be hired for *Hajj* *Niyabi*. But if he can reach the
*miqat* without being hired, he should not perform *Hajj* *Niyabi* and
should perform his own *Hajj*.

**Question 8:** While hiring someone for *Hajj*, if the person hiring
the *naib* is unaware that the latter has excuses and hires him, would
the *niyabah* wages be halal for the *naib*? Would his *Hajj* *Niyabi*
be correct and be considered the obligatory *Hajj* of Islam or other
type of *Hajj* for the one who has hired him?

**Answer:** In case he had an excuse and was hired, he does not deserve
wages and it would not suffice for the *Hajj* *Niyabi*.

Types Of Umrah
--------------

As with *Hajj*, *Umrah* also falls into two types: obligatory and
recommended. *Umrah* would become incumbent only once in the lifetime of
one who has *istitaah*. As with *Hajj*, its obligation is immediate. In
its obligation, there is no requirement for having *istitaah* for
*Hajj*. If one were *mustati* for *Umrah*, it would become incumbent on
him to perform, even if one is not *mustati* for *Hajj*. The opposite
also holds true: If a person has *istitaah* for *Hajj* but is not
*mustati* for *Umrah*, he should perform the *Hajj*.

But for those who are away from Makkah, such as the Iranians who
shoulder the duty of *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*, the *istitaah* of *Hajj* and
the *istitaah* of *Umrah* would be the same, as *Hajj* *at-Tamattu* is a
combination of both. This is contrary to the case of people who are in
Makkah or close to it. They shoulder the duty of *Hajj* and *Umrah*
*Mufradah*, for one of which they should have *istitaah*.

Getting into the state of *ihram* is compulsory for anyone who wants to
enter Makkah to get to the state of *Umrah* or *Hajj*. If he wants to
enter Makkah sometime other than the *Hajj* season, he should perform
*Umrah* *Mufradah*. This does not apply to one for whom only a month has
passed after *ihram*. In such a case, *ihram* is not necessary.

Going on repeated *Umrah* (more than once), like going on *Hajj*
repeatedly, is *mustahabb*. Spacing is not needed between two *Umrah*,
but based on precaution, one can perform only one *Umrah* for himself
every month. Each person can however, perform an *Umrah* on behalf of
others.

Types Of Hajj
-------------

The *Hajj* in Islam is of three types: *Hajj at-Tamattu*, *Hajj
al-Qiran*, and *Hajj al-Ifrad*. Those who live over 48 miles away from
Makkah should perform *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*, while *Hajj al-Qiran* and
*Hajj al-Ifrad* are incumbent on others.

Hajj Al-Ifrad And Umrah Mufradah
--------------------------------

A person who cannot perform *Umrah* *Tamattu* due to shortage of time
should go on *Hajj al-Ifrad*. With the same *ihram* for the *Hajj*
*at-Tamattu*, he can perform the *Hajj* *al-Ifrad* and go to the plain
of Arafat and embark upon *wuquf* like other pilgrims. He should then go
to Mashar and stay (*wuquf*). Afterwards, he should go to Mina and
perform the Mina rites apart from *hady*, which is not compulsory for
him. He should subsequently go to Makkah, perform the *tawaf*, prayer,
*Say*, *tawaf an-nisa* and its prayer.

After this, he can dispense with *ihram* and return to Mina to pass the
night and spend nights of *tashriq* period as done by other pilgrims. In
principle, therefore, *Hajj al-Ifrad* is similar to *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*
with the exception that in the latter case, a *hady* should be offered,
while in the *Hajj* *al-Ifrad*, *hady* is not compulsory and is rather
recommended.

*Umrah* *Mufradah*, which should be performed after *Hajj* by one, whose
*Hajj* *at-Tamattu* has been turned into *Hajj al-Ifrad* requires
departing from *Adni al-Hal*. It is best to put on *ihram* from
"Jeranah" or "Hudaybiyah", or "Taneem" which are closer to Makkah. Then
he should go to Makkah for circumambulation around the Kabah and recite
its prayer, embark upon *Say* between Safa and Marwah, engage in
*taqsir* or shave his head, carry out the *tawaf al-nisa* and recite
*tawaf* prayer.

Hajj At-Tamattu In Brief
------------------------

*Hajj* *at-Tamattu* includes two rites: *Umrah* *Tamattu* and *Hajj*
*at-Tamattu*. *Umrah* *Tamattu* has priority over *Hajj*.

*Umrah* *Tamattu* has the following five acts:

1. Getting into the state of the *ihram*
2. *Tawaf* around the Kabah
3. *Tawaf* prayer
4. *Say* between Safa and Marwah
5. *Taqsir*

When the *muhrim* accomplishes these tasks, things, which had become
unlawful to him due to *ihram,* become permitted.

*Hajj* *at-Tamattu* comprises of the following thirteen acts:

1. Getting into the state of the *ihram*
2. *Wuquf* in the plain of Arafat,
3. *Wuquf* in Mashar al-Haram
4. Stoning the Jamarat al-Aqabah in Mina
5. Offering sacrifice in Mina
6. Shaving the head or *taqsir* in Mina
7. *Tawaf* in Makkah
8. Reciting two *rakah* *tawaf* prayer
9. *Say* between Safa and Marwah
10. *Tawaf an-nisa*
11. Reciting two *rakah* prayer of *tawaf an-nisa*.
12. Staying in Mina on the 11th, 12th, and 13th Dhul al-Hijjah (for
some people)
13. *Ramy Jamarat* on the 11th 12th of Dhul al-Hijjah. Those who remain
in Mina on the night preceding the 13th should engage in *ramy jamarat*
on the 13th.

It is permissible to perform *Umrah* *Mufradah* during the *Hajj* season
before *Umrah* *Tamattu*.

Based on precaution, one should observe a month's space between the two
*Umrah* he undertakes for himself. If the second *Umrah* is performed
through *niyabah*, the *naib* can receive wages for it. If the *Umrah*
*Mufradah* were obligatory for the one who has hired the *naib*, it
would be sufficient.


