Rites Of Hajj At-Tamattu
========================

Chapter 1: Ihram Of Hajj At-Tamattu
-----------------------------------

Upon completion of *Umrah*, it is obligatory for the *mukallaf* to get
into the state of *ihram* for *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*.

If he makes *niyyah* for *Hajj* *at-Tamattu* and pronounces the *wajib*
*labbayks* (as already mentioned in the part on *ihram* for *Umrah*), he
would become a *muhrim* and does not need to make the intention for
*ihram* and for abstaining from the *muharramat*. He should not make the
intention of doing anything that would invalidate the *ihram*.

*Niyyah* should be pure and sincere to satisfy Almighty Allah (SwT).
Hypocrisy would invalidate the *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*.

Getting into the state of *ihram* and pronouncing *labbayk* is the same
as mentioned in regard to *ihram* for *Umrah*.

Everything presented as *muharramat* for *ihram* is also *haram* in the
*ihram* for *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*. Likewise, all which required *kaffarah*
there would also need *kaffarah* in the *Hajj* *at-Tamattu*.

Time is ample for *ihram*. The pilgrim can delay it so long as he still
has time for *ikhtiyari wuquf* in Arafah after *ihram*. He cannot delay
it further.

*Ihram* for *Hajj* should be done in any part of Makkah, even in the
newly built districts. Nevertheless, *ihram* in the Masjid al-Haram is
*afdhal*.

The same precept, which applies to one who has not got into the state of
ihram due to forgetfulness, applies to the person who fails to have
*ihram* due to unawareness.

*Hajj* will be invalidated if a person knowingly and intentionally
postpones *ihram* until the time for *wuquf* in Arafat and Mashar is
over.

**Question 1:** The distance between some newly built districts of
Makkah and the Masjid al-Haram is more than 18 kilometers. These might
conventionally be deemed as suburbs of Makkah, not as parts of it, since
traffic signs indicate the direction of Makkah. Is it then possible to
become *muhrim* for *Hajj* at the aforementioned districts?

**Answer:** There is no problem if they are the districts of Makkah. But
if they are not Makkah's districts or if there is doubt about this, the
pilgrim should avoid becoming a *muhrim* at these sites.

Chapter 2: Wuquf In Arafat
--------------------------

*Wuquf* is obligatory in Arafat, which is a famous place with commonly
known bounds, with pure intention, as is the case of other acts of
worship.

Based on the *ahwat*, *wuquf* in Arafat should commence at the *zawal*
until *maghreb*. The pilgrim might be allowed delay from the *zawal* to
recite the *zuhr* and *asr* prayers and make the preliminaries.

It is obligatory to be in Arafat from midday until sunset on the same
day. But as already indicated, this is not entirely *rukn* to invalidate
the *Hajj* if abandoned. Therefore, if the pilgrim engages in a brief
*wuquf*, departs, and returns in the afternoon for *wuquf*, his *Hajj*
will be correct, even if he deliberately and knowingly abstains from
*wuquf*.

Mere presence in Arafat is the *rukn* for *wuquf*. This presence might
be very brief such as one minute or two; therefore, if one does not at
all go to Arafat, he has abstained from a *rukn*.

If one intentionally and knowingly dispenses with the *rukni* *wuquf*
(namely if he does not have any presence in Arafat from midday until
sunset), his *Hajj* will be invalidated.

If he deliberately departs from Arafat before sunset and leaves its
precincts, he has committed a *haram* act. If he becomes repentant,
returns, and engages in *wuquf* until sunset, he will not have to embark
upon compensation.

If, however, he does not return, he should offer a camel as *kaffarah*
to be sacrificed in the way of Almighty Allah (SwT) at any place. Based
on *ihtiyat* *mustahabb* (recommended precaution), he should sacrifice
the camel in Mina and on the day of *Eid al-Qurban* and his *Hajj* will
be correct. If this is beyond his means, he should fast for 18 days.

If he mistakenly leaves Arafat, he should return before the time
expires. If he realizes his mistake but does not return, he will be a
sinner, yet he does not have to pay *kaffarah*. If he does not realize
his mistake until the time expires, he does not have to offer
*kaffarah*.

The same decree applies who leaves Arafat due to ignorance.

Realization of the obligatory stay (*wajib* *wuquf*) and not the *rukni*
*wuquf* is the standard to measure the time for *wuquf* in Arafat, which
converts the *Hajj*.

Chapter 3: Wuquf In Mashar Al-Haram
-----------------------------------

After completing *wuquf* in Arafat when the sun sets on the 9th of
*Dhul* *Hijjah*, the pilgrim should go the Mashar al-Haram, which is a
well-known place with specific limits.

After leaving Arafat, based on precaution, he should spend the night
preceding the *Eid al- Qurban* until daybreak of the *Eid* in the Mashar
al-Haram with the intention of submitting to the will of Almighty Allah
(SwT) in spending the night there.

In the morning of *Eid al-Qurban*, he should make *niyyah* for *wuquf*
in the Mashar al-Haram until sunrise. This is the extent of *wajib*
*wuquf*. As this *wuquf* is an act of worship for Almighty Allah (SwT),
it should be based on sincere *niyyah* without engaging in hypocrisy and
show-off.

Those having excuses, such as women, children, the ailing people, old
men, the physically weak and those who need nurses and guides, can leave
the Mashar al-Haram for Mina after some halt in the Mashar at night.

Chapter 4: Wajibat Of Mina (Obligations Of Mina)
------------------------------------------------

### First: Ramy Of Jamarat al-Aqaba

*Ramy* of Jamarat al-Aqaba refers to throwing pebbles at the symbolic
Satans that are located in Mina.

The pilgrim should use pebbles for *ramy*. These should not be very
small such as gravel. Nor should they be very large. The pebbles should
be of stone not of other material like clod, potsherd, and gems.
However, different types of stones, even marble, can be used.

The pebbles should belong to the Mashar al-Haram, and those outside the
Mashar are not acceptable.

The pebbles must be new, that is to say they should not have been used
for *ramy* in the past years.

The pebbles must be *mubah*; therefore, usurped pebbles or those
procured by others for personal use are not sufficient.

*Ramy* should be done from sunrise until sunset of the day of *Eid
al-Qurban*. If the pilgrim forgets to perform the *ramy* on this day, he
can carry it out until the 13th. If he cannot carry it out by then, he
should, based on necessary precaution, carry it out in person or through
deputation. The following year, he or his *naib* should perform its
*qadha*.

Several things are obligatory in *ramy*:

a. *Niyyah*, which should be sincere without hypocrisy or show-off, both
of which invalidate the *ramy*.

b. The pebbles should be thrown. Going close to the jamarah and placing
the pebbles on it would not be sufficient.

c. The pebbles, being thrown, should hit the jamarah.

d. Each *ramy* must be carried out using seven pebbles.

e. The pebbles should be gradually and consecutively thrown. In this
case, there would be no problem if they hit the jamarah at the same
time. But all or a few of the pebbles should not be thrown at the same
time, even if they consecutively rather than simultaneously hit the
jamarah.

If the pilgrim throws a pebble but does not hit the jamarah, he should
throw it anew, even though at the time of *ramy* he conceived that the
pebbles had hit the jamarah. Therefore, if there are other things
installed close to the jamarah and he has mistakenly thrown the pebbles
at them, the *ramy* should be repeated, even if next year and by the
pilgrim's *naib*.

Those who have excuses not to engage in *ramy* during the day can
perform it anytime at night.

### Second: Dhibh Is Obligatory In Mina

One who performs the *Hajj* *at-Tamattu* should offer a *hady* (i.e. a
camel or a cow, or a sheep) for *dhibh*. Camel is preferable.

Apart from the aforementioned three animals, other animals do not meet
the requirements of *dhibh*.

Several points apply to the *hady*:

a. It should be free of any defect

b. It should have all bodily organs

c. Its inner horn should not be broken

d. It should not be thin

e. It should not be castrated

It is not a condition for the *hady* to have unmutilated testicles,
unless it reaches the point of castration. All bodily organs such as
testicles and ears or horns and tail that are natural to the relevant
animals should be found in the *hady*; otherwise, it would be regarded
as defective. The *hady* does not have to be young.

If the *hady* is a camel, it should have entered its sixth year. If the
*hady* is a cow, based on necessary precaution, it should have entered
its third year. The same applies to a goat. Based on necessary
precaution, an ewe should have entered its second year.

*Dhibh* should be per after *ramy* jamarah.

Based on necessary precaution, *dhibh* of *hady* should be performed on
the day of *Eid al-Qurban* and not afterwards.

If due to an excuse, such as forgetfulness or others, he forgets to
perform the *dhibh* on the day of *Eid al-Qurban*, he should, based on
necessary precaution, engage in *dhibh* during the *tashriq* period. If
not possible, *dhibh* should be carried out in the remaining days of the
month of Dhul Hijjah.

If the pilgrim engages in *dhibh* of a *hady* which he conceives to be
sound and healthy and later realizes that it was sick or names
(defective or having some bodily deficiencies) his *dhibh* will not
suffice and he has to do it all over again if he can afford it.

Based on necessary precaution, the *naib* for *dhibh* should be a
Shiite, unless the pilgrim himself makes the *niyyah* for *dhibh* and
hires a *naib* only to perform the *dhibh*.

*Dhibh* is also an act of worship and entails pure *niyyah* to submit to
the will of Almighty Allah (SwT).

#### Secondary Issues Related To The Hady

It is not permissible to deliberately delay the *dhibh* until after the
day of *Eid al-Qurban*, unless there is an *ahwat*. But if the pilgrim
intentionally, unknowingly, or mistakenly delays it, he should offer the
*dhibh* during the *tashriq* period.

Based on precaution, the person who has accepted the *niyabah* of the
*mukallaf* should personally conduct the *dhibh*.

Under the present conditions, offering the sacrifice at the new places
for slaughter is correct and permissible.

If a man offers the *dhibh* on behalf of his wife or another person
without having their *wikalah* and supposing to have implicit permission
from them, the *dhibh* will not be correct. Based on necessary
precaution, he should not suffice with the *dhibh* of the *naib* if
prior permission has not been obtained from the one who hired the
*naib*.

Iron and stainless steel (knives) should be used for *dhibh*. If the
pilgrim doubts whether the knife or other instruments are made of iron
or not, he should come to a certainty (and then perform the *dhibh*).

**Question 1:** What duty is shouldered by a person who has given his
sheep to a non-believer for *dhibh* and who has performed *halq* and
other subsequent rites and then realised that a non- believer has
conducted *dhibh* for him?

**Answer:** There is no need to perform *dhibh* all over again if the
*naib* is hired for the mere practice of *dhibh*. But if the *naib* had
*niyabah* for both the practice of the *dhibh* and the *niyyah* for
*dhibh*, it should be performed all over again. Then *halq* and other
subsequent rites will be correct.

**Question 2:** What happens if a person mistakenly, unintentionally, or
unknowingly fails to observe the specific order of the rites of the day
of *Eid al-Qurban*?

**Answer:** It is obligatory to observe the specified order of the Mina
rites. This order cannot be intentionally abandoned. If, however, one
had not followed the order, obviously it is not obligatory for him to
repeat the rites he had performed without observing order. But order
should be observed based on precaution.

**Question 3:** What should be done if after *dhibh* and before or after
completing the remaining *Hajj* rites, the pilgrim realizes that the age
of the *hady* was less than required?

**Answer:** He should offer *dhibh* anew.

### Third: Taqsir Is Obligatory In Mina

After *dhibh*, each *mukallaf* has the choice to either shave his head
or shorten his, nail or hair.

Women should cut some locks of their hair or clip nails and should not
shave their heads. Based on the *ahwat*, women should both clip their
nails and cut some locks of their hair.

One who has gone on *Hajj* for the first time has the choice to either
shave his head or perform *taqsir*. But based on the *ahwat* complete
shaving of the head (*halq*) should be carried out.

Shaving the head and *taqsir*, being acts of worship, should be carried
out with pure intention to submit to the Will of Almighty Allah (SwT).
They would not be correct without pure intention and in such a case they
would not make *halal* (permissible things which normally become *halal*
after such acts).

Shaving the head and *taqsir* should be carried out in Mina and it is
not permissible to voluntarily perform them elsewhere.

Based on precaution, the head should be shaved and *taqsir* should be
performed on the day of the *Eid*, even though the pilgrim might be
allowed to delay them until the end of the *tashriq* period.

In Mina, it is obligatory to primarily engage in *ramy* jamarah, then
*dhibh*, and then *taqsir* or *halq*.

If the pilgrim does not observe the required order (of the *Hajj*
rites), he has committed a sin. But obviously, he does not have to
repeat those rites whose orders he has not observed, though their
repetition would be in accordance with *ihtiyat*.

#### Secondary Issues Related To Halq Or Taqsir In Hajj

Based on necessary precaution *halq* or *taqsir* should not be postponed
until the night. If the pilgrim fails or forgets to perform them on the
day of the *Eid*, he should carry them out on the night of the 11th of
Dhul Hijjah. And this would suffice.

One who wants to shave the head of another person cannot do so before he
performs his own *halq* or *taqsir*. Removing the hair of another person
is not permissible until one obtains relief from *ihram*.

One who has conducted *halq* in a place other than Mina and performed
the subsequent rites has not become a *muhill* and should perform the
subsequent rites all over again.

One who has, for some reason, postponed *dhibh* to after the *Eid* does
not have to delay *halq* or *taqsir*. Based on precaution, *halq* and
*taqsir* should be performed on the day of the *Eid*. But the *tawaf*
*al-Hajj* would be invalid if performed before *halq* or *taqsir*.

**Question 1:** Would rites of Makkah be correct for those who came to
Makkah after performing *halq* and *taqsir*, carried out Makkah rites
such as *tawaf*, *say*, and *tawaf* *an-nisa* and then realised that
their *halq* and *taqsir* was not carried out in Mina?

**Answer:** In such a case, their Makkah rites are incorrect and should
be performed all over again.

Chapter 5: The Obligations After The Rites Of Mina
--------------------------------------------------

Rites that is obligatory to be performed in Makkah:

a. *Tawaf al-Hajj* known as *tawaf*

b. *Tawaf* prayer

c. *Say* between Safa and Marwah

d. *Tawaf* *an-nisa*

e. Prayer of *tawaf an-nisa*

The *tawaf* *al-Hajj*, its prayer, *say*, *tawaf* *an-nisa* and its
prayer should he performed exactly as already indicated in the part of
*tawaf al-Umrah* and its prayer and *say*. Only the *niyyah* would be
different here. The pilgrim has to make *niyyah* for *tawaf al-Hajj*, it
*say* and *tawaf* *an-nisa*.

If Mina rites were performed in advance due to excuses, they would
suffice, unless the excuses become invalid later. For instance, a woman
(who thought her monthly period would start) does not become *haydh*, a
sick person recovers, and overcrowding is not as such to cause
annoyance. Thus in such cases, it is not exigent to perform the rites
all over again. But performing them all over again is in accordance with
the *ahwat*.

A separate *tawaf* *an-nisa* is obligatory for *Hajj* and for *Umrah*
*Mufradah*.

**Question 1:** A person has forgotten to perform *tawaf* *an-nisa* for
*Umrah* *Mufradah* and has become *muhrim* for *Umrah Tamattu*. Should
he perform the forgotten *tawaf an-nisa* before or after *Umrah Tamattu*
rites?

**Answer:** He can perform it after the *Tamattu* rites. If *tawaf*
*an-nisa* is delayed it would bear adverse impacts and the *Hajj* will
not suffice.

**Question 2:** A person who has not performed the *tawaf* *an-nisa* of
*Umrah* *Mufradah* is to carry out the *Hajj al-Ifrad* subsequently.
Would *tawaf* *an-nisa* of the *Hajj al-Ifrad* suffice for him or not?

**Answer:** It will not suffice.

Chapter 6: Staying Overnight In Mina
------------------------------------

It is obligatory for the pilgrims to spend the nights preceding the 11th
and 12th of Dhul Hijjah in Mina. That is to say, they should stay there
from sunset until midnight or from midnight until sunrise. Those who
hold vigil in Makkah and engage in worship until the morning without
doing anything else other than what is exigent (such as eating and
drinking as needed, and renewing the *wudhu*) do not have to spend the
nights preceding the 11th and the 12th in Mina.

Remaining in Mina for the said three nights could extend from the
evening until midnight or from midnight until sunrise.

Staying overnight in Mina is an act of worship and should be performed
with pure intention for the satisfaction of Almighty Allah (SwT).

One who abstains from remaining in Mina on the nights, which are
obligatory, should sacrifice one sheep for each night he misses.

Based on precaution, the sacrifice should be offered if the pilgrim
fails to spend the night at Mina either knowingly and deliberately, or
forgetfully and unknowingly.

The *kaffarah* for hunting should be offered in Makkah during *Umrah*
and in Mina during *Hajj*. Based on precaution, the same should apply to
other instances of *kaffarah*.

**Question 1:** What would happen if one stays overnight in a place
other than Mina? Are those ignorant of this precept excused or not?

**Answer:** He should offer a sacrifice. Based on precaution, there is
no difference between those aware and those ignorant of this precept.

**Question 2:** After performing the threefold rites of the day of the
*Eid*, a pilgrim wants to go to Makkah to perform the *tawafs*. But he
knows that if he goes to Makkah he would not be able to spend the first
three hours of the required period in Mina. Should he go to Makkah or
not? Does he have to pay *kaffarah* for going to Makkah (in this case)?

**Answer:** In this case, there is nothing wrong with going from Mina to
Makkah. But *kaffarah* should be given for delay. Unless he spends the
entire second half of the night in Mina.

Chapter 7: Ramy Al-Jamar
------------------------

*Ramy al-Jamarat* should be performed on the days following nights that
are obligatory to be spent in Mina. *Ramy al-Jamarat* means throwing
pebbles at the three Jamar or the symbolic Satans, namely the ones in
the front, the middle, and the rear.

The pilgrim should daily throw seven pebbles at each jamarah. The
manner, condition, and obligations of *ramy* have already been presented
in the previous part on Jamarat al-Aqabah.

Pebbles should be thrown from sunrise until sunset on the morrow of the
night the pilgrim spends in Mina. *Ramy* should not be carried out at
night.

People with excuses not to perform the *ramy* during the day, such as
shepherds, sick ones, impotent individuals, and those fearing something
such as the huge crowds, are allowed to perform the *ramy* on the night
of the same day or on the next night.

*Ramy* should be carried out in order. The front, the middle, and the
rear jamarah should be respectively hit with pebbles.

A person who forgets to perform the *ramy* and leaves Mina should return
and perform the *ramy*. If he cannot return, he should hire a *naib*. If
the *tashriq* period has passed, he should return, based on necessary
precaution, and perform *ramy* or hire a *naib*. He or his *naib* should
perform the *qadha* the following year.

### Secondary Issues Related To The Ramy

Women and their caretakers, as well as weak people, who are allowed to
arrive in Mina from the Mashar al-Haram after midnight can engage in
*ramy* at night, if they have excuses not to perform it during the day.
Women are allowed to engage in *ramy* at night.

Ramy al-Jamarat can be done from the upper floor, though, based on
recommended precaution (*ihtiyat* *mustahabb*), it should be conducted
from the conventional place of the past (ground level).

Those who have excuses not to engage in *ramy* on the day of the *Eid*
can do so on the preceding or following night of the *Eid*. If they also
have excuses not to conduct *ramy* on the 11th of Dhul Hijjah, they can
perform the relevant *ramy* of the 11th on its night.

**Question 1:** Can one conduct the *ramy* at night without having any
excuses? If *ramy* at night is correct, does it involve a sin? Likewise,
although delay in *dhibh* on the day of *Eid al-Qurban* is aright, does
it involve a sin?

**Answer:** *Ramy* cannot be done at night without an excuse. If one
does not conduct *ramy* during the day without having a valid excuse, he
would be committing a sin. Likewise, based on the *ahwat*, if he
deliberately delays the *dhibh* and does not perform it on the day of
the *Eid*, he would be committing a sin, though his *dhibh* would be
correct.

**Question 2:** Can one throw the pebbles at the cement made part of the
column?

**Answer:** If the cement-made part were conventionally regarded as a
constituent of the column (jamarah), *ramy* would be correct.

**Question 3:** Due to overcrowding and possible dangers, is it possible
to bring the women from Mashar to Mina after the midnight of the 10th of
Dhul Hijjah, take them to jamarah Aqabah on the same night for *ramy*,
return them to the tents, and again take them to the Jamarat close to
the sunset on the 11th to perform the *ramy* of both the 11th and the
12th on the night of the 12th?

**Answer:** After *wuquf* in Mashar and arrival in Mina, women can
perform *ramy* jamarah al- Aqabah on the night before *Eid al-Qurban*.
But they could perform the *ramy* on the 11th and the 12th at night,
only if they have excuses not to perform them during the day.

### Miscellaneous Issues

One has the option of *qasr* and *itmam* for the daily prayers all over
the two holy cities of Makkah and Madinah. Apparently, the precept
applies to the two cities as they stand, without any distinction between
their former and new districts. But, based on the *ahwat*, in this case,
one should suffice with the limits of the past Makkah and Madinah or
rather the Masjidayn Sharifayn (The Masjid al-Haram in Makkah and the
Masjid an-Nabi in Madinah).

If due to an excuse, such as illness, a pilgrim has failed to take off
his stitched clothes in order to enter the state of *ihram*, he should
make *niyyah* for *Umrah* and/or *Hajj* and pronounce the *labbayk* at
the *miqat* or areas parallel to it. This would suffice. Whenever he is
relieved of the excuse, he should remove the stitched clothes and enter
the state of *ihram*. He, however, does not have to return to *miqat*,
but, based on *ihtiyat* *wajib*, he should offer a sheep as sacrifice
for having worn stitched clothes.

*Kaffarah* should be given to the poor and the needy.

A person who made intention for *iqamah* *ashrah* in Makkah retains his
intention upon going to
Arafat and Mina and returning. His Prayer would be *itmam* at all these
sites.

**Question 1:** Should prayer be performed all over again if a person
has engaged in *istidarah* prayer in the Masjid al-Haram such that he
faced the congregation prayer leader or stood on his sides?

**Answer:** There is no need to perform it all over again and it is
permissible.

**Question 2:** In Purifying the Masjid al-Haram, the *nijasah* is
removed and it is then washed with water. *Qaleel* water is used to wash
each side and one becomes aware of the *nijasah* of the entire Masjid.
Can one engage in *sajdah* on those stones due to distress or difficulty
or some other reason?

**Answer:** One cannot gain awareness (about this issue) and should
disregard any doubt that may arise.

**Question 3:** A pilgrim, after performing all the rites of *Umrah* and
*Hajj*, realised that his *wudhu* was null and void. Would his *Hajj* be
considered correct if he makes provisions for the *tawafs* and prayer?
Supposing that his *Hajj* would become invalidate, how should he be
relieved of *ihram*, and what duty does he shoulder?

ANSWER: Yes, by making provisions for the *tawafs* and the prayer his
*Hajj* would be correct.


