Glossary
========

A
-

***afdhal*** meritorious

***ahkam*** decrees or injunctions; plural of *hukm*

***ahwat*** greater precaution or care

***Arafat*** the 9th day of Dhul Hijjah when the pilgrims assemble at
the place outside Makkah, known as the plain of Arafat

***asr*** afternoon

***aqwa*** (what is) stronger or more forceful

***ashwat*** rounds or turns; plural of *shawt*

B
-

***badhl*** gift, present

***Badhli Hajj*** Gifting of *Hajj*; sending someone on *Hajj* as a way
of generosity

***Bayt Allah al-Haram*** The Sacred House of Allah

D
-

***dhibh*** slaughtering, animal sacrifice

E
-

***Eid al-Qurban*** Feast of Sacrifice celebrated on 10th Dhul Hijjah

F
-

***faridhah*** an indispensable religious duty

***fuqaha*** jurisprudents

***fusuq*** disobedience to the commends of God; committing sins

G
-

***ghayr ul-mahram*** one who is not *mahram*

***ghusl*** ritual bathing

H
-

***hadath akbar*** major impurity requiring *ghusl*

***hadath asghar*** minor impurity requiring *wudhu*

***hady*** animal sacrifice, sacrificial offering

***haidh*** menstruating

***Hajar al-Aswad*** The Black Stone

***Hajj*** pilgrimage

***Hajjat ul-Islam*** the obligatory *Hajj* pilgrimage in Islam

***Hajji*** pilgrim

***Hajj Miqati*** *Hajj*, which starts from one of the *mawaqit* or the
specified places where pilgrims are required to assemble

***Hajj Nyabi*** pilgrimage performed on one's behalf

***halal*** permitted; religiously lawful

***halq*** complete shaving of the head

***haram*** prohibited; religiously unlawful

***Haram*** sanctuary, sacred precincts

***harwalah*** with a fast pace

***haydh*** menstruation

***hijab*** Islamic mode of dressing and covering for women

***Hijr Ismail*** The semicircular 1.3 meter high wall on the northern
side of the Kabah, where Ismail and his mother Hajar are buried

***Hujjaj*** pilgrims

***hukm*** religious decree or injunction acts of worship

I
-

***ibadat*** acts of worship

***idhn*** permission

***idhtirar*** exigency; urgency; emergency need

***idhtirari*** based on exigency, exigent, emergency

***ihram*** state of pilgrim sanctity, which a pilgrim of *Hajj* or
*Umrah* assumes on reaching miqat

***ihtiyat*** precaution, reservation

***ikhtiyar*** choice

***ikhtiyari*** based on choice, optional

***istidar*** circular

***istighfar*** seeking forgiveness

***istihbab*** considering an act as *mustahabb*; recommendable

***istitaah*** capability

***itmam*** reciting the prayer completely as opposed to the shortened
prayer of the traveller

J
-

***jidal*** quarrelling, swearing

***janabah*** major ritual impurity caused by sexual intercourse or the
like

***jabirah wudhu*** a special kind of ablution for one who has bandages
or the like on the parts that should be washed during *wudhu*

***junub*** one who is in the state of *janabah*

K
-

***kaffarah*** expiation, atonement

***khums*** one-fifth levy

***kifayah*** being sufficient, sufficiency, competence, capability

***kurr*** water weighing about 384 kilograms which does not become
*najis* if *nijasah* reaches it

M
-

***Madinah*** Medina

***ma fil-dhimmah*** an act or deed that is incumbent on the pilgrim and
should duly be discharged

***maghreb*** sunset

***mahram*** Relations with whom marriage is not permissible such as
father, mother, step father, step mothers, sons, daughters, brothers,
sisters, grandfathers, grandmothers, grandsons, granddaughters, maternal
or paternal uncles and aunts, nieces, nephews, grand nephews and grand
nieces, father law and mother law, son law and daughter law, wet nurses,
etc. Consequently husband and wife are considered *Mahram* to each other

***Makkah*** Mecca

***mal al-ijarah*** wages paid to a person hired as a *naib*

***Marja Taqlid*** Religious Authority for following such as the Chief
Jurisprudent

***masjid*** mosque

***mataf*** place for (conducting) the *tawaf*

***mawaqit*** the places permissible for halting

***mawaqit*** plural of *miqat*

***miqat*** a number of stations outside Makkah from where the pilgrims
intending *Hajj* or *Umrah* assume *ihram*

***mubah*** permissible; allowed

***mudd*** dry measure equal to 800 grams

***muharramat*** acts and things that are religiously unlawful

***muhill*** one who has been relieved from *ihram*, non-muhrim

***muhrim*** a pilgrim in the state of *ihram*

***mukallaf*** one who has reached the age of *takleef*

***mustahabb*** desirable though not obligatory; recommended

***mustahsan*** praiseworthy; commendable

***mustati*** a person possessing capability (*istitaah*)

***muwalat*** continuity without break

N
-

***nadhr*** vow

***nafaqah*** maintenance; necessary living expenses

***nafelah prayer*** supererogatory prayer

***naib*** deputy

***najis*** ritual unclean

***nifas*** puerperal period

***nijasah*** ritual uncleanness

***niyabah*** deputation

***niyyah*** intention

Q
-

***qadha*** settling a *wajib* act which had not been performed in time,
not performed but due

***qaleel*** little in quantity, less than *kurr*

***qasr*** reciting two *rakah* instead of the 4 *rakah* prayer during a
journey exceeding 23 Kms

***qiraah*** the recitation of the Quran in the prayer

R
-

***rakah*** unit of the length of prayer

***ramy*** threefold throwing of stones at al-jamarat or symbolic satans

***rukn*** essential part or pillar

S
-

***sajdah*** prostration

***shawt*** round, turn

T
-

***taharah*** purity, cleanness

***tahlil*** relief from the state of *ihram*

***takleef*** age in which one becomes mature and thus responsible for
performing Islamic duties

***taqsir*** partial shortening of the hair on the head

***tashriq period*** the three days following *Eid al-qurban*

***tawaf*** sevenfold circumambulation of the Kabah

***tayammum*** statutory dry ablution with soil, sand, etc.

U
-

***udul*** change of purpose by the *naib*

***Umrah*** (in common usage) visit, (in religious texts) paying a visit
to the Bayt Allah al Haram (the Sacred House of Allah, i.e. the Holy
Kabah)

***Umrah*****-** ***Mufradah*** *Umrah* performed independently of
*Hajj*

W
-

***wajab*** span

***wajib*** religiously obligatory

***wajib Hajj*** obligatory pilgrimage

***Wajib ul-Hajj*** one for whom *Hajj* has become obligatory

***wajib*****at** obligatory acts and deeds

***wali*** guardian, heir

***wikalah*** deputation

***wudhu*** ablution with water

***wujub*** obligation

***wujuh shareeyah*** religiously due sums, religious payments

***wuquf*** stop, halt

***wuqufayn*** the two stays

Z
-

***zawal*** time when the sun crosses the meridian

***ziyarah*** visit

***zuhr*** noon


