[Inroduction]
=============

Distinguish feature of a human being is reason. It differentiates it
from all other creatures. The prominent characteristic of reason is the
harmonization between thought and action of a being. Reason plays a key
role to civilize a being and society. When this feature collectively
emerges in the circles of daily life to organize the activities of
masses it gives birth to a political system or to a system of state.
This ideological approach and practical behavior emanates from the faith
or the philosophy of a being.

[Main Debate]
=============

In this respect there are two main approaches i.e.

•  Revealed Religions. In this respect there are two leading doctrines.

i. Islam

ii. Judaism and Christianity

•  Philosophy. It is also consisted of two main eras.

i. Greek Philosophy

ii. Modern Western Thought

Now we discuss about the attitude of religion and philosophy in respect
of human being and his role in this universe. Human Being and Sacred
Book Let us start from Christianity.The Sacred Book narrates the story
of creation in these words. At first God stationed to first being i.e.
Adam A.S. with his companion (wife) in heavens with some rules and
regulations. They disobey their Lord and crossed their limits. So, He
descended them to this world as a punishment. Lord held this world a
place of chastisement for the first disobedient couple (forefathers of
humankind) and for their descendants. So an antagonism started between
humankind and their Lord from the very first day. We may conclude to
this story of creation as:

•  There was a wisdom tree in heaven. God stationed to first couple
(Adam A.S. and Eve) in heaven with some liberties and restrictions i.e.
they were allowed to eat every-thing except the fruit of wisdom tree.
They ate the fruit of wisdom tree which was prohibited for them and in
this way they got the wisdom to differentiate good from evil like God.
So, they displeased to their Lord.

•  They (both Adam and Eve-the first human pair) were expelled from
heaven due to their above said first disobedience.

•  There was another tree of eternal life. Now it was the possibility
that Adam and Eve will try to eat the fruit of the tree of eternal life
to be eternal like God. So, to prevent it from the first human couple,
God appointed the angels at the Eastern side of the Garden. There were
flaming swords revolving all around the tree of eternal life to block
the way of first human pair. (Bible, 1916:5-9)

This story represents an antagonism between God and Adam. Due to this
antagonism a continuous rift, confrontation, conflict, clash, and war
state established between God and human being. Further it emerged in all
spheres of life i.e. in the form of a division between spiritual and
material, religious and worldly, divine and human, and Church and state.
According to Iqbal there is a lot of difference between the approaches
of both the sacred books Old Testament and Quran in respect of the
legend of fall. He commented on

this event in the following way. “But confining oursselves to the
Semitic form of the myth, it is highly probable that it arose out of the
primitive man‟s desire to explain to himself the infinite misery of his
plight in an uncongenial environment, which abounded in diseases and
death and obstructed him on all size in his endeavor to maintain
himself. Having no control over the forces of nature, a pessimistic view
of life was perfectly natural to him. Thus, in an old Babylonian
inscription, we find the serpent (phallic), the tree, and a woman
offering an apple (symbol of virginity) to the man. The meaning of the
myth is clear—the fall of man from a supposed state of bliss was due to
the original sexual act of human pair. The way in which the Qur‟an
handles this legend becomes clear when we compare it with the narration
of the book of genesis. The remarkable points of difference between the
Quranic and the Biblical narrations suggest unmistakably the purpose of
the Quranic narration.” (Iqbal A. M., 1989:66) Human Being and
Philosophy As for as, philosophy is concerned, chronologically we may
divide it into following ages i.e. ancient, medieval, renaissance, early
modern, and modern. (Concise Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2ooo:690) Almost all manmade political systems revolve around these
three main approaches, conservatism, socialism, and liberalism (Concise
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2ooo:693) even we may observe
their reflection in classical republicanism, Roman law, natural law, and
utilitarianism. According to its own claim the origin of modern Western
philosophy is Greek. Renaissance grew on the heels of ancient Greek
philosophy. Medieval period is the age of scholasticism i.e. dark age of
philosophy. Reformation accelerated to the confrontation and division of
secular and sacred. (Concise Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
2ooo:691)

According to Plato, realty was in an-other world. Aristotle fell in the
trap of form and matter. In respect of human being he viewed that human
being is a social animal. Medieval Christianity promoted to monasticism.
To establish a discipline and order in all spheres of life
institutionalization is necessary while monasticism is the negation of
all social activities. In this situation gradually new political
philosophies emerged.Dictionary of philosophy summed up this discussion
as

•  Aristotle held human being a social animal. This view played a
fundamental role in the determination of the role of human being in this
universe and his/her relationship with God, other beings and universe.

•  A conflict emerged between state and church. Church declared to
earthly state as satanic. In the result of this conflict new approaches
established in respect of the nature of state.

•  Thomas Aquinas observed that the source of power was people and they
had the right to determine, manage, govern, and control it. This
approach continued to flourish further.

•  A new era of political philosophy started after renaissance.

•  Machiavelli and Bodin emphasized on the sovereignty and solidarity of
state and on the rights of people.

•  Hobbes, Lock,and Rousseau introduced the theory of social contract.
It circumscribed to unlimited imperial power and promoted to democratic
trends.

•  Meanwhile an idea of natural law emerged in opposition to Divine law.

•  Hegel declared to stateas an ultimate end while Marx and Engels held
that ultimate object of state was to establish a classless society. At
the achievement of this goal there will be no need of state. At this
stage they considered state useless and predicted the end of state.

•  In nineteenth century, political philosophers held to state the
source of all power and gave it all authority and complete sovereignty.
(Qadir C.A, 1994:343)

So, in the perspective of above said discussion we may say that in
respect of human being, his/her attitude, life style, social and
cultural behavior, ideologically and practically two approaches are in
practice i.e.

•  Interpretation of life and universe on Divine basis

• Understanding of life and universe on Greek cum modern interpretations

Existing political cum economic systems i.e. Western democratic systems,
Socialism, and Communism, have been derived from Greek to some extent.
Basis of all manmade ideologies and philosophical systems is a material
interpretation of this universe. From ancient Greek to modern world i.e.
Aristotle to Darwin human being has the material basis only. Aristotle
defined human being as a Social Animal. With the passage of time, along
with the development of science, negation of all sources of knowledge
except sense perception, and elimination of religion from politics to
all affairs of life, this concept of Aristotle gradually molded into
Darwinian Theory of Evolution. In the West, after renaissance all
thinkers and philosophers discussed and viewed about human being as a
material being only. The focus of all intellectual activities was on
matter. For scientists and reformers human being was only a material
object. So, all technology, discoveries and inventions of science were
to facilitate a material object. There was no room for any other
approach about life, universe, beginning, and end. For example in 1943 a
well-known anthropologist Abraham H. Maslow presented his famous theory
Hierarchy of Needs. In this theory he pointed out five basic needs of a
being. It is interesting that he considered human being a material
object only and his theory is based on the perception that human being
was only a material entity which had no other aspect. (Tahir, 1985:9)

After renaissance the West entered in a new and the most crucial phase
of its intellectual life i.e. a division of Church and state which
reshaped all social and cultural scenarios of an individual and society.
Religion became a personal affair. There was no right to Church to
interfere in the affairs of state. Theoretically philosophy and
practically science became the fountain heads of all norms, standards,
criterions, and values. Divinity was deprived of to regulate the
affairs. So, modern political systems (capitalistic democratic systems
on one side and socialist and communist republicans system on the other
end) emerged from the materialistic interpretations of life and universe
rather than spiritual. These political systems served to their

nations materially but they deprived of them spiritually.Values became
subjective. System should not follow to values but values should follow
to system. But in new interpretations of life and universe values are
going to follow subjective values. Subsequently these societies felled
in spiritual crises.According to Richard Nixon: “In my first inaugural
address twenty years ago, I said: To a crisis of spirit we need an
answer of the spirit. That was true than and that is true today”.
(Hussain, 1998:31)

Islam and Political Thought
===========================

Quran presents a complete code of life which encircles to all aspects of
personality, all corners of life, and all dimensions of universe. Iqbal
has rightly elaborated this fact in his lectures. (First Lecture) There
are number of verses of the Holy Quran which illuminate to this aspect.
For Islam, Quran has used the term Din, which is comprehensive than all
other terms like faith, belief, and religion. Here we quote a verse of
Quran which reflects the gist of divine guidance under the title of
Islam. There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has
become clearly distinct from error; therefore, whoever disbelievers in
the Shaitan and believers in Allah, he indeed has laid hold on the
firmest handle, which shall not break off, and Allah is Hearing,
Knowing. (M.H, 2:256) Above said verse of the Holy Quran guides us
towards following conclusions.

•  There is a tolerance in Din i.e. Islam

•  It is rational

•  It is a complete system of guidance

•  Every approach other than Din is seduction

•  Having belief in Allah means to be undefeatable

•  It provides firm and sound basis

•  Almighty Allah is Omnipotent and Omniscient

•  Islam encircles to all aspects of personality i.e. spiritual,
material, individual, collective, personal, social, internal, and
external

It means Islam encompasses all aspects of life i.e. the life in this
world, the life before this world, and life after this world. (The
confession of Islam necessitates to its follower to have a faith in life
before this world, life in this world, and life after this world.) Adam
A.S. is the first being in this world. In Quran Allah has narrated his
story in detail. He declared him his vicegerent in earth. His
representation is related with the life of all the worlds. Political
Thought of Iqbal We may encircle to whole history of Muslim world in
three ages: Classical (the era of peak), Medieval (the days of decline),
Modern (the age of renaissance). Syed Jamal al Din Afghani is known as
the father of Modern Muslim world. He set the foundations of renaissance
of Muslim world. He struggled throughout the Muslim world. (Unluckily he
remained alien for Muslim lands while the West realized his mission.) He
struggled for the political independence, solidarity, freedom, and
sovereignty of the Muslim world. He put his emphasis on science and
reason along with revelation. Iqbal-a celebrated philosopher, mystic,
theologian, politician, and a wisdom poet of modern Muslim world is his
real precursor. He admired Afghani as the genius of modern Muslim world.
Although Iqbal has derived his political vision from the teachings of
Quran

but he enriched it with all treasuries of knowledge of the east and the
West specifically with the vision of Syed Jamal al Din Afghani. (Iqbal
A. D., Harf e Iqbal, 1984:137)

Iqbal describes that the Islam‟s concept of religion is comprehensive
than all other approaches. (Iqbal A. M., 1963:224) According to Quran,
politics and affairs of state are a section of the multidimensional
teachings of Islam. To fulfill the will of God, to govern the system of
state, to provide equal opportunities to all beings with all justice,
and to maintain peace, harmony, and discipline in this world, Islam
provides a political guidance. Iqbal tried to reevaluate it according to
the needs of time. In this respect he starts his discussion by
describing the concept of Tauhid (concept of God) and determining the
role of being in this universe in the light of Quran. Here is the
conclusion of his standpoint in this regard.

•  God is One (Quran, 112:1)

•  Allah is the light of all heavens and earth (Quran,24:35)

•  The heavens, the earth, and the mountains refused to bear the burden
of God‟s trust while human being received it voluntarily (Quran,33:72)

•  Human being (Adam A.S.) is the chosen of God and God guided him
(Quran,20:122)

•  Human being is a representative of God on earth and God will test him
by what He has given to him (Quran,6:166)

•  God has made the soul perfect. He, who purifies it, is successful and
he, who corrupts it is looser (Quran,91:7-10)

•  Human being has not turned away from heavens with contempt and this
world is not a place of chastisement for him

•  The origin of human being and of everything of this world is
spiritual (Iqbal A. M., 1989:122)

•  For the development of an individual, for a peaceful and purposeful
universe we will have to interpret an individual and this universe on
spiritual basis (Iqbal A. M., 1989:122)

•  We will have to develop all human societies on spiritual basis (Iqbal
A. M., 1989:123)

We may sum up all above discussion in these words. According to Iqbal,
Almighty Allah is the origin of every-thing. Allah is the light of the
heavens and the earth. He has made human being on the best make. (Quran,
95:4) Human being is His representative in this world. Among whole
creature only human being received His trust voluntarily and only he is
the bearer of His trust on earth. He favored human being with a lot of
blessings. Human being is not an expelled and rejected being. His fallen
to this world is not as a chastisement. He is the representative of God
on earth. He has to live in this world according to the will of God. He
has to work hard to govern this universe according to the will of God.
He has to prove that he deserves this designation i.e. a vicegerent of
God. He has to fulfill the will of God in this universe by providing a
moral, ethical, peaceful, just, and safe and sound environment with all
opportunities to all beings with-out any discrimination. To fulfill this
will of God Iqbal presents a socio cum philosophical system. This system
is consisted of two steps i.e.

i. Development of an individual ( by the development of self, inner
self, personality, or ego (Iqbal A. D., Shuzrat e Fikr e Iqbal, 1983:78)

ii. Building of an ideal society by the developed individuals


