The Origin of Human Being
=========================

According to Islam human being is a masterpiece among all other
creation. Its origin is divine and its basis is spiritual. This is the
basic point of Iqbal‟s philosophy. For him God is an absolute spirit.
God is the origin of everything. He has the absolute creator. So,
everything is spiritual by its very nature. Now the question arises,
what will be the basis of the development of this being? All ancient
Greek, modern West and socialist and communist societies made a lot of
efforts for the development and grooming of an individual. But all have
considered human being only a material object and a social animal.
Materiality provokes to selfishness while spirituality nourishes to
sacrifice. So for Iqbal for the development of a beneficial individual
and for the building of an everlasting welfare society we should
consider human being a spiritual object. Spirit has no color, no
boundary and no limit. So spiritually developed being would be
beneficial for whole humanity without any discrimination. Consequently a
society built by spiritually developed beings would be advantageous to
fulfill the will of God in this universe. The West and Separation
between Church and State As we discussed in previously to some extent in
medieval ages in all personal and social dimensions the approach of
Christianity was monastic. All authority was for priests and
authenticity was for religious institutions. All institutions were bound
to follow priests‟ and church. All rational and scientific activities
were prohibited by religious authorities. Society became stagnant. The
movements of renaissance and reformation broken away respectively from
stagnant religious atmosphere of the medieval ages and changed the
intellectual and religious scenario of the West. Iqbal pointed out to
this phenomenon as, “Primitive Christianity was founded, not as a
political or civil unit, but as a monastic order in a profane world,
having nothing to do with civil affairs, and obeying the Roman authority
practically in all matters. The result of this was that when the state
became Christian, state and Church confronted each other as distinct
powers with interminable boundary disputes between them”. (Iqbal A. M.,
1989: 123)


