The Ills of Muslim World
========================

Iqbal pointed out that there were three main ills of Muslim society i.e.
Priesthood, Monastic Sufism, and Dictatorship. He condemned strongly to
these ills of Muslim society. He held that these are the major reasons
of decline of the Muslim world. For him these are as dangerous for a
Muslim society as the separation between state and Church is harmful for
the Western lands. “The ultimate reality, according to the Quran, is
spiritual, and its life consists in its temporal activity. The spirit
finds its opportunities in the natural, the material, the secular. All
that is secular is, therefore, sacred in the roots of its being. The
greatest service that modern thought has rendered to Islam, and as a
matter of fact to all religion, consists in its criticism of what we
call material or natural-a criticism which discloses that the merely
material has no substance until we discover it rooted in the spiritual.
There is no such thing as the profane world. All this immensity of
matter constitutes a scope for the self-realization of spirit. All is
holy ground. As the Prophet so beautifully puts it „The whole of this
earth is a mosque.‟ The state, according to Islam, is only an effort to
realize the spiritual in a human organization. But in this sense all
state, not based on mere domination and aiming at the realization of
ideal principles, is theocratic.” (Iqbal A. M., 1989:123) Iqbal
considers necessary the structuring of a state but he condemns to all
forms of state established on the material interpretation of the
universe. Even he criticized to all democratic forms based on bare human
intellect only. He proposed to spiritual democracy-a form of government
whose ultimate end is absolute reality-an Ultimate Spirit. Concluding
Remarks

•  For Iqbal the origin and ultimate goal of this universe is ultimate
Spirit i.e. God.

•  Human being is a masterpiece of His creation.

•  He held human being as His vicegerent on earth.

•  Human being has to fulfill God‟s will on earth.

•  Human being has two dimensions: both spiritual and material.

•  In respect of his origin human being is spiritual while in respect of
his field of action he is material because he has to fulfill Gods will
in this material world.

•  From Aristotle to modern ages almost all rationalist and empiricists
considered human being a material object only.

•  They interpreted to whole phenomenon of existence on material basis
only.

•  So, matter was considered a spring of all individual, collective,
personal, social, moral, economical, political, and cultural activities.

•  Resultantly they separated church from state i.e. religion from
worldly affairs.

•  Iqbal was of opinion that all problems of humanity in all ages were
due to the material interpretation of life and universe.

•  Along with all other harmful issues the most fatal among all is the
spiritual crises of modern being.

•  The nature of the problems of Muslim world is different from the
West. Majority of the Muslim world is occupied by the most harmful

diseases which corrupt the human societies are Priest Hood, Monastic
Sufism, and Dictatorship.

•  For Iqbal democratic form of government is the best way among all
other approaches to govern the system but he differentiates between
material democracy and spiritual democracy.

•  For him material democracy is as harmful for human societies as are
the priesthood, monastic Sufism, and dictatorship. Spiritual democracy
is the only option by which we save the future of humanity.

•  For spiritual democracy we will have to admit that the ultimate
origin of all existents is spiritual. On the heels of this
acknowledgement we will have to develop individuals, build up societies
and interpret all phenomenon of creation on spiritual basis with in the
material world.


