Chapter 1: The Religious Referential Authority
==============================================

**1. The Religious Authority: Extension of Imamate**

**2. Qualifications and Conditions**

**3. Tasks and Responsibilities**

The Religious Authority: Extension of Imamate
---------------------------------------------

The structure of the system is based on the concept of Imamate in which
the individuals of this community believe. This conception entails that
the overall guardianship and leadership of Muslims must be held by one
of the Twelve Imams from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) after the Holy Prophet
(S).[^1] It also entails that Imamate is an extension of the mission of
the Prophets and Messengers. This extension can be represented in the
following points of similarity between prophethood and Imamate:

(1) The positions of prophethood and Imamate are both identified to be
divinely ordained offices that are prescribed through direct designation
by Almighty Allah, like in the case of the Prophets and Messengers, or
through indirect designation, such as the case of the Holy Imams and
other prophets’ successors. For instance, the Holy Prophet (S), by the
command of Almighty Allah, designated Imam \`Ali to be the next Imam
(i.e. leader). The other Holy Imams (‘a) were specified in the same way
by the preceding Imam.

(2) The particularities and qualifications of the person designated as
Prophet or Imam are the same. Both are, as a stipulation, required to
have the highest degree of perfection, which is called infallibility
(*\`ismah*).

(3) Both a Prophet and an Imam undertake the same responsibilities,
duties, and rights towards the masses and have the same rights, the
observance of which is obligatory upon the masses. Like a Prophet, an
Imam must be obeyed by the public, enjoy general authority over them, be
regarded as having a greater claim over the believers than they have on
themselves, undertake the mission of conveying the divine message,
edify, educate, teach the public the Book and Wisdom, tend to their
affairs, and live at the same level as them. In this respect, the Holy
Qur'an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي بَعَثَ فِي الْأُمِّيِّينَ رَسُولًا مِنْهُمْ يَتْلُو
عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِنْ كَانُوا مِنْ قَبْلُ لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُبِين
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is Who raised among the inhabitants of Mecca a Messenger from
among themselves, who recites to them His communications and purifies
them, and teaches them the Book and the Wisdom, although they were
before certainly in clear error. (62:2)***

The system that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) set forth for managing the affairs
of the virtuous community is based on the aforementioned concept of
Imamate. Even if an Imam is circumstantially deprived of authority and
power to rule, he must still possess all the particularities and
qualifications to undertake all the responsibilities and carry out all
the duties divinely entrusted upon him. The public, on the other hand,
must obey the Imam. All such responsibilities and duties must be
compatible with the circumstances as well as the virtuous community that
is being managed. The ability or inability to perform such
responsibilities and duties would depend upon the circumstances.

In the age of the absence of the Imam, the well-qualified *mujtahid*, in
his capacity as the natural heir of the Prophets and the Imams, must
undertake this mission. The Prophets have in fact not left gold or
silver coins as their legacies, but rather great knowledge and wisdom.
In this respect, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلعُلَمَاءُ مَصَابِيحُ الأَرْضِ، وَخُلَفَاءُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ،
وَوَرَثَتِي، وَوَرَثَةُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The scholars are the lanterns of the earth, the representatives of
prophets, my heirs and the heirs of the prophets.*[^2]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ الْعُلَمَاءَ وَرَثَةُ الأَنْبِيَاءِ، وَذَاكَ أَنَّ الأَنْبِيَاءَ
لَمْ يُوَرِّثُوا دِرْهَماً وَلاَ دِينَاراً؛ وَإنَّمَا أَوْرَثُوا
أَحَادِيثَ مِنْ أَحَادِيثِهِمْ. فَمَنْ أَخَذَ بِشَيْءٍ مِنْهَا فَقَدْ
أَخَذَ حَظّاً وَافِراً. فَانْظُرُوا عِلْمَكُمْ عَمَّنْ تَأْخُذُونَهُ،
فَإنَّ فِينَا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ فِي كُلِّ خَلَفٍ عُدُولاً يَنْفُونَ
عَنْهُ تَحْرِيفَ الْغَالِينَ، وَانْتِحَالَ الْمُبْطِلِينَ، وَتَأْوِيلَ
الْجَاهِلِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, scholars are the heirs of the prophets. The prophets have not
left behind them Dirhams or Dinars; rather, the treasure they have left
behind is their discourses. So, whoever applies some of these discourses
acquires a great share of the fortune. You must consider the source from
which you take your knowledge. Verily, in each generation, there are
some decent people belonging to us, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), who cleanse
this religion from the distortions of the exaggerators, the forgery of
the misguided, and the interpretation of the ignorant ones.*[^3]

The previously mentioned natural sequence (i.e. extension) in the divine
position and representation of the Prophets has been clearly mentioned
in the following verse of the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ ۚ يَحْكُمُ بِهَا
النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا
وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ
اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ ۚ فَلَا تَخْشَوُا النَّاسَ
وَاخْشَوْنِ وَلَا تَشْتَرُوا بِآيَاتِي ثَمَنًا قَلِيلًا ۚ وَمَنْ لَمْ
يَحْكُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, We revealed the Torah in which was guidance and light. With
it, the prophets who submitted themselves to Allah judged matters for
those who were Jews, masters of divine knowledge and doctors, because
they were required to guard part of the Book of Allah, and they were
witnesses thereof; therefore, fear not the people and fear Me, and do
not take a small price for My communications. And whoever did not judge
by what Allah revealed, those are the unbelievers. (5:44)***

Abu-\`Amr al-Zubayri has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّ مِمَّا إسْتُحِقَّتْ بِهِ الإمَامَةُ التَّطْهِيرَ وَالطَّهَارَةَ
مِنَ الذُّنُوبِ وَالْمَعَاصِي الْمُوبِقَةِ الَّتِي تُوجِبُ النَّارَ،
ثُمَّ الْعِلْمَ الْمَكْنُونَ بِجِميعِ مَا يَحْتَاجُ إلَيْهِ الأَمْرُ
مِنْ حَلاَلِهَا وَحَرَامِهَا، وَالْعِلْمَ بِهِ خَاصَّةً وَعَامَّةً،
وَالْمُحْكَمِ وَالْمُتَشَابِهِ وَدَقِائِقِ عِلْمِهِ وَغَرَائِبِ
تَأْوِيلِهِ وَنَاسِخِهِ وَمَنْسُوخِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Among the matters by which one is deservingly designated for Imamate
are purification and purity from sins and destructive acts of
disobedience (to Almighty Allah)—which have an inevitable punishment in
Hellfire—and acquaintance with unseen knowledge of everything the
position (of Imamate) requires, such as, the lawful and unlawful and
full awareness of specific and general matters of law, including
knowledge of decisive and allegorical issues, the minutest details of
the law, the most precise points of interpretation and currently valid
and abrogated matters.*

The reporter asked, “What is the evidence that proves that an Imam must
have full knowledge of the things you have just mentioned?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

> قَوْلُ اللهِ فِي مَنْ أَذِنَ اللهُ لَهُمْ بِالْحُكُومَةِ وَجَعَلَهُمْ
> أَهْلَهَا: "إِنَّا أَنْزَلْنَا التَّوْرَاةَ فِيهَا هُدًى وَنُورٌ ۚ
> يَحْكُمُ بِهَا النَّبِيُّونَ الَّذِينَ أَسْلَمُوا لِلَّذِينَ هَادُوا
> وَالرَّبَّانِيُّونَ وَالْأَحْبَارُ" {44} فَهَذِهِ الأَئِمَّةُ دُونَ
> الأَنْبِيَاءِ الَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ النَّاسَ بِعِلْمِهِمْ، وَأَمَّا
> الأَحْبَارُ فَهُمُ الْعُلَمَاءُ دُونَ الرَّبَّانِيِّينَ. ثُمَّ
> أَخْبَرَ فَقَالَ: "بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا
> عَلَيْهِ شُهَدَاءَ"  {44}

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَقُلْ بِمَا حُمِّلُوا مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The proof is Almighty Allah’s statement about those whom He has
permitted to hold the position of government and those whom He has
stated to be the actual men of authority. He says,* ***‘Surely, We
revealed the Torah in which was guidance and light; with it the prophets
who submitted themselves to Allah judged matters for those who were Jews
and the masters of Divine knowledge and the doctors. (5:44)’*** *These
are Imams not Prophets who inherit the authority over people due to
their knowledge. The doctors are the scholars whose rank is less than
that of the masters of divine knowledge. After that, Almighty Allah
continues to say, ‘Because they were required to guard part of the Book
of Allah, and they were witnesses thereof.’ Notice that He has not said,
‘because they were required to convey it.’*[^4]

A *mujtahid* who represents ‘the doctors’ in the aforementioned holy
verse must be characterized by the required qualifications that are held
by the Imams–who represent ‘the masters of divine knowledge’–in the
amount that is compatible with him (the *mujtahid*), his
responsibilities, and rights. These qualifications are:

(1) Full acquaintance with religious laws

(2) Utmost decency

(3) Other personal qualifications to include:

(a) Awareness of political and social conditions

(b) Personal experience of the advantages and disadvantages linked to
the movement and perfection of the virtuous community

(c) Courage to implement difficult, yet required, decisions

(d) Ability to take responsibility and lead the movement

(e) Maintenance of equality among the believers

(f) Presenting an exceptional example of conduct

Similarly, a *mujtahid* must enjoy the same rights and duties of the
Holy Imams, yet again, in the amount that is compatible with his level
of leadership.

This understanding and view of the general system of the virtuous
society is an important issue because many responsibilities,
relationships, policies, systems, courses, and situations that are
compatible with the theoretical comprehension of the Prophets’ movements
and their roles in the history of humanity as well as the norms that
have affected history, branch out from this understanding.

The System of Religious Referential Authority
---------------------------------------------

Based on this theoretical foundation, the Holy Imams (‘a) established
the system of religious referential authority or the position of the
well-qualified jurisprudential authority (*wilayat al-faqih*). In brief,
this system can be defined as designating a *mujtahid*[^5] from the
scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School, who fully meets all the
previously cited qualifications and requirements, as a referential
authority (*marji\`*) for their followers with the aim of undertaking
the basic tasks of Imamate, which are as follows:

(1) Authority (*wilayah*) over the affairs of the Muslims

(2) Issuance of verdicts (*ifta'*) in order to explicate the concepts of
the Divine Message, define the boundaries of religion and convey good
tidings to those who commit themselves to them and warn people to
refrain from acting outside those confines

(2) Reaching decisions on judgments in cases of litigation, allegations,
and disputes

A review of the history of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) shows that while they
practiced their roles as Imams in a limited way within the milieu of the
virtuous community, they began establishing this system (religious
referential authority) with the growth of the virtuous community. As a
result, the circle of the virtuous community’s works, activities, and
existence extended to such an extent that this system became the basic
and general system in the ages after the Holy Imams (‘a).

As will be discussed in further detail, the Holy Imams (‘a) themselves
established this system for the virtuous community by managing some of
the affairs among the masses so that this would play a pertinent role in
building the virtuous community and become an effective, reliable and
sufficient system after the occultation of Imam al-Mahdi–may Allah
hasten his advent.

*It can be said that the most important and basic role of the Imams
al-Jawad, al-Hadi, and al-\`Askari, was to firm up and consolidate the
posts of the system of religious referential authority.*[^6]

In order to depict the religious referential authority completely and
clearly, we should have a lengthier discussion about the qualifications
that must be met by a *marji\`*, the tasks that must be undertaken by
him, and the steps that the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took in the field of
organizing the virtuous community.[^7]

Qualifications and Requirements
-------------------------------

In addition to the basic requirements for the position of the religious
referential authority—such as reason, freedom, and faith—the chief
qualifications that a *marji\`* is required to meet are as follows:

**A. Ijtihad**: *Ijtihad*, as a condition for holding religious
authority, means that a *marji\`* is required to have familiarity with
religious laws, including the lawful and unlawful, and Islamic concepts
to such an extent that he has the ability to recognize these laws and
concepts from the religiously acceptable proofs—the Holy Qur'an and the
Sunnah that is authentically reported from the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Imams (‘a) as well as other proofs—and to use the rules and practical
principles that have been determined by the Holy Legislator in order to
identify the practical, religion-based circumstances of an issue.

This qualification has been cited by the previously mentioned verse in
general, and in the following section of the verse in particular:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"بِمَا اسْتُحْفِظُوا مِنْ كِتَابِ اللَّهِ وَكَانُوا عَلَيْهِ
شُهَدَاءَ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…Because they were required to guard part of the Book of Allah, and
they were witnesses thereof.***

Confirmation of such knowledge has been made in many traditions that are
reported from the Holy Imams (‘a), including the following which is
authentically reported from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and is recorded under the
title of choosing an arbitrator to judge between disputants:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْظُرَانِ مَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ مِمَّنْ رَوَى حَدِيثَنَا وَنَظَرَ فِي
حَلاَلِنَا وَحَرَامِنَا وَعَرَفَ أَحْكَامَنَا، فَلْيَرْضُوا بِهِ
حَكَماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They (i.e. the disputant parties) must seek out one of you (i.e. the
Shi\`ah) who has reported our discourses, has acquaintance with what has
been deemed lawful and what has been deemed unlawful by us, and has
familiarity with our laws; then, they must accept him as
arbitrator.*[^8]

On the authority of Imam \`Ali (‘a), Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (‘a)
reported the Holy Prophet (S) to have repeated the following
supplicatory prayer three times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إرْحَمْ خُلَفَائِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, (please) have mercy upon my representatives.*

When he was asked to define his representatives, the Holy Prophet (S)
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَأْتُونَ بَعْدِي، يَرْوُونَ حَدِيثِي وَسُنَّتِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My representatives are those, among the coming generations, who will
report my sayings and traditions.*[^9]

The following instruction has been mentioned in the famous document
signed by Imam al-Mahdi—the Patron of the Age:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْحَوَادِثُ الْوَاقِعَةُ فَارْجِعُوا فِيهَا إلَى رُوَاةِ
حَدِيثِنَا، فَإنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي عَلَيْكُمْ، وَأَنَا حُجَّةُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for the events that will take place in the future, you must refer
them to the reporters of our traditions, for they are my proof on you
and I am the Proof of Almighty Allah.*

In addition, there are other traditions—some of which will be cited
later—confirming that the ordinary followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
must refer to the well-versed and well-qualified scholars of their sect
with respect to the religious laws. There are also other traditions that
order the well-versed scholars to issue verdicts.

**B. Decency**: According to jurisprudents, decency can be defined as
uprightness in following Islamic laws and avoidance of deviation. In
other words, a decent person is one who never commits any act of
disobedience to Almighty Allah, such as negligence of an obligatory act
or commitment of a forbidden act unless there is a religiously
justifiable reason. In this respect, there is no difference between
minor or major sins.[^10]

Decency is a disposition involving integrity in following Islam such
that neither a major nor a minor sin is committed.[^11]

Decency can be also defined as the faculty that habitually prevents one
from performing acts of disobedience for which Almighty Allah has
threatened Hellfire. This is not the same as regret that is felt after
lust or anger vanishes because in regret the person experiences
degeneration caused by such an act of disobedience.[^12]12

Imam al-Khumayni has mentioned a similar definition of decency in
*Tahrir al-Wasilah*.[^13]

Sayyid al-Hakim seems to consider the decency that must be enjoyed by a
*marji\`*, as understood by religious believers (i.e. *mutasharri\`ah*),
to be such a supreme rank that it is neither compelled nor overcome by
lust or anger in such a way that neither repentance nor regret will be
necessary. “To be fair,” Sayyid al-Hakim adds, “it is extremely
difficult for a general referential authority to persevere with decency
in the issuance of verdicts–and this may take place in any age for a
single or a group of scholars–unless such decency is of a powerful and
supreme rank and is always monitored and managed. If such a rank of
decency is lacking, this will definitely cause one’s feet to slip and
expose great men to hazards. Only from Almighty Allah can we seek
protection against such dangers.”[^14]

Because traditions have highlighted the existence of decency among the
qualities of witnesses that testify, leaders of congregational prayers,
and leaders of holy wars in particular in addition to leaders of general
affairs as well as other persons, religious scholars have concluded that
decency must be one of the qualifications for a general referential
authority. The scholars have unanimously agreed on this condition.

Moreover, the rationally approvable line of conduct (i.e. *al-Sirah
al-\`uqala'iyyah*) that is assented by the Holy Legislator also confirms
this condition, as is maintained by both Sunni and Shi\`ite
scholars.[^15]

In this respect, a tradition that is reported from Imam Muhammad
al-Baqir (‘a) states that the Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَصْلُحُ الإمَامَةُ إلاَّ لِرَجُلٍ فِيهِ ثَلاَثُ خِصَالٍ: وَرَعٌ
يَحْجُزُهُ عَنْ مَعَاصِي اللهِ، وَحِلْمٌ يَمْلِكُ بِهِ غَضَبَهُ،
وَحُسْنُ الْوِلاَيَةِ عَلَى مَنْ يَلِي حَتَّى يَكُونَ لَهُمْ
كَالْوَالِدِ الرَّحِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Imamate is unsuitable for anyone except a man who enjoys the following
three qualities: (1) piety that prevents him from committing acts of
disobedience to Almighty Allah, (2) self-possession that makes him
control himself in situations of rage, and (3) affectionate authority
over those who are under his authority to the degree that he acts as
their tender father.*[^16]

Shaykh al-Kulayni has also reported through an authentic chain of
authority on the authority of Muhammad ibn Muslim that Imam al-Baqir
(‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللهِ، يَا مُحَمَّدُ، مَنْ أَصْبَحَ مِنْ هَذِهِ الأُمَّةِ لاَ
إِمَامٌ لَهُ مِنَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ ظَاهِرٌ عَادِلٌ، أَصْبَحَ
ضَالاًّ تَائِهاً، وَإنْ مَاتَ عَلَى هَذِهِ الْحَالَةِ مَاتَ مِيتَةَ
كُفْرٍ وَنِفَاقٍ. وَاعْلَمْ، يَا مُحَمَّدُ، أَنَّ أَئِمَّةَ الْجَوْرِ
وَأَتْبَاعَهُمْ لَمَعْزُولُونَ عَنْ دِينِ اللهِ، قَدْ ضَلُّوا
وَأَضَلُّوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Muhammad, I swear by Allah that if any one of this nation begins his
day without having a leader (i.e. Imam) characterized by directness and
decency, who is designated by Almighty Allah, he is then certainly
misled and lost. If he dies in such a state, he will have then died the
death of unbelief and hypocrisy. Be it known to you, Muhammad, that
leaders of injustice and their followers are detached from the religion
of Allah, for they have strayed from the right path and misled
others.*[^17]

**C. Competence**: Competence stands for aptitude, capability, and power
to manage affairs. It thus includes proficient reasoning, excellent
management, courage, fair policy, supervision, and guardianship along
with other personal qualities upon which competence relies.

In their verdicts, scholars have highlighted competence as a term
specified to be among the qualities of a religious referential
authority. For instance, in his book of *Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha'*,
\`Allamah al-Hilli has referred to the term of competence as being one
of the indisputable conditions that is unanimously agreed upon by all
jurisprudents. He thus says:

Among the conditions that must be met by an Imam is that…he must be
courageous, have a judicious view and be competent. In addition, his
hearing, sight, and pronunciation must be sound. Finally, he must be the
most virtuous of his contemporaries.[^18]

This condition has also been confirmed in many traditions. Imam \`Ali
Amir al-Mu'minin ('a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ، إنَّ أَحَقَّ النَّاسِ بِهَذَا الأَمْرِ أَقْوَاهُمْ
عَلَيْهِ وَأَعْلَمُهُمْ بِأَمْرِ اللهِ فِيهِ. فَإنْ شَغِبَ شَاغِبٌ
اِسْتُعْتِبَ، فَإنْ أَبَى قُوتِلَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people, the most rightful of all persons to hold this office
(leadership) is the one who is most competent among them to maintain it
and who knows best Almighty Allah’s commands about it. If any mischief
is created by a mischief-monger, he will be called upon to repent. If he
refuses, he will be fought.*[^19]

Imam \`Ali ('a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالثَّانِي أَنْ يَكُونَ أَعْلَمَ النَّاسِ بِحَلاَلِ اللهِ وَحَرَامِهِ
وَضُرُوبِهِ وَأَحْكَامِهِ وَأَمْرِهِ وَنَهْيِهِ وَجَمِيعِ مَا
يَحْتَاجُ إلَيْهِ النَّاسُ، فَيَحْتَاجُ إلَيْهِ النَّاسُ وَيَسْتَغْنِي
عَنْهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The second quality (of one who must have the leadership of the Muslim
nation) is that he must be the most knowledgeable among all people of
what Almighty Allah has deemed lawful and unlawful as well as all the
laws, commands, prohibitions and whatever is needed by people, as
decided by Almighty Allah. So, people will need such a person but that
person does not need them.*[^20]

In his authentic report, al-\`Ays ibn al-Qasim has reported Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانْظُرُوا لأَِنْفُسِكُمْ؛ فَوَاللهِ، إنَّ الرَّجُلَ لَيَكُونُ لَهُ
الْغَنَمُ فِيهَا الرَّاعِي، فَإذَا وَجَدَ رَجُلاً أَعْلَمَ بِغَنَمِهِ
مِنَ الَّذِي هُوَ فِيهَا يَمُجُّهُ وَيَجِيءُ بِذَلِكَ الرَّجُلِ
الَّذِي هُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِغَنَمِهِ مِنَ الَّذِي كَانَ فِيهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*…Choose for yourselves; I swear by Allah, an owner of a flock of sheep
who has hired a shepherd must certainly dismiss his shepherd and appoint
another if he finds that the latter is more skilled in shepherding his
sheep than the earlier.*[^21]

In a previous tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) has mentioned ‘nice
authority’ as one of the conditions of an Imam. This quality corresponds
with competence.

Describing an Imam, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالإمَامُ عَالِمٌ لاَ يَجْهَلُ وَرَاعٍ لاَ يَنْكِلُ... نَامِي
الْعِلْمِ، كَامِلُ الْحِلْمِ، مُضْطَلِعٌ بِالإمَامَةِ، عَالِمٌ
بِالسِّيَاسَةِ، مَفْرُوضُ الطَّاعَةِ، قَائِمٌ بِأَمْرِ اللهِ، نَاصِحٌ
لِعِبَادِ اللهِ، حَافِظٌ لِدِينِ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*An Imam is so knowledgeable that he ignores nothing, so watchful that
he never tires…He is of ever-growing knowledge and perfect
self-possession. He is well-versed in (the affairs of)* *Imamate, is
knowledgeable of politics, is obeyed as an obligation, undertakes his
tasks by Almighty Allah’s command, is a well-wisher of Allah’s servants,
and safeguards the religion of Allah…*[^22]

Tasks and Responsibilities
--------------------------

The tasks and responsibilities of the system of the religious
referential authority of the virtuous community can be summed up in the
following three fields:

(1) Issuance of verdictsIssuance of verdictsIssuance of verdicts

(2) Judgment

(3) Authority

Generally, these three areas of responsibility correspond with the
responsibilities of Imamate, especially when we understand issuance of
verdicts in its expansive meaning, which is to elucidate and propagate
the Islamic code of religious law, along with its rules, concepts,
doctrines, and views about the universe, life, history, norms, and
ethics.

### a) First Responsibility: Issuance of Verdicts

In order to systematize the process of issuing verdicts for elucidating
features of the religion and propagating Islam the Holy Imams (‘a) took
the following steps:

#### (1) Education

The Holy Imams (‘a) worked towards educating well-versed jurisprudents,
scholars, and reporters of their traditions by means of conferring upon
them special attention that they (i.e. the Holy Imams) used to give
certain persons who had extraordinary interest in seeking knowledge, had
actual competence to receive knowledge, and possessed the required
scientific aptitude. These persons then became distinguished in
scientific and moral fields. In addition to these persons, the Holy
Imams ('a) educated a large number of students in jurisprudence and
other fields of religious sciences and capable learners of the Holy
Qur'an who lived in various regions of the virtuous community,
especially the regions where their followers were considerable in
number.

Such education can be evidently noticed in personalities like Aban ibn
Taghlib, Zurarah ibn A\`yun, Abu-Basir, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Burayd
al-\`Ujali, Yunus ibn \`Abd al-Rahman, \`Uthman ibn Sa\`id and his son
Muhammad, and many others.

Abu’l-\`Abbas al-Fadhl ibn \`Abd al-Malik has reported that he heard
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَبُّ النَّاسِ إلَيَّ أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتاً أَرْبَعَةٌ: بُرَيْدُ
بْنُ مُعَاوِيَةَ الْعُجَلِيُّ، وَزُرَارَةُ، وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ مُسْلِمٍ،
وَالأَحْوَلُ. وَهُمْ أَحَبُّ النَّاسِ إلَيَّ أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The most beloved persons to me, from among both the dead and the alive,
are four: (1) Burayd ibn Mu\`awiyah al-\`Ujali, (2) Zurarah, (3)
Muhammad ibn Muslim, and (4) al-Ahwal. These are positively the most
beloved persons to me from among all the dead and the alive.*[^23]

Ibrahim ibn \`Abd al-Hamid and others have reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَحِمَ اللهُ زُرَارَةَ بْنَ أَعْيُنٍ. لَولاَ زُرَارَةُ وَنُظَرَاؤُهُ
لاَنْدَرَسَتْ أَحَادِيثُ أَبِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May Allah have mercy upon Zurarah ibn A\`yun. Had it not been for
Zurarah and his peers, the traditions of my father would have been wiped
out.*[^24]

Sulayman ibn Khalid has said that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَجِدُ أَحَداً أَحْيَا ذِكْرَنَا وَأَحَادِيثَ أَبِي إلاَّ
زُرَارَةَ، وَأبَا بَصِيرٍ لَيْثَ الْمُرَادِيَّ، وَمُحَمَّدَ بْنَ
مُسْلِمٍ وَبُرَيْدَ بْنَ مُعَاوِيَةَ العُجَلِيَّ. وَلَوْلاَ هَؤُلاَءِ
مَا كَانَ أَحَدٌ يَسْتَنْبِطُ هَذَا. هَؤُلاَءِ حُفَّاظُ الدِّينِ
وَأُمَنَاءُ أَبِي عَلَى حَلاَلِ اللهِ وَحَرَامِهِ. وَهُمُ
السَّابِقُونَ إلَيْنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالسَّابِقُونَ إلَيْنَا فِي
الآخِرَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I cannot find anyone who revived our affairs and my father’s traditions
save Zurarah, Abu-Basir Layth al-Muradi, Muhammad ibn Muslim, and Burayd
ibn Mu\`awiyah al-\`Ujali. Had it not been for these persons, none would
have had the ability to infer this. These are the protectors of the
religion and the trustees of my father regarding the lawful and the
unlawful that Almighty Allah has determined. They are verily the
forerunners toward us in this world and the forerunners toward us in the
Hereafter.*[^25]

Abu-\`Ubaydah al-Hadhdha' is reported to have said that he heard Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

> زُرَارَةُ وَأَبُو بَصِيرٍ وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ مُسْلِمٍ وَبُرَيْدٌ مِنَ
> الَّذِينَ قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: وَالسَّابِقُونَ
> السَّابِقُونَ {10}أُولَٰئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ {11}

*Zurarah, Abu-Basir, Muhammad ibn Muslim, and Burayd are among those
about whom Almighty Allah has said, ‘And the foremost are the foremost;
these are they who are drawn nigh to Allah. (56:10-11)’*[^26]

\`Abdullah ibn Abi-Ya\`fur has reported that he said to Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a), “I cannot meet you every time I would like, and I cannot come to
you. However, one of our parties may come to me and ask a question while
I do not have all the answers.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَمْنَعُكَ مِنْ مُحَمَّدِ بْنِ مُسْلِمٍ الثَّقَفِيِّ؟ فَإنَّهُ
سَمِعَ مِنْ أَبِي وَكَانَ عِنْدَهُ وَجِيهاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What prevents you from asking Muhammad ibn Muslim al-Thaqafi? He heard
from my father and he had considerable status with him.*[^27]

Yunus ibn Ya\`qub has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to him and
his companions when they once visited him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ مَفْزَعٍ؟ أَمَا لَكُمْ مِنْ مُسْتَرَاحٍ
تَسْتَرِيحُونَ إلَيْهِ؟ مَا يَمْنَعُكُمْ مِنَ الْحَارِثِ بْنِ
الْمُغِيرَةِ النَّضْرِيِّ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Do you not have any shelter? Do you not have any rest-house to rest in?
What prevents you from joining al-Harith ibn al-Mughirah
al-Nadhri?*[^28]

Jamil ibn Darraj has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), condemning
someone, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ قَدَّسَ اللهُ رُوحَهُ، وَلاَ قَدَّسَ مِثْلَهُ! إنَّهُ ذَكَرَ
أَقْوَاماً كَانَ أَبِي ائْتَمَنَهُمْ عَلَى حَلاَلِ اللهِ وَحَرَامِهِ،
وَكَانُوا عَيْبَةَ عِلْمِهِ. وَكَذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ هُمْ عِنْدِي
مُسْتَوْدَعَ سِرِّي وَأَصْحَابَ أَبِي حَقّاً. إذَا أَرَادَ اللهُ
بِأَهْلِ الأَرْضِ سُوءاً صَرَفَ بِهِمْ عَنْهُمُ السُّوءَ. هُمْ نُجُومُ
شِيعَتِي أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتاً. هُمُ الَّذِينَ أَحْيَوْا ذِكْرَ
أَبِي. بِهِمْ يَكْشِفُ اللهُ كُلَّ بِدْعَةٍ، يَنْفُونَ عَنْ هَذَا
الدِّينِ إنْتِحَالَ الْمُبْطِلِينَ وَتَأْوِيلَ الْغَالِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*May Allah sanctify neither his soul nor the souls of his likes! He
reviled some personalities whom my father used to entrust with the
lawful and the unlawful matters that have been decided by Almighty Allah
and they were the store of his knowledge! Similarly, these very persons
are the hoards of my secrets and true companions of my father. If
Almighty Allah wills to pour a misfortune on the inhabitants of this
earth, he may save them from this misfortune for the sake of these
persons in particular. They are verily the stars of my followers (i.e.
Shi\`ah) in their lifetimes and after their death. It is they who
revived the affairs of my father. By them, Almighty Allah exposes all
heresies. They save this religion from the fabrications of the
wrongdoers and the misinterpretations of the exaggerators.*

The Imam (‘a) then wept. I (the reporter) asked, “Who are these?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَلَيْهِمْ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ، وَعَلَيْهِمْ رَحْمَتُهُ أَحْيَاءً
وَأَمْوَاتاً: بُرَيْدُ الْعُجَلِيُّ وَأَبُو بَصِيرٍ وَزُرَارَةُ
وَمُحَمَّدُ بْنُ مُسْلِمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah’s blessings and mercy be upon them in their lifetimes and after
their death. They are Burayd al-\`Ujali, Abu-Basir, Zurarah, and
Muhammad ibn Muslim.*[^29]

Dawud ibn Sarhan has reported that he heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنِّي لأُحَدِّثُ الرَّجُلَ بِالْحَدِيثِ، وَأَنْهَاهُ عَنِ الْجِدَالِ
وَالْمِرَاءِ فِي دِينِ اللهِ، وَأَنْهَاهُ عَنِ الْقِيَاسِ، فَيَخْرُجُ
مِنْ عِنْدِي فَيَتَأَوَّلُ حَدِيثِي عَلَى غَيْرِ تَأْوِيلِهِ... إنَّ
أَصْحَابَ أَبِي كَانُوا زَيْناً أَحْيَاءً وَأَمْوَاتاً. أَعْنِي
زُرَارَةَ وَمُحَمَّدَ بْنَ مُسْلِمٍ وَمِنْهُمْ لَيْثُ الْمُرَادِيُّ
وَبُرَيْدُ الْعُجَلِيُّ. هَؤُلاَءِ الْقَائِلُونَ بِالْقِسْطِ،
هَؤُلاَءِ الْقَوَّامُونَ بِالْقِسْطِ، هَؤُلاَءِ السَّابِقُونَ
السَّابِقُونَ أُولَئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When I hold a discourse with some men and warn them against argument
and disputation in matters concerning the religion of Almighty Allah and
against analogy, they misinterpret my discourse as soon as they leave
me….*

*The companions of my father were good examples in their lifetimes and
after their death. These are Zurarah, Muhammad ibn Muslim, Layth
al-Muradi, and Burayd al-\`Ujali. It is these people who speak fairly.
It is these people who are the maintainers of justice. It is these who
are the foremost—the foremost who are drawn near to Allah.*[^30]

#### (2) Undertaking the Mission of Issuing Verdicts

The Holy Imams (‘a) specially directed the best among their companions
and those distinguished by knowledge and virtue to undertake the mission
of issuing verdicts and reporting their traditions to the next
generations of the virtuous community. Sometimes, the Holy Imams (‘a)
would direct these elite companions to give legal opinions to the
Muslims of other sects according to each individual’s sect so that these
personalities would take their natural role in the Muslim community and,
at the same time, maintain the virtuous community and its
particularities as a favor.

In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said to Mu\`adh
ibn Muslim al-Nahawi (the grammarian), “I have been informed that you
sit in the mosque and give legal opinions to people.”

“Yes, I do,” Mu\`adh answered, “and I wanted to ask you about this
before I left you. As I sit in the mosque, people come to ask me
questions. When I know that the asker is an opponent of you, I answer
him according to the other sects’ opinion. When I know that the asker is
a follower of you, I answer him according to what you have said about
his question. However, it happens that a man whose sect I cannot
recognize comes to me, so I answer by saying that so-and-so scholar says
this, and so-and-so scholar says that. Hence, I include your sayings
along with the others’ opinions.”

The Imam (‘a) answered, “Good, continue in this way, because I myself do
it.”[^31]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إعْرِفُوا مَنَازِلَ شِيعَتِنَا بِقَدْرِ مَا يُحْسِنُونَ مِنْ
رِوَايَاتِهِمْ عَنَّا. فَإنَّا لاَ نَعُدُّ الفَقِيهَ مِنْهُمْ فَقِيهاً
حَتَّى يَكُونَ مُحَدِّثاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Recognize the ranks of our followers (i.e. Shi\`ah) according to the
extent to which they master reporting our traditions. Verily, we cannot
consider one to be a real jurisprudent (i.e. faqih) until one is a
proven traditionist (i.e. reporter of our traditions).*

The Imam (‘a) was asked, “Is it possible that a faithful believer
receives from the angels directly?”

He answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(الْمُؤْمِنُ) يَكُونُ مُفَهَّماً، وَالْمُفَهَّمُ الْمُحَدَّثُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A faithful believer may receive explanations from the angels. Hence,
one who receives explanations is receiving them directly from the
angels.*[^32]

#### (3) Asking people to refer to well-versed scholars

The Holy Imams (‘a) used to draw the attention of the masses towards
referring to the elite companions and distinguished scholars in
questions of religion in general and religious laws in particular so
that the structure of the virtuous community could be accomplished in
their lives. In this way, when the next generations of the virtuous
community would refer to the well-versed scholars in religious issues,
this significant feature would be automatically entrenched in the milieu
of the virtuous community.

Ahmad ibn Ishaq has reported that he asked Imam Abu’l-Hasan al-Ridha
(‘a), “With whom should I deal? From whom should I take (answers to my
religious questions)? Whose word should I accept as true?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلعُمَرِيُّ ثِقَتِي، فَمَا أَدَّى عَنِّي فَعَنِّي يُؤَدِّي، وَمَا
قَالَ عَنِّي فَعَنِّي يَقُولُ. فَاسْمَعْ لَهُ وَأَطِعْ، فَإنَّهُ
الثِّقَةُ الْمَأْمُونُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-\`Umari is my trustee. So, whatever he conveys to you on behalf of
me is truly conveyed on behalf of me. Whatever he says to you on behalf
of me is truly said on behalf of me. So, you must listen to and obey
him. He is verily, an honest trustee.*

When the reporter put the same question before Imam Abu-Muhammad (‘a),
he answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلعُمَرِيُّ وَابْنُهُ ثِقَتَانِ، فَمَا أَدَّيَا عَنِّي فَعَنِّي
يُؤَدِّيَانِ، وَمَا قَالاَ لَكَ فَعَنِّي يَقُولاَنِ، فَاسْمَعْ لَهُمَا
وَأَطِعْهُمَا، فَإنَّهُمَا الثِّقَتَانِ الْمَأْمُونَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Al-\`Umari and his son are trustworthy. So, whatever they convey to you
on behalf of me is truly conveyed on behalf of me. Whatever they say to
you on behalf of me is truly said on behalf of me. So, you must listen
to and obey them. They are verily honest trustees.*

The reporter once asked al-\`Umari a certain question and al-\`Umari
answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُحَرَّمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ أَنْ تَسْأَلُوا عَنْ ذَلِكَ. وَلاَ أَقُولُ هَذَا
مِنْ عِنْدِي، فَلَيْسَ لِي أَنْ أُحَلِّلَ وَلاَ أُحَرِّمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is forbidden for you all (i.e. the Shi\`ah) to ask this question. Do
not cite such a thing from me. I have no right to forbid or deem things
lawful.*[^33]

Isma\`il ibn al-Fadhl al-Hashimi has reported that he asked Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) about temporary marriage (i.e. *mut\`ah*).

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلْقَ عَبْدَ الْمَلِكِ بْنَ جُرَيْحٍ فَسَلْهُ عَنْهَا، فَإنَّ عِنْدَهُ
مِنْهَا عِلْماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You may find \`Abd al-Malik ibn Jurayh and address this question to
him, because he has considerable knowledge of this matter.*

The reporter said: I therefore met with \`Abd al-Malik who dictated a
great deal of knowledge to me proving the legality of temporary
marriage. Within the matters that \`Abd al-Malik has reported about
temporary marriage is that its term and number are limitless.

I then brought the paper dictated by \`Abd al-Malik to Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) and he, confirming it, replied, “These dictations are true.”[^34]

Al-Mufadhdhal ibn \`Umar has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) during a
long discourse to al-Faydh ibn al-Mukhtar said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإذَا أَرَدْتَ حَدِيثَنَا فَعَلَيْكَ بِهَذَا الْجَالِسِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*If you want to be on familiar terms with our traditions, you must join
the sessions of this man.*

When I asked our companions about the man whom the Imam (‘a) had
indicated, they answered, “He is Zurarah ibn A\`yun.”[^35]

\`Ali ibn al-Musayyab al-Hamadani has reported that he once said to Imam
al-Ridha (‘a), “My home is far away, and I cannot visit you any time I
want. From whom should I acquire matters of the religion?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…مِنْ زَكَرِيَّا بْنِ آدَمَ الْقُمِّيِّ، الْمَأْمُونِ عَلَى الدِّينِ
وَالدُّنْيَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You should receive them from Zakariyya ibn Adam al-Qummi, the one
entrusted with worldly and religious affairs.*

The reporter added: When I left, I visited Zakariyya ibn Adam and asked
him everything I needed.[^36]

\`Abd al-\`Aziz ibn al-Muhtadi and al-Hasan ibn \`Ali ibn Yaqtin have
both reported that they asked Imam al-Ridha (‘a), “We can with
difficulty present ourselves before you whenever we want to ask you
about what we need from the matters of our religion. Is Yunus ibn \`Abd
al-Rahman so trustworthy that we can receive from him whatever we need
about the matters of religion?”

The Imam (‘a) answered in the affirmative.[^37]

Al-Fadhl ibn Shadhan has reported \`Abd al-\`Aziz al-Muhtadi—describing
him as the best of the people of Qum he had ever met and the
representative of Imam al-Ridha ('a) and one of his elite companions—as
saying, “I said to Imam al-Ridha, ‘I cannot visit you whenever I want
to, so from whom should I acquire the matters of religion?’

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ عَنْ يُونُسَ بْنِ عَبْدِ الرَّحْمَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You should take them from Yunus ibn \`Abd al-Rahman.*[^38]

### b) Second Responsibility: Judgment

Judgment, in the sense of deciding judicially which party of two
disputants is rightful and which is not, is considered one of the most
important issues in the organization of the Muslim community in general
and the virtuous community in particular. It is, moreover, one of the
basic topics for which the Divine Books were revealed and the Divine
Messages were given to Prophets and Messengers of Almighty Allah.

This is because judgment is correlated with matters of disputation and
contention among people—an issue that coexisted with the first brick in
the human structure of life. Throughout the various ages of human
progression, this issue has always had such a special significance that
it gave man the idea that the issues of government and establishment of
states are originally and inseparably connected with the issue of
judgment with which the state develops into a social system.

Being connected to issues of contention and disputation, judgment seems
complicated to some extent. In some cases, both parties of litigation
believe that they are right. Moreover, the result of judgment can
sometimes be opposite to the factual right causing more complication,
since the owner of the right may be judicially forced to abandon his
right and keep silent because of a judgment made by a judge.

In view of all this, the Holy Qur'an connects faith with surrender to
the judgment that is issued by the Holy Prophet (S). Hence, it reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But no! By your Lord! They do not truly believe until they make you a
judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement among them, and
then do not find any resistance in their hearts as to what you have
decided and submit with entire submission. (4:65)***

The Holy Prophet (S), who is divinely infallible and connected with
divine revelation, took precautions for himself and for his authority
among Muslims, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنَّمَا أَقْضِي بَيْنَكُمْ بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَالأَيْمَانِ، وَبَعْضُكُمْ
أَلْحَنُ بِحُجَّتِهِ مِنْ بَعْضٍ، فَأَيمَّا رَجُلٍ قَطَعْتُ لَهُ مِنْ
مَالِ أَخِيهِ شَيْئاً فَإنَّما قَطَعْتُ لَهُ بِهِ قِطْعَةً مِنْ نَارٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I can only judge between you on the bases of evidence and oaths, and
some of you may provide their evidence more convincingly than others.
So, if I deem a portion of the property of someone to be for another,
this will mean that I have decided a piece of Hellfire for him.*[^39]

Judgment, in the aforesaid tradition, does not include decisions made
based on Unseen Divine Knowledge (*al-ghayb al-ilahi*). Judgments based
on presented evidence may sometimes be contrary to actual fact, such as
in cases when a plaintiff cannot find evidence to prove his claim, when
a defendant swears falsely to gain the decision, or when a defendant
refers taking an oath to the plaintiff who refrains from taking it out
of fear of Almighty Allah and thus relinquishes his right so that the
case is won by the defendant. The defendant might also provide false
witnesses who apparently seem righteous and thus the judge may accept
their testimony and issue a judgment contrary to reality.

The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) encountered a real problem in the
milieus of the virtuous community when they attempted to fill this
crucial gap in the general system of the virtuous community. Therefore,
they found a veritable and practical solution.

The problem of flawless judgment has various aspects some of which are
related to the ruling authority since the position of a judge is an
official position that requires permission determined and given by the
ruling authority. This is the point of difference between judicature,
being a governmental position, and issuance of verdicts, which was
practiced by any well-versed scholar, traditionist, or student of
jurisprudence without need for permission.

Other aspects are related to the executive and procedural power. A judge
may settle a dispute by a sentence that he issues, but the actual
executor of this sentence is the executive power, such as the police and
other governmental agencies that use power to put that sentence into
action when a party of the lawsuit refrains from submitting to the
judge’s sentence. As for the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), they
did not have such executive power.

Other aspects are related to the community itself, be it a reluctance of
qualified persons to assume this precise and sensitive job or be it the
masses’ response and commitment to the decisions issued by the Holy
Imams (‘a).

Despite all these impediments, the Holy Imams (‘a) succeeded in creating
an active and functioning system of judicature during the span of their
actual lifetimes which continued to survive during other ages. To
achieve this goal, the Holy Imams (‘a) provided an exceptional form of
judgment that is characterized by exactitude, flexibility, and lucidity.
This form can be found in their traditions about judgment.

#### True Judgment

Let us refer to some aspects and steps that the Holy Imams (‘a)
developed in order to establish their exceptional form of judgment:

**A.** The Holy Imams (‘a) severely condemned individuals who presented
their lawsuits before unjust judges that had been appointed by
tyrannical and unjust ruling authorities. Such condemnation was not only
based on the probability that such inexperienced judges would issue
flawed judgments with regard to the religious law of Islam, but also
based on two other important issues:

**First**: The position of a judge is a divinely designated office that
none has the right to hold except those well-qualified. Without such
qualification, which is both spiritual and practical, judgeship is
invalid even where a judge has judged according to that which is true.
Hence, unqualified judges are unsuitable for holding this divine
position.

In this respect, Sulayman ibn Khalid has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إتَّقُوا الْحُكُومَةَ؛ فَإنَّ الْحُكُومَةَ إنَّمَا هِيَ لِلإمَامِ
العَالِمِ بِالْقَضَاءِ الْعَادِلِ فِي الْمُسْلِمِينَ، كَنِبِيٍّ أوْ
وَصِيِّ نَبِيٍّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Avoid holding the position of judgeship, because this position must be
exclusively held by a leader who is well-versed in judgment and who
treats Muslims justly, such as a Prophet or a Prophet’s successor (i.e.
wasi).*[^40]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْقُضَاةُ أَرْبَعَةٌ؛ ثَلاَثَةٌ فِي النَّارِ وَوَاحِدٌ فِي
الْجَنَّةِ: رَجَلٌ قَضَى بِجَوْرٍ وَهُوَ يَعْلَمُ، فَهُوَ فِي
النَّارِ. وَرَجُلٌ قَضَى بِجَوْرٍ وَهُوَ لاَ يَعْلَمُ، فَهُوَ فِي
النَّارِ. وَرَجُلٌ قَضَى بِالْحَقِّ وَهُوَ لاَ يَعْلَمُ، فَهُوَ فِي
النَّارِ. وَرَجُلٌ قَضَى بِالْحَقِّ وَهُوَ يَعْلَمُ، فَهُوَ فِي
الْجَنَّةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There are four categories of judges—three will be in Hellfire and only
one in Paradise: (1) a judge that intentionally rules unjustly will be
in Hellfire; (2) a judge that rules unjustly because he does not know
will also be in Hellfire; (3) a judge that rules according to that which
is true but he does not know will also be in Hellfire; and (4) a judge
that rules according to that which is true and knows (that he is ruling
according to the truth) will be in Paradise.*[^41]

Abu-Basir has reported that he, once, said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “It
happens that I have to decide about an issue that I have found neither
in the Book of Allah nor in the Sunnah. Should we use our view about
such issues?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ، أَمَا إنَّكَ إنْ أَصَبْتَ لَمْ تُؤْجَرْ، وَإنْ أَخْطَأْتَ
كَذَبْتَ عَلَى اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*No! If you do so and hit on the correct ruling, you will not be
rewarded and if you do and fail to make an accurate ruling, you will
have fabricated a forgery against Almighty Allah.*[^42]

**Second**: Referring to such false judges is a submission and surrender
to the governments of tyrannical and unjust ruling authorities who
appoint such unqualified persons as judges. As a result, reference to
such judges is regarded as “summoning one another to the judgment of
Satan” about which the Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا
أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يَتَحَاكَمُوا إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ
وَيُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ يُضِلَّهُمْ ضَلَالًا بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has been
revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to summon
one another to the judgment of the Evil One, though they were commanded
to deny him, and Satan desires to lead them astray into remote error.
(4:60)***

Abu-Basir has quoted Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) regarding a man who had a
dispute with one of his brethren-in-faith about a property. When the
latter asked him to accept a third person of their faith as arbiter, the
former refused and insisted on summoning his brother-in-faith to the
official court of the unjust ruling authorities.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…كَانَ بِمَنْزِلَةِ الَّذِينَ قَالَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ: " أَلَمْ تَرَ
إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ
وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحَاكَمُوا إِلَى
الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

***This man is of the same rank of those about whom Almighty Allah has
said, “Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to
summon one another to the judgment of the Evil One, though they were
commanded to deny him. (4:60)”***[^43]

Umar ibn Hanzalah has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “Two of
our acquaintances disputed about a debt or an issue of inheritance. They
sued one another before the ruling authority and their judges. Is this
acceptable?”Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “Two of our acquaintances disputed about
a debt or an issue of inheritance. They sued one another before the
ruling authority and their judges. Is this acceptable?”Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a), “Two of our acquaintances disputed about a debt or an issue of
inheritance. They sued one another before the ruling authority and their
judges. Is this acceptable?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَحَاكَمَ إلَيْهِمْ فِي حَقٍّ أَوْ بَاطِلٍ فَإنَّمَا تَحَاكَمَ
إلَى طَاغُوتٍ، وَمَا يَحْكُمُ لَهُ فَإنَّمَا يَأْخُذُ سُحْتاً وَإنْ
كَانَ حَقُّهُ ثَابِتاً، لأَنَّهُ أَخَذَهُ بِحُكْمِ الطَّاغُوتِ، وَقَدْ
أَمَرَ اللهُ أَنْ يُكْفَرَ بِهِ. قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: " أَلَمْ تَرَ
إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْكَ
وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحَاكَمُوا إِلَى
الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Anyone who takes their litigation before such judges, be the judge
right or wrong, has in reality taken his litigation to the Evil One
(Taghut). Whatever he gains from that court is considered illegally
acquired property, even if it is his right. This is because he has taken
it through the judgment of the Evil One while Almighty Allah has
commanded to deny him (the Evil One), saying,*

***“Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to
summon one another to the judgment of Satan, though they were commanded
to deny him. (4:60)”***[^44]

**B.** On various occasions, the Holy Imams (‘a) laid great stress on
this issue so as to achieve a practical goal and create a strong
personal deterrent that replaces the executive power of official judges
of the unjust ruling authorities. As a step in this way, the Holy Imams
(‘a) advised the virtuous community to strongly condemn the corruption,
deviation and aggression that the offices of the ruling authorities in
general and the system of judicature in particular used against the
rights of people.

**C.** In the designation of a judge, the Holy Imams (‘a) followed a
method characterized by flexibility on the one hand and by proportional
power of execution on the other. They used to ask the disputant parties
to choose for themselves an arbitrator and reach an agreement on
selecting a judge, as is mentioned in the accepted tradition (i.e.
*maqbulah*)[^45] of \`Umar ibn Hanzalah and the authenticated tradition
(i.e. *muwaththaqah*) of Abu-Basir.

Some scholars believe that such traditions do not denote a judge in the
ordinary meaning, but give explanations of the qualities of the
arbitrators of judgment and conciliation, because they specify as
condition the consent of the two parties.[^46] However, the last
statement in the tradition involved apparently shows that it denotes the
designation of judges.

**D.** The Holy Imams (‘a) gave general, simplified, and clear-cut
qualifications that must be held by a judge whose words are taken as
final judgment in the case that many judges disagree about a question
(i.e. a chief-judge).

\`Umar ibn Hanzalah has reported that he asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “Two
of our acquaintances disputed about a debt or an issue of inheritance.
They sued one another before the ruling authority and their judges. Is
this acceptable?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ تَحَاكَمَ إلَيْهِمْ فِي حَقٍّ أَوْ بَـاطِلٍ فَإنَّمَـا تَحَـاكَمَ
إلَى الطَّاغُوتٍ، وَمَا يَحْكُمُ لَهُ فَإنَّمَا يَأْخُذُ سُحْتاً وَإنْ
كَانَ حَقّاً ثَابِتـاً، لأَنَّهُ أَخَـذَهُ بِحُكْـمِ الطَّاغُوتِ،
وَقَدْ أَمَرَ اللهُ أَنْ يُكْفَرَ بِهِ. قَالَ اللهُ تَعَالَى: " أَلَمْ
تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّهُمْ آمَنُوا بِمَا أُنْزِلَ
إِلَيْكَ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ مِنْ قَبْلِكَ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَحَاكَمُوا
إِلَى الطَّاغُوتِ وَقَدْ أُمِرُوا أَنْ يَكْفُرُوا بِهِ"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Anyone who takes their litigation before such judges, be the judge
right or wrong, has in reality taken his litigation to the Evil One
(Taghut). Whatever he gains from that court is considered illegally
acquired property, even if it is his right. This is because he has taken
it by the judgment of the Evil One while Almighty Allah has commanded to
deny him, saying,*

***“Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has
been revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to
summon one another to the judgment of Satan, though they were commanded
to deny him. (4:60)***

“What should they do instead?” asked the reporter.

The Imam (‘a) explained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْظُرَانِ مَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ مِمَّنْ قَدْ رَوَى حَدِيثَنَا وَنَظَرَ
فِي حَلاَلِنَا وَحَرَامِنَا وَعَرَفَ أَحْكَامَنَا، فَلْيَرْضُوا بِهِ
حَكَماً، فَإنِّي قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِماً. فَإذَا حَكَمَ
بِحُكْمِنَا فَلَمْ يَقْبَلْ مِنُهُ، فَإنَّمَا إسْتَخَفَّ بِحُكْمِ
اللهِ وَعَلَيْنَا رَدَّ، وَالرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا الرَّادُّ عَلَى اللهِ،
وَهُوَ عَلَى حَدِّ الشِّرْكِ بِاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*They should choose one from among you who has reported our sayings,
learnt the questions that we have deemed legal and those we have deemed
illegal, and gained knowledge of our judgments; hence, they should
accept him as arbitrator, for I proclaim such individuals to be your
judges. If the arbitrator then decides according to our judgments, any
rejecting party would be belittling the judgment of Allah and rejecting
us. Whoever rejects us has in fact rejected Almighty Allah—an act, which
is as grave as polytheism.*[^47]

### c) Third Responsibility: Authority

Without doubt, authority (*wilayah*) and Imamate is the most important
divinely designated position in the Islamic system as is openly stated
by the Holy Qur'an and the traditions that are authentically reported
from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), some of which have been previously cited in
this book under different titles.

It is also possible to insert the first responsibility (issuance of
verdicts or propagation and elucidation of religious issues) and the
second responsibility (judgment) within this very important divinely
designated position.

The greatness and holiness of this position and the numerousness of
tyrants, oppressors and leaders of injustice that have claimed this
position might be two reasons that caused the Holy Imams of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) to condemn the others who claimed this holy position on the
one hand and confirm that the position was designated to them alone on
the other.

This may be a convincing explanation for the scarcity of traditions
about a decent and well-versed *mujtahid* having the right of general
authority after the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a). The Holy Imams (‘a) confirmed that
the general authority was originally their exclusive right in which
nobody else shared in order to block any possible psychological or
mental gap that might have aroused the idea that others who claim having
this authority might have the like of this right or that their right of
authority might be parallel to the divinely designated right of
authority of the Holy Imams.

It is also noteworthy that all the traditions about the qualities of
judges restrict the right of judgeship to the Holy Imams (‘a) except for
some reported texts indicating them to be restricted to the arbitrators
of conciliation and judgments of mutual consent.

Based on such interpretations, a group of jurisprudents are of the
opinion that there is no definite text (authentically reported from the
Holy Imams (‘a)) involving the designation of the *mujtahid* for this
divine position. Such jurisprudents, however, admit that it is not
feasible to leave this divine position unoccupied and lacking a
responsible person among the Muslim community, who possesses the
essential qualifications (*al-qadr al-mutayaqqan*) to undertake the
responsibility of this position must be a well-qualified *mujtahid*.
These jurisprudents also agree that the well-qualified *mujtahid* is the
most suitable person to occupy this divine position from another type of
evidence which is called *dalil al-hisbah*, meaning evidence that is
derived from necessity.[^48]

In any case, some texts that are reported from the Holy Imams (‘a) refer
to or can be understood, suggestively or openly, as referring to the
general authority of the well-qualified jurisprudent. Apart from
exhaustive discussions on each of these texts, we can, in the main,
extract this conceptual trend in the Ahl al-Bayt’s building of the
system of the virtuous community—entailing that the well-qualified and
well-versed jurisprudent must undertake the affairs of the general
authority (*wilayah*).

More precisely, the position of the general authority is a fact firmly
established in the milieus of the Ahl al-Bayt’s followers as it has been
practiced by the *mujtahids* and supported by the scholars, irrespective
of the evidence proving its transfer to the well-qualified
jurisprudents.

However, the most obvious divine text that can be used as evidence
proving this general authority for the well-qualified jurisprudents is
the aforesaid verse (No. 44) of Surah al-Ma'idah (No. 6). As for
*hadith*, the best tradition that proves this issue is a document of
Imam al-Mahdi (may Allah hasten his advent) which he himself dictated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْحَوَادِثُ الْوَاقِعَةُ فَارْجِعُوا فِيهَا إلَى رُوَاةِ
حَدِيثِنَا، فَإنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَنَا حُجَّةُ اللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*As for the events that shall take place in the future, you must refer
them to the reporters of our traditions, for they are my proofs for you
and I am the Proof of Almighty Allah.*[^49]

This tradition, pointing out ‘the events that shall take place in the
future’, signifies the emerging issues that humanity is bound to
encounter in the daily activities of life that will require a religious
law to resolve them. In addition, the statement that the reporters of
the traditions are the proofs of the Imam (‘a) for people has been
concluded with the statement that the Imam (‘a) is the Proof of Almighty
Allah for people. Of course, this is comprehensive and general. This
significance can also be gauged from the traditions describing the
qualities of judges. As has been previously discussed, judicial
authority is considered to be one of the most important and crucial
positions of the general authority.

The discussion of this topic consummates the Holy Imams’ (‘a) conception
about the system of the virtuous community thus: the well-qualified
jurisprudent (*mujtahid*) must conclusively be the *religious
referential authority* of the individuals of the virtuous community, and
such authority undertakes the tasks of the Imam (‘a).

Among the many well-versed jurisprudents, the *religious referential
authority* can be appointed either through direct election by the masses
made after investigating the required personal
qualities–knowledgeability, decency, experience, competence, and others
to which experienced people must testify–after which it becomes
obligatory upon them to act upon the verdicts of that *mujtahid;* or,
through indirect election by the masses who elect experienced
individuals who in turn elect the general referential authority who then
holds the authority of the Holy Imam. Such a process of election and
voting cannot take place unless the masses possess the determination and
freedom to vote in order to freely express their wills. As a practical
example, well-versed scholars of the Islamic Republic of Iran elected
the general referential authority and the Constitution of the country
upheld their election.[^50]

[^1]: - The Twelve Imams from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) are namely: 1) \`Ali
ibn Abi-Talib 2) Hasan ibn \`Ali 3) Husayn ibn \`Ali—(2) and (3) are the
grandsons of the Holy Prophet (S) and sons of Imam \`Ali (‘a) 4) \`Ali
ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-\`Abidin 5) Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Baqir 6) Ja\`far
ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq 7) Musa ibn Ja\`far al-Kazim 8) \`Ali ibn Musa
al-Ridha 9) Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Jawad 10) \`Ali ibn Muhammad al-Hadi
11) Hasan ibn \`Ali al-\`Askari 12) Muhammad Mahdi, (the rightly-guided)
son of Hasan, the Hujjah (Proof of Allah), namesake of the Holy Prophet
(S)—his grandfather—as foretold by the Prophet (S) himself. I have
discussed the concept of Imamate, along with explanation of this
concept, necessity for Imamate and related proof in the first book of
this series under the title ‘Imamate.’ Similarly, many Imamiyyah
scholars have dealt with this topic in detail in many books, citing
numerous proofs on its accuracy.

[^2]: - Muhammad al-Rayshahri, Mizan al-Hikmah 6:457 as quoted from
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummal, H. 28677.

[^3]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi 1:32 H. 2.

[^4]: - Shaykh al-Huwayzi, Tafsir Nur al-Thaqalayn 1:634, H. 206, as
quoted from Tafsir al-\`Ayyashi.

[^5]: - Mujtahid can be defined as a person who possesses the faculty of
inferring a religious law or analyzing practical examples of an issue by
means of drawing on religiously acceptable proofs and criteria that have
been decided or approved for this purpose specifically by the Holy
Legislator with the aim of arriving at religious facts, laws, and
examples of an issue.

[^6]: - This fact will manifest itself more evidently when the special
roles of each of the Holy Imams (‘a) is displayed individually.

[^7]: - This topic will be discussed in greater detail in the coming
thesis about the virtuous referential authority in a later volume of
this series.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 18:19, H. 1.

[^9]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 18:101, H. 7.

[^10]: - Sayyid Abu’l-Qasim al-Khu'i, Minhaj al-Salihin, 1:10, Ed. 28.

[^11]: - Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, Minhaj al-Salihin, 1:12, with a
commentary by Martyr Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, Ed. 2.

[^12]: - Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, Minhaj al-Salihin, 1:12, with a
commentary by Martyr Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, Dar al-Ta\`aruf –
Beirut.

[^13]: - See Imam al-Khumayni, Tahrir al-Wasilah, 1:10.

[^14]: - Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, Mustamsak al-\`Urwah al-Wuthqa, 1:43.

[^15]: - Refer to the words of the scholars in this connection; Shaykh
al-Muntazari: Wilayat al-Faqih, 1:261-273.

[^16]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 1:407, H. 9.

[^17]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi, 1:183-184, H. 8.

[^18]: - Shaykh al-Muntazari, Wilayat al-Faqih, 1:265 as quoted from
\`Allamah al-Hilli, Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha', 10:452.

[^19]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, 2:104 (commentary of Shaykh Muhammad
\`Abduh), Sermon No. 173.

[^20]: - Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, 93:64, as quoted from al-Nu\`mani,
Kitab al-Ghaybah.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 11:35, H. 1.

[^22]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi, 1:202.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 18.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 20.

[^25]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 21.

[^26]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 22.

[^27]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 23.

[^28]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 24.

[^29]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:105, H. 25.

[^30]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:106, H. 26.

[^31]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:108, H. 36.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:108, H. 38.

[^33]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:100, H. 4.

[^34]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:100, H. 5.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:104, H. 19.

[^36]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:106, H. 27.

[^37]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:107, H. 33.

[^38]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:107, H. 34.

[^39]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:169, H. 1.

[^40]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:7, H. 3.

[^41]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:11, H. 6.

[^42]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:24, H. 6.

[^43]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:3, H. 2.

[^44]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:4, H. 4.

[^45]: - An accepted tradition (maqbulah) is that which is admitted by
scholars although its series of narrators does not meet the
qualifications required.

[^46]: - Ayatollah Sayyid al-Khu'i, Minhaj al-Salihin, 1:4.

[^47]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:99 Sifat al-Qadhi
(Qualities of judges), S.11, H.1.

[^48]: - In the search for general authority, jurisprudents have dealt
with this topic. In sum, some of them have concluded that the general
authority of the jurisprudent (wilayat al-faqih) is proven by clear
texts reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), while others have concluded
that this position is proven by the reason-based necessity for
occupation of this important position by the most qualified person, as
well as by other proofs. Thoughtfully but simply, I have discussed this
topic in my book entitled al-hukm al-islami bayna al-nazariyyah
wa’l-tatbiq (Islamic Government: Theory and Application). Here, I prefer
to discuss this topic from the angle of the universal and conceptual
basis rather than other angles.

[^49]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah, 18:101, H. 9.

[^50]: - Further discussions of this issue have been cited in my book of
al-hukm al-islami bayna al-nazariyyah wa’l-tatbiq (Islamic Government:
Theory and Application); Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Act 5.


