Importance of Hajj in Islam
===========================

Hajj is one of most important pillars of Islam and it is one of greatest
religious duties.

Holy Qur’an says in a short and meaningful sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لِلّه عَلَى النّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَیْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطاعَ اِلَیْهِ
سَبیلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It is on people for the sake of Allah to perform Hajj of his house,
anyone who is able to undertake the journey to him. (2:196)***

And it says below this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ کَفَرَ فَاِنَّ اللّهَ غَنِىٌّ عَنِ الْعالَمینَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And anyone who disbelieves (and renounces Hajj, has impaired
himself), Allah is not in need of any of his created ones in the
worlds.”(3:97)***

The sentence “It is on people for the sake of Allah …” adding the
definition of “disbelieves” (infidelity) for people who renounce the
obligatory Hajj. This clears shows it’s extraordinary importance in
Islam.

It is interesting that in the interpretation of the holy verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ کانَ فى هذِهِ اَعْمى فَهُوَفِى الاْخِرَةِ اَعْمى وَ اَضَلُّ
سَبیلاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And anyone who had been blind (from seeing Allah) in this world, will
be blind in hereafter and more deviant from the path”. (17:72)***

It has been quoted from Imam Sadiq (a.s.) that one of the meanings of
the verse is that a person who postpones his obligatory Hajj
continuously until his death arrives (he will be blind in
hereafter).[^1]

It has been mentioned in another Hadith: “Anyone who renounces his
obligatory Hajj without any excuse will be re awoken as Jew or
Christian”

We read in a Hadith from Imam Sadiq (a.s.): “Persons who perform Hajj
and Umrah are guests of Allah. He will grant them their wishes and any
prayer that they recite will be accepted. And if they pray for
intercession about a person it will be accepted … and if they die in
this way Allah will forgive all of their sins”.

Also, we read in another Hadith that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِنَّ الْحَجَّ المَبْرُورَ لا یَعْدِلُهُ شَىءٌ وَ لا جَزاءَلَهُ اِلاَّ
الجَنَّة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Nothing compares with the accepted Hajj and it has no reward other than
heaven!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اَنَّ الْحاجَّ یَکُونُ کَیَوم وَلَدَتْهُ اُمُّه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A Person who performs Hajj purifies himself from sins like the day that
he was born”.*

And this is the greatest gift, and the best honor and the highest
reward.

[^1]: This Hadith and future ones have been quoted by the late Mohaghegh
Yazdi in “al-Urwat al-Wusqa” in the book of Hajj and the late Sheikh
Hurr Ameli and other great scholars in the book “Wasael al-Shi’aa” and
other famous Hadith books.


