Miqats (stated places) of Ihram (preparing to perform Hajj)
===========================================================

Article 32
----------

Miqat is a place which pilgrims should wear Ihram and from there go for
Hajj or Umrah. They should not pass these places without Ihram.

Article 33
----------

Miqats of Ihram are ten places of which five of them are the main ones.

Article 34
----------

### 1) Masjid al-Shajarah

Masjid al-Shajarah is located beside Medina, and today it is known as
“Abar Ali”. All persons who want to perform Hajj from Medina should
become Muhrim from this place, and it is not permitted to delay in this
act and for example becomes Muhrim from Juhfah, which is located in the
middle of the way of Mecca to Medina, unless ill or weak people or other
persons who have other problems.

Article 35
----------

It is not obligatory to wear Ihram from inside the mosque and it is
possible to perform this act beside the mosque, and there is no
difference between old mosque and this new one which has been expanded
so much, therefore women who are in their menstrual period can wear
Ihram outside of the mosque.

Article 36
----------

### 2) Juhfah

Juhfah is a place in the middle of the distance between Medina and
Mecca, 150 km from Mecca, which is some distance from the main road, and
this is the Miqat of people who come for Hajj from Egypt, north of
Africa, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon (road trip), also all persons who are
passing from this way.

Article 37
----------

Muslims from Iran and other places who enter the airport of Jeddah by
airplane and do not want to go to medina can go to Juhfah, and become
Muhrim there and then go to Mecca.

Article 38
----------

There is a mosque in Juhfah, from where it is possible to wear Ihram
from inside or outside of that mosque. But it is better to wear Ihram
from inside the mosque.

Article 39
----------

### 3) Wadi Aqeeq

Wadi Aqeeq is a place located in north east of Mecca approximately 94 km
from the city and that is the Miqat for people of “Iraq” and “Najd”, and
all people who are passing from that way can become Muhrim from there.
This Miqat has three sections; section one is called “Maslakh”, and
second one is called “Qumrah” and the third one is called “Dhat Irq”
(also Zaat Irq) and although it is better to wear Ihram from “Maslakh”,
which is the first section, it is permitted to become Muhrim from any of
these three sections.

Article 40
----------

### 4- Qarn al-Manazil

Qarn al-Manazil is a place located near “Ta’if” which is about 94 km
from Mecca and this is the Miqat for people from there or those who pass
from that way. Also all people who enter Jeddah can go to that place and
become Muhrim from there.

Article 41
----------

### 5- Yalamlam

“Yalamlam” is the name of a hill in southern regions of Mecca (about 84
km from Mecca) and this is the Miqat of those who come from the south
parts of Arabian Peninsula like Yemen to Mecca, also all people who pass
that way can become Muhrim in there.

There are five main Miqats.

Article 42
----------

### 6- The City of Mecca

“Mecca” is the Miqat for “hajj al-Tamattu’”; it means that pilgrims wear
Ihram for performing Hajj, in which its first act is going to “Arafat”,
after performing Umrah from the city of Mecca.

Article 43 There is no difference between places of Mecca and the
pilgrim can become Muhrim from any place of this city, even places that
have been added to Mecca today during the advancements of city in the
past years. But the place should not be out of the zone of Haram as an
obligatory precaution; For example, today Mecca has been expanded and
has gone beyond Masjid al-Tan’eem, which is the closest boundary of
Haram, and if a person becomes Muhrim from that place which is out of
boundaries of Haram, this act is not free of problem and the best place
is Masjid al-Haraam.

Article 44
----------

### 7- House of the Pilgrim

Miqat for persons whose houses are closer to Mecca than the Miqat, then
their own houses can be their Miqat. However, it is permitted and also
better than they go to one of those first quintet Miqats and become
Muhrim from those places.

Article 45
----------

### 8- Ji’irranah

“Ji’irranah” is a place at the end of Haram between Ta’if and Mecca, and
people of Mecca and those who have lived there for two years of more,
should wear Ihram from this place as an obligatory precaution.

Article 46
----------

### 9- Parallel places to one of Miqats

Those who do not pass Miqats should become Muhrim whenever they reach a
place parallel to one of the Miqat and it is not necessary to go to one
of first quintet Miqats, and if they pass two places parallel to two of
Miqats, they should wear Ihram in the first place that is parallel to
the first Miqat.

Article 47
----------

When the pilgrim surely knows the location of the place parallel to
Miqat or he/she asks the location from informed people, it is enough for
wearing Ihram from that place. But if he/she has doubt about this matter
and there is no way of finding the correct answer, then it is better
that he/she performs Nazr of Ihram before reaching that place and
becomes Muhrim from there.

Article 48
----------

Whenever a pilgrim is passing from a direction in which there is no
place parallel to one of Miqats, then he/she should go to one of Miqats
and become Muhrim from there as a precaution; and if this not possible,
then he should become Muhrim from a place where there is a possibility
of being parallel to one of Miqats, in his/her opinion, and then renew
his/her Ihram after reaching the closest point to Haram (around Mecca).
This means that the pilgrim makes the intention again and says
“Labbayk”.

Article 49
----------

There is no difference between places, which are parallel to Miqats in
being in the desert, sea or air. Therefore, if the pilgrim passes one
place parallel to one of Miqats in airplane, then he/she should become
Muhrim from that place and immediately says “Labbayk” (and ruling for
the matter is that the pilgrim is under a roof in this condition, will
be mentioned later).

Article 50
----------

### 10- Adni al-Hal

“Adni al-Hal” means the first point out of Haram, and this is the Miqat
of those who perform Umrah al-Mufradah (consisting of Umrah of Hajj
al-Qiran and Ifrad or Umrah al-Mufradah, which is possible to perform in
any time of the year).

Article 51
----------

It is better for a pilgrim to wear Ihram from one of these three places,
“Hudaybiyah” or “Ji’irranah” or “Tan’eem” which are famous among people
of Mecca for Umrah al-Mufradah .It is easier for those who want to
perform Umrah al-Mufradah after Hajj to go to Masjid al-Tan’eem, (which
is about 80 km from Masjid al-Haraam and today has been become as a part
of the city of Mecca) and become Muhrim from that place.

Article 52
----------

Those who are going to Mecca for performing Umrah al-Mufradah from
Jeddah should become Muhrim from “Hudaybiyah” (which is about 17 km from
Mecca and is the farthest boundary of Haram).

Article 53
----------

It is better that Ihram of Umrah al-Mufradah also perform from one of
first quintet Miqats (Masjid al-Shajarah, Juhfah, Qarn al-Manazil, Wadi
Aqeeq and Yalamlam). Therefore, it is better that those who intend to
perform Umrah al-Mufradah and went to Medina before, become Muhrim from
Masjid al-Shajarah or at least Juhfah.

Article 54
----------

Briefly, sequence of Miqats is as follows:

1- Miqat of “Umrah of Hajj al-Tamattu’” is one of first quintet Miqats,
if the Hajj is obligatory or Mustahab.

2- Miqat of “Hajj al-Tamattu’” is Mecca.

3- Miqat of “Hajj al-Ifrad or Qiran” is one of quintet Miqats.

4- Miqat of “Umrah al-Mufradah” is Adni al-Hal; it means the first point
that is out of Haram of Mecca (like Tan’eem, Ji’irranah or Hudaybiyah).

5- Miqat of those whom their own houses are after Miqats is that their
houses can become Muhrim from there for Umrah al-Tamattu’ or Hajj
al-Ifrad and Qiran, but it is better that they also become Muhrim from
one of quintet Miqats.


