Rulings of Miqats
=================

Article 55
----------

Wearing Ihram before Miqat is not permitted, as it is Haraam to pass
Miqat without Ihram. Pilgrims should only become Muhrim in Miqats,
except on two conditions:

1- When the pilgrim performs Nazr for becoming Muhrim before Miqat, it
is necessary to fulfill his/her Nazr from anywhere, and not necessary to
renew Ihram in Miqat. Accordingly, when a person has doubt in Miqat or
places parallel to that, he/she can perform “Nazr of Ihram” before
reaching the doubtful place and become Muhrim from there and there is no
difference between obligatory and Mustahab Hajj. Also Nazr of woman has
no problem if it does not cause disturbance for her husband.

2- A person who wants to perform Umrah of month of Rajab and has a fear
that month ends before he/she can reach the Miqat, can become Muhrim
before Miqat. It is permitted for him in order not to lose the
superiority and benefit of Umrah of month of Rajab.

Article 56
----------

Reaching the Miqat should be proved by certainty, or confidence or
popularity among people of the region, or at least by the testimony of
an impartial person. It is not permitted to wear Ihram in doubt (except
by performing Nazr in the way that mentioned in past article).

Article 57
----------

It is not permitted for a person to pass Miqat without Ihram unless
there is another Miqat in the way that in this case Ihram from the
second Miqat is correct, although it is better to become Muhrim from the
first Miqat as an obligatory precaution.

Article 58
----------

Whenever a person passes Miqat without Ihram deliberately and with
awareness, then he/she should return to Miqat and become Muhrim, and if
it is not possible for him/her to return then his/her Hajj is
invalidated and should perform it the next year.

Article 59
----------

Whenever a pilgrim passes Miqat because of ignorance or forgetfulness,
when he/she remembers, should wear Ihram wherever he/she is. If the
place is out of Haram and if he/she has entered Haram then should go out
of Haram (for instance Tan’eem) and wear Ihram and if a person cannot go
out of Haram should wear Ihram from the place.

Article 60
----------

Whenever a woman is in her menstrual period and thinks that it is not
permitted for her to wear Ihram and does not wear it in Miqat, then she
should return to Miqat if she can and become Muhrim. If she cannot
return to Miqat, then she should go out of Haram and if that is not also
possible she should wear Ihram from the place that she is in, and her
Hajj and Umrah is correct.

Article 61
----------

As it has been mentioned before, Ihram for Hajj al-Tamattu’ is performed
from Mecca. Now if a pilgrim goes to “Arafat” without Ihram because of
ignorance or forgetfulness, then he/she should return to Mecca, if it
possible, and if it is not he/she should become Muhrim in “Arafat”,
“Mash’ar” or “Mena” (before Ramy al-Jamarat and sacrificing), and if
he/she remembers after Ramy al-Jamarat or sacrificing, then the time of
Ihram has passed and the Hajj is correct.

Article 62
----------

Whenever a person renounces Ihram because of ignorance or forgetfulness
and remembers after finishing the acts, then his/her acts are correct if
it happens in Umrah al-Tamattu’ or Hajj or Umrah al-Mufradah.


