Process of Ihram
================

As it is said before, the first act of Umrah and Hajj is “Ihram” and
obligatory acts of Ihram are three things as follows:

Article 63
----------

### First: Niyyah (Intention)

Making intention of Ihram as in the way that the pilgrim should intend
not to perform the acts (that will be mentioned later) and consider them
as Haraam for himself/herself and performs the acts of Umrah or Hajj
after that, and by considering that meaning it is enough to say by words
or in his/her heart:

“I wear Ihram for Umrah al-Tamattu’ for obligatory (or Mustahab) Hajj
for myself (or in behalf of a person whom I am his/her proxy) for
closeness to Allah (قربة الی الله)” and the purpose of saying I wear
Ihram is to prohibiting himself/herself from the acts (which will be
mention later).

And the pilgrim says for Ihram of Hajj: “I wear Ihram for obligatory
Hajj for closeness to Allah (قربة الی الله)” and in Umrah al-Mufradah:
“I wear Ihram for Umrah al-Mufradah for closeness to Allah (قربة الی
الله)”.

Article 64
----------

It is not necessary to utter the intention but it is enough to have this
intention in the heart, but it is better to express the intention by
word adding this to the internal intention.

Article 65
----------

The purpose of intending for closeness to Allah is intending to satisfy
Allah and being close to his pure essence. The pilgrim should have the
intention of performing the rites of Umrah or Hajj in that state and it
is better to define from the beginning that he/she has the intention of
performing Umrah or Hajj. For example “Hajjat al-Islam” which means
obligatory Hajj because of gaining the ability of performing Hajj or
“Mustahab Hajj” or “Hajj of Nazr” or “Hajj by proxy”, but it is also
permitted to make intention for Ihram intending to define the type of
act later.

Article 66
----------

If after making intention of Ihram, and prohibiting himself/herself from
the acts which are Haraam for Muhrim, the pilgrims intends to perform
some of those acts (for example, he/she is in travel at that moment and
is sitting under the roof of car or airplane unnecessarily), then it is
not free of problem for his/her Ihram.

Article 67
----------

Knowing the details of Haraam acts is not necessary and it is enough to
know them as a whole.

Article 68
----------

### Second: Saying Labbayk

It is obligatory to say the “quadruple Labbayks” during Ihram with
correct Arabic accent and it should be as follows as obligatory
precaution:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبّیْکَاللّهُمَّ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ لا شَریکَ لَکَ لَبَّیْکَ،
اِنَّالْحَمْدَ و النِّعْمَةَ لَکَ وَ الْمـُلْکَ، لا شَریکَ لَکَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Allah! I comply (and obey) you, again I comply to you, and one more
time I obey you, there is no partner for you, I comply to you, solely
you deserve all praise and grace and sovereignty are exclusive to you,
there is no partner for you!”**

It is better to abstain adding other expressions, except those that will
be mentioned in Mustahab acts later.

Article 69
----------

If the pilgrim cannot express these word with correct Arabic accent, it
is enough that another person says them articulately for him/her and the
pilgrim recites them after that person, and if he/she cannot pronounce
correctly he/she should say as much as he/she can and express also its
meaning as a precaution and a person who has the ability of pronouncing
correctly, can say the words in behalf of that pilgrim, too.

Article 70
----------

It is obligatory to say Labbayk during Ihram only once (in the way that
mentioned before) and after that it is Mustahab to repeat that in
different conditions as much as possible. E.g. while getting in and
leaving a car, passing low and high lands, after awakening and after
prayers It is better that men recite these words with a loud voice.

Article 71
----------

It is obligatory that the pilgrim recites Labbayk when he/she sees the
houses of Mecca during Ihram of Umrah al-Tamattu’, and at the noon of
the day of Arafa during Ihram of Hajj, and at the time of seeing Kaa’ba
in Umrah al-Mufradah. If the pilgrim has gone out of Mecca for Ihram,
and if he/she is coming to Mecca from out of the city should stop and
say Labbayk when he/she is entering the region of Haram.

Article 72
----------

A pilgrim that is unable to speak, can point with his/her hand instead
of saying “Labbayk” and moves his/her tongue as normal and it is better
that another person says Labbayk in behalf of that pilgrim, but it is
not obligatory.

Article 73
----------

Children also can become Muhrim for Umrah or Hajj, and if they can
distinguish between good and evil they can say “Labbayk” with the
intention (Niyyah), and if they do cannot differentiate, then a person
makes the intention and says Labbayk on behalf of them .Whenever a
person is unconscious in Miqat, it is possible to make the intention and
say Labbayk on behalf of him/her.

Article 74
----------

Twenty-five acts, which are Haraam for Muhrim, are not Haraam for
him/her before saying “Labbayk” even if he/she has made the intention
and has worn the clothing of Ihram. Therefore, there is no punishment if
the pilgrim performs one of the acts that are Haraam for Muhrim before
saying Labbayk; in fact, “Labbayk” is like “Allahu Akbar” at the
beginning of the prayer that a Muhrim does not enter the state of prayer
before saying that, and whenever a pilgrim has doubt that if he/she has
said “Labbayk” or not, nothing is also Haraam for him from the
prohibited acts of a Muhrim.

Article 75
----------

Whenever a pilgrim is in Miqat and has doubt that if he/she has said
Labbayk or not, then he/she should say the Labbayk. And if he/she has
passed Miqat then he/she can return to Miqat and say it as a precaution.
If it is not possible to return, then he/she should say it in that
place, but if the pilgrim do not know that if he/she has said Labbayk
correctly or not, then he/she should consider it as correct and his/her
Ihram is correct.

Article 76
----------

### Third: Wearing Ihram Clothing

It is obligatory for a person who wants to wear Ihram, to remove all
clothes which are Haraam for Muhrim, and then wear the two clothes of
Ihram. Wrap one of them around the waist (that is called “Izar”) and put
another one on the shoulder like Aba (that is called “Rida’”); this
ruling is exclusive to men and it is not necessary for women to wear
these two parts of clothing beneath or over their own clothes.

Article 77
----------

It is an obligatory precaution that clothing of Ihram and the way of
wearing be as it is common. This means that the pilgrim should wrap the
loincloth (Izar) in the way that at least it covers the body from the
belly to the knees and puts Rida’ on the shoulder in a way that it
covers the rest of the body. There is no condition about the quality or
color of the Ihram clothing, but it should not be sewn.

Article 78
----------

It is an obligatory precaution to wear Ihram clothing before making
intention and saying Labbayk.

Article 79
----------

It is an obligatory precaution not to tie a loincloth around the neck
(but tying it around the waist has no problem) and the best way is to
tie a belt over the Izar.

Tying two sides of Rida’, also fastening that by a pin, or putting a
piece of stone in one side and fastening that to the other side with a
string (as it is common among some of Hajjis) is no problem, although it
is better to renounce these acts.

Article 80
----------

If a pilgrim wears Ihram while he/she has a shirt or other common cloth
on because of ignorance or forgetfulness, then his/her Ihram is correct,
but he/she should immediately remove that cloth and wear only Ihram
clothing, and if this act has been performed deliberately, then after
removing the clothes it is a precaution to make the intention and say
Labbayk again.

Article 81
----------

Whenever a pilgrim puts on a shirt after wearing Ihram clothing because
of ignorance or forgetfulness, then he/she should remove that cloth from
the bottom and if it is not possible he/she should tear the clothe and
remove it.

Article 82
----------

It is not obligatory to have Ihram clothing on all the time and the
pilgrim can remove that for washing or changing or any other purposes.

Article 83
----------

Whenever a pilgrim is ill and cannot take off his/her common clothes in
Miqat, it is enough to make the intention of Ihram and say Labbayk, and
if it is possible for him/her to remove his/her common clothes
temporarily he/she should do it and wear Ihram clothing. And after that
if it is not possible to continue with that clothing he/she can wear
his/her common clothes, and if this act was not possible in Miqat and
after a while his/her health conditions got better for wearing Ihram
clothing, it is an obligatory precaution to return to Miqat (if he/she
can) and wears Ihram again, but if it was not possible to return to
Miqat he/she should change the clothes in that place, but renewing Ihram
is not necessary.

Article 84
----------

Wearing more than two parts of Ihram clothing for preventing from cold
or heat or other than that has no problem.

Article 85
----------

All things, which are the conditions of prayer clothing, are also the
conditions of Ihram clothing, therefore Ihram clothing should be clean
and not being from the parts of Haraam-meat animals or pure silk or
interwoven with gold (there is no difference between men and women in
this ruling as obligatory precaution, although men and women have
difference in the matter of wearing silk and gold-interwoven fabrics
during prayer).

The cases that impurity (being Najis) of the clothing for prayer has
been forgiven, also implies on Ihram clothing.

Article 86
----------

Izar loincloth should not be see-through and it is a precaution that
Rida’ should be either in this way.

Article 87
----------

Whenever the Ihram clothing becomes Najis, the pilgrim should wash that,
and if it is not possible he will do it whenever it is possible (If
Rida’ becomes Najis the pilgrim can remove it temporarily).


