1. Wearing Sewed Clothing
=========================

Wearing clothes like shirt, cassock, trousers and underclothes are
Haraam for men in the state of Ihram. And it is an obligatory precaution
to abstain from wearing any sewn clothes, woven clothes and clothes that
their parts are attached to each other or have made been made like and
are in the form of shirt, overcoat, trousers etc., even if it is not
sewn and needle and thread have not been used in making them, it is a
precaution to abstain from wearing all these clothes.

Article 89
----------

There is no difference between large or small in sewn clothes. However
pulling blankets, which their edges have been sewn, over shoulders for
protection from cold and such, or pulling that over the body (on the
condition that pilgrim does not cover his/her head with that) has no
problem, also it has no problem if the edges of Ihram clothing have been
sewn although renouncing is a precaution.

Article 90
----------

Wearing a coin bag on the waist has no problem although it is sewn (coin
bag is a little bag for carrying cash, coins). Also wearing a belt over
Ihram clothing has no problem if it is sewn or not. Also wearing a
wraparound even if it has made from a sewn fabric or not, but in all
these cases it is Mustahab precaution that all clothing must not to be
sewn.

Article 91
----------

Wearing a truss has no problem even if it is sewn, also carrying sewn
bags which pilgrims carry on their shoulders or necks and place their
needed objects in them has no problem, and there is no problem if they
are sewn, too.

Article 92
----------

As we said before, it is an obligatory precaution that the pilgrim does
not tie loincloth around the neck, but tying that around the waist,
especially when it is needed, also tying Rida’ around or using a pin for
fixing the position of Rida’ or Izar has no problem, but it is better to
renounce that acts. The method, which is common among some of Hajjis, of
putting a piece of stone on one side of clothing and fastening it with a
rubber strap or a string to another side is also permitted.

Article 93
----------

Wearing all kinds of sewn clothing is permitted for women, except
gloves, which are not permitted to wear.

Article 94
----------

The atonement of wearing sewn clothing in cases of necessity is a sheep,
but if this act is performed because of ignorance or forgetfulness, then
it has no atonement.


