Secrets of the Hajj
===================

Undoubtedly, there are great rewards as mentioned above. However there
are also harsh penalties that have been mentioned, in holy Qur’an and
hadeeth, for renouncing the Hajj. This is because of the secrets and
important philosophies that this great Islamic worship has.

The holy Qur’an says in a short and meaningful sentence about Hajj that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِیَشْهَدُوا مَنافِعَ لَهُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(Encourage people to perform Hajj) That they may witness advantages
for them (22:28)***

These benefits are so much and have been pointed to them in hadith of
Ma’soomin (infallibles) (a.s.), for instance:

**1** Culturing the souls, purifying of ethics and strengthening the
bases of virtue and purity. The sentence which had been mentioned in
above Ahadith, stating that an accepted Hajj causes a person to exit his
sins like the day that he was born, is a clear proof for influence of
Hajj on purity of heart and happiness of the souls and removing the
effects of sins of a lifetime. This great moral and intellectual journey
benefits the pilgrims of Bait Allah al-Haraam (sacred house of Allah).

One may note carefully to the secrets of acts and rites that they
perform, in order that each step that they go through is a step to Allah
this great and meaningful worship becomes like a “rebirth” for them.

Those who perform this great spiritual worship by noticing to its
secrets and with extreme purity of intention feel its deep effects on
their soul until the end of life, and whenever they remember the
memories of this spiritual journey and its full of spirituality,
happiness and purity they feel a new and fresh soul is being blown in
them (this is the teaching and moral effect of Hajj).

**2** “Political effects” which are available beside the teaching
effects of Hajj are very Important; because Hajj, if performed as Islam
has ordered and Prophet Abraham has invited people of the world to do,
causes to increase the honor of Muslims and strengthen the basis of
religion and causes the unity of the word and power and respect against
enemies and announcing the avoidance of polytheists of the world.

This great divine assembly which takes place beside the house of Allah
gives the best opportunity to Muslims for reviving their powers, and
neutralizing the plans of enemies of Islam.

But unfortunately, some of Muslims are unaware of political philosophy
of Hajj, as they do not reach to the depth of its moral philosophy. They
suffice only to the appearances and are unaware of the soul of this
great worship. A politician once commented: “Woe betide Muslims if they
do not understand the meaning of Hajj, and woe betide enemies of Islam
if Muslims understand the meaning of Hajj!”

**3** “Scientific and cultural effects” are other important effects of
Hajj which had been pointed to us in hadith of infallibles (a.s.),
Effects and signs of prophet of Islam (s.a.) and infallible Imams (a.s.)
can be seen in any place of Mecca and Medina and stations of Hajj.

The presence of great Islamic scientists from all countries, consisting
of great religious scholars, masters of other fields, orators and
writers, amongst those who are attending Hajj every year, give an
opportunity to exchange information and knowledge in all religious and
scientific fields to all Muslims of the world. Moreover a good amount of
information about the conditions of Muslims can be achieved. This
information can help in alleviating the conditions of Muslims.

**4** “Economical philosophy” has been also considered in Islamic books
as one of secrets and purposes of Hajj. Some people may be wondering on
how Hajj can be related to economical matters?

However we notice that today, the most important problem of most Muslims
is their economical dependence to enemies of Islam, and if it is
possible to establish meetings and seminars by economists of the world
of Islam, to free Muslims from domination of others in this issue, the
importance of this matter becomes clear.[^1]

Hajj has important secrets as above, which can be further explained in
separate topics and taught to all Muslims especially the younger
generation.

[^1]: These four philosophies have been quoted in a Hadith from Imam Ali
ibn Mousa al-Reza (a.s.) (Wasael al-Shi’aa, vol. 8, page 7, Hadith 15)


