11. Going under the shade during travel
=======================================

Article 132
-----------

A Muhrim man should not go under the shade during travel or keep a shade
or an umbrella over his head. Therefore traveling on airplane or a
roofed vehicle is not permitted for a Muhrim man, but it is permitted
for women.

Article 133
-----------

Going into a camp or under the roof of stations in middle of the way or
in Mecca, Arafat, Mashâ€™ar or Mena has no problem. Also passing roofed
markets and tunnels, which have been made for pedestrians, is permitted.

Article 134
-----------

Whenever a shade no effect on preventing one from sunlight and rain, men
are permitted to go under that shade. Therefore Muhrim men can use
roofed vehicles or airplane from dawn to sunrise or in full cloudy days,
but using a shade on rainy nights has atonement.

Article 135
-----------

Passing bridges in the way and staying in the shades of vehicles has no
problem.

Article 136
-----------

Ill persons and those whom sunlight harms them severely or is a strong
discomfort can use roofed vehicles, but they should pay the atonement
(the amount of atonement will be mentioned in the next article).

Article 137
-----------

Whenever a Muhrim goes under the shade because of ignorance or
forgetfulness then there is no atonement on him, but if it has been done
deliberately or according to a necessity, then it has atonement and the
amount of the atonement is one sheep for each Ihram, meaning that one
sheep is obligatory for the whole Ihram of Umrah and one sheep for the
whole Ihram of Hajj.

Article 138
-----------

It is better to perform Zebh (ritual slaughter) for atonement of Umrah
in Mecca and those related to Hajj in Mena, but it is permitted to delay
this act and perform it in the homeland. If it is hard to find people
who deserve the food, it is better to perform this act in the homeland,
but Hajjis should be aware not to forget it.

Article 139
-----------

A Sheep of atonement should be used completely by poor persons and Hajji
can use none of that.


