12. Removing hair from the body
===============================

Article 140
-----------

A Muhrim should not remove hair from the his/her body, even if it is
performed by shaving, scissoring or removing by any other means, even if
a Muhrim can do it by himself/herself or forcing another person to do
that. Removing even one hair from the body is not permitted and there is
no difference between the parts of limbs of the body.

Article 141
-----------

If a Muhrim knows that combing causes hair removal then it is not
permitted to comb the hair of head or face, and it is a precaution that
the Muhrim abstains from combing hair in the state of Ihram. Also a
Muhrim should be aware that no hair is to be removed by scratching.

Article 142
-----------

Whenever hair causes illness or severe discomfort, it is permitted to
remove it but it has atonement and the amount of that will be mentioned
in the next article.

Article 143
-----------

Whenever a Muhrim shaves the hair of the head or both armpits of one of
them deliberately, then the atonement of that is one sheep, but if
he/she shaves his head because of a necessity then he/she has the choice
of one sheep, three days of fasting or feeding six poor persons by
giving each of them two portion of food (approximately one and a half
kilogram). It is an obligatory precaution to pay the same atonement for
removing the hairs of the armpit, but if the Muhrim removes a part or
some of the hairs of the head, the face or beneath the chin, then
feeding only one needy person is enough.

Article 144
-----------

There is no atonement if a Muhrim removes a hair because of ignorance
about the matter or forgetfulness, and whenever Muhrim rubs the hand on
the body during Ghusl or ablution for prayer and hair is removed in this
way then also there is nothing on him/her, but if he/she rubs the hand
on the face and head or the body without any purpose, and hair is
removed in this way, then it is an obligatory precaution to give some
food to a needy person.

Article 145
-----------

A Muhrim cannot remove hair from the body of another person, even if
that person is in the state of Ihram or not, and even if it is performed
by razor or scissor or any other instrument (but it has no atonement).
Therefore people cannot shave othersâ€™ heads or faces in Mena when they
are exiting from the state of Ihram, but they should exit from the state
of Ihram first and then perform that act.


