Conditions of Necessity of Hajj
===============================

Article 1
---------

Hajj is obligated to be performed, by a Muslim, once in a lifetime. One
must be;

1- An adult

2- Sane

3- Having provisions for the journey e.g. Transporation, accomodation
food cost

4- Having the permission to travel and not having any difficulty in the
way, like fear of life, assets or honor.

5- Having physical abilities for performing the acts of Hajj.

6- Having enough time for reaching Mecca and performing the acts.

7 Having enough savings to support the cost of living of family members
left behind and any other person under the pilgrim’s charge, when the
pilgrim goes for Hajj.

8- Having a job or business that the pilgrim can resume after returning
from Hajj. Pilgrim should be able to be financially able for day to day
expenses for himself and those who are under his support e.g. family

Article 2
---------

Hajj is obligatory for a person when he has enough money for buying a
house. However if the needs are not being sufficed without owning a
house; but if the person can live in a rental house or Waqf (inalienable
religious endowment) house, then the person can perform Hajj by having
that kind of house.

Article 3
---------

Whenever a person does not have enough money for going to Mecca, but
another person gives him the money for performing Hajj and also this
person pays the costs of his family during this pilgrimage, then Hajj is
obligatory for him. Even he has debts or does not have a job or business
for paying the costs of living.

Accepting such a gift is obligatory; unless that person puts him under
severe moral obligation by accepting this gift or there is a loss or
intolerable hardness in accepting that gift.

Article 4
---------

A Person who has been employed for serving in the journey of Hajj as the
religious leader or manager or deputy of caravan or member of the staff
or physician and nurse or disciplinary agent or bank authority or any
other occupation, and has performed Hajj in this way, it is considered
as an obligatory Hajj, on one condition that the costs of living of the
family or dependants has been provided during the journey; but accepting
such an employment is not obligatory.

Article 5
---------

A person who can perform Hajj by borrowing money is not able to perform
Hajj, even if he can pay later his whole debt at once or by
installments, unless he has assets that can pay his debt from them
easily.

Article 6
---------

It is not permitted to perform Hajj by Haraam (illegally acquired) money
or the money from which Khums has not been paid. If the money for Ihram
clothing and Tawaf and Sa’y or payment for sacrifice or the cost of camp
and floor covering that the pilgrim stays on t in Arafat and Mena is
Haraam, then his Hajj is invalidated as a precaution.

Article 7
---------

Whenever a person registers for Hajj and thereafter dies or his physical
ability is greatly reduced and he is not able to perform the Hajj any
more, and in condition of his death, the receipt of registration belongs
to his heirs, on the condition that he had not been able to perform Hajj
in a way other than registration.

Article 8
---------

The money that is given for registration has no Khums, if it is from the
income of the same year.


