Tawaf
=====

Article 173
-----------

Second obligatory act of Umrah is Tawaf; Tawaf is circumambulating the
house of Allah (seven rounds) and it is obligatory in both Umrah and
Hajj (one time in Umrah and two times in Hajj).

Article 174
-----------

There are five acts in Tawaf that should be done:

### First: “Niyyah” (intention)

Because Tawaf is one of the worships and it is not correct if done
without the intention of closeness to Allah.

### Second: “Purity of Hadath”

That means having ablution and being pure of Janabah (sexual intercourse
or discharge of semen) and menstruation and Nifas (lochia) , and this
should be considered for obligatory Tawaf and Taharah (purity). However
it is not the condition for Mustahab Tawaf, although it is better to be
pure and if a person is in the state of Janabah and has forgotten that,
then his/her Mustahab Tawaf is correct, but if the person is aware, then
Tawaf is not correct, because it is Haraam that a person to be in Masjid
al-Haraam in the state of Janabah.

Article 175
-----------

Whenever a person does not have access to water or using water could be
harmful for him/her, then this person can perform Tayammum (dry
ablution) instead, even if it is Tayammum instead of Ghusl (full
ablution) or ablution for prayer, and performs Tawaf after that.

Article 176
-----------

Whenever a woman is in her menstruation period and cannot perform Tawaf
and the prayer of Tawaf with purity before Wuquf in Arafat, then she
should return to Hajj al-Ifrad and after completing Hajj, she should
perform Umrah al-Mufradah with purity, even if menstruation occurs
before Ihram or after that, and the ruling for woman after childbirth is
the same. But women can delay menstruation by using pills and perform
Tawaf of Hajj and Umrah.

Article 177
-----------

Whenever a person is performing Tawaf and his/her ablution becomes
invalidated then this person should renew the ablution and return to the
tawaf. If the person has passed four rounds then he/she can continue,
and if it was less than four rounds then Tawaf should be performed
again, and if menstruation occurs for a woman during Tawaf, the ruling
is the same after getting pure.

Article 178
-----------

If a person leaves an obligatory Tawaf because of necessity for
himself/herself or one of religious brothers or sisters then he/she
should act according to the past article.

Article 179
-----------

If a person gets ill during Tawaf in the way that cannot continue and
complete Tawaf, he/she can leave Tawaf and if four rounds has been
completed then he/she performs the rest and if was less than four rounds
then Tawaf should be performed again, and if illness continues and the
person cannot continue by himself/herself, then some persons can carry
him/her for performing Tawaf and if it is not also possible, then the
person should take a proxy for performing Tawaf.

Article 180
-----------

Whenever a person leaves a Mustahab Tawaf (even for a necessary reason
or not), then he/she can continue from the place that he/she has been,
if the person has performed four rounds or not.

Article 181
-----------

Sitting has no problem, during Tawaf, for removing tiredness, but it is
obligatory precaution to observe the conventional sequence (it means to
perform Tawaf without long pauses and in sequential rounds).

### Third: Taharah from impurities.

Article 182
-----------

The body and clothes of a person who performs Tawaf should be pure of
any impurities in both obligatory and Mustahab Tawaf, even some of
impurities which has been forgiven for prayer (like blood spot smaller
than a one dirham coin) should not be on the body or clothes of the
person during Tawaf, but if washing the blood of injuries causes strong
discomfort, then Tawaf could be performed with that.

Article 183
-----------

There is no problem if small parts of clothes (like socks, hat and coins
bag which are not enough for covering private parts) are impure.

Article 184
-----------

In the condition that a person does not know that the body or clothes
are impure or he/she knew that but has forgotten, and finds out after
Tawaf, his/her Tawaf is correct. However if he/she finds out during
Tawaf, then clothes should be changed and if there is no clean and pure
cloth available then clothes or the body should be washed in order to be
pure and Tawaf should be continued from the place and this Tawaf is
correct, even it has been paused before the completion of fourth round.

### Fourth: Circumcision.

Article 185
-----------

Tawaf of an uncircumcised man is not correct and an obligatory
precaution is that children should be also circumcised for performing
Tawaf.

Article 186
-----------

Whenever a person performs Tawaf without circumcision, deliberately or
because of ignorance or forgetfulness, then his Tawaf is invalidated.

Article 187
-----------

Whenever an adult has not been circumcised and gains the ability of
performing Hajj (like people who are newly converted), should perform
Hajj in that year if he can be circumcised. But if he cannot do it, then
he should delay his Hajj until he is circumcised, and if circumcision is
harmful for him, then he should perform Hajj in that condition (but it
is Mustahab precaution to take a proxy for performing Tawaf in behalf of
him adding to his own Tawaf).

### Fifth: covering the private parts.

Article 188
-----------

Covering the private parts is obligatory for performing of Tawaf and it
is necessary for him/her to cover his/her body in the way that not to be
called naked.

Article 189
-----------

It is an obligatory precaution to observe all condition of clothes of a
performer of prayer for Tawaf.


