Obligatory acts of Tawaf
========================

### Article 190

Seven things are obligatory in Tawaf:

**First and Second**

Tawaf should be begun from al-Hajar al-Aswad (the black stone) and
should finish at al-Hajar al-Aswad. It is enough that beginning and
finishing is accepted by the normal place from al-Hajar al-Aswad, and it
is not necessary to notice in part of body to be parallel to the parts
of al-Hajar al-Aswad, but it is obligatory precaution to start Tawaf a
little before al-Hajar al-Aswad and finish it a little after al-Hajar
al-Aswad in order to be sure about performing seven complete rounds.

**Third**

It is obligatory to perform Tawaf in the way that the Kaa’ba is at the
left side of the body as is common among Muslims, and Tawaf on the upper
levels of Masjid al-Haraam is not free of problem in other than the
cases of necessity.

Article 191
-----------

It is not necessary that the left shoulder always be parallel to the
Kaa’ba and it is enough if the pilgrim circumambulates normally. If
sometimes he/she faces Ka’ba and then continues the round it has no
problem, and it is not necessary to perform the thing which others do
that is the left shoulder should always be parallel to Ka’ba (even when
they reach Hijr Ismael).This act has no necessity of performance, and
even if it is vilified, their Tawaf has problem. It is better that they
have the presence of heart (getting rid of all secular problem and only
think of Allah) and pray to Allah and circumambulate Ka’ba like other
Muslims instead of these unnecessary observations about the left
shoulder to be always parallel to Ka’ba.

### Fourth

It is obligatory to include Hijr Ismael into Tawaf, which means to
perform Tawaf of Hijr Ismael from outside and if someone performs Hijr
Ismael from inside then he/she should not count that round and begin
from al-Hajar al-Aswad (but because in these cases returning back is not
possible because of congestion of people, then it is better that
performer continues with other people and completes that round without
intention and when he/she reaches al-Hajar al-Aswad makes intention and
begin the next round).

### Fifth

Tawaf should be performed out of the house of Ka’ba. Tawaf inside Ka’ba
is not permitted. Also it is not permitted to perform Tawaf on that part
of side of Ka’ba which is called Shadherwan (although today Shadherwan
has been made in the way that practically Tawaf is not possible on that)
and it is not permitted to go on the wall of “Hijr Ismael” and perform
Tawaf.

Article 192
-----------

Putting the hand on the wall of Ka’ba or the wall of Hijr Ismael or on
the al-Hajar al-Aswad does not harm Tawaf, but the Mustahab precaution
is to abstain from putting the hands on the wall of Ka’ba on the side
which Shadherwan is placed.

Article 193
-----------

If a person enters the Ka’ba during Tawaf then his/her Tawaf is
invalidated and he should redo it, and whenever one performs Tawaf from
inside of Hijr Ismael then that round should be performed again from
al-Hajar al-Aswad is, as has been said before. But if someone performs
on the wall of Hijr Ismael or Shadherwan then only that distance should
be retaken.

Article 194
-----------

Whenever one leaves Tawaf deliberately but does not go out of the mosque
and returns before that sequence is completed and continues from the
place that he/she had left, then this Tawaf is correct.

### Sixth

It is famous among Faqihs that Tawaf should be performed in the distance
between the Maqam Ibrahim and the house of Ka’ba (it is less than
thirteen meters) and this distance should be observed from each side.

Therefore, the Tawaf zone is less than three and a half meters in the
side of Hijr Ismael, because the size of Hijr Ismael is ten meters and
it subtracts from the whole distance.

But it was so much better that Tawaf could be performed in all parts of
Masjid al-Haraam although it is better to observe the precaution. It
means that if performing Tawaf in the defined distance is not hard then
the Muhrim does not go out of that zone; and performing Tawaf in upper
levels is not free of problem in other than necessary cases.

### Seventh

Sequence is one of the conditions of Tawaf; it means that the performer
should circumambulate seven complete rounds around the house of Ka’ba.
Less than seven rounds is not enough, but as we said before, sequence is
not one of the condition of a supererogatory Tawaf.

Article 195
-----------

Whenever the time of obligatory or supererogatory “Vitr” prayer comes
during obligatory Tawaf, then the performer can leave Tawaf, perform the
prayer and then return and continue the rest of Tawaf, only if it is
before the completion of four rounds or after that.


