Reducing or Increasing Tawaf
============================

Article 199
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim reduces the number of Tawaf deliberately and sequence
passes then Tawaf is invalidated and Tawaf should be performed again,
but if he/she compensates that amount before passing the sequence then
Tawaf is correct; and it is possible to stop Mustahab or obligatory
Tawaf and start it again from the beginning.

Article 200
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim performs Tawaf more than seven rounds deliberately
then Tawaf is invalidated, even if he/she had the intention of doing
this from the beginning or makes the intention of adding something after
that, and even this amount is one round or more or less, but if this
added distance has been included without the intention of Tawaf, for
example going the first round with crowds in order to be familiar with
Tawaf and start it from al-Hajar Al-Aswad, then this act has no problem.

Also there is no problem if the pilgrim cannot leave the place because
of congestion of people after completing Tawaf and walk a distance with
crowd without the intention of Tawaf.

Article 201
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim performs Tawaf more than seven rounds involuntarily,
if the added amount is less than one round then he/she stops that and
Tawaf is correct, and if this is one round or more then obligatory
precaution is to add next round to it until completing another seven
round with the in intention of closeness to Allah, and then this pilgrim
performs two Rak’ats prayer of obligatory Tawaf and then performs
another two Rak’ats prayer for Mustahab Tawaf after Sa’y (when Sa’y is
obligatory). It is necessary to define that first one is obligatory and
the other is Mustahab, it is enough to perform that with the intention
of closeness to Allah.

Article 202
-----------

“Qiran” in Tawaf (that means performing two Tawafs one after the other
without performing the prayer of Tawaf between them) is Haraam in
obligatory Tawaf, but the first Tawaf is not invalidated, unless he/she
had the intention such an act from the beginning that in this case the
correctness of Tawaf is not free of problem; but Qiran in Mustahab Tawaf
is Makrooh, but it is not Haraam or invalidated.

Article 203
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim reduces an amount from Tawaf involuntarily then
he/she should act as in article 197.


