Doubt in Amount of Tawaf
========================

Article 204
-----------

Doubt after completing Tawaf in the amount of rounds or in conditions of
Tawaf like performing ablution or other acts correctly, should be
ignored.

Article 205
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim has doubt after reaching al-Hajar Al-Aswad that did
he/she perform seven rounds or eight rounds or more, he/she should
ignore that doubt and Tawaf is correct; also if during the rounds he/she
has doubt that if this is the seventh or eighth round or more than that,
this doubt should be ignored and after finishing that round Tawaf is
correct.

Article 206
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim doubts about performing less than an amount in
obligatory Tawaf (like the doubt between six and seven or five and six
etc.) it is obligatory precaution to leave that Tawaf and restart if
from the beginning (this is for obligatory Tawaf), but in Mustahab Tawaf
he/she can consider it as the lesser number and Tawaf is correct.

Article 207
-----------

Assumption and guessing is the same as doubt in past issues and should
be acted as the rulings of doubt.

Article 208
-----------

There is no problem in relying on a friend for counting the rounds of
Tawaf (if that person is a reliable person).

Article 209
-----------

A doubtful person (a person who has lots of doubts in Tawaf) should
ignore his/her doubts, and take the number which is more appropriate for
him/her, for example this person should take six between five and six,
and take seven between seven and eight.

Article 210
-----------

Talking, laughing and even eating something do not invalidate Tawaf, but
it is better not to say a thing other than prayers to Allah (in Mustahab
or obligatory Tawaf) and to perform this great worship with presence of
the heart and abstain from doing anything that reduces presence of the
heart.


