Sa’y of Safa and Marwah
=======================

Article 225
-----------

Sa’y of Safa and Marwah is one of the obligatory acts of “Umrah
al-Tamattu’” and “Hajj”. It means shuttling between these two small
hills, the pilgrim goes from “Safa” to “Marwah” and returns from
“Marwah” to “Safa” until seven rounds are completed (shuttling from one
to another is considered as one round). Therefore, the pilgrim goes from
Safa to Marwah four times and returns three times from that and does not
return the fourth time and it becomes seven rounds in this way.

Article 226
-----------

Whenever a person renounces all of the seven rounds or a part of it
deliberately, and if this person is performing Umrah al-Tamattu’, and
cannot compensate that before Wuquf to Arafat, it is obligatory
precaution to convert the Hajj to Hajj al-Ifrad, it means that this
person should make the intention of Hajj al-Ifrad and completes the
rituals of Hajj, and the next year should perform Hajj al-Tamattu’
again. If a pilgrim renounces Sa’y in Hajj deliberately and cannot
compensate that in time, then his/her Hajj in invalidated and should be
performed the next year again.

Article 227
-----------

If a person renounces Hajj because of ignorance about the matter, it is
obligatory precaution to act to the ruling of renouncing deliberately as
it has been mentioned in the previous article; but if a pilgrim forgets
to perform Sa’y, then he/she should return and perform that whenever
he/she remembers, although it is after the month of Dhu’l-Hijjah, and if
returning causes him/her trouble, he/she can take a proxy for performing
Sa’y in behalf of the him/her, and nothing is Haraam (from Haraam act of
Muhrim) for him/her in this time.

Article 228
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim performs more than seven rounds deliberately with the
intention of obligatory Sa’y, then this Sa’y is invalidated and if the
pilgrim adds one or more or less than one round to Sa’y involuntarily
and then remembers later, he/she need not pay attention to that and
his/her Sa’y is correct, and there is no need to complete the added
amount up to seven rounds, but it is a precaution not to do this act.

Article 229
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim adds an amount to the seven rounds because of
ignorance about the matter, it’s ruling is similar to performing it
deliberately; it means that he/she should perform Sa’y again.

Article 230
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim reduces a round from Sa’y because of forgetfulness,
and if this has happened before four rounds are completed and then
he/she remembers and performs that reduced round, then his/her Sa’y is
correct. If this person has gone out of Mecca or has returned to the
homeland and returning to Mecca causes him/her trouble, then he/she
should take a proxy for performing Sa’y and it has no atonement,
although he/she has performed acts that are Haraam for a Muhrim.

Article 231
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim assumes that he/she has completed the Sa’y before
Taqsir, he/she should not suffice to this assumption and investigate and
if he/she does not remember, then he/she should perform the amount which
is not sure about performing that; and if this person performs Taqsir
(cuts the hair of the head and the nail) with the assumption of
completing Sa’y without the investigation and performs sexual
intercourse with his/her spouse it is obligatory precaution to sacrifice
a cow (sacrifices in Mecca if it is possible and if it is not possible
then sacrifices in the hometown) adding to completing the Sa’y.

Article 232
-----------

Whenever a person is performing Sa’y of Safa and Marwah, and the time of
prayer comes, this person should leave Sa’y, perform the prayer and
return and complete the rest of Sa’y.

Article 233
-----------

Whenever a necessary need happens for the pilgrim or one of religious
brothers and sisters, then this pilgrim can stop Sa’y and go to fulfill
the need and continue Sa’y after returning from the place that he/she
has stopped and his/her Sa’y is correct. And if a person gets tired,
he/she can sit between Sa’y and stands up after the rest and continue
Sa’y (if it is in Safa, Marwah or between these two).

Article 235
-----------

It is a precaution to observe the sequence in Sa’y except the cases
which have been mentioned before, it means that the pilgrim should
perform seven rounds sequentially and without interruption.


