Obligatory Acts of Sa’y
=======================

**Article 236**

Some obligatory things in Sa’y:

First: Niyyah (intention) – it is obligatory that the pilgrim performs
“Sa’y” with “intention” for the satisfaction of Allah, and as much as
he/she knows what is he/she doing and it is for Hajj or Umrah then it is
enough, and it is not necessary to say it in words.

Second: Sa’y begins from “Safa”

Third: finishes at “Marwah” (as it has been mentioned before, Safa and
Marwah are two small hills near Masjid al-Haraam and when a pilgrim
exits Masjid al-Haraam he/she sees “Safa” in the right side and “Marwah”
in the left, therefore Hajji first goes to Safa and begins Sa’y from
there).

Going from Safa to Marwah is considered as one round and returning from
that is considered as another round, therefore the seventh rounds ends
in Marwah.

Article 237
-----------

The pilgrim should go the whole the distance between these two hills and
it is enough to go through the slope because today a part of hillside
has been covered and there is no need to reach the bare part of the hill
and place his/her foot on that place, and perform some vilifying acts of
some of commons.

Fourth: Sa’y of Safa and Marwah should be performed in seven complete
rounds, nothing more and nothing less, and if the pilgrim increases or
reduces it deliberately then his/her Sa’y is invalidated and if this has
happened involuntarily then he/she should complete that before that
sequence passes in the case of reducing, and increasing it involuntarily
has no problem.

Fifth: Sa’y of Safa and Marwah should be performed in its normal way,
therefore if a part of it is performed from inside Masjid al-Haraam or
the outer places then this Sa’y is not correct; also performing Sa’y in
the upper level which has been made nowadays and is upper than Safa and
Marwah is a problem, unless there is a strong necessity and performing
from the grounds could not be possible, in this case Sa’y from the upper
level is permitted.

Sixth: It is obligatory to face Marwah when proceeding to it and to face
Safa in returning to that hill, and if a person performs this contrarily
and place his/her back to Marwah during going to that and goes backward
or in right or left hand, then it has problem. It is enough for a
pilgrim to shuttle in a normal way, although he/she sometimes turns
his/her head to right or left or for observing other companions
sometimes looks back.

Seventh: It is obligatory precaution in order for correctness of Sa’y,
that the personal clothes and stuff of the pilgrim be not usurped; also
covering private parts for men and religious veil for women is a
precaution.

Article 238
-----------

It is not necessary to perform Sa’y immediately after Tawaf and its
prayer, but it can be delayed until the night because of tiredness or
heat of the weather. Also it is permitted without tiredness or heat of
the weather, but delaying until the next day is not permitted without
any necessity. If a person delays Sa’y until the next day he/she has
performed a sin but his/her Sa’y is not invalidated.


