Taqsir
======

Article 243
-----------

Fifth obligatory act of Umrah is Taqsir, which means cutting the hair of
the head or the face (beard or mustache) and cutting a part of the nail,
and it is enough to cut the hair of the head or the face and forgo
cutting the nail, but it is a precaution not to suffice cutting the nail
solely.

Article 244
-----------

Cutting the hair of the head or the face can be performed with any tool,
but tweezing is not enough.

Article 245
-----------

Taqsir is part of worship and should be performed with the intention and
for closeness to Allah.

Article 246
-----------

There is no specific place for Taqsir in Umrah al-Tamattu’, therefore
the pilgrim can perform Taqsir in Marwah after completing the Sa’y or do
it after returning home, and also there is no difference between cutting
the hair by the pilgrim himself/herself or asking someone else to do.

Article 247
-----------

Shaving the head instead of cutting the hair is not permitted in “Umrah
al-Tamattu’”, and if this act has been performed deliberately in the
month of Dhu’l-Qa’dah or after that, then the atonement is one sheep,
but it has not been performed deliberately then there is no atonement
for that.

Article 248
-----------

After a Muhrim comes out of Ihram after performing Taqsir in “Umrah
al-Tamattu’” all Haraam act of Muhrim becomes Halaal for the person,
except hunting which is still Haraam for that person, because hunting of
Haram is Haraam for everyone.

Article 249
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim forgets to perform Taqsir and goes for Hajj (it means
that wears Ihram and goes to Arafat) his/her Umrah and Hajj is correct
and there is no compensation, but it is better to pay the atonement of
one sheep.

Article 250
-----------

If a person does not perform Taqsir deliberately and goes for the
rituals of Hajj, his/her Umrah is invalidated and his/her Hajj converts
to Ifrad, then he/she should complete the Hajj and it is obligatory
precaution to perform Umrah al-Mufradah after the Hajj and his/her Hajj
is correct, although it is Mustahab for him/her to perform Hajj again in
the next year.

Article 251
-----------

If a person does not perform Taqsir because of ignorance about the
matter, then his/her ruling is similar to renouncing deliberately.

Article 252
-----------

Tawaf of Nisa’ is not obligatory in Umrah al-Tamattu’, even there is no
necessity for performing Tawaf of Nisa’ with the intention of Rija’
(hoping for the goodness of the act).


