Hajj by Proxy
=============

Article 11
----------

It is permitted to deputize a person for performing obligatory or
Mustahab Hajj on behalf of a dead person, but it is only permitted in
Mustahab Hajj for a person who is alive.

However for those who have been able to perform Hajj and had not
performed so because of carelessness and now that they are not able to
perform Hajj according to their oldness, illness or inability, in this
condition it is obligatory for them to take a proxy; but if when a
person has financial ability in the time that has no more physical
ability or the way is not open for him, then Hajj is not obligatory for
him, also taking a proxy is not obligatory, even during lifetime or
after the death.

Article 12
----------

A woman could be a proxy on behalf of a man and vice versa, and each of
them should observe their own duties in this kind of Hajj; if the proxy
is a woman then she should perform duties that is ascribed for women and
if the proxy is a man then he should perform duties ascribed for men,
but it is better for women to be proxies of women and for men to be
proxies of men.

Article 13
----------

It is not permitted for a person, on whom Hajj is obligatory for him/her
to be someone else’s proxy; but if this person performs this act, the
Hajj is correct for other person who has deputized him/her although the
person has performed a sin. A person who is not able by himself/herself
can be someone’s proxy, but does not gain the ability by reaching Mecca
in this way.

Article 14
----------

Whenever a person is deputized for performing Hajj and the year of
pilgrimage has not been specified then he/she should perform Hajj in the
first year.

Article 15
----------

It is permitted to take a proxy for performing obligatory Hajj in behalf
of a dead person from “Miqat” and the money of this act subtracted from
the main inheritance. However if the heir agrees then it is permitted to
take a proxy for performing Hajj from the city (the city which dead
person had lived in) but the margin of costs between Hajj from Miqat and
city can only be paid by the adult heirs.

Article 16
----------

The “Proxy” should know the issues and rituals of Hajj, but it is not
necessary that he/she has performed Hajj before. People such as servants
of a caravan or alike who know from the beginning that they cannot meet
Mash’ar voluntarily cannot accept to be a proxy.


