Wuquf in Arafat
===============

Article 257
-----------

The second act of obligatory acts of Hajj is Wuquf in Arafat. “Arafat”
is a desert about 20 km from Mecca which has became semi-treed today and
it is obligatory for Hajjis to say the noon of the ninth day of
Dhu’l-Hijjah in that place.

Article 258
-----------

It is a precaution to remain from the beginning of noon of the ninth day
until the sunset in Arafat, afoot or ride, moving or sitting, awake or
partly sleep, and it is Mustahab to pray and observe the pure essence of
Allah and asking forgiveness from him in that time, The superiority of
praying in this place and time is unequaled

Article 259
-----------

Wuquf in Arafat is worship and should be performed with intention of
closeness to Allah, and its intention has no specific statement and
having the intention of performing that in the heart is enough.

Article 260
-----------

If a person leaves Arafat before sunset, and if it is because of
forgetfulness or ignorance about the matter, then there is nothing on
him, but if has done this deliberately, then this person should
sacrifice a camel in Mena (and if he/she cannot sacrifice a camel, then
he/she should perform eighteen days of fasting) and his/her Hajj is
correct.

Article 261
-----------

Whenever a person returns to Arafat before the sunset and stay until
sunset in there and then leaves the place, there is no atonement on him
in this case.

Article 262
-----------

Although staying in Arafat is obligatory all the time as has been
mentioned before, renouncing it is a sin, but it is not one of
essentials of Hajj, and the pillar is staying for a while in there. It
means that if a person stays a part of the time from noon until sunset
in Arafat, then his/her Hajj is correct, but if he/she stays away the
whole time then the Hajj is invalidated.

Article 263
-----------

It is obligatory for a person who has not been successful in completing
Wuquf in Arafat from noon until sunset, to stay there for some time in
the night of Eid. Therefore, when a pilgrim reaches Arafat when people
have left there, he/she should stay a part of the night in there on the
condition that he/she can reach Mash’ar al-Haraam before the dawn of the
day of Eid and this is called “Emergency Wuquf of Arafat”. However if
this person couldn’t stay a part of night in Arafat, it is enough for
him/her to perceive Wuquf a part of Wuquf in Mash’ar al-Haraam, which
will be mentioned later, and his/her Hajj is correct in this way.


