Wuquf in Mash’ar al-Haraam
==========================

Article 264
-----------

Mash’ar al-Haraam which is also called “Muzdalifah” and “Joma’” is a
famous place between Mena and Arafat (its boundaries are the mount
Ma'zmein and Hiyadh and Wadi Mohassar) and it is obligatory for those
who to go to that place after Wuquf in Arafat and it is precaution not
to delay going to that place if it is possible.

Article 265
-----------

Wuquf in Mash'ar al-Haraam is obligatory from the dawn until sunrise and
it is also an obligatory precaution to stay the night there and pray to
Allah and it is obligatory to have the intention of closeness to Allah
for all of these acts.

Article 266
-----------

Leaving Mash'ar without any religious lawful excuse and going to Mena
because of ignorance has no problem, but if a person performs this act
deliberately, then he/she should pay one sheep as the atonement, but
his/her Hajj is correct.

Article 267
-----------

Wuquf in Mash'ar al-Haram is a pillar of Hajj and if a person renounces
that deliberately, then his/her Hajj is invalidated.

Article 268
-----------

Although staying all the time between the dawn and the sunset in Mash'ar
al-Haraam is obligatory (and even staying the night of Eid is also
obligatory as a precaution), but staying the night solely is enough for
the correctness of Hajj, but as we said before if this act has been
performed deliberately, it is a sin and has the atonement of one sheep.

Article 269
-----------

It is allowed for the below listed to stay a while in Mash'ar and then
go to Mena.

1- Women  
 2- Ill persons  
 3- Old men  
 4- All persons who have an acceptable excuse

Therefore, all people who have an excuse can stay a part of the night in
Mash'ar and then depart for Mena; so old men, ill persons, children and
all those who have to accompany them for nursing or guidance and those
who are afraid of congestion of the crowd in the morning of the Eid can
go to Mena in the night (after staying a while in Mash'ar al-Haraam and
pray to Allah) and perform Ramy al-Jamarat al-Aqaba; but it is Mustahab
precaution not to leave Mash'ar before midnight, and it is precaution
that guides return to Mash'ar after taking people who are in their
charge if it is possible.


