Rulings of Wuquf in Arafat and Mash’ar
======================================

Article 270
-----------

As it has been said before, each of the Wuqufs in “Arafat’ and “Mash'ar”
are of two kinds:

1- Voluntary Wuquf 2- Emergency Wuquf

“Voluntary Wuquf of Arafat” is from about the noon until the sunset.

“Emergency Wuquf of Arafat” is some time, even a short time, of the
night of the Eid.

“Voluntary Wuquf of Mash'ar” is from the dawn until the sunrise of the
day of the Eid.

“Emergency Wuquf of Mash'ar” is from the sunrise until the noon of the
day of the Eid.

Albeit “Mash'ar’ has another emergency Wuquf which is for women and weak
and ill persons and it is staying a part of the night of Eid and
departing there for Mena.Here, we explain the rulings of persons who
perceive all of these kinds of Wuqufs or some of them.

1- If a person performs both Wuqufs in Arafat and Mash'ar voluntarily
(which is from the noon until the sunset of the day of Arafa in Arafat,
and from the dawn until the sunrise in Mash'ar al-Haraam), surely
his/her Hajj is correct.

2- A person who does not perform any of voluntary or emergency Wuqufs of
Arafat and Mash'ar which has been mentioned before, his/her Hajj is
invalidated and should make the intention of Umrah al-Mufradah, it means
that he/she should perform Tawaf and prayer and Sa’y with the Ihram that
he/she has and perform Taqsir (also performs Tawaf of Nisa’ and its
prayer as a precaution) and comes out of Ihram, but this person should
perform Hajj al-Tamattu’ again the next year.

3- Hajj is correct and free of problems by performing “emergency Wuquf
of Arafa” and “voluntary Wuquf of Mash'ar” (it means that he/she has not
reached Arafa in the ninth day and he/she has only stayed a part on the
night in there, then he/she has stayed in Mash'ar al-Haraam from the
dawn until the sunrise).

4- Hajj of a person is correct if he/she has performed “voluntary Wuquf
of Arafa” and “emergency Wuquf of Mash'ar” (it means that this person
had been stayed in Arafat from the afternoon until the sunset of the day
if Arafa, but he/she had not stayed in Mash'ar after the dawn until the
sunrise because of a reason, but he/she had stayed a part of the noon in
Mash'ar).

5- Hajj of a person who has performed only “voluntary Wuquf of Arafat”,
by any reason, is correct (it means that he/she has been stayed from the
afternoon until sunrise of the ninth day in Arafat, but he/she couldn’t
stayed even a while in Mash'ar after the noon of the Eid).

6- Hajj of a person who has performed only “voluntary Wuquf of Mash'ar”
is also correct (it means that he/she had never reached Arafat, but had
stayed in Mash'ar from the dawn until the sunrise).

7- A person who has performed “emergency Wuquf of Arafat” in the night
of the Eid and “emergency Wuquf of Mash'ar” before the noon of the day
of the Eid, deserves that his/her Hajj to be correct.

8- If a person has only performed “emergency Wuquf of Mash'ar” (it means
that he could only reach Mash'ar al-Haraam before the noon of the day of
the Eid), then his/her Hajj is invalidated and should make the intention
of Umrah al-Mufradah and comes out of Ihram after performing the rituals
of Umrah al-Mufradah, and this person should perform Hajj al-Tamattu’
again the next year.

9- The Hajj of a person who has only performed “emergency Wuquf of
Arafat” is also invalidated and should act according to the previous
ruling.

10- The Hajj of a person who has performed none of the voluntary or
emergency Wuqufs is also invalidated and should act according to the
previous ruling.


