Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba
========================

Article 271
-----------

The fourth obligatory act of Hajj is “Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba”, on the
day of Eid of Qurban (festivity of sacrifice). The meaning of this is to
throw seven pebbles to a place which is placed at the end of Mena in the
side of Mecca that is called “al-Jamarah al-Aqaba”

Article 272
-----------

There are some things obligatory is Ramy “al-Jamarah”:

1- Having the intention of closeness to Allah, and it is enough to have
the intention in the heart that he/she has the intention of throwing
seven pebbles to the Jamarah for obeying Allah and performing rituals of
Hajj and it is not necessary to say this intention by words.

2- The pilgrim should use seven pebbles (not being very large and not
being very small, it is enough that each of them to be in size of a
finger nail).

3- Pebbles should be hurled one by one and throwing two pebbles together
is considered is throwing only one.[^1]

4- Pebbles should strike Jamarah and if there is a doubt in this matter,
it is not enough and the act should be performed again.

5- Pebbles should be hurled not being placed in the place of Jamarah and
it is not enough that pebbles strike Jamarah with assistance of other
person or thing (for example if a pilgrim throws a pebble and this
pebble strikes Jamarah by assistance of other pebble which has been
hurled by another person, then this is not enough).

6- The time for performing the throwing of the pebbles is from sunrise
until sunset of the day of the Eid, but as we said before “women” and
“old men” and those who are afraid of the congestion of the crowd can
perform Ramy al-Jamarah at the night of the Eid.

7- Pebbles have three conditions:

“First”, they should be stone, not clod or clay or anything else.

“Second”, they should be collected from “Haram” (attention that all of
Mash'ar al-Haraam and Mena are placed in Haram but Arafat is out of
Haram), but it is better to collect the pebbles from Mash'ar al-Haraam
in the night of the Eid, also collecting from “Mena” and “Mecca” has no
problem.

“Third”, pebbles should be untouched; it means that nobody or even the
pilgrim himself/herself had not used them for Ramy al-Jamarat before.

Therefore, pebbles which are fallen around Jamarah and have been used
cannot be used for Ramy al-Jamarat. But of the pilgrim sees pebbles in
other than that place and doubts that if these have been used or not,
he/she can use them.

It should be considered that 49 pebbles are needed for three days (and
if the pilgrim has to stay the thirteenth day then he/she needs 70
pebbles) that is better to collect them in the night of the Eid from
Mash'ar and bring them in a bag with himself/herself, but it is better
to have some more pebbles because it is possible that some of them may
not strike the Jamarah.

Article 273
-----------

It is an obligatory precaution not to collect the pebbles from mosques
in there.

Article 274
-----------

Ramy al-Jamarah can be performed ride or afoot, with the right or the
left hand, also there is no specific method for throwing them and having
ablution is not a condition, although it is better to perform Ramy
al-Jamarah afoot with ablution and with the right hand, and in that
state it is better to praise and pray to Allah.

Article 275
-----------

Performing Ramy is not permitted in the night, except for women and ill
persons and those who are afraid of the congestion of crowd in the day,
or people who are busy in days managing and arranging the tasks of
Hajjis in caravans (there is no difference in performing Ramy in the
night before or after).

Article 276
-----------

Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba and other Jamarat can be performed from any
side, although it is famous that it is Mustahab to stand back to Qibla
and facing Jamarah when performing Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba, but it is
Mustahab to face the Qibla in performing Ramy of other Jamarat.

Article 277
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim doubts about the number of pebbles which have been
hurled, he/she should take the lesser number and perform the rest, and
if he/she is sure about performing less than seven, he/she can perform
the rest if the sequence has not been past and if it has been passed it
is precaution to perform the rest and then perform it again by other
seven pebbles.

Article 278
-----------

Whenever a person renounces Ramy al-Jamarah because of forgetfulness or
ignorance about the matter, it is necessary to perform that whenever
he/she remembers or informed about the matter until the thirteenth day,
and it is better to perform the Ghazaa of the previous day before the
noon and the duty of that day in afternoon; but it has no problem to
perform them both in one time (first the Ghazaa of the previous day and
then the duty of that same day).

Article 279
-----------

If a pilgrim finds out that he/she had not performed Ramy al-Jamarah
after returning to Mecca from Mena, he/she should return to Mena and
perform that, and if the thirteenth day has passed he/she should perform
that in the next year in the same days or if it is not possible, he/she
should take a proxy for performing that.

Article 280
-----------

If a person renounces Ramy al-Jamarah deliberately, his/her Hajj is not
invalidated but he/she should act according to the previous article.

Article 281
-----------

The sequence of Jamarat should be observed in the eleventh and twelfth
days which Ramy of all three Jamarat is obligatory; it means that the
pilgrim should perform Ramy first on the place of “Jamarah al-Uula”,
then “Jamarah al-Wusta” and after that the “Jamarah al-Aqaba” which is
the last Jamarah (this is for the eleventh and the twelfth day; but in
the tenth day which is the day of the Eid only Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba
is performed).

Article 282
-----------

Whenever sequence has not been observed in Ramy al-Jamarat, the pilgrim
should return and perform it in the way that sequence is observed, but
if he/she has hurled four pebbles or more to each Jamarah, he/she
returns and performs the rest sequentially, and if he/she has not hurled
four pebbles, then he/she should return and perform from the beginning
and throw seven pebbles, and if he/she has missed three pebbles or less
from one of Jamarat, he/she should complete only that Jamarah and there
is nothing else obligatory for him/her in this matter.

Article 283
-----------

If the pilgrim has not observed the sequence deliberately, it is
obligatory precaution to return and perform that from the beginning and
there is no difference between four pebbles or less.

Article 284
-----------

It is obligatory to observe the “sequence without interruption”; it
means that the pilgrim should hurl the pebbles sequentially and with a
little pause between them to the place of Jamarah, but as we said
before, if a pilgrim has hurled four pebbles or more to the Jamarah
sequentially and has renounced the rest because of forgetfulness or
ignorance about the matter, then he/she can hurl the rest in another
time although the sequence has been passed.

Article 285
-----------

As it has been mentioned before those who cannot perform Ramy in the day
because of an excuse should perform it in the night, and if they are
incapable of performing it in the night or there is fear of a danger or
harm, they should take a proxy to perform Ramy in behalf of them in the
day.

Article 286
-----------

Today, upper levels have been constructed for Jamarat, and it seems that
performing Ramy from the upper level also suffices and it is enough when
pebbles are hurled into the holes around the Jamarah and falls on the
ground.

[^1]: According to lots of great scholars and scientist of literature,
Jamarah means “مجتمع الحصي” which means the place of collection of
pebbles or according to the owner of Jawahir Jamarah is the place of
Jimar (pebbles) and it is understood from several cabbalas that Jamarah
is the same land which pebbles are thrown to that and it seems that
pillar are placed there as signs, therefore it is not necessary the
respected Hajjis trouble themselves to throw the pebbles to pillars, but
it is enough to throw the pebbles to the circle around the pillar and it
is enough if pebbles strike the pillar and fall at the base; but bearing
this hardness is not necessary and if they perform Ramy from the upper
level, throwing the pebbles to the holes which are placed in upper level
and then pebbles fall of the ground from there is enough.


