Sacrifice
=========

Article 287
-----------

The second obligatory act of Mena is sacrifice and camel is the best for
this purpose and its middle is a cow and the least of that is a sheep
and this is obligatory for only those who are performing Hajj
al-Tamattu’ and it is not obligatory for the others.

Article 288
-----------

It is an obligatory precaution that a sacrifice to be only for one
person even in the cases of necessity; and if some persons are capable
of sacrifice only one animal, then it is a precaution to perform
fasting, which will be mentioned later, added to sacrifice; but it has
no problem to sacrifice only one animal for a group of people in
Mustahab sacrifices like the Eid of Qurban even they are seventy
persons.

Article 289
-----------

It is better to perform Zebh (ritual slaughter) in the day of the Eid
but it is permitted to delay that until the thirteenth day.

Article 290
-----------

If a pilgrim delays the sacrifice because of an excuse or without any
excuse and deliberately, it is obligatory to perform that until the end
of Dhu’l-Hijjah and if he/she doesn’t perform that, then he/she should
take a proxy to perform this act in the next year in the days of Eid in
the same place.

Article 291
-----------

The animals of sacrifice should have the following conditions:

First condition: The Camel should be at least 5 years old, cow 2 years
old and the sheep should be at least one year old for sacrifice as an
obligatory precaution.

Second condition: Its eye should be healthy and its ear should not be
cut and its feet should not be crippled (little crippling has no
problem). Its inner horn should not be broken, but there is no problem
if its outer horn is broken.

Article 292
-----------

Whenever a part of the ear of the animal has been cut or punched as a
sign, it has no problem.

Article 293
-----------

If a type of that animal is naturally without ear or tail or horn, then
there is no problem.

Article 294
-----------

A castrated animal is not permitted for sacrifice; but if it’s balls are
ground or its vessel is disabled then there is no problem.

Article 295
-----------

The animal should not be thin and it suffices if people say that it is
not thin, and it is enough if it seems thin but there is some fat on its
kidney.

Article 296
-----------

The word of the seller of the animal can be accepted about the age of
that animal or not being castrated or other hidden matters which buyer
cannot recognize.

Article 297
-----------

If a person buys an animal that seems to be fat, and recognizes that it
is thin after the Zebh or after paying the price and before performing
Zebh, this sacrifice is correct. Also, if a pilgrim buys an animal
assuming that it is thin and it clears later that the animal is fat then
this sacrifice is correct.

Article 298
-----------

Whenever a pilgrim buys an animal which seems to be healthy and it
clears after the Zebh or paying the price that the animal has a defect
then the pilgrim can suffice this animal, although Mustahab precaution
is not to suffice that animal.

Article 299
-----------

It is Mustahab to divide the meat of the sacrificed animal to three
parts. Take one third of that for themselves, give one third as alms in
the way of Allah and give one third of that to friends and believers as
a gift; but giving a part of that meat to poor people is obligatory
while eating from that meat is not obligatory.

Article 300
-----------

If people who deserve this meat cannot be found in Mena, then the Hajji
can bring the meat out of Mena and even out of Hejaz and give that to
the poor Muslims. Although it is according the precaution to take the
deputyship from some of people who deserve or believers for accepting
the share of poor people or the gift of believers and leaving that
sacrifice there, but it is not obligatory.

Article 301
-----------

It is not necessary that three shares be specifically equal.

Article 302
-----------

It is a precaution not to take the meat of sacrifice out of Mena while
there are needy persons in there, and if there is no poor person in
there then it is permitted to take the meat out of Mena.

Article 303
-----------

Meat of the sacrifice can be given to all poor Muslim consisting of
Shiites and Sunnis, but giving it to non-Muslim people or Nasibis (those
who hate Ali (a.s.) and are the enemies of his holiness and his
followers) is a problem.

Article 304
-----------

If a pilgrim does not find an animal of sacrifice until the time of
return, but has the money of sacrifice, he/she can give the money to a
reliable person in order to buy a sheep until the end of Dhu’l-Hijjah
and sacrifice that in behalf of him/her in Mena and if it is not
possible perform it in Mecca, and if it is not possible perform it in
the month of Dhu’l-Hijjah of the next year and if the pilgrim cannot
find a reliable person in there he/she can ask some of Hajjis to buy and
sacrifice in behalf of him/her in the next year.

Article 305
-----------

It is a precaution not to sell the skin of the sacrificed animal and if
he/she want to keep it for himself/herself must give an equal amount of
money to a poor person.

Article 306
-----------

Sacrificing in the places for sacrifice in enough, although today it is
common that all of them are out of the Mena region and it is not
necessary to sacrifice in a corner of Mena hidden or leave it for the
next days.

Article 307
-----------

Muslims should do something in order that meat of sacrificed animals to
be used and not be buried or burned because of uselessness or
corruption, because this acts are Israaf (wasting), Haraam and is
against the Islamic orders. And if there is no person in Mena who
deserves this meat, then Hajjis should take the meat out to other cities
or countries and give it to poor people and believers and it this act
has costs, these costs should be paid by the Islamic governor or people.

Article 308
-----------

Using machineries for Zebh has no problem if the conditions of Islamic
Zebh are observed like being to Qibla and saying “بسم الله being faced
to Qibla and saying

Article 309
-----------

If there is no way found for using the meats of sacrificed animals, and
pilgrims are forced to destroy the meat or an important part of them,
then sacrifice should be stopped temporarily in Mena and Hajjis should
keep the money in order to sacrifice in their towns after returning and
act as its order; If the authorities of reliable organizations can
accept to perform the Zebh of all animals of sacrifice there and send
the meat to the deprived people of other regions, it is better to
perform sacrifice in the available places for sacrifice, although these
places are out of Mena.

Article 310
-----------

In the assumption of the previous article sacrifice should be performed
in the rest of Dhu’l-Hijjah and if the return takes more time then
he/she should take a proxy. And if is not possible in the Dhu’l-Hijjah
of that year, it should be performed in the days of Eid of Qurban in the
next year.

Article 311
-----------

Sacrifice can be performed by the Hajji himself/herself or by a proxy
and in any way Hajji makes the intention and there is no need that proxy
should be known completely, only knowing him/her as a whole is enough.
Also it is not necessary for the person who performs sacrifice to be
Shiite, but all person whom their sacrificed animal is pure and Halaal,
can perform Zebh, although it is better for a person who performs
sacrifice to be Shiite.

Article 312
-----------

It is not necessary that the proxy say the name of a person who are
performing Zebh in behalf of him/her (although saying the name is
better), even if this person says the name of another person
erroneously, then it has no problem and sacrifice is performed for the
main person.


