Taqsir
======

Article 313
-----------

It is obligatory that the Hajji cuts a part of his/her hair of the head
or shaves the head and it is his first Hajj then it is better to shave
the head, but it is not obligatory. He/she comes out of Ihram by this
act, it means that wearing sewed clothes and other Haraam acts of Ihram
become permitted for him except fragrance and women that will become
Halaal in the next acts (as will be mentioned).

Article 314
-----------

It is an obligatory precaution for those who have tied their hair or
have stuck the hair with some materials to shave the head and it is
Mustahab precaution to shave the head for those who are performing Hajj
for the first time, but it is permitted to only suffice to cutting a
part or shortening the hair of the head; and he has choice between these
two acts for the next times; although shaving the head is for men and
women are not permitted to shave their heads and only cutting a part of
the hair of the head is obligatory.

Article 315
-----------

Cutting the nail is good with the cutting of the hair from the head for
men and women; but it is obligatory precaution not to suffice to cutting
the nail alone.

Article 316
-----------

It is obligatory to perform the triple acts of Mena in sequence. This
means that first- Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba, second- sacrifice and third-
shaving the head or cutting a part of the hair of the head and nail.
Whenever a pilgrim performs these acts without observing the sequence
because of ignorance or forgetfulness then his/her acts are correct,
even if he/she does not observe that deliberately, he/she has performed
a sin but there is no atonement. Delaying shaving the head or cutting
the hair of the head or the nail has no problem until the twelfth day,
but it is a precaution not to perform these acts in the night.

Article 317
-----------

It is obligatory to perform shaving or shortening of the hair of the
head before Tawaf of Hajj, and if a pilgrim performs Tawaf of Hajj
before Taqsir deliberately, then he/she should perform Tawaf after
Taqsir again and pay the atonement of one sheep; but if he/she has
performed Tawaf before Taqsir because of ignorance or forgetfulness then
it is has no atonement, but it is obligatory precaution for him/her to
perform Tawaf after Taqsir again.

Article 318
-----------

It is not necessary that the Hajji himself/herself shortens his/her hair
of the head and it is enough if he/she orders another person to do that,
if that person is Shiite or Sunni and in any way he/she himself/herself
should make the intention that for example “I perform the obligatory act
of Taqsir for Hajjat al-Islam for closeness to Allah (قربة الی الله)”.

Article 319
-----------

It is obligatory to perform shaving or shortening the hair of the head
in Mena and if a person does not perform that deliberately or because of
ignorance or forgetfulness, it is obligatory for him/her to return to
Mena and perform this duty. And if he/she cannot return or it causes
severe hardness for him/her, then he/she should perform that anywhere
that he/she is; and it is an obligatory precaution to send his/her hair
to Mena and it is Mustahab to bury the hair in Mena.

Article 320
-----------

It is not permitted for those who have not performed Taqsir yet and are
still Muhrim to shave the head of another person or shorten his/her
hair, but they should perform Taqsir first and then they can do it for
the others.

Article 321
-----------

A person who knows that if he/she shaves his/her head, he/she might get
injured, then it is a precaution to cut a part of the hair first and
then shave the head.


