Quintet Obligatory Acts of Mecca
================================

Article 322
-----------

It is obligatory for a Hajji to return to Mecca after performing triple
acts of Mena in order to perform the rest of ritual of Hajj which are
five things as follows:

1- “Tawaf of Hajj” that is also called “Tawaf of pilgrimage”.

2- “The prayer of Tawaf of pilgrimage”.

3- “Sa’y of Safa and Marwah”.

4- “Tawaf of Nisa’”

5- “The prayer of Tawaf of Nisa’”.

These five acts should be performed exactly as we have said before for
Umrah al-Tamattu’ except for intention that is here the intention of
Tawaf of Hajj and its prayer and its Sa’y or the intention of Tawaf of
Nisa’ and its prayer.

Article 323
-----------

A Hajji can go to Mecca in the day of Eid of Qurban immediately after
performing the acts of Mena and performs the above acts in there in that
day. And it is better not to delay it to after eleventh day and if this
happens, then no longer than the thirteenth day. If it is not impossible
to perform these acts until the end of Dhu’l-Hijjah, although it is
Mustahab precaution not to delay after the thirteenth day.

Article 324
-----------

Acts of Mecca which are Tawaf of pilgrimage and prayer and Sa’y and
Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer should be performed after the acts of
Mena, but those who can perform them before going to Arafat are;

1- Women who have the fear of involving with menstruation of childbirth
and cannot stay until they become pure.

2- Ill persons who are not capable of performing Tawaf and Sa’y in the
congestion of the crowd.

3- Old men and women who are incapable performing these acts when
returning from Mena because of congestion of the crowd or fear of danger
or harm.

4- All persons who know that they are incapable of performing these acts
after returning or performing these acts causes them lots of troubles
(and there is no difference between Tawaf of Nisa’ and Tawaf of Hajj in
this matter).

Article 325
-----------

In case of performing these acts before the acts of Mena, it is an
obligatory precaution to become Muhrim to the Ihram of Hajj and then
performing the acts.

Article 326
-----------

If an ill person becomes healthy or a woman gets pure after returning
from “Mena” and are capable of performing Tawaf and Sa’y then it is
obligatory precaution to perform them again.

Article 327
-----------

Tawaf of Nisa’ is obligatory for man, woman, old and young, married and
single and even discriminator or neutral children, and without that
woman does not become Halaal for man and man does not become Halaal for
woman; and it is obligatory precaution that if a person brings a
non-discriminator child then his/her guardian performs Tawaf of Nisa’
with him/her.

Article 328
-----------

Tawaf of Nisa’ is not an obligatory Umrah of Hajj al-Tamattu’, but it is
obligatory in Hajj al-Tamattu’ and Umrah al-Mufradah.

Article 329
-----------

If a woman is in menstruation before performing Tawaf of Nisa’ and
cannot stay until becoming pure (for example when caravan does not wait
for her) it is necessary to take a proxy for performing Tawaf of Hajj
and its prayer, and then she performs Sa’y and after that takes a proxy
for performing Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer (also other persons who are
not capable of performing Tawaf and Sa’y, should take a proxy).

Article 330
-----------

Tawaf of Nisa’ cannot be performed immediately after Tawaf of Hajj and
before Sa’y, but it should be performed after performing Sa’y; but if a
person performs that before Sa’y because of ignorance about the matter
or forgetfulness, then it is correct.

Article 331
-----------

The things which were Haraam for Hajji in the state of Ihram become
Halaal by performing the triple acts of Mena and acts of Mecca in three
stages:

1- All Haraam things become Halaal after cutting or shaving the hair of
the head, except fragrance and spouse.

2- Fragrance becomes Halaal after performing Tawaf of pilgrimage and the
prayer of Tawaf and Sa’y of Safa and Marwah.

3- Spouse becomes Halaal after performing Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer.


