Staying the Night in Mena (Baytuta in Mena)
===========================================

Article 332
-----------

It is obligatory for Hajji to stay the eleventh and twelfth night in
Mena (and in some cases the thirteenth night is also obligatory) and if
he/she stays in any other place in these two night then the atonement is
one sheep and it is obligatory to pay the atonement of one sheep for
each night.

Article 333
-----------

It is enough to stay half of the night, if it is first or the second
half.

Article 334
-----------

It is possible that a Hajji returns to Mecca after the middle of
eleventh night for performing the acts of Mecca or returns to Mecca in
the day of the Eid after performing the acts of Mena and returns to Mena
until the midnight.

Article 335
-----------

Baytuta in Mena also needs to have the intention for closeness to Allah
like other acts of Hajj, and it is enough to have in the intention of
staying the night in Mena for performing Hajj al-Tamattu’ from Hajjat
al-Islam or Mustahab Hajj in the heart.

Article 336
-----------

Whenever a person abstains from performing Baytuta in Mena inevitably or
because of an emergency or necessity then there is no sin considered for
him/her and also there is no atonement and his/her Hajj is correct.

Article 337
-----------

Some types of people are exempt from staying performing Baytuta in Mena:

1- Old men and women and ill persons and their nurses whose staying in
Mena causes them severe hardness.

2- Authorities and servants of caravans in the case that they have to
return to Mena for arranging the issues of pilgrims.

3- Those who have fear of danger or harm among the congestion of the
crowd when returning.

4- People who are busy all the night performing Tawaf of other worships
in Mecca and do not perform any act other than their necessities.

5- Those who have come to Mecca for performing the rituals of Mecca and
will return to Mena before the dawn.

Article 338
-----------

Performing Baytuta in the hillsides around Mena (especially in
congestion of the crowd) has no problem (also in the hillsides around
Mash'ar in the time of Wuquf in Mash'ar at the night of the Eid, but it
has problem to stay in the hillsides of the mount “Ma’zmein” which is
situated at the beginning of Mash'ar and it is out of the zone of
Mash'ar, except the cases of necessity of congestion of the crowd).

Article 339
-----------

Three types of people should stay the thirteenth night in Mena and
perform Ramy of triple Jamarat (as obligatory precaution):

1- A person who has hunted an animal in the state of Ihram

2- A person who has performed sexual intercourse with his/her spouse.

3- A person who does not depart from Mena in the twelfth day until the
sunset.

Staying the third night in Mena is obligatory in these three conditions,
and in other than that the pilgrim can return to Mecca in the twelfth
day.

Article 340
-----------

Returning from Mena should be after the Azan of noon in the twelfth day,
but those who depart there in the thirteenth day can return before Azan
of noon.


