Masdood and Mahsoor (People who have been prevented from performing ritual of Hajj or Umrah because of an Obstacle)
===================================================================================================================

Article 342
-----------

“Masdood” is a person who is prevented of performing the rituals after
the Ihram of Umrah or Hajj by another person (enemy of government
agents), and “Mahsoor” is a person who cannot perform the rituals of
Hajj or Umrah because of illness.

Article 343
-----------

Whenever a person who is Muhrim to Ihram of “Hajj” or “Umrah” and an
enemy or other persons like government agents or thieves or other than
them prevent him/her from going to Mecca, and there is no other way of
going to Mecca or this pilgrim cannot afford to pay the fare of that
way, then he/she should sacrifice an animal in there and come out of
Ihram. It is a precaution to shorten the hair of the head, and if there
is no possibility of performing sacrifice in that place, he/she makes
the “intention” of coming out of Ihram and it is a precaution to perform
fasting for ten days instead of sacrifice (in the way that will be
mentioned in the “article 347” and if he/she couldn’t perform in that
way, then he/she perform it after he/she return to his/her hometown).

Article 344
-----------

Being Masdood happens by being prevented of going to Mecca, or coming to
Mecca and being prevented of performing all of the acts of Hajj because
of going to jail or any other cause, or by being prevented of Wuquf in
Arafat and Mash'ar. But if a pilgrim is prevented of performing the acts
of Mena then he/she should take a proxy for performing Ramy and
sacrifice, and then shave the hair of the head or shorten it and come
out of Ihram and perform the other acts of Mecca personally; and if this
pilgrim has performed Wuqufs and is prevented only from the rituals of
Mena and Mecca, he/she takes a proxy for performing Ramy and sacrifice
and then perform Taqsir personally, and after that takes a proxy for
performing the acts of Mecca.

And in all of these conditions his/her Hajj is correct and comes out of
Ihram, unless in the case that he/she is prevented of entering Mecca or
performing the Wuquf of Arafat and Mash'ar or, this person is prevented
of performing the acts that Hajj is invalidated when a person does not
perform them (even involuntarily); in this case if he/she has the
ability of performing Hajj before or his/her ability remains until the
next year, then Hajj is obligatory for him/her, unless it is not
obligatory for this person.

Article 345
-----------

“Mahsoor” is a person who cannot perform the rituals of Hajj and Umrah
because of illness or injury or fracture of bones or like them, and has
four conditions:

1- If a pilgrim is a Muhrim to Ihram of Umrah al-Mufradah but he/she has
to return to his/her home because of illness, or similar problem and is
not capable of performing the acts of Umrah al-Mufradah, then this
person should send the money for sacrifice to Mecca and arrange with
his/her friend for performing sacrifice for him/her in a specific time
and date in Mecca, and then he/she performs Taqsir in that specified
time and comes out of Ihram, and everything becomes Halaal for him
except women until that he becomes healthy and performs Umrah
al-Mufradah. If he/she became healthy but couldn’t perform Umrah
al-Mufradah then he/she sends a proxy, and if there is no person for
performing sacrifice for him/her, sacrifice in the place that he/she is
in and comes out of Ihram, and even if it is not possible, then the
sacrifice is made after returning to the hometown and action is done
according to above order.

2- Whenever a person is a Muhrim to Ihram of “Umrah of Hajj
al-Tamattu’”, acts like the previous article (as obligatory precaution)
and if his/her Hajj is obligatory then he/she should perform it again
the next year.

3- Whenever a person becomes Muhrim to Ihram of Hajj al-Tamattu’ (from
Mecca) and cannot perform any of the Wuqufs of “Arafat” or “Mash'ar”
because of obstacles, then he/she should send the money for sacrifice by
one of his/her friends to Mena in order to sacrifice for him/her in the
day of the Eid (or after that until thirteenth day) and perform Taqsir
in the time that has been arranged with his/her friends, and he/she
comes out of Ihram and everything becomes Halaal for him except women
(as obligatory precaution). He should perform Hajj in the next year in
order that it becomes Halaal for him, or performs Umrah al-Mufradah
before the time of Hajj of the next year, or if it is not possible then
he should send a proxy. This person should perform Hajj again in the
next year if Hajj has been obligatory for him/her in that time.

4- Whenever he/she performs one of two Wuqufs, his/her Hajj is correct
and should perform the rest of the acts as much as he/she can and takes
a proxy for performing the other acts that he/she could not perform.

Article 346
-----------

Whenever a person become healthy and can reach Hajj and perform at least
one of two Wuqufs, then he/she should go and perform the rest of the
rituals, too.


