Miscellaneous Issues of Hajj
============================

Article 347
-----------

It is obligatory for a person who does not have either the sacrifice or
it’s money, to perform ten days of fasting, three days sequentially in
the days of Hajj (seventh and eighth and ninth of Dhu’l-Hijjah) and
seven days after returning home. If he/she could not perform fasting in
the seventh day, he/she should do that in the eighth and ninth days
after each other and one day after the thirteenth day, and these three
days should be in the month of Dhu’l-Hijjah (and being in travel in not
a obstacle for performing fasting in this condition), but he/she can
perform other seven days in other months, sequentially or separated.

Article 348
-----------

Whenever a person perform Umrah al-Tamattu’ and comes out of Ihram and
wants to abstain from doing the rituals of Hajj, he/she has performed no
sin if this is because of illness or another obstacle, and if it is the
first year of his/her ability of Hajj, it is clear that he/she has not
been able of performing Hajj, and if Hajj has been obligated for him/her
before then he/she should perform Hajj al-Tamattu’ completely in the
next year.

But if the pilgrim abstain from performing Hajj without any excuse then
he/she has performed a sin (if has is obligatory or Mustahab) and there
is nothing else on him/her and should perform the obligatory Hajj in the
next year and it is obligatory to perform Tawaf of Nisa’ and its prayer
any way.

Article 349
-----------

Killing a bee and other insects like a fly or mosquito is not permitted
in the state of Ihram (as obligatory precaution) and if the pilgrim
kills that insect deliberately, then he/she should pay the atonement
which is some food (for example one loaf of bread to a poor person) but
it these insects causes him/her harm or disturbance then killing them is
permitted and has no atonement.

Article 350
-----------

It is obligatory for a person who performs Umrah al-Tamattu’ to stay in
Mecca and complete the rituals of Hajj (if Hajj is Mustahab or
obligatory) and he/she can go out of Mecca only if he/she is sure than
he/she can return and perform Hajj. Therefore going to close places like
the cave of Hira and like that, which do not cause trouble in performing
Hajj, has no problem.

Also servants of caravans and others can go to Jeddah, Medina or other
places for performing necessary tasks, on condition that they are sure
that they can return on time for performing the rituals of Hajj. And it
is an obligatory precaution for them to become Muhrim to Ihram of Hajj
when they want to leave and remain Muhrim until performing the acts of
Hajj; but if this act causes severe hardness then they can leave without
Ihram.

Article 351
-----------

Whenever a person goes out of Mecca for performing a task after
completion of Umrah, Ihram is not obligatory for him/her if he/she
returns in the same month (for example the pilgrim performs Umrah
al-Tamattu’ in the beginning of Dhu’l-Qa’dah and depart Mecca for Jeddah
or other places and return in the same month of Dhu’l-Qa’dah), but
he/she should become Muhrim if he/she returns in the next month and
performs Umrah again and this will be considered as his/her Umrah
al-Tamattu’ and it is precaution to perform a Tawaf of Nisa’ and its
prayer for the previous Umrah.

Article 352
-----------

Being in a roofed vehicle in the city of Mecca in the state of Ihram has
no problem (in day or night) but it is better to observe the precaution
in the place that is out of Haram (that side which is beyond Masjid
al-Tan’eem).


