Umrah al-Mufradah
=================

Article 353
-----------

Umrah al-Mufradah is one of the best acts and has lots of superiorities
and it has been quoted from holy prophet (s.a.) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“اَلْعُمرَةُ کَفّارَةٌ لِکُلِّ ذَنْب”
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Umrah is the atonement of all of the sins (and lighten the sins on the
back of the human).*

Article 354
-----------

Umrah can be performed in any month of the year but performing it in the
month of Rajab is best of all months and it has been affirmed many times
in hadeeth.

Article 355
-----------

A person who is able to perform Umrah al-Mufradah, it is obligatory
precaution for him/her to perform that although he/she has not the
ability of performing Hajj, and it is not obligatory more than once in a
lifetime. Therefore, it is obligatory precaution for those proxies who
perform Hajj in behalf other persons to perform Umrah al-Mufradah for
themselves.

Article 356
-----------

No one is permitted to enter Mecca without Ihram by any reason and
should perform Umrah al-Mufradah after Ihram, and does not come out of
Ihram without that, but some groups are excluded from this ruling: Car
drivers and servants of caravans and all persons who go out of Mecca
(for example to Medina and Jeddah) frequently, also the person who has
performed Umrah al-Tamattu’ or Umrah al-Mufradah and goes out of Mecca
and returns in the same lunar month, Ihram and Umrah is not obligatory
for this person.

Article 357
-----------

Performing Umrah is Mustahab in each month; therefore if a person enters
Mecca in the end of month of Rajab and performs Umrah, he/she can
perform Umrah again when the month of Sha’ban begins, but performing two
Umrah al-Mufradah has problem in that same month and if a person wants
to perform more than one Umrah in one month, he/she performs that with
the intention of Rija’, which means hoping Allah to accept that (not
with the intention of an absolute order).

Article 358
-----------

There are seven acts for Umrah al-Mufradah:

1- Ihram from Miqat.

2- Tawaf of house of Allah (seven rounds).

3- The prayer of Tawaf.

4- Sa’y of Safa and Marwah.

5- Taqsir (Shortening the hair and the nail).

6- Tawaf of Nisa’.

7- The prayer of Tawaf of Nisa’.

These acts should be performed in the way that has been mentioned in
this book before for the Umrah of Hajj al-Tamattu’, but with a
difference in intention that is making the intention of Umrah
al-Mufradah instead of the intention of Umrah al-Tamattu’.

Article 359
-----------

It is possible to wear Ihram from any of famous Miqats especially
“Masjid al-Shajarah” (near Mecca), and also it is permitted to become a
Muhrim from “Adni al-Hal” which means the first point out of Haram, and
it is better to wear Ihram from any of the following places which are
famous among the people of Mecca: “Hudaybiyah”, “Ji’irranah” or
“Tan’eem”; but it is easier for those who want perform Umrah al-Mufradah
after Hajj to go to Masjid al-Tan’eem which is currently inside Mecca
and is about eight kilometers from Masjid al-Haraam, and people can go
to that place with roofed car even in the day because it is in the city.

Article 360
-----------

People who come from Jeddah for performing Umrah al-Mufradah should
become Muhrim from Hudaybiyah (which is about 17 km from Mecca), and for
those going through Medina, becoming Muhrim in Masjid al-Shajarah is the
best of all.


