The Rites and Mustahab Acts of Hajj and Umrah
=============================================

Lots of ritual and Mustahab acts for “Hajj” and “Umrah” has been
mentioned in the words of great Faqihs (Allah’s heaven be upon them) and
we have brought a considerable part of them here.

But it is better to perform them with the intention of “Rija’”, which
means hoping for the goodness of the act in the eyes of religion and
having benefits and blessings, because some of them do not have enough
proof (and we do not consider the principle of tolerance correct in the
proof of traditions and Mustahab acts).

Another important point is that performing some of those Mustahab acts
today, with crowd congestion, is impossible for many people. Therefore
they can perform those actions which is possible, and if the Hajji wants
to perform an act which is difficult to perform but have an intention of
performing that, Allah will give him/her the reward according to his/her
intention as it has been mentioned in hadeeth of Ma’soomin (a.s.).

It is Mustahab for a person who intends to travel to Mecca or other
places to ask Allah for goodness of the travel and prepare his/her will
and pay alms in order to buy his/her health with that alms and it is
Mustahab to perform four Rak’ats prayer in the home when he/she is
preparing for travel and recites Hamd and “قل هو الله**”** Suras in each
Rak'at and recite;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إنّی أتَقَرَّبُ إلَیْکَ بهِنَّ، فَاجْعَلْهُنَّ خَلیفَتی فی
أهْلِی وَ مَالی .
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is Mustahab to stand at the door of his/her house and recite Hamd
Sura three times in front, right side and left side also Ayat al-Kursi
(verse 255 of Baqara Sura) three times in the same way and says after
that:

اَللَّهُمَّ احفَظْنى وَ احْفَظْ مَا

**  
**

مَعىَ وَ سَلِّمْنی وَ سَلِّم مَا مَعِىَ وَ بَلِّغْنی وَ بَلِّغْ مَا
مَعِىَ ببَلاغِکَ الحَسَنِ الجَمیلِ.


