Mustahab acts of Ihram
======================

1- Cleaning the body and cutting the nail and shortening mustache above
the lips and removing the hairs of armpit and pubic area before Ihram.

2- A person who intends to go to Hajj leaves the hair of the face and
the head from the beginning of Dhu’l-Qa’dah and the person who intends
to go to Umrah leaves them one month before, and some of Faqihs
considered it as obligatory.

3- Performing Ghusl of Ihram before Ihram in Miqat. This Ghusl is also
correct for a woman who is in her menstruation period and has given
birth to a child. Performing it before other acts is permitted
especially when there is a fear of nonexistence of water in Miqat and if
water was found in Miqat, then it is Mustahab to perform that Ghusl
again and after performing this Ghusl if Mukallaf (accountable; a Muslim
who has reached the age of puberty) wears clothes or eats things which
are Haraam for Muhrim, then performing again is Mustahab and if Mukallaf
performs Ghusl in the day, that Ghusl suffices until the end of the next
night and if it is performed in the night then it suffices until the end
of the next day. But he/she should perform the Ghusl again if the
ablution is invalidated before Ihram and after Ghusl.

4- Saying the following sentences while wearing the two clothing of
Ihram:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلحَمْدُ لِلّه الَّذی رَزَقَنی مَا اُواری بِه عَوْرَتِی و اُؤدِّی
فیهِ فَرْضی وَ أعْبُدُ فیهِ رَبِّی و اَنْتَهی فیه إلى مَا اَمَرَنِی
الحَمْدُ لِلّهِ الَّذی قَصَدْتُهُ فَبَلَّغَنی و أرَدْتُهُ فَاُعانَنى
وَ قَبِلَنی وَ لَمْ یَقْطَعْ بی وَ وَجْهَهُ أرَدْتُ فَسَلَّمَنی فَهُوَ
حِصْنی وَ کَهْفِی و حِرْزی وَ ظَهْری وَ مَلاذی وَ رَجائى وَ مَنجای و
ذُخری وَ عُدَّتى فی شِدَّتی وَ رَخائی .
  </p>
</blockquote>

5- The two towels of Ihram should be made of cotton.

6- Wearing Ihram in the following way: If it is possible, after the
prayer of noon and if it is not, then after another obligatory prayer.
If this is not also possible, then wear after performing six or two
Rak'ats of Mustahab prayer, reciting Tawhid Sura after Hamd in the first
Rak'at and  
 “قل یا ایها الکافرون” after Hamd Sura in the second Rak'at although
performing six Rak'ats is better. One should praise and thank ALLAH
(swt) after the prayer and sending Salawat (salutation to Muhammad
(s.a.) and his family (a.s.)); then the pilgrim should say:

للَّهُمَّ إنَّی أسألُکَ أنْ

**  
**

تَجْعَلَنی مِمَّنِ اسْتَجابَ لَکَ وَ آمَنَ بِوَعْدِکَ وَ اتَّبَعَ
أمْرَکَ فإنَّی عَبْدُکَ وَ فی قَبْضَتِکَ لا أوُقى إلاَّ مَ وَقَیْتَ وَ
لا آخُذُ إلاّ مَا أعْطَیْتَ وَ قَدْ ذکَرْتَ الْحَجَّ فَأسْاَلُکَ أنْ
تَعْزِمَ لی عَلیهِ عَلى کِتابِکَ وَ سُنَّةِ نَبِیِّکَ صَلَواتُکَ عَلیهِ
وَ آلِهِ و تُقَوِّیَنی عَلى مَا ضَعُفْتُ وَ تُسَلِّمَ لی مَناسِکی فی
یُسر مِنْکَ وَ عافِیَة وَ اجْعَلْنی مِن وَفْدِکَ الَّذی رَضِیْتَ وَ
ارْتَضَیْتَ وَ سَمَّیْتَ وَ کَتَبْتَ، اللّهُمَّ إنَّی خَرَجْتُ مِنْ
شُقَّة بَعیدة وَ أنْفَقْتُ مالی إبْتِغاءَ مَرْضاتِکَ اللّهُمَّ فَتَمِّمْ
لی حَجَّتی وَ عُمْرَتی، اللّهُمَّ إنّی اُرِیدُ الَّتمَتُّعَ بِالعُمرَةِ
إلى الحَجِّ عَلى کِتابِکَ وَ سُنَّةِ نَبِیِّکَ صَلَواتُکَ عَلَیهِ وَ
آلِهِ، فَإن عَرَضَ لی عارِضٌ یَحْبِسُنی فَخَلِّنی حَیثُ حَبَسْتَنی
بِقَدَرِکَ الَّذی قَدَّرْتَ عَلَىّ، اللّهُمَّ إنْ لَمْ تَکُنْ حِجَّةً
فَعُمرَةً اُحَرِّمُ لَکَ شَعْری وَ بَشَری وَ لَحْمی وَ دَمی وَ عِظِامی
وَ مُخِّی وَ عَصَبِی مِنِ النِّساءِ وَ الثِّیابِ وَ الطّیبِ أبْتَغی
بِذلِکَ وَجْهَکَ وَ الدّارَ الآخِرَةَ

7- It is not sufficient to say the intention of Ihram in the heart, It
is Mustahab for men to say Labbayk with a loud voice.

8- We have said before that obligatory Labbayk which causes the entrance
in the state of Ihram is as follows as a precaution:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّیْکَ اللّهُمَّ لَبَّیکَ، لَبَّیْکَ لا شَرِیکَ لَکَ لَبَّیکَ، إنَّ
الحَمْدَ وَ النِّعْمَةَ لَکَ وَ المُـلْک، لا شَرِیکَ لَکَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is Mustahab to say after that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّیْکَ ذَ الْمـَعارِجِ لَبَّیْکَ لَبَّیْکَ داعِیاً اِلى دارِ
السَّلام لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ غَفّارَ الذُّنُوبِ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ
اَهْلَ التَّلْبِیَةِ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ ذَاالْجَلالِ وَ الاِکْرامِ
لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ تُبْدِئُ وَ الْمَعادُ اِلَیْکَ لَبَّیْکَ،
لَبَّیْکَ تَسْتَغْنی وَ یُفْتَقَرُ اِلَیْکَ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ
مَرْعُوباً وَ مَرْهُوب اِلَیْکَ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ اِلهَ الْحَقِّ
لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ ذَا النَّعْمآءِ وَ الْفَضْلِ الْحَسَنِ الْجَمیلِ
لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ کَشّافَ الْکُرَبِ العِظامِ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ
عَبْدُکَ وَ ابْنُ عَبْدَیکَ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ یا کَرِیمُ لَبَّیْکَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is also good to say these sentences:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّیْکَ أَتَقَرَّبُ اِلَیْکَ بِمُحَمَّد وَ آلِ مُحَمَّد لَبَّیْکَ،
لَبَّیْکَ بِحَجَّة اَوْ عُمْرَة لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ وَ هذِهِ عُمْرَةُ
مُتْعَة اِلَى الْحَجِّ لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ اَهْلَ التَّلْبِیَةِ
لَبَّیْکَ، لَبَّیْکَ تَلْبِیَةً تَمامُها وَ بَلاغُها عَلَیْکَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

9- One must repeat reciting Labbayk in the state of Ihram in these cases
also:

1- When awaking from the sleep.  
 2- After each obligatory and Mustahab prayer.  
 3- When reaching other pilgrims who are ride.  
 4- When going up the ascent or coming down from that.  
 5- While getting in or off the vehicles, animals or like them.  
 6- Reciting then a lot in the time of the dawn and women also must
recite these Labbayks during menstruation and lochia, and the ones who
are performing Umrah should continuously recite Labbayks until he/she
sees the house of Mecca and stops that after seeing them, but the
Labbayk of Hajj are continuous until the noon of the day of Arafa and
stops after that.

### Makrooh (Disliked) acts of Ihram

1- Wearing black Ihram clothing. It is precaution and better to renounce
that and wearing white Ihram clothing.

2- Sleeping in yellow bedding and pillow for a Muhrim.

3- Wearing impure clothing of Ihram and if clothing becomes impure
during Ihram, it is better not to wash them in the state of Ihram, but
it is possible to change that clothing.

4- Wearing striped clothing of Ihram.

5- Using henna before Ihram in the way that its effects remain until
Ihram.

6- It is better for Muhrim not to use washcloth or like that on the
body.

7- It is a precaution to say Labbayk answering someone who is calling a
Muhrim.


