Questions and Answers
=====================

Question 1- These days, all or an important part of meat of sacrifice is
destroyed and buried under the ground, what is the duty of your
followers?

Answer: It is not permitted to perform sacrifice in that place in these
conditions. Hajjis should keep the money and perform sacrifice in the
month of Dhu’l-Hijjah in a place that the meat will be consumed; I hope
for the day that Muslims can perform sacrifice in Mena and bring the
meat to another place that are consumed.

Question 2- If in the condition that has mentioned in the question 1,
what is the duty of a person who performs sacrifice in Mena?

Answer: He/she should not suffice that and should perform another
sacrifice in his/her hometown.

Question 3- If a Hajji doubts that the meat of sacrifice will be
destroyed or not, then what is his/her duty?

Answer: According to the fact that others perform enough sacrifice,
he/she should abstain from that and keep the money in order to perform
sacrifice after returning to the hometown.

Question 4- Is research necessary to ascertain if meats will be consumed
or not?

Answer: Research about this matter is not necessary in these conditions.

Question 5- How then should the acts of “after performing sacrifice” be
performed?

Answer: It is enough to keep the money and performs other acts of Mena
and come out of Ihram.

Question 6- The amount of money should be as much as the cost of
sacrifice in his/her place or in Mecca?

Answer: The costs of sacrifice in his/her place.

Question 7- Is it possible that the Hajji can save money before
departing for Hajj in his/her place, or order to keep the money on
behalf of him/her, or order to sacrifice on that day for him/her?

Answer: All three solutions have no problem.

Question 8- If the Hajji arranges for performing sacrifice in his/her
place in the day of Eid of Qurban, then it should be performed according
to the date of his/her place or the date of Mecca?

Answer: The date of Mecca.

Question 9- Whenever a Hajji cannot perform sacrifice in the month of
Dhu’l-Hijjah because of delay in return, then what should he/she do?

Answer: He/she should perform sacrifice in the month of Dhu’l-Hijjah of
the next year.

Question 10- If a Hajji performs sacrifice after returning, is it
possible to feed friends and family with that meat?

Answer: It is has no problem, but a group of poor people should be
included in that.

Question 11- Those who were followers of previous Maraji’ (resources of
religious rulings) and remain on their following according to your
fatwa, can these people act according to your fatwa in this issue?  
 Answer: They should act according to our fatwa in all rituals in the
first journey, and if it is not their first journey, then they can act
according to Fatwas of those great scholars.


