Framework of Hajj al-Tamattu’
=============================

Article 23
----------

The summary of Hajj al-Tamattu’ is as follows:

### 1- Umrah al-Tamattu’

Umrah al-Tamattu’ should only be performed in the months of Hajj (which
are Shawwal, Dhu’l-Qa’dah and Dhu’l-Hijjah) and the following acts are
obligatory in performing that:

1- Wearing Ihram from Mecca with the intention of Umrah al-Tamattu’.

2- Doing the Tawaf of Ka’ba seven times

3- Performing two Rak’ats of prayer of Tawaf behind the Maqam (station)
of Ibrahim.

4- Sa’y –The shuttling between Safa and Marwah seven times

5- Taqsir which means cutting the hair and nail but pilgrim should not
suffice in cutting only the nail.

When the Hajji comes out of the Ihram after performing these five acts
the things and acts that had been Haraam for him/her because of Ihram,
now becomes Halaal.

### 2- Hajj al-Tamattu’

Hajj al-Tamattu’ consists of following acts:

1- Wearing Ihram from Mecca.

2- Wuquf that means staying in Arafat from noon until sunset of the day
nine of Dhu’l-Hijjah.

3- Wuquf in Mash’ar al-Haraam and staying in there from dawn to sunrise
of the day of Eid al-Qurban.

4- Going to Mena (Mina) and performing Ramy al-Jamarah al-Aqaba
(throwing seven pebbles at the place, which is allocated at the end of
Mena that is called “al-Jamarah al-Aqaba or al-Jamarah al-Quswa).

5- Giving a sacrifice in Mena on the day of Eid (tenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah).

6- Taqsir. That means shaving the head or cutting a piece of hair or
nail.

7- Tawaf of Ka’ba (this Tawaf is called Tawaf of pilgrimage).

8- Performing two Rak’ats of prayer of Tawaf.

9- Sa’y –The shuttling between Safa and Marwah seven times

When these acts had been performed then fragrance becomes Halaal for the
pilgrim.

10- Performing another Tawaf around Ka’ba (this Tawaf is called Tawaf of
Nisa’).

11- Performing Two Rak’ats of prayer of Tawaf of Nisa’.

By performing these two acts the spouse also becomes Halaal for the
pilgrim.

12- Returning to Mena and spending the eleventh and the twelfth nights
(and in some conditions the thirteenth night) in there.

13- Performing Triple Ramy al-Jamarat (throwing seven pebbles to each of
three places, which are situated in Mena) in the eleventh and the
twelfth days.

And by performing these acts, the pilgrim can return to Mecca and
his/her Hajj is completed.

These were the five acts of Umrah al-Tamattu’, and thirteen acts of Hajj
al-Tamattu’ The details will be explained in next discussions.

### Framework of Hajj al-Ifrad

Hajj al-Ifrad is similar to Hajj al-Tamattu’ with a difference that
while there is a Qurban (sacrifice) in Hajj al-Tamattu’ the same is not
performed in Hajj al-Ifrad.

However it is Mustahab to do so and Umrah is performed after Hajj unlike
Umrah al-Tamattu’ that is performed before that.  
 We abstain from explaining Hajj al-Qiran because it is not performed
these days.


