Conditions of Hajj al-Tamattu’
==============================

Article 24
----------

There are five conditions in Hajj al-Tamattu’:

1- Niyyah (Intention) which is that the pilgrim should intend to perform
“Hajj al-Tamattu’” for Allah, therefore if this person intends to
perform some other type of Hajj or has some doubt about performing “Hajj
al-Tamattu’” or other type of Hajj or he/she does not have pure
intention for Hajj, then his/her Hajj is not correct.

2- Both “Umrah” and “Hajj” should be performed in months of Hajj
(Shawwal, Dhu’l-Qa’dah and Dhu’l-Hijjah), therefore it is not enough
that a pilgrim performs all of Umrah or a part of it before the month of
Shawwal.

3- A pilgrim should perform both “Umrah al-Tamattu”’ and “its Hajj” in
one year, if he/she performs one of them in this year, and the next one
in another year (even in the months of Hajj), then this Hajj is not
correct.

4- As it was mentioned before, Ihram of “Hajj al-Tamattu’” should be
worn from Mecca.. There is no difference between different places or
regions of Mecca. it can be worn from a house, mosque, or even in a
street, but the best place for wearing Ihram is in “Masjid al-Haraam”.

5- If “Hajj al-Tamattu’” is to be performed by proxy, then both “Umrah”
and “Hajj” should be performed by the same person and it is not enough
that a person performs Umrah and another one performs Hajj.

Article 25
----------

As an obligatory precaution, the pilgrim should not leave Mecca after
performing “Umrah al-Tamattu”’ until the time of Hajj commences and
he/she performs Hajj. Unless there is a special necessity or need that
in this case as obligatory precaution the pilgrim should wear Ihram with
the intention of Hajj and leave Mecca with Ihram and remain in that
state in return, until he/she performs the rites of Hajj; but if wearing
Ihram causes this person severe hardness then he/she can renounce that
act. Then there is no difference in this ruling between obligatory and
Mustahab Hajj.

Article 26
----------

The rule of prohibition of leaving Mecca is for people who have
performed Umrah al-Tamattu’ and want to travel a far distance. Therefore
going to a distance one or two parasang (each parasang is approximately
5.6 km) far from Mecca is not prohibited and people who live out of
Mecca can return to their homes after performing Umrah.

Article 27
----------

Today, Mecca has advanced to a big city, but all that is called Mecca
has the rulings of Mecca , like Masjid al-Haraam that has advanced and
expanded. but all of that is within the rulings of Masjid al-Haraam.

Article 28
----------

Whenever a pilgrim goes out of Mecca after performing Umrah without
Ihram and passes the Miqats, then in return he/she should become Muhrim
(a person who is in state of Ihram) from Mecca and perform Umrah, unless
his/her return is on the same month that he/she has leaved Mecca (for
instance, a pilgrim has leaved in Dhu’l-Qa’dah and has returned in
Dhu’l-Qa’dah).

Article 29
----------

A person who has a duty to perform Hajj al-Tamattu’ cannot return to
Hajj al-Ifrad or Hajj al-Qiran, unless there is not enough time
available in the way that this person cannot finish Umrah and join Hajj.
In this case, the pilgrim can leave “Hajj al-Tamattu’” and make
intention for Hajj al-Ifrad or Hajj al-Qiran, and performs the duties of
Hajj and after finishing Hajj performs Umrah al-Mufradah (similar to
other persons who perform Hajj al-Qiran and Ifrad).

The purpose of not having enough time is that pilgrims cannot perform
Wuquf in Arafat from noon until the sunset of the day of Arafat.

Article 30
----------

A woman who has menstruation and cannot perform Tawaf and the prayer of
Tawaf, , before the time of Hajj (and Wuquf to Arafa), Therefore she
should make intention of Hajj al-Ifrad and go with that Ihram to Arafat
and perform the rites of Hajj, and perform the tawafs of Hajj and
prayers of tawaf.

After returning to Mecca and becoming clean, she should go to Masjid
al-Tan’eem for performing “Umrah al-Mufradah” after finishing Hajj and
becomes Muhrim from that place and perform acts of Umrah al-Mufradah. It
is better to perform Tawaf al-Nisa’ as a precaution.

Article 31
----------

There is no problem for women, to prevent their menstruation by using
pills or such, in order to perform the rites of Hajj al-Tamattu’ like
Tawaf and prayer of Tawaf in the state of being clean.


