Introduction
============

When the aggressive war[^1] broke out, I went to the front to carry out
my legal duty, due to my responsibility. There I was lucky to be
surrounded with a moral sphere, and I made the acquaintance of those of
luminous faces, divine souls, and holy personalities.

Some believers of understanding suggested that I might, on the days when
the fronts became quiet and when the mujahidin came back from the way of
love to Tehran to do some tasks, hold a meeting of gnostic discussions
according to the holy Qur'an, the Prophet’s Sunna and the traditions of
Ahlul Bayt (as). We would meet with those pure hearts and luminous faces
in a circle of faithful friendship. We confirmed the divine knowledge,
and were supplied with the moral provision that was necessary for the
fields of fighting.

I could not but accept this suggestion. The weekly meeting’s time was
appointed; it was on Tuesday night every week.

In the beginning, the number of attendants was not more than twenty men.
The meeting began with offering the prayer congregationally in a moral
and divine state, and then mentioning some questions and researches on
the divine knowledge. We finished the meeting with the retelling of
the  
 Tragedy of Abu Abdullah al-Husayn (as)[^2]. Gradually the attendants
spread the news of the meeting. Other men joined the twenty men that
gave the meeting a special moral sphere. This meeting was different from
all the other meetings. It had notitle, no name, and no certain
etiquette. It had no chairman, no chief or subordinate. It was full of
love, longing, unity, and sincerity. They all came to the meeting for
the sake of Allah, sat for the sake of Allah, talked and listened for
the sake of Allah. Nothing was felt in this meeting save love and
passion.

The attendants increased to about one thousand men. I was bound to
attend the meeting on Tuesday nights, even if I was in the farthest
point of Iran, and so were the other participants. The mujahidin, who
were in the south and the west of the country, also got permission from
the military leadership to come and participate in this meeting of love.

I thought that this meeting of love and sociability would continue for
many years, but fate made a group of the best of the participants of
this meeting be martyred, and the Ba’thi[^3]enemy captured another
group. The number of the martyrs and the captives from among the
participants of the meeting became so high that I could not bear to see
their places empty, and the new attendants could not fill the places of
those dear ones; I could not but leave the meeting with a sad heart and
teary eyes. Therefore, that meeting stopped forever. I am still, until
this day on which I am writing these lines, hoping to find men like
those dear ones but I have not found ones like them nor do I think that
I will in the future.

Many subjects were discussed in the meeting: repentance, loving the
truth, the day of resurrection, and gnosticism. Fortunately, all those
discussions were recorded on cassettes, and, after some years, I got
some of those cassettes by my two sons, Muhammad and Ameer. The
discussions in those cassettes were about repentance. They suggested
that I write down the discussions and then present them in a book to the
people. This book before you is a memorandum of more than twenty
meetings filled with moral teachings from those Tuesday nights, nights
that bring good and beautiful memories. I hope you will be lucky to make
full use of the discussions of this book that address us with new forms
in the circle of repentance and go deep intoour consciences to move the
feelings of goodness in our souls.

**Husayn Ansariyan**

[^1]: The war between Iraq and Iran.

[^2]: Imam al-Husayn (as) is the third infallible Imam of the Shia. He
has been martyred on Ashura 61 A.H in the land of Karbala.

[^3]: Ba’th was the ruling party in Iraq.


