Guilt and the ways of curing it
===============================

***“O men! There has come to you indeed an admonition from your Lord and
a healing for what is in the breasts and a guidance and a mercy for the
believers.”*** Qur'an 10:57

The key of peace
----------------

When man recognizes the important fact that he has spent all his
previous age in adversity and away from knowing Allah the Almighty, and
His blessings (both apparent and hidden) which Allah has created and put
at man’s hand totally and freely; when he recognizes that these great
blessings bring him happiness and lead to goodness in this life and the
afterlife; when he recognizes that these blessings are the key that
opens the doors of the great mercy of Allah; when he recognizes that he
has spent most of these blessings of Allah in other than the right path,
and consequently he has been afflicted with different minor and major
sins, and he has suffered a manifest loss and tasted the meanness of
servitude to bad tendencies and lusts and has been prevailed upon by
Satan from outside and inside; when he understands this well, he must
repair his degrading past and previous sins that were due to his
ignorance, inadvertence and disobedience, and he must repair his bad
deeds, his corrupted soul, and bad morals. He must repent and return to
Allah so that the sun of moral life, which is full of purity and
happiness, rises in his soul.

Yes! man, in order to receive the wide mercy of Allah, must get power
from His special care, and gain divine blessing, must follow the way of
repentance and return to Allah. He must walk in the Way with the feet of
his heart, the light of his mind, pure and sincere intention,
determination and continuous jihad. He must walk in this way with love
and knowledge to purify his Heart and soul from vices, abominable deeds,
transgression, debauchery, evil and bad manners. Then he will be fit to
join the caravan of the pure believers, the benevolent, the lovers, the
worshippers, the followers of the Way of the Truth and the neighbors of
the divine sanctum. Instead of straying into the circle of mutiny and
the darkness of the divine wrath, he will live in the station suitable
for him to enjoy the divine mercy and care.

This wakefulness and attentiveness toone’s past, coming to repent, and
trying to purify ones soul from apparent and hidden sins is considered
as the key of peace with Allah the Almighty and the return to the field
of His mercy. Since repentance and returning to Allah are among the
greatest worship, and the states which best show the firm relationship
between man and his Creator (as it has been declared by many Qur’anic
verses and traditions of AhlulBayt (as)); therefore, a repentant person
has to pay attention to these concerns in order that he can realize this
great worship and to make use of its many benefits and blessings.

Guilt is a disease
------------------

Every human being comes to this world pure and sound in mind and soul.
Stinginess, envy, hypocrisy, transgression and debauchery are not
natural aspects of man, they are accidentals, coming to man because of a
series of educational and social factors or because of the effects of
friendships or the like.

The Prophet (S) said, “Everyone is born with (human) nature, but his
parents either make him Jewish or Christian (change his natural
beliefs)[^1].”

A teacher, a friend or a deviant society has a greateffect on ma king
one deviant.

Because of these effects, one may get involved in intellectual mistakes,
vices and bad deeds. This group of mistakes and sins is a series of
diseases, but there is a cure. The holy Qur'an confirms this meaning,
and it declares that there is a way of recovery for these diseases and
states of tension that result from latent dregs in the unconscious. The
holy Qur'an prescribes an effective cure by saying:

***“O men, there has come to you indeed an admonition from your Lord and
a healing for what is in the breasts, and it is guidance and a mercy for
the believers.”*** (10:57)

According to the holy Qur'an, this disease may be a cause for the divine
forgiveness and mercy. Allah says:

***“Except those who repent after that and amend, then surely Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.”*** (3:89)

Despair is disbelief
--------------------

It is made clear by studying the Qur’anic verses and the traditions of
AhlulBayt (as) that the apparent and hidden sins are a psychological
disease and this disease is curable by the forgiveness and mercy of
Allah. Sinful ones must try to rescue themselves from this dangerous
impasse and deadly hole; they must try to cure this disease. Therefore,
they must have hope and expect the forgiveness and mercy of Allah. They
must rely on Allah and depend on this positive hope to reach the actual
repentance and the true return. Then they must make peace with the
Beloved. Finally, they must repair the damage that resulted from all
previous sins and remove obstacles that stand in the way of repentance.
Man is able to do these things, and turning to Allah and repairing the
previous sins are legal obligations, whereas laziness, weak
determination and keeping to the satanic motto “all that has passed has
passed, and all that will come will come” is prohibited and equal to
disbelief.

Allah says:

***“And despair not of Allah's mercy; surely none despairs of Allah's
mercy except the unbelieving people.”*** Qur’an 12:87

Of course, sinful ones, who want to get the forgiveness and mercy of
Allah, have to have hope and expectation. Hope is fostered by serious
repentance, giving up disobedience, repairing the previous sins, paying
back to people what is owed to them, offering missed obligations and
reforming conduct, deeds and morals. Then hope and expectation become
possible. For example, the correct hope of a farmer is to plow his
fields in autumn to remove obstacles and dregs, and then he sows seeds
in the spring, waters the crop in the summer and hopes that his seeds
will grow, until, again in the autumn, a rich harvest is his reward.

If hope and expectation are not actively fostered, they will be just
empty hope and unfruitful expectation, like a farmer who expects to get
a yield without working his farm by plowing, seeding and watering. Such
illusory and unfruitful hope is talked about in a very important
tradition. Someone said to Abu Abdullah as-Sadiq (as), “Some people
commit sins and say “we expect (the mercy of Allah)”. Abu Abdullah (as)
said,

“These people sway with wishes. They just tell lies. They do not hope.
He who hopes for something tries to get it, and he who fears something
runs away from it[^2].”

According to this tradition, expecting the mercy of Allah must be
accompanied with abstaining from sins, avoiding vices and doing good
deeds so that one can be fit to get the forgiveness and mercy of Allah.
In order to be safe from the torment of hell, you must first pluck out
the causes for deserving torment that lie deep within you.

Curer
-----

It should be clear to sinners that sin is not found in man by nature but
it is an accidental disease coming to man’s Heart and soul due to many
ca uses as any other disease that attacks man’s body. As a sic k man has
to go to the doctor to get the required drugs, so a sic k man with a
moral disease has to go to a doctor who is specialist in such diseases.
He must get the doctor’s instructions and follow them in order to pluck
this disease out of his Heart and soul, however difficult and chronic
that disease is. The doctors of such diseases are Allah the Almighty,
the Prophets (as), the Imams (as) and the faithful ulama.

The divine prescription to cure these kinds of diseases is the holy
Qur'an. The prescriptions of the Prophets (as), the Imams (as) and the
ulama are their traditions, advice, maxims and effective preaching.

The Prophet (S) said, “O people, you are as the sick and the Lord of the
worlds is as the doctor. The goodness of the sick is what the doctor
does and prepares and not what the sick like and suggest.”

There are many traditions narrated from the Prophets (as), the Imams
(as) and the ulama in which they are referred to as “doctors.”

The sick of sins and guilt, in order to cure their sicknesses, must
follow the orders of these kind doctors, follow their instructions and
submit to their advices. They must not despair of recovery because this
is the only way leading to repentance, which leads to reaching a high
rank of human perfection.

It is necessary in this part of our research to refer to some
instructions and prescriptions of these moral doctors to clarify the
causes of such diseases and to diagnose the defects so that sinners may
benefit from them, be cured and come back to honesty.

Allah says:

***“Say: If you love Allah, then follow me. Allah will love you and
forgive you your faults, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** Qur’an
3:31

***“O you who believe, be careful of (your duty to) Allah and speak the
right word. He will put your deeds into a right state for you, and
forgive you your faults; and whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, he
indeed achieves a mighty success.”*** Qur’an 33:70-71

***“O you who believe, shall I lead you to merchandise that may deliver
you from a painful chastisement. You shall believe in Allah and His
Messenger, and struggle hard in Allah's way with your property and your
lives; that is better for you, did you but know. He will forgive you
your faults and cause you to enter into gardens beneath which rivers
flow a goodly dwellings in gardens of perpetuity; that is the mighty
achievement.”*** Qur’an 61:10-12

***“If you lend unto Allah a goodly loan, He will double it for you and
will forgive you, for Allah is Responsive, Clement.”*** Qur’an 64:17

***“And (as to) those who do evil deeds, then repent after that and
believe, your Lord after that is most surely Forgiving, Merciful.”***
Qur’an 7:153

***“Then if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, leave
their way free to them; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** Qur’an
9:5

***“And others have confessed their faults, they have mingled a good
deed and an evil one; maybe Allah will turn to them (mercifully); surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”*** Qur’an 9:102

We understand from these Qur’anic verses that if sinners want to gain
Allah’s forgiveness and mercy, they want their repentance to be accepted
by Allah, their bad deeds to be changed into white pages full of good
deeds and they want to save themselves from the torment of the day of
resurrection, they must know the following matters mentioned in the
curative prescription; the holy Qur’an:

1. Imitating the conducts and manners of the Prophet (S)

2. Being pious and avoiding sins

3. Saying the true and right things and not talking except in suitable
time and occasion

4. Obeying Allah

5. Obeying the Messenger of Allah (S)

6. Believing in Allah

7. Believing in the Messenger of Allah (S)

8. Struggling (jihad) for the sake of Allah by spending monies and
wealth

9. Struggling for the sake of Allah by sacrificing themselves

10. Lending to the poor and needy

11. Giving up sins and returning to Allah

12. Giving up false beliefs

13. Offering prayers

14. Paying zakat

15. Confessing their sins before Allah

Once a man came to the Prophet (S) and asked him, “O Messenger of Allah,
what is the way of the People of paradise.” The Prophet (S) said,
“Truthfulness. If one becomes truthful, he becomes pious. When he
becomes pious, he believes (in Allah), and when he believes he enters
into paradise.”

The man asked, “O messenger of Allah, what is the doing of the people of
hell?”

The Prophet (S) said, “Telling lies. If one tells lies, he becomes
debauched. When he becomes debauched, he disbelieves (in Allah). When he
disbelieves he enters into hell.[^3]”

One of the Prophet’s wives has said, “Once I asked the Prophet (S),
“With what is a believer known?” He said, “With gravity, leniency and
truthfulness[^4].”

Prophet Dawood (David) (as) said, “O people, gather to get her, for I
want to saysomething to you.” When people gathered at his door, he came
out to them and said, “O people of Israel, let nothing enter you except
good (permissible foods) and let nothing come out of your mouths except
good (speech)[^5].”

Jabir bin Abdulla h al-Ansari narrated that he had heard the Prophet (S)
saying to Ka’b bin Ujra, “He whose flesh has built up out of suht[^6],
will not enter into paradise; hell is worthier of him[^7].”

Imam Ali (as) has said, “Allah makes one who is taken from the meanness
of sins to the honor of piety rich without money, powerful without
helpers and entertained without an entertainer[^8].”

Imam Ali (as) has also said, “The worldly life is as a passage, and its
people are twomen (two kinds); one sells his self and he degrades it,
and one buys his self and he makes it free[^9].”

It has been narrated that a man came to Imam Husayn (as) and said to
him:

“I am sinful and I cannot refrain from committing sins. Would you advise
me with something? “Imam Husayn (as) said to him, “Do five things, and
commit whatever sins you like. First: Do not eat the livelihood of
Allah, and commit whatever sins you like! Second: Get out of the
guardianship of Allah, and commit whatever sins you like! Third: Go to
somewhere that Allah does not see you, and commit whatever sins you
like! Fourth: When the Angel of Death comes to you to take out your
soul, prevent him from doing that, and commit whatever sins you like!
Fifth: When Angel Malik wants to put you into Fire, do not enter into
it, and commit whatever sins you like![^10]”

Ali bin al-Husayn (Imam as-Sajjad) (as) has said, “Knowledge and
perfection of religion of a Muslim are realized by avoiding talking
about what does not concern him/ her, avoiding disputing, being patient
and having good manners[^11].”

Imam al-Baqir (as) has said, “If one is Truthful, his deeds will be
pure; if one is with good faith, his livelihood is increased and if one
is dutiful to his relatives, he will live long[^12].”

Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq) (as) has said, “The most pious one is he
who refrains when being suspicious. The best worshipper is he who
performs the obligations. The most ascetic one is he who avoids
prohibited things. The most diligent one is he who refrains from
sins[^13].”

Imam as-Sadiq (as) has also said,

“Allah has mercy on whoever feels shy of Him with real shyness.
Therefore he keeps the head and what it has had (keep the mind by
thinking in the right way), the abdomen and what it includes (not to eat
anything impermissible or ill gotten), remembers death and punishments,
perceives that paradise is surrounded by calamities and hell is
surrounded by lusts[^14].”

In the books of Hadith, many import ant traditions of the Prophets (as)
and the Imams (as) have been included concerning matters that bring us
happiness and keep us safe from misery and punishment. What we have
mentioned above was a drop in that great sea of divine wisdom and human
knowledge. It has maxims and advice from men of understanding and wisdom
that is a curative prescription for us and away toward spiritual safety
and psychological health. It is a way of rescue from sin’s pollution. It
is good to mention some examples of these maxims and spiritual knowledge
here:

One of the wise men said, “There are four things that we looked for in
four things, but we failed, and then we found them in four other things.
We looked for wealth in money, but we found it in satisfaction. We
looked for honor in ancestry, but we found it in piety. We looked for
comfort in the abundance of money, but we found it in having less money.
We looked for blessing in cloths, food and gaining what we liked, but we
found it in a healthy body[^15].”

Luqman, in advice to his son, said, “O my son, know well that you will
be asked tomorrow about four things when you will stand before Allah the
Almighty: about your youth, how you have spent it; your age, how you
have worn it out; your money, wherefrom you have gained it, and on what
you have spent it. Therefore, you have to prepare answers for
that[^16].”

A wise man has said, “The Ulama have agreed on four words and I have
chosen them from the four sacred Books. The Torah states, “He, who is
satisfied, is satiate.” The Psalms state, “He, who keeps silent, becomes
safe.” The Bible states, “He, who gives up what does not concern him and
keeps away from whomever he does not expect goodness from, will be
saved.” And the Qur'an states, “He, who resorts to Allah, is guided to
the right path.”

Sulayman bin Ali has said to Hameed at-Taweel, “Would you preach
something to me?” Hameed said, “If you, when disobeying Allah in your
loneliness, think that he sees you, then you trespass a great thing and
if you think that He does not see you, then you disbelieve[^17].”

It has been mentioned in a tradition that Gabriel had said, “O Muhammad,
if our worship was in the earth, we would do three things: watering the
Muslims, helping the ones who have big families and covering sins (of
people)[^18].”

A wise man has said,

“O my Lord, the loftiest worship in my Heart is expecting Your mercy,
the sweetest speech of my tongue is praising You, and the loveliest time
to me is the time when I meet You[^19].”

One of the men of understanding has said,

“Iblis, curse be upon him, has become miserable because of five things:
he did not confess his guilt; he did not feel sorry about it; he did not
blame himself; he did not intend to repent and he despaired of the mercy
of Allah. Whereas Adam has become happy because of five things: he
confessed his guilt; he felt sorry about it; he blamed himself; he
hastened to repent and did not despair of the mercy of Allah[^20].”

Yahya bin M a’ath has said,

“Whoever’s satiety increases, his flesh increases. Whoever’s flesh
increases, his lust increases. Whoever’s lust increases, his sin
increases. Whoever’s sin increases, his Heart becomes severe, and
whoever’s Heart becomes severe drowns in the evils and pleasures of this
worldly life[^21].”

It has been said that all of the saints have three qualities: keeping
silent, for safety is in silence; having hunger, for it is the key of
goodness; tiring the soul in worshipping, offering prayers in the night
and fasting in the day.”

There is no doubt that sinners that follow the orders of Allah for
curing the diseases of sins and that follow the instructions of the
Prophet (S), the Infallible Imams (as) and the ulama, their sins will be
forgiven and their souls will recover from the bad effects of moral
diseases and psychological illnesses.

Sinners must pay attention to the fact that the advent of the Prophets
(as), the guardianship of the Imams (as) and the knowledge of the Ulama
are for the sake of curing the intellectual, spiritual, moral and
behavioral diseases of people. Therefore, it is not justifiable for
sinners to sit at home desperate of recovery while driving away the
light of hope and expectation from their hearts by keeping their sins so
that they become more miserable. They must follow the teachings of Allah
and the instructions of the Prophets (as) and the Imams (as), especially
concerning the great mercy of Allah, His call to sinners to repent and
His promise to forgive them. Hence, there is no way for a sinner except
to repent and turn to Allah the Almighty.

Repenting is a prompt duty
--------------------------

We referred before to this instruction and said that sin is a
psychological disease that has a cure. The doctors who cure this disease
are Allah, the Prophets (as), the Imams (as) and the ulama. Therefore,
the diseased must submit to these doctors and follow their instructions
so that they can recover and become sound psychologically. Then they can
spiritually join the caravan of the good slaves of Allah.

Those diseased with sin have to see that, as with bodily diseases, they
should hasten to the doctor as soon as the symptoms appear in order to
get rid of that disease before it becomes chronic and incurable. They
also have to hasten to cure the disease of sin by following the
instructions of the true doctor (Allah) and by repenting and turning to
Allah to get rid of the bad effects of sin and the darkness of
disobedience. They must get out of the circle of Satan and sinful
desires; remove from their hearts the screens of disobedience and the
dregs of sins and let the light of Allah’s acceptance of their
repentance and turning, and the light of mercy and forgiveness shine in
their hearts. Then they will become psychologically and spiritually
sound and safe.

Sinners, from the first moment they awake from the darkness of carnality
and desire and notice their miserable state before all the divine
mercifulness and generosity, must spend the rest of their days and
nights in obedience, worshipping, serving people and being kind to them,
and they must purify their Hearts from the dregs of disobedience and the
darkness of sins. They must refrain from all the apparent and hidden
sins. They must cut off their relations with Satan and desire and turn
to Allah to repair all that they have committed. They must follow the
right path, humble themselves before Allah and keep on worshipping Him
and helping His people.

This duty, according to jurisprudence and the sharia, is a prompt
obligation. It means that we must repent at the very moment we notice
that we have committed a sin and disobeyed our Creator, and rebelled
against His Guardianship as Generous Creator, and fought His kind
Lordship. When sinners notice this, they must, immediately and without
any delay, repent, turn to Allah and pluck the roots of sins out of
their souls and lives. They must regret their sin and remove all the
effects of sin so they are able to purify their hearts and gain the
mercy and forgiveness of Allah. If sinners delay repentance, hoping that
they will be able to repent in the future, this is itself considered as
in and a kind of disobedience. This will lead to feeling safe from the
punishment of Allah and will insure that they will keep on committing
sins.

Abdul Adheem al-Hasani narrated from Imam al-Jawad (as) from Imam
ar-Ridha’ (as) that Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (as) had explained to Amr bin
Ubayd the major sins according to the Qur'an and said, “And feeling safe
from the punishment of Allah[^22].”

Hence, sinners have no rights to appoint future times for their
repentance and are not allowed to procrastinate in turning to Allah.
Sinners are not permitted to put off the cure of their disease (of sins)
until old age and infirmity.

What is the guarantee for sinners that the future, when they promise to
reform themselves, will come to them?

Who can guarantee that sinful young men will live until old age to
repair the sins they have committed during their youth?

Who knows that death will not snatch the lives of sinners during their
indifference to Allah when they are committing their sins and immersing
themselves in forbidden lusts?

How many sinners procrastinated concerning their repentance and put it
off for the future, but that future did not come!

How many youth, polluted with sins say, “We now live in the prime of
life and we have to enjoy pleasures and lusts, but when we become old we
will repent.” But death did not give them time and it snatched them
unexpectedly!

How many the sinners want to repent and turn to Allah, but they keep
repeating sins and being disobedient, until their souls are shackled
with the chains of the Satan and desire? They become fixed in their sin
and disobedience and the ability to repent is removed from them so they
cannot ever turn to their Generous Creator. Moreover, repeating sins,
keeping on being disobedient and being far from Allah makes them deny
the divine mission, deny the true proofs, deny the day of resurrection,
deny the punishment in the afterlife and deride the signs of Allah.
Therefore, they close the door of mercy, forgiveness, repentance and
turning to Allah.

***“Then evil was the end of those who did evil, because they rejected
the signs of Allah and used to mock them.”*** Qur’an 30:10

Sin demolishes faith and belief, corrupts morals and personality,
degrades dignity and leads, in the end, to denying the signs of Allah.
Sin mocks the Prophets (as), the Imams (as) and the holy Qur’an, and
then no advice or preaching will be useful to sinners or will affect
their hearts.

***“And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord; and a Garden, the
extensiveness of which is (as) the heavens and the earth, is prepared
for those who guard (against evil).”*** Qur’an 3:133

In order to purify the heart from the effects of the apparent and hidden
sins and to gain the forgiveness and mercy of Allah, it is one of the
most import ant obligations for us to hasten promptly and immediately to
repent and turn to Allah. Delaying repentance even for one moment is
something despised and ugly. In fact, as some Qur’anic verses tell us,
delaying repentance for any reason is injustice and aggression against
ourselves, and this injustice and aggression is another sin added toour
record.

***“And whoever does not repent, indeed these are the unjust.”***
Qur’an, 49:11

Sinners must know that Allah, His Prophets (as) and His saints hate
sinners to such a degree that Jesus Christ (as) often said to his
disciples:

“O disciples, be beloved to Allah by hating the sinners, be near to
Allah by keeping away from them and ask for His contentment by being
discontented with them[^23].”

Sinners have to notice that when committing any sin their dignity and
personality become degraded before Allah and their honor and values are
lowered to the level of the animals and beasts. Infact, they may be more
deviant and lower than animals, and they will be resurrected on the day
of resurrection in an inhuman shape.

Imam Ali (as) said to al –Bara’ bin Aazib, “how have you found this
Religion? “Al-Bara’ bin Aazib answered, “We were like the Jews before we
followed you. Worship was light for us but when we followed you and the
true faith got in our hearts, we found worship so heavy inside us.” Imam
Ali (as) said, “And then people will be resurrected on the day of
resurrection in the shape of donkeys and you will be resurrected one by
one taken to paradise[^24].”

Repentance is an ethical obligation
-----------------------------------

The ulama and scholars have written many books about ethics. They have
divided morals into two parts: virtues and vices. They have classified
pride, haughtiness, selfishness and the like under vices, and they have
put humbleness under the virtues. They have discussed this subject in
detail. Sin is a result of man’s haughtiness before Allah, whereas
repentance is the delicious fruit of humbleness. Haughtiness occupied
Iblis when Allah ordered him to prost rate himself before Adam (as).
Then Iblis was cursed and exiled from the sanctum of the divine mercy.
It was haughtiness before the divine order.

But the repentance of Adam (as) and his wife, which had been accepted by
Allah, was the fruit of humbleness and submission to the Almighty;
therefore the Ulama have said that haughtiness was the reason behind
driving man out of the paradise and keeping him away from the mercy of
Allah. Therefore, it is obligatory to avoid pride and haughtiness
because humbleness and submission to Allah lead us near to Allah and
encourage us toobey and worship Allah. They also lead us to apologize
before Allah for our sins and disobediences and then to repent and turn
to Allah. We have to be servile and submissive to Allah and to turn to
Allah with crying eyes and fearing Heart. We have to determine sincerely
to give up sins forever and to repair all we have committed before.  
 It has been mentioned in the following Hadith qudsi[^25] that Allah
talked to Prophet Moses (as) saying, “O son of Imran, give Me from your
eyes tears, from your heart reverence, from your body submission and
then call upon Me in the darkness of nights you will find me near and
responding[^26].”

The holy Qur'an, when talking about Iblis, says:

***“He said: What hindered you so that you did not prostrate when I
commanded you? He said: I am better than he: Thou hast created me of
fire, while him Thou didst create of dust. He said: Then get forth from
this (state), for it does not befit you to behave proudly therein. Go
forth; therefore, surely you are of the abject ones.”*** (7:12-13)

The holy Qur’an shows that the misery, meanness and exiling from the
mercy of Allah, which had happened to Iblis, are the poisonous fruits of
haughtiness before the orders of Allah; the haughtiness that caused him
to get out of the sanctum of Allah’s mercy and fall down into the valley
of meanness and punishment. Hence, we must avoid pride and haughtiness
because this satanic state prevents us from obeying the orders of Allah
the Almighty.

Allah has said about Adam (as) and his wife:

***“They said: Our Lord! We have been unjust*** *too**urselves, and if
Thou forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be
of the losers.”*** Qur’an 7:23

Thus, the holy Qur’an has mentioned Adam (as) and his wife’s confession
of disobedience and their asking for forgiveness and mercy of Allah as
good and desirable. It means that the holy Qur’an has mentioned this
confession as a kind of repentance and turning (to Allah) by Adam (as)
and his wife. The Sura of al-Baqara, verse 37 mentions the acceptance of
this repentance too. We must pay attention to the fact that confession
and turning to Allah are precious results of spiritual humbleness,
Hearty reverence and psychological submission. According to the Ulama,
pride and haughtiness make a dark screen between us and our Creator, but
humbleness and submissiveness make a paved way and an open door between
believers and Allah. Holding on to pride and haughtiness is a great sin,
whereas avoiding them is a great obligation. It is necessary that we
should be humble before Allah and other people. We should make use of
this humbleness to purify our hearts and souls from the dregs of sin and
the darkness of disobedience and to grace our souls with worship and
obedience. Repenting of sins is, indeed, a sign of being humble before
Allah the Almighty and of being free from pride and haughtiness.
Repentance is one of the fundamental moral obligations.

We read in the traditions that talk about pride and haughtiness that
Hakeem has said, “Once I asked Abu Abdullah (Imam as-Sadiq (as)) about
the least sign of atheism and he said, “Pride is the least of it[^27].”

Al-Husayn bin al-Ala’ has said, “I have heard Imam as-Sadiq (as) saying,
“Pride may be in the evil people of every kind. Pride is the dress
(aspect) of Allah and whoever tries to put on the dress of Allah, Allah
will make him meaner and lower[^28].”

Imam al-Baqir (as) has said, “Glory is the dress of Allah and pride is
His loincloth and whoever gets something of that, Allah will throw him
into hell[^29].”

Imam as-Sadiq (as) has said about humbleness, “In the Heaven there are
two angels responsible for people; whoever (of people) becomes humble
before Allah, theyexalt him and whoever becomes proud, they lower
him[^30].”

The Prophet (S) has said, “Whoever is humble before Allah, Allah exalts
him, whoever is proud, Allah lowers him, whoever is moderate in his
living, Allah bestows more blessings on him, whoever wastes, Allah
deprives him of blessings and whoever remembers death much Allah loves
him[^31].”

In a Qudsi tradition, Allah said to Prophet David (as), “O Dawood
(David), the closest people to Allah are the humble ones and the
farthest people from Allah are the haughty ones[^32].”

[^1]: Quoted from the prophetic traditions mentioned in Biharul Anwar,
vol.3 p.278-281.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, vol.2 p.68.

[^3]: Majmoo’at Warram (Warram’s collection), vol.1 p.43.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Majmoo’at Warram (War ram’s collection), vol.1 p.60.

[^6]: Suht; forbidden, ill-gotten or illegal properties.

[^7]: Warram’s collection, vol.1 p.61.

[^8]: Ibid. p.65.

[^9]: Ibid. p.75.

[^10]: Biharul Anwar by al-Majli si, vol.78, p.126.

[^11]: Biharul Anwar by al-Majli si, vol.78, p.137.

[^12]: Ibid. p.175.

[^13]: Ibid, p.192

[^14]: Ibid, p.305.

[^15]: Al-Mawa” idh al-Adadiyya by al-Mishkeeni, p.238.

[^16]: Ibid., p.236.

[^17]: Warram’s collection, vol.1 p.236.

[^18]: Ibid., vol.1 p.39.

[^19]: Al-Mawa’idh al-Adadiyya, p.190.

[^20]: Ibid., p.278.

[^21]: Ibid, p.280.

[^22]: Al-Kafi, vol.2 p.285.

[^23]: Biharul Anwar, vol.14 p.330.

[^24]: Rijal (men) by allama Bahrul Uloom, vol.2 p.127.

[^25]: Hadith Qudsi (sacred, or holy tradition or divine tradition) is a
class of traditions which give words spoken by Allah, as distinguished
from prophetic traditions which give the words of the Prophet. It
contains Allah’s words, it di ffers from the Qur'an which was revealed
through the medium of Gabriel, is inimitable, is recited in the prayers
and may not be touched or recited by the ceremonially unclean.

[^26]: Biharul Anwar, vol.13, p.361.

[^27]: Usool Al-Kafi, vol.5 p.214.

[^28]: Ibid.

[^29]: Ibid., p.216.

[^30]: Ibid.,vol.4 p.366.

[^31]: Usool Al-Kafi, vol.4 p.366.

[^32]: Ibid. p.372.


