Turning to Allah
================

***“And most surely I am most Forgiving to him who repents and believes
and does good, then continues to follow the right direction.”*** Qur'an,
20:82.

Sins and the ability to repent
------------------------------

Mothers do not give birth to sinful children, and children do not come
to this world defiled with sins.

When a baby comes to this life for the first time, his mind is empty of
any knowledge, intellect and information. He is completely ignorant of
what is around him. When he comes to this world, he does not know
anything, save crying and suckling. At the same time when he cries or
suckles his mother’s breast, he is ignorant of that too. Gradually
instincts, feelings and lusts move into the circle of his physiological
being and these bodily activitiesenter into the field of his life. Then
the baby begins to learn from the external environment and surroundings
and from the conduct of the others what is necessary for him to survive
in this life.

As for the body of a baby, it is liable to different kinds of diseases
and calamities throughout his life. The same is said about his
intellect, soul, spirit and heart. Concerning morals, he is also liable
to commit sins and vices. Hence, sins are accidental to man just as
diseases that attack his body. Sin is something accidental and not
spontaneous.

Bodily diseases can be cured by following the instructions of a doctor
but intellect, spirit and soul, when diseased, can be cured by following
the instructions of Allah the Almighty and obeying His orders.

If as inner knows his state and notices his wrongdoing and he knows what
he should do and what he should not do, he must get ready to repent, to
turn to Allah and to follow the instructions of the “Spiritual Doctor”
and then he will get out of the circle of sin to the circle of Allah’s
mercy. Thus, he gets free of sins and becomes pure, as he has been born.

A sinner cannot pretend that he is unable to repent because he, who is
able to commit sins, is undoubtedly able to repent of those sins too.

Yes, if we who are able to eat, drink, come and go, talk, get married,
work, play sports, travel and associate with other people will curb our
appetites or activities if a doctor asks us to in order to avoid
disease, then we should be able to avoid sins and falling into the abyss
of corruption and disobedience.

If sinners make excuses for not repenting, Allah will not accept their
excuses. If sinners and disobeyers refuse to repent now, Allah will not
invite them to repent later.

Sinners must accept the fact that they are able to refrain from sin in
any ca se and any condition. The Qur’anic verses show that Allah is kind
to His people, and He accepts their repentance and forgives sinnerseven
if their sins are as vast as the sands of deserts. In fact, Allah may
recompense sins with good doings.

Sinners must perceive that if they do not hasten to stop committing sin
and being disobedient, and they do not purify their inner beings from
sin’s dregs, then Allah will torture them severely and punish them for
their sins and crimes with the worst punishment.

Allah talks about Himself in the holy Qur'an by saying:

***“The Forgiver of the faults and the Acceptor of repentance, Severe to
punish”*** (40:3)

Imam Ali (as) described Allah the Almighty in the Iftitah supplication
by saying, “I have ascertained that You are the most Merciful of the
merciful at the time of forgiveness and mercy, and You are the severest
Punisher at the time of punishment and revenge[^1].”

Allah declares to His sinful people His saying:

***“Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving the Merciful.”*** Qur’an
39:53

Hence, if we understand the verses of the Qur'an that gives us the good
news that we have the ability to refrain from sins, and that Allah
accepts our repentance and is forgiving and merciful, then we have no
excuse if we delay repenting and keep on committing sins. Therefore
repenting of sins is a prompt, moral, and rational obligation for all
sinners.

If sinners do not hasten to repent, and they refuse to repair what they
have committed and to purify themselves from the filth of sin and
disobedience, then, in the afterlife, when they stand before Allah they
will not be excused by appealing to reason, conscience or wisdom. The
day of resurrection will come, when sinners will stand with deep regret,
calling loudly:

***“Were there only areturning for me, I should be of the doers of
good.”*** Qur’an, 39:58

Allah will reply to them:

***“Aye! My revelations came to you, but you rejected them, and you were
proud and you were one of the unbelievers.”*** Qur’an 39:59

On that day, no excuses will be accepted from sinners. Faith and good
deeds al one will save them from the torture. Allah emphasizes the
inevitable end of such people when saying:

***“And had those who are unjust all that is in the earth and the like
of it with it, they would certainly offer it as ransom (to be saved)
from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection; and what
they never thought of shall become plain to them from Allah.”*** Qur’an
39:47

Imam Ali (as) stresses in Du’a Kumayl that there will be no excuse
accepted from as inner when not repenting and turning to Allah and that
Allah has completed His authority over people by saying, “You have the
authority over me in all of that and I have no excuse before Your
judgment against me[^2].”

A wonderful tradition on the authority of Allah over people
-----------------------------------------------------------

Abdul A’la, the freed slave of aalsam[^3] , narrated that he had heard
Imam as-Sadiq (as) saying:

“On the day of resurrection a beautiful woman, who has been deceived by
her beauty, will be brought to be tried. She will say, “O my Lord, You
have made me so beautiful so that I did so and so.” Then the Blessed
Virgin Mary (as) will be brought forward. It will be said (to the
woman), “are you more beautiful than this one? We have made her so
beautiful but she has not been deceived.” A handsome man, who has been
deceived by his beauty, will be brought. He will say, “O my Lord, you
have made me handsome until I got so and so from women.” Then Prophet
Yousuf (Joseph) (as) will be brought forward. It will be said (to the
man), “Are you more handsome than this one? We have made him so handsome
but he has not been deceived.” Then a miserable man, who has been
deceived by (has lost his faith because of) his calamities, will be
brought forward. He will say, “O my Lord, You have afflicted me with so
many calamities that I have been deceived.” Then Prophet Ayyoub (Job)
(as) will be brought forward. It will be said (to the man), “are your
calamities severer than this man’s? He has been tried but he has not
been deceived (has not lost his faith)[^4].”

We have inherited repentance from our father Adam and mother Eve
----------------------------------------------------------------

When Allah has created Adam as His caliph in the earth and when Adam’s
body has become straight and the divine spirit has been breathed into
it[^5], he has become fit to be taught the names and then Allah has
ordered the angels to prostrate themselves before Adam to glorify him.
Then Allah has let him and his wife live in paradise. Allah has
permitted Adam and his wife to enjoy all the blessings of paradise
except a certain tree. Allah has forbidden him and his wife from
approaching this tree and if they did they would be unjust:

***“And do not approach this tree, for then you will be of the
unjust.”*** Qur'an, 2:35

But the Satan, who has refused to prostrate himself before Adam and has
been driven out of paradise, has whispered evil to Adam and Eve because
of his grudge against them until he could deceive them to commit the
sin; eating from that prohibited tree. Then their hidden private parts
appeared and they (Adam and Eve) lost their high position and honorable
rank near Allah because of obeying the Satan. Thus, they have been
exiled from paradise and driven away from the mercy of Allah.

The Satan has whispered evil to Adam and Eve out of his hidden complexes
and in order to lead them to that prohibited tree to commit sin. He said
to them, “O Adam and Eve, Allah has prevented you from this tree just
because if you eat from its fruit, you will be two angels and then you
will live in paradise forever.”

In order to compact his evil whispering and to fix his plot into their
Hearts, the Satan took binding oaths that he wanted nothing save their
goodness and advantage:

***“And he swore to them both: Most surely, I am a sincere adviser to
you.”*** Qur'an, 7:21

His evil whispering affected them and the fires of love of life broke
out inside them. This desire made a thick screen between them and the
prohibition of Allah and they fall in the trap of the Satan. They
involved in disobedience and stretched their hands towards the
prohibited tree after the Satan had seduced them. When they ate from the
fruit of the tree, their private parts appeared to them and the dress of
gravity, dignity and light had been taken off them. They began to cover
their private parts with the leaves of trees. Then Allah called out to
them:  
***“Did I not forbid you both from that tree and say to you that the
Satan is your open enemy?”*** Qur'an, 7:22

Thus, Adam and Eve had been driven out of paradise where the position of
deputyship, knowledge and the prostration of the angels before Adam had
no any use for them. They had come down from thatexalted position to
begin their life on the earth. But being away from the position of
nearness (to the Lord), away from the angels, away from paradise, paying
no attention to the order of Allah the Almighty and obeying the Satan,
alto get her, had caused them a great sorrow, grief and regret; and
hence they had got out of the horrible prison of selfishness and
terrible suppression of desire because those selfishness and desire were
the reason behind their becoming away from the mercy and care of their
Beloved Lord and falling into the valley of deviation; therefore they
could go out again to the horizon of the mercy, kindness and care of
Allah; that horizon which was full of goodness and honor in the worldly
life and deliverance and infinite success in the afterlife.

When Adam and Eve got out of paradise in this way, they cried loudly,
(Our Lord, we have been unjust toourselves) and fallen into the prison
of inadvertence and selfishness and slipped into the darkness of
greediness and pride.

This attention and awakening were as the first step towards freedom and
the cause for their rescue from the traps of the Satan in order to
return to the mercy of Allah after being humble and submissive. If the
Satan himself had become humble and submissive before Allah, he would
have not come to hiseternal fate of misery and wretchedness and he would
have not fall en under the divine curse and wrath forever.

We find that Adam and Eve, due to reason, sight and wakefulness and at
the same time with regret, have not been impolite before Allah; they
have not said to Him, “forgive us!” but they have said,

***“And if Thou forgive us not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall
certainly be of the losers.”*** Qur'an, 7:23

After this advertence, humbleness, submissiveness, regret, crying,
repenting and going out of the prison of selfishness to the wide horizon
of Allah’s mercy, the doors of mercy have been opened for Adam and Eve
and the divine c are has come to save them from that misery and terrible
fate:

***“Then Adam received (some) words from his Lord, so He turned to him
mercifully; surely He is Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.”***
Qur'an, 2:37

The light of the Lord hasentered into Adam’s heart through some words he
has received and the perfect repentance has been realized via the
connection between these three facts; “the light of the Lord”, “the
words”and “the soul of Adam”. Repentance that can repair what one has
missed thro ugh his past age is the light that will illuminate the way
of future to a repentant.

It has narrated from Imam al-Baqir (as) that the words that Adam had
received from Allah were, “O Allah, there is no god but You. Glory and
praise be to You. My Lord, I have been unjust to myself; forgive me for
you are the best Forgiver. O Allah, there is no god but You. Glory and
praise be to You. My Lord, I have been unjust to myself; have mercy on
me for You are the best Merciful one. O Allah, there is no god but You.
Glory and praise be to You. My Lord, I have been unjust to myself;
accept my repentance for You are the Oft-Returning, the Most
Merciful[^6]“.

It has been narrated that Adam had seen honored names written on the
Throne and when he had asked about them, it had been said to him that
they had been the most honored names near Allah. The names were
Muhammad, Ali, Fatima, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Adam had begged Allah to
accept his repentance and to high his position by the means of these
names[^7].

When the rains of the divine inspirations fell as words to water the
seed of love in Adam, confession of his sin and of being unjust to
himself grew. Adam had nothing to do save to cry and to pray his Lord
and then the tree of choice grew in the land of his soul and the flowers
of repentance and turning (to Allah) bloomed:

***“Then his Lord chose him, so He turned to him and guided (him).”***
Qur'an, 20:122

Sins
----

Imam as-Sadiq (as), in a wonderful article as a “letter of repentance”,
talked about the sins that must be repented of promptly as a moral and
legal obligation; the sins that if had not been repaired by true
repentance, they would not be removed or omitted from the book of the
soul and heart and they would trouble man’s life in this world and
subject him to the divine torment on the day of resurrection.

Imam as-Sadiq (as) said, “O Allah, I beg You to forgive me any sin that
has been related to You and then I committed it again. I beg You to
forgive me what I have wasted of your obligations and rights of prayer,
zakat, fasting, jihad, hajj, minor hajj, perfecting wuDu’and ghusl,
worshipping at night, glorifying You quite often, expiation for
(breaking) oaths, returning to disobedience and every obligation I have
neglected. I pray You to forgive me that and all what I have committed
of major sins, minor sins, disobediences, bad deeds and lusts intendedly
or by mistake, openly or secretly! I repent of that and of shedding
blood, disobeying the parents, cutting the relation with the kin,
fleeing from jihad, acc using honorable women, eating the monies of the
orphans wrongfully, committing perjury, concealing true witnesses,
buying your covenant for Alittle price, usury, ill-gotten properties,
magic, divination, pessimism, polytheism, hypocrisy, thieving, drinking
wines, giving short measure and short weight, dissension, breaking
covenants, fabrication, treason, breaking protection, (false) swearing,
backbiting, tale bearing, slandering, defaming, traducing, harming
neighbors, insulting one another by nicknames, entering houses without
permission, pride, haughtiness, stubbornness, exultancy, injustice in
judgment, oppression when angry, fanaticism, supporting the unjust,
helping others in sin and transgression, (littleness of family and of
wealth and children), suspicion, following lusts, enjoining the wrong,
forbidding the right, corruption, denying the truth, flattering the
rulers, cheating, stinginess, talking about what I do not know, eating
meat of dead animals, drinking blood, eating pork and any meat over
which any other name than (that of) You has been invoked, envy,
aggression, inviting to debauchery, wishing what You have granted to the
others, self-deceit, reminding when gifting, intending to wrong, harming
the orphans, c hiding the beggars, breaking oaths, wronging any of your
people in his wealth, body and honor, what my eyes have seen, what
myears have heard, what my tongue has uttered, what I have stretched my
hands to, what I have moved my feet to, what my skin has touched, what I
have talked to myself which is disobedience to you and every false
oath[^8].”

In this tradition, Imam as-Sadiq (as) has mentioned different sins that
one should repent of and turn sincerely to Allah.

The bad results of sins
-----------------------

There are many bad results of sins in this life and the afterlife as
mentioned by the Qur’anic verses and the traditions of AhlulBayt (as),
that if a sinner does not repent of his sins, he will, definitely, be
involved in these bad effects.

Allah has said,

***“Yea, whoever earns evil and his sins beset him on every side, those
are the inmates of the fire; in it they shall abide.”*** Qur'an, 2:81

***“Say: Shall We inform you of the greatest losers in (their) deeds.
Those whose effort goeth astray in the life of the world, and yet they
reckon that they do good work. Those are they who disbelieve in the
revelations of their Lord and in the meeting with Him. Therefore, their
works are vain, and on the day of resurrection, We assign no weight to
them.”*** Qur'an, 18:103-105

The scale will be set to the persons, whose deeds can be weighed, but
the resisting disobeyers and unbelievers will have no any weight on the
day of resurrection because their deeds will become as scattered dust
and so they will have no deed to be weighed.

***“There is a disease in their hearts, so Allah added to their disease
and they shall have a painful chastisement.”*** Qur'an, 2:10

***“But you will see those in whose hearts is a disease hastening
towards them”.*** Qur'an, 5:52

It means that the hypocrites hasten towards the enemies of Allah from
among the Jews and the Christians.

***“And as for those in whose hearts is a disease, it adds uncleanness
to their uncleanness and they die while they are unbelievers.”***
Qur'an, 9:125

***“(As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly,
surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and they shall enter
burning fire.”*** Qur'an, 4:10

Some scholars think, according to this holy verse and other verses, that
these criminals, on the day of resurrection, will be punished by their
sins. It means that their sins will become on the day of resurrection as
painful torment and their crimes as chains and fires by which they will
be tortured severely.

***“Surely those who conceal any part of the Book that Allah has
revealed and take for it a small price, theyeat nothing but fire into
their bellies, and Allah will not speak to them on the day of
resurrection, nor will He purify them, and they shall have a painful
chastisement. These are they who buy error for the right direction and
chastisement for forgiveness; how bold they are to encounter fire!”***
Qur'an, 2:174-175

***“The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord: their actions are
like ashes on which the wind blows hard on a stormy day; they shall not
have power over anything out of what they have earned; this is the
gre**ate**rror.”*** Qur'an, 14:18

It is understood from the previous verses that the bad results of sins
are much more than what has been mentioned before. They are as
following:

Entering into hell on the day of resurrection, being in torment forever,
lo sing the worldly life and the afterlife, loss of one’s efforts and
deeds, vanity of one’s deeds on the day of judgment, (sinners) not being
given any weight, increase of disobedience because of not repenting,
hastening towards the enemies of Allah, cutting the connection with
Allah, not being purified on the day of resurrection, changing guidance
into deviation and changing forgiveness into torment.

Imam Zaynol Aabideen[^9] (as) has talked about the bad results of sins
by saying, “The sins that remove blessings are: oppressing people,
giving up doing good and favor, being ungrateful for blessings and
giving up thanking Allah. The sins that cause regret are: killing
innocent ones, breaking off relations with the kin until they feel in no
need of each other, not offering prayer until its time elapses, being
inadvertent to wills and to wronged people, not giving zakat until death
comes. The sins that bring calamities are: disobedience of a knowing one
by oppressing people, being rude to them and mocking them. The sins that
keep blessings away are: pretending poverty, sleeping until after dawn
and until the time of Fajr Prayer elapses, scorning blessings and
complaining against Allah the Almighty.

The sins that disgrace honors are: drinking wine, gambling, joking and
talking nonsense, mentioning the defects of people and accompanying
sinful and bad people. The sins that bring calamities are: refraining
from helping needy people, refraining from supporting oppressed people,
not enjoining what is right and not forbidding what is wrong. The sins
that cause the enemies to prevail are: doing injustice openly, spreading
debauchery, violating prohibited matters, disobeying good people and
submitting to evil people. The sins that hasten perishment are: cutting
communications with one’s kin, false oath, lying, adultery, blocking the
ways of the Muslims and pretending to be an Imam falsely.

The sins that dispel hope are: being desperate of the mercy of Allah,
relying on other than Allah and disbelieving in the Promise of Allah.
The sins that darken the space are: magic, divination, believing in
stars, disbelieving in fate and being undutiful toone’s parents. The
sins that uncover the curtain (of the unseen) are: borrowing with no
intention of repaying, exceeding in spending on impermissible things,
being stingy with one’s family, children and relatives, impoliteness,
impatience, laziness and making little of religious people.

The sins that reject supplication are: malevolence, ill-intention,
hypocrisy with brothers, disbelieving in responding to supplication,
delaying obligatory prayers until their prescribed times elapse, giving
up approaching Allah via doing good and paying charities, and using bad
and obscene sayings. The sins that prevent the rain of the heaven are:
the injustice of rulers in judgments, perjury, concealing true
witnesses, preventing zakat, preventing loan and helping the needy,
hard-Heartedness towards the poor and the needy, being unjust toorphans
and widows, chiding the beggars and turning away from them[^10].”

Imam Ali (as), concerning sins, says, “Even if Allah had not threatened
for disobeying Him, people must not disobey Him in order to be grateful
to His blessings[^11].”

Therefore, we have to avoid any kind of sins as a matter of being
grateful to Allah for His blessings and gifts, which can never be
counted. In addition, we have to repent and regret the sins we have
committed before. We have to apologize to Allah for our previous sins in
order to gain His mercy, forgiveness, care and generosity.

The way of true repentance
--------------------------

Paying attention to the important consequences of repentance, that are
gaining forgiveness, mercy and divine contentment and to be fit to enter
into paradise, to be safe from the torment of hell, to be away from
deviation and straying, to follow the right path and the way of
guidance, to be pure from the darkness of sins and guilt we have to say
that repentance is a great and important matter, a big program and a
clear divine fact.

Repentance does not take place when one just says with his tongue
“astaghfirullah-I ask Allah to forgive me” with Alittle shyness inside
him or he sheds some tears secretly or openly for there are many people
who repent in this way but after Alittle time they return to commit the
same sins and disobediences they have committed before.

Returning to commit sins is the clearest evidence showing that the true
repentance has not been realized and that the light of the actual
turning to Allah has not penetrated one’s soul. True repentance and
actual turning to Allah are so important that a great part of the
Qur’anic verses and holy traditions have talked about.

True repentance in Imam Ali’s view
----------------------------------

Once Imam Ali (as) heard someone saying, “I ask Allah to forgive me”. He
said to him, “Woe unto you! Do you know what “asking for forgiveness “is
asking for forgiveness is the position of “illiyeen[^12]”. It includes
six meanings; the first is to feel contrition for what one has committed
before; the second is to determine not to commit it again forever; the
third is to give people their rights until meeting Allah with no
responsibility; the fourth is to perform every obligation that has been
missed; the fifth is to melt the flesh that has been grown out of
ill-gotten properties by regretting and sorrowing until the skin sticks
on the bones and then new flesh grows, and the sixth is to make the body
taste the pain of obedience as it has tasted the sweetness of
disobedience and then it is possible to say “astaghfirullah-I ask Allah
for forgiveness[^13]”.

A repentant have to realize the meaning of repentance and to determine
definitely to give up sins and not to commit them again forever. He
should not think of repentance while he is still committing sins.
Procrastination and hoping to repent in the future is no doubt one of
the plots of the Satan. It has been narrated that Imam ar-Ridha’ (as)
had said, “He, who asks for forgiveness with his tongue and does not
repent with his Heart, mocks himself.”

In fact, it is ridiculous or regrettable that man throws himself into
disease hoping that he may find the medicine! How much man loses because
of this false hope of repenting and how much he commits crimes and sins
while he talks with himself that the door of repentance is always open
and that he can commit sins now and then he repents!

If man, when intending to repent, determines seriously and the
conditions of repentance realize inside himself, this will lead to
purify his inners and refine his soul and heart and then the dregs of
sins will be removed from his organs inwardly and outwardly.

Repentance should not be just as a habit because sin, in fact, is
darkness while repentance is light and oft en going and coming between
darkness and light confuse the soul. Hence, if we repent of a sin and
then we commit it again, we are still in the circle of sin and our
repentance is just a temporary sentiment.

A human soul is like hell. It does not become full at all. It does not
satiate with sin and disobedience. It is always greedy to impermissible
things. It is these things that make man keep on committing sins and not
approach Allah the Almighty. Therefore, the door of this oven must be
closed by repentance and this unruly beast must be tied with the chains
of the real turning to Allah.

Repentance is the reversal of the present condition and the conscious
movement of faith and piety and the internal change of the heart and
soul. Then man’s connection with sins and their motives become weak and
he is bound by a strong tie with the Truth and the means of purity and
lightness.

Repentance at its beginning is a new life; a pure and heavenly life. In
this life man devotes his heart to Allah the Almighty and his soul to
the good deeds. He purifies his inwards and outwards from the effects of
sins.

Repentance in its essence is the extinction of the fire of fancies. It
takes man to the path of the Truth, obedience and submission to the
Exalted Creator.

Repentance is the end of the control of the Satan over the inners of
man. It prepares the tenacious psychological base that makes the truth
rule over the inners of man and prevents him from slipping under the
pressure of fancies and transient material pleasures.

Each sin has a special repentance
---------------------------------

Some people think, after committing some sins and offenses, that their
repentance will be accepted just by apologizing to Allah and saying “I
ask Allah to forgive me and I turn to Him”

or by resorting to a mosque or one of the sacred places to recite some
supplications and to shed some tears whereas the Qur’anic verses and
prophetic traditions concerning repentance do not accept this childish
manner of repentance. A repentant should notice that repentance differs
according to different sins and each sin has a special repentance. If
repentance is not realized, one remains polluted with the effects of sin
and his soul remains lacking morale; in fact it remains dark until the
day of resurrection and this one will suffer the severe torment of that
sin.

All the sins can be classified under three groups:

1. The sins that are committed by man when neglecting his obligations
such as prayers, fasting, khums, jihad and the likes.

2. The sins that are committed when one disobeys Allah by committing
impermissible things such as drinking wine, impermissible looking (at
not mahram women)[^14], adultery, gambling, sodomy, masturbation,
listening to impermissible music and the likes which do not concern the
rights of other people.

3. The sins that, besides leading to disobeying Allah, violate the
rights of other people such as killing, stealing, usury, rage, extorting
orphans” properties, bribe, aggression against people in their bodies
and propertiesetc.

Repenting of the sins of the first group is achieved by leaving these
sins which means that one has to perform the missed obligations like
prayers, fasting, hajj and paying khums and zakat of all the years that
he has not paid.

Repenting of the sins of the second group is achieved by asking Allah
for forgiveness, regretting and determining to leave these sins in away
causing one’s state to change at all and causing his organs to abstain
from committing such bad deeds forever.

Repenting of the sins of the third group is achieved by giving the
rights of people back to them; a killer should let himself under the
option of the guardians of the killed one to punish him or ask him to
pay them blood money or to forgive him. A usurer must pay back all the
monies he has taken from people as usury. An extorter must give all what
he has extorted back to their owners. The properties of the orphans must
be given back to them. Bribes must be given back to their owners. An
aggressor must pay blood money and must recompense the loss and damage
in people’s properties and so on.

In order to achieve the real repentance man has to be cautious of three
things:

### 1. The Satan

The words “Satan” and “Iblis” have been mentioned in the holy Qur'an
about ninety-eight times. This dangerous and malicious creature has no
aim out of his devilish acts and insinuation except to cut the
connection between man and his Creator and to involve man into sins and
crimes. The holy Qur'an has warned man of a deviate and misleading
invisible being living inside man which is called as “Satan”.

Satan linguistically means vile, disobedient, mutinous, deviate and
misleading whether this being is a human being or jinnee.

The holy Qur’an and the traditions that have interpreted and explained
the words of the Qur'an have mentioned the aspects of the Satan whether
of human beings or jinn in this way: (open enemy, he who incites people
to do evil and atrocity, he who ascribes bad things to Allah the
Almighty, he who frightens good people of poverty if they spend their
monies on good, he who involves man in sins, he who incites man towards
the valley of deviation, he who paves the way for man to slip into the
circle of gambling and drinking wine, causes enmity and hatred among
people, shows vices to them as good deeds, promises them of untruth,
causes pride into man’s Heart, involves man into lowness, puts obstacles
in the way of the Truth, invites man to what leads to the torment of
hell, encourages man to divorce and prepares the background for it,
fills man with desire to disobey (Allah) and to spread debauchery among
people, makes the worldly life appear beautiful before man, fills man
with love to money and wealth, incites man to commit sins and convince
him to procrastinate repentance, plants selfishness, stinginess,
backbiting, and telling lies into man’s mind, motivates lusts and
incentives of anger, encourages man to declare sins and disobediences,
etc)[^15].

As long as man is still in the traps of the devils of the human beings
and jinn, he remains unable to walk in the way of the real repentance
because the prevalence of the Satan and the devils over man’s heart
paves the way for man to slip into the swamp of disobedience after
repenting again and again because of the evil whispering of these devils
and hence man breaks his promise and repentance and follows his desires
and his Satan.

A repentant must pray Allah to grant him success to keep on his
repentance, to keep on being away from sins and rebelling against the
Satan and the devils and then he can be free from the control of the
wicked Satan little by little and at last he can drive him away from his
life and get rid of his rule over his soul and body. By doing this man
prepares for himself a good base to repent and to turn to Allah with his
deep heart and then this luminous covenant will not be broken by the
darkness of sins and disobediences after that.

### 2. The worldly life

The worldly life in its religious meaning is the way of man’s relation
with all the constituents of nature and all what makes his life and
survival continue.

If this relation is based on the truth and the divine system, no doubt
this worldly life will be praiseworthy and it will lead man to (build)
the afterlife too but if man’s relation with this worldly life is based
on one’s tendencies and material pleasures, it will be dispraised and
lead to the (destruction) of the afterlife.

Of course the relation that is based on worthless tendencies, pleasures
and material lusts will be the first step leading to the mires of sin
definitely.

Man in this wrong relation will be excessive lover to lusts and material
pleasures and then he will commit what contradicts the commands of
Allah. Such relation will deceive man to involve him in material
pleasures and lusts and it will not bring him save loss and then to come
on the day of resurrection with a back overburdened with sins, crimes
and faults.

Imam Ali (as) says about such a worldly life, “The worldly life
deceives, harms and passes away[^16]”

In the Qudsi tradition it is narrated that Allah has addressed His
messenger (Muhammad) describing to him the people of this worldly life
who have been involved in its traps saying, “The people of the worldly
life are those whose eating, laughing, sleeping and anger are much. They
are of little contentment. They do not apologize to whom they do wrong
to and do not accept the apology of that who apologizes to them. They
are lazy when it is time toobey (Allah) and brave when they disobey
(Him). Their hopes are too far whereas their ends are too near. They do
not blame themselves. They fear Allah little and become too happy when
eating foods. The people of the worldly life do not thank Allah at
welfare and are not patient at misfortune. They belittle the great deeds
of the others. They praise themselves with what they have not done
themselves and they pretend to have what they do not have. They talk of
what they wish, mention the defaults of the others and hide their (other
people’s) good deeds.”

He (Prophet Muhammad) asked, “O my Lord! Is there any defects in the
people of the worldly life other than these ones?”  
 Allah said, “O Ahmad[^17]! The defects of the people of the worldly
life are so many. Among them there are ignorance, stupidity They do not
be humble before the one whom they learn from. They consider themselves
as wise while they are stupid near the knowing people[^18].”

If one repents of his sins but at the same time still lives under the
domination of the worldly tendencies and pleasures, he cannot achieve
inside himself the real repentance because whenever he repents, those
pleasures and lusts attack him and draw him towards sin and then he
breaks his repentance.

### 3. Plagues

Strong adhering to the worldly life, excessive love to pleasures and
lusts, changing according to tendencies, fancies and instincts besides
the material and immaterial interests and pleasures all are considered
as dangerous plagues that obstacle man’s way and behavior and prevent
him from achieving the real repentance. So a repentant must purify
himself from all these things and try to cure these diseases and plagues
so that he can follow the way of repentance and turning to Allah the
Almighty.

The gift of Allah to the real repentant
---------------------------------------

One of the infallible Imams (as) says, “Allah the Almighty has given the
repentant three advantages. If He has given one of them to all the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth, they will be saved by it.
Allah has said:

***“Surely Allah loves those who turn much (to Him), and He loves those
who purify themselves.”*** Qur'an, 2:222

He, whom Allah loves, will never be tortured. Allah has said too:

***“Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise
of their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who
believe: Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge,
therefore grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy
way, and save them from the punishment of the hell. Our Lord! And make
them enter the gardens of perpetuity which Thou hast promised to them
and those who do good of their fathers and their wives and their
offspring, surely Thou are the Mighty, the Wise. And keep them from evil
deeds, and whom Thou keepest from evil deeds this day, indeed Thou hast
mercy on him, and that is the mighty achievement.”*** Qur'an, 40:7-9

Allah has also said,

***“And they who do not call upon another god with Allah and do not slay
the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in the requirements of
justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he who does this shall
find a requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled to him on the
day of resurrection, and he shall abide therein in abasement. Except him
who repents and believes and does a good deed; so these are they of whom
Allah changes the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.”*** Qur'an, 25:68-70

The holy Qur'an and repentance
------------------------------

The word “repentance” and its derivatives have been mentioned in the
Qur’an about eighty-seven times. It has been mentioned so much and this
shows the greatness of this fact near Allah the Almighty.

We can classify what has been mentioned in the Qur'an concerning the
matter of “repentance” into five parts:

1. The command of repentance.

2. The way of the real repentance.

3. Accepting repentance (by Allah).

4. Turning away from repentance.

5. The reason of not accepting repentance.

### 1. The command of repentance

Allah has said,

***“And ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him.”*** Qur'an, 11:3

***“And turn to Allah all of you, O believers, so that you may be
successful.”*** Qur'an, 24:31

Ar-Raghib al-Isfahani says in his book Mufradat al-Qur’an,

“Success on the day of resurrection is life without death, honor with no
ignominy, knowledge with no ignorance and wealth with no poverty.”

Allah has also said,

***“O you who believe! turn to Allah a sincere turning.”*** Qur'an, 66:8

From these Qur’anic verses it is understood that Allah the Almighty has
ordered the believers and other than believers of repentance. It is
well-known that obeying Allah is something obligatory and it leads man
to the way of forgiveness and mercy and on the contra ry that disobeying
the order of Allah is impermissible and it leads to Allah’s wrath and
torment and brings disgrace in this life and in the afterlife and ca
useseternal perishment.

### 2. The way of the real repentance

Repentance is not an easy matter. It is not achieved except by certain
and practical conditions.

Among the elements that form the basic adobes in building the real
repentance are regretting, determining to give up sin forever, changing
one’s bad morals into good ones, repairing one’s deeds and past and
relying on believing in Allah and the day of resurrection in following
the straight path and the way of perfection.

Allah has said,

***“Except those who repent and amend and make manifest (the truth),
these it is to whom I turn (mercifully); and I am the Oft-returning (to
mercy), the Merciful.”*** Qur'an, 2:160

***“Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil in ignorance,
then turn (to Allah) soon, so these it is to whom Allah turns
(mercifully), and Allah is ever knowing, Wise.”*** Qur'an, 4:17

***“But whoever repents after his iniquity and reforms (himself), then
surely Allah will turn to him (mercifully); surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.”*** Qur'an, 5:39

***“And (as to) those who do evil deeds, then repent after that and
believe, your Lord after that is most surely Forgiving, Merciful.”***
Qur'an, 7:153

***“But if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, they
are your brethren in faith.”*** Qur'an, 9:11

According to these verses we notice that the conditions of the real
repentance are: believing in Allah and the day of resurrection,
reforming one’s faith, morals and doings, prompt turning (to Allah)
without any delay, cutting one’s relation with injustice and sin,
offering prayers, paying zakat and giving the rights of people back to
them. Whoever repents in this way his repentance no doubt is a real
repentance and then it will definitely be accepted by Allah.

### 3. Accepting repentance

When a sinful one obeys the order of Allah concerning the matter of
repentance, tries to act according to the conditions of repentance and
to follow the way that the holy Qur’an has determined for the repentant,
definitely his repentance will be accepted by Allah for Allah has
promised sinful people who repent to accept their repentances. Such one
is fit so that Allah purifies him from the consequences of sin and
changes the darkness of his inners into light and brightness.

Allah has said,

***“Do they not know that Allah accepts repentance from His servants”***
Qur'an, 9:104

***“And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons
the evil deeds.”*** Qur'an, 42:25

***“The Forgiver of the faults and the Acceptor of repentance.”***
Qur'an, 40:3

### 4. Turning away from repentance

If turning away from repentance is due to despair of the mercy of Allah,
then such a person should know that despairing of the mercy of Allah is
one of the aspects of disbelief and the disbelievers[^19].

If a sinful turns away from repentance thinking that Allah is unable to
accept his repentance and forgive him, he should know that this matter
is from the morals of the stubborn Jews[^20].

If a sinful turns away from repentance out of pride, defiance and
impudence before his generous Lord, he should know that Allah is mighty
and powerful and He does not like such pride and impudent persons to be
in His sacred yard. A person, who lives outside the circle of the love
of Allah, lives a dry spirituality and is stuffed inside his dark soul
besides that he is saved neither in this life nor in the afterlife[^21].

A sinful one has to know that his turning away from repentance-in spite
of that the door of repentance is always open and one is able to repent
with the previous mentioned conditions and that Allah accepts repentance
from His people-is the very injustice against oneself and distorting and
destroying the high divine facts. Allah has said,

***“And whoever does not turn, these it is that are the unjust.”***
Qur'an, 49:11

***“Surely (as for) those who persecute the believing men and the
believing women, then do not repent, they shall have the chastisement of
hell, and they shall have the chastisement of burning.”*** Qur'an, 85:10

### 5. There as on of not accepting repentance

When a sinful one finds the opportunity of repentance and he repents of
his sins following all the conditions of repentance, definitely his
repentance will be accepted by Allah the Almighty but if he wastes the
opportunity of repentance and procrastinates it until the signs of his
death come and then he announces repentance of his previous sins or his
repentance is not according to the actual conditions or he disbelieves
after his believing, his repentance will not be accepted. Allah has
said,

***“And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until
when death comes*** *too**ne of them, he says: Surely now I repent; nor
(for) those who die while they are unbelievers. These are they for whom
We have prepared a painful chastisement.”*** Qur'an, 4:18

***“Surely, those who disbelieve after their believing then increase in
unbelief, their repentance shall not be accepted, and these are they
that go astray.”*** Qur'an, 3:90

The traditions and the matter of repentance
-------------------------------------------

Imam Abu Ja’far Muhammad al-Baqir (as) has said,

“Adam has said, “O my Lord, You have empowered the Satan over me and
made him as the flow of the blood in me. O my Lord, do me something!”
Allah said, “O Adam, I have granted you that Whoever of your progeny
intends to do an evil, it will not be written against him but if he
commits it, it will be written as one evil and whoever intends to do a
good deed without doing it, it will be written for him as one good deed
and if he does it, it will be written for him as ten good deeds.” Adam
said, “O my Lord, grant me more!” Allah said, “I have granted you that
whoever of your progeny does an evil and then asks for forgiveness, his
evil will be forgiven.” Adam said, “O my Lord, grant me more!” Allah
said, “I have granted your progeny repentance until the moment of
death.” Adam said, “O my Lord, this suffices me[^22].”

Imam as-Sadiq (as) narrates that the Prophet (S) has said, “Whoever
repents a yea r before his death Allah accepts his repentance.” Then he
said, “A year is too much. Whoever repents a month before his death
Allah accepts his repentance.” Then he said, “A monthis too much.
Whoever repents a week before his death Allah accepts his repentance.”
Then he said, “A week is too much. Whoever repents a day before his
death Allah accepts his repentance.” Then he said, “A day is too much.
Whoever repents before (the moment) he sees the angel of death Allah
accepts his repentance[^23].”

The Prophet (S) has said, “Allah accepts the repentance of His servant
even before he breathes his last. Turn to your Lord before you die and
hasten to do good deeds before you become busy (with other things) and
keep what is between you and your Lord by mentioning Him too much[^24].”

It is narrated that Imam Ali (as) has said, “There is no intercessor
more successful than repentance[^25].”

And the Prophet (S) has said, “Repentance cancels all what is
(committed) before it[^26].”

Imam Ali (as) has said, “Repentance calls down mercy[^27].”

He has also said, “Turn to Allah and enter into His love because Allah
loves those who turn much (to Him), and He loves those who purify
themselves. The believers turn much to Allah[^28].”

Imam Ridha’ (as) has narrated from his fathers that the Prophet (S) had
said, “A believer near Allah is like a close angel. A believer near
Allah is greater than this and nothing is more beloved to Allah than a
repentant believing man or a repentant believing woman[^29].”

Imam Ridha’ (as) has alsonarrated from his father that the Prophet (S)
had said, “A repentant of sin is like one who has not committed as
in[^30].”

It is narrated that Imam as-Sadiq (as) has said, “Sincere repentance is
that one repents of a sin and determines not to come back to it
again[^31].”

The Prophet (S) has said, “Allah is happier with the repentance of His
servant than a sterile man when begetting a child, than a lost one when
finding his destination and than a thirsty one when reaching a drinking
fountain[^32].”

He has also said, “A repentant, if the effect of repentance does not
appear on him, is not repentant. He should satisfy his litigants, offer
his wasted prayers, be humble among people, keep himself away from lusts
and emaciate his neck by fasting in the days[^33].”

Ameerul Mo’mineen (Imam Ali) (as) has said, “Repentance is regretting in
the heart, asking (Allah) for forgiveness by the tongue, giving up
(sins) by the organs and intending not to come back (to sins)
again[^34].”

He has also said, “Whoever turns to Allah, Allah turns to him and his
organs are ordered to cover his sins, the lands to conceal his sins and
the guardians (angels) are made forget what they have written against
him[^35].”

Imam as-Sadiq (as) has said, “Allah the Almighty has revealed to His
Prophet Dawood (David): if My faithful servant commits a sin and then
turns and repents of that sin and becomes shy of Me when mentioning Me,
I will forgive him and make the guardians (angels) forget (what they
have written against him) and I change his evils into good deeds and I
am the most Merciful of the merciful ones[^36].”

In an important tradition the Prophet (S) has said, “Do you know who a
repentant is?” His companions said, “By Allah, no, we do not.” He said,
“If one repents without satisfying his litigants, he is not repentant.
Whoever repents without increasing his worship is not repentant. Whoever
repents without changing his cloths (conducts) is not repentant. Whoever
repents without changing his companions is not repentant. Whoever
repents without changing his meetings is not repentant. Whoever repents
without changing his bed and pillow is not repentant. Whoever repents
without changing his morals and intent is not repentant. Whoever repent
without opening his Heart and giving with his hand generously is not
repentant. Whoever repents without repressing his wishes and controlling
his tongue is not repentant. Whoever repents without gifting the further
power of his body is not repentant. If he does these things, he will be
repentant[^37].”

What has been mentioned in this import ant tradition concerning the
state of changing is something very important especially the things that
one gains from unlawful sources or through unlawful relations.

The advantages of repentance
----------------------------

Repentance has very important advantages in the worldly life and the in
afterlife mentioned in the Qur’anic verses especially the verses
concerning repenting of sins and also the honorable traditions narrated
from AhlulBayt (as). H ere we mention some of these advantages:

Allah has said,

***“Ask forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most Forgiving. He
will send down upon you the cloud, pouring down abundance of rain and
help you with wealth and sons, and make for you gardens, and make for
you rivers.”*** Qur'an, 71:10-12

***“O you who believe, turn to Allah a sincere turning; maybe your Lord
will remove from you your evil and cause you to enter gardens beneath
which rivers flow.”*** Qur'an, 66:8

Most of the verses concerning repentance end with the two attributes
“Forgiver” and “Merciful”. It means that Allah grants a true repentant
with His forgiveness and mercy[^38].

***“And if the people of the towns had believed and guarded (against
evil) We would certainly have opened up for them blessings from the
heaven and the earth.”*** Qur'an, 7:96

In Tafseer Ma jma’ul Baya n an important and attractive tradition has
been mentioned that Once a man has come to Imam al-Hasan (as) compla
ining to him of barrenness. Imam al-Hasan (as) said to him, “Ask Allah
to forgive you!” Another one came to him complaining of poverty. Imam
al-Hasan (as) said to him, “Ask Allah to forgive you!” a third one came
to him saying, “Pray Allah to grant me a son!” Imam al-Hasan said to
him, “Ask Allah to forgive you!” The people there said to Imam al-Hasan
(as), “Some men came to you complaining and asking for different things
but you ordered them all to ask Allah for forgiveness.” He said, “I have
not said that out of myself but I followed the saying of Allah when
mentioning the story of Prophet Noah (as) where he said to his people,

***“Ask forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most Forgiving. He
will send down upon you the cloud, pouring down abundance of rain and
help you with wealth and sons, and make for you gardens, and make for
you rivers.”*** Qur'an, 71:10-12[^39]

Anyhow what is und ers tood from the holy Qur’an and the noble
traditions is that the advantages of repentance are: omitting sins, the
divine pardoning and forgiving, the divine mercy, being safe from the
torment of the hereafter, deserving to enter paradise, safety of the
soul, purity of the Heart and the organs, being away from scandal,
falling of rains, abundance of wealth and children, growing of gardens
and flowing of rivers, disappearance of barrenness and poverty

***“In their histories there is certainly a lesson for men of
understanding.”*** Qur'an,12:111.

[^1]: Mafateeh al-Jinan, by Abbas al-Qummi, Iftitah Du’a.

[^2]: Mafateeh al-Jinan, Du’a Kumayl (Kumayl Supplication).

[^3]: Aal means “the family of”.

[^4]: Rawdhatul Kafi, p.228.

[^5]: Ibid., p.72.

[^6]: Majma’ul Bayan, vol.1 p.89.

[^7]: Majma’ul Bayan, vol.1 p.89.

[^8]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 97 p.328.

[^9]: He is the fourth infallible Imam of the Shia.

[^10]: Ma’ani al-Akhbar, p.270.

[^11]: Nahjol Balagha, maxim no.290.

[^12]: “Illiyeen” is the high position of the prophets, saints, martyrs
and great faithful people near Allah (in Paradise).

[^13]: Nahjol Balagha, maxim no.309.

[^14]: A mahram woman is a woman that a man cannot get married to.

[^15]: The Holy Qur’an, Wassa’il ash-Shia, vol.11, Al-Khisaal, Biharul
Anwar, Warram Collection, Nahjol Balagha, Ghurarul Hikam.

[^16]: Nahjol Balagha, ma xi m no.415.

[^17]: It is another name of Prophet Muhammad (S).

[^18]: Biharul Anwar, vol.77, p.23.

[^19]: Refer to the Qur’an, 12:87.

[^20]: Refer to the Qur’an, 5:64.

[^21]: Refer to the Qur’an, 16:23, 22:38, 28:76, 31:18, 57:23.

[^22]: Al-Kafi, vol.2 p.440, Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.18.

[^23]: Al-Kafi, vol.2 p.440.

[^24]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.19.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.1 p.338.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.21.

[^29]: Uyoon Akbar ar-Redha, p.198.

[^30]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.21.

[^31]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6, p.22.

[^32]: Mizan al-Hikma, vol.1 p.338.

[^33]: Jami’ul Akhbar, p.226.

[^34]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 78 p.81.

[^35]: Thawabul A’mal, vol.1 p.214.

[^36]: Ibid., p.125.

[^37]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.35.

[^38]: Refer to the Qur’an,3:89, 5:34, 7:153, 9:102, 24:5.

[^39]: Majma’ul Bayan, vol. 10 p.361.


